THE LIFE OF St. Ignatius, FOUNDER OF THE Society of Jesus.

Written in French by the Reverend Father DOMINICK BOVHOVRS of the same Society.

Translated into English by a Person of Quality.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel. 1686.

THE CONTENTS.
The Contents of the First Book, Page 1.
THe Birth of St. Ignatius, and his Natural Parts. His Life in the World. He is
wounded at the Siege of Pampelona. His Conversion. He goes to Montserrat. He
goes to Manreze. His Penitential Life. He retires into a Cave. He is tempted,
and resists the Temptation. He is afflicted with interior Pains, and above all
with Scruples. He is comforted, and enlightened from above. He trusts not his
own Light. He is called by God to the Service of his Neighbor. He writes the
Book of Spiritual Exercises. The Scheme and Order of the Exercises. He leaves
Manreze to go to the Holy Land.

The Contents of the Second Book, Page 51.
WHat happened to him at Barcelona. The Sentiments which he had in the Holy
Land. How he is obliged to leave Palestine. He raises a dead Man to life. He
goes to Alcala to continue his Studies there. He does many good Works. He is
suspected of Sorcery, and Heresy. He is declared innocent. He is again accused
and put in Prison. What he does, and what he suffers at Salamanca. He leaves
Spain to go into France. He is informed against to the Inquisitor. He helps him
who had robbed him. He makes choice of new Companions. He Converts many
Persons. He proposes to his Companions his Design of gaining Souls. Ignatius
and his Companions make their first Vow at Mont-Martyr. He applies himself to
form his Companions. He is again informed against to the Inquisitor. He returns
into his own Country. The Life which he leads in his own Country. The number of
his Companions is increased. He cures the Sick. What pas'd between Ignatius and
a Carthusian. He Embarques for Venice. He is Employed in the Service of his
Neighbor. He is decry'd in Venice, and afterward cried up again. His
Companions go to meet him at Venice. Ignatius and his Companions are Employed
in the Hospitals. He sends his Companions to Rome. He receives the Order of
Priesthood with his Companions. He prepares himself for his first Mass. He goes
to the Relief of one of his Companions.

The Contents of the Third Book, Page 146.
HE goes to Rome, to offer his Service to the Pope. He gives to his Company the
Name of The Society of Jesus. He goes to Mont-Cassm. He sees the Soul of Hozez
enter into Heaven. He gets a new Companion. He proposes to his Companions the
Founding a new Order. He continues his Works of Piety. He confers with his
Companions about his Institute. He opposes an Heretical Preacher. A Persecution
raised against him in Rome. The Persecution is appeased by degrees. He solicits
to have a Sentence pass to justify him, and at last obtains it. He helps the
People during a Famine. He Presents to the Pope the Project of his Institute.
Some of his Companions are Employed by the Pope. He appoints two of his
Companions for the Indies. He persists to have his Institute approved by the
Holy See. The Society of Jesus is approved by the Pope. Ignatius is chosen
General of the Society. He refuses the Charge of General. Ignatius and his
Companions make their Profession. He Catechizes with great Fruit. The first
Rules which he prescribed to his new Society. Ignatius and his Companions
Employed in the Service of the Church. He makes the Establishments for the Jews
and Curtezans Converted. He does other Works of Charity. He begins to write the
Constitutions of his Order. The End of the Society of Jesus. The Means which
the Society makes use of to obtain their End. The Society has no particular
Habit. The Society has no Austerities of Obligation. Why the Society does not
keep Quire. How Persons are to be chosen, and what hinders from being received
into the Society. In what manner the Novices are to be trained and tried. The
Order of Studies for those who have ended their Noviceship. The Care of St.
Ignatius for the Health and Progress of Students. Piety joined with Study in
the Society. The different Degrees in the Society. The General of the Society
perpetual and absolute. How the Authority of the General is tempered. The Union
of the Members with their Head, and among themselves. Means found out by St.
Ignatius to preserve the Society. The Constitutions of the Society divided into
Ten Parts.

The Contents of the Fourth Book, Page 210.
THe Society begins to spread in Europe. The General receives, and dismisseth
William Postel. He chooses Laynez and Salmeron for the Council of Trent. The
Advertisements which he gives to Laynez and Salmeron. He reconciles the King of
Portugal and the Pope. His Domestical Government. His Conduct toward the
Novices. His Care for the Sick. His Zeal for Regular Discipline. Le Jay,
Laynez, and Salmeron at the Council of Trent. Le Jay nominated to the
Bishopric of Trieste. Le Jay refuses the Bishopric of Trieste. St. Ignatius
opposes the Promotion of Le Jay. He declares his Reasons to the Pope, of
refusing Ecclesiastical Dignities. The Society begins to Instruct Youth in
Learning. The General's Directions for good Order in the Colleges. He delivers
the Society from the Government of Religious Women. His Proceeding with
Hercules d' Este Duke of Ferara. The Spiritual Exercise is approved by the Holy
See. He goes out of Rome upon a Work of Charity. He tries the Obedience of his
Subjects. The Society enters into Africa and America. The Society ill used in
Germany. Melchior Cano declares himself against the Society. Note upon the
Letter 29. Art. 12. The Conduct of Ignatius in the Persecution raised by Cano.
Oviedo inclined to a Solitary Life. Oviedo set right again. Francis de Borgia
called to the Society. He moderates the Fervor of Borgia, and others. His
Confidence in God recompensed. His Application to make Learning flourish in the
Society. He sends three Divines to Ingolstadt. The Society makes small Progress
in France. Avila and Granada favorable to the Society. The Order of the
Carthusians Affectionated to the Society. Julius the Third grants many Favors
to the General of the Society. He submits the Constitutions to the Censure of
the principal Fathers. He endeavors to lay down the Generalship of his Order.
He Treats at Rome with the Duke of Gandia. The Society ill treated at Paris.
The General endeavors to Establish the Society in France. He causes a House of
Catechumens to be Established in the Indies. Artifices of the Heretics to
pervert the Jesuits of Rome. The Archbishop of Toledo opposite to the Society.
The General hinders the Promotion of Borgia. Don Antonio de Cordoua received
into the Society.

The Contents of the Fifth Book, Page 280.
THe Foundation of the German College. He supports the German College in
troublesome Times. He makes a Reconcilation, and does other good Works. He
hinders the Incorporating the Barnabites, the Somasques, and the Theatines with
the Society. He condemns the Conduct of Miron and Gonzales. He reprehends
Laynez, and how Laynez receives the Reprimand. He keeps up Regular Discipline
in the College of Naples. Troubles in the Province of Portugal, and the
General's Conduct in quieting them. The General overcomes great Oppositions. He
sends a Visitor into Portugal. He gives Advice to the Provincial. He moderates
the Fervor of the Portuguez. The Epistle of Obedience. Two Missioners accused,
and justified. A new Persecution in Spain. A Testimony in favor of the
Exercises of Father Ignatius. The King of Portugal demands of Father Ignatius a
Patriarch and Bishop for Aethiopia. The Fathers proposed by the General, oppose
their Promotion. The General engages the three Fathers to submit. The Geneal's
Letter to the King of the Abyssins. How the General treats Rodriguez. He makes
a Regulation for the Visits of Women. He caused Rules of Behavior to be
published. The Pope incensed against the Society. The General appeases the
Pope. The Affection of Popes for the Society. He hinders Laynez's being made a
Cardinal. The Confidence of Father Ignatius in the Providence of God. The
Society Persecuted in France. The Decree of the Faculty of Divinity at Paris
against the Jesuits. The General will have no Answer made to the Decree. He
Confers with some Doctors of the Sorbon. His Care for the Advancement of
Learning in the Roman College. His Infirmities oblige him to give over
Business. He reserves to himself the Care of the Sick. He Institutes the
Prayers of Forty hours, during the three last days of Carnivall. He disposes
himself to die.

The Contents of the Sixth Book, Page 347.
THe Effect which his Death produced. The Judgment of the first Fathers of the
Society concerning St. Ignatius. He is honored as a Saint in Rome. A Miracle
wrought upon the Day of his Interment. The Place where his Body lies, and his
Epitaph. Testimonies of several Persons in Praise of St. Ignatius. He is
Reverenced by the People as a Saint. The Prediction, and the Apparition of St.
Ignatius. A miraculous Cure. The Saint Religiously Reverenced by Cardinal
Baronius. The Pope orders Informations to be taken of Ignatius's Life. His Gift
of Prayer. His Love toward God. His Charity toward his Neighbor. His
Humility. His Disengagement from the World. His Command over his Passions. His
Reserv'dness in Speaking, and how weighty her Words. His Constancy in what he
undertook for God, and his Greatness of Soul. His Confidence in God. His
Prudence in Spiritual Matters. His Beatification. His Cononization.

THE LIFE OF St. IGNATIUS. The First BOOK.
THE providence of God never appeared more visibly in the preservation of his
Church, then in the last Century; so fatal to Germany, to England, and to
France; by the Apostasy of Luther, by the Schism of Henry the Eighth, and by
the pretended Reformation of Calvin: As the manners of Men generally grow
corrupt, by the same degrees that they loose their Faith; so were these new
Heresies followed by a general licentiousness. The People, after they had
revolted from the common Pastor of the Faithful, Rebelled also against their
Lawful Princes; and having shaken off the Yoke of Ecclesiastical Obedience, and
of Allegiance to their Sovereigns, they abandoned themselves to all those
disorders, which Men are capable of, when they are governed by the Spirit of
Lying. Thus did Impiety ravage the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and in those
places, where Religion had been most flourishing, Altars were profaned, the
use of Sacraments abolished, the Evangelical Councils contemned, and all Laws,
both Humane, and Divine, trampled under foot.

Then it was, that Heaven raised up Ignatius of Loyola, to serve, and relieve
the pressing necessities of the Christian World; and it looks, as if the Divine
wisdom had intended specially to declare that very purpose, by a concourse of
Accidents then happening, which could not be the product of mere chance: For in
the same year, that Luther publicly maintained his Apostasy in the Diet of
Worms, and retiring himself into his solitude of Alstat, wrote a Book against
Monastical Vows, which made an infinity of Apostates, Did Ignatius consecrate
himself to God, in the Church of Montserrat, and in his retreat of Manreze,
write his spiritual Exercises, which served to form, and model his own, and to
re-people all other Religious Orders.

At the very time that Calvin began to Dogmatize, and gather Disciples in
Paris; Ignatius, who was come thither to Study, did in like manner assemble his
company, to declare War against the Enemies of the Catholic Faith. And Lastly,
When Henry the Eighth first assumed the Title of Head of the Church, and
Commanded all his Subjects under pain of Death, to raze out the Name of the
Pope from all their Papers and Books: Did our new Patriark (whose life I now
write) lay the Foundation of a Society, devoted to the service of the Holy See.

Ignatius was born in the year 1491. in the Reign of Ferdinand and Isabella,
His Birth and his Natural parts.
and in that part of the Spanish Biscay, which reaches toward the Pyreneans,
and is at this day called Guipuscoa; Don Bertram his Father, Lord of Ognez, and
Loyola, was of the Ancient Nobility in that Country, and Head of a Family,
which had always enjoyed the first charges, and had produced many eminent
Persons. His Mother Marina Saez de Balde, was of no less Illustrious an
Extraction. He was the last born of three Daughters, and Eight Sons; well
shaped, of a temper inclining to choler, his Air and his Genius lofty, and
above all he had an ardent passion for Glory: Tho he seemed outwardly something
violent, and haughty, he was nevertheless in his conversation affable, and
obliging. He was naturally Wise; and in his first years a certain discretion
was observed in him, which had nothing of Childishness.

His Father, His Life in the World.
who judged him proper for the Court, sent him thither betimes, and made him
Page to the Catholic King. Ferdinand took pleasure to see a Child so lively
and rational, and upon occasions gave him Marks of his good liking. But young
Ignatius was not of a humor to lead so unactive a life; the Love of Glory, and
the Example of his Brothers, who had signalized themselves in the Army of
Naples, soon gave him a disgust of the Court, and put thoughts of War in his
head, at an Age, in which others only mind the plays of Children. He declared
his intentions to the Duke of Naiare, Don Antonio Manrique, Grandee of Spain,
his Kinsman, and a particular friend to his Family; The Duke, who had a Martial
Soul, and was esteemed one of the most accomplished Gentlemen of his time, did
not oppose the design of Ignatius. He took care to have him well taught his
Exercises, and delighted himself in forming and instructing him in them.
Ignatius under so good a Master, became in a short time capable of serving his
Prince; He pas'd through all the degrees of Soldiery; In all occasions he
showed great Bravery, and was extremely intent, and sedulous in the Service,
whether he Obeyed or Commanded.

He was not so exact in the Duties of Christianity, as in the Discipline of
War; those ill habits he had contracted at Court, were increased in him by the
Licentiousness of the Camp; nor did the toils of War lessen in him his
propension to Love and Pleasure. Perhaps there never was a Cavalier more
hardened to Labor, and at the same time so polite, and addicted to Gallantry;
and yet as Worldly as Ignatius then was, he had in him those principles of
Morality and Religion, which made him keep a kind of decency even in his
Irregularities. He was never heard to utter any thing, that was impious or
immodest; he had a Reverence for Holy Places, and Sacred Persons. Although he
were very nice in the point of Honor, and his Natural promptness incited him
to revenge the least Injury, yet he easily Pardoned, and was perfectly
reconciled, upon the least submission, and acknowledgement. He had a particular
Talent to accommodate, and reconcile quarrels amongst Soldiers, and also to
appease popular commotions; in so much, that he has been seen more then once,
with a word only to make incensed Parties lay down their Arms, when they were
upon the point of falling on.

How generous and disinteress'd he was, appeared at the taking of Naiare, a
Town situated upon the Frontiers of Biscay, which being left to the pillage of
the Soldiers, Ignatius (who had the greatest part in the Victory, and therefore
ought to have no little share in the booty) was content to have for his
portion, only the glory of the Action: For he judged, that a Man of Honor
ought not to Enrich himself with the spoils of miserable people. He wanted not
dexterity in the management of Affairs; and as young as he then was, he very
well understood, how to humor both Men, and Occasions; He hated Gaming, but
loved Poetry, and tho he had no tincture of Learning, he made very good Verses
in Spanish, and sometimes upon pious Subjects, among which, one Poem is
particularly mentioned, composed by him in the praise of St. Peter.

This notwithstanding, his conduct was never the more Christian, or regular,
his fancy was wholly filled with Gallantry and Vanity, and in all his Actions
he only followed the false maxims of the World. In this sort he lived to the
Age of Nine and twenty, at which time God was pleased to open his Eyes, in the
way and manner, I am now to relate.

Charles the Fifth, who succeeded Ferdinand, and was newly elected Emperor,
being gone into Germany, to take possession of the Imperial Crown, the people
of Spain, irritated by the exactions of the Lord des Cheures, made an
Insurrection in Castile, and the greatest part of the Castilean Lords, jealous
of the Authority of the Flemings, who Governed all in Spain, put themselves at
the head of the Rebels.

Don Frederick Henriques, Viceroy and Admiral of Castile, being faithful to his
Prince, made it his business to secure and fortify the strong Holds, and to
that end, drew out of Navarre into Castile, both Troops and Ammunition.

Francis the First of France, who having been a pretender to the Empire, was
now become an Enemy to the Emperor, understanding that Navarre was unprovided,
resolved to make use of the occasion to recover that Kingdom, of which
Ferdinand had lately Dispossessed John d'Albert, and which Charles the Fifth
still held, contrary to the treaty of Noyon, which obliged him to restore it in
Six Months. Francis therefore sent a great Army thither in the year 1521, under
the Conduct of Andrew de Foix, Lord of Esparre, and Brother to the Famous
Lautrec.

At the noise of this March, Don Manrique, Viceroy of Navarre, went in person
to demand succors from Don Frederick, who had newly routed the party of the
Rebels; but in this while, the French Army passed the Pyreneans, and were
entered into Navarre, through the Province of Guypuscoa, and having taken
several places of less Importance, laid Seige to Pampelona, the Capital of that
Kingdom. The Viceroy had left behind Don Ignatius of Loyola, not to Command,
but to Encourage the Garrison, and keep the people in their Duty, under the
Authority of an old Officer.

The Soldiers and Inhabitants, affrighted at the sight of the Enemy, were
resolved to open their Gates, notwithstanding all the Remonstrances of
Ignatius. He promised them Relief, he threatened them with the Indignation of
the Viceroy, and of the Emperor. He reproch'd them for their Cowardice, and
perfidiousness; but he gained nothing upon a sort of people, possessed with a
Panick fright, and who gave themselves for lost. To revenge himself of them,
and to save his own Honor, he left them to their fears, and retired into the
Citadel, with one only Soldier, who had the heart to follow him.

The Governor of the Citadel himself, was in no very good assurance, being
ill provided with Victuals, and Men; his Spirit began to fail him, when he saw
the French, Masters of the Town. But he was somewhat recovered, when they
offered him an Interview to Capitulate. The Ancient Officers were of opinion,
that they should accept the offer, made by the Enemy: Ignatius opposed it, but
without success: Not being able therefore to hinder this Interview, he would at
least be of it, so to hinder (if possible) the shameful consequence it might
have. The Besiegers confident of their Forces, and Success, proposed very hard
conditions to the Besieged. Ignatius with disdain rejected them; and finding
that his companions were upon the point of making a dishonorable composition,
on set purpose he fell into sharp, and provoking Language with the Enemy,
whereupon the conference broke off. And then raising the Courage of the
Officers, who were come forth to Capitulate, he shut himself up with them,
resolved to defend the place to the last drop of his Blood, at least to die
like a Man of Honor. The French incensed at the transport, and fierceness of
the young Spaniard, Attacked the Castle with great Fury. They planted all their
Artillery against it, and where the breach was widest, they made their
Approches, and in conclusion their Assault. Ignatius appeared upon the breach,
at the head of the bravest, and received the Enemy with his Sword in his hand.
On both sides it was obstinately Fought, and in a little time a great Slaughter
was made. In the heat of the Combat Ignatius was wounded with a Splinter in his
left Leg, and almost in the same instant, He is wounded at the Siege of
Pampelona.
his right was broken with a Cannon bullet. The Soldiers, who had been animated
by his Courage, lost Heart when they saw him thus disabled, and rendered upon
discretion.

But the French used their Victory with moderation, they carried off Ignatius
to the Generals quarter, treated him very civilly, and had all the care of him
that was due to his Valor and Quality. When his Leg was set, and the condition
of his wound would permit his removal, they caused him to be carried in a
Litter to the Castle of Loyola, which is not far distant from Pampelona.

Where he was scarce arrived, but he felt extraordinary pain. The Surgeons
were of opinion, that some of the Bones were out of their places, either
through the ignorance of him, who first set them, or by reason of the moving,
and jogging too soon after the setting: And that to replace the Bones in their
Natural situation, they must break the Leg again. Ignatius readily believed
them, and being under their hand, he suffered the painful operation without the
least concern. But in these occasions Courage cannot always support Nature, and
he was forced to yield to a violent Fever, which seizing him with dangerous
symptoms, cast him down into a languishing weakness. The Physicians declared to
him his danger, and that he had not many days to live. He received the
Sacraments upon the Eve of the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, and then grew
so much weaker and weaker, that it was not believed he would pass that night.

But God, who had his designs upon him, preserved him, contrary to all humane
appearance; and so ordered it, that he should be cured by the means, and
intercession of St. Peter; either because Ignatius had from his youth a special
veneration for the Prince of the Apostles, or in regard that St. Peter had an
Interest in the cure of a Man destined by Heaven, to maintain against Heretics
the Authority of the Holy See. However it were, the sick Man saw in his dream
the Blessed Apostle, who touched him, and cured him, and the event did show,
that this dream was no illusion; for Ignatius, as soon as he awaked, found
himself out of danger; his pains left him, and his strength suddenly returned.
Tho he recovered Miraculously his health, he did not lose the spirit of the
World; his Leg, which had been ill set at first, was not so well re-set the
second time but that there remained a visible deformity, caused by the standing
out of a Bone under the Knee, which hindered the Cavalier from wearing a Boot
with a good Grace; He passionately affecting to appear every way complete,
without the least blemish, resolved to have this Bone cut off. The Chirurgions
told him, the operation would be extremely dolorous: He reckoned pain for
nothing, and would neither be bound nor held; The Bone was cut off, and
Ignatius, whilst it was doing, hardly changed his countenance.

This was not the only torment, which he endured, that he might have nothing of
deformity in his person; one of his Thighs being shrunk, by reason of his
wound, he was in mighty apprehension, least any lameness should appear in his
Gate, which to prevent, he put himself for many days together upon a kind of
Rack, and with an Engine of Iron he violently stretched, and drew out his Leg:
But with all his pains and endeavors, he could never extend it, but that ever
after his right Leg remained shorter then his left.

The Posture Ignatius was now in, did not very well agree with his Active and
Ardent nature; he was restrained from Walking, and confined to his Bed. Having
nothing to do, it appeared the more irksom to him, in regard he found himself
perfectly in health, bating only the cure of his Knee, which required time; He
therefore to divert himself, called for a Romance; Amadis de Gaul, and such
Books of Knight Errantry, were at that time in great vogue with all Persons of
Quality; and he above the rest, was most particularly affected with the
Adventures, and feats of Arms, in such Books related. Although the Castle of
Loyola did not use to be unprovided of such Fabulous Histories, yet, at that
time, they could not light upon any; so that instead of a Romance, they brought
him the Life of our Savior, and of the Saints.

These Books he read with no other design, His Conversion.
but to wear away the time, and at first, without any gust, or pleasure; But
after a while, he began insensibly to relish them, and by degrees took such
delight in them, that he past whole days in reading. The first effect which
this produced in him, was to admire in the Saints their love for Solitude, and
for the Cross. He considered with Astonishment, among the Anchorets of
Palestine and Egypt, Men that had been of quality, and condition in the World,
covered with Hair-shirts, macerated with Fastings, and buried alive in Caves
and Dens: He thereupon said within himself, These Men, so much at enmity with
their own flesh, and so dead to the vanities of the Earth, were of the same
nature that I am of: Why therefore should not I do, what they have done?
Hereupon he took a resolution to imitate them, and thought nothing too great
for his courage, nor too hard for his undertaking. He proposed to himself, to
visit the Holy Sepulcher, and to shut himself up in an Hermitage: But these
good motions lasted but for a while, and he quickly relapsed into his former
weakness. Besides his innate passion for Glory, he had a secret inclination for
a certain Lady of great Quality in the Court of Castile, and now instead of
thinking upon his Retreat, his head was full of I know not what, Military
exploits, to make himself worthy of the Ladies favor, as he himself has
afterward confessed to Father Lewis Gonzales, giving him an account of his
Conversion. He was possessed to that degree with these fond Ideas, that it would
not enter into him, how any Man of Honor could be happy without a strong
passion for Glory, and the softer entertainments of Love. When his thoughts
were tired with thus tumbling about, for his diversion he set himself again to
read; and falling into fresh admiration of the virtues he found in the Saints,
there did appear to him something more wonderful in their Actions, then in all
the exploits of those Romantic Heroes, which had formerly filled his
imagination. And by reading on, and reflecting upon what he read, he came at
length to understand, that nothing was more frivolous then that Worldly Glory,
which had so possessed his fancy; that God only was capable to content the Soul
of Man, and that he ought to renounce all things, to make his Salvation sure.

These considerations did by degrees re-kindle in him the desire of solitude,
and that, which formerly appeared impossible to him, consulting his nature and
inclinations, now seemed feasible and easy, having the example of the Saints
before his Eyes. But still when he was just upon the point of taking a good
Resolution, the World with all its Charms so powerfully assaulted him, that he
fell back, and soon became the old Man again.

Many days he spent in this fluctuation of mind, unresolved which way to
determine himself; still attracted by God, and still held fast by the World.
But these his various thoughts, as they were very Heterogenious in their
origin, so were they no less different in their effects. Those, which came
from God, filled him with consolation, and caused within him a profound peace
and tranquillity of mind; But the others, though at first they brought with them
a more sensible delight, yet after some continuance, he found, they left behind
them a certain bitterness, and heaviness at Heart. He reflected upon it, and
(as Carnal and Worldly as he then was) he began to reason and discourse with
himself upon the nature of spiritual things; for God Almighty, who had resolved
to settle in him a great fund of Sanctity, and to show in his person, how far
Christian Wisdom can advance, when accompanied with great Natural parts, would
not have his conversion too easily, or suddenly made.

He observed that there were two kinds of Spirits, diametrically opposite, the
one of God, the other of the World; He took notice by what he found within
himself, that a solid joy which penetrates the Soul, does infinitely surpass
that light and flashy pleasure, which only gratifies the senses: Whereupon it
was easy for him to conclude, what advantage the things of Heaven have over
those of the Earth, in order to the contenting and satiating the Heart of Man.
These first Rudiments, which Ignatius had of interior motions, were the Ground
and Foundation of those Rules, which he gives us in the Book of his Exercises,
for the discernment of those Spirits, which are in us the principles of Good
and Evil.

These great Truths having taken full possession of his Soul, and being
fortified with Divine Grace against all the suggestion of Hell; He made now a
final Resolution to change his Life, and quite to break off with the World. His
first purpose was, to use his Body with all the rigor it was able to bear; and
this he did, either through a lively apprehension of the torments of Hell, with
intent to appease the Divine justice, or else, as being yet but of small
experience in a Spiritual life, he imagined that all Christian perfection
consisted in the maceration of the Body.

He resolved therefore to go barefoot to the Holy Land, to cloth himself with
Sackcloth, to fast with Bread and Water, not to sleep but on the bare Ground,
and to choose a wild Desert for his abode; But whereas his Leg was not yet
perfectly cured, he could not immediately execute what his love of Penance
inspired him to do.

So that for the present, to satisfy in some measure his fervor, he
constantly rose up at midnight, and being thoroughly touched with a Remorse of
his sins, he spent that time, which was free from the disturbance of company,
in weeping for them. One night among the rest, being up according to his
custom, and prostrating himself before an Image of the Blessed Virgin, with
extraordinary sentiments of Piety, he offered up himself to Jesus Christ, by
her means, and intercession, and Consecrated himself to the Service of the Son
and the Mother, vowing to them both an inviolable fidelity. When he had ended
his Prayer, he heard a mighty noise, the House trembled, all the windows of his
Chamber were broken, and there was made a great rent in the Wall, which remains
at this day to be seen. It is probable, that God did thereby make it appear,
that the Sacrifice of his new Servant was agreeable to him; for Heaven
sometimes declares it self by such surprising signs in favor of the Saints;
witness, what we read in the Acts of the Apostles, of the place where the
Faithful were Congregated to make their Prayers; and of the Prison where St.
Paul and Silas sung Hymns together. It may also be, that this Earthquake was
caused by the Devils, who enraged to see their prey ravished from them, and
foreseeing, what Ignatius would one day become, did their endeavor, by the
fall of the Castle of Loyola, to put a Period to his life, and to his future
progress.

Thus, whilst his Leg was still in cure, he continued reading the lives of our
Savior and the Saints; not as formerly, for amuzement sake, and to pass away
the time, but to the end of forming his own life according to those great
Models, and of corroborating his Holy Resolutions. Nor did he only read them,
but he made them the subject of his Meditation, and wrote down what he found
most sensibly to affect him.

It is farther said of him, that having Learned in his Youth to design, he took
delight with Crayons of several Colors to draw the most signal Actions of the
Saints, and to write down their remarkable sayings; to the intent of Printing
them deeper in his memory.

Whilst he was thus employed, the great Truths of Christianity took such deep
root in him, that he himself was astonished at his own transformation into
another Man, so that the conversion of Ignatius was finished, and brought to
perfection, by the same means, which first gave the rise, and entrance to it.
And the reading of good Books worked that in him, which neither a mortal
Disease, nor the terrors of Death, nor an apparition from Heaven, with a
miraculous cure could effect: So much it imports Worldly persons, and even the
most obdurate sinners, some times to read Books of Piety.

The Favors he received from Heaven, did not a little serve him to forget the
Vanities of the World: The blessed Virgin all environed with light appeared to
him one Night, holding little Jesus in her Arms. At this Vision Ignatius felt
his Soul replenished with such a spiritual Unction, as ever after rendered all
pleasures of the Senses insipid to him. During this Apparition, which lasted a
considerable time, it seemed to him that his Heart was purified within him, and
that all images of sensual Delights were quite razed out of his Mind. These
happy effects did not end with the Apparition; for from that time forward he
was never subject to the rebellion of carnal concupiscence, nor even to those
thoughts with which sometimes the most chaste Persons use to be tormented. But
the disappearing of Jesus and Mary left him in great trouble: Wherefore to
comfort himself, he often with flaming Aspirations looked up to Heaven; and
when he did so, all that was charming and tempting in the World, he beheld with
horror. His Leg being thoroughly cured, he prepared himself in good earnest to
follow the Voice of Heaven, but did it with all possible secrecy; being even
then persuaded, that the Affairs of God are to be carried on without noise; and
that no ostentation should be used in leaving the World. And yet, to see him so
different from himself, plunged in profound Meditations, speaking little, and
speaking only of the vanity of worldly things, always Reading, and Writing; it
was easy to imagine, that he was disgusted with the World, and that he
projected something very extraordinary. Don Martino Garsias, his eldest
Brother, who since the death of Don Bertram was become Lord of the Castle of
Loyola, one who did not live overmuch according to the Maxims of the Gospel,
did all that he could to discover and break his Design. Taking him one Day
aside, he began to praise the good Qualities that Nature had bestowed upon him,
and above all, his Warlike Genius, which from his Childhood had made him
embrace the Profession of Arms; and the maturity of his Judgment, which
appeared so early in his Conduct: After this he conjured him not to give way to
his Melancholy Distemper, nor rashly to run upon any extravagant Courses. He
said to him, You have gained no little Glory at the Siege of Pampelona, and you
are now reckoned among the most illustrious Warriors of Spain, do not destroy
your own Reputation, nor dishonor your Family by a Folly unworthy of your Name;
at least hide not from me those Thoughts, with which of late you are so filled,
and altered; and put confidence in a Brother, who tenderly loves you.

When God speaks efficaciously to the Heart, the words of Men, be they never so
flattering, make little impression. Ignatius, who thought nothing so truly
Great, as the contempt of worldly Greatness, and apprehending the danger which
a Conference with his Brother might expose him to, answered him in two words;
That he was very far from doing any foolish thing, and that he would endeavor
always to live like a Man of Honor. Although so short and general an Answer did
not content Don Garsias, however it made him hope, that Ignatius would make
sober Reflections upon what he had said, and so in time would come again to
himself.

Soon after this, He goes to Montserrat.
Ignatius, who had taken his measures for his departure from Loyola, got on
Horseback, without any other design in appearance, then to visit the Duke of
Naiare, who lived at Navarret, a small neighboring Town, and who during his
Sickness had often sent to see him. From this Place he took some occasion to
send home his two Servants which attended him; and having ended his Visit, he
went without any Company onwards in the way to Montserrat, a Monastery of St.
Bennet's Order, distant a days Journey from Barcelona. This Place is famous for
the Devotion of Pilgrims, who come thither from all parts of the World, to
implore the succor, and to honor a miraculous Image of the Virgin Mary. At his
coming out of Navarret, he made a Vow of perpetual Chastity; and this he did,
not only to render himself more agreeable to the high pattern of Purity, the
Holy Virgin, before whom he was shortly to present himself, but also, as it
were, to put a Seal (never to be broken) upon the grace and gift of Chastity,
which he had received in the Apparition we formerly mentioned. For although he
found himself free from all the assaults of concupiscence, yet he thought he
could never be too severe, and therefore resolved always to be upon his guard,
lest those extinguished flames should kindle again.

The Zeal which he then conceived for the honor of the Mother of God, had
almost transported him too far, for want of light and experience in spiritual
matters, in which he was yet but a Novice. Ferdinand, who had conquered the
Moors, and endeavored to root them out of Spain, so to abolish Mahometism, of
which they made profession, could not so wholly purge them out of his Kingdom,
but that many remained after the Conquest of Granada: That Prince being
deceased, some Relics of those Infidels were scattered even in the Kingdoms
of Valentia and Arragon.

One of these Mohammedan Moors happened to join Ignatius on the Road, and as
Travelers commonly ask Questions of the Places from whence, and whither they
come, and go; Montserrat being named, they fell into Argument about the
immaculate Purity of the Blessed Virgin. The Moor agreed, that till the Birth
of Christ, Mary preserved her Virginity; but he maintained, that when she
became a Mother, she ceased to be a Virgin. Ignatius could not hear this
Blasphemy without horror; he took great pains to disabuse the Moor, and his
Devotion instructed him with Reasons far surpassing the capacity of a Soldier;
but his Arguments were lost upon the Infidel, whose Understanding was poisoned,
and prepossessed against Christian Truth. The Moor slighted his Reasons, and
fell to railly his Religion; but perceiving that his Raileries began to stir
the choler of Ignatius, and judging by his Physiognomy that he would take his
Satisfaction, not in words only, the Infidel very wisely set Spurs to his
Horse, and made his way with all the speed he could. Ignatius transported both
with anger and zeal, was in doubt with himself, whether his Faith did not
oblige him to revenge the Honor of the Blessed Virgin, by the death of the
Mohammedan: Nor are we much to wonder, that such a Doubt should come into the
Head of a Man brought up in Arms, accustomed to Combats, and but little
instructed in the Rules of Conscience.

Not being able to resolve his Doubt, and fearing on the other side to be
wanting in his Duty, he resolved at least to follow the Moor, and then to do
what God should inspire him. Thus riding on, he came where the Road parted, one
Way leading to Montserrat, and the other to a Village, whither the Moor was
gone; he stopped short with his Horse, and resolved on the sudden to leave
himself to the guidance of his Beast, which of the Ways to take, purposing to
kill the Moor, if Providence directed his Horse that Way which leads to the
Village; consequently he slackened his Reins, and although the Road to the Village
was very plain and wide, the Horse of his own accord took the other leading to
Montserrat, which was both narrow and rugged; Whereupon Ignatius concluded,
that God did not require at his hands, that he should revenge the Blasphemies
of the Moor.

Being come to the Village, lying at the foot of a Mountain, on which stands
the Monastery of Montserrat, he bought for his Voyage of Jerusalem a long Coat
of course Cloth, a Girdle, a pair of Sandals, with a Pilgrims Staff, and a
Wallet: This Equipage of a Pilgrim he took along with him up to the Monastery,
where his first thoughts were, to begin the Reformation of his Life, by a
general Confession of all his Sins, tho at that time such Confessions were not
much in use. For the well performing so important an Action, he made it his
business to find out some very able spiritual Director, to instruct him in the
Duties of a Penitent, and to set him right in the way of saving his Soul.

There was in the Monastery a Religious Man of eminent Sanctity, called Don
John Chanones, of the French Nation, a Man of great Sense, and who before his
retreat had sometime been Grand Vicar of Mirapoix. Ignatius had the good
fortune to light into the hands of this good Religious Man, who was chief
Confessor of the Pilgrims. He wrote down his Sins with all possible exactness:
but he confessed them with so lively a Sorrow, and such abundance of Tears,
that he was forced several times to interrupt his Confession; so that it lasted
three days. He discovered to his Confessor all his Intentions, and chiefly that
Form of an austere Life which he was resolved to lead. The good Father, who was
himself a very mortified Person, confirmed Ignatius in his Design; and withal
gave him Rules for his conduct, discovering to him those snares which the evil
Spirit might possibly lay for him in his first Fervours.

The Sentiments of Penance which Ignatius then had, went farther then bare
Sighs and Tears. In the Evening he went forth to find out a poor Man, to whom,
stripping himself to his Shirt, he privately gave all his Clothes; then putting
on his long Weed, and girt with a Cord, which he had bought by the way, he
returned back to the Church of the Monastery: Entering in, there came into his
thoughts what he had formerly read in Amadis, and such other Books of Chivalry,
that those Knights, before they were received into the Order, did watch a whole
Night in their Arms. He to convert into a holy usage this profane Ceremony, in
like manner made his Vigil before the Altar of our Lady, sometimes standing,
sometimes kneeling, but always praying and devoting himself to Jesus and Mary,
in quality of their Knight, according to those Warlike Idea's which were still
in him, and by which he represented to himself the things of God.

He hung up his Sword upon a Pillar near the Altar, in testimony of his
renouncing secular Warfare. Very early in the Morning he Received the
Communion, and then departed from Montserrat, fearing lest he should be
discovered by some of those persons who came from Biscay and Navarr: For that
Day happened to be the Feast of the Annunciation, which is Celebrated in that
holy Place with much Solemnity, and great concourse of Pilgrims from all Spain.
He left his Horse to the Monastery, and carried away nothing with him but some
penitential Instruments, which (at his request) were bestowed upon him by his
Ghostly Father.

He marched with his Staff in his Hand, He goes to Manreze.
his Scrip by his Side, bare-headed, one Foot bare, for the other, which had
still a weakness since his hurt, and swelled every Night, he thought necessary
to be shod; but he marched with such vigor and speed, as well showed what
Spirit moved him; mightily comforted, in having cast off the Liveries of the
World, and put on those of Jesus Christ.

He was scarce advanced a League, when he heard the noise of a Horseman riding
with full speed after him: He was an Officer of the Justice, belonging to
Montserrat. Is it true (says he being come up to him) that you have bestowed
rich Clothes upon a Beggar? Notwithstanding the poor Man's protesting the
contrary, he is not believed; he is suspected of theft, and clapped in Prison. At
these words Ignatius was sensibly grieved, and could not refrain tears. To
deliver the innocent he confessed the truth; but would not declare (tho pressed
to it) neither his Quality, nor his Name. He pursued his Journey with some
trouble of mind, for the Misfortune of the poor Man, which he reckoned his own,
in that he could not assist his Neighbor, without bringing him into trouble.
With these thoughts he went on toward Manreze, where he resolved to conceal
himself, and to wait till the Plague did cease at Barcelona, and till the Port
was open, that he might proceed in his Journey to the Holy Land.

Manreze is a little Town, three Leagues distant from Montserrat; a Place
famous at this day, for the exemplary Penance of the Saint, whose History I
write, and for Devotion of the People, who resort thither in Pilgrimage from
all Parts; but at that time hardly taken notice of, having nothing in it
considerable, but a Monastery of Dominicans, and an Hospital for Pilgrims, and
sick Persons. Ignatius went straight to the Hospital, which stood without the
Walls of the Town, and was called the Hospital of St. Lucius. He took great
content, to see himself in the number of the Poor, and in a condition of doing
Penance witout being known.

Which he began by Fasting the whole Week with Bread and Water, His penitential
Life.
excepting the Sunday, when he eat a few boiled Herbs, but sprinkled over with
Ashes; he girded his Reins with an iron Chain; under his course Habit he wore a
Hair Shirt; thrice a day he Disciplined himself, slept little, and lay upon the
Ground.

In this ill treatment of himself, he had at first no other aim, but to imitate
those holy Penitents, whose Lives he had read, and to expiate the Disorders of
his Life past. Afterward he conceived an ardent desire of pursuing the Glory
of God in all his Actions; and this desire rendered the Motive of his Penance
more pure and noble. The truth is, he had always his sins before his eyes, and
always he had a horror of them: But after some time his own concern did not
touch him, and in those rigours which he used upon his Person, instead of
minding to satisfy for the pains which his sins deserved, he only thought of
revenging the injury, and repairing the Honor of the Divine Majesty.

He was every day present at the whole Service of the Church, and spent seven
hours in Prayer upon his Knees; and tho he had not as yet the Rules of Mental
Prayer, yet he was so recollected, that he many times continued several hours
together without any motion. He often visited the Church of our Lady at Villa
Dordis, which is but half a League from Manreze, and when he performed these
little Pilgrimages, he commonly added to his Hair Shirt and his Chain, a Girdle
of certain Herbs, full of little Thorns and Prickles.

Reflecting upon his own conduct, he rightly judged, that the macerations of
the Flesh would little advance him in the ways of Heaven, if he did not make it
his business to stifle in himself all motions of pride and self-love. To this
end he begged his Bread from Door to Door, endeavoring to appear a real
Beggar; and lest any should guess at his Quality, either by his Countenance or
by his Behavior, he affected clownishness in his Carriage, so to liken himself
to the meanest sort of People. And the better to disguise himself, he entirely
neglected his Person, and studied how to deform himself; he, who formerly made
it his chief happiness to appear graceful and comely in the eyes of the World.
His Face all covered with Dirt, his Hair clodded and uncomb'd, his Beard and
his Nails grown out to a fearful length, made such a Figure of him, as seemed
at once both frightful and ridiculous; so that whenever he appeared in the Town
of Manreze, the Children pointed at him, threw Stones at him, and followed him
in the Streets with shouts and outcries. Most part of the People of whom he
asked Alms, instead of giving him any thing, laughed at him; and one there was
more brutal then the rest, who not content to abuse him only when he met him in
the Street, would often go on purpose to the Hospital to revile him, and to
insult over him. Ignatius suffered all these outrages and scorns without saying
a word, as if he had been a stupid Idiot, but rejoiced in his heart that he had
his share in the reproaches of the Cross.

The Devil could not endure these Christian Sentiments, in a Man naturally
haughty, and who was but a beginner in the Service of God; therefore he took
his time to tempt him with such thoughts as these; What do you do in an
Hospital? Heaven, who has bestowed upon you a noble Extraction, and generous
Inclinations, would have you to be a holy Cavalier, not a counterfeit Beggar.
Were you at Court, or in the Army, your Example alone would reform all the
Couriers and the Soldiers.

At the same time the nastiness of the Hospital grew strangely noisome and
disgustful to him; and he felt an inward shame to see himself in the company of
Beggars. But he soon discovered the suggestion of the malignant Spirit, who
under the pretense of a specious and plausible Good, would have drawn him out
of that way in which God had placed him. To vanquish the Enemy, and to overcome
himself, he now used more familiarity then before with his poor Companions, and
applied himself to the tending of those sick Persons whose Diseases were most
loathsome.

In the mean time a report was spread in Manreze, That the poor Beggar, whom no
body knew what he was, or whence he came, and who was mocked and scorned by
every body, was a Man of Quality, disguised upon the score of Penance. The
abovementioned Adventure of the Beggar of Montserrat was the ground of this
suspicion: It had made a noise in the Country, and by the circumstances of the
Face, and the marks of the Person, they judged that this unknown Pilgrim might
well be the same Cavalier who stripped himself to his Shirt. The Modesty, the
Patience, and the Devotion of Ignatius, made this conjecture very probable: so
that the Inhabitants of Manreze began to look upon him with other eyes; and by
how much they were conscious of their Indignities against him, by so much more
they now did reverence and admire him. He perceived it, and to avoid this new
snare, which he imagined the Devil had laid for him, he sought out a Retreat,
where he might be more concealed then in the Hospital.

At the foot of a Hill, He retires into a Cave.
about half a mile from the Town, he found a Place fit for his purpose; it was
a dark and deep Cave, in the hollow of a Rock, which opened into a solitary
Valley, commonly called, The Vale of Paradise. This Cave was known to few, and
it appeared so hideous, that none would ever venture into it. Ignatius made his
way through the overgrown Bushes and Brambles, which stopped up the passage and
entrance into it. And in this gloomy Cavern, which had no light but what came
in by a small cleft in the Rock, he fixed his abode.

The horror of the Place inspired him with a new spirit of Penance, and the
liberty he had in so great solitude, gave scope to his fervor, to proceed
therein without restraint. He chastis'd his Body four or five times a day with
an iron Chain; three or four Days together he remained without taking any
Nourishment; and when he could hold out no longer, he relieved himself with a
few Roots which he found in the Valley, and some Bread which he brought from
the Hospital. The seven hours of Prayer, which was his former stint, did not
now satisfy him; he did nothing but Pray, or rather he employed both Night and
Day to lament the Transgressions of his Youth, and to praise the Mercies of our
Lord. Sometimes he went out of his Cave, and whatever his Eyes beheld, served
to entertain his penitential Sentiments. When he beheld a rapid Torrent running
at the foot of a Hill, he considered with pleasure, that all the things of this
World pass and perish, and are unworthy the care and esteem of an immortal Soul.

Tho Ignatius were of a very strong Constitution, yet these Excesses had
mightily ruined his Health; he had great pains in his Stomach, accompanied with
continual faintings; and some who had made search after him, and had discovered
the Place of his Retreat, found him one Day in a Swoon at the entrance of the
Cave; When he was brought to himself, and had recovered a little strength by
the Nourishment which his Friends made him take, he would have retired again to
his dark Cell; but they would not suffer it, and carried him against his will
to the Hospital of Manreze.

The malignant Spirit took hold of this occasion to assault Ignatius with a
temptation of Despondency; He is tempted, and resists the temptation.
How will you be able to endure so austere a Life for fifty years together,
which you are yet to live? said the Tempter to him. Ignatius, who well
understood whence this suggestion came, answered within his soul, You that talk
at this rate, can you insure me only one day of life? Is not God the Master of
our days? And were I yet to live fifty years, what are so many years to
Eternity?

But in the mean time Ignatius was seized with a violent Fever; which finding
a Body so wasted and broken, soon got the upper hand of Nature; so that his
life was despaired of. Lying in this extremity, he heard another inward voice
often repeating to him, That he need not be troubled to die, because he died a
Saint; and that, being arrived to so high a degree of perfection in so short a
time, he had no reason to fear either the temptation of the Devil, or the
Judgment of God. After this, there appeared (as it were) placed before his
Eyes, his Sackcloth, his Chains of iron, his Hair-Shirt, and all the
Instruments of his Penance. There also was represented to him, on one side his
Cave, bedewed with his tears, and sprinkled with his blood; on the other,
Heaven open, where the Angels with Palms and Crowns in their Hands, invited him
to come in. Tho these imaginations caused horror in him (as well knowing whence
they came) yet so strongly were they impressed in his Fancy, that he had great
difficulty to put them by: For a preservative against them, he called into his
memory the most shameful and enormous sins of his life; he made to himself a
lively representation of the pains of Hell, which he had so often merited, and
then asked himself this Question, Whether there were any proportion between one
Month of Penance, and an Eternity of Torments? These Considerations humbl'd
him in the sight of God, and made him clearly to understand that he ought to
fear, and not to presume. In conclusion, he vanquished the temptation; but he
remained so terrified with it, that when he came to be a little recovered, he
desired some devout Persons who tended him in his Sickness, often to tell him
in his Ear, Remember your sins, and think not that Heaven was made for such
Sinners as you.

But this was not the rudest assault which Ignatius sustained in his Retreat of
Manreze; He is afflicted with interior pains, and above all, with Scruples.
Since he first gave himself up to God, he for a while enjoyed a perfect
tranquillity, he often tasted that healing joy which the Holy Ghost does
usually pour into the Souls of newly converted Sinners, so to give them a
disgust of the Pleasures of the World, and to sweeten to them the labor of
Penance. This interior calm, and these spiritual joys were now taken from him,
insomuch that in the times of his Prayer, and in his Mortifications, he found
nothing but anxiety and dryness; sometimes ('it is true) serenity of mind all on
the sudden would return, and with such a flood of consolations, that he was
even overwhelmed and transported out of himself. But these delicious moments
had no continuance; and he found himself often, as it were, precipitated from
an illuminated state, into desolation and darkness. Having not had any
experience of these different states, and not knowing that Souls at their
entrance into a Christian Life are often treated after that manner, lest they
should attribute the fervor they feel, to their own forces, and should more
adhere to the Favors of God, then to God himself. In these sudden changes he
used to cry out, What new war is this? Into what unknown Lists do we enter?

God Almighty also put him upon other trials; Tho Ignatius had made a very
exact Confession, and was none of those weak Heads that are troubled with vain
appearances, yet was he now cruelly infested with the torment of Scruples.
Sometimes he doubted whether he had duly explicated all the Circumstances of
such and such Sins; sometimes he was afraid that some he had concealed, or at
least had not clearly expressed them, to cover his shame. To clear himself of
these doubts, and to dissipate his fears, he had recourse to Prayer; but the
more he prayed, the more his doubts and fears grew upon him. Every step he made
he thought he stumbled and offended God, imagining there to be sin where there
was not the least shadow of it, and always disputing with himself about the
state of his Conscience, not being able to decide what was sin, and what was
not. In these continual conflicts and agitations of Mind, sometimes he broke
out into sighs, into outcries, and threw himself upon the Ground, like a Man
tormented with pain; but for the most part he kept a mournful silence, as if
the sadness which oppressed him, had made him insensible and stupid.

Amidst all these spiritual convulsions, he had no relief but from the Holy
Sacrament of the Altar, which he received every Sunday: It happened also to him
more then once, that being ready to Communicate, his troubles of Mind so
redoubled upon him, that fearing to commit a Sacrilege, he retired from the
Holy Table full of confusion and desolation. After a great many unprofitable
debates within himself, in which his Understanding was lost, and could see no
day, it entered into his thoughts, that Obedience only could cure him, and that
his pains would cease, if his Confessor did command him entirely to forget what
was past. But he had a difficulty to propose to his Confessor an Expedient of
his own finding out. True it is, he had been forbid to hearken to Scruples; but
he had no certain Rule whereby to know what was a Scruple, and what not; And to
decide this matter, was to him a new subject of disquiet.

He did not fail to continue his practices of Piety and Penance, judging that
the more he was in trouble, the more exact and sedulous he ought to be. But
finding no relief, neither from Earth nor from Heaven, he believed that God had
forsaken him, and that his damnation was certain. No body can tell the torment
which he then suffered; and none but those Persons who are afflicted with this
sort of Crosses, are able to conceive how heavy they are.

The Religious of St. Dominick in the Monastery of Manreze, who governed his
Conscience, had pity of him, and out of charity took him into their House.
Instead of having there any comfort, he was more tormented then at the
Hospital. He fell into a dark Melancholy, and being one day in his Cell, he
had the thought of throwing himself out of the Window, to end his misery: But
he was withheld from yielding to this motion of Despair, by the same Hand which
struck him. Tho Heaven seemed wholly shut upon him, he notwithstanding with an
ardent Faith raised up his Eyes thither, and with a flood of tears, cried out,
Succor me, O Lord, my support and my strength, succor me; It Is in you only
that I hope, nor do I seek comfort but in you. Hide not your face from me; and
since you are my God, show me the way by which you will have me come to you.

Soon after he remembered to have read, that an ancient Hermit not being able to
obtain a favor from God which he had long prayed for, set himself to Fasting,
and resolved to eat nothing till God had heard him. By this Example of the
Hermit, he purposed to take no Nourishment till he had recovered the peace of
his Soul; He purposed (I say) to Fast in this manner, as far as he could go
without danger of death. Accordingly he Fasted seven whole days without eating
or drinking, but not without continuing his accustomed Exercise of Devotion.
But his trouble of Mind still continuing; and whereas by a kind of miracle his
strength was not much impaired, he would have still held on his Fast, if his
Confessor had not absolutely commanded him to break it. Heaven did accept both
of the fervor which made him undertake so extraordinary a thing, and of the
obedience which made him lay it down again; for his former tranquillity was
restored to him, and his interior crosses were changed into such spiritual
delights, as hitherto he had not tasted. But a new tempest was raised in his
Heart three days after: His Scruples, his Dejections, his Despairings took him
again with so much violence, that he would certainly have sunk under them, if
he had not been in his hands whose Trials are Favors: And it was not without
great meaning, that he was tried in so many different manners: For being
designed by the Providence of God for the direction of Souls, it was necessary
that his own experience should teach him the several ways by which God does
lead them.

Here ended all his troubles of this kind; He is comforted and enlightened from
above.
and Ignatius was not only delivered from all his scruples, but had the gift
bestowed upon him of curing scrupulous Consciences. And as God does usually
bestow comforts on pious Souls, in proportion to their sufferings, and
fidelity, so now, having freed his Servant out of his desolate state, he
rewarded him with many singular graces.

One day, as he was saying the Office of our Lady upon the Stairs of the
Dominicans Church, he was elevated in Spirit, and in a most lively manner there
was represented to him the Mystery of the Holy Trinity. This vision so sensibly
affected him, and filled him with such inward consolation, that going
afterward in a solemn Procession, he could not hold back his Tears before all
the company. All his thoughts were fixed upon that Mystery, he could not speak
but of the Trinity; but he spoke with so much unction, and light, and in such
proper, and sublime expressions, that the most Learned admired him, and the
most ignorant were instructed by him. He wrote down the conceptions he had of
that Adorable Mystery, and his writing (which since) by, I know not by what
misfortune has been lost, contained no less, then fourscore Leaves; if
notwithstanding we may call that his writing, which had something in it of the
Language of the Prophets, and wherein the Spirit of God had a greater share,
then the Spirit of Man. For Ignatius could only Read, and Write; and an
ignorant Cavalier, without being inspired, could not possibly treat of so high
a subject. From hence he conceived a most tender devotion to the Trinity, and
had a custom many times in the day, to make his Prayers to the Three Divine
Persons, sometimes to them altogether, sometimes to each in particular,
according to the different dispositions he felt within himself.

A little after this, by another illumination was represented to him the order,
which God held in the Creation of the World, and the motives which induced the
Divine wisdom to that outward communication of himself. Once, in time of Mass
at the Elevation he had an intuitive knowledge, that the Body and Blood of the
Son of God were truly under the Elements; and in what manner they were there.
One day, as he went to visit the Church of St. Paul, lying a quarter of a Mile
out of the Town, setting himself down on the banks of the Cardenero, which runs
along the plain of Manreze, he had a profound knowledge of all the Mysteries
together; and at another time, when he prayed before a Cross, upon the way to
Barcelona, all that he had formerly learned, was set before his Eyes, in so
full a light, that the verities of Faith seemed to him to have nothing obscure
in them: And he remained so enlightened, and so convinced of them, that he has
been heard to say, that had they never been Recorded in the Scriptures, he
should still have maintained them to the last drop of his Blood; and that, had
the Scriptures been lost, no part of his Faith had been diminished.

But of all the favors, he at that time received, the most remarkable was an
Ecstasy, which lasted Eight days; A thing hardly to be believed, if many
Persons of credit, had not been witnesses of it. This began upon a Saturday
about the Evening, in the Hospital of St. Lucy, where Ignatius had again taken
up his Lodging, and it ended upon the Saturday following, just at the same
hour: He had no use of his senses all that time; they thought him dead, and
would have buried him, if those who came to visit his Body, had not perceived
something of motion about his Heart. He came to himself, as out of a sweet
sleep, and opening his Eyes, he said with a tender and devout voice, Ah Jesus!
No body ever knew the secrets, which were revealed to him in this long Rapture,
for he would never discover them to any body. And all that they could draw out
of him was, that the graces with which God Almighty favored him, could not be
expressed.

These divine illustrations did not hinder him from consulting the Religious of
St. Dominick, He trusts not his own light.
and of St. Benet, about the state of his Soul, nor from punctually following
their directions. Many times he went to his Confessor of Montserrat, to render
him an account of his interior, and to ask advice for his Spiritual
advancement. Although this holy old Man did the office of an instructor to
Ignatius, yet he looked upon his Disciple with great veneration, and said to
the Religious of his Monastery, That this Penitent of Manreza would one day be
the Support, and Ornament of the Church; that he should be a Reformer of the
Christian World, a successor of St. Paul, an Apostle, who should transmit the
light of Faith into Idolatrous Nations.

But Ignatius opened himself only to his Directors, and no farther to them then
was necessary for his conduct; otherwise he kept a profound silence, and shut
up all his secret favors from Heaven within himself. Yet notwithstanding his
care to be concealed from the Eyes of Men, he missed of his aim, either
because God would recompense the humility of his Servant, or in regard, that
virtue has marks, which discover her against her will. His Austerities, and his
Extacies grew famous round the Country; And that, which added Luster to them,
was, that no body doubted of his being a Person of Quality, who had disguised
himself upon the account of doing Penance. A certain Religious Woman, esteemed
a Saint in those parts, spoke of him with great Admiration, and pronounced him
a Saint; This is the same person, who at that time was Celebrated all over
Spain, and who was often consulted by the Catholic King in matters of
Conscience, and was called the Beata of Manreza.

They had in fine so great an opinion of Ignatius, that falling sick again, and
being removed to the House of a rich Burgess, who was a good Man, and would not
suffer the Servant of God to continue in the Hospital, the people hereupon
commonly called this Burgess by the Name of Simon, and his Wife by the Name of
Martha, as if, in receiving Ignatius within their walls, they had received
Jesus Christ.

His reputation drew every body to him, some only to behold him, others to hear
him; And when he went to Pray before the Crosses, which are set up about
Manreza, or when he went in Pilgrimage to our Lady at Villa-Dordis, and to
other places of Devotion, the people usually crowded after him.

Hitherto in all his practices of Piety, He is called by God to the Service of
his Neighbor.
he only proposed to himself his own perfection. But providence, which designed
him for the Evangelical Ministry, and had already prepared him for it, without
his knowledge, by contempt of the World, by retirement, and mortification, gave
him now other lights, and measures. He began to consider, that Souls having
cost our Savior so dear, nothing could be done more acceptable to him, then to
hinder their loss; He comprehended that the glory of Gods Majesty did most
shine in the Salvation of Souls, purchased with the Blood of his Son. These
were the notions which kindled in him his Zeal for Souls. It is not enough
(said he) that I serve our Lord; all Hearts must love him, and all Tongues must
praise him.

As soon as he had turned his thoughts toward his Neighbor, how dear soever
solitude was to him, he gave it over, and least he should fright those from
him, whom he designed to bring to God, he changed his austere penitential
Dress, into a more decent Attire. Moreover, knowing that the Ministry, to
which he was called, required health and vigor, he moderated his Austerites,
and put on a Garment of course Cloth, because the Winter was very sharp, and
the pains of his Stomach still continued.

He spoke in public of the things of Heaven; and to be better heard by the
people, which came about him, he got up upon a Stone (which is at this day
exposed to view) before the Ancient Hospital of St. Lucy. His mortified
Countenance, his modest Air, his words animated with the Spirit of Truth,
inspired into his Auditors the love of Virtue, and a horror of Vice. But his
private entertainments produced wonderful effects: He converted the most
obstinate sinners, by laying before them the Maxims and Duties of Christianity,
and by causing them to meditate upon them in retirement. Some were so touched,
that they renounced the World, and changed at the same time both manners and
state.

The many reflections, which Ignatius made upon the force and power of these
Evangelical Maxims, and the many trials of their Operation both in himself, and
others, moved him to write a Book of Spiritual Exercises, for the good of their
Souls that live in the World. This Book has so great a part in the life, which
I now write, and is so little known in the World, that it will not be
unprofitable in this place to give an account of it.

The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius are something more then a bare
collection of Meditations and of Christian considerations; if they were that,
and no more, there would be nothing in them particular, and new.

St. Ignatius is not the first, He writes the Book of Spiritual Exercises.
who has taught us the way of raising our minds to God, and of looking down
into our own infirmities, by the means of mental Prayer. Before him, were known
the several heads of Meditation; concerning the end for which we were Created,
the Enormity of Sin, the Pains of Hell, the Life and Death of our Savior; but
this we may say, that, before him, there was not a certain, and prefixed method
for the reformation of manners. To him we owe this method; and he it was, who
enlightened by God, after a manner, altogether new, in a methodical way reduced
(as it were) into a holy Art, the conversion of a sinner. Knowing of one side
the perverse inclinations of the Heart of Man, and on the other, the power and
virtue which such particular truths of Christianity duly applied, have to
rectify them, he has set down a way, by which Man, with the succor of grace,
may recover out of his sin, and climb to the highest degree of perfection. In
effect, if we look near into the matter, there is as much difference between
the common Meditations, and these Exercises, as between the knowledge only of
simples, and the entire Art of Physic; which has its principles, and aphorisms
for the cure of Diseases, according to the constitution of Bodies, the nature
of the Distempers, and the quality of the Remedies. But to the end, the reality
of what I say, may appear, I will here set down the whole Order and Scheme of
St. Ignatius his Spiritual Exercises.

They begin by a very important Meditation, The Scheme and Order of the
Exercises.
which is the ground work, on which the whole Frame is built, and therefore is
called the Beginning or Foundation of the Exercises. The scope of this
Fundamental Meditation, is to weigh and duly consider, the end for which we are
born and placed here upon Earth; Whether it be, to enjoy the pleasure of our
Senses, to grow Rich, to acquire Glory, learn unprofitable Sciences; or whether
it be, to Serve and Obey our Lord and God, whose Creatures we are: And when our
understanding is fully possessed of this Truth, that our Eternal Salvation wholly
and solely depends upon loving and serving him, we must then draw this
consequence, That the things of this World, are no otherwise to be sought or
enjoyed, then as they conduce to the honoring and serving God.

Moreover, whereas such things, as are only means to some end, are to be
considered and valued, not by their own intrinsic worth, but for their fitness
and tendency to such End: It necessarily follows, that we ought to judge of
Riches and Poverty, of a High and a Low Condition, of Health and Sickness, not
according to the Good or Evil, which they bring us in this present Life, but
according to the Advantages, or Hindrances we receive from them, in order to
Eternity.

Hence again it will follow, That we ought to be perfectly indifferent, in
reference to these things; so that we are not to desire Health more then
Sickness, to prefer Riches above Poverty, Honor above Contempt, nor a long
Life above a short one.

And in the Last place, we are to conclude, That if we must determine our
Choice, on the one side more then on the other, we must choose that, which most
directly leads to our End.

It is hardly credible, how much this grand verity well weighed, and
comprehended, does enlighten and stir up the Soul of a sinner, be he never so
blind and obstinate: For, provided he be a little removed out of the noise and
hurry of company and business, it makes him look upon the World with other Eyes
then he did, and shows him the fatal mistake of Worldlings, who place their
happiness in Creatures; and thereby thoroughly awakes him out of his former
Lethargy.

Being possessed and convinced, of this Essential Principle, we are next to
consider, what it is, that puts us out of the way to our End: In order to this,
St. Ignatius proposes to us Meditations upon sin; And first, of the fall of
the Angels, who were cast down from Heaven, into the bottom of Hell, for one
sin of Pride; next, of the Transgression of the first Man, who was banished out
of Paradise, He and his Posterity condemned to so many Evils, for his
Disobedience; and Lastly, of so many Millions, that are Eternally lost, and
doomed to the Torments of Hell, for sins, less Enormous then our own.

But in regard, our main business is to remedy our own disorders, it is
necessary for us, to have a sufficient knowledge of them; Wherefore the Saint
leads us, from the general consideration of sin, to a particular Discussion and
Examination of our own Conscience; To the End, that looking thoroughly into the
state of our whole Life, we may find out all our enormities and deviations,
which have set us at distance and at enmity with God; but further, because the
knowledge of our Trangressions would have no great effect upon us, if we did
not rightly apprehend, how shameful and criminal they are; St. Ignatius
directs, that in the Second Meditation of Sins, we should consider how ugly and
infamous in their own Nature they are, and would be, although they were not
forbid: And to the end, this consideration may have its full force, to show us,
how infinitely Heinous they are; He bids us set before our Eyes the Immense
distance between the Greatness and Glory of God, and our Wretchedness and
Lowness.

These past Considerations (tho Powerful and Weighty) are not yet sufficient to
inspire into a worldly Soul, all the Compunction that is necessary; There must
be something used, more Corrosive and Penetrating: And because her adhering to
the World was that, which made her leave and forget God, she must be made
sensible how Vain and Transitory, are all those objects of her Passions; and
also of the certain and speedy end, of the Pleasures, Riches and Greatness of
this present Life; She must also have before her Eyes the severe Account, which
will be one day taken of the bad use of the Creatures; and what those pains
are, which are reserved for Impenitent sinners: Hence follow in order those
Meditations, which expose the frightful Images of Death, Judgment, and Hell.
The contemplation of Hell, which is very useful to make us comprehend the
deplorable effects of sin, is best made by an application of our interior
senses, to draw lively Images of the Torments of the Damned, Howlings,
Blasphemies, etc.

These First Exercises tend (as may be seen) to purge the Heart of those
corrupt Passions, which make it incapable of conceiving an efficatious desire
of Salvation, but in regard that these vicious affections are ordinarily very
deeply rooted; and are of no less difficulty to be removed, then the bad
humors, which have been long settled and habituated in the Body, we must
therefore more then once use the same Medicine, by repeating the same
Meditation. In the repetition of them are added some fervent Prayers, which the
Saint calls Colloquies, and are addressed to the Eternal Father, to our Savior,
and to the Blessed Virgin: These Prayers which close the Repeated Meditations,
redouble their virtue and efficacy. Thus ends the First week; for St. Ignatius
divides the whole Body of his Exercises into Four weeks, or rather Parts, which
he calls weeks, and which are not so well distinguished by the number of the
days, as by the diversity of the Matters.

The Soul when she is thus purged, and her Corrupt Passions carried off, will
now be in a temper and disposition to receive and follow the motions of Grace,
which lead her into the ways of Heaven; And for this reason, the Second week
begins with the Contemplation of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. This
contemplation represents to us our Savior, as a King most Perfect and Amiable,
who invites his Subjects to accompany him in a Military Expedition, in which he
designs to make himself Master of the whole Earth, and who invites them upon
these most advantageous Conditions; that they shall be every way Treated like
himself; That in his Service they shall do and suffer nothing, but what he in
person shall First give them an Example of; And in conclusion, that they shall
have a share in the Booty and Glory of his Conquest, in proportion to the
Fatigues they endure in the War.

So engaging an invitation makes her take the Resolution of marching after
Jesus Christ, in the observation of the Divine Law, and in the Exercise of
Evangelical Virtues. But in regard, that it does not suffice to form in general
the design of a Christian Life, but that we must come to particulars; the
following Meditations, which are of the Incarnation, the Nativity, the
Circumcision, the Presentation in the Temple, the Flight into Egypt, the
concealed Life of the Son of God, represent him to us in these several States
and Conditions, as a Pattern and Model of Humility, of Poverty, of
Mortification, of Piety, of Retirement, according to which we are to regulate
our conduct.

It is not enough to be the Disciples and followers of Jesus Christ, unless we
make a public profession of it, which may Edify our Neighbor, and induce him
to Imitate us, according to the word of St. Paul, Be you Imitators of me, as I
am of Jesus Christ. And this is the Aim and Design of the Meditation of the two
Standards, which was composed by St. Ignatius according to his Military Ideas,
but very congruous to the expressions of the Holy Ghost, who calls our life a
warfare, and by consequence makes all Christians to be Soldiers.

Here is represented the Son of God, coming forth from his retreat and
concealment, to Preach his Doctrine to the World; but he is Represented with
the Devil standing in front before him, and both under the semblance of
Generals, who raise Troops, spread their Ensigns, take the Field, and Exhort
their Men to follow them.

At the sight of so many Generous Souls, who in all Ages have ranged themselves
under the Standard of Jesus Christ, a penitent sinner declares himself for
Virtue, and far from being ashamed of the Gospel, He makes it his Glory, to
Combat the Maxims and the Practices of the World.

Being once engaged on the right side, he is not content with a bare desire of
Christian Perfection, he seeks, and embraces all the means which are capable to
bring him to it, and renounces all things that may hinder him from it, and
desires nothing, but what may contribute to his perfection. From this
disposition he goes on to another, and so wholly submits himself to the Orders
of God, that he would rather lose all the Goods of the World, then deliberately
commit, I will not say a Sin that wholly deprives him of Divine Grace, but the
least fault, that should make him less acceptable in the Eyes of God.

His submission goes farther yet; and not only content to avoid the lightest
sins, he will also in a manner express in himself a perfect Image of our
Savior, so that in case it were equal to the Interest of Gods Glory, whether
he be placed in a state of Honor, or of Contempt, of Riches or of Poverty, he
would prefer Contempt before Honor, Poverty before Riches, without any other
motive, but of resembling the Son of God. These generous Sentiments are to be
learnt in two Meditations, of which one is Entitled Of the Three Classes, or
Three sorts of Persons; and the other, Of the Three Degrees of Humility. And
for the well Rooting and Establishing these Sentiments, are the Meditations
upon the Baptism, the Tempting in the Desert, and upon the other Mysteries of
our Saviors Life to his Passion.

All these Premises are necessary Preparatives for the last Meditation of the
Second week, which is that of the choice of a State and Form of Life. This
being a matter equally important and difficult, on which our Salvation does
much depend, and in which we may be easily deceived. St. Ignatius therefore
uses all the precautions Imaginable, so to direct us in it, that we may never
repent of the choice we make.

First he consider the Matter, next the Time, and lastly the manner of this
Election. As to the Matter of our Choice, it is certain, that it must be good,
or at least there must be nothing ill or sinful in it. Moreover it is evident,
that of those things to be chosen, some are fixed and immutable, as Priesthood
and Marriage, others may be changed, as Offices and Employments Ecclesiastical
or Secular. If we be already engaged in the former conditions of Life, there is
no more room for deliberation and choice, although our first Engagement were made
upon Humane and Worldly Motives; What we have then to do, is to use our
endeavor to acquire all that Perfection, which such a state requires: Nor are
we to relinquish the second, when we are once engaged in such state; I say we
are not to relinquish it, unless it contains in its self, or obliges us to,
any thing against the duties of Christianity; or unless we leave it to put our
selves in a more perfect state.

As to the Times and Seasons, that are proper for the making such Election, the
most apposite are these; First, When God touches the Heart in such a manner,
that there is no possibility of a doubt, that the Call comes not from Heaven;
as in the case of St. Matthew, St. Paul, and some others. Secondly, When the
Impression of Grace is at least so strong in us, as to give us a kind of
assurance that our Vocation comes from the Holy Ghost; And Thirdly, when the
Soul Illuminated by Faith and undistracted by outward objects, which may
mislead her into false judgments, is in a fit disposition to elect, what is
most conducible to her Salvation.

As for the Manner of the Choice, thus it ought to proceed. First, the
Condition, the Office, the Employment, the form of life, whatever it be, is
laid before us. Secondly we are to recall into our Consideration the End, for
which we were Created, and according to the Rules of the Fundamental
Meditation, we must Endeavor to put our selves into an absolute Indifferency
toward all the things of the World, and to make no reckoning of them any
otherwise, then as they Serve to our End. Thirdly we are humbly to beg of God,
that he will enlighten our understanding, and not suffer us to deviate from
that way, by which he would conduct us. After this, we are to find out all the
Reasons, for, or against such a Course, and to weigh them, one against the
other, and those must preponderate, which in our Aim to Eternity, and our last
End seem to tend most directly thither. When it appears evidently to us, upon
Examination so made, that one calling has the Advantage over the other, there
we must fix, and firmly resolve to embrace it with out delay. If afterward we
should find any wavering and irresoluteness in our selves, and should desire to
be confirmed and settled in our choice, we are then to use the same Reasons to
our selves, as we should do to our best Friend, upon the like occasion.
Moreover, we ought to do that, which we shall wish were done at the hour of
Death, and at the day of Judgment, when we are to render an Account of all our
Actions. Lastly, we ought to choose that way, which shall seem best to us,
according to these Solid, and evident Principles. This in short is the whole
Economy of this matter of Choice; and the Conclusion of this Important affair
makes an End of the Second week.

It will be hard for a Soul to tread all those steps, we have now marked out,
without much labor and pain; and it is natural, that a new state, and form of
life should find great contradictions, either because the world does usually
rise in opposition against those, who embrace a true Christian life; or for
that God does commonly try the fidelity of his new Servants. The Soul therefore
has great need of strength and of Love to be supported; and where can she find
more powerful Succor, then in the wounds of Jesus Christ Crucified, who has
Consummated by his sufferings the work of our Redemption, and so loved us, as
to dye for us upon the Cross? It Is in the Contemplating the Passion and Death
of our Savior, that the Soul enflamed with his Love, takes Resolution to
Suffer all things to please him, and constantly to persist in the Practice of
Christian virtues, in defyance of the world and the Devil.

The Soul being now in such a Situation, what she has more to do, is to
elevate her Thoughts and her desires toward Heaven; And this she does in the
Fourth week, which represents to her, the Glorious Mysteries of the
Resurrection, of the Apparitions, and of the Ascension of the Son of God, as
being most proper to enliven her Faith, to strengthen her Hope, and to purify
her Love. In conclusion, the contemplation of Spiritual Love, or of the
Benefits and perfections of the God, consummates the whole work, by closely
uniting her to God, and making her taste the sweetness of Divine Union. Thus
ends our Saint his spiritual Exercises, with a Prayer full of Unction and
fervor, in which after having entirely given himself up to Jesus Christ, he
asks nothing of him, but his Grace and his Love, protesting that there is
nothing in the world besides, that he desires; and that he is rich enough, if
he can but Love, and be Loved.

It is easy to perceive the Connection of the four parts, and how all the
Meditations have such a dependence one on the other, that the First is still
the foundation of the Second, the former still supporting and giving strength
to the latter, and all of them together work the intended effect, which is, to
raise a Soul into a State of perfect charity, after having disingaged her from
the Love of the world.

Here you have the Character and the Spirit of the Exercises which Ignatius
composed at Manreza, and which in process of time he digested into that order
and form in which now we see them, then adding to them diverse Rules concerning
Catholic Faith, Prayer, Alms deeds, Temperance, Scruples, and Discernment of
spirits; Besides those, which he sets down under the Title of Annotations and
Additions, to make the exercises, both easily and profitably; and which are so
Essential, according to the Judgment of one of the most Eminent Sons of our
Saint that we can expect no fruit from our Retirement, if we neglect them.

For, amongst other things, they Import, that he, who desires profitably to
make the Exercises, must enter into them with great Courage, and with a
Resolution, to give himself up wholly to the Dictates and Conduct of the Holy
Ghost, and be ready to go what way soever the voice of Heaven shall call him;
That being so disposed at his entrance into them, he must not only forget for a
time, all the affairs of the World, but also must apply himself singly and
Solely to the Meditation of each Present day; not permitting his thoughts to
make any excursion into the Meditations, that are to follow; That it is not
Sufficient to read Holy and Good Books, but the matter of them must be
agreeable to the Subject of his Meditations, least the understanding being
dissipated and scattered upon diverse Objects, should have less force to
Penetrate those Truths, of which it is to be convinced; That the way of Living,
the Solitude, the Silence, the Austerities, ought to be applied and directed to
the matter and Subject of the Meditations of each week, as much as prudence may
require; That if he feels Devotion upon any Article, he should not pass on to
another, till such time, as that Pious affection be fully satisfied; That if he
falls into a dryness and Irksomness, far from shortning the time prefixed for
his Prayer, he should somewhat lengthen it beyond the usual bounds: So to
master his Reluctance, and to overcome himself, waiting with silence and
Humility the comfortable visit of the Holy Spirit. That if on the contrary, he
be filled with Spiritual Gusts and consolations, at that moment he should not
engage himself in any vow, especially if the vow be Perpetual, and such as
obliges to a change of State of life: That in conclusion, he should open
himself to his director in these Exercises, and give him an exact Account of
all that passes in his Interior, to the end, that such Director may treat the
Penitent conformably to his dispositions, and necessity; and that he may not
instill too much fear into a pusillanimous soul nor too much Confidence into a
Soul inclining to presumption; and least he should mistake, and aim to bring a
Sinner to the height of perfection, before he is Purged of his vicious habits.

It follows from all, that I have now set down, that the Spiritual Exercises of
St. Ignatius exactly perform, what they promise in the beginning of the Book;
which is to conduct a Soul in such manner, that she may overcome her self, and
choose a state of Life, tending best to her Salvation; after she has cleans'd
her self from those depraved inclinations, which may corrupt her Judgment in
making her Choice.

In this Book, which I now speak of, St. Ignatius has also inserted the
particular Examen of the Conscience, not to say any thing of the General Examen
with the five points so common at present, and so little used before him; This
particular Examen, which he has invented, and which he reckoned among the
surest means, to reform a worldly Soul, consists in taming that Vice, which
most raigns in us, and in setting upon it singly by its self, and in continual
fighting against it by a Constant watch upon our selves, that we may at no time
yield to it; by a contrite returning to God, as often as we fall by it; By an
exact computation of our Falls, even to the setting them down, by making little
Marks upon so many Lines, which are drawn to Correspond with every day in the
week (as may be seen in the Book it self) to the end, that comparing day to
day, and week to week, we may easily see the Progress we have made. We are not
to discontinue this practice, till the bad Habit, which we propose to overcome,
be quite destroyed, and when we have compassed it, we are then to undertake
another Vice in the same way.

I will not stop here, to confute the Imaginations of a certain unknown Writer,
who fancying that the Founder of the Jesuits had taken his Exercises, out of a
Book of Don Garcias de Cisneros, Religious of St. Benets Order, and Abbot of
Montserrat, has Printed on the Subject a Libel, under the Name of Don
Constantine Cayetan, Abbot of Mont Cassin. For besides that the Congregation of
Mont Cassin has disavow'd the Author and the writing, in a General Chapter of
the Order, held at Ravenna in the Year 1644, and that the same was done, in the
Year following by the Benedictines of Portugal; the two Books themselves are
every where to be seen, and they will best decide the Point, that Bating the
Titles, there is no resemblance at all of one with the other.

But to return to our History, the Fruits of Ignatius his Apostolical
Discourses, and of his Spiritual Exercises, were so great in Manreza that they
more and more drew upon him the praises and admiration of the People. He could
not endure, that they should so esteem him in a place, whither he had retired
only to avoid the esteem of men; Wherefore he resolved to Leave Manreza, after
more then a ten months continuance there: Besides, the Plague being now abated
at Barcelona and the Commerce of the Sea beginning to be open, he had an
extreme Impatience to proceed toward the Holy Land. At the beginning of his
Conversion, he only intended by this Pilgrimage, to honor those places,
consecrated by the Presence, and Blood of Jesus Christ; But now he undertook it
with an ardent desire, to procure, according to his ability, the conversion of
the Scismaticks and Infidels.

He did not leave Manreza with so much Privacy, He Leaves Manreza to go to the
Holy Land
as he did Montserrat, he declared his journey to his Friends, but did not tell
them what he designed to do in Palestine. It cannot be Imagined, how much this
news did trouble them: They conjured him with tears in their Eyes, not to
abandon them; They represented to him the Fatigue and the danger of so long a
journey: But neither their Entreaties, nor their reasons could stop him a
moment. Many offered to accompany him; all presented him their Purse; He would
take neither Companion, nor money; that he might have no comfort, but from God,
and no dependence but on Providence: And he said to those, who were instant
with him to make some Provision of necessaries for his Journey, that a perfect
relyance upon Heaven was all things; that we are not Christians only by Faith
and by Charity, but also by Hope; which virtue could not be perfectly exercised
but in the want of all things.

THE LIFE OF St. IGNATIUS. The Second BOOK.
Ignatius being come to Barcelona, What happened to him at Barcelona.
found in the Haven a Brigantine, and a great Ship, both which prepared for
their Voyage into Italy. He was upon the point of Imbarquing in the Brigantine,
because that Vessel was likely to part soonest: but God, who had a care of his
Servant, changed his Design; which happened in this manner.

A very virtuous Lady, called Isabella Rosella, hearing one day a Sermon,
chanced to cast her eyes upon Ignatius, who was placed at the foot of the Altar
amongst the Children; she thought she saw his Countenance environed with light,
and heard a Voice, which cried; Call him, call him. However she contained her
self at that time from saying any thing, fearing it might be an Illusion. But
when she came home, she spoke to her Husband of it: both of them were of
opinion to examine what it might be; wherefore they immediately sent to find
out the Pilgrim, who was still in the Church. In design of honoring our Savior
in the person of a poor Man, they obliged him to eat with them at their Table;
and to sound him, they put him upon a Discourse of Piety. Ignatius, who was
ignorant of their Design, spoke of the things of Heaven so feelingly, and so
sublimely, that they were convinced he was a Man of God. Fain they would have
had him make his abode with them; but he declared, that he was called by Heaven
to another Place, and that he only waited the departure of the Vessels, to
leave Spain. The Lady, who understood by him, that he had taken a Place in the
Brigantine, conjured him not to go in that Vessel, and told him more then once,
by some secret instinct, that his life would be in danger if he went in the
Brigantine. The same Spirit that moved her so to speak, moved him to believe
her.

He would not engage in the Ship, but upon condition that the Master would give
him free Passage for Charity sake. In the interim the Brigantine put forth to
Sea, and she was hardly out of the Haven, but there rose a furious Tempest, in
which she was cast away, and all the Passengers and Mariners drowned.

The Master of the Ship gave Ignatius his Passage free, but withal obliged him
to make his own Provision for the Voyage. This Condition appeared very hard to
him; for having thrown himself wholly upon Providence, he thought it would be a
kind of retracting, and diffiding, to provide for himself; and whereas he
should only want a little Bread, which he might beg in the Ship, he was afraid
he should deviate from Evangelical Poverty, in carrying any thing along with
him. To ease himself of this scruple, he had recourse to his Confessor, and
being ordered by him to accept of the Condition as it was proposed by the
Master, he boldly did that out of Obedience, which he durst not do of himself:
He would not accept of any thing from the Lady, that by her counsel had saved
his life, who offered him all Necessaries for his Journey; but he would beg
from Door to Door for what might suffice him; whereupon an Adventure befell him
very remarkable.

There was in the Town a Woman of Quality, called Zepiglia, who had a Son
extravagantly lewd, and a Libertine, that lately had thrown himself into a
Troop of wandering Beggars, with whom he ran up and down the World. Ignatius saw
this Woman coming out of her House, and prayed her for God's sake to give him a
piece of Bread. Looking upon him, she presently thought of her Son; and judging
by his Carriage, and the Air of his Countenance, that he who asked the Alms
was a Counterfeit, and not truly poor, she began to rate him, and treat him as
an idle Vagabond, threatening withal to have him punished. Ignatius very
peaceably heard all she said, and at last told her, That indeed he was a great
deal worse then she had made him, and so went away. She remained surprised at
his Patience and his Answer: But understanding afterward, that the Pilgrim she
had so ill treated, was a holy Man, she was extremely confounded at what she
had done: she employed some persons to ask his pardon, and upon the Day of his
departure sent him a good provision of Bread. He would not carry with him the
Money which some devout people had forced him to take against his will, nor
would he give it to the Seamen, who would have used him the better for it in
his Voyage; and being to enter the Ship, not finding any Poor to bestow it
upon, he laid it down upon the Shore, for the first Comer to take.

The Voyage was dangerous, but short; a violent wind carried the Ship in Five
days to Gayeta in the year 1523. Ignatius being Landed, took up his Lodging at
night in the Stable of an Inn, when he began to sleep, he heard a great cry, as
it were of a person who called for help, in some extremity. He presently ran
toward the place from whence the noise came; and finding a young Woman in the
hands of Soldiers, who would have forced her, he spoke to them with so much
Courage and Resolution, that they left her; For upon this occasion his Zeal
stirred in him his Natural fierceness, and made him speak in that Imperious
tone, which Officers of War commonly use to stop the Insolence of the Soldiers;
He took his way toward Rome, alone, and a Foot, Fasting the whole Day, and
Begging according to his Custom. He arrived there on Palm Sunday, and Eight
days after Easter, he parted for Venice, having first received the Benediction
of the Pope (who was Adrian the Sixth) and obtained leave of his Holiness to
make the Pilgrimage of Jerusalem. Some Spaniards gave him Seven or Eight
Crowns, and told him, it would be madness to go without Money, or Language,
into a Country, which was infected with the Plague. But afterward he had a
trouble upon his Conscience, for having taken this Money, and he accused
himself of it to God in his Prayer; And often said to himself, that it was
better to pass for a Fool in the judgment of Men, then in the least to distrust
the Care and Providence of God.

To make amends for his fault, he gave to the first poor that he met, all the
Money he had. By this means he was brought to extreme necessity, not finding
almost any thing to live upon in the Villages, and not being able to enter into
the Towns; For by reason of the Plague then raging, and of his pale and
extenuated Countenance, the Guards at the Gates denied him entrance: So that he
was often necessitated to lie whole Nights abroad in the open Air. But these
great hardships, which his Body endured, were abundantly recompensed by Divine
Consolations in his Soul. Being one Day quite spent, and not able to keep
company with those, that Traveled with him, he was left alone, in an open
Desert. The solitude invited him to Pray, in which Jesus Christ appeared to
him, gave him inward strength, and promised him, that he should have entrance
into Padua, and Venice.

The event confirmed the Apparition. His Company, that had left him, and were
gone before, could not with their Tickets of health gain admission into the
Town; but he coming after, went quietly in without the least questioning of the
Guards. It was late when he came to Venice* and not knowing where to lodge, he
laid himself under a porch in the great square of St. Mark, to take a little
rest: But God would not have his Servant pass the Night in that place.

There was amongst the Senators of the Republic, a Man of extraordinary Merit,
called Marc Antonio Trevisani. Of that wise Senate, he was one of the best
heads, and moreover a perfect Christian, disingaged from the World, in the
midst of the World, and such an enemy to Luxury, that he always wore a Hair
shurt. His tenderness for the poor had in a manner changed his House into an
Hospital; and indeed he himself would have been a poor Man, if the Marcelli his
Nephews had not obliged him to regulate his Charities. He acquitted himself in
his Employments after such a Christian manner, that they called him the Saint
of Cyprus, where he had Exercised the charge of Proveditor. His Virtue
afterward raised him to the Dignity of Doge, which he would absolutely have
refused, and renounced, if Lorenzo Massa, and Antonio Milledonne, both
Secretaries of the Republic, had not diverted him from it, for reasons which
he could not oppose. Having lived to a great Age, one day being present at the
Divine Mysteries, with a lively and ardent Faith, which even shined in his
Countenance, he fell into a sound, and expired at the foot of the Altar.

This Senator, who lived in the Square of St. Mark, whither Ignatius was
retired, heard in his sleep a voice, which seemed to say, that whilst he slept
at ease in his Bed, the Servant of God lay upon the Stones in the Porch: He
waked, and immediately went himself to find out the person signified by the
Voice. He sound him, and with great humanity brought him into his House, and
there paid him all the Charitable respects, due to a Pilgrim sent by God.

Ignatius, who thought himself very unworthy to be so treated, left the Palace
of the Senator, upon pretense of Lodging with a Biscay Merchant of his
Acquaintance. Both the Senator, and the Merchant, offered him all manner of
supplies for his Voyage of the Holy Land. But the only Courtesy he asked of
them, was, to be introduced by their means to the Doge Andrea Gristi, one of
the Sagest Politicians, and greatest Men of his time. The Ship being gone some
days before, which carried the Jerusalem Pilgrims, Ignatius had no means left
of proceeding in his Journey, but by getting a Passage in the Admiral, which
was ready to set Sail for the Island of Cyprus, whither the Commonwealth was
sending a new Governor. This was his business with the Doge which he effected
at the Audience procured him.

Notwithstanding all the Instances of the Spanish Merchant, he would not be
brought to see the Ambassador of Charles the Fifth. He had renounced all
Interests in the Courts of Princes, and his Ambition and Desires were now
Converted to Holy Places. It made no Impression upon him when they told him,
that since the taking of Rhodes (of which Solomon made himself Master the year
before) the Turkish Rovers infested the Coasts of Syria, and that the danger of
being made Salves had obliged the greatest part of the Pilgrims to return back
to Venice. All this did not Discourage him, and the reliance which he had on
God, made him tell those, who endeavored to fright him from the Journey, that
if he could not get a Ship, he would pass the Sea upon a Plank, with the
succor of Heaven. He had a burning Fever a little before his departure, and
tho he had been purged that very day, when they put to Sea, he would not be
hindered from going, against the advice of his Physicians who thought it would
cost his Life, if he then went: But far from dying by doing so, he found
himself very much amended, and the Sea-sickness perfectly cured him.

There was on board the Vessel, a profligate crew, which almost in open view,
committed the most enormous Sins: There was nothing of Prayer, nothing of
Religion among the Mariners, But all, that came from them, was Impious, or
Obscene. These Disorders highly afflicted, and irritated Ignatius: He
endeavored to remedy them by Christian instructions, and Charitable
advertisments; But finding that the ways of Mildness were unprofitable, he fell
to severe reprehensions, and menaced the guilty with the vengeance of Divine
Justice: This liberty of the Spanish Pilgrim did not please the Italians. To be
rid of so incommodious a Reprover, they Conspired together to touch upon a
Desert Island, and there to leave him: The notice, which was given him of it by
a Passenger, who had something more of humanity then the rest, did not at all
abate his Zeal. But the design of the Italians took no effect: For coming near
the Coast, where they meant to Land him, a sudden gust of Wind came from the
Land, with so much violence that it carried them off in spite of their teeth,
and brought them in a few hours to the Island of Cyprus.

They found in the Port, the Ship, which carried the Pilgrims, quite ready to
hoist Sail, as if they had only staid for Ignatius. He immediately went on
Board, and after Forty days Sail since his departure from Venice, he arrived at
the Port of Jaffa, on the last day of August in the year 1523. He took the way
of Jerusalem by Land, and came thither the Fourth of September, with the rest
of the Pilgrims.

Seeing the Town at a distance, The sentiments which he had in the Holy Land.
he wept for Joy, and was seized with a certain Religious horror, which has
nothing in it, but sweet and comfortable. He visited the Holy places several
times, and always with a profound Reverence, and most sensible Piety; for he
did lively represent to himself, what had past in each place for the Redemption
of Man; even to the imagining, that he saw Jesus Christ, Born in the Grotte of
Bethlem, Teaching in the Temple of Jerusalem, Praying in the Garden of Olives,
and dying upon Mount Calvary.

Upon this Mountain it was, that his Heart was touched with the most tender
Devotion; He kissed ten thousand times over the Earth which had been died with
the Blood of our Crucified Savior, and bathed it with his tears; making most
fervent Acts of Love. The Sentiments he then had, we receive from his own
Relation, and he set them down in a short Memoire, which he writ concerning the
Particulars of his Journey.

But in regard, that according to the best manner of meditating upon the
Mysteries of our Religion, we should frame a lively Image of the place, where
the Mystery was performed, by so applying our Interior senses, as if we heard
and saw what was said, and done; He therefore filled his Imagination as much as
he could, with the Scheme, and Situation of those Holy Places.

He came with a design into Palestine, to labor in the Conversion of those
Eastern People, and it seemed to him, that God almighty had called him to it.
In truth, it was made known to him in his Contemplations of Manreza, that
Providence had Ordained him for the service of his Neighbor, and there was
showed to him a rough draught of his Institute, in the Meditation of the two
Standards; But he did not precisely know, in what Country, or in what manner,
that was to be executed, so that, being guided by the light of his natural
Reason, where that of the Holy Ghost did not evidently appear, he imagined,
that his Vocation did lead to Palestine, because upon his first Conversion he
had an inward motion, which prompted him to the voyage of Jerusalem, which
motion always continued in him.

To proceed orderly, He is obliged to leave Palestine.
he went to the Guardian of the Franciscans, who reside in Jerusalem, and look
to the Holy Sepulcher, having delivered to him his Letters of Recommendation,
which he brought out of Italy, he declared to him his thoughts of remaining in
the Holy Land, but he did not open himself to him concerning his intended
Employment there; He only said, that he did not intend to put them to any
Charge, and that all the Charity he asked of them, was to direct his
Conscience. The Guardian treated him Civilly, but for his Answer he remitted
him to the Father Provincial, who was then at Bethlem, and daily looked for.

The Provincial being come, he Councel'd Ignatius to return into Europe, not
only because Alms were very scarce in those parts, for they themselves had much
ado to Subsist; but also, because there was no security for Pilgrims in a
Country, where the Grand Signior was Master; And that, not long since, some had
been made Slaves and some killed that were found walking in the Neighborhood
of the Town.

Ignatius, who as yet thought of nothing, but of Converting the Barbarous
people, did not relish this Council; He answered, that he neither feared
Slavery nor Death; and that nothing, but the fear of displeasing God, should
make him leave the Holy Land. Why then says the Provincial, with an Air and
tone of Authority, you shall be gone to Morrow; for you cannot resist me
without offending God: I have Power from the Holy See, to send back what
Pilgrims I please, and moreover to Excommunicate those, who will not Obey. As
St* Ignatius insisted upon his Staying, for fear of going against his
Conscience, so he no sooner heard the power of the Holy See injoyning his
Return, but he instantly submitted; taking the words of the Provinical, as of
an Oracle from Heaven, without so much as staying to see the Popes Bull, which
the Religious man offered to show him.

At the same moment an extreme desire took him, once more to see the Print of
our Saviors feet, which he left upon the stone, when he Ascended into Heaven.
To this end he Privately slipped out, and went alone to Mount Olivet, and for
want of Money, giving his Pen knife to the Turk, that kept the Mosque, where
the Footsteps are to be seen, he entered in, and fully satisfied his Devotion.
When he was come back as far as Betfage, it came into his mind, that he had not
observed, to what quarter of the Heaven the impression of those Sacred Feet was
directed, he therefore comes back again (so much Curiosity there is sometimes
in Piety it self!) and to procure his Entrance the second time, he presented
the keeper with a little pair of Sizzers, and having made his Observations and
finished his Devotions, he returned.

In the mean time the good Religious of the Franciscan Convent, understanding
that the Spanish Pilgrim was gone toward Mount Olivet, and fearing least he
should be ill treated by the Turks, sent after him a Servant of the Convent, an
Armenian, who was known to the Guards. The Armenian met Ignatius coming down
the Hill, and with great Choler held up his stick at him, and taking him by the
Arm drew him along with him to the Monastery. But Ignatius did not feel, nor
scarce know, what he did to him. He was wholly rapt with an interior joy,
caused in him by the Presence of our Savior, who appeared to him in the Air,
shining with Glory, and marching, as a Guide before him.

He parted the day following from Jerusalem, and embarked in a ship, which
carried him to the Isle of Cyprus: Coming there, he found three Vessels in the
Port ready to set Sail for Italy, one was a Turkish Gallion, the other a great
ship of Venice, and the third a little Bark very weak, and ill Equipped. They
who came with Ignatius, desired the Venetian Captain to receive him on board
upon the Score of Charity, telling him, that he was a Saint. The Captain who
being very Covetous, but not very Religious, did not care for the Company of a
poor Saint, answered in raillery, that if the Pilgrim were so great a Saint, as
they said, he had no need of a Ship, he might go into the Sea, and the waves
would carry him whither he pleased. The Master of the little Bark was more
Civil and Charitable, he received him Gratis. The three Vessels made Sail
together, and had at first a favorable wind; but the weather changing all on a
sudden, there rose a furious Tempest: The Turkish Gallion sunk with all her
company; the Venetian ship endeavoring to get to land, and to recover the
Island, was dashed in pieces upon the Rocks: The little Bark, which carried
Ignatius, was very ill treated, but all in disorder as she was, she saved her
self by the favor of a good wind, which seemed to rise on purpose, to bring
her on the Coast of the Kingdom of Naples, where having gained a Port, she
refitted: And thence she put again to sea, and happily arrived at Venice, about
the end of January in the year 1524, after a voyage of more then two months.
Whence may be seen, that Saints are under the Protection of Heaven, and that
Providence does Conduct them, even when to outward appearance it seems to
abandon them.

During this Voyage, Ignatius had leisure to make a great many refflections. He
considered, that to work Profitably in the Conversion of Souls, some parts were
required, which were wanting in him, and that without the foundation of humane
Learning, nothing could be solidly performed. He was every day more and more
convinced of this Truth; which made him resolve to return to Barcelona, where
he had acquaintance with the Master of the School, and where he hoped to find
wherewithal to subsist during his Studies. So that, without making any stay at
Venice he began his Journey in the deep of Winter, and very ill clad for the
season. The Spanish Merchant, who knew him, would have clothed him; but he
could not make him accept of any more, then a little Piece of Course cloth to
cover his stomach, which the Air of the Sea had extremely weakened: The
Merchant also forced him to take fifteen or sixteen Reales, but he took them
only to part with them again; of doing which, he soon had the opportunity.

Being come to Ferrara, he went to pray in the great Church. A poor man
immediately came to him, and held out his hand; He gave him a Real; another
came after, and he gave him as much: These Liberalities drew all the Beggars to
him, and he refused none of them, as long as his money lasted. When he had done
his Prayers, they followed him out of the Church, and seeing him beg there
himself, they all cried out a Saint a Saint.

He needed no more, to make him leave the place, he continued his Journey
through Lombardy, and took the way of Genova. There being War at that time
between the French and the Spaniard, and the two Armies spreading all over the
Country, made the ways exceeding dangerous: Every body adviz'd him not to
venture forwards: But being under the Protection of God, he conceived, he ought
not to fear any thing: He moreover believed, that if he did not go the strait
Road, he should go out of the way in which Providence designed to Conduct him.
He took up his Lodging every night in some Cottage, where he could hardly lie
dry, in a season of Rain, and Snow. He traveled all the day in the bad weather,
both through the French and Spanish Armies; coming near a Village, where the
Spaniards were entrenched, some of the out Guards took him: His Habit and
Figure made them believe, he was a Spy. They examined him, but not being able
to draw a word out of him, they stripped him, and carried him in his shirt to
their Captain.

The Remembrance of Jesus Christ, exposed naked to the Eyes of the Jews,
fortified Ignatius in an exigence of so great Humilitation: But the fear of
being tortured did a little terrify him. He began to think that if he did make
himself known, he could get clearly off; at least, that by speaking fairly and
rationally to the officers, they might hear reason, and not treat him as a
Spy. But upon Reflection, Judging these thoughts to be suggestions of a bad
Spirit, and Illusions of self Love, he affected and immitated more then before,
the Stupidity of an Idiot. He remained without motion in presence of the
Captain, casting down his Eyes, and answering nothing to the Questions, which
the Officiers put to him: He never spoke, but when they asked him, if he were a
Spy; then he readily answered, No, the Officer taking him to be a silly Poor
Wretch, was angry with the Soldiers, that they could not distinguish a Spy
from a natural Fool; and Commanded them to give him his Clothes again. So that
the semblance of an Idiot, which out of the Love of Suffering and humilitation,
he took upon him, was that which saved him, and brought him off.

But the Soldiers, before they parted with him, used him very roughly both in
words and blows, being enraged for having had a Reprimand from the Captain,
upon his account. The joy which Ignatius had, in being used in the Camp of the
Spaniards, much after the same rate of Jesus Christ his usage, in the Court of
Herod, hindered him almost from feeling the rude treatment of the Soldiers. Yet
among them, there was one less Barbarous then the rest, who out of Compassion
lodged him that night, and gave him meat.

Following on his way, he fell into the Quarters of the French; the officer, to
whom he was brought was a Basque, a neighbor to the Province of Gypuscoa, and
a very Gallant Man: He judged favorably of the Pilgrim, by his Physiognomy:
And having learnt his Country, he treated him very Civilly. This diversity of
entertainment confirmed Ignatius in his relyance upon the Providence of God,
and in his resolution, to receive from the hands of God, with the same
Equality, comforts, and Crosses.

At Genova he met Roderigues Portundo, General of the Spanish Galleys, who knew
him. They had seen one another at the Court of the Catholic King, and were
both of the same Country: That which pleased Ignatius most, was to meet a Ship
ready to go for Spain, in which he easily procured his passage, by the Favor
of Portundo. The Pirates, which haunt the Coasts of Genova, gave chase to the
Vessel; and the Galleys of Andrea Doria, who had embraced the French Interest,
did also pursue her; but she escaped both the one, and the other, and happily
gained the Port of Barcelona.

Ignatius went immediately to see Jeronimo Ardebale, who taught in the Grammar
School, and he Communicated to him his new design: He imparted it also to
Isabella Rosella, who was infinitely glad to see him again, and promised to
supply him with all necessaries. He was then thirty years old, and had no
natural propension for study; for he had been trained to Military Exercises
from his Childhood, as we have already seen; and the love of Arms, which before
his Conversion had wholly possessed him, gave him a disgust to Latin, in an Age,
when People of quality took Pride in their Ignorance. There was little
appearance of Success, in beginning to Learn at that time of day a Language,
which is only well learnt in the years of Childhood. On the other side, a man
wholly applied to the Practice of an interior life, must find a great deal of
difficulty to interrupt it, with beating his brains about the Rules of Grammar.
However, Ignatius fell to study the first Rudiments of the Latin Tongue, and
went every day to School with the little Children. The desire he had of making
himself useful to his Neighbor, and the aim he took of Gods greater glory,
which he now Proposed to himself for his only Rule, made easy to him that
Crabbed Task, and overcame in him all his disgusts and repugnances. But the
enemy of the salvation of Mankind, who foresaw where the Science of Ignatius
would one day end, used his Artifice to defeat the Pious design.

That Spirit of darkness, which is sometimes transformed into an Angel of
Light, continually instigated our new Scholar to Practices of Piety, filled
him with Consolations, raised in him such tender sentiments for God, that all
the time of his study was spent in devout Aspirations: Instead of conjugating
the Verb Amo he made Acts of Love, I Love thee my God (said he), you Love me;
to Love, to be Loved, and nothing more. When he was in the School his thoughts
flew up to Heaven, and while his Master explicated the Rules of Grammar, he was
attentive to another Master within him, who opened to him the difficulties of
Scripture, and the Mysteries of Faith.

So that he learnt nothing; or the little which he did learn, was soon rubbed
out of his Memory by other more lively and strong Idea's, which he could not be
rid of; Had he stopped at appearances, or followed the motions of self love, he
would have believed, that God had only called him to the repose of a
contemplative life, and that study had been an Obstacle to perfection. But
considering the Matter according to that light, which he had for the
discernment of Spirits, and regulating all things by the greater glory of God,
he had no difficulty to comprehend, that the Malignant Spirit deceived him.

He discovered the temptation to Ardebale, and carrying him one day along with
him to the Church of St Mary of the Sea, he fell down upon his knees, asked him
Pardon for his negligence, and made a vow at the foot of the Altar, to continue
his studies with greater application. He also entreated his Master to use him
with severity, when he did not perform his Task, and to spare him no more, then
the least of his Scholars. It Is very marvilous, that after Ignatius had in this
manner combated the illusions of Hell, they so absolutely vanished, that they
never returned more.

Some Learned men counseled him to read the books of Erasmus (Famous at that
time over all Europe) and amongst the rest the Christian Soldier, as most
proper for Piety, and for the Purity of the Latin tongue. He read him, and
also marked the Phrases, and best ways of expression: but he perceived, that the
Reading this Author diminished in him his Devotion, and that the more he read,
the less fervor he had in his Exercises of Piety. By often experience finding
this to be so, he threw away the Book, and conceived so much horror of it, that
he would never read it more; and when he came to be General of the Society, he
ordered, that they should not read the Books of Erasmus, or at least, not
without great precaution. To keep alive his first fervor, he often read the
Imitation of Christ, Looking upon it to be a book, next to the Gospel, most
full of the Spirit of God.

But if sometimes divine Consolations, with which God often favored him, were
lessened in him, he comforted himself with the fruit which he expected from his
studies; and well distinguishing between Dryness, and Tepidity, he was wont to
say, that the loss of spiritual gusts, caused by study, purely followed for the
Glory of God, was better worth, then all the delights of sensible Devotion;
provided the heart be replenisht with the Love of God. In this manner, it it was
his Principle care, to maintain the interior Spirit, which grows slack, and is
dissipated by study, when it is not established upon solid virtue.

For this reason, his health being now mended, since his return from the Holy
Land, he renewed his Austerities, which the weakness of his stomach, and the
hardships of the Journey had caused him to intermit. But he did nothing without
the advice of his Confessor; and far from permitting himself to be transported
by his Devotion, he retrencht part of his seven hours of prayer, to have more
leisure for his study; Following the light, which he then had, that we may, and
ought in some occasions leave God for God.

Whereas he had now formed a Model of outward Conversation, conformable to that
of Jesus Christ, not to scare or estrange the People from him, nor to
distinguish himself by any extraordinary Habit, he would not take to his
Sackcloth again, nor to his Iron chain, but was contented to wear a hair shirt,
under a very poor Cassock; of the Alms, which Isabella Rosella, and other
devout persons bestowed upon him, he reserved to himself no more, then was
precisely necessary to live, and parted the rest among the poor, to whom he
always gave the best of every thing: Insomuch, that Agnes Pascal a devout
woman, with whom he lodged, and where probably he was placed by Isabella
Rosella, astonished at the little Care, which Ignatius took of himself,
reprehended him one day for keeping still the worst for his own use. And what
would you do (Replied Ignatius) If Jesus Christ should ask of you an Alms?
Could you find in your heart to give him the worst?

The Son of Agnes, called John Pascal, a Sober and devout Youth, would rise
sometimes in the night to observe what Ignatius did in his chamber; and
sometimes he saw him upon his knees, sometimes prostrate upon the ground, his
Countenance always inflamed, and often in tears; He thought once, that he saw
him elevated from the ground, and surrounded with Light. He often heard him
deeply to sigh, and in the heat of his Prayer, these words usually came from
him, O God, my Love, and the delight of my Soul, if men did know thee, they
would never offend thee! my God, how good art thou, to bear with such a sinner,
as I am!

This is that Pascal, who being afterward Married, told his Children, that if
they knew what he had seen of Ignatius, they would never leave kissing the
Floor and the Walls of the Chamber where the Servant of God did Lodge. And in
saying this, Tears would come from his Eyes; he would knock his Breast, and
accuse himself for having so little profited by the Company of so holy a Man.

Ignatius, while he endeavored his own perfection, did not neglect that of his
Neighbor. At those hours which were not employed in Study, he made it his
Business to withdraw Souls from Vice, by Examples, or by edifying Discourses:
This his Zeal did very much appear upon an important Occasion. There was out of
the Town, between the new Gate, and the Gate of St. Daniel, a famous Monastery
of Nuns, called The Monastery of the Angels; this Name did not very well agree
with those Religious: They lived in a great libertinage, and abating their
Habit, were perfect Curtisans. Ignatius could not without horror see such
abomination in a holy Place; notwithstanding he judged, that how violent soever
the Disease was, violent Remedies would have no good effect; and that whereas
Religious Persons who have forsaken God, are more difficult to be Converted
then those of the World, they are to be managed with greater caution and
tenderness.

In order hereunto he frequented the Church of the Monastery of the Angels,
making it the constant Place of his Devotions, where he every day made his four
or five hours of Prayer upon his Knees, and received the Sacrament of the
Priest who Served that Church, called Puygalte, who was a Man of good life, and
to whom he communicated his Design. The regular and constant Devotions of
Ignatius, with his great modesty and recollection, raised a curiosity in the
Nuns to know who he was: Wherefore they desired to speak with him; and after
many idle Questions concerning his Country, his Condition, and the like, which
Ignatius endeavored to elude by general Answers, as well as he could. He at
last turned his Discourse upon the Excellency and the Duties of a Religious
state of Life. He much insisted upon the Purity which Jesus Christ requires in
his Spouses, and represented to them the dishonor done him by their Infidelity.
But he spoke to them with such energy and sweetness together, and gained upon
them so much in this first Conference, that they desired to hear him again. He
came to them many days together, and finding them disposed to follow his
Advice, he engaged them by degrees to meditate upon the first Verities of his
spiritual Exercises. In process of time they were so touched with Compunction,
that changing their Conduct, they shut up their Doors, and quite broke off the
scandalous Commerce which they formerly had with the Men of the Town.

This change enraged some of the Youngsters who most used to haunt the
Monastery, and they resolved to revenge themselves on him whom they found out
to be the Author of it. One day, when Ignatius returned from the Monastery with
the Priest Puygalte, two Moorish Slaves set upon them near the Gate of St.
Daniel, and Bastinado'd them almost to death. In effect, Puygalte died few days
after, and Ignatius was left in a manner dead upon the place: But coming a
little to himself, after the Assassins were gone, and not being able to stand
upon his Legs, he was relieved by a charitable Passenger, who set him upon his
Horse.

His Bruises and Pains had so weakened him, that his Friends despaired of his
life. Many Persons of Quality, who honored him as the Apostle of Barcelona
(according to the Testimony of John Pascal) came to see him as soon as they
heard of his Disaster, and among the rest a Daughter of the Conde de Palamos,
who was Wife to Don John de Riquesens. This Lady, no less illustrious for her
Piety then for her Birth, who had a particular affection for the Servant of
God, was afflicted in the highest manner to see him in that condition; at all
times, and in all places she wept for him. But Ignatius, who esteemed himself
happy in suffering upon such an account, blamed her Tears, telling her, that
she ought to rejoice, and not to grieve for him.

He had his Hair-Shirt upon him when he was assaulted by the Slaves, and he
could not be induced to leave it off in the height of his Pains, but by the
Command of his Confessor, Diego d' Alcantara, of the Order of St. Francis. John
Pascal locked up the Hair-Shirt, and would not let him have it any more; he
charily kept it all his life, and left it to his Children as a precious Legacy,
with a Writing under his Hand to attest the truth of it: But in the Year 1606,
the Duke of Mont-Leon, Viceroy of Catalonia, with great entreaty got it of the
Family, who had kept it as a Relic.

God in the mean time, who had destined Ignatius to greater Enterprises then
this, which cost him so dear, restored his Health after Three and fifty days of
Sickness and Pain. As soon as he was able to walk, he visited the Monastery of
the Angels, to finish the Work he had begun; and when they told him, that he
should take heed of a second Assassination, he answered, How glad should I be
to die for so good a Cause? But his Enemies, far from enterprising any thing
more upon his Person, repented of their Crime, and the most furious amongst
them, called Ribera, came and threw himself at Ignatius's Feet, begging his
pardon.

Two Brothers, He raises a dead Man to life.
called Lisani, had a Lawsuit one with the other for a Matter of concern, and
there was a mortal hatred between them, as commonly it happens, when nearest
Relations go to Law. One of these being overthrown, was in such affliction and
rage, that he hanged himself upon one of the Beams of his House. All the
Neighborhood came in at the outcries of the Family, upon finding their Master
hanged. Ignatius, who was coming back from the Monastery of the Angels, went
into the House with the rest, and made them cut the Rope: they found the
unfortunate Man without motion or Pulse, and notwithstanding all they could do
to him, he showed no signs of life.

Ignatius, concerned at the deplorable state of the poor Man, fell upon his
Knees close to the Body, and by a strong inspiration begged of God with a loud
and distinct voice, so much life for this miserable wretch, as might serve him
to make his Confession. He is heard, and in presence of all the Company, who
astonished at his Prayer, waited with impatience the success, Lisano
immediately came to life. In this manner it is, that the three Auditors of the
Rota speak of this matter; Cunctis stupentibus, and rei exitum expectantibus,
Lysanus ad vitam rediit.
and to the end it may not be doubted, that Heaven did restore life to the dead
Man at the Prayer of Ignatius, the resuscitated Person immediately died, after
he had Confessed.

Ignatius had now continued almost two years at Barcelona, in which time he had
so well profited in the Latin Tongue, that his Master judged him capable to
proceed to the higher Sciences. Though he did not believe that Ardebale would
flatter him, yet for greater security, he would be Examined by a Person who was
a Doctor of Divinity, and had little acquaintance with him. The Doctor was of
the same opinion with Ardebale, and counseled him to Study his Course of
Philosophy in the University of Alcala, which had been newly Founded by the
Cardinal Ximenes, and was at that time very flourishing.

Many young Men, He go's to Alcala, to continue his Studies there.
whom Ignatius had brought into the way of Virtue, desired to accompany him;
but he would take with him only three, of which one was called Caliste, another
Artiaga, and the third Cazieres. He also chose a fourth Disciple in the
Hospital of Alcala; where Ignatius took up his Quarter at his arrival in that
Town. This fourth Disciple was a Frenchman, Page to Don Martin de Cordova,
Viceroy of Navarr. The young Frenchman, who had been wounded in a Quarrel, as
his Master passed through Alcala, was carried to the Hospital to be cured of
his Wounds. While the Chyrurgeons had care of his Body, Ignatius undertook the
Cure of his Soul; and he labored so successfully in it, that the Page resolved
to reform his Life, left the Service of the Viceroy, and his Hopes in the
World. They were all five Habited alike, wearing a long Garment of gray Cloth,
with a Hat of the same color; and they lived only upon Aims, but they did not
reside together in one House: Ferdinando de Para, and Andrea d' Arze, each of
them Lodged two out of Charity. As for Ignatius, he had his Lodging in the
Hospital of Dantezana, where he had no difficulty to get a Chamber,
notwithstanding the great multitude of Poor there; for that which they let him
have, had been a long while empty, and no body durst lie in it, having the
reputation of being haunted with Spirits; and perhaps not without reason: for
the first Night that Ignatius lay there, he heard a terrible noise, and even
saw some hideous Specter, which, as bold as he was, did a little frighten him;
but having recourse to Prayer, he never saw nor heard more of them.

The impatience which he had to give himself entirely to the Conversion of
Souls, made him follow his Study with extreme earnestness; and believing that
he should make a quick dispatch, by applying himself to several Sciences at
once, he had scarce learned his Terms of Logic, but he fell upon Natural
Philosophy, and also undertook Scholastical Divinity. They read in the Schools
of that University, the Logic of Soto, the Physic of Albertus Magnus, and the
Theology of the Master of the Sentences. He took all these three Lessons one
after another, and Studied Night and Day without intermission. But so many
different Notions so confounded his Understanding, that all his labor ended in
learning nothing; as it always happens when one Study's without Method, and
would grasp all at once. Thus it was, that Providence, designing Ignatius to
teach Jesus Christ in the University of Alcala, instead of learning Aristotle
and S. Thomas, gave him not any light to see the disorder in his way of
Studying, nor even permitted that his own natural Reason should serve to
redress it.

Wherefore being disheartened with the little progress which he had made in the
Sciences, He does many good works.
he, with his four Disciples, applied himself wholly to good Works. All the
time which he did not spend in Prayer, he employed in Catechizing Children, in
serving the Sick of the Hospital, and in procuring Relief for poor People
ashamed to beg. But most particularly he applied himself to reform the Manners
of dissolute Scholars, for which he had a special Talent from Heaven.

This zeal for the reformation of Youth, made him undertake the Conversion of a
Man much given to liberty, who held one of the first Dignities in the Church of
Spain, and who by his ill Example, by his Liberalities, and by his Caresses,
corrupted almost all the young Men in the University of Alcala. After having
begged of God the Light and Forces which he should have need of in so hard an
Enterprise, he go's to the Lodging of the Prelate; and to obtain Audience, he
sends up word, that an unknown Person had things of great importance to tell
him. When he was brought up to him, he said, It is the greatest Concern you
have in the World which obliges me to wait upon you, for it is the Concern of
your eternal Salvation. And what? (he added in a Tone of Assurance, and yet of
Respect) do you think that God has placed you in this World to live as if there
were neither Heaven nor Hell? Is a happy Eternity of so little value, that it
does not deserve your care? If at this moment that I speak to you Death should
surprise you, where would you be? What Account could you give, I do not say of
so much Riches so sinfully employed, but of so many Souls which you have
destroyed, and do every day destroy?

Ignatius would have still continued in the same Tone, but the Prelate took him
short, called him an insolent Fool, and a Madman, and in a great rage
threatened to have him thrown out of the Window, if he did not presently depart;
and in order thereunto, called up his Servants. For all this Ignatius did not
cease to follow on his Point with the same liberty as before; and God gave such
a Blessing upon his Words, that the incensed Prelate grew suddenly calm, and so
much an altered Man, that with great Civility he invited Ignatius to Sup with
him. Ignatius would not balk so fair an occasion of going on with his Work; but
made such good use of his time, that before he left him, what with his modest
Comportment, and with the force of his Reasons, he gained him to that degree,
that he wholly changed the loose course of his life.

This Conversion made a great noise in the Country, and had a very good effect
upon the young Students of the University, in order to the reformation of their
Manners: The Prelate himself becoming zealous to reclaim those by his good
Example, whom his bad had corrupted. But that which most served to reform the
Youth of Alcala, was the Assemblies of Devotion which Ignatius held in the
Hospital, whither great Crowds of Scholars came to him, and seldom went away,
but with a horror and detestation of Vice.

The common People were struck with these extraordinary Changes, He is
suspected of Sorcery and Heresy.
and following their natural malignity, they entertained strange Fancies
concerning Ignatius. Some said he was a Conjurer, and that without Art-Magick
he could not do what he had done: Others, that he was an Heretic, and that
under pretense of bringing the young Fry to Piety he instilled false Doctrine
into them.

These Rumors quickly came to the Ears of the Inquisitors at Toledo. They had
lately condemned in Spain certain Visionaries, who were called the Illuminated,
or Men of new Lights. The Heresy of Luther began to desolate Germany, and
there was reason to fear that it would spread it self abroad like the Plague,
which seldom does rage in a Country without infecting the Neighboring Parts.
Wherefore the Inquisitors being very zealous and watchful, were induced to
believe, that possibly the Person so much talked of, might either be an
Illuminato or a Lutheran; and to be thoroughly informed of the matter, they came
themselves to Alcala, to take Examinations upon the Place.

After an exact Enquiry into the Manners and Doctrine of Ignatius, He is
declared innocent.
not finding any thing that might render him suspected, and not judging it
expedient to make him appear before them, they were contented to refer the
Matter to John Roderiques Figueroa, Grand Vicar of Alcala, and to Delegate to
him all their Authority, in case any new Matter should happen. As soon as the
Inquisitors were gone, the Grand Vicar called Ignatius before him, and declared
to him, that the Juridical Information which had been made, was much in his
favor, and that he might continue his Functions for the service of his
Neighbor. He only admonished him, that it was not approved of, that he and his
Companions, not being Religious, should go in Habits alike. Ignatius, to take
away all ground of Complaint, Clothed himself and Artiaga in Black, left his
gray Habit to the Frenchman, and made Caliste and Cazeres go into a Russet
Color. But in regard the Grand Vicar had forbidden him to go barefoot, he put
on Shoes, and ever after wore them.

The Testimony of the Inquisition justified Ignatius, and gave him a great deal
of Credit among the People. He was no more now an Illuminato or a Lutheran, but
a Man filled with the Spirit of God, and a Successor of the Apostles; and
Alphonso Sanchez, Canon of St. Just, commonly called him The holy Man. This is
the Canon who before he had discovered the true Piety which was in Ignatius,
and in his Disciples, did one day publicly refuse them the Communion, upon
supposition that they were Hypocrites, if not worse.

Martin Saez, a rich and principal Man of the Town of Aspetia, which lies near
to the Castle of Loyola, being come to Alcala for some Business of Consequence,
heard them speak much of Ignatius, which made him desire his Acquaintance.
Being showed to him one day in the Street, he followed him to a little House
whither he used to go every Morning upon a Charitable account: Having seen him
go in, and come out of the House, he went in himself, and there found a poor
sick Woman, whom he asked who that Person was that last went from her; She
answered, that she did not know the Man, but that he brought her every day
something to live upon, and that without his assistance she must have starved.
Tell him (says the Man of Aspetia) that you know a Person that will furnish him
with Money for all the Charities which he will do. The sick Woman failed not to
advertise Ignatius of it, and to tell him the Lodging, the Name, and the
Country of this Man, according to the Order she had received from him. The very
Name of Aspetia did much affright Ignatius, who feared nothing more then the
meeting of any Persons of his own Country: On the other side he was mortified
to be so discovered; so that without saying any thing farther to the poor
Woman, he only told her, Sister, I have succored you hitherto, according to my
ability; hereafter Providence will assist you by some other means. After which
he departed, and came no more.

In this while the Grand Vicar caused new Informations to be taken of Ignatius
and his Disciples; either incited thereunto by ill-minded People, or else
imagining with himself, that Men of small Learning might be apt to teach false
Doctrine in their Catechisms; and that being young, how virtuous now soever
they appeared, they might easily fall into the frailties of Youth. Upon this
fresh Enquiry he still found their Doctrine sound, and their Manners
irreprehensible. But there fell out an Accident which gave him ill impressions
of their Conduct, and even did exasperate him against them.

Amongst the Persons that followed Ignatius, there were two Women of Quality,
the Mother and the Daughter, and both Widows: The Mother was called Maria de
Vado, and the Daughter Lovisa Velasquez, They had both been great Worldlings,
especially the Daughter, whose Beauty and Youth had drawn more Courtship. From
the beginning of their Conversion they resolved to undertake something
extraordinary for the love of God. As Women commonly run to Extremes, and the
Spanish having more fire then the rest, they imagined that nothing could be
finer, nor more edifying, then to Clothe themselves like Beggars, and to travel
about begging their Bread, visiting Hospitals, and serving the Sick. However,
they would not set forth till they had consulted Ignatius, whom they took for
their spiritual Director. He told them the folly of their Design, and that
without an evident Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, they must not take such
extraordinary Courses to advance in Perfection; That Sanctity did not consist
in running about; That Women, who were not too secure even within their own
Walls, had a great deal to fear in a wandering Life; That in Alcala there were
Hospitals where they might exercise their Charity; That being rich, they should
employ themselves in helping the Necessitous, and not counterfeit them by an
affected Beggary; In conclusion, That they should either renounce the World for
good-and-all, or else live in it like reasonable Persons, regulating their
Virtue according to their Condition, and not attempting to be Saints in any
other way then God would have them.

These Devotes, by Profession, do not always believe Counsel, nor have
deference to the Judgment of their Directors, unless it jump with their own
sense. These its true did lay down the thoughts of rambling every where about,
but they could not be hindered from making a Pilgrimage in their own fashion,
to our Ladies of Guadeloupe, and to the Holy Syndon of Jaen. These are two
Celebrated Devotions in Spain, the one in new Castille, the other in Andalousia.

They set forwards with great Secrecy, He is again accused and put in Prison.
without saying any thing to Ignatius, Habited like penetent Pilgrims, and went
all the way on Foot begging Alms. As soon as the thing was known, all the World
fell foul upon Ignatius, and among others, Doctor Cirol, who was a particular
friend of these Ladies. He complained against the suffering an illiterate
Layman to tamper in the Direction of Consciences; He said openly, that a
Director, who advised mad things, ought himself to be shut up. Whereas this
Doctor was in great Credit with Cardinal Ximenes, who had bestowed on him the
first Chair of Divinity in the new University of Alcala, he had no great
difficulty to make the Grand Vicar enter into his sentiments. Ignatius is
Arrested, and publicly carried to Prison.

Don Francisco de Borgia, Son to the Duke of Gandia, who at that time was but
Seventeen years old, happened then to pass in the Street with a Magnificent
Train. The Modesty and Mildness of Ignatius, in the midst of the shouts and
clamor of the People, mightily struck the young Lord, and made those
impressions in him, of which he did not comprehend the meaning, till
afterward. It is probable, that Heaven, designing Borgia to be one day a Son
of Ignatius, purposely exposed him to his view in this suffering condition; and
that this sight of him was the first seed of his Vocation.

The news of Ignatius's Imprisonment was no sooner spread about the Town, but
people of all sorts flocked to him: According to his Custom, he spoke to them
of Heaven, and the things of God; and he spoke with greater liberty then ever.
George Naver, who was the first Professor of Holy Scripture in the University
of Alcala, and who passed for a Man of great Sense, was one day so charmed with
the Discourse of Ignatius, that he forgot the hour of his Lesson. Going
afterward to the School, and meeting his Scholars, who had waited for him; I
have seen St. Paul in Prison (said he) quite transported.

Some Ladies of Quality, who knew the Innocence of the Prisoner, sent to him,
to offer their Mediation for getting him out of Prison. The most considerable
were Theresa Henriquez, Mother of the Duke of Maqueda, and Elinor Mascaregnas,
at that time Lady of Honor to the Empress, and afterward Governant to the
Prince of Spain, Philip the Second. Both the one, and the other, were of that
sort of Virtuous Women, whom the World does not corrupt, and who have the
secret to be Saints at Court. They had never conversed with Ignatius but once,
and that only Conference had given them a great opinion of his Sanctity.

He did not accept of their offers, and would not so much as retain an
Advocate; whether it were, that he confided in the goodness of his Cause, or
that he believed, he ought to leave himself to Providence, not to lose, through
his own fault, so fair an occasion of partaking in the Ignominies of the Cross.
And besides, he desired nothing more then to be set right by Eccelesiastical
Superiors, in, case he had erred in any thing; and declared, that he was
disposed and resolved blindly to obey them.

Ignatius had been seventeen days in Prison, when the Grand Vicar came thither
to examine him. The stress of the Examination was concerning the two Pilgrim
Ladies. He confessed that he knew them, but at the same time declared, that far
from counselling them to so unbecoming an expedition, he had endeavored, what
in him lay, to suppress in them such rambling thoughts. And yet for that only
matter are you put into Prison, said the Grand Vicar.

While strict enquiries were made upon this Subject, as also upon the Life and
Conversation of Ignatius, the wandering Ladies came back, after a two and forty
days ramble; who being Juridically interrogated, confirmed what Ignatius had
said, and their Testimony was believed, in this matter, where they accused
themselves; so that he was fully acquitted on that side; and nothing more being
found to charge him withal, he was absolutely discharged, and enlarged by a
public Sentence, the first day of June in the year 1527.

This Sentence had two Clauses in it not very favorable, That he, and his
Companions should wear the ordinary Habit of Scholars; That not being Divines,
they should abstain from explicating to the People the Mysteries of Religion,
till such time, as they had studied Four years in Divinity: Moreover the Grand
Vicar forbad them all manner of teaching or instructing in Religious matters,
under pain of Excommunication and Banishment.

For what regarded their Clothing, Ignatius answered, it was not in their power
to obey, unless they had the means of doing it; upon the other point of
instructing the People, he did not declare himself, because he doubted, whether
it were a lawful Command. The ground of his doubt was, that their work in
Catechizing did not require a profound knowledge of the Mysteries; and that in
not doing it, they should be wanting to their Call and Vocation. To clear this
Scruple, and above all to take certain measures in the doing it, he resolved to
apply himself to the Archbishop of Toledo, who was at Vallidolid.

The Grand Vicar made him, and his Disciples be clothed after the manner of the
Scholars; he moreover told him a little harshly, that they would not have
brought so much trouble upon themselves if their Discourses had less of Novelty
in them. I did not think, Ignatius replied with a grave and modest Air, that
it had been a novelty amongst Christians, to speak of Jesus Christ.

Some few days before his Departure, passing through a Street, where the People
were assembled to see some play at long Tennis, before the House of Lopez
Mendoze, he asked an Alms from some of the People there. Lopez had no sooner
cast his Eyes upon him, but pointing at him with his finger, he cried out, I
will be burnt, if that Man does not deserve to be so. The same day the news was
brought of the Birth of the Prince of Spain, Philip the Second; and at night
Bonefires were made over all the Town. Lopez being on the top of his House, to
cause some little pieces of Cannon to be discharged, it chanced, that a spark
fell upon his provision of Powder, which taking Fire, enclosed him, and burnt
him alive: As if God, to declare the innocence, and to repair the honor of
Ignatius, had designed to take Lopez at his word, in punishing him, according
to his own Imprecation.

Ignatius was very well received by Don Alphonso de Fonseca, Archbishop of
Toledo. This Prelate, having heard his reasons, and knowing how much those of
Alcala were prepossest against him, counseled him to go and Study at Salamanca,
and very much exhorted him to continue his functions of piety toward his
Neighbor. He promised him all the protection that he and his Companions should
want, and gave them wherewithal to make their journey.

Notwithstanding Ignatius his earnestness to prosecute his Studies, What he
does and what he suffers at Salamanca.
when he should be at quiet, yet when he came to Salamanca, he made it his
first business to Labor in the gaining of Souls; and he did it with the
greater Fervor and Liberty, because now his Mission seemed to be Authorized by
the Archbishop of Toledo. The fruits of his Evangelical Labor first appeared
in the Conversion of many among the ordinary People; and in a little time his
Reputation so spread it self, that the most considerable of the Town desired to
learn of him the Maxims of Salvation.

And yet there were some good People, who did not well relish all that Ignatius
did, either out of a secret Jealousy, that so many good works should be done
by him, in which they had no part, or else being persuaded, that in a time in
which Heresy did very much spring up, every new thing ought to be suspected.
They said, it was a thing unheard of, that a simple Layman should instruct the
People, and in a manner execute the Office of a Pastor, in directing
Consciences.

The Religious of St. Dominick in the Monastery of St. Stephen were of this
opinion, and took upon them to Examine the Matter to the Bottom; although they had
no Jurisdiction, nor Order given them, for their so doing. Ignatius had his
Confessor in this Monastery, who one day invited him to Dinner by order of the
Sub-Prior, who at that time, in the absence of the Prior, governed the House:
This Religious Man had a great Curiosity to know what kind of Man this new
Apostle was, of whom the World so much talked. After dinner the Sub-Prior,
accompanied with the Confessor, and another Father, carried Ignatius and his
Disciple Calisto into a private Chapel; where putting on an open free
Countenance, he thus spoke to him, I am very glad, that according to the
Example of the Apostles, you go about every where Teaching the People the
things of Heaven, and I can assure you, that all of this Convent are no less
satisfied with it. But I would fain know ( he added) what ability of Learning
you have, and to what Sciences you are most applied. We are not Learned Men,
nor do we pretend to be so ( answered Ignatius) nor have we Studied much. How
then comes it to pass, that you take upon you the Ministry of Preaching? (
replied the Sub-Prior.) We neither undertake the Office of Preaching, nor do we
Preach ( said Ignatius) We only Catechize, and make familiar Discourses. But
what do you speak of ( replied the Sub-Prior) in those familiar Discourses? We
speak of Virtue, and Vice ( Answered Ignatius) and we endeavor the best we
can, to represent the Beauty of the one, and the Deformity of the other. Truly
you are pleasant Men ( said the Sub-Prior) that you dare Discourse to the
People of Virtue, and Vice, without being either Philosophers, or Divines. You
have therefore infused Knowledges ( he added, in a tone of Derision) since they
are not acquired by study, and you would do me a kindness to tell me, what
those Revelations are, that you have had.

Ignatius judged, that such a Question did not deserve an Answer. He held his
peace, and tho often urged by the Sub-Prior to give him an Answer, he only
said, Father it is enough; if you please let us stop here, I will Answer no
farther, till my Ecclesiastical Superiors, to whom I owe Obedience, shall
Command me. But I will make you speak (said the angry Sub-Prior) your silence
sufficiently shows, that there is something very unwarrantable in your
Doctrine. And then looking upon Calisto, who was at that time a little odly
dressed, We need but look upon you (said he) to Judge, that you affect
singularity, and that Novelties please you. This Companion of Ignatius coming
to Salamanca, met a Pilgrim upon the Road extremely poor, to whom he gave his
new Cloths in Exchange of the Pilgrims old ones, which consisted of a pitiful
Jacket too short for him, and a Hat with broad brims all worn out, all which
together made but a ridiculous Figure of him: He truly confes'd what had
happened, to take away the suspicion conceived against them. But the Sub-Prior,
no more satisfied with the Answer of Calisto, then with the silence of
Ignatius, had them both conducted into a Cell, and there locked them up.

Three days after, they were carried to Prison by the Order of Frias, Grand
Vicar of the Church of Salamanca, and a friend of the Sub-Prior. They put them
into a dark Dungeon, as seditious persons, and Heretics, and fettered them
together with a great Iron Chain. All the night they spent in singing Hymns,
and giving Thanks to Heaven, for having been judged worthy to suffer contumely
for the Name of Jesus Christ.

Upon the first noise of the Imprisonment of Ignatius, all the Town was in an
uprore, from all parts they flocked to the Prison, some to see the Prisoners,
others to relieve them. Don Francisco Mendoza (who was afterward Bishop of
Burgos and a Cardinal,) going thither, and Condoling Ignatius's misfortune, he
asked him, if his Imprisonment was not painful to him. Do You think (said
Ignatius smiling) it is any great matter to be in Prison, and in Chains? for my
part I confess truly to you, that there are not so many Dungeons, nor Fetters
in Salamanca, but that I should be glad of more, for the love of my Savior
Jesus Christ.

He made almost the same Answer to some Nuns, who mightily compasionating his
Condition, wrote to him Letters full of tenderness and grief on his behalf, and
of Resentment against those, who had made him be arrested. But he condemned
these Sentiments of Nature in them, and told them, it was a sign, that they did
not know the Treasures, which are hid under the Crosses we suffer, for the
Service of God. This Advertisement had such an effect upon these Religious
Women, that they became enflamed with the desire of Humiliations and Sufferings.

In the mean time Frias, who had much the Character and Spirit of Figneroa,
came to interrogate the Prisoners; Ignatius delivered into his hands the Book
of his Spiritual Exercises, and told him the Lodging of his other Three
Disciples, to the end they might be Examined. Immediately they were
apprehended, and put into a Dungeon apart, where they could have no
Communication with Ignatius or Calisto.

The Grand Vicar took the pains himself to read the Book of the Exercises, and
afterward gave it to three Doctors to read, of which one of his own Name was
called Frias, the other Paravignas, and the third Isidoro. After they had all
four thoroughly examined it, they sent for Ignatius to come before them, and
proposed to him diverse Questions, not only upon the Matters contained in his
Book of Exercises, but also upon many Theological Points, treated of in the
Schools. Ignatius acknowledged to them, that he was no Learned Man: However he
answered so to the purpose, that the Doctors were surpised. One of them, to
puzzel him, proposed a crabbed and difficult Question to him out of the Canon
Law; He answered, he did not know what the Canonists had determined upon that
Point, but in Obedience to them he told them his own Opinion of it, which
proved to be exactly right and true. They commanded him to explicate to them
the first Precept of the Decalogue, in the same manner, as he usually did to
the People. He did it, but like a man inspired, and in such a way, as persuaded
them that the Holy Ghost spoke by his mouth. This notwithstanding, they again
told him, that they much wondered, that he, being no Scholar, as he confessed
himself, should undertake in the beginning of his Exercises to determine the
difference between a Venial, and a Mortal Sin. To which he plainly answered
that they were his Judges; And if he had advanced any thing contrary to Faith,
they ought to condemn him: But if his Doctrine of the distinction between a
Venial and a Mortal Sin had nothing in it but what was Catholic, he humbly
hoped, that they would approve of it.

At this very time, while they were examining Ignatius, the Prisoners broke
open the doors of the Prison, and having killed, or bound the Guards, all made
their escape, except the Companions of Ignatius, who were found all alone in
the Prison, with the Doors open. This did not a little serve to justify their
Innocence. In conclusion after two and twenty days of Imprisonment, the Master
and his Disciples were cited before the Judges, to hear their Sentence read; by
which they are declared to be good Men, and their Doctrine to be Sound: They
are farther permitted to speak of Heavenly things, and to Instruct the People,
as much as they please: But, although the difference which Ignatius had set down,
between Venial and Mortal Sins, were allowed to be Orthodox by the Judges
themselves, they forbad him to touch upon that Point in his Catechisms, or in
his Exhortations, till such time, as he had studied four years in Divinity.

Here we may wonder, that the Lords of Loyola did not appear, during all these
Storms, and that, since the Conversion of Ignatius, none of his Family did ever
look after him. This possibly may be, either because Ignatius still made it his
chief business to conceal his Family, and his Condition, so that his Kindred
were wholly Ignorant, what was become of him, or else God might permit, for the
greater Perfection of his Servant, that he who had absolutely abandoned the
World, should also be forgot by it.

Ignatius, who desired not his Liberty but for the Service of his Neighbor,
was not well satisfied with the last Article of his Sentence. He looked upon it
as a Snare laid to catch him. He knew that his Enemies had caused this Article
to be inserted, with design of raising new Quarrels, and Complaints against
him. Wherefore to avoid the ill Consequence of it, he resolved to leave
Salamanca, and even Spain, it self. He had at the same time a strong
Inspiration to go for France, to continue or rather to recommence his Studies
in the University of Paris, which was at that time the most celebrated in all
Europe.

Having found by Experience, He leaves Spain to go into France.
that the little Progress which he had made in Learning at Alcala and
Salamanca, did much proceed from his losing time in begging about for his
subsistence, he thought that before he entered into a strange Country, he might
in Conscience raise a small Fund, wherewith to subsist during his Studies.
Wherefore, when he past through Barcelona, he made no Scruple to accept of the
Money, and Bills of Exchange, which his Friends offered him. He left his
Companions there, whom he found not over disposed to follow him, and departed
alone, about the end of December, however, with design that they should follow
him, when he had made their way, and prepared accommodations for them. There
was little Security upon the Frontiers of the two Kingdoms, where the Soldiers
on both sides robbed, and ill treated Passengers. It was besides a severe
Winter, and the Snow which covered all the Ground, made the ways hardly
passable. Notwithstanding he performed his Journey without any Disaster, and
came to Paris in good health at the beginning of February. 1528.

The chief End, which Ignatius had in this Voyage, was to advance in Learning.
He lodged in the University with some Spanish Students; And that he might be
Master of the Latin Tongue, he put himself again to the Study of it in Montaigu
College. Whereas he had no love for Money, and had no Inclination to keep it,
out of the Principle of Evangelical Poverty, he trusted all that he had with
one of his Chamber Fellows: But this Companion of his proved very unfaithful to
him; Part of the Money he riotously spent, and the rest he run away with.
Ignatius who had no Recruit, was constrained to retire to the Hospital of St*
James, where Spaniards are received, and which was founded by Charlemain for
the Pilgrims of St* James, after he had freed Spain from the Yoke of the
Saracens.

He had only his Lodging in the Hospital, and for his Subsistence, he was
forced to beg his Bread from Door to Door: This alteration did much prejudice
his Studies, for he lost a great deal of time in procuring Alms about the Town;
and Lodging far from the College, he could not be punctual at the Hours of
School. He would gladly have been a Servitor to one of the Masters of the
College; but with all his diligence and endeavor, he could not obtain so mean
an Employment.

His Poverty however, did not hinder him from exciting to Virtue those of his
Acquaintance, and his words made great Impression upon three Spaniards, of
which, one was named John de Castro, the other Peralta, and the last Amadore.
Having all three made the Spiritual Exercises, they sold all that they had, and
gave the Money to the Poor; after which, retiring themselves with Ignatius to
the Hospital of St. James's, they lived as he did upon Alms.

The Friends of these young Men mightily blaim'd their Conduct, and told them,
that their Devotion made them pass for Madmen all over the Town. But seeing
that they gained nothing that way upon them, they had recourse to Violence, and
one day entered into the Hospital with Armed Men, and took away the three
Spaniards against their Will.

This business made a great Noise. He is informed against to the Inquisitor.
Ignatius is accused of concealing bad designs under a Mask of Piety; and two
famous Doctors, Peter Ortiz a Spaniard, and James Govea a Portugues, who were
Acquainted with Castro, Peralta, and Amedoer, so openly declaimed, that such a
Man, who seduced young Scholars, should be well looked after, that he was
informed against to the Inquisitor Matthew Ori, Religious of the Order of St.
Dominick, and Prior of the great Convent in St. James's Street.

Although the Tribunal of the Inquisition was never established in France, in the
same manner, as it is in Italy and Spain, yet there have been formerly for many
years Inquisitors, delegated by the Pope, to conserve the purity of Faith, and
to keep the People in Obedience to the Church: Twelve years after the death of
St. Dominick, who was the first Inquisitor General, commissionated by Pope
Innocent the Third, and by Honorius the Third, against the Albigenses, Gregory
the Ninth, deputed two Religious of the same Order in the year 1233, to
exercise the said Office. And this Apostolical Commission was not only
continued in the Convent of Toulouze, but was also extended to many other
Monasteries of the Kingdom. One of the Commissioners, named in the cause of the
Templers, was the Inquisitor General of France; one of the Examiners of the
Doctrine of John Petit Doctor of the University of Paris, was also such: And
the History of the Maid of Orleans tell us, that in the year 1430. John
Magistri, Vicegerent of John Graverant Inquisitor of the Faith, was one of her
Judges, that five and thirty years after, John Brekal, he also being an
Inquisitor, declared her Innocent, together with the Prelates thereunto deputed
by Pope Calixtus. From that time to the Reign of Francis the First, it does not
appear, that in France there have been any of this sort of Inquisitors, whether
it were, that the Popes did not Judge them necessary in an Age, when Heresies
were in a manner extinguished, or that the Princes then reigning, more jealous
of their Royal Authority then their Predecessors, would not suffer any thing
that seemed to interfere with the Liberty of the Gallican Church.

Matthew Ori, He helps him who had robbed him.
who had received from Pope Clement the Seventh the Office of Inquisitor, by
reason of the Heresies rising in Germany, and who was a zealous Man, would have
Ignatius brought before him, that he might himself judge of his Doctrine. He
caused him to be searched for, but Ignatius was not to be found. At the same
time that the three young Spaniards were taken by force out of the Hospital, he
received Letters which told him, that he who had robbed him, was fallen sick at
Rouen, in his return to Spain. The Thief himself wrote, that he was in great
want in a Place where he had no Acquaintance; and that without a speedy Relief,
he must certainly perish. Ignatius did not at all balance upon what he had to
do: At that very moment he departed, hoping to assist, at least to comfort the
sick Man, if he could not otherwise help him. His fervor made him go away
without eating, and persuaded him, that he should march more nimbly, if he went
barefoot. He had gone but a little way, but he found a sadness at his Heart,
and a heaviness all over him: However, he haled himself on to Argentevil, much
ashamed of his weariness, and reproching himself with want of Courage at every
step that he made. When he had got to the top of the Hill, his sadness and
weariness left him. He was filled with spiritual Joys; and without taking any
Nourishment, he followed on his way with so much vigor and cheerfulness, that
he seemed to fly. He was only necessitated sometimes to stop, that he might
sigh at his ease, and give a little Liberty to those Flames of Love, with which
his Heart did burn. At last he comes to Rouen, and having found out the sick
Man, he embraces him, he comforts him, he serves him, he begs Alms for him, and
puts him in a Condition of prosecuting his Journey; he moreover procures a
place for him in a Merchants Ship, which was to go for Spain, and gives him
Letters of Recommendation for Barcelona. Thus Saints revenge themselves.

While these things were doing, Ignatius received News from one of his Friends
at Paris, to whom he had confided the design of his Journey, that the
Inquisitor had caused search to be made after him, and that his absence had
rendered him more suspected. This made him with all diligence return back to
Paris, where in the first place he immediately presented himself before the
Prior of the Dominicans: But the Prior having caused strict enquiry to be made,
and not finding any thing amiss in his Doctrine or Conversation, dismissed him
without any reproof.

In the mean time Ignatius suffered a great deal in a Town where the Poor, that
are Strangers, have less share in the Charities then the rest, and where
Spaniards were not very well looked upon, though the Peace of Cambray had newly
reconciled the two Crowns. Wherefore his necessity obliged him to follow the
counsel of a holy Religious Man, to go into Flanders during the vacancies of
Study, so to procure some Subsistence from the Spanish Merchants who Traded at
Antwerp and Brussels.

The first time that he made this Journey, passing through Bruges, he asked an
Alms of Ludovicus Vives. This Learned Man being none of those who are puffed up
with Science, and who had in him an edifying Charity, made Ignatius eat with
him at his Table, upon no other Motive, but of well treating a poor Man. But
when he had heard him discourse of Christian Verities, and of the Secrets of an
interior Life, he admired the Wisdom more then Natural which appeared in his
Discourses, and said by a kind of Inspiration, This man is a Saint: I am
mistaken if one day he be not a Founder of some Religious Order.

This Supply out of Flanders gave him a Subsistence for two years; after which
time, not to importune the same People again, he went to seek Relief in England
from the Spanish Merchants who resided at London. But in the years following he
made no more of these Voyages: for, not only the Spanish Merchants of the
Low Countries, upon the knowledge of his Virtues, returned him their Charities
to Paris, but he moreover received a new Recruit from his Friends at Barcelona.

A Man of Biscay residing at Paris, called John Madera, discovered, I know not
by what means, who Ignatius was, and was mightily scandalized at his proling
and begging Life, which his poverty reduced him to. Taking him one day apart,
he told him with freedom, that the Life he lead was a dishonor to the
Illustrious Family of Loyola, and that a Man well born, and of rich Parentage,
could not live upon begging Alms, without offending God.

Though Ignatius had no scruple upon it, yet he thought it expedient to consult
the Sorbon upon the Point, both for his own security, and chiefly to undeceive
Madera: He drew up the Case in these terms; Whether a Gentleman, who having
renounced the World to follow Jesus Christ, going about in several Countries to
beg Alms, does any thing against Conscience. The Doctors, to whom he proposed
the Case in Writing, all Answered, and put their Hands to it, That there was
neither sin, nor the shadow of a sin in it. He showed to Madera the Answer of
the Doctors, not so much to justify his own Conduct, as to vindicate the honor
of Voluntary Poverty, which has been enobled by Jesus Christ himself.

Being thus at repose in the Matter of Subsistence, as well as of Conscience,
he began now to advance very fast in Learning. After he had spent eighteen
months in the College of Montaign, he made his Course of Philosophy in the
College of St. Barbara. His Study was now his principal Employment; and he
applied himself to it the more, for that he knew the design which God Almighty
had in it. It was upon this Consideration, that during the Course of his
Philosophy, he would not give the Spiritual Exercises to several Persons of the
Town, nor be engaged in such other Works of Charity, which required much time,
and would have distracted his Studies. He even abstained to speak of heavenly
things with his Chamber-Fellows in the Hours of Study, because he found, that
if he entered upon a Discourse of Piety at those Hours, he had not the power of
giving it over, nor of reassuming his Notions of Study.

But with all this, he no day omitted to take an account of the secret motions
of his Heart; And to tame more and more his natural Inclinations, he constantly
made the particular Examen of his Conscience, according to the Method set down
in the Book of his Spiritual Exercises.

Though the love of Science hindered him from communicating himself outwardly, He
exhorts the Scholars to Nertue, And what happens to him.
and made him keep those Measures we now spoke of, yet upon good occasions, and
at spare hours, he ceased not to entertain the Scholars with the Vanities of
the World, the Horror of Sin, and the Pains of Hell.

Some of them, touched with his Discourses, left their bad Haunts and sinful
Commerce, and entered into so Christian a Conduct, that they frequented the
Sacraments every Sunday and Festival Day. It being the Custom in the College
of St. Barbara, to have Disputations upon those Days, for the Exercise of the
young Students, the Master, called John Pegna, soon found that his Scholars
were more assiduous at the Church then in the School. He mightily complained of
Ignatius; and finding that Devotion did make Philosophy to be every day more
and more neglected, he was sofar transported, as to call him the Disturber of
the College. But that which most provoked him, was that many of his Scholars
left him, to make themselves Religious Men.

This Professor, who found not his Account in all this, and who leaned a little
more to his own Interest then to the spiritual good of his Scholars, demanded
Justice of the Principal of the College against Ignatius, declaring, that the
Warning which had been given him, served to no purpose; that the evil daily
increased; and that the irregularity of one Scholar, which broke all Order in
the College, deserved an exemplary punishment.

Doctor Govea was Principal of St. Barbara: he had a grudge against Ignatius
upon the account of the three Spaniards, and particularly for that Amador, for
whom he was most concerned, had resolved to embrace Religious Poverty before
the end of his Studies. So that he easily suffered himself to be preposess'd by
Pegna, and without any great Examination of the matter, he resolved to have
Ignatius publicly Corrected. They had a Custom at that time for the punishing
scandalous Scholars, who debauched their Companions, to assemble the whole
College in the great Hall, at the ringing of a Bell; The Regents came with
Rods in their Hands, and every one in their turn gave a Lash to the Delinquent,
and this Correction was called The Hall.

The Design of Pegna was hereby to render Ignatius in a manner infamous, so to
hinder young Men, that were of any Quality, from having Communication with him.
The Business could not be so secretly carried between the Professor and the
Principal, but that Ignatius had intelligence of it from some of his Friends in
the College. The thought of so shameful a Punishment gave him at first some
horror; But he instantly suppressed this motion of Nature, and instead of
disappearing, as his Friends advised him to do, or at least not to come that
day to the College, he came and openly presented himself, being glad of the
occasion of suffering for a good Cause.

Yet for all this, he began to consider, that the young Men whom he had
reclaimed, might possibly take scandal at his disgrace, and thereupon leave
their holy Practices out of humane Respects; that his words would no more have
the efficacy of persuading them, and that they would avoid him as a Corrupter
of Youth; that although this Chastisement might conduce to his own perfection,
yet he ought not to suffer any thing that might prejudice the spiritual good af
his Neighbor. In fine, his zeal for Souls prevailed above his love of
Mortification; so that while all things were prepared for this Execution,
Ignatius went to the Principal, who was not yet come out of his Chamber, and
following the inward Light which directed him, he modestly declared the Reasons
of his Conduct to him, adding withal, by a Sentiment of Christian Generosity,
that he was not afraid to suffer for the Cause of Jesus Christ, and that the
Prisons of Alcala and Salamanca had prepared him for the most ignominious
Affronts.

Govea, without answering him any thing, took him by the Hand, and lead him
into the Hall, where the whole College was assembled: But when they all looked
for the Sign of falling on, he threw himself at the Feet of Ignatius, asking
his pardon, for too lightly believing false Reports. Then rising up, he
publicly declared that Ignatius was a Saint, who had no other aim but the good
of Souls, and was disposed to suffer with joy the most infamous Punishments.

So solemn a Reparation of Honor set all People right, and made the Name of
Ignatius famous. The most considerable Persons of the University desired to see
him, and among the rest a Doctor, called Martial, who contracted a great
Friendship with him, and received from him such lights in the highest Mysteries
of Religion, that ever after he called him his Master; not doubting, but that a
Man so enlightened in the Matters of Faith, who was yet no Divine by Profession,
had been instructed in another School then that of Men.

Pegna himself, who had raised this Storm, ever after loved Ignatius, and made
it his business to improve and advance him in his Studies. To this end he
ordered a poor Youth of very good Parts, called Peter Faber, to explicate and
repeat to him the Lessons which had been taken up at School. This Faber was a
Savoyard, and lived in the College of St. Rarbara, with a young Gentleman of
Navarr, called Francis Xaverius, who was not very well accommodated with Means,
but almost as poor as Faber himself. They had both ended their Course of
Philosophy, and Lodged in the same Chamber. Ignatius, for the convenience of
his Studies, came in to them; and by the assistance of Faber made such
progress, that his Course being ended, which was of Three years and a half,
according to the Usage of that Time, he was judged, after a rigorous Examen,
fit to proceed Master of Arts, whereupon he began his Divinity at the
Dominicans.

At this time his zeal for the Conversion of Souls mightily increased upon him,
and he clearly saw, that God had appointed him to establish a Company of
Apostolical Men to that end, and that he was to choose them himself out of the
University of Paris: for now he did not reckon upon those whom he had left at
Barcelona. When he was robbed by his Chamber-Fellow, he let them know the ill
Condition which that Robbery had put him into, and advised them to make an end
of their Studies in Spain: But he had quickly news of them, that they had taken
other Measures, and had no thoughts of following him. Three of the four betook
themselves again to the World, and ended miserably.

Caliste, after he had made the Voyage of the Holy Land, went into the
East Indies to enrich himself, and died a Beggar. Artiaga, who had got the
promise of a Bishopric in America, passed the Seas, and as soon as he was
possessed of his new Establishment, for which he had traveled so far, out of a
Principle of Avarice and Ambition, he casually poisoned himself. Cazeres
returning to Segovia, where he was born, and leading there a Libertine life, at
last took to the Trade of Soldiery, and Served up and down all Europe. He was
taken for a Spy in France and in England; and once he was so cruelly tortured,
that he remained a lame Man all the rest of his days. The young Frenchman, who
had been Page to the Viceroy of Navarr, had more Conduct, and better Fortune
then the rest: He became a Religious Man, and peaceably ended his days in a
Cloister.

The first Man upon whom Ignatius cast his Eyes, He makes choice of new
Companions.
to fill up the places of his unfaithful Companions, was Peter Faber: He had
excellent Qualities in him, a good Nature, a solid Wit, a great deal of
Prudence and Learning, joined with Humility and Modesty. He did not at first
discover to him his whole Design; he only directed him in the way of Virtue, or
rather seconded his Inclinations which lead him to it.

Faber, though perfectly chaste, had yet very violent Temptations, which were the
more grievous to him, in regard that from his Childhood he had made a Vow of
Chastity; so that the least shadow of a sin in that kind caused a horror in
him. He endeavored to overcome these importunate Temptations by continual
Fastings; but this did not make them cease, or if they diminished a little, he
had in the room of them Sentiments of Vainglory, as if by his own strength he
had vanquished the Enemy. Whereupon a flood of Scruples broke in upon him. Not
knowing one day on which side to turn himself, he made known his Condition to
his dear Ignatius, and told him in confidence, that he had a great desire to
hide himself in some wild Desert, where he might see nothing to make any
impression upon his Senses, and where he might Night and Day mortify his Body.

Ignatius was too well read in Scruples, not to discern, that so strange a
Resolution was a new Temptation. In order to cure Faber, and in curing him to
gain him, he made him understand, that the most solitary Places were not always
Sanctuaries against the Suggestions of the evil Spirit; that St. Jerome had met
with Idea's of the Roman Ladies, even in the middle of the Deserts of
Palestine; And that in leaving the World, we are not free from our greatest
Enemy, because we always carry our Selves about us: On the other side, that the
Macerations of the Body only, were not infallible Remedies against such
Temptations; And that there had been many Men extenuated with Fastings, who
still were exposed to those carnal Suggestions.

Next he applied himself to conduct his Friend in the way which his practice of
a Spiritual Life made him judge most sure and suitable for him. He taught him
therefore the use of his particular Examen, so proper to extinguish those
corrupt Inclinations which cause a Rebellion of the Flesh against the Spirit.
He prescribed to him the Method of interior acts of Virtue, which were directly
opposite to each particular Temptation. And this Method consists in humbling
our selves, for example, in the prospect of our Nothingness and of our Sins,
when a thought of Vainglory assaults us. In the matter of Scruples, he so well
quieted the Conscience of Faber, that he put him in a Condition of making a
General Confession, without any difficulty.

Having cured in this manner his spiritual Infirmities, he formed him by
degrees to solid Virtue, by his Discourses and Lessons upon Christian
Perfection: but he did it with some reserves; for though he had an earnest desire
to make him his first Companion, yet he would not touch upon that Point till
after two years of trial; when one day entertaining him with the things of God,
he said, (to sound him) that he had a desire to go into the Levant, as soon as
he had ended his Divinity, and to employ himself wholly in the Conversion of
Infidels. For Ignatius was not discouraged by the bad success of his Jerusalem
Voyage, and he still imagined that God would be served by him in the Holy Land.

Faber, who had been for some time deliberating upon the Course of life he
should choose, presently took fire; and, as if the Holy Ghost had at that moment
determined his Choice, embracing Ignatius with great affection, he told him, I
will follow you, and I will follow you even to death: Yet before he did
absolutely engage himself, he resolved to go into his own Country. He was born
in a Village called Villaret, which belongs to the Diocese of Geneva. When he
was young, he was put to keep Sheep; but his strong inclination to learn the
Latin Tongue made him leave those Country Employments. After he had Studied a
while in a small neighboring Town under a Master who was a very holy Man, he
was sent to Paris by the counsel of Don George Faber, his near Kinsman, and
Prior of a Monastery of Carthusians in Savoy.

During the absence of Faber, Ignatius undertook to gain Xaverius, who then
taught Philosophy. Xaverius had a spritely Wit, an agreeable Humor, a generous
Soul, and a great purity of Manners; but he was naturally vain, and loved
ostentation. Whareas the Quality of his Birth, his natutural Parts, and his
progress in Learning, had raised his Expectations in the World (notwithstanding
the ill Condition of his impoverished Family) he pretended to advance himself
by Ecclesiastical Preferments; and according to the custom of ambitious Men,
who feed themselves with Chimera's, he framed to himself the obtaining great
Advantages, upon the least appearances. Ignatius believed, that a Genius of
this Character and Mould, being turned the right way, might do great things in
the Service of God, but that it would be a very hard matter to bring him into a
right temper to be wrought upon.

In effect, He Converts diverse Persons.
that innate Tumor of Vanity and Pride, made useless all the first Essays, and
Discourses of a Man, who only spoke of the Contempt of worldly Greatness. He
would hardly give ear to him, and instead of believing him, civilly raillied
him. This did not dishearten Ignatius. To insinuate himself by degrees into the
good liking of our young Professor, he commended his natural Talents,
congratulated his Reputation, applauded in public the ingenuity of his
Answers, and made it his business to procure him Scholars.

But the zeal of Ignatius was not confined within the Walls of St. Barbara. He
began to speak French, and was not now afraid that his Works of Piety would
injure his Studies. It is not to be told, of how many Expedients he served
himself, for the Conversion of Sinners. A Man of his Acquaintance was
desperately in Love with a Woman, who lived in a Village near Paris, with whom
he held a sinful Commerce. Ignatius employed all Reasons, both Humane and
Divine, to cure him of this shameful Passion: But his Remonstrances were lost
upon a Man, absorpt in carnal Pleasures; and without the strange Remedy, which
he invented, the Disease had been incurable.

Having learned out the way which this Person used to pass in going to this
Woman, he waits for him near a Pond side, which the Cold of the Season had
almost quite turned to Ice. As soon as he perceived him coming at a distance,
he stripped himself, and stood up to the Neck in the Water; Whither do you go,
unhappy Wretch? (cried he, when he saw him draw near) whither do you go? don't
you hear the Thunder breaking over your Head? don't ye see the fiery Darts of
Divine Justice ready to strike you? Well then, (he continued with a terrible
Voice) go, satisfy your brutal Passion, here will I suffer for you, till the
wrath of Heaven be appeased. The lascivious Man, frighted with these Words, and
at the same time confounded with the Charity of Ignatius, whose Voice he knew,
began to open his Eyes, grew ashamed of his sin, and returned back, with the
design of wholly changing his Life.

Ignatius showed his Industry in another way, to reduce a Religious Man, who
was a Priest, but who dishonored his Character and Profession by a scandalous
Life. He went to him upon a Sunday Morning, desiring him to hear his
Confession; and under pretense of quieting the Scruples of his Conscience, he
made a general Confession to him. While the Penitent accused himself of his
ancient Disorders with an extraordinary feeling and remorse, the Confessor
began to feel an inward confusion, upon the account of his own dissolute Life,
which now appeared to him the more criminal, for that the Sins of a Religious
Man are of greater guilt then those of Men in the World.

He also reproch'd to himself the hardness of his Heart, when he saw Ignatius
lament with so many Tears his past Disorders: In conclusion, his Heart was
mollifi'd, and before the Confession was ended, he found himself touched with a
true Repentance. He communicated to Ignatius the state and condition of his
Soul, and asked his advice and help, to raise him out of that dismal Gulf into
which his Sins had cast him. Ignatius prescribed to this Religious Man his
Spiritual Exercises so successfully, that in a little time he put him into the
way of Perfection.

Going one day to see a certain Person upon a business of Charity, he found him
playing at Billiards: This was a Doctor of Divinity, eminent for his Birth and
for his Learning, regular enough in his Manners, but not very devout, and more
taken up with secular Business then with his spiritual Advancement. The Doctor
invited Ignatius to play: He excused himself, because he knew not the Game; but
the other still pressing him, and even his own Virtue inclining him to a
complacence, What shall we play for? (said he pleasantly to the Doctor) a poor
Man as I am cannot play for Money, and there is no pleasure in playing for
nothing; I will tell you then (he added) what we must do: If I lose, I will
Serve you for a whole Month, and do exactly all that you shall command me; and
if you lose, you shall only do one thing that I will ask of you. The Doctor
being in a merry humor, readily accepted the Condition: They played, and
Ignatius wan, he who never before had played at Billiards. The Doctor thinking
there might be something extraordinary and mysterious in this matter, resolved
to obey Ignatius. According to, and under his Direction, he made the Spiritual
Exercises a whole Month, and so profited by them, that he became an Interior
Man.

Among those which Ignatius had brought into the way of Devotion, one there was
who fell back, and was even upon the point of totally forgetting God: The Saint
spared no Advertisements to resettle him in Virtue; but not being able to
obtain any thing upon him, he Fasted three whole days without eating or
drinking, weeping at the foot of the Altars, and praying without intermission.
His Fasting, his Tears, and his Prayers obtained mercy from Heaven, and
restored the spirit of compunction and fervor upon him for whom he did this
Penance.

Ignatius also at this time attended to Works of Charity in the Hospitals. One
day he helped to dress the Sores of a poor Man, all covered with Ulcers, whose
Disease had something of Contagious. Whereas in the Dressing him he was forced
several times to touch the affected Parts, he was seized with an apprehension,
that his Hands might be infected; and this fear did somewhat cool his charity
for such Employments: But upon reflection he condemned himself for his
weakness, and with great remorse he clapped his Hand into his Mouth, saying,
Since thou art so afraid for one part only, the whole Body shall take its
share. From that time forwards he vanquished his fear, and returned to those
Actions of Charity with greater fervor then ever.

In this while Faber came back from Savoy, absolutely disposed to have no other
Father but Ignatius, having now disengaged himself from the Ties of Flesh and
Blood. Though Ignatius found in him a ripe Judgment, and solid Virtue, yet
farther to try and fortify him, he resolved to give him the Spiritual
Exercises, before he would communicate to him his whole purpose and design.
Faber entered upon them in the middle of Winter, not in the College of St.
Barbara, but in a House where Ignatius had hired a Chamber for him, in the
Street of St. James. The fervor which our Recluse felt in his Meditations,
obliged him often to go down into a little Court to take fresh Air: There he
remained sometimes whole Hours together, and not seldom a good part of the
Night. He Fasted six Days together, without any Nourishment but the Holy
Eucharist, and would have still so continued, as long as his strength would
have permitted, if Ignatius, seeing him brought very low, had not commanded him
to eat.

Faber, in the time of his retirement, clearly saw that Heaven had ordained him
to be a Companion of Ignatius: So that when he came back to the College, he
led so holy and so exemplary a Life, that Ignatius made no farther difficulty
of opening fully to him his whole Design. He then declared his Resolution of
gathering together Evangelical Workmen to labor in the Vineyard, for the
gaining of Souls to God; and from that time forwards he looked upon him as his
beloved Son in Christ Jesus.

Now also had the Compliances of Ignatius, and the many good Offices he had
done to Xaverius, wrought a greater tractableness and condescension in him. The
great alteration in Faber's way of Living, did much run in his Head, and raised
Reflections in him upon his own State, which did not a little stagger him. At
the same time he came to understand the Quality and Birth of Ignatius; after
which, his Discourse appeared more rational to him then before, as if the
Condition of the Person had given weight and authority to his Words.

Ignatius, who watched all the Motions of Xaverius, seeing him one day disposed
to hearken to him, did thus press him more closely then before; Xaverius, what
will it avail a man to gain the whole World, and to lose his soul? If there
were no other Life but the present, and no other Glory but that of the World,
you would have reason to take care only how to appear in it, and to raise your
Fortunes among Men; But if there be an Eternity, as undoubtedly there is, with
what sense can you place all your Desires here below, and prefer that which
passes as a Dream, to that which never will have end? Believe me, ( said he)
the vain Honors of the Earth are too poor and inconsiderable for so generous a
Heart as yours: The Kingdom of Heaven is only worthy of it. I do not pretend to
exstinguish that noble Ardor which you have for Glory, nor to inspire you with
mean thoughts: Be Ambitious, be Magnanimous; but level your Ambition to a
higher Mark, and show the greatness of your Soul, by despising all that is
beneath it.

Xaverius at that time was so disposed, that he could not hold out against the
strength and kindness of these reasons. After some little strife within
himself, at last he yielded, and made himself a Disciple of Ignatius. The
School he then taught would not permit him to make the Spiritual Exercises
before the Vacation; but the pious Entertainments he had with Ignatius and
Faber, served him instead of them.

A certain Spaniard of mean Birth, and worse Life, called Michael Navarr, who
pretended a great concern for Xaverius, could not endure this Change, which
broke all their Commerce: His rage fell upon the Author of it, and he believed,
that by the death of Ignatius he might again possess the Friendship of
Xaverius: He resolved therefore to kill him; and to that end he set up a Ladder
one Night to the Window of Ignatius's Chamber: But while he was getting up, he
heard a threatening Voice, which said to him, Whither do thou go, thou
wretched Man? what do thou mean to do? At which he retired trembling and
aghast, and acknowledged the horror of his Crime.

The late conquest which Ignatius made with so much industry and labor, was
followed by another of less difficulty. Two young Men of extraordinary Parts,
both at once came in unlooked for to him; one of them, called James Laynez,
born at Almazan in the Diocese of Siguents, was but One and twenty years old:
The other, called Alphonso Salmeron, born near Toledo, and only Eighteen years
of age; and yet he was Master of the Greek and Hebrew Tongues. They had both
studied their Philosophy at Alcala, where they had heard the Fame of Ignatius,
as of a Saint. The desire of seeing him, and of putting themselves under his
Conduct, no less induced them to come to Paris, then their love and design of
Learning.

It was an effect of Chance, or rather of Providence, that Ignatius was the
first Man they met, entering into the Town. Such an Air of Prudence and of
Holiness as appeared in his Countenance, so struck Laynez, who had never seen
him, that at first sight he doubted not but this was the Man. They both made
their application to him, and were ravished with Joy, to find in him the Person
for whose sake they had taken so long a Journey. Ignatius, who appeared as if
he had gone purposely out to meet them, embraced them as Angels sent from
Heaven, and received them with great affection into the number of his
Disciples. They passed the trial of the Spiritual Exercises, and came out of
their Retirement so inspired with the zeal of Souls, that they longed for
nothing more then to labor in an Apostolic Life.

Another Spaniard, named Nicholas Alphonso, and surnamed Bobadilla from the
Place of his Birth, which is a Village near Palenza in the Kingdom of Leon, was
called to the same Employment; but after a different manner. This was a poor
young Man, of a very good Wit, who had taught Philosophy at Valladolid, before
he came in to France. His Poverty more then once made him have recourse to
Ignatius, who had wherewithal to live decently, upon the Charities which came
in to him from all Parts, and who thereby was in a Condition to assist
necessitous Scholars.

Ignatius discovered rare Talents in Bobadilla, and remembering that the Poor
had been chosen by the Son of God to Preach his Gospel, he believed that this
Person might prove a very fit Workman for that purpose. He drew him by degrees
with spiritual Discourses, which he entertained him with before he gave him any
Alms; and having tried him in a Retirement, as the others, he made him his
Fifth Companion.

The Sixth was a Portugueze Gentleman, called Simon Rodriguez d'Azevedo, a
comely Person, and very ingenious; God had prevented him from his Infancy with
the Gift of an Angelical Purity: and his Father at his Deathbed looking upon
him in the Arms of his Mother, This Infant (he said) will one day do great
Service to the Church of God.

Rodriguez had Studied some Years at Paris, and was maintained in his Studies
by the King of Portugal. He first knew Ignatius before Laynez, Salmeron, or
Bobadilla, but after them he put himself under his Direction. He had always in
him a certain zeal for the Conversion of Infidels, and a desire of making the
Voyage of the Holy Land. Ignatius observing these motions in him, so
conformable to his own, without discovering himself wholly to him, intended to
gain him: But finding that his Designs for Jerusalem hindered him from
associating himself with them, he then declared to him, what he had done before
to Faber, concerning his own Resolutions in that matter, and at the same
instant Rodriguez delivered himself up entirely to Ignatius.

Though the choice of these six Persons was very happy, and promised something
extraordinary, yet Ignatius judged, that unless they did all propose to
themselves the same End, nothing would be done. On the other side, remembering
the inconstancy of his first Companions, and making reflection upon the
lightness and uncertainty of humane Resolutions, he persuaded himself, that how
good soever the present Inclinations of his new Disciples were, it was
expedient to fix them by some indispensable Engagements.

To which end, He proposes to his Companions his design of gaining Souls.
calling them one day together, after he had first caused each of them in
particular to Pray and to Fast, and to beg of Almighty God his Light to direct
them in the way they ought to serve him, he then told them, his design was to
imitate our Savior Jesus Christ in the most perfect manner he could: That he
(God and Man) had no other aim in the whole course of his Life, but the
Redemption of Mankind: That to follow him close, he purposed to labor for his
own Perfection, and for the saving his Neighbor's Soul; That he was not
ignorant, that Solitude had something in it more delightful, but that all
things must yield to the Interests of Gods Glory: That however, in losing a
little repose, there was to be gained an infinity of Graces and Merits; and
that after all, it did not import whether we gained or we lost, so that Souls
might be saved; that the Apostles had lived in this sort, after the Example of
their Master; and that, this kind of Life, was undoubtedly the most noble, and
the most perfect.

He added, That having considered all the Countries in which the Glory of God,
and the Salvation of our Neighbor might be procured, he knew none that offered
a more plentiful Harvest, and that was more abandoned, deserving least to be
so, then Palestine; that having been himself upon the Place, he could not
behold without extreme grief, that Land where our Savior had Redeemed Humane
Kind, lie under the Bondage of Infidels; that he was inflamed with a desire of
returning thither, and that he should esteem himself most happy, in shedding
his Blood for Religion, in a Country which had been Sanctified by that of God
and Man. He said all this with such a fervency of Spirit, that the flame even
appeared in his Countenance. His whole Discourse he closed, with telling them,
that in expectation of a proper season to execute this his design, he would at
present oblige himself by a Vow, to make the Voyage of Jerusalem, and wholly to
renounce all things of this World.

Scarce had he ended speaking, when they all, as one Man, declared, that they
had the same thoughts, and the same intentions; whether it were, that his
Discourse had wrought them to that unanimity, or that they were all at the same
time alike Inspired by God. After which, Recognizing him for their Father, and
cordially embracing one the other, they interchangably promised never to
separate.

Before this meeting broke up, a Question was moved, whether in case they could
have no means to pass into the Holy Land, they should be obliged to Preach the
Gospel in other parts. The matter being Examined and Debated, they Agreed,
according to the Advice proposed by Ignatius, that when they were at Venice, if
they could not in a years time procure any Accommodation for that Journey, they
should then be released from that part of their Vow, which concerned Palestine;
but that, in lieu thereof, they should go to Rome, and offer their Services to
the Vicar of Jesus Christ, to be sent into what part of the World, he pleased.

In the interim, for that the greatest part of them had not finished their
Divinity, Ignatius was of opinion, that they ought not to shorten their
Studies; being persuaded, that great Enterprises must be estabish't upon solid
Foundations, and that there would be temerity in taking upon them the
Evangelical Ministry, without an Exact knowledge of the Mysteries, and
Principles of Religion.

And to the End, that all of them might adjust their measures, he judged it
expedient to prefix a certain term for the ending of their Studies, which was,
from that present July of the year 1534, to the Twenty fifth of January of the
year 1537. He Judged it also necessary, that their fervor might not cool in
them, to expedite the making of that Vow, which they had agreed upon; for which
doing, he appointed the Fifteenth of August following, Ignatius and his
Companions make their first Vow at Montmartyr.
being the Feast of the Assumption of our Blessed Lady: But, that this might be
performed with the Solemnity and Devotion, which such an Action requires, he
chose Montmartyr for the place of the Ceremony. This is a Monastery near Paris,
upon a Hill, made Holy by the Blood of Martyrs, whence it derives its Name.

At the appointed time, and place, they all met. Peter Faber, who since his
Exercises had received the order of Priesthood, said Mass to them, and gave
them the Holy Communion in a Chapel under. Ground, where it is believed, that
the Apostle of France, St. Denis was beheaded, which is therefore called in
Ancient Records the Chapel of the Holy Martyr.

After they had Received the Holy Communion, they all made their Vows, with a
loud and distinct Voice, of undertaking, within the time prescribed, their
Journey to Jerusalem, for the Conversion of the Infidels in those parts; of
leaving all things, which they possessed in this World, excepting only, what was
necessary for their Journey thither; and, in case they could not enter into, or
remain in that place, of going to cast themselves at the Feet of the Pope, as
it had been agreed upon. They farther obliged themselves to ask nothing for
performing their Functions; not only to the end of being more free and
disentangled in their Ministry, but also to stop the Mouths of the Lutherans,
who reproached Ecclesiastical Ministers with enriching themselves by the
Dispensation of Holy things.

Nor was it without a particular design of Providence, that among so many
places of Piety, which are in and about Paris, this new Patriark should choose
Montmartyr, there to lay the Foundation of his Order: Heaven, who Inspired that
thought into him, made him without doubt, comprehend, that a Society, which
should one day shed their Blood for the Honor of Jesus Christ, and was to be
persecuted in all the different ways, in which the Church of God had formerly
been, ought to be born in the Sepulcher of Martyrs.

Nor was it again without Mystery, that they chose the Feast of our Blessed
Lady for so Important an Action. It was necessary, that a Society wearing the
Name and Livery of Jesus, should be born under the Auspitious Patronage of
Mary; and that the Queen of Virgins should be the Protectress of an Order,
which makes profession of Angelical Purity.

This business being over, He applies himself to form his Companions.
Ignatius made it his chiefest care to keep up the fervor of his Companions,
and to maintain a perfect union among them. He prescribed to them all, the same
practices of Piety; of making every day the same Meditations, and of doing the
same Penances; of having Conferences together about Spiritual matters; of
diligently reading the Book of the Imitation of Christ; of Examining their
Conscience often in the day; of Confessing and Communicating every Sunday and
Holiday. But least their Devotions and Studies should interfere one with the
other, to the prejudice of either, he himself regulated the times of each
Employment. And least, notwithstanding all these precautions, their first
fervor might insensibly relax, he adviz'd himself of an expedient, altogether
new, which was to make them reiterate their Vows every year, upon the same day
of the Assumption, and with the same Ceremony.

He continually exhorted them to love one another, and to live like Brothers;
and because they did not lodge all in one House, he obliged them often to
intervisit, and to walk abroad together, and sometimes to make little Repasts,
which might breed a kindness and familiarity among them, conformably to the
Agapes, or Commessations of the Primitive Christians, in which he would
sometimes himself be of the Party, when his other occasions gave him leave.

There were many persons at this time in Paris, leaning toward the new sprung
Heresies. Francis the First designing to re-establish Learning in France,
invited Learned Men thither from all parts. Some of them, coming out of Germany
to be Professors of the Greek and Hebrew Tongues, insinuated Lutheranism into
many of the University: The Queen of Navarr, who had been seduced by Roussel,
Bishop of Oleron, a secret Partizan of Luther, favored the Lutherans at Court,
and gave countenance to their Errors. On the other side, the Sacramentarians,
who also endeavored to introduce themselves into France, scattered about their
Libels in all places, against the holy Sacrament, and such was their Impudence,
that they fixed some of them upon the Gates of the Louvre: Calvin also, being
returned from Bourges, where during his Study of the Law, he had learnt of
Volmar, a German, his First Notions of a New Gospel, had now published, and
spread abroad the Doctrine of Luther, and of Zuinglius.

Although the King were a great hater of Heresy, as he made it appear, in
publicly protesting, that if his right Arm were infected with that Plague, he
would immediately cut it off, and also in condemning to the Fire the Authors of
Sacrilegious Libels, yet those Novelties ceased not to spread, and to gain
Ground by degrees.

The principal employment of Ignatius at that time was to confirm Catholics in
their Ancient Belief, and to make Heretics sensible of their Errors. He caused
many to return; who had abjured their Faith, and he brought them to the
Inquisitor, to be reconciled to the Church.

But while Ignatius labored to stifle these growing Errors, he did not forget
his dear Sons in Christ Jesus; he offered them every day to God, and offered
himself in Sacrifice for them. He had a custom of retiring himself to the
Church of our Lady in the Fields, which is at present the Church of the
Carmelites, in the Suburbs of St. James; and there he spent whole days in the
contemplation of Divine Mysteries. He also sometimes withdrew himself into a
deep and dark Grotte at Montmartyr, which represented to him his Cave of
Manreza; And in this place it was, that he used his severest Austerities.

These new Rigors mightily abated his Natural Strength, and augmented the pains
of his Stomach, which were now returned upon him again; so that he fell by
degrees into so languishing a weakness, as hindered him from applying himself
to the Exercises either of Piety or Study. His health not having been very
good, since his coming into France, and not having found any benefit from the
Remedies he used, the Physicians were of opinion, that the Air of Paris was
noxious to him, and that nothing but his own Country Air would recover him. His
Companions, who had so much the more care, and disquiet for his weakness, by
how much the less he minded himself, joined all together in conjuring him to
follow the advice of the Physicians; and they importuned him so much, that
notwithstanding his great difficulty in being separated from them, he at last
submitted. But there were other reasons, besides those of his health, which
contributed to that Resolution.

Xaverius, Salmeron, and Laynez had some Domestic affairs, which obliged them
to go into Spain, before they could absolutely renounce all their Worldly
goods. He was afraid least this Voyage might slacken their Vocation, and that,
as fervent as they were, they might want strength to resist the Caresses, and
the Tears of their Families; So that, not to expose the Virtue of these three
young Men, from whom he expected great matters, he thought it expedient to
charge himself with their several Affairs, and to do their business for them.
On the other side, it occurred to him, that having in his youth given so much
bad example in his own Country, it would be proper to repair that scandal, and
show, at least to his own Kindred, how much through the mercy of God, he
contemned Worldly Greatness.

While he was making ready for his Journey, He is again informed against to the
Inquisitor.
some ill-minded people published about the Town, that Ignatius and his
Companions were suspected of being a little infected with the Novelties of
Germany; that so Austere a kind of Life in young Men, did denote a headiness
and singularity, peculiar to Heresy; and that so strait a League between
Persons, so different in condition, could not proceed, but from a Spirit of
Faction. Ignatius was advertised of the rumor, which went about, and knew
moreover, that they had accused him a fresh, before the Inquisitor, Matthew
Ori. The principle Accusation fell upon the Book of Exercises, where his
Enemies pretended the whole venom of his Doctrine lay, and which they called
the Mysterious Book.

Judging, that a good Reputation was necessary to the Preachers of the Gospel,
and fearing least his Departure should be taken for a kind of Flight, if he
left France without justifying himself, he went in person to the Inquisitor,
and prayed him not only to examine his cause, but to pronounce sentence therein
in due form. When I was single (said he) the words of Men did not affect me;
but now that I have Companions, and am called with them, to Evangelical
Functions, I must take care of their honor, and my own.

The Inquisitor, who knew by former experience, how much Ignatius abhorred
Heresy, and not finding any thing in his Conduct that was irregular, told him,
that he did not so much as give ear to his Accusers, knowing that their
Accusations had neither Foundation nor appearance. However he desired to see
his Book of Exercises, not so much to examine it, as to read it. He read it
through, and was so Edified with it, that he desired Ignatius's leave to
transcribe it for his own particular profit, and for the Spiritual advancement
of those Persons, whom he directed. Ignatius gave way to it; but not contenting
himself with these Testimonies, which were not Authentic, and desiring to
leave a clear Reputation behind him to his Disciples, he appeared one day
before the Inquisitor, with a Notary, and two or three Doctors of Sorbon. He
prayed him, in their presence to give him an Attestation in writing, to
certify, that he had been unjustly Accused, and that the Book of Exercises
contained in it no unsound Doctrine. The Inquisitor made no difficulty of doing
what Ignatius desired; But he set forth his Attestation with so many Elogies
and Commendations, that Ignatius was much confounded at them.

There being nothing now to hinder his Journey, he took leave of his
Companions, He returns into his own Country.
after having more then once Exhorted them to Constancy, and commanded them to
obey Peter Faber, who was the only Priest among them, and whom they all honored
as their Senior. He Agreed with them before his Departure, which was in the
beginning of the year 1535. that when he had recovered his health, and ended
his business, he would go and stay for them at Venice; and that they should
come away upon the five and twentieth of January of the year 1537, and meet him
there. His weakness would not permit him to make his Journey a Foot. He rod on
a Horse, which his Companions had bought for him; but he had scarcely past the
Pyreneans, and breathed the Air of Guypuscoa, when he found a great amendment
in his health.

Being at two Leagues distance from Loyola, he was known by John d'Equibar, who
had formerly seen him there, and used to frequent the place: This person
arrived at the Inn a little after Ignatius, and asked the Host what company he
had: He told him that there was only one Horseman, not very well accoutred,
but who had a good Mien, and by his Accent seemed to be one of the Country,
Equibar had the Curiosity to see him: They told him that the Cavalier was locked
up in his Chamber: He looked upon him through the chink of the Door, and saw
him at his Prayers upon his Knees, with a profound Recollection. He presently
began to call him to mind, and having well viewed him, he no longer doubted,
but that he was the Brother of Don Garcias, Lord of Loyola: For although Ignatius
were very much changed by his Sicknesses and Austerities, yet he had in his
Countenance so particular an Air, and such distinguishing Features, that he
was easy to be known.

Equibar instantly took Horse, to carry the surprising new to Loyola. Don
Garcias, who lately had heard that his Brother Ignatius lead a very holy Life
in France, was overjoyed at his coming. He had thoughts of going forth to meet
him with all his Retinue, and to make him a magnificent Reception; but fearing,
least it might discompose him, he was content to send him an Ecclesiastic of
great Reputation, to give him joy of his return. Ignatius kindly received the
Complement from his Brother, but he sent back the Churchman, who would have
waited upon him to Loyola; and instead of going thither, he took his way over
the Hills to the Town of Azpetia, which lies near it. They of the Town had some
incling of Ignatius's coming, and all the Clergy was assembled to pay him their
Devoirs, and meet him with Ceremony: So that, coming near the Town, he met this
Procession, which waited for him. He got off, as well as he could, from this
Ceremonious Complement, and retired to the Magdalen Hospital. His Brother, and
his Nephews, instantly came to him, and conjured him to take his Lodging in the
Castle, telling him, it was his home, and that he should be Master there. He
Answered them, that since he had changed his course of Life, he did not reckon
upon having any home in this World, and that instead of being Master, he only
pretended to be a Servant of the Poor.

Not being able to draw him out of the Hospital, The Life which he leads in his
own Country.
they sent him a very handsome Bed, and furniture for his Table: But far from
lying in it, he lodged upon the Ground, till such time, as they had provided
him one of the poor men's Beds: But to conceal this from his Relations, he every
Morning tumbled and disordered the fine Bed, of which he made no other use. As
for the dishes of Meat, which came every day from the Castle, he treated the
poor and the sick persons with them, without touching them himself, and begged
his own Bread about the Town. Thus he lived amongst the Poor, and like a poor
Man, those three Months, he remained at Azpetia, and in all that time, he went
but once to see his friends at Loyola, nor would he then have gone, had it not
been to satisfy the extreme Importunity of his Sister in Law, who begged it of
him upon her Knees, for the Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ. During his
Visit, his whole Discourse was of the Vanity of the World, and of the blindness
of Worldly Men. Whereas he came thither in the Evening, he lodged in the
Castle; But he lay upon the Ground all that part of the Night which he did not
spend in Prayer, and returned to the Hospital very early in the Morning.

The sight of those Places, where he had lead a Sensual Life, Inspired him with
the thought of renewing his former Austerities. He put on a sharp hair Shirt,
girded himself with a great chain of Iron, disciplined himself every Night, so
much the more rigorously, by how much he found himself better recovered in his
health: But withal this, not to be unprofitable to his Neighbor, he every day
taught poor Children the Christian Doctrine.

Don Garcias, who was a wise Worldling, and who looked upon all these Actions
of his Brother with Carnal Eyes, could not endure, that any of the Name of
Loyola, should lead so abject a Life, which he several times reproached to him.
It mightily disgusted him; to see his Brother constantly with a Troop of little
Children about him; and once when Ignatius was going out to Catechize, to
dissuade him from it, he told him, that no body would come to hear him. If I
have but one Child at my Catechism (replied Ignatius) I shall be very well
content with my Auditory.

Besides this, he Preached every Sunday, and two or three days in the Week. The
Churches not being able to contain the great Crowds which flock't to him, he
was forced to instruct them in the open Fields. An infinite of People, from all
the Neighboring Towns came to hear him, and many got upon the Trees to see him.

The first time that he Preached, he told his Auditors, that one of the
reasons, which moved him to return into his Country, after an absence of so
many years, was to quiet his Conscience, concerning a sin of his youth, and to
make satisfaction to an Inhabitant of those parts. The Person, of whom he
spoke, was there present, and he had found him out in the Crowd. He told them
therefore, that on a certain time, breaking into a Garden with other young
Boys, as mad as himself, they stole and spoiled a great quantity of Fruit; that
a poor Man was accused of the Theft, put in prison for it, and condemned to pay
the Damages. Then he raised his Voice, saying, Be it known to all this
Assembly, that in satisfaction of the injustice, and the loss, which that
Innocent man has sustained, I do here give and grant to him two Farms, which
belong to me. He then called him aloud by his Name, and asked him Pardon before
all the People.

The words of a Preacher, whose Actions are of this sort, will easily persuade.
After he had Preached against the Costly and Immodest Attire of Women, it was
presently seen, that the richness of their Habits, their undecent Fashions, and
naked throats (so common in Spain) did all disappear. The same day, that he
spoke against Play, all the Gamesters threw away their Cards and Dice into the
River, and not a Man in the Town touched them any more in three years time.
When he Explicated the Ten Commandments, during the ten Days between the
Ascension and Pentecost, to prepare the Faithful for receiving the Holy Ghost,
he so well acquitted himself, that in the Second day he quite abolish't, and
exterminated all Blasphemies, and false Oaths, which were too frequent in that
Country. The sixth Day made a great Conversion of Curtezans, of which some made
long Pilgrimages a foot, and the most famous among them, bound her self to
serve the Sick in the Hospital, all the days of her Life, so to Expiate their
former sins.

But Ignatius was in nothing more successful, then in reforming the manners of
Churchmen, who thereabouts were great Libertines, and for the most part lived
in open Concubinage. He made them change their Conduct, by laying open to them
the Holiness of their Profession; and to the end, that temporal punishments
might restrain them, if the principles of Christianity would not, he engaged
the Magistrates, and all Governors rigorously to execute the Laws against
Scandalous Priests.

He did some other good works, which still last, and will last to the end of
the World: For he instituted a Confraternity of the Holy Sacrament, for the
relief of the Poor, that are not Beggars, and he founded it with a part of his
Estate, which he had not yet renounounc'd; he Introduced the Custom of Praying
at Midday for such as were in Mortal sin; and least time should wear out this
practice, he gave something in perpetuity to the daily Ringer of the Bell for
this Prayer. He established also the Prayer commonly called the Angelus Domini.
He renewed the ancient Custom of the Country, of Praying every Night for the
Dead. He engaged his own Family at Loyola, to give every Sunday, in the great
Church, twelve Loaves of Bread to so many poor People, in Honor of the twelve
Apostles; In conclusion, he did what he pleased in Azpetia; These were the very
Words of the Witnesses, who were heard after his Death, in the Process of his
Canonization, and who had seen with their own Eyes, what they deposed.

While Ignatius labored in this manner at home, The number of his Companions
is increased.
his Companions followed their Studies at Paris, without intermitting their
Works of Piety. They were all animated with his Spirit, and Faber, who Governed
in his absence, had so well learned his Maxims, that they all lived as if
Ignatius himself had Governed them.

Their number was then increased by three other Divines, whom Faber found to be
very proper to be their Fellow Laborers, after a due trial made of them in the
Spiritual Exercises of their common Father. The First was Claude l' Jay, who
was of Anessy, a Man of an extraordinary Genius, and of an excellent
Disposition. The Second John Codure, and the Third Pasquier Brouet, both of
them Learned Men, and both Frenchmen, one of the Diocese of Ambrun, and the
other of Amiens.

So that the first Fathers of the Society of Jesus, were Ten in number: Upon
which Subject a certain Hugonot Writer strains hard for a Conceit, telling us
(a little nonsensically) that among the Pythagoreans the number of Ten is
surnamed Atlas, and that it is not without Mystery, that Ten Men made up the
Foundation of a Society, which upholds the Sea of Rome, as Atlas does the
Heavens.

These three last made their first Vow at Mont martyr, when the other six
renewed theirs the second time; And they were all so united together, that
notwithstanding the difference of Nation and of Humor, they all seemed to have
but one Heart and one Soul.

Such happy News much comforted Ignatius in the absence of his beloved
Disciples: He cures the Sick.
But the Reputation which he had gained in Biscay did sensibly mortify him;
and this was that which made him resolve to hasten his Journey to Venice. He
passed every where for a Saint, and the People believed he could do Miracles:
Whereupon they brought to him a Woman who had been four years possessed, and
had all the signs in her of a true Possession. He remanded her to the Exorcisms
of the Church, saying that he was no Priest, and that a Sinner, like himself,
had no command over the Devils. But they still pressed him at least to make the
Sign of the Cross over the possessed Person, which he could not refuse them to
do, and immediately she was delivered.

Some few days after they brought him a Maid whom the People would needs have
to be also Possessed; she was very raging, with violent Contortions over all
her Body; Ignatius, when he had beheld her, said she was not Possessed, and
that those extraordinary Motions proceeded from a natural Cause; and that if
the Devil had any part in it, 'twas only in troubling the Imagination of the
sick Person. He made the Sign of the Cross upon her, and her fury presently
ceased.

There was in the Hospital of St. Mary Magdalen, a poor Man called Bastida, who
for many years had the Falling Sickness: He had once a long and violent Fit in
the presence of Ignatius; the Saint touched with Compassion, lifted his Eyes to
Heaven, made an ardent Prayer for the poor Man, and laid his Hand upon his
Head; Bastida instantly recovered of his Fit, and was so perfectly cured of his
Disease, that it never came more.

But God, who gives his Servants the power of curing Diseases, for the Glory of
his Name, permits them at the same time to be diseased themselves; so to humble
them, and to try their patience. Ignatius accordingly had then a great
Sickness: He would not be carried to Loyola; but he could not hinder his
Kindreds taking care of him. Two Women of Quality, his Cousin-germans, one
called Maria Doriola, and the other Simona d' Alzaga, tended him, and
continually watched with him.

One Night, when they were retired into the next Chamber to take a little rest,
they heard him sigh in an extraordinary manner. Going in to him, they found him
with his Hands joined, his Eyes lifted to Heaven, his Countenance otherwise
enflamed then with his Fever; for it shined with such a light, that it dazzled
their Eyes. Ignatius was in Confusion to be so found by them, and he earnestly
prayed his two Kinswomen to keep it secret.

As soon as he was cured, he parted from Azpetia, with the great regret of his
Family, and of all the Inhabitants. He accepted of a Horse, of Money, and of
Servants, to content his Brother, and to part fairly with him; but he had no
sooner got to the Confines of Biscay and Navarr, when he rid himself of his
Attendance. He went by the Way of Pampelona to the Castle of Xavier, to
dispatch the Business of his Disciple Francis Xavier, and afteward to Almazon,
and to Toledo, for the Concerns of Salmeron and Laynez.

Having dispatched all these Affairs, What passed betwixt Ignatius and a
Carthusian.
he took the Way of Valentia, where he hoped to find the opportunity of a Ship
for Venice: While he was waiting for it, he went to Visit Don John de Castro at
Segorbe, who had lately made himself a Carthusian in the Charter House of
Val-Christ, and had not yet ended his Noviceship. This was one of the three
Spanish Gentlemen, who at Paris being moved with the Discourses and Example of
Ignatius, retired themselves into the Hospital of St. James.

This Novice having a very mature Judgment, and being moreover a great Servant
of God, Ignatius told him in confidence his most secret thoughts; That he
intended to go into Italy, in order to make a Voyage to the Holy Land; and that
there, or elsewhere, he intended to Institute a Society, whose only Aim and
Business should be, to perfect their own, and to save their Neighbors Souls.
He set down to him the Scheme and Drift of that Society, in the manner he had
then framed it within himself, according to the present light he received from
God. He farther told him what Companions he had chosen for executing this
Design, a Xaverius, a Laynez, and others not unknown to Castro; and then he
asked his counsel in that important Business.

Casto did not immediately tell him his judgment upon it; but having spent the
Night following wholly in Prayer, he came out of his Cell at Break-of-day with
a transport of Joy, which he could not moderate, and went in great haste to
tell Ignatius, that his Undertaking was the Work of God, and that it should
succeed in spite of all the Contradictions of Men, and that all Christendom
should receive great Advantages by it: And (said he) to let you see that I do
not speak at random, I offer my self to be your Companion and Disciple; for
being only a Novice, I am not yet under any Engagement.

Ignatius received this Testimony of Castro as an Oracle of the Holy Ghost; but
far from consenting that this Recluse should leave the Solitude to which God
had called him, he exhorted him to persist in so holy a Vocation as his was,
and made him understand, that a contemplative Life was his Lot. The thought
which this Novice had of changing his State, lets us see, that Persons inspired
from Heaven in the behalf of others, are not always so for themselves; and that
God made use of Ignatius to resettle Castro, as he did of Castro to fortify
Ignatius. The Records of the Charter House of Val-Christ mention this whole
Passage between these two; of which there are besides Juridical Attestations of
Don Antonio Martin d' Atarriba, and of Don Andrea Soler, both Carthusians, who
deposed that they heard this Transaction from Castro's own Mouth.

Ignatius more settled then ever in his Design, He Embarques for Venice.
went immediately to Valentia, and there went on Board a Merchants Ship, which
parted for Genoua. The famous Pirate Barbarossa, who had driven Mulyassen out
of the Kingdom of Tunis, was abroad upon the Mediterranean Sea with a Fleet of
an hundred Galleys, pillaging the Coasts, seizing all Ships, and every where
making Slaves: But so it happens sometimes, that one Evil is the cure of
another.

The most furious Tempest that perhaps ever was known upon the Coasts of Spain,
brought this poor Merchants Ship to the last extremity: The Rudder was carried
away with the stress of the Weather, the Masts were broken, the Pilot and
Mariners in despair. Among the Cries of so many People, who looked for nothing
but present death, Ignatius was the only Person not discomposed, and so
acquiescing in the Orders of Heaven, that he had not the least trouble upon
him, to see all his holy Projects overthrown: His only sensible grief was for
not having corresponded with the Graces of Heaven with that fidelity he ought.
But when nothing but Shipwreck was looked for, the Wind, by a miraculous
Providence, carried on the Ship to the Port of Genoua.

This was not the only Danger which Ignatius passed through in this Journey:
Going from Genoua to Bologna, he lost his Way upon the Apennine. After having a
great while wandered through difficult Passages, he came at last to a Way wide
and even at the entering, but growing by degrees narrow and craggy, which
brought him in the end to a steep and upright Mountain, which had at the bottom
a great Torrent of Water gushing out of the Rocks.

Being insensibly engaged into so dangerous a Passage, he stopped with some
terror at the sight of Precipices, which were on all sides of him; but after he
had implored the succor of Heaven, he took heart again, and not knowing how to
go back, he resolved to adventure forwards: Wherefore he crawled up along the
Rock, sometimes hanging upon the Shrubs, sometimes upon the Stones, that stood
out, always in hazard of rolling down to the Bottom of the Precipice which he
saw under him. This adventure was the most perilous of his whole Life, and he
was used to say, that without a kind of Miracle, he could never have come out
of so great a danger.

The Rains then falling, did almost drown the ways, by which he so much
suffered, that he came very sick to Bologna: Entering into that Town, as he past
over a narrow Bridge, his foot slipped, and he fell into a Ditch full of Mire, out
of which he came forth so covered with dirt, that he was a frightful spectacle.
However, he was not nice to show himself about the Town, as dirty as he was,
and to beg Alms: But whether it were, that his figure made him less acceptable,
or that Charity was very cold, he could not all that day get one piece of
Bread, and he must have starved, if the Spaniards who in that Town have a rich
College, had not taken pity of him. As soon as he had a little recovered his
strength, he went forwards on his Journey, and came to Venice about the end of
the year 1535.

From his first coming thither, he employed himself in the Service of his
Neighbor, following the Spirit of his Vocation. He is employed in the Service
of his Neighbor.
Two Brothers, Gentlemen of Navarre, the one called Stephen, the other James
d'Eguia, were newly returned from the Holy Land. They both had sentiments of
Piety, and some thought of quitting the World, but were held back by other
humane motives. Ignatius, who had seen them at Alcala, engaged them to make the
Spiritual Exercises, that so they might be well directed in choosing their
course of Life. They found, during their retirement, that God had designed them
one day to be the Children of Ignatius: They promised to follow in due time the
Grace which called them, and they were so true to their engagement, that as
soon as the Society of Jesus was formed, they both entered into it.

There was in the Town another Spaniard of Malaga, of an Ancient Family, that
came out of Cordova, and was called James Hozez: He was Bachelor of Divinity,
a Man of good Life, and a declared enemy of the Novelties of Germany. The
desire of his Spiritual profit made him seek out Ignatius, who had been
represented to him, as a great Master in the Science of the Saints: But having
learnt that he had been suspected of Heresy, in Spain and in France, he durst
not wholly rely upon his Conduct. However he one day, resolved to begin the
Spiritual Exercises, first Arming himself with preservatives against any
Poison, that he might find in them. He took therefore along with him an
Abridgment of the Councels, some of the Holy Fathers, and a great many Books of
Divinity, to examine the Doctrine of the Exercises by solid and certain Rules.

Scarcely had he ended the first Meditations, but he found a Character of
Truth, where he was afraid he should have met Errors. Going forwards, he
clearly saw that nothing was more Orthodox then the Faith of Ignatius: But
that, which most of all convinced him, was what Ignatius himself declared to
him of his Sentiments about Religion: That true Christians ought to submit
themselves to the decisions of the Church, with the simplicity of an Infant;
that in order to this, we are bound to believe, that the Spirit of our Savior
Jesus Christ does animate his Spouse the Church, and that the same God, who in
former times gave the Precepts of the Decalogue, to the Israelites, does govern
at this day the Society of the Faithful: That far from disapproving the Customs
in ure among Catholics, we ought always to be provided with reasons to defend
them against Libertines, and Heretics; that we must receive with profound
submission the Ordinances of Ecclesiastical Superiors; and, when their lives
should not be so blameless, as they ought to be, to abstain from speaking
against them, because such Invectives always cause Scandal, and make the Sheep
revolt from their Pastors; that we cannot too much esteem the Science of
Theology, whether Scholastic, or Positive; That the chiefest aim of the
Ancient Fathers, was to excite Men's hearts to the love of God, but that St.
Thomas, and the other Doctors of the last Ages proposed to themselves, to
reduce the Principles of Faith, into an exact Method, for more surely confuting
Heresies; that we cannot be too wary in speaking of Predistination, and of
Grace; and that Preachers ought to be very circumspect, when they treat of
those Mysteries, that they may not seem to take away the Power of our free
will, and the Merit of good works, in exalting Predestination, and Grace; nor
on the other side, to undervalue Predestination and Grace, in raising the Power
of our will, and the Merit of our works; that often by exagerating the
Excellency of Faith, without any distinction or farther explications, the
People are made prone to neglect the practice of Virtues. In conclusion, that
though it be the part of a good Christian, to serve God out of a Principle of
pure love, we must not neglect to recommend the fear of God, nor that only,
which we call Filial, which is most Holy, but that also, which is called
Servile, because it may help a sinner more readily to get out of his sinful
state, and may dispose him to that other fear, which unites the Soul with God.

All these Articles and Rules of an Orthodox Belief, as the Saint calls them in
his Book of Exercises, into which he has inserted them, made Hozez ashamed of
the distrust he had concerning the Doctrine of Ignatius, to whom he made a
Confession of it, showing him the Books he had Armed himself withal, by way of
prevention, and now without any fear, he so adheared to his Director, that he
embraced the same form of life, with Ignatius, and his Companions.

Many Noble Venetians did put themselves under the Direction of Ignatius, as
the three Spanish Gentlemen had done, and among the rest, Peter Contarini,
Administrator of the Hospital of St. John and Paul, afterward Bishop of Batto.
He found great advantage for a Spiritual life in the Exercises, and if
afterward he did not embrace the institute of Ignatius, as some of the
Venetian Nobility did, it was only, that he might be the Protector, and Father
of the whole Order.

The World, He is decryed in Venice, and afterward cried up again.
which commonly misconsters, what it does not understand, could not look upon
the good Actions of Ignatius, without Judging ill of them; They imagined him,
to be an Heretic in Masquerade, and that, after he had infected Spain, and
France, he was now come to do the same in Italy, some were so mad, as to say,
that he had a Familiar, which informed him of every thing, and that when he was
discovered in one place, he saved himself in another, before Justice could take
hold of him.

As soon as Ignatius heard what Rumors were spread of him, he applied himself
to Jerome Veralli, Nuncius of Paul the Third, with the Republic, humbly to
request him, that if according to these Reports, he were culpable, his Process
might be made. The Nuncius, having well examined the matter with Gaspar de
Doctis his Assessor, and finding no sufficient ground for these Calumnies, he
past a Juridical sentence in favor of Ignatius.

The esteem, which John Peter Caraffa showed for Ignatius, did not a little
serve to dissipate these Slanders. This is that Caraffa, who was exalted to the
Sovereign Pontificate under the name of Paul the Fourth, and who before that,
leaving the Archbishopric of Theate, to make himself a Colleague of Caietan
Thyene, had Founded the Order of Regular Clericks, called Theatins, from the
name of the Archbishopric, which by a Spirit of Humility and Penance he had
quitted. He was at that time in Venice, and lived the life of an exact
Religious man. The great correspondence with Ignatius held with Caraffa, made
the World believe, that he was become a Disciple of Caraffa, and thence
certainly it came, that the People in those times called Ignatius and his
Companions, Theatins.

In this while, the War was kindled more fircely then ever, between Francis the
First, and Charles the Fifth, by the Death of Francis Sforza, Duke of Millain;
both these Princes had pretentions on that Duchy. The Emperor, persuaded that
in these occasions, diligence and strength does best decide matter of right,
immediately took up Arms, and made an irruption into Provence, with the choice
of his Troops.

Upon the First rumor of the War, His companions go to meet him at Venice.
the Companions of Ignatius, who were not to have departed from Paris, till the
25th. of January of the year ensuing, according to the first agreement,
resolved to Anticipate the time of their Journey, and to go out of the Kingdom,
before the Passages upon the Frontiers were stopped. They set forth the 15th. of
November of the year 1536; with no other Equipage, but a staff in their Hands,
and a little Valice on their Backs, in which they carried their Writings. To
avoid Provence, they went by the way of Lorrain.

The whole Troop marched with great Recollection, and modesty, sometimes
Praying, sometimes Discoursing of Heavenly things, other while singing Psalms,
or Church Hymns. Faber, Le Gay, and Brouet, who were Priests, every day said
Mass; the others also Communicated as often, to fortify themselves with the
Bread of Life, against all the hazards, and difficulties of their Journey, in
so bad a season. They past through Germany with their Beads about their Necks,
as it were to make a public profession of their Faith in those places, where
Heresy began to be Triumphant.

Coming one Night to a Borough, near Constance, where they were all Heretics,
the Lutheran Minister, an Apostate Priest, and who before had been Curat of the
Place, followed them into the Inn where they went to lodge: They having a plain
and a simple outside, he thought he might deal very well with them, by way of
disputation, and gain a signal Victory over nine Papists at once. He began with
them by laughing at their Beads, and then fell to Argumentation about Religion.
As weary, as they were they would not decline the engagement; and Laynez was
the person, who first undertook him; He disputed so vigorously and so solidly,
and the Minister was so non-plus'd, that he cried, Gentlemen, let us go to
Supper, and let us Sup altogether, and afterward we shall be better able to
Dispute. They consented to renew the Dispute, but they would not eat with the
Heretic. They made a sober Meal by themselves according to their custom, while
the Dutchman, in another Room, eat and drank at his own rate. After Supper they
resumed the debate, and now a great many People were got together to hear the
Disputation: But the Minister, who had drunk a little too plentifully at
Supper, not being able to Answer any one Argument of his Adversaries, fell a
swearing in his own Tongue, and in great fury went out of the Inn.

The next Morning they followed on their Journey to Constance, where the
Heresy of Luther had been received, both by the Magistrates, and the People.
Coming near the Town, hard by the Hospital for the infected of the Plague, they
saw an old Woman, who seemed ravished with Joy, at the sight of them and their
Beads, and lifting up her hands to Heaven, she made the sign of the Cross. The
Lutherans of Constance could not prevail upon her, neither by fair means, nor
by foul, to change her Religion; whereupon they banished her out of the Town.
The good old Creature often kissed their Beads, and knowing no Language but her
own, she made signs to them to stay a little while for her, in the place where
they were. She presently went into the Hospital, where her abode was, and
returning again, she brought with her a great many pieces of broken Crucifixes,
intimating to them, that those were the greatest Treasure she had. To make a
kind of Reparation to the Honor of Jesus Christ, so ill treated in Effigies by
the Lutherans, they prostrated themselves upon the Snow, which all covered the
Ground, and devoutly kissing those broken Crucifixes, they adored the Crucified.

After which the Woman, returning back to the Hospital, and followed by our
Catholic Troop, told those, whom she met; Look ye, you miscreants, what you
say is not true, that all the World believes in Luther, and that the Roman
Religion is quite extinct, Pray, whence came these Men with their Beads? Are
not they of this World?

The nine Travelers passed out of Germany, notwithstanding the great rigor of
the Winter, and after much hardship endured, with their earnest desire of
seeing Ignatius made less painful to them, at last they arrived at Venice, the
8th. of January, in the year 1537. Ignatius embraced them all, and wept for
joy; he had with him James Hozez, who made the Eleventh of the Company, and was
not less fervent, or less learned then the rest.

Having some leisure time before their going to Rome, Ignatius and his
Companions are employed in the Hospitals.
to receive the Blessing of His Holiness, for their Voyage to Jerusalem, they
advized to dispose and fit themselves for that enterprise by works of Charity,
and Humility; for which purpose, they divided their Company into two Hospitals,
some went into that of the Incurables, and the rest into that of St. John and
St. Paul: They instructed the Ignorant, served the Sick, assisted the
Agonizing, and buried the Dead.

Thus they were employed till Mid-Lent, He sends his Companions to Rome.
when they all parted for Rome, except Ignatius; who did not think it
convenient to appear in a place, where his presence might possibly be of some
prejudice to his Companions; for John Peter Caraffa, the Theatine, who was at
Rome, and whom Paul the Third had newly made a Cardinal, seemed at that time
very opposite to the designs of Ignatius; whether it were, that he had some
resentment, that he, and Hozez, would not incorporate themselves with the
Regular Clericks, Founded by him, or that he did a little believe those false
reports, spread about in Venice concerning Ignatius.

The Companions of Ignatius being come to Rome, they were presented to the Pope
by Peter Ortiz, that Spanish Doctor, who had received in France ill Impressions
concerning Ignatius, but who afterward, upon better Information, had him in
great esteem; He was deputed by the Emperor Charles the 5th. to maintain the
Validity of the Marriage of Catherine of Arragon, Queen of England, whom Henry
the 8th. had repudiated, to Marry Ann of Bullen. He remembered Faber, Xaverius,
and the rest, whom he had seen at Paris; And did them all sorts of good
Offices, in consideration of Ignatius. He told the Pope, that they were very
Learned men, disengaged from the World, lovers of Poverty, very zealous for the
Conversion of Souls, and that the only motive of Preaching the Gospel to
Infidels, made them beg leave, to pass into the Holy Land.

Paul the Third, who loved Men of Learning, and had a custom in time of his
Meals, to have the choicest Questions both of Humane, and Divine Sciences,
Treated and Discoursed before him, had a mind to see these Persons, whom Ortiz
had so commended, and bad the Doctor bring them to him the day following. He
proposed to them himself a point of Divinity, upon which they spoke so
Learnedly, and with so much respect and modestly, that Charmed with their
Discourses, he rose from his Chair, and said with a loud voice, We are
Extremely pleased to see so much Erudition, and so much modesty joined
together. He asked them, what it was they desired of him, and being told by
them, that they only requested, what Otiz had already said, He gave them his
Benediction, with all the Marks of a Paternal kindness; telling them withal,
that he did not believe, they would be able to make the Voyage of Jerusalem, by
reason of the League which was upon making between the Emperor, the Republic
of Venice, and the Holy See, against the Turk, and which would break out very
suddenly.

He gave them Sixty crowns of Gold by the hands of Ortiz, and granted to those,
who were not yet Priests, permission to receive Holy Orders from any Bishop
whatsoever. Ignatius was comprehended in this concession, upon the Testimony,
which Ortiz gave his Holiness concerning him, and Cardinal Anthony Pucci Issued
forth a Dispensation out of the Penitentiaria, for Alphonso Salmeron, that he
might receive the Order of Priesthood, with the rest, at the Age of Twenty
years.

After they had visited the Principal Churches of Rome, they took their way
back again to Venice, living upon Alms, and keeping for their Palestine Journey
the sixty Crowns of the Pope, with an Hundred and forty more which other
Charitable Persons had bestowed upon them. Being come thither they made the Vow
of Poverty, and of perpetual Chastity, in the presence of the Nuncius Veralli,
and fell to their works of Charity in the Hospitals, which Ignatius had
continued in their absence.

Upon the Nativity of St. John Baptist, He receives the Order of Priesthood
with his Companions.
they were Ordained Priests by Vincent Nigusanti, Bishop of Arbe, and during
the Ceremony, they had such moving sentiments of Religion and Devotion, that
the Bishop even with Tears protested, that he had never been so Edified in all
the Ordinations, he had ever made.

In the mean time, the League was concluded; and the Venetians having declared
War against the Turk, there was nothing but Armies and Fleets preparing on both
sides. Though now there was no more Commerce between those two States, nor any
hopes of passing into the Levant, yet Ignatius, and his Companions would not go
out of the Teritories of the Republic, to keep their Vow, which obliged them
to expect there one whole year.

The new made Priests, made use of this time, to prepare and dispose themselves
for saying their first Masses, and the better to do it, they went out of Venice
into some solitary Places, where nothing but Divine objects might enter into
their thoughts; and they chose their quarters in such manner, that although they
were separated, they might easily come together, in case any opportunity should
offer it self, of passing into the Holy Land.

Ignatius made choice of a forlorn Cottage, He prepares himself for his first
Mass.
not far from Vicenza, which was ready to fall. He lived there much after the
rate of the Ancient Hermites of Thebais, fasting every day, incessantly
Praying, and never coming forth unless to get a little meat: But he received
there such overflowing Consolations, that through the abundance of his Tears,
he was in danger of losing his sight. and yet after forty Days of Retirement,
and Penance, he would not presume to approach the Holy Altar; and though his
Companions said their first Masses before the end of September, or October, he
did not say his, before Christmass-day of the year following defering it from
Month to Month, according to the light which he received from God; still
judging himself more and more unworthy for executing that Holy Function: So
profound was his Reverence of those Sacred Mysteries.

Waiting the end of the year, our new Priests, animated with a new Spirit and
Fervor, were distributed into the Towns, and Buroughs adjacent to their
solitary Mansions, in company of the Ancient standers, who had been formerly
Ordained, to labor in their Vocation of saving Souls. Ignatius, Faber, and
Laynez, went to Vicenza, Xaverius and Salmeron to Montselioe, Codurus and Hozez
to Trevtsa, le Jay and Rodriguez to Bassano, Brouet and Bobadilla to Verona;
they commonly got upon some Stone, in the middle of Market places, and invited
the Passengers to hear them. Whereas they had the mien of Strangers, and spoke
bad Italian, the People who took them for Mountebanks, come out of some far
Country, flockt about them in great numbers. But God bestowed such power upon
their words, that such as came thither only to laugh at them, went away weeping
for their sins.

They only Preached Repentance and Penance, and to look upon their pale and
mortified Countenance, they appeared to be true Penitents themselves, who had
newly come forth out of some Desert. After having labored the whole Day,
without other sustenance then a little Bread begged from Door to Door; they past
the Night in small Cottages or Huts, lodging on the Ground, with a little Straw
under them.

They could not long hold out in so Austere a course of Life, the greatest part
of them fell sick, and amongst the rest Simon Rodriguez was brought to Deaths
door. He and le Jay were retired into an Hermitage, built on the top of an
Hill, near Bassano. The Hermit, who was called Antonio, and was a Holy Man,
spared no pains to assist and comfort him, but the Violence of the Disease did
not yield to any remedies.

Upon the first news of this dangerous Sickness, He goes to the Relief of one
of his Companions who was sick and tempted.
Ignatius parted from Vicenza, which is a days Journey distant from Bassano. He
had at that time a lingering Feavor upon him, and yet walked so fast, that Faber,
who was strong and healthy, could not keep pace with him. Having always the Van
of his Companion, he now and then staid for him, and in these pauses, he begged
of God upon his Knees, the Recovery of his Disciple. Nor did he pray in vain,
even in his Journey he had an assurance of being heard, and he told Faber, that
Rodriguez would not die. However, they found him so ill, that the Physician,
who visited him, and the Hermit both dispair'd of his Life. But Ignatius,
embracing the sick Man, confidently told him, fear nothing, Brother, you shall
recover. From that moment, Rodriduez began to mend, and in few days was quite
recovered.

But the evil Spirit endeavored to rob Ignatius of him, whom Heaven had newly
restored to him: For Rodriguez, a while after, being charmed with the delights
of Solitude, and comparing the quiet life of the Hermit Antonio, with the
restlesness and fatigues of Ignatius, was tempted to make himself an Hermit.
Nothing unites us more to God ( said he within himself) then the Exercises of
an interior life: All these outward Employments dissipate the Spirit in Saints,
though never so great, the Commerce of Men in the World cannot be but dangerous
for him, who deals with them, though it be to save them, and it is always most
secure, only to mind our own Soul.

These reasons much prevailed upon him; but the remembrance of his Vow, and the
consideration of Ignatius, held him in suspense: Not being able to resolve, it
came into his thoughts to consult the holy Man Antonio, and implicityly to
follow his Council. For this end, stealing away from Ignatius, Faber, and le
Jay, with whom he was at Bassano, he went toward the Hermitage. He was hardly
got out of the Town, when a Man of a terrible aspect, and of a Giants stature,
appeared before him, with a naked Sword in his hand; at first he was terrified:
But after a while, thinking it might be only fancy, and that his Eyes deceived
him, he followed on his way. Immediately the same Man in a greater rage, then
before, looked dreadfully upon him, and threatened him with his Sword, as if he
meant to run him through; so that Rodriguez, trembling and frighted, ran back
with full speed to the Town. Ignatius received him with open Arms, and with a
smile, full of sweetness, Thou man of little Faith (he said) why have thou
doubted? These words made Rodriguez ashamed, but they Confirmed him in his
Vocation, and at the same time gave him to understand, that God had revealed
the whole matter to Ignatius.

The Charity, which the Hermit of Bassano had showed to Rodriguez in the time
of his Sickness, obliged Ignatius to take his leave of him, before he returned
to Vicenza. They had often seen one another; the Recluse, who highly valued his
own way of life, and to whom Ignatius did not much communicate himself, had no
great esteem for a Man, in whom he saw nothing extraordinary, either in his
outside, or in his discourse. This last time of seeing him, he undervalued him
even more, then formerly: But when Ignatius was departed, he understood by a
light from above, that he, of whom he made so little Reckoning, was a Vessel of
Election, and a Man filled with the Spirit of God.

THE LIFE OF St. IGNATIUS. The Third BOOK.
THE Year being run out, He goes to Rome to offer his Service to the Pope.
and no hopes appearing of a Passage into the Holy Land, Ignatius, who had
called his Companions together at Vicenza, gave them to understand, that since
the Entrance into Palestine was shut up, they ought not to defer the
accomplishing of the other part of their Vow, which obliged them to offer their
Service to the Pope.

Here we cannot too much admire the Conduct of Providence, which does sometimes
infuse Thoughts and Designs into the Minds of Saints, not intending that they
should be executed, and yet expecting from them their Obedience and Diligence,
toward the Execution of them. It is a thing moreover very remarkable, that the
Ships Transporting the Jerusalem Pilgrims, which in the foregoing Years never
failed to put to Sea, should only omit going in the Year 1537. Doubtless the
Divine Wisdom, which conducted his Servants by secret ways to higher
Enterprises then they themselves imagined, did so dispose it for his own Glory.

It was resov'd, that Ignatius, Faber, and Laynez, should first go to Rome, and
represent to his Holiness the Intentions of the whole Company; that the rest,
in the mean time, should be distributed into the most famous Universities of
Italy, to plant and insinuate Piety among the young Students, and to increase
their own number with such as God should call in to them. Before they
separated, they established a Form of Life, which they were all to follow, and
engaged themselves to observe these ensuing Rules.

1. That they should Lodge in Hospitals, and live only upon Alms. 2. That such
as were of a Company, should be Superiors by turns, each in his Week, lest
their fervor should carry them too far, if they did not prescribe Limits one
to the other, for their Pennances and Labor. 3. That they should Preach in all
public Places, and in such other where they could be permitted to do it. That
in their Sermons they should set forth the Beauty and Rewards of Virtue, with
the Deformity and Punishments of Sin; and that they should do it in a plain
Evangelical manner, without the vain Ornaments of Eloquence. 4. That they
should teach Children the Christian Doctine, and the Principles of good
Manners. 5. That they should take no Money for executing their Functions, and
that in serving their Neighbor, they should seek the Glory of God, and nothing
else.

They all consented to these Articles: He gives to his Company the Name of The
Society of Jesus.
But in regard they were often asked who they were, and what was their
Institute, Ignatius declared to them in precise terms what they were to answer
thereunto. He told them, That being united together to fight against Heresies
and Vices, under the Standard of Jesus Christ, the only Name which answered
their Design, was, The Company of Jesus. He had this Name in his thoughts ever
since his retirement at Manreza; and it is believed, that God revealed it to
him in his Meditation of the two Standards, in which was showed him the first
Draught, and the general Scheme of his Order, by Military Representations.

But that which happened to him in his Journey to Rome, much confirmed him in
the thought, that this Name was inspired by Heaven. In his whole Voyage he
every day received the Holy Communion from the Hands of Laynez or Faber. He was
all the way in constant Meditation upon the Mysteries of our Savior, with a
feeling Devotion. Lighting upon a ruinous Chapel in the Road from Sienna to
Rome, he went all alone into it, to recommend that little Company to God, which
he was now going to offer to the Vicar of Jesus Christ. Scarce had he begun his
Prayer, when he was rapt in spirit. He saw the Eternal Father, who presented
him to his Son; and he saw Jesus Christ laden with a heavy Cross, who after
receiving him from the hands of his Father, said to him these words, I will be
propitious to you at Rome. The sight of the Cross astonished him; but the
Promise of our Savior filled him with assurance and strength.

Being come to himself, he went out of the Chapel with a transported
Countenance; and joining his two Companions, I know not, Brethren (he said)
what is prepared for us at Rome, and whether we may not be ill treated there;
but this I know, that whatever our treatment shall be, Jesus Christ will be
propitious to us. After which, to fortify them against all that might happen,
he told them what he had seen. This heavenly Visit is one of the most
remarkable which St. Ignatius ever had, and is so well attested, that there is
no ground for a doubt of it.

Laynez, when he was General of the Society, made a Relation of it to all the
Fathers of Rome, in a Domestical Conference; and Ribadeneira, who first writ
the Story of Ignatius, says he was present at it. When any body asked St.
Ignatius concerning the Particulars of it, he referred them to Father Laynez,
to whom, he said, he had formerly given a true account of it. Nevertheless, at
the time when he made the Rules and Constitutions of his Society, and set down
the Sentiments which God inspired him with at the Altar, Quando el Padre Eterno
me puso consu Hijo.
he once writ, that he found himself in the same inward disposition and state
as he was when the Eternal Father appeared to him, and recommended, or Put him
with his Son, to use the Saint's own Term.

Ignatius, Faber, and Laynez, came to Rome about the end of the Year 1537. At
their first arrival they had Audience of his Holiness, Paul the Third, by the
means of Ortiz. His Holiness received with joy the Offers which Ignatius made
him, and seemed very well satisfied to see him. To try, and employ his new
Workmen, he desired that Laynez and Faber might teach Divinity in the College
of Sapienza, the first, Scholastic, and the other, the holy Scripture.
Ignatius undertook, under his Apostolical Authority, the reformation of
Manners, by the means of his Spiritual Exercises, and of Christian
Instructions. He first restored all the Money that he and his Companions had
received for their Journey of Jerusalem, and he even sent back four Crowns of
Gold as far as Valentia, which Martin Perez had given him.

Cardinal Jaspar Contarini, one of the most Learned Men, and most Ingenious of
his Time, was so charmed with the Disinteressedness and Wisdom of Ignatius,
that he said he now had met with such a Director as he had long wished and
sought for. He gave himself up wholly to him, and in his own Hand wrote out the
Book of the Exercises.

According to the Example of Contarini, He goes to Mont-Cassin.
Ortiz put himself under the Direction of Ignatius; But that he might make the
Exercises with more liberty, he went out of Rome, and took Ignatius with him to
Monte-Cassino. This Place, equally solitary and Religious, seemed to him very
proper for his design of forgetting for a whole Month, all the Business of the
World, and of minding no other but that of his Soul. As far advanced in years
as he was, he made himself Ignatius's Scholar; and he said after his
retirement, that the Divinity which he had learned at Monte-Cassino, in the
space of Forty days, was incomparably better then that which he had taught in
so many years. He said also, there was a great deal of difference between
studying to instruct others, and studying to perfect ones self; that in the
first we only design to make our selves able Men, in the second to become
Saints. In conclusion, he more valued one single Notion, gained in his
Solitude, then all the curious Speculations of humane Sciences.

In this while Xaverius and Bobadilla were employed in Bologna about saving of
Souls; Le Jay and Rodriguez were at the same Work in Ferara, Pasquier and
Salmeron in Sienna, Codurus and Hozez in Padua. From Venice their Reputation
was every where spread about; and the Marchioness of Pescara being at Ferara,
desired to be acquainted with the two who Labored there. Meeting one of them
by accident, she asked, if he were not one of those Priests come into Italy, to
go into the Holy Land, and where he Lodged. She was informed by him, that their
Journey to Jerusalem was disappointed, and that they Lodged in the Hospital.
She went thither the very same day; but before she called for them, she
inquired in what manner they lived. She was told that they were great Saints;
that they spent part of the Night in Prayer, and in saying their Office
together; that every day they begged their Bread about the Town, and would not
eat in the Hospital what belonged to the Poor; that, as thin clad as they were,
they never came to the Fire in the coldest Weather; that they never spoke but
of Heavenly things, and that they were continually employed in the Service of
their Neighbor.

The Marchioness, who had true Sentiments of Piety, was overjoyed to find
Directors of this Character. She gave them an account of her Interior, and
obliged them to come and Lodge for a time, near her Palace. It was she who
first made them known in the Court of Ferara, and who induced the Duke Hercules
d'Este to choose Claude le Jay for his Confessor.

But of three other of Ignatius's Companions, God was pleased to try the
Virtue, and to exercise their Patience. Xaverius had a great Sickness at
Bologna, of which he was brought to Deaths-door. Codurus and Hozez were put in
Prison at Padua, by order of the Bishops Suffragan, who suspected them of ill
Designs, and some Contrivances against the State of Venice: But the whole Town
was concerned in their behalf; so that they lay but one Night in Prison. As
soon as they fell to their Employment again, Hozez was seized with a most
violent Fever, which carried him off in few days. The Disease took him after
he had newly Preached to the People upon these words of the Gospel, Watch and
pray, because you know not the day nor the hour.

Ignatius, who had the News brought him to Monte-Cassino, of Hozez Sickness,
knew it would be mortal. He sees the Soul of Hozez enter into Heaven.
At the very instant of his Expiring the Saint saw his Soul, shining and
glorious, enter into Heaven, in the same manner as St. Bennet in that Place had
formerly seen the Soul of St. Germanus, Bishop of Padua, carried by Angels into
Paradise, as it is related by St. Gregory. Ignatius had the same Vision more
then once: for being one day hearing Mass, at those words of the Confiteor, Et
omnibus Sanctis, he saw Heaven opened, and among the numerous Troop of the
Blessed, his Companion more resplendent then the rest; not that he was more
holy, or more elevated in Glory, but because God, as Ignatius himself observed,
would have him so distinguished, that he might take notice of him. This Vision
so wrought upon him, that he wept for many days together. And that which made
it appear that it was no Illusion, was, that the Body it self of the Deceased
seemed to give some assurance of the glorious state of his Soul: for Hozez,
who, living, was of a swarthy Complexion, and very hard-featur'd, becaMe so
handsome and well-colour'd after his Death, that Codurus, who never left him,
could hardly know him for the same Man.

To increase his comfort, He gets a new Companion.
Ignatius stayed not long without finding another Companion, to fill his room
whom he newly had lost, or rather whom it pleased God to take into his own
Kingdom: Nor could he reckon it a loss to himself, that this holy Man should be
the first to take possession of Heaven, out of that Society which was hardly
yet well established upon Earth, and from whom he hoped for more protection (in
that blessed State he had seen him) then he could have had service or
assistance from him, if he had continued longer in the World.

Coming back from Monte-Cassino, he met a young Spaniard of his Acquaintance,
called Francis Strada, who was come to Rome to make his Fortune. Doctor Ortiz
had placed him with Cardinal John Peter Caraffa. But Strada, who was full of
spirit and fire, grew quickly weary of a Court, where all things go slowly on.
He therefore resolved to turn Soldier, to advance himself that way; and he was
then going to find Employment at Naples. It is the custom for Men, uneasy in
their Fortunes, to be always complaining. He told Ignatius his Disgusts against
the Court of Rome, called it Deceitful and Ungrateful; but still he comforted
himself with the prospect of a freer Life, in which at least he should gain
Reputation.

You have no reason to complain ( said Ignatius to him). The World, in
deceiving you, has only done what it uses to do: you have rather cause to
rejoice, then to complain; for it was rather a Kindness then a Deceit, to let
you know at first what the Court is, and how ill-grounded all Hopes are there.
This ungrateful World, which has so ill recompensed your Services, does in a
manner it self admonish you to leave it: but you do like him, who suffers
Shipwreck upon one Sea, and presently Embarques again upon another. You leave
Rome for Naples, as if the Court were not still the Court as well at Naples as
at Rome. For my part I have pity of you, not so much for the Hopes you have
already lost, as for those you have still before you. If you will not be
deceived, renounce all your vain Pretensions upon Earth, and trust only to God,
who is only faithful, and can only make you happy.

These words made such Impressions upon the young Soldier, that he laid down
his new Profession to make himself a Disciple of Ignatius. He went back with
him to Rome, and in process of time became one of the most famous Preachers of
Europe. Other young Men, considerable for their natural Parts and for their
Piety, almost at the same time, followed the Example of Strada.

At this time God bestowed upon Ignatius more distinct Notions of the Institute
of which he was to be the Founder, He proposes to his Companions the Founding a
new Order.
together with a strong desire of Establishing it out of hand. He conferred
with Faber and Laynez about it, and he sent for the rest of his Companions, who
were dispersed up and down Italy. Upon his first Order they came to Rome about
the end of Lent, in the Year 1538. They Lodged all together with a Roman
Gentleman, called Guirino Garzonio, whom Ignatius had brought into the Service
of God, and whose House he accepted of, that he might Treat more commodiously
with his Companions about the great Business in hand.

Having one day called them together, Can you think, Brethren ( said he,) that
Providence has gathered us out of so many different Countries, and united us
with so strait a band of perfect Charity, with intention, that after so long
Studies, and such painful Voyages, every one should go home again at his
pleasure? No, no, ( he added) God would have us engaged in his Service for
ever; and even that we leave behind us Successors that shall embrace the same
manner of Life. Heaven has been pleased to stop our Entrance into Palestine,
and yet I can say it to the glory of God, that our zeal for his Service has
still increased from day to day. Ought we not to judge from thence, that we are
called to enlarge the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, not with a single Nation or
Country, but with all the Nations and Countries of the World?

The small number which we were at first, did not suffice for so vast an
Enterprise. New Succors are now come in to us, and more are daily coming. But
what benefit shall we receive from those who associate with us, if we all live
in an Independency? and what great thing can we perform, if our Company be not
Erected into a Religious Order, capable of multiplying it self in all Places,
and subsisting to the end of the World?

I doubt not but this Design will meet with great opposition: The Contradiction
of Men is a Character and Mark of the Works of God: But neither Earth nor Hell
can prevail against the Decrees of the Eternal Wisdom. Jesus Christ has
promised us to be favorable to us; and what may we not hope upon his Word? and
what can we fear with his Assistance? After all, I am if opinion, that you and
I should take a little time to prepare our selves by Prayer, to make a farther
discovery of his Divine Will, and faithfully to Execute it, when it shall
appear to us.

This Discourse of Ignatius fully convinced the whole Company; yet in Obedience
to him, they did not deliver their Opinions upon the Matter till they had taken
some time to recommend it to God in the manner by him prescribed; which being
done, they assembled a second time, and agreed by a common consent, that their
Society should be Erected into a Religious Order; that no time ought to be lost
in undertaking it; and that the first step to be made, should be to prepare the
Mind of the Pope, which seemed to be averse from these new Establishments.

While they sought out means to bring this to effect, Paul the Third parted
from Rome for Nice, a Maritime Town in Provence, where there was to be an
Interview between Francis the First, and Charles the Fifth. The Design of the
Pope was to Compose the Differences of those two Princes, by a Treaty of Peace,
or at least to obtain of them a long Truce: for he had reason to fear, that
their Divisions would hinder the progress of the League made against Soliman.

It was a great pain to Ignatius, He continues his Works of Piety.
to see the Business of God retarded: he drew his comfort only from him, who
permitted this delay, and in the mean time he employed himself in the Service
of his Neighbor. Having obtained leave of Cardinal Caraffa, whom the Pope had
made his Legate in Rome, to Preach in what Places he would, he distributed his
Companions into several Churches of the Town. He chose for himself our Ladies
of Montserrat, out of the Devotion which he always conserved toward the
miraculous Image, which is honored at the Place of Montserrat, where he made
his Renunciation of secular Warfare.

He Preached very feelingly; and his Talent was to make the Truths of the
Gospel enter into the Heart, by laying them forth in a plain manner, such as
they are in themselves, and as he himself relished them: so that pious Persons,
and of good sense, who used to hear his Sermons, were wont to say, That the
Word of God, naked and plain, had in the Mouth of Ignatius its full Majesty and
force. Faber, Xaverius, Laynez, and the rest, did also Preach with great
fervor, and with no other aim but the good of Souls.

From their first Sermons there was observed a remarkable change in the Manners
of the People. The frequentation of the Sacraments, which was then little in
use, was restored according to the Model of the first Ages of Christianity; and
it is since that time, that so holy a Custom has been introduced into all
Catholic Countries, as well as that of making Catechisms to the Children, and
Sermons to the People every Sunday and Holy Day.

This Eavngelical Ministry did not hinder Ignatius from often Treating with his
Companions concerning the Project of his Institute: He confers with his
Companions about his Institute.
for though he had the Model of it within him, yet he would do nothing in it
without their concurrence. Being employed all the day either in instructing the
People in public, or in directing Consciences in private, they took the Night
for the time of their Consults. They resolved in one of their Assemblies, by
the direction of Ignatius, that besides the Vows of Poverty and Chastity, which
they had made at Venice, they should make another of perpetual Obedience; the
more to conform themselves to the Son of God, who was obedient even to death;
That to this end they should elect a Superior General, whom they must all obey,
as God himself; That this Superior should be perpetual, and that his Authority
should be absolute.

At another Meeting they agreed, That such as were Professed in their Society,
should add to the three Vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, an express
Vow of going wheresoever the Vicar of Jesus Christ should send them, to labor
in the Salvation of Souls; and even to go without any Viaticum, and living upon
Alms, if his Holiness should think it fit. They had also other Conferences,
where they resolved, That the Professed should possess nothing, neither in
particular nor in common: but that in the Universities they might have Colleges
with Revenues and Rents, for the subsistence of those who Study.

After this manner they were employed, He opposes an Heretical Preacher.
in expectation of the Pope's return; and the Blessing which God bestowed upon
their Labors, made them hope for a happy success in their grand Design; when
on the sudden a Tempest was raised, which almost over-turn'd all their hopes.
There was at Rome a famous Preacher, by Nation a Piemontese, and a Religious of
the Order of the Augustine Hermits, a reformed Man in appearance, but unworthy
of the holy Habit which he wore, and a Lutheran in his heart. The absence of
his Holiness gave him confidence from his Pulpit, to vent the Errors of that
Heresiarch. The better to surprise the People, he mightily lamented the
relaxation of Discipline, and of Doctrine in point of Manners and Christian
Morals: And thereupon he would insinuate some ambiguous Proposition, which he
failed not seemingly to back with the Authority of holy Fathers, and with the
Example of the first Ages.

Ignatius could not imagine, that a Religious Man should be capable of
Preaching Heresy in the middle of Rome; and he believed at first that they had
put a wrong sense upon the words of the Preacher, or that the Propositions
which made so much noise, had negligently slipped from him without design.
However, to be thoroughly informed of the truth, he ordered Salmeron and Laynez,
who had formerly Disputed with the Heretics in Germany, and knew the bottom of
Lutheranism, to go at several times to hear him.

Being ascertained by them that he taught the very Doctrine of Luther, under a
specious pretense of teaching that of the Primitive Church, he procured him to
be admonished in secret, that his Doctrine had caused a great deal of scandal;
and this Advice was given him with all the precautions which Prudence and
Charity require.

But it is the nature of Heresy to affect Moderation, when it is undisturbed and
let alone, and to be violent in the highest degree, upon any opposition made
against it. The Preacher, (whom all Rome followed as an Oracle) made haughty by
his Reputation, and so much the more irritated by the Remonstrances which had
been made him, by how much they were founded upon Truth; he vented his rage
against those who suspected his Doctrine, and boldly maintained all those
Propositions which he had advanced. Ignatius seeing that a secret Admonition
had been unprofitable, and that sweet Remedies increased the Disease, thought
it his duty publicly to oppose the Enterprise of a Man, who made it his
Business to corrupt the purity of Faith in the Capital City of Christendom.

Wherefore he and his Companions went into the Pulpit, and with all their might
confuted his Errors, by defending the necessity of Good-works, the Vows of
Religion, the Authority of the Church, and such other Catholic Articles as are
Impugned by the Lutherans. The ten Preachers did not Preach in vain; the Friar
became suspected of Heresy: but being a Man very dextrous and intriguing, he
wanted neither Artifice to justify himself, nor Credit to be supported.

His first Address was to retort upon Ignatius the suspicion of Heresy, A
Persecution raised against him in Rome.
saying aloud, That it was the custom of cunning Heretics, to impute Errors to
whom they pleased, that by raising a dust, they might undiscovered, and with
Impunity vent worse themselves. But the better to corroborate what he would
have believed, he drew into his Cabal three Spaniards, who had an honest and
sober outside, very proper to authorize a Calumny. One of them was called
Mudarra, another Barrera, and the third Castilla.

They were not contented to defame Ignatius only as a Lutheran, and a wicked
Man, but they suborned Michael Navarr, and engaged him to depose something of a
heinous nature against him. This is that Navarr who at Paris, being enraged at
the Conversion of Xaverius, made an attempt upon the Life of Ignatius. He was
come to Rome, after he had run about the greatest part of Europe; and he hated
Ignatius the more, for that having offered himself to be one of his Disciples,
he was not judged worthy.

This Man then declared before the Governor of Rome, that the Ringleader of
certain Spanish Priests, was an Heretic and a Sorcerer, who had been burnt in
Effigy at Alcala, at Paris, and at Venice. He protested upon Oath, That
nothing but his Conscience forced him to accuse a Man of his own Nation: that
he averred nothing but what he had seen with his own Eyes, and of which he
could produce indisputable Proofs.

There needed no more with the People, inconstant of their own Nature, and
prepossessed in favor of the Friar, to change their Sentiments in the behalf
of Ignatius. The Men whom lately they admired in the Pulpit, and whose Life
seemed to them so Apostolic, were now pointed at as Hypocrites and false
Prophets. No body dared to appear in the Company of miserable Wretches, who
they believed would suddenly be brought to the Stake; and two Priests, whom the
Cardinal Legate had assigned them, to be their Assistants in hearing Confessions
fled out of the Town, for fear of being involved in their destruction.

The Friar and his Confidents congratulated with one another the success of
their Enterprise. But Ignatius, whose hopes were the stronger in the protection
of God, by how much more desperate his Condition seemed to be, encouraged his
Companions, and excited himself to fear nothing. Behold, O Lord, (he said) the
accomplishment of that which the heavy Cross did prognosticate, when I saw you
loaded with it in my Journey to Rome. Accomplish also the rest, and refuse us
not the Assistance which you then promised us. His Prayer was heard; and to the
end it might appear, that God only did lay the Tempest, the Calm ensued by
those means, from which humanely it could not be expected.

Of all the Friends of Ignatius, there was none but Guirino Garzonio, who did
not abandon him. The particular knowledge he had of the persecuted Persons, by
having Lodged them so long before their Persecution, had given him so high an
Idea of their Virtue, that the Reports of Rome made no impression upon him. It
being his Custom to speak in favor of them upon all occasions; Cardinal John
Dominique de Cupis, Dean of the sacred College, his Friend and Kinsman, one
day reprehended him for it, and above all, advised him to avoid Ignatius, not
only for the dishonor which the Company of such infamous Persons always
brings, but for the danger of being infected by keeping the Company of wicked
and impious Persons. I assure you (answered Garzonio) that if you knew him, as
I do, instead of forbidding me his Company, you would desire and seek it your
self. I see (replied the Cardinal a little sharply) that this Wretch has
disturbed your Reason, and that you are not less enchanted by him, then the
Disciples that follow him; for they say he is a great Sorcerer.

Garzonio gave an account the very same day to Ignatius of the Conversation he
had with the Dean of the sacred College. The Persecution is appeased by
degrees.
Ignatius praised the zeal of the Cardinal, who since he had an ill opinion of
the Manners and Doctrine of a Man, would not have him conversed withal; he only
added, that if he might be so happy as to wait upon the Cardinal, he did not
doubt but he should undeceive him. Garzonio engaged to procure him an Audience,
and he easily obtained it; for the Cardinal had a mind to see a Man so much
talked of, and to reproach him with his Crimes; so that when he granted the
Audience, he said, Let your Ignatius come, and I will treat him as he deserves.

Ignatius appeared before the Cardinal with a modest assurance, such as
Innocence only can give. It is not precisely known what they said; but this is
certain, that they were together about two hours, and that the Cardinal wholly
disabus'd, threw himself at the Feet of Ignatius, to ask his pardon; that he
brought him forth with great marks of esteem and good will; and that from that
time forwards he sent him every Week a large Alms.

Though Ignatius found that Heaven began to be favorable to him, yet he failed
not to be very industrious on his part, according to his grand Maxim, That in
difficult Occurrences we ought to rely wholly upon God with an entire
assurance, as if the good success of the thing were to come from Heaven by a
kind of Miracle; and nevertheless, that we must use our utmost endeavor on our
parts to make it succeed, as if we were to receive no succor at all on the
part of God.

His first step was to Present himself before Benedict Conversin, Bishop of
Bertinero, Governor of Rome, and to solicit himself, that his Cause might come
to a Hearing. The Governor having set a day, the two Parties, Ignatius and
Navarr, who had accused him, appeared in Court. The Accuser maintained all that
he had before deposed, and swore it over again by all that was sacred. In
Answer to all this, Ignatius only produced a letter, and asked Navarr if he
knew the Hand. It Is mine, said he, not mistrusting any thing. He said true, for
he had writ that Letter to an Acquaintance some Months before. It contained,
That Ignatius and his Companions led an unblameable Life; That he had known
them at Paris, and at Venice, and that they were truly Apostolical Men.

The Letter was read, and had all the effect which Ignatius promised to
himself. The Accuser, who spoke with so much boldness, seeing himself convinced
of falsity under his own Hand, was struck dumb; or what he spoke was so
confused and incoherent, that it made his Perjury more notorious.

But that which absolutely dissipated the Calumny, was, that the three Judges
who had declared Ignatius's Innocence in the three Cities where Navarr
maintained that he had been Condemned to be burnt, were all present in Rome at
that time; Jaspar de Doctis, Assessor of the Nuncius Veralli, was come thither
from Venice; the Grand Vicar John Figueroa, from Alcala; and the Inquisitor
Matthew Ori, from Paris; each upon his private Concerns, or rather for those of
Ignatius, whose Innocence God would have to be made authentically manifest in
the Capital City of the Christian World. Of Judges, as they had been, they
became Witnesses, and all three deposed the Truth against the Perjuries of
Navarr.

The Impostor was condemned to a perpetual Banishment, and would have been more
rigorously punished if Ignatius had not interposed in his behalf. For the other
three Spaniards, they all retracted what they had said, in the presence of the
Governor of Rome, and of the Cardinal Legate. There now remained nothing for the
absolute Justification of the Master, but to vindicate also his Disciples. Upon
the Reports which were spread out of Rome, that the Companions of Ignatius were
Men of bad Lives, the Grand Vicars of Padua, of Bologna, of Ferara, and of
Sienna, immediately sent of their own accords very ample Attestations of their
holy Life. And Hercules d' Este, Duke of Ferara, gave order to his Ministers
then with the Pope, to interpose his Authority and Testimony in behalf of the
unspotted Lives of Le Jay and Rodriguez.

So many Proofs did not yet satisfy Ignatius, He sollicits to have a Sentence
pass to justify him, and at last obtains it.
he would have a Sentence Juridically passed, to remain upon Record. He said,
that in time the Banishment of his Accuser might be forgotten; and if there
were no public Act in favor of the Accused, it might hereafter be believed,
that by their Intrigues and their Credit they had stopped the Course of Justice,
as fearing a bad Issue of their Cause. That which the more induced him to
solicit for a Sentence, was, that he might once-for-all justify himself also
of those Accusations at Alcala, Paris, and Venice. I know ( said he, Writing to
Signior Peter Contarini) that in so doing we shall not silence bad Tongues, nor
am I so ill-advis'd as to pretend to it: We only intend to save the Honor of
Religion, which is in some manner joined with our own. It does not much concern
us, that they make us pass for Unlearned, or for Men of a bad Life: but that
the Doctrine which we Preach should pass for Heterodox in the Minds of the
People, and that the way in which we conduct Souls should be esteemed the way
of Perdition, is that which we cannot permit, without betraying our Ministry,
since it is the very Doctrine, and the very way of Jesus Christ.

Though this Enterprise, which Ignatius laid so much to heart, was very just, and
did not appear very difficult, yet he found Obstacles on all sides. The
Governor, a just, but a weak Man, who was afraid of drawing Enemies upon
himself, if he should show too much favor to Ignatius, neither daring to grant
nor to refuse his Request, spun out the matter in length. On the other side,
the Cardinal Legate was not of opinion that the Business should be farther
prosecuted; and there wanted not those, even among the Companions of Ignatius,
whose Sentiments did not agree with his upon this Matter. They said it was
enough for them to be found innocent, and that any thing more would have an
Air of Revenge, which might disedifie the People. These Oppositions did not
startle Ignatius, no less jealous of his Honor, when the Interest of Religion
required it, then greedy of Reproach and Ignominy in other occasions.

Tired with the put-offs of the Governor, and despairing of ever obtaining any
thing from him, he thought the shortest and most secure way would be to address
himself immediately to the Pope, who returned to Rome while these things were
transacted, and was gone to pass part of the Autumn at Frascati, to rest
himself after his Journey from Provence. Thither Ignatius went to him, and the
Justice of his Cause gave him so much assurance, that he neither looked out for
a Mediator, nor an Introductor.

The Pope had no sooner heard the Reasons of Ignatius, but he ordered the
Governor to give him content. The Governor obeyed; and after having caused the
Book of Spiritual Exercises to be Examined, he drew up a Sentence according to
Form, which contained great Commendations of the Accused, and entirely cleared
them.

Ignatius sent Copies of the Sentence round about, even as far as Spain: but
the unhappy Destiny of his Enemies, did yet farther vindicate him. Navarr lived
miserably and agitated with remorse of his Conscience. Barrera died a few days
after of a violent Disease. Mudarra and Castilla were both accused of Heresy:
the first was condemned to perpetual Imprisonment; and the other, who appeared
more obstinate, to be burnt. As for the Piedmont Friar, he fled from Rome to
Geneva, and there declared himself openly an Heretic; and moreover wrote a
violent Book against the Church of Rome, Entitled, The Summary of Scripture. In
conclusion, the Impieties of this Apostate came to such an excess, that falling
at last into the hands of the Inquisition, he ended his life at the Stake.

Our ten holy Strangers having recovered their Honor, He helps the People
during a Famine.
began to appear again in public; and there was presented to them an occasion
of succouring their Neighbor, which they were careful to take hold of. The
Winter at Rome was at that time exceeding sharp, and there was so great a
Dearth, that many of the Common People almost famished, lay up and down in the
Streets, having hardly strength enough to ask for Relief. Though Ignatius and his
Companions, who lived only upon Alms, felt their share of the Famine, however
they undertook, upon the Fund of Providence, to relieve these poor Wretches.
They all set their hands to take them up in the Streets, and carried them on
their Backs into the House where of late they Lodged themselves. They give
their Beds to the weakest among them, and accommodate the rest as well as they
can, with Straw laid upon the Ground. The Providence on which they reckoned,
did not fail them: They received so great a Supply of Meat and Money all at a
time, that they had wherewithal, not only to feed above Four hundred Persons,
but also to clothe the most necessitous, who were almost starved both with Cold
and Hunger.

The Charity of Ignatius and his Companions, drew a great many Spectators.
Some, who came only out of curiosity to see what they did, being moved at the
sight, stripped themselves of part of their Garments, to clothe the half-naked,
who were not yet provided of Clothes: And many Persons of Quality raised a
Stock for the subsistence of three or four thousand Persons, whom Famine had
reduced to extremest misery. But the care of Ignatius was not confined to the
relief of their Bodies, he also instructed those poor Wretches in all the
Duties of Christianity; he made them Pray orderly every day together, and
engaged them to make their Confessions.

While these things were doing, He Presents to the Pope the Project of his
Institute.
Ignatius, who had the Benedictions and Praises of all Rome, and was called the
Father of the People, thought it expedient to make use of so favorable a
Conjuncture for the Execution of his Design. Having made an Abstract of the
Institute which he and his Companions had formed, he Presented it to Paul the
Third, by the Mediation of Cardinal Gaspar Contarini. The Pope received the
Writing very satisfactorily, and gave it immediately to be Examined to Thomas
Badia, then Magister Sacrae Palatiae, and afterward made Cardinal of St.
Silvester. Badia kept it by him two Months, after which time he brought it back
to his Holiness, declaring that he found nothing in it, but what was very
commendable. The Pope read it himself, and it is said, that after reading it, he
cried, The Finger of God is here.

Ignatius at the same time besought his Holiness, that he would be pleased
Authentically to Confirm what he had already vouchsafed to approve by word of
Mouth. Though Paul the Third stood well enough inclined, yet he would do nothing
in it without the advice of three Cardinals: Of whom the first and principal
was Bartholomew Guidiccione, a Man of great merit, and so worthy of the Papacy,
that when he died, the Pope said, His Successor was dead; but of so austere
Virtue, and so much an Enemy to Novelties of all kinds, that far from approving
new Religious Orders, he thought that some of the old ones should rather be
suppressed, and all of them reduced only to four. His zeal in this matter went so
far, that he set out a Book with his Reasons for it, which were grounded upon
the Decrees of the Councils of Lateran and of Lions, under Innocent the Third,
and Gregory the Tenth, concerning the multiplication of Religious Orders. With
this disposition of Mind he would hardly look upon the Memorial that was put
into his Hands; and he often said, That whatever the Institute were, the Church
had no need of it. The Authority of Guidiccione, who was an able Divine, and a
great Canonist, drew along with it the other two Cardinals.

At the same time that Paul the Third named these three Commissioners, Some of
his Companions are employed by the Pope.
he spoke to Ignatius for some of his Companions, to be employed in some
necessary Occasions of the Church. This he did at the instance of some Princes,
Bishops, and other considerable Persons, who had knowledge of the Disciples and
of the Master. Pasquier Brouet was sent to Sienna, to reform a Monastery of
Religious Women, which was in great disorder; Claude le Jay to Brescia, to
extirpate the Heresy which some Uncatholick Preachers had there sow'n; and
Nicholas Bobadilla to the Island Ischia, upon the Coasts of Naples, to make
Peace among the principal Inhabitants, who had mortal Feuds among them. James
Laynez and Peter Faber attended the Cardinal of St. Angelo, in his Legantine
Voyage to Parma: Laynez was left at Placentia, and Faber at Parma; from whence
he was afterward recalled, to accompany Doctor Ortiz, who had received Orders
from Charles the Fifth, to be present at Worms, where there was to be a
Colloquie between the Catholics and the Protestants. Lastly, Simon Rodriguez
and Francis Xaverius parted toward the Indies, and the occasion of their
Journey was this:

James Govea (that Portuguez Principal of the College of St. Barbara, who
penitently acknowledged the Innocence of Ignatius, when he was upon the point
of exposing him to public shame) being yet at Paris, and hearing the great
things which Ignatius and his Companions had done in Italy, judged, that Men of
their Mould would be very useful in the East Indies, which were newly conquered
by the Portuguez. He writ about it to Father Ignatius, whose Sentiment he would
first know, before he made any Overture of it in the Court of Portugal. The
Father praised God that he had opened to him the Door of a new World, after
shutting that of the Holy Land; and he conceived an ardent desire of going
himself, to carry the Gospel into so many Idolatrous Nations. He answered
Govea, That he and his Companions were ready to go into any Place in the World,
where the Vicar of Jesus Christ should please to send them; That they had
devoted their Service to him upon the account of Missions, and that they could
not dispose of themselves without the leave and good liking of his Holiness.

Govea sent the Answer of Ignatius to John the Third, King of Portugal,
together with his own Thoughts concerning the Conversion of the Indians. This
Prince, who was very Religious, and no less careful of Establishing the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ in those Countries newly discovered, then of Enlarging the
Dominion of Portugal, gave Order at the same time to Don Pedro Mascaregnas, his
Ambassador at Rome, to obtain of his Holiness six at least of these Evangelical
Laborers recommended to him by Govea, and to bring them along with him.

The Ambassador, He appoints two of his Companions for the Indies.
who was particularly acquainted with Ignatius, and even made use of him for
his Confessor, showed him the Order of his Master. The Father answered, That it
belonged to the Pope to determine upon the matter; but if he might speak his
own thoughts, he was of opinion, that two of the Fathers were as many as could
well be spared for the Indies. When Mascaregnas insisted upon the number
prefixed by the King, Good God! (replied Ignatius) if of ten that we are, six
should go to the Indies, what would there remain for all the other Countries of
the World. The Pope, to whom Mascaregnas made all possible instance, referred
the Matter to Father Ignatius, who still adhered to his first Sentiment: So
that the Ambassador brought away no more with him but Simon Rodriguez and
Francis Xaverius; a small Supply indeed, if we look only upon the number, but
very considerable in weight and value.

The two Missionaries being arrived at Lisbon, labored there for the good of
Souls, while they waited for the departure of the Admiral, in which they were
to Embarque, in Company of Martin Alphonso Soza, who Commanded the Fleet. And
their Labors from the very beginning gained them the Title of Apostles, which
in that Kingdom remains at this day to their Successors. Some Lords of the
Court, inamor'd with the zeal of Xaverius and Rodriguez, represented to the
King, that perhaps it would be more advantageous to keep them both in Portugal,
then to send them to the Indies.

The two Fathers, who had their Mission appointed for the new World, having
some inkling of the Design of the Portuguez, wrote presently to Rome, and
conjured their Father Ignatius to Interest his Holiness in behalf of their
Mission. Paul the Third would not appear in it, but was of opinion the disposal
of it should be left to the King. Accordingly Father Ignatius sent to the two
Fathers, that they should follow the Direction of the King of Portugal, whom
they were to obey in this Circumstance as God's Vicegerent. But he added, that
if perchance the King should ask what his Opinion was of it, they might tell
him his Judgment was, That Xaverius should go to the Indies, and that Simon
Rodriguez should remain in Portugal. The King received this Advice as an
Oracle; and as Ignatius Proposed, so it was Executed: Wherefore for this reason
alone we may in a manner attribute to him all those glorious things done by St.
Xaverius in the Indies.

The Joy which Ignatius had to see his Companions preferred to be Apostles of a
new World, was a little allayed by the opposition made to his chief-Design, He
persists to have his Institute Approved by the Holy See.
by the three Cardinals. However he continued his Applications to the Pope with
more warmth then ever. At the same time he redoubled his Prayers to the Divine
Majesty with great confidence; and, as if he were certain of success, he
promised one day to God three thousand Masses, in acknowledgment of the Grace
which he hoped to obtain.

His hopes were not deceived; Cardinal Guidiccione found himself changed all in
an instant, not knowing why: and this sudden change seemed to himself so
extraordinary, that he doubted not but God was the Author of it. Now he read
the Memorial, which before he would not look upon; and after well Examining it,
he said his Sentiment was still in general the same, that new Orders of
Religion were not to be admitted; but for this, which was now Presented, he
could not oppose it. He farther declared, that he even thought it necessary for
the present State of Christendom, and above all, for stopping the Course of
Heresies, which began to overrun all Europe.

In effect, there hardly appeared any footsteps of the ancient Religion in the
greatest part of Germany, where the Lutherans and the Anabaptists (branched out
into many contrary Sects) only agreed together to destroy the Catholic Faith.
England separated from Rome, followed the Deviations of Henry the Eighth, whom
she acknowledged for Head of the Anglicane Church. Switzerland, Piedmont, and
Savoy, and all the Neighboring Parts, were infected with the Errors of
Zuinglius and Oecolampadius. France was every where tainted with the Contagion
of Geneva, even into Italy it self the Venom had crept, whither Calvin had sent
his Institutions Translated into French, and had so insinuated himself and his
Doctrine into the good liking of Renee, Duchess of Ferara, who was Daughter of
Lewis the Twelfth, that she and part of her Court had embraced the Heresy.

The Pope judged, that in so fatal a Juncture the Church had need of
extraordinary Succors. He understood at the same time, that the Disciples of
Ignatius, who were employed out of Rome, did every where awaken and stir up the
Spirit of Christianity; and that the most hardened Sinners could not resist the
force of their Exhortations. Among the remarkable Conversions, that of a Priest
of Sienna was most admired by the Pope. This Priest had lived a very dissolute
Life: He was not content only to compose Comedies to entertain the People, but
he would sometimes Act in them himself, to the high scandal of all good
Christians, who could not endure to see the same Man, sometimes at the Altar,
and sometimes upon the Stage. Brouet and his Companion Strada (that young
Spaniard, whom Ignatius had gained in his return from Monte-Cassino) had touched
him so to the quick with their Discourses, that after having made a Spiritual
Retirement, he (with the leave of the Grand Vicar) publicly asked pardon of
the People with a Rope about his Neck, for the Scandal he had given; and
afterward shut himself up in a Convent of Recollects, where he spent the rest
of his days in rigorous Penance.

The Pope, The Society of Jesus is Approved by the Pope.
being moved with so many extraordinary Actions, and more powerfully incited by
an inward Impulse, confirmed at last the Institute of Ignatius, under the Title
of The Society of Jesus, by the Bull, Regimini Militantis Ecclesiae. This Bull
which was Expedited the 27th of September, in the year 1540, contains the Elogy
of the first ten Fathers, and says in express words, that there is nothing but
what is Good and Holy in this new Institute. The Pope, by the same Bull gave
them leave to make Constitutions, such as they should think most proper for
their own perfection, for the Good of their Neighbor, and for the Glory of
God. It is true, that he limited the number of the Professed, and restrained
them to Sixty; but this restriction he took away two years after by another
Bull; and it was the Interest of Christianity, which obliged him so to do, as
he himself declares.

As soon, as the Holy See had approved the Society of Jesus, Ignatius judged it
necessary to begin with choosing a Superior; and to this effect, he called to
Rome, with leave of the Pope, such of his Company, as were free to come; For
Xaverius and Rodriguez were at the Court of Portugal, Faber was at the Diet of
Worms, and Bobadilla had Order expressly from the Pope not to leave the Kingdom
of Naples, till the business committed to him was ended. So that these four
Fathers assisted not at the Election: The two first left their suffrages behind
them, when they left Rome; Faber sent his, and though Bobadilla did not do so,
either for want of convenience, or for that he hoped from day to day to be back
in Rome, yet at his return, he confirmed the choice, which the others had made.

When le Jay, Ignatius is chosen General of the Society.
Brouet, and Laynex, were come, they took three Days seriously to consider,
whom they should choose, which time they past in Prayer and Recollection. The
fourth Day they met, and all the Voices were for Ignatius, except his own,
which he gave to him, who should have most Suffrages, but still excepting
himself. He did not declare for any body by Name, either because he could not
decide who was most worthy, or that he would not show any partiality, but hold
the balance even.

Whereas some of these Suffrages, which every one gave in Writing, are still
preserved, the Reader perhaps may be curious to see them, as they are taken out
of the Originals. I protest, says Francis Xaverius, in his own Tongue, that
without having been solicited by any Person, I judge according to my
Conscience, that we ought to choose for Head of our Society, our ancient
Superior, and true Father, Don Ignatius, who after having gathered us together
with so great pains, will best know how to maintain, and govern us, as best
knowing each of us in particular.

Our thrice honored Father, Don Ignatius de Loyola (says John Codurus in Latin)
is he, to whom I give my voice, as having always found him inflamed with the
Zeal of Gods Glory, and of the good of Souls. I farther believe, that he ought
to be the Superior over the rest, because he has always made himself the least,
and has ever been the servant of us all.

The Suffrage of Salmeron is the most in Form, and the Largest. In the Name of
Jesus Christ (says he) I Alphonsus Salmeron, most unworthy of this Society,
after having besought God, and duly examined the thing in question as far as I
am capable, do hereby choose, and declare, Don Ignatius of Loyola for my own,
and the whole Societies Superior General. Whereas by the wisdom, which has been
Communicated to him from above, he has ingender'd us all in Jesus Christ, and
nourisht us with Milk in our Spiritual Infancy; now that we are grown more
adult, and strong in our Lord, he will give us the Solid nourishment of
Obedience, will conduct us in the Celestial Pastures to the Fountain of life;
to the end, that when he shall give up this small Flock to the chief Pastor,
Jesus Christ, we may truly say, We are his People, and the Sheep, which his
hand has conducted, and that he, with joy, may also say, Lord, I have lost none
of those, which you have given me. May the Good Pastor, Jesus, give us all this
Grace. Amen.

Ignatius afflicted, He refuses the charge of General.
and even surpised to see himself chosen General, Brethren ( said he) I am not
worthy of this employment; and I assure you, I shall not be able to discharge
it; For how shall I conduct others, who am not able to conduct my self. I speak
to you with all possible sincerity, when I consider the disorders of my former
life, and the weaknesses of my present life, I cannot resolve to accept of this
charge of General, wherefore I conjure you, in the Name of God, not to take it
ill, that I refuse it, and that you would again, for the space of three or four
Days, implore the Divine assistance, so to enlighten us all, that we may choose
for our Father and Superior, him, who is most capable of well governing our
Society.

Though this refusal served only to confirm them in their first choice, yet in
deference to him, they submitted to a new Election. After four Days of Fasting
and Penance, he was chosen the second time, but he made a second endeavor to
wave the Employment; He said, that he would put the business into the hand of
his Confessor, and if he, who knew all his bad inclinations, should command
him, in the Name of Jesus Christ to submit, he would then blindly obey.

The Fathers had great difficulty to yield to him in it; They said, that the
will of God was sufficiently manifested, and that it would be a kind of
opposing it, any longer to balance upon the matter. But at last his Authority
carried it, and he went to find out a Religious man of the Order of St.
Francis, called Father Theodosius, to whom he ordinarily had used to Confess,
and only left him, since the Holy See had confirmed the Institute. After
exposing to him in a private conference both his Spiritual and Corporal
Infirmities, he made his Confession to him of his whole life in the three last
Days of the holy Week. Father Theodosius told him plainly, that he resisted the
Holy Ghost in resisting his Election, and commanded him, on the part of God, to
accept of the charge of General.

Father Ignatius did then yield, Ignatius and his Companions make their
Profession.
and out of Obedience took upon him the Government of the Society of Jesus,
upon Easter Day in the year 1541. at which time they all agreed to make their
solemn Profession the same Week, which they did upon the Friday following,
being the 22th. of April. In this manner the Ceremony was performed; They all
went to visit the Seven Churches, which are the principal Stations of Rome:
Being come to St. Paul's, which is without the Walls of the Town, Father
Ignatius said Mass at the Altar of our Lady. Before he took the Communion, he
turned toward the People, and holding in one hand the Sacred Body of our Lord,
and in the other, his Vows in Writing, he pronounced them all, with a loud
voice, and then took the Communion. After which, turning again to his
Companions, who were upon their Knees at the Foot of the Altar, and holding
five Hosts upon the Patten, he received their Professions, and then
Communicated them. They all engaged, as he did, to observe perpetual Poverty,
Chastity, and Obedience, according to the form of life contained in the Bull of
their Institution. They promised moreover a special Obedience to the Pope, in
regard of Missions, set down in the said Bull, and they obliged themselves to
teach Children the Christian Doctrine.

There was this difference between the Profession of Father Ignatius, and that
of the others; He made his Promise immediately to the Vicar of Jesus Christ,
and the rest made theirs to him, as to their General and Chief. The Mass being
done, they went altogether to the great Altar, where the Bones of the Blessed
Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul are laid, and there embracing their common
Father, they humbly kissed his hand, in token of their Submission and Obedience.

The General began his Office with Catechizing, He Catechizes with great fruit.
in the Church of St. Mary de Strata, which Peter Codacius, an Officer of the
Pope, and Powerful in Rome, caused to be given to the Fathers, when they yet
dwelt in an hired House. This is he, who charmed with their holy life, quitted
great Benefices, and by a Spirit of retirement ranged himself among them, with
no other intent but of taking care of their Temporals, and of procuring them
Alms.

Though the new Superior made his Christian Instructions principally for
Children, according to his Vow; yet all sorts of People came to hear him, even
Men and Women of Quality, Divines, and Canonists; He explicated in Italian the
Mysteries of Faith, and the Commandments of God, in a plain, easy way,
accomodated to the understanding of the People. In these explications he
mingled some lively touches, and incitements to Piety, and Devotion; and though
his Language were a little Barbarous, he made such Impression upon their minds,
that after having heard him, they went away in silence, with Tears in their
Eyes, and Compunction in their Hearts: Their sorrow was sometimes so excessive,
that when, after the Catechism, they would go to Confession, they could not
speak for sighing and weeping. He continued this Exercise forty Days together
in the same Church; and it is according to this example, that the Superiors of
the Society make forty Days of Catechism; when they enter into their Office.

But whereas nothing was more essential, then to regulate the Conduct of the
Members of this newly born Society, before making any Constitutions in exact
form, he drew up, for the present, some general Regulations.

I. That as much, The first Rules which he prescribed to his new Society.
as possibly they can, they should always have God before their Eyes; and that
they should propose the life of Jesus Christ for the Pattern of their own.

II. That they should look upon God in their Superiors, to execute their
Orders, and to honor their Dignity; and that they should be persuaded, that
obedience is a Guide, which never misleads, an Oracle, which never deceives;
That they should discover to their Superior the bottom of their Souls, that so
they may be rightly directed; That they should abhor nothing more, then being
their own Guide; and that they should wholly mistrust self-love, by so much
more blind, by how much it thinks it self clear-sighted.

III. That in the Commerce of the World, they should use the circumspection of
those, who succor Men that are drowning, and that they should take heed, not to
lose themselves in the endeavoring to save others; That they should not only
love all as their Brothers, but that every one should love his Brother, as
himself; That they should never dispute in words, with obstinacy and heat,
which often cools Charity, if it does not put it out, and when they differ in
opinion, that the love of truth should rule their dispute, and not the vain
desire of getting the better.

IV. That silence be exactly kept among them, unless it be, when necessity
obliges them to break it; and that when they must speak, they do it in a modest
and Religious way; That what great things soever it should please God to work
by their Ministry they should not think any thing better of themselves, nor
Usurp the Glory of any good Action; for the Instrument is nothing by its self,
but derives all its Virtue from the Arm, which Governs it; That they should
reckon, Wit, Eloquence, Learning, as nothing in comparison of Virtue; and that
they should never think themselves better rewarded, and paid for what they do,
in behalf of their Nighbour, then when they shall receive affronts, and
outrages, the only recompense which Jesus Christ received from the World for
his Labors, and Sufferings.

V. That if they should fall into any public fault, which might seem to
dishonor them, far from losing courage, they should give thanks to God, for
having made them know their own weakness, by permitting their fall, and for
having undeceived the World, which thought them to be greater Saints then they
were; and that for the future, they should always have their fall before their
Eyes, to make them more humble, and to walk more warily; that others also may
learn by their example, to have a care of falling, even when they think
themselves least in danger.

VI. That in the hour of Recreation after Meals, they should be mindful of that
Modesty, which the Apostle requires in our conversation; to be cheerful without
Levity, and to be sober without fullenness; That in their exterior Functions,
they should never let pass the occasions of a present and certain good, out of
imaginary hopes of some great good to come, which is uncertain. In conclusion,
that they keep themselves firm in their Vocation, and continually upon their
Guard, against the deceits of the malignant Spirit, who labors to draw every
one out of his way, tempting Monasticks to outward Employments, Ignatius and
his Companions employed in the Service of the Church.
and Apostolical men to the repose of Solitude.

Francis Xaverius, for whom the King of Portugal had procured, without his
knowledge, a Brief of Legate Apostolical in the Indies, parted about this time
from Lisbon, and left there Simon Rodriguez. The same year Paul the Third sent
Alphonso Salmeron, and Pasquir Brouet into Ireland with the Characters of
Nuncius, to maintain the Catholic Faith among those People, who,
notwithstanding the Edicts of Henry the Eighth, still remained in Communion
with the Holy See. The Commonwealth of Venice demanded James Laynez, Doctor
Ortiz carried Peter Faber along with him to Madrid; Nicholas Bobadilla, and
Claud le Jay, went to succeed in the place of Faber, at Vienna, and at
Ratisbone.

While these Gospel Laborers, animated with the Spirit of Ignatius, were at
work in so many different places, for the good of Souls, Ignatius upon the same
account, was in his own person no less active at Rome. Assisting the sick in
the Hospitals, and elsewhere, he found that the greatest part of them went not
to Confession, till almost at the hour of death, when for the most part
Repentance is ineffectual. He represented this disorder to the Pope, and at
first humbly proposed to him, to renew the Decretal of Innocent the Third,
which Ordains, that the Physician shall not visit the sick, till they have
first been at Confession. But afterward he judged, that to the end such a
Decree might be more duly observed, it ought to be a little moderated, so as it
might be lawful for the Physician to make two visits to a Patient, before
Confession, but that the third should be forbidden under grievous Penalties.
The Pope followed the advice of Father Ignatius, and this Christian practice is
exactly observed in Italy, even to this day.

Rome was at that time full of Jews, He makes the Establishments for the Jews
and Curtezans Converted.
and some of them opened their eyes to the Truth, since the new Society
explicated the Mysteries of Faith; but the fear of Poverty hindered them from
declaring themselves. Father Ignatius offered his house to those who would be
made Christians, and many there were, who abjured Judaism: The number of the
Converts daily increasing by the Conversion of some prime Men of the Synagogue,
who disabus'd he rest; he undertook to found a House, where all such Jews
should be instructed, who demanded Baptism; and he engaged diverse Persons of
Piety to concur in so holy an Establishment. He obtained of the Pope, that the
Jews who were Converted, should lose no part of their Goods, which were
lawfully gained; that such Goods as had been gained by Usury, and of which
restitution could not be made, for want of knowing to whom they belonged,
should be employed toward the relief of the new Converts, and that the
Children, who embraced Christianity against the will of their Parents, should
inherit, as if they had not changed their Religion.

There were also in the City, many Maids and Women, whom necessity had cast
into evil courses; some of them, who had not quite lost the fear of God, had a
horror of their infamous life, but yet they continued it, as not knowing
whither to go, or how to live. There was indeed at that time a Monastery
established of the Magdalenists; but they received only such, as would be
Religious, and would pass the rest of their days in Solitude, and Penance.
Father Ignatius considering, that the Grace, which excites sinners to leave
Vice, does not always carry them so far, as to leave the World, and that the
state of Marriage is not consistent with that of Religion, Formed the design of
another House, where secular Maids, and Married Women might be indifferently
admitted. He communicated this Project to the principal Gentlemen of Rome, who
all approved it, and promised to contribute to so beneficial a Foundation,
provided that some body would undertake to begin the Work. The Father finding
that no body would be the first to embark in it, boldly began it himself.

Father Codatius, Procurator of the Casa Professa, caused some great Stones to
be drawn out of the ruins of Ancient Buildings, in a place belonging to the new
Society, which stood before their Church. Father Ignatius ordered him to sell
as much as came to a hundred Ducats, and having received the Money, he carried
it to those Roman Gentlemen, who durst not venture to lead the Dance, in so
Pious an undertaking. If no body will be the first (he said smiling) at least
let some body second me, and threw down his Money before them. They all of them
furnished great Sums, and in less then a Month, a House was built for the
Married, and Unmarried Penitents, called the Monastery of St. Martha. He
carried them thither himself, and was not ashamed to appear about the Town in
the company of Public sinners. He was sometimes told that he lost his time,
and that such Women were never heartily converted. If I did hinder them but one
night from offending God (he replied) I should think my time, and my labor
well employed.

He also took great care of young Maids, He does other works of Charity.
that were exposed to great hazard, either for want of Education, or for want
of means; and for these he caused another Monastery to be Founded, by the name
of St. Catharine. The method which he observed in this sort of good Works, was
first to engage as many Rich and devout Persons, as he could; next to choose
some Cardinal of great Piety to be their Protector, and then to settle Trustees
for the Temporal, and Directors for the Spiritual, who might prudently govern
such Houses, according to those Statutes, they should agree upon: But when the
business was well Cemented, and went currantly on, it was his custom to
withdraw himself, that he might not give jealousy to any body, and to betake
himself to some other work, that might be profitable to the Public.

The next affair that he chiefly labored in, was to procure a Fund for the
subsistence of Orphans; in which he also succeeded, and two Houses were Erected
in Rome, the one for Boys, and the other for Girls, and these two
Establishments, which he regulated himself, have ever since subsisted; Lastly
he endeavored to purge the Town of some enormous Vices, which the Corruption of
the Age had introduced, and which custom did in some manner countenance.

All these Actions of Charity did not so take him up, He begins to write the
Constitutions of his Order.
but that even then he applied himself to Model the Constitutions of his Order.
He employed many hours of the day upon it, and some part of the Night. His
Method was this, First he Examined every Article according to the Rules of good
Sense, and set down all the Reasons Pro and Con. These Reasons were neither few
in number, nor light in substance; for upon one only Point, which is none of
the most important, there have been found in his Papers written with his own
Hand, Eight Reasons for one side, and Fifteen for the other; every one of them
of weight, and capable of holding the Understanding in suspense. After this,
laying aside all Self-love, and private Interest, he exactly weighed all the
Reasons of each side, one against the other, the better to discern which were
the weakest, and which the strongest.

After having done all that Prudence required, he consulted God with the
simplicity of an Infant; as if he had nothing to do, but to write down that
which God should dictate to him. Viewing it therefore all over again by the
light of eternal Verities, he supplicated Jesus Christ, by the Intercession of
the Holy Virgin, to make him see what should be most conducing to the Service
of his Divine Majesty, and to the good of the Society.

Though sometimes he found his Judgment so determined to one side, as seemingly
to exclude all manner of doubt, he would nevertheless continue his Prayers,
that he might more distinctly know what was best; insomuch that upon a certain
occasion, when he had taken his last Resolution in a Matter before him, after
ten days of Communication with God, he made his Prayer again upon the same
Article, and Meditated farther upon it thirty days together. All this while the
Matter was not very considerable; it was only to determine, Whether the
Churches of the Professed Houses should have Revenues, or whether they should
be maintained by the Charity of the Faithful.

Besides, when he had written a Constitution, he laid it upon the Altar when he
said Mass, and offered it to God together with the Divine Sacrifice; to the
end, that the Father of Lights would cast his Eyes upon it, and make him know
whether it were consonant to the Rules of Evangelical Perfection. He did this
in imitation of the holy Pope St. Leo, who before he sent to the Bishop Flavian
the Dogmatical Epistle which he had written against the Heresy of Eutiches,
laid it upon the Altar of the Apostle St. Peter, and there kept it Forty days,
Fasting all that time, and incessantly praying the Prince of the Apostles to
Correct it himself, and with his own Hand to blot out all that should not be
Orthodox.

The interior Answers which the Holy Ghost made to Father Ignatius, gave him at
least an entire assurance, and a perfect quiet in his Understanding, concerning
the Resolution he had made. Wherefore having one day asked Father Laynez, if he
did not think that God had revealed to Founders of Orders the Form of their
Institute; and Father Laynez having answered him, That it seemed very probable
to him, at least in regard of the Essentials. I am of your opinion (replied the
Saint); and it was, without doubt, his own Experience that made him judge so.

He began the Platform of which we speak, The End of the Society of Jesus.
with setting down the End of his Order, which he made to be not only (with the
assistance of God's Grace) to save and cultivate their own Soul, but also, with
the help of the same Grace, to employ all their might for the Salvation and
Perfection of their Neighbor: For he would have it, that these two should make
but one, and the only end of the Society, and should equally depend one on the
other; being persuaded, that as nothing contributes more to our own
sanctification, then to devote our selves entirely to the saving of Souls, so
on the other side, nothing renders us more fit and proper to save Souls, The
Means which the Society makes use of to obtain their end.
then the sanctifying of our selves.

Having established the End, he thought upon the Means which were necessary to
obtain it; and he set before his Eyes the two different Forms of Life: the one
of which, by the Model of Martha, is wholly employed in the Service of our
Neighbor; and the other, by that of Magdalen, is wholly taken up with the
Repose of Contemplation. He easily discerned, that the Functions of these two
States, taken in several, and in the whole extent, did not agree with his
Design; and that he ought to choose that which was best out of them both, and so
evenly to mingle them, that they should help, and not hinder one the other: for
in conclusion, as little resemblance as there is between Martha and Magdalen,
they are still Sisters, and not Enemies.

He took therefore out of the Contemplative Life, Mental Prayer, the Examens of
Conscience, the Reading of the Holy Scriptures, the Frequentation of
Sacraments, Spiritual Retirements, the Exercises of the Presence of God, and
such other Practices of Devotion.

He took out of the Active Life, all that might contribute to save, and bring
to perfection our Neighbors Souls; Preaching, Catechizing, Missions, as well
amongst the Faithful, as amongst the Infidels, maintaining Controversies
against Heretics, Entertainments of Devotion with secular Persons, Visiting
Prisons and Hospitals, the Direction of Consciences, and the Instruction of
Youth. But this last he most particularly regarded; for in that general
Corruption which then reigned, he thought he could no better way reform the
World, then by infusing the love of Virtue into Children, before they had
contracted evil Habits. He hoped that thee young Plants growing up with
Christian Impressions, would make Innocence flourish again in all States and
Conditions of Civil Life: And he doubted not, but these first Seeds of Piety
would continue in them as long as they lived, though possibly they might be
smothered for a time by those Passions which the heat of Youth does commonly
engender.

It may be also, that being informed how the new Heresiarchs took the way of
perverting Children, and how one of their false Doctors of Geneva taught them
Songs against the Roman Church, he would employ the same Means to maintain
Religion, which they made use of to destroy it.

But foreseeing that there would be no great Concourse to the Schools of the
Society, if only Piety, and nothing else should there be taught; and
considering on the other side, that the Universities were daily infected with
the Venom of Heresy, he conceived, that to draw Scholars, and to keep them
from Error, it was necessary to hold public Schools, where all Sciences proper
for Religious Men to teach, might be taught gratis.

Indeed, for the first four or five years after the Confirmation of the Order,
the Children were only instructed in their Catechism. The first Fathers were so
full of other Employments, that they could not keep Schools, and those who were
associated to them, had not ability at first to do it. The General would have
them finish their own Studies in Philosophy, Divinity, and the Holy Scripture,
before they were employed to Teach. And thence it comes, that the first
Colleges of the Society were only for teaching the young Men of their own Body.

It was to facilitate the use of all these Means, The Society has no particular
Habit.
so proportionate to the End of an Apostolical Calling, that Father Ignatius
made choice of a common conversible Life, according to the Model of that of
Jesus Christ: Whereas he was a Priest, and that his Order was no other then a
Congregation of Priests or Regular Clericks, he appointed no other Habit for
his Religious, then what was used by Ecclesiastical Persons; nor did he
prescribe to them any such Uniformity of Habit, as was used in other Regular
Societies: He only ordered in general, that theirs should be decent, according
to the Usage of the Country, but such as should not be contrary to Religious
Poverty. The Design which he had to Convert all Men, if it were possible, made
him judge, that the Society having to treat often with Heretics and
Libertines, who are apt to deride the holy Habits of other Orders, it was most
expedient for them, not to take any, that was remarkable and singular, that so
they might have freer access every where.

He regulated the Lodging, The Society has no Austerities of Obligation.
Diet, and the rest, as he did the Habit, according to the Laws of Decency and
Poverty. This Principle of a Communicative Life, determined him also not to
command in his Rule any Austerity by Obligation. He well knew, that Religious
Societies are composed of Persons who are not all of the same Constitution or
Age; that when Austerities are of Obligation, they must have recourse to
Dispensations, in favor of Persons infirm, or Aged; and that Dispensations,
how legitimate soever they may be, have almost always troublesome Consequences.

On the other side, he foresaw that the Macerations of the Body, Established by
the ancient Founders of Orders, according to the Form of their Institute, would
be great Obstacles to the Functions and Business of his. And yet, in not
prescribing any set measure of Pennances for all in his Society, he does not
pretend to exclude all Austerities; On the contrary, he will have every one
mortify his Body as much as his Health and his Employment will permit. But
lest Self-love should hold back, or Fervor should too much drive on, he
appoints that Superiors shall be Judges in these Matters, who considering on
one side the End of the Institute, to which all the Means must be subordinate;
and on the other side, the Constitution and Strength of the several Persons,
are to keep a Mean between a Relaxation hurtful to the Soul, and an Excess
ruinous to the Body.

Notwithstanding his Devotion to hear the Praises of God Sung, Why the Society
does not keep Quires.
and his Veneration for those Religious Persons who Sing them Night and Day,
yet the Injunction of keeping Quires he left out of his Order, upon
consideration that the Employments of his Institute, were incompatible with
that pious Exercise, which however is not essential to a Religious Profession;
for the Military Orders, and those which are employed upon Works of Mercy, have
no Quire; even the Order of St. Dominick it self had none at the beginning; and
in the most reformed Orders, Masters of Divinity, Preachers, and Missioners are
therein dispensed. The Authority of the holy Pope St. Gregory, who in a Council
at Rome forbids Deacons that are Preachers, to Sing: And that of St. Thomas,
who teaches, that it is better to raise men's Hearts to Heaven only by the
Ministry of the Word of God, then by Singing and Music, did not a little serve
to confirm St. Ignatius in this Resolution. And it may be said, that in
reserving himself wholly for Evangelical Functions, he followed the Example of
St. Paul, who says of himself, That Jesus Christ did not send him to Baptize,
but to Preach. Not but that it was a holy and laudable Action to Baptize, but
in regard he had been chosen to publish the Gospel, and there wanted not others
to confer Baptism.

Whereas the diverse Employments of a Society, How Persons are to be chosen, and
what hinders from being received into the Society.
devoted to the good of Souls, would require excellent Workmen, the Founder did
forecast all that was necessary thereunto. For in the first place he ordained,
that good choice should be made of those who are received; and he sets down
himself the principal Qualities which they ought to have; among others, a good
Nature, a good Wit, a vigorous Constitution, a Body well made, and a fair
Carriage: As for Nobility, and the Advantages of Fortune, he reckons them as
nothing, if the rest be wanting: But he would have them considered, when they
are joined with Talents requisite; and for this Reason, because Men of great
Birth, and such as have been considerable in the World, are very proper to be
hearkened to by the People, to speak to Great Men, and to maintain the Interest
of the Church.

He excludes those, who having been born Christians, shall have abjured their
Faith among Infidels, or held publicly Heretical Opinions. To whom he adds
Infamous Persons, and such as have been Convicted of enormous Crimes; all
Persons subject to Lunacy, or Distempers of the Brain; Lastly, all those who
have worn the Habit of an Hermit, or of any Religious Order, though but for a
day. And all those Exclusions are grounded upon this, that St. Ignatius
required for his Institute, Principles of Religion well settled in the Heart,
and untainted Reputation, a sound Judgment, and a Will constant in the good
Course which once it has embraced.

Besides these Impediments, which are not so Essential, but that the Holy See
may dispense with them for just Causes, and in extraordinary Cases, there are
others of less Consequence, which the Superiors themselves, according to
discretion, may dispense withal; as being, for Example, under Fifteen years of
age, or above Fifty; having violent Passions, bad Habits, indiscreet Devotions,
etc.

To have a perfect knowledge of those who Present themselves, the Founder
requires, and directs a very exact Scrutiny, even to know whether they be born
in lawful Wedlock; Whether they be only Sons; What their Family is; If they
have any Engagement upon them, either by Holy Orders, or by Promise of
Marriage, or by Vow.

Above all, he recommends, that their inward Dispositions should be narrowly
looked into, and chiefly that their Vocation should be well Examined; Whether,
since their being called, they had not changed their mind, or suffered their
holy Desires to grow cold; Whether any of the Society had not allured them; And
in such case, though it might have been done with good intention, he declares,
that a reasonable time ought to be given them, to re-consider upon so important
an Affair, by the only Rule of Gods greater Glory, and as if no person had ever
mentioned it to them.

But to draw out of this Examen the desired Effect, he requires from those who
are Interrogated, a great openness and freedom, and prescribes to the Superiors
a profound Secrecy. Lastly, when after all these Interrogatories, the Persons
are judged proper for the Institute, he will have them, before they are
received, made to understand, that if they sincerely desire to be admitted,
they must be ready wholly and entirely to Consecrate themselves to God.
Moreover, he prescribes, that the most humiliating and painful part of a
Religious Profession, should be proposed to them, and even that they should be
asked whether they will be content to be admonished, not only of all the Faults
that shall be observed in them, but that whoever shall know their Faults by any
other way but by Confession, shall inform the Superior, that he may correct
them; and whether they themselves be disposed to inform him, with the spirit of
Charity, of the Faults of others, when he shall ask them, to the greater Glory
of God.

The Choice being thus made, In what manner the Novices are to be tried and
trained.
the Saint will have trial made of the Persons so chosen, after this manner.
That upon receiving them into the House, they enter into the Spiritual
Exercise, and that after a whole Month of retirement, without any Communication
whatsoever, but with their Director, they shall make a general Confession of
their whole Life.

After this, they shall take the ordinary Habit of the Society, unless it be
judged expedient to continue them in their secular Attire, as the Saint himself
ordered it, in the case of Antonio Araos, his Kinsman, and of a Neopolitan
Gentleman, who had been Captain of the Castle of St. Elm.

That the Noviciate shall last two years, because a less time of trial will not
suffice for those, who being designed for outward employments, have need of a
great stock of Virtue.

That during the Noviceship, besides learning every day something without Book
to cultivate the memory, which loses its vigor for want of Exercise, they
shall not study at all.

They shall serve the Sick in some Hospital for the space of a Month; the same
space of time they shall also spend in making some Pilgrimage of Devotion a
Foot, without Viaticum, begging Alms. Inquiry shall be made of the
Administrators of the Hospital, how the Novices behave themselves, and also in
the places, through which they pass, what their comportment was.

That being well instructed themselves, they shall teach the Christian Doctrine
to Children, and to the meaner sort of People, that they may betimes be
accustomed to it. Lastly, that they shall be only employed in the Practices of
a Spiritual life, and that their whole care must be, to acquire solid Virtue,
particularly Humility, and Self-abnegation.

Whereas Piety alone is not sufficient for Evangelical Functions, The Order of
Studies for those who have ended their Noviceship.
Learning being absolutely necessary for them, he Ordains that after the two
years of Noviceship, they shall apply themselves to Study: He sets down the
Sciences which they shall learn, viz. The Learned Tongues, Poetry, Rhetoric,
Philosophy, Divinity, Ecclesiastical History, the Holy Scripture: But he leaves
it to the prudence of Superiors, to regulate the Studies of every one in
particular, according to their Age and Talents; so that such Wits, as are
capable of all, shall be trained in all the Sciences, and such as are not so
universal shall learn that in which they are likeliest to excel.

But some Rules he sets down, which are to be fixed and universal; he will have
them instructed in Grammar, Poetry, and Rhetoric, before they begin their
Philosophy; That they shall not Study Scholastical Divinity, before they have
finished their courses in Logic, Physic, Metaphysick, and Moral Philosophy,
nor be applied to cases of Conscience, till they have had an entrance in
Scholastical Divinity. That they shall not proceed from one Science to another,
till they have undergone a rigorous Examen; that in each Faculty, they follow
the best grounded opinions, and the most approved Authors, that in studying the
holy Tongues, their aim must be, thoroughly to understand the Scripture, and
also to defend the version, Authorized by the Church. The want of method, which
Ignatius found so prejudicial in his Study at Alcala, and the danger, which the
reading of a suspected Author exposed him to, made him use all these
Precautions.

He likewise remembered, how his Exercises of Charity, and ill-timed Devotion,
had hindered his progress in Learning; He therefore ordered that the Students of
the Society should not be employed abroad; that the time of their Prayers
should be limited, and that they should not receive the Order of Priesthood,
till toward the latter end of their Studies.

Moreover whereas his Infirmities and Sickness had much obstructed his own
advancement in the Sciences, The care of St. Ignatius for the health and
progress of Students.
he thought it very material to take great care of their Health, that their
application should not be too violent, that they lost none of their sleep: That
they should not Study at unseasonable hours, nor be longer at it then two hours
together, without interruption. He ordered for them days of Recreation, and
even from that time, designed to procure Houses in the Country; where they
might go once every Week for their Diversion.

And in regard, that the extreme Poverty, to which he had been reduced in the
University at Paris, was one of the greatest obstacles in his Studies; He
thought it not expedient to oblige those, who Study to live upon Alms, and
therefore resolved, that such Colleges of the Society should have Foundations.

But if on one side, he has so great consideration and Indulgence, for the
young Men of his Order. He is no less strict on the other, to have them kept
close to their business. He will have them take pains and labor at it, always
to be Exercised, either in private Conferences, or in public Disputations. He
charge the Rectors of Colleges to excite and spur on those, that are heavy
and slothful, and to withdraw such from the Study of Sciences, who make no
progress in them, either for want of wit, or application; Lastly, to have
continually his Eye upon them, and even to observe whether their Masters do
their duty.

But to prevent, Piety joined with Study in the Society.
least the love of Science should insensibly weaken the Spirit of Devotion, he
failed not to prescribe diverse means for the maintenance and increase of it; of
which the Principal are, to frequent the Sacraments once a Week, to examine
their Conscience twice a Day, to make every Year the Spiritual Exercise, and to
renew their Vows twice in the Year, with great Preparatives, that is to say,
during three days of Retirement, of Meditations, of extraordinary Penance; of a
sincere declaration of their inward state to their Superior, and a general
Confession.

But judging it almost impossible, that much Study and speculation should not
in time cause some dissipation, and dryness in that Unction, and Spirit, which
belongs to a Religious life, he advised of an expedient, altogether new, to
reform the inward man, when their Studies were ended. To which purpose, he
appointed a third year of Noviceship, in which they should wholly apply
themselves to the Exercises of a Spiritual life, without the least attention to
human Learning. Whereas this second Noviceship is the last trial of those that
are admitted into the Society, the Saint would have them exercised more then
ever, in all those things that may improve them in the contempt of the World,
and of themselves: That, only minding Prayer, and the reading of such Books, as
may render them more Devout, and not more Learned, they should be employed to
teach the Christian Doctrine, and perform their Missions in Towns and Villages.

These are the ways, by which the General of the new Society, intended to form
Apostolical Men, that should be eminent in Science, and Virtue; So that his
first intention was, to raise such accomplished Workmen; But Nature, which
tends to perfection in all its works, does not always arrive to it. He
discerned that of many Persons, who were admitted, some there would be, who for
want of natural Talents, or of Qualities acquired, would not come up to that
perfection, which the Institute requires: He also at the same time
comprehended, that the productions of Nature, which are not the most perfect,
ceased not however to be profitable; and that an indifferent Talent, well
managed, might serve to great things; and that Workmen, who are not excelling,
may aid and assist the great Masters.

To this end, The different Degrees in the Society.
he constituted two different degrees in his Order; one of the Professed, and the
other of Spiritual Coadjutors. The Professed make publicly the three solemn Vows
of Religion, and add thereunto one of special Obedience to the Head of the
Church, in regard of Missions among the Faithful, and Infidels. The Coadjutors
also make in public the Vows of Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience; But they
make not the fourth concerning Missions. It follows from this constitution of
several Degrees, that there are three states in the Society, not to speak of
Lay Brothers, who are called Temporal Coadjutors. The first is of Scholars
approved, so they are called who are in the Way, during their Studies; The
second is of Spiritual Coadjutors; And the third of Fathers Professed, both which
last, are come to their Station.

Whereas the State of Trial does not imply a certain and fixed Situation, St.
Ignatius judged, that the Society, proposing to themselves to try their
Scholars, ought not to be obliged or bound to them, but under conditions; but,
whereas it was incongruous that young Men should so long remain at liberty, and
Masters of themselves, he judged, that for their particular good, and for that
of the whole Body, they ought, on their part, to be absolutely engaged to the
Society, by promising to live and die there, in the observance of the Vows of
Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience; and also by tying themselves in a Vow
express, to accept of any such degree, as should afterward be found to be
suitable for them.

By the Vows of Chastity, of Poverty, and of Obedience, the Founder unites them
to the Society, and makes them truly Religious men, since the Essence of a
Religious State consists in the Promise, which is made to God, of perpetually
observing the Evangelical Councils, as much as lies in us. But in ordaining,
that the Vows of the Scholars should be simple Vows, he leaves to the Society,
under the good pleasure of the Pope, the Power of Dispensing with them. By this
means, he leaves to the Scholars themselves the right and property of their
Goods, though he takes from them the power of using and disposing of them,
independently of their Superiors: and this is an usage, received in Spain, in
Italy, in Flanders, and in all other Countries, except in France, where the
Parliaments have not thought fit to permit, what the Holy See, and the Council
of Trent have granted, in approving the Institute.

As for the Fathers professed, who make the Essential part of the Society, the
Saint obliges them to an exact observance of Evangelical Poverty; and orders
that the Professed Houses shall have no Revenue, though Noviciates, and Colleges
ought to have them, in regard that it is not just for Novices, and Scholars to
live at the charge of the public, before they are in a condition of serving
it; not to say any thing of the hindrance, which the care of a livelihood might
bring to their Devotions and Studies.

On the other side, considering that Poverty is as it were the Bulwark of a
Religious State, and that the most flourishing Orders, are almost fallen to
Ruin, for not having well observed it, he ordains that the Professed shall make a
particular Vow, never to consent to change any thing in the Society, in
relation to Poverty, unless it be, to make it stricter then before.

After having made so many Ordinances concerning the Disposition and Form of
the whole Body, The General of the Society Perpetual and Absolute.
he made others relating to the Head, and the Members. He decreed in the first
place, that the General should be Perpetual and Absolute, according to what he
and his Companions had agreed upon, before the Society was approved by the Holy
See; and many reasons determined him to it.

As to the perpetuity, he thought that the first Charge being once filled, and
not to be vacant before the Death of the Incumbent, there would be no ground
for a Temptation in any, to aspire to it; That it would be less difficult to
find one Man, that was capable of the place, then to find many; That a General,
who is only temporary, can undertake no great thing in the Service of God,
because great enterprises require a considerable time to have them well
executed; Lastly, That perpetuity draws Reverence and Submission from
Inferiors, by giving the Superior a Character indelible.

As to the Authority of the General, he will have it to be Absolute, and he
leaves him the Power of making Provincials, Superiors of Professed Houses, and
Rectors of Colleges, and Noviciates. The aim of the Saint was, to keep all the
Members in a continual dependence of the Head, and to free the Body of the
Society, as much as might be, from those Commotions, which almost always
precede, and accompany Capitular Elections; and so to contrive it, that this
first Superior, being at a distance from the greatest part of his Subjects,
might Govern without Passion, and without any other Interest, but that of the
Order.

And to the end, that the General may have knowledge of so many Persons, whom
he never sees, besides that the Subordinate Superiors give him an Account in
general every year of those, that are under their charge, they also send him,
from three years to three years, Catalogues of every Province, in which are set
down the Age of every one, their Ability, their natural Tallents, their
advancement in Learning and in Virtue, in a word, all their good or bad
Qualities: And least such faithful Memories should be lost, or should fall into
the hands of Strangers, a Deputy, elected by the Provincial Congregation, which
is held every three years in all the Provinces, and which is composed of the
Rectors, and of the most Ancient Professed, carries these Catalogues to Rome,
with Instructions to inform the General of the State and Condition of the
Province, which deputes him.

Moreover there are extraordinary occasions, in which Informations are made, of
the life and capacity of particular Persons, the better to inform the General,
and this is done when any are to be admitted to Degrees, or to Superiorships in
the Society. But to the end, that these Informations may be certain and true,
or such at least, as that out of them, he may be able to collect the very
Truth, they are made in great secrecy, by three different Persons, who are to
have no Communication upon the matter, nor one to know what the other does: So
that the General, joining all these Reports together, and confronting the
particular Informations with the aforesaid Catalogues, may easily enough know,
what his Inferiors are capable of.

This first Superior would not be able to fulfill his Office, if he had not
Talents proportionable to a charge of so great extent. Wherefore St. Ignatius
in his constitutions draws the Caracter of a General, by marking down all the
Qualities, which he requires in him; one may say that he drew himself to the
life, not knowing what he did: But in regard the Idea which he had of himself,
was so far distant from that, which he framed of a General, we are not to
wonder, if he judged himself so incapable of that Office.

The General therefore, according to the Saints Idea, ought to be in a close
Union with God, in all his Exercises of Piety, and in all the Actions of his
Life, to obtain from his Divine Majesty a plentiful supply of Grace for the
whole Body of the Society, and that he would be graciously pleased to bless the
means and endeavors of his Servants in the gaining of Souls. It is moreover
necessary, that by his example, he should animate his Subjects to the practice
of all sorts of Virtues; that Charity to our Neighbor should eminently appear
in his Actions, with a true humility, to render him acceptable to God and to
Men; that he must have no irregular Passion; and that he be so composed in his
exterior, so circumspect in his words, that nothing may be observed, neither in
his Person, nor in his Conduct, but what is winning and edifying.

He ought so well to temper Severity with Mildness, as never to relent, or to
recede, from what he judges most conformable to the will of God; and that he
show such tenderness to his subjects, that even they, whom he reprehends, or
punishes, may be sensible of his Charity and Equity, how grievous soever his
reprehension or punishment should be to them.

He had need of no common strength and courage, to bear with the Infirmities of
his Inferiors; to undertake and execute the most difficult things for the
Service of God, and to be Proof against the Menaces, or the Entreaties of the
Powers of the Earth; neither to be dejected by cross Accidents, nor to be
elevated with favorable; always Master of himself, and of his Business; and
always ready to suffer death for the good of the Society, when the Honor of
Jesus Christ shall require it.

It is moreover necessary, that there be joined in him a solid Judgment with a
clear-sighted Wit, that he may be able to carry himself equally well, in
Matters of Speculation and of Practice. And though the Head of so many Learned
Men must have no common share of Learning, yet the Science of the Saints is
that which is most necessary for him, to discern the diverse interior Spirits,
and to cure the spiritual Diseases of those whom he Governs.

Yet there will be required in him great Prudence and Sagacity, for the
management of so many different Affairs, both within and without his Society;
which Prudence must be accompanied with no less Vigilance, to lay hold on all
occasions of acting for the good of his Community, and for the Glory of God;
and with equal Vigor to prosecute, and to finish what he undertakes.

For what concerns the Age, the Exterior, and the Health of a General, they
must be such as may suit with the Authority, the Dignity, and with the Burden
of his Office, that he may worthily perform all the Duties of it, to the
greater Glory of God. Greatness of Birth, Titles of Honor, and Riches formerly
enjoyed in the World, are Qualities not to be neglected in him. But above all,
regard must be had, that he who is elected, have a clear Reputation, and not
the least flaw in his past Conduct.

Lastly, he must be of the number of the Professed; and that, if he has not
all the Talents that were to be desired in him, he be at least furnished with
an exact Probity, a good Judgment, a Capacity proportionable to his Employment,
and a tender Love for the Society.

But St. Ignatius judging that the most accomplished Person could not suffice
alone, to do all that was necessary in a Government of so great extent, assigns
to the General four or five Persons of a consummated Experience, and of
indefatigable Application, to be his Coadjutors, whom he calls Assistants; and
they bear the Name of the Kingdom or Country from whence they come: for
Example, of Italy, of Spain, of Germany, of France, and of Portugal. Each of
these has the care of preparing the Matters of his Assistancy, and of putting
them in such an order as may facilitate their Expedition. It Is by them that the
Inferiors and the Superiors within their District, regularly make their
Application to the General; I say regularly, for if any of these Assistants be
upon a just ground suspected, they may Apply immediately to the Head.

Lastly, How the Authority of the General is tempered.
the Founder, upon reflection that the General might possibly at some time make
ill use of his Sovereign Authority, thought fit to qualify the Generalship
with some Counterpoizes or Correctives. For which end, these Assistants are not
chosen by the General, but by a general Congregation of the whole Society,
which also chooses the General: And though they be particularly established to ease
and assist him in his Charge, yet they are also, in some sort, to observe his
Conduct; so that in case he should commit a scandalous Fault, or should
dissipate the Revenue of Colleges, or should swerve from the sound Doctrine of
the Faithful, they may against his Will call a general Congregation to depose
him, according to Form; or if the Evil be pressing, and will not admit of so
much delay, they have power to depose him themselves, after having first by
Letters taken the Suffrages of the Provinces.

So that, as absolute as the General of the Society is, his Power is no longer
in assurance then his Conduct is regular. And upon this account it is, that St.
Ignatius has ordered, That the Provincial Congregations, which are held every
three years, should in the first place deliberate, Whether there be a necessity
of assembling a general Congregation; That the Deputies of each Province, when
arrived at Rome, should confer together upon this nice Point, without the
participation of the General; and that in the Assembly which is held upon this
Subject, every one should give his Vote in Writing, to the end, that being
secret, the Suffrages might be free.

Besides this, the General has always near him, as also the other Superiors
have, a Person discreet and virtuous, from whom upon occasions he is to receive
Admonitions. This Person, who is chosen by the general Congregation, is to
represent to the General, what he or the Assistants shall observe to be
Irregular in his Government, or in his Person; but he must do it with all
possible Respect and Moderation.

After all these Precautions and Preservatives against the ill Consequences
that possibly may attend the Absoluteness of a single Person, The Union of the
Members with their Head, and among themselves.
in a Religious Society, the Saint in the next place provides Means to preserve
the necessary Union which the Members ought to have with their Head, and among
themselves, without which no Body, whether Natural or Politic, can subsist;
And these are many. 1. That the General should have a fixed Habitation, and
that his ordinary Residence should be at Rome, that so an easy Communication
may be held with him from all the Parts of the World. 2. That the Provincials
and Rectors should write very often to him, that is to say, every Week, if
conveniently it might be done, or at the least every Month. 3. That every
particular Person may Address to him when he pleases, as a Child to his Parent,
to open to him his Wants, or tell him his Grievances, and that he should treat
him in a tender and Fatherly way. 4. That Obedience being the Bond which most
of all unites the Members with the Head, it should be preserved in its full
vigor; that a perfect dependence should be exacted from the subordinate
Superiors, upon those who are immediately above them; and that according to the
Rules of Subordination, the Rectors should not be less subject to the
Provincials, and the Provincials to the General, then each particular Person is
to the one or to the other. 5. That notwithstanding the diversity of Climates,
and the antipathy of Nations, they should observe every where the same form of
Life; That every one should prevent his Brother in good Offices, and kindly
treat him upon all occasions; That they should express a particular affection
to Strangers; and in conclusion, That all Breakers of Fraternal Charity should
be rigorously punished.

But to hinder the Body from altering and decaying with Time, Means found out
by St. Ignatius to preserve the Society.
he found out two Expedients very efficacious. The first consists in Expelling
all scandalous or incorrigible Persons, and such who make Dissension, or
machinate, or contrive any thing against the Order. And the Saint Ordains, That
no regard should be had either to their Birth or to their Learning; nor that
the General himself should be spared, if found guilty of such Misdemeanors. He
also Wills, That such Persons, who through their Laziness are wholly useless;
and such who have essential Impediments, which at first they did not discover,
should be Discarded. But he will have Rules observed in the Dismission of all
sorts of People; That no body should be put out without a manifest Cause, and
mature Deliberation; That the Scholars approved, and the Spiritual Coadjutors,
should in such Case have Dispensations from their Vows, which being only
simple, are dispensible; And if at their Entrance, or afterward, they have
given any thing to the Society, it should be punctually restored to them; That
care be had to save the Reputation, as much as may be, of such as are
Dismissed; and that if the Fault for which they are Excluded be not of it self
notorious, it should be kept secret.

He will not have them Expelled only for Corporal Infirmities, especially if
they be contracted since their Admission. In conclusion, he Orders, That when
any one is to be Dismissed, the Superiors should use the same Precautions which
skilful Chyrurgeons are wont to have, when a Leg or an Arm is to be cut off.

The Second extraordinary Means which St. Ignatius has contrived, to make his
Order continue and flourish, is to Exclude all Ambition, and to keep their best
Subjects within the Body, by obliging the Professed to make a Vow, never to
seek after any Superiority in the Society, nor any Preferment of Prelature out
of it; but to inform the General of all such whom they shall know to be any
ways engaged in such Contrivances.

The Saint, not content only to charge the Conscience of such as shall solicit
for any Office, also renders them incapable of ever possessing any, from the
moment that they are found guilty of such Solicitation. As for Ecclesiastical
Dignities, they are not only forbid to seek them directly or indirectly, but
they are moreover bound not to accept of them upon any account, unless the
Supreme Pastor by express Command, and under pain of Mortal sin, should oblige
them to it. Thus the Founder of the Jesuits provides that his Religious,
spending their days in the Service of their Neighbor, shall propose to
themselves no other Emolument but the Glory of Jesus Christ. And to render
their Disinteressedness more perfect, according to the Example of the holy
Apostle St. Paul, who testifies of himself, that he had rather die then Preach
for Gain, St. Ignatius Ordains, That none of his Body shall receive any thing
by way of Salary or Recompense, for any of their Functions. This is the true
Platform of an Institute, of which so many false Copies have been made, which
have almost equally imposed upon the Wise, and upon the Simple.

After he had traced out his Constitutions in the manner whith I have related,
The Constitutions of the Society divided into Ten Parts*
he afterward gave them a new Form, and divided them into Ten Parts, which
have an essential Connection. The First Part contains what Qualities are
necessary for Admission, and what hinder it, or make it void.

But in regard that all those who are received, do not always answer
Expectation, and that it will be necessary to Dismiss some of them; the Second
Part sets down the Reasons for which they are to be Dismissed, and the Manner
of doing it. Whereas those who continue, and are upon trial, till such time as
they are Incorporated into the Society, have need of help and assistance to
become good Workmen. The Third and Fourth Parts treat of Devotion, of Health,
and of Studies. These four Parts contain that which disposes to the Profession
of the four Vows. Wherefore the Fifth Explicates the Conditions of this eminent
Degree, and also those of the inferior Degree. The Sixth and the Seventh
prescribe Rules to the Professed, and to the Spiritual Coadjutors, for their
Conduct in their Employments according to the Institute. These Seven Parts
regard the whole Body of the Order; the Two following more nearly relate to the
Head; how he is to be qualified, the Form of his Election, his Authority, and
all that which appertains to him. Lastly, the Tenth sets down several Means for
the Preservation and Growth of the Society.

He wrote all his Constitutions in Spanish, and Father John Plancus, his
Secretary, Translated them into Latin. They are filled with the Spiritual
Unction of Grace, which an attentive Reader may easily feel; and an Apostolical
Zeal is every where so diffused in them, that in every Page, and almost in
every Line, these following Words are found: For the Good of Souls, For the
Service of our Neighbor, For the Honor of His Divine Majesty, For the greater
Glory of God.

Whereas Laws do not always descend to Successors with Explanations, but that
they have often need to be interpreted, the Saint adds to his, in Form of a
Gloss, Chapter by Chapter, certain Declarations which have the same Authority
with the Constitutions, and have also the same Spirit.

Though before he wrote them, he had read the Rules and Histories of other
Religious Orders, yet at the time of Writing them he never had in his Chamber
any other Book but the New Testament, and Thomas a Kempis. During that time
there was often seen a Flame over his Head, not much unlike that which appeared
in Tongues of Fire over the Apostles, when the Holy Ghost descended from
Heaven: And his Hours were spent in Tears of Devotion, in holy Ardors, in
Raptures, and in Celestial Apparitions, as we read in a Paper-Book written with
his own Hand, which Providence hindered from being burnt with many other Papers
of the same nature, which he caused to be cast into the Fire some few days
before his Death.

THE LIFE OF St. IGNATIUS. The Fourth BOOK.
WHile Father Ignatius was thus Employed at Rome, The Society begins to spread
in Europe.
in doing good Works, and in Writing the Constitutions of his Order, many Towns
of Italy, Spain, Germany, and of the Low Countries, sent to him for Workmen of
his own Training, and offered him Colleges for the Forming of more. They
followed in this the Example of John thee Third, King of Portugal, who having
sent Father Xaverius to the Indies, and intending to send from time to time
fresh Succors to Second him in his Apostolical Labors, Founded the First
College of the Society in the University of Conimbria, to be a Nursery of
Preachers, and of Apostles for the new World.

Alcala, Valentia, Gandia, Collen, Lovain, and Padua, were the first Cities
which desired to have the Children of Ignatius. In a little time they were
sought for by all Catholic Countries, excepting France, where the Society,
though in that Place it had its Birth, made the least progress; whether it were
that the Heretics, who were then spread about in the Kingdom, made it their
Business to render it odious; or that the War being renewed between Charles the
Fifth, and Francis the First, they did not love a Society, whose Head and
principal Members were Natives of Spain: So that, far from being desired by the
Towns of France, those of the Society who Studied at Paris, and were not
Frenchmen, were obliged to leave the Kingdom, in Obedience to an Edict, which
banished thence all Subjects of the Emperor.

At the same time many Learned Men of all Nations, The General receives and
dismisses William Postel.
and even French, embraced the Institute of Ignatius; they came to Rome, to put
themselves under the Direction of the Saint, and to learn of him the Science of
Salvation. One of the most eminent was William Postel, born at Barenton in
Normandy, and Professor Royal in the University of Paris: He had in point of
Learning the greatest Wit of his Age, vivacious, penetrating, and joined with a
prodigious Memory; an universal Genius, which was ignorant of nothing, and
which excelled particularly in the knowledge of Tongues: Besides the Latin, the
Greek, the Hebrew, the Chaldaic, and the Syriack, he so perfectly knew all
those that are now spoken, and are the living Languages, that he has been heard
to say, he could go the whole Round of the Earth without an Interpreter.
Francis the First, a Lover of Learning, and the Queen of Navarr his Sister, not
unskilled in Literature, looked upon Postel, as the Miracle of the Age. The
greatest Persons, and among the rest, the Cardinals of Tournon, of Lorain, and
of Armagnac, were greedy of his Company, and in a manner, made their Court to
him. The most Learned admired him, and in speaking of him, it was a common
Saying, That there came out of his Mouth as many Oracles as Words.

The Reputation of the Society of Jesus all Europe over, raised a Curiosity in
Postel, to see the Founder of this new Order, which made profession of
Learning. Being come to Rome on this account, and having seen Father Ignatius
more then once, he was so charmed with his way of Proceeding, his Maxims, and
with the Character of his Institute, that Visiting the Seven Churches, he made
a Vow to enter into his Society. And afterward with so much instance he
pressed his Admission, and expressed so much zeal for the Conversion of Jews
and Idolaters, that Father Ignatius, who well knew the Abilities of Postel,
could not refuse to receive him.

But the Saint soon perceived that a fair outside had dazzled his Eyes; whereas
he knew that Science breeds Pride, and that without profound Humility, the
greatest Wits are the least proper to do great things in the Service of God, he
himself took the charge of the Conduct of Postel. This Novice, who was about
Forty years old, and who before his Voyage into Italy, with much Reading of
Rabbis, and Contemplating the Stars, had raised Visions in his Brain
concerning a new Coming of Jesus Christ, could not so well contain himself, but
that sometimes these Extravagancies would come from him. The Father, who found
at first, that Rabbinism and Judicial Astrology had a little turned his Brain,
used all possible means for Two years together, to set him right in his Wits:
After having tried charitable Remonstrances, and severe Reprehensions, he put
him into the hands of Laynez and Salmeron, who endeavored to undeceive him with
solid Reasons, and advised him to read only St. Thomas. He moreover Addressed
him to the Pope's Vicar, a Man Learned, Prudent, and every way Accomplished for
the curing a distempered Wit. But seeing that all these Remedies were
unprofitable, and that Postel became every day more and more Visionary, to the
degree of playing the Prophet, he Expelled him from his Order, and forbad all
those of the Society to have any Commerce with him.

The Event did justify the Conduct of Ignatius. As soon as Postel was
Dismissed, he set himself to Dogmatize in Rome, saying, for a color of his
leaving the Order, That it was not to be wondered at, if he could not agree
with the holy Man Ignatius, since even St. Paul, and St. Barnabas were not of
the same mind. Afterward retiring to Venice, where he thought he should be
more in safety. He was so infatuated concerning a certain Religious Woman,
called Mother Joan, as to hold forth, That in this Coming of Jesus Christ,
which according to his Predictions was to happen in few years, she should be
the Redeemeress of Women, as Jesus Christ was to be the Redeemer of Men; and he
composed a Book on this Subject, Entitled, De Virgin Veneta.

As we wander without end, when we leave the straight Line of Truth, and
whereas Fanaticism borders upon Phrenzy, Postel published in his other Books,
That all Sects should be saved by Jesus Christ; That the greatest part of the
Mysteries of Christianity were only Fables; That the Angel Raphael had revealed
to him the Divine Secrets, and that his Writings were the Dictates of Jesus
Christ himself.

So many Impieties would perhaps have cost him his Life, if he had not been
judged Distracted. He was shut up for his Extravagances, and remained several
years in Prison; at last he made his escape, and after having a long while
roam'd about, he returned into France by the way of Geneva, more Libertine, and
more Extravagant then ever. Yet at last it pleased God to give him his Wits,
and the Grace to acknowledge his Impieties, in an extreme old Age, and to die
in the Communion of the Church. It is said that he lived an hundred years, and
that about the end of his days, he in a manner grew young again, so that his
white Hairs returned to be black.

About the time that Father Ignatius Expelled Doctor Postel, He chooses Laynez
and Salmeron for the Council of Trent.
his Holiness Paul the Third, who ever since his Promotion, still had it in his
thoughts to remedy the Evils of Christendom, and who had lately made Peace
between the Emperor and the King of France, demanded two Divines of the
Society, who should Assist in his Name with his Legates, at the General Council
to be held at Trent. The Father chose James Laynez and Alphonsus Salmeron; both
of them indeed very young, the first being Four and thirty, and the other but
Thirty years old, but both of them so Learned, and so Instructed in the Matters
of Religion, that the old Divines looked upon them as their Masters.

Laynez, whom the Venetians obtained, from the time that the Institute was
first Approved by the Holy See, was Employed over the whole State of the
Signiory; and the chief of his Business was to preserve Venice, Padua, and the
other Towns, from the Errors of Germany, where they had insensibly crept in*
Salmeron did the same at Modena, whither after his return from Ireland, he had
been called by the Cardinal John Moron, Bishop of the Town; into which Place
those new Heresies had also found their way.

Though Father Ignatius did much rely upon the Virtue both of the one and the
other, The Advertisements which he gives to Laynez and Salmeron.
yet the fear he had least the Title of The Pope's Divines, in the most August
Assembly of the World, should a little dazzle Men so young, obliged him to give
them, before their departure, some Advertisements and Instructions for their
Conduct. After recommending to them in general, to seek in all things, during
the Council, the greatest Glory of God, and the common Good of the Church,
without neglecting their Neighbors Souls, and their own Perfection, he
prescribes to them in Particular these following Rules. Always to give their
Opinions with modesty, and in those occasions to show more Humility then
Learning; To observe with great attention the Sentiments and Reasons of those
who first Opine, that afterward they may either speak or be silent, as the
Matter requires; When any Points are Debated, always to set forth the Reasons
on both sides, that they may not appear wedded to their own Judgment; and never
to quote any living Author for a Guarrantie of their Opinions, that they may
not seem to be tied up to any Man's Judgment; To Visit Hospitals at least every
Fourth day, to Catechize Children, to Preach Penance to the People; but
without touching in their Sermons upon any Point of Controversy which may
perplex their Understandings; but only in general exhorting them to submit
their Judgments to the Decisions of the Church. Lastly, to excite their
Auditors incessantly to pray for the good success of the Council. This farther
Advertisement he gives them, That as in the Assemblies where Questions of Faith
are Treated, a moderate and concise Discourse is most suitable; so when they
come into the Chair, they should be more diffuse and vehement.

He afterward declared to them, that these Directions did as well regard
Claude le Jay, who was at that time in Germany, much employed in making head
against the Heretics, and whom Cardinal Otho Bishop of Ausburg, was upon
sending to Trent in Quality of his Divine, and of his Legate. He added, That
when they should be all three together, they should live in a perfect Concord,
without interfering in Opinions and Judgments; That every Night they should
confer upon what had passed that Day, and deliberate every Morning upon what
they had to do the rest of the Day; That they should let slip no occasion of
doing good Offices to every body, and to themselves, in admonishing one another
of their Faults, in not leaving any thing uncorrected, and in mutually
animating one another to lead an unblameable Life.

The satisfaction which Father Ignatius had to see the Council opened at last,
He reconciles the King of Portugal and the Pope.
after so many Lets and Delays, was much allayed by the Misunderstanding then
happening between the Pope, and the King of Portugal, which arose upon the
account of the famous Michael de Silva. This Portuguez, descended from the
Illustrious House of the Counts de Portalegre, and Son of Don Diego de Silva,
who had been Governor to the King Don Emanuel, having resided a long time with
the Popes, Leo the Tenth, Adrian the Sixth, and Clement the Seventh, was called
back from his Embassy of Italy by Don John the Third, Successor to Don Emanuel,
and provided at his return, not only with the Bishopric of Viseu, but also
with the Office of Protonotury, of Secretary of the Kingdom. He was afterward
nominated Cardinal by Paul the Third, who had known him in the former
Pontificates.

Whereas his Promotion was properly the Work of Cardinal Alexander Farnesius,
his Friend, and the Pope's Nephew. Portugal being wholly a Stranger to it, it
shockt the King, who would not have his Subjects owe their Preferment to any
but himself: So that this Prince would never be induced to give way that the
Bishop of Viseu should receive his Cap.

The Bishop, persuaded that Princes do not easily recede, and that having lost
the good Graces of his Master, he had more yet to fear, departed secretly out
of Portugal, and went into Italy, whither Fortune seemed to call him. Being
come to Rome, he was made Cardinal with great Solemnity, and his Disgrace in
Portugal, joined with his great Merit, were the occasion of extraordinary
Honors done him.

The King, irritated with the Flight, and with the Reception of the Bishop,
began his Resentment by depriving him of the Revenue of his Bishopric, and by
forbidding his Subjects, under grievous Penalties, to have any Communication
with him. He highly complained of the Court of Rome, and above all, against
Cardinal Farnesius, who Employed Cardinal de Viseu in the most important
Affairs of the Church. That which galled him most, was, that Cardinal
Contarini, Legate of Paul the Third with the Emperor Charles the Fifth, being
dead in his Legatship of Spain, they sent Michael de Silva in his Place, with
the Character, and the full Power of a Legate Apostolical.

The Pope no less displeased on his side, condemned the Proceedings of the King
of Portugal, and upon occasions, made his Complaints to Father Ignatius, who
was wont to speak to him of this Prince, as of the most Religious Monarch in
Europe. The Breach began to widen, and to produce ill effects in behalf of
Religion, when the Father undertook to heal it. In the first place, he had his
recourse to God, in whose hands are the Hearts of the Great ones of the Earth,
and he ordered Prayers in his whole Society, to draw a Blessing from Heaven
upon his undertaking. He wrote at the same time to Lisbon, where his Councels
were well received: He treated with Cardinal Farnesius, and with the Pope, who
both had confidence in him, and he so well managed the Parties, and the
Business, on both sides, that so nice and so difficult a matter was easily
composed. In testimony of a sincere Reconciliation, the King restored Cardinal
de Viseu into Possession of the Revenues of his Bishopric, and the Pope
granted to the King considerable Privileges, in favor of the Tribunal of the
Inquisition, Established in Portugal.

These Foreign Employments did not hinder Father Ignatius from discharging at
home all the Duties of his Charge. His Domestical Government,
He made diverse Regulations, according to the diversity of Occurrences; He gave
all necessary Orders, but after a way, rather of Entreating, then Commanding.
In distributing employments, he had regard to the inclinations of those whom he
employed, though on their parts, he will have them indifferently disposed to any.

It was his custom to choose persons of great experience, for Offices in the
Society; And yet he would not stick sometimes to put in less experienced
subjects, to govern under him in Rome: This he did, to try their Talents, and
to form them himself, by observing their deportments. But he never sent in
laborious missions any but Men of tried virtue. He spared the weak, and the
less perfect, sometimes with design of making them take notice of their own
weakness, and to the end, that shame should stir them up to become more
Vigorous; or if he gave them Employments of some hardship, it was at their own
request, and upon condition, that if they found themselves over burdened, they
should freely declare it to him.

Nevertheless, when he met with those rough, indocible tempers, whose harshness
of Nature was accompanied with a robust Constitution, he would load them with
employments, harder then the rest; and if peradventure they fell sick, he was
not much troubled at it, as thinking, that the Infirmity of their Body, might
tame their dispositions, and prove beneficial to their Souls.

When they asked him any thing of Consequence, he commonly told them the
reasons he had to refuse it them, to the end, that he who obtained it not,
should be the better content, and that he, who received a savor, should be
more reserved in asking new ones. But for the most part, he never denied any,
but when his Conscience would not permit him to grant it; and even his refusal
he sweetened with such obliging terms, that they always went away satisfied.
His very reprehensions he seasoned with so much civillity, or at least he so
tempered them, that although they were smart and penetrating, yet they were not
harsh nor reflecting.

He had so good an opinion of his own, that he could not believe any thing,
that was said against their Honor; and he loved them all so well, that every
one thought himself to be the most beloved: He so accommodated himself to the
humor of every one in particular, as if his own had been tranform'd into
theirs, and this with an Air so plain, and natural, that one would have said,
he was born that which he seemed to be.

Though he would have the Novices well tried, His Conduct toward the Novices.
yet he treated them like tender Plants, newly transplanted, which still
partake of the Soil, whence they came. A Rich man, who was received into the
Society, had a Crucifix well wrought, and of great Prince, of which he was very
fond; the General let him have it. In the mean time the Novice made great
progress in Virtue, and particularly labored in the overcoming himself. As
soon as the General perceived it. This go's well, says he, since the Brother is
not only disengaged from the World, but also from himself, we may venture to
take out of his hands the Image of Christ Crucified, for now he has him in his
Heart. And in effect he took away the Crucifix, and the Novice, who was now
well weaned, without difficulty parted with it.

The Conduct, which he observed toward Persons Illustrious, by their Birth, or
by their Learning, who embraced the Institute, is very remarkable. He showed
great consideration for them in the beginning, he called them Counts,
Marquesses, Doctors, till such time as they grew ashamed to be called by those
Names, and that they asked themselves not to be distinguished. But when he saw,
that they began to relish the Maxims of the Gospel, and that they marched in
the way of Perfection, there were none whom he mortified more. He took pleasure
in making a Man of Quality stoop to the meanest Offices, in humbling a Doctor,
and he gave it not over, till he had quite made them forget what they had been.
This he did, first to let the World know that among the Jesuits, advantages of
Birth and of Knowledge, are of no reckoning without Humility, and that, to be
great among them, they must be little in their own Eyes; and in the second
place, because a Religious Society always receives from such sort of Persons,
either a great deal of Honor, or a great deal of Confusion.

There was nothing which he would leave undone, to strengthen those, who began
to grow weary of carrying the Yoke of Jesus Christ, and were in danger of
falling from their Vocation. He went one night to the Chamber of a Father, who
had resolved to return into the World, and after many remonstrances, both of
the Rewards and Punishments of the next Life, he made such impressions upon his
Heart, that this Father fell at the feet of the General, and offered to undergo
what Punishment he would Impose upon him. One part of your Penance (said
Father Ignatius embracing him) shall be, never to repent you more of having
served God; for the other part, I will take it upon me, and perform it my self.

A young German, who had great Natural parts, was tempted to leave the Order.
Father Ignatius, who had taken him in, and judged him very proper for the
Ministry of the Gospel, did what he could to keep him: But the German, so
violent was his temptation, would harken to nothing. The Father seeming to
yield to him, entreated the Novice to stay at least some few days in the House,
and to live as he pleased, without being subject to any Rule. He accepted the
offer, and lived at first with all the liberty of a Man, who had shaken off the
Yoke of Discipline. But after a while, he grew ashamed of his way of living,
when he considered, how modest and regular the rest were; and in conclusion he
effectually repented of his inconstancy.

If the General discovered, that this sort of Temptations came from any secret
sin, or from a vicious habit, he endeavored to find out the root of the
Disease, and exhorted the Culpable to make an exact Confession. To engage them
to do it, he often made use of the same pious Artifice, which he had formerly
tried with success upon that Religious Man, whom he reclaimed from Libertinism,
and would recount to them at large the disorders of his own Worldly life. He
would never permit them to be left alone; and whereas the night is commonly the
time, in which the Devil, and Melancholy most torment those, who are so
tempted, he ordered that some prudent, and agreeable Companion should lie near
them, to entertain them when they waked, and with wholesome Discourses by
little and little to dissipate those black Vapors, which so distempered them.

Lastly, If all this were unsuccesful, he called together all the Fathers, and
desired him, who had a mind to depart, to tell them his reasons, hoping, that a
public Declaration from them all, would make the poor wretch sensible of his
delusion, or that God would inspire the Fathers with such Arguments, as might
convince him.

The General in his Government was no less careful of the Corporal Infirmities
of his subjects, His care for the Sick.
then of their Spiritual. He Ordained in the beginning of his Generalship, that
as soon as any of them fell sick, they should advertise him of it, and that
twice a day they should come to tell him, whether the Brother, that had care of
the Provisions, did his part in furnishing them with all necessaries. He would
have nothing spared in their behalf, and that if Money were wanting for it,
they should sell their very Movables, for the relief of the sick.

The Physician having one day prescribed some choice Meat for a Lay Brother,
whose Stomach was very weak, and the General being told, that there was not two
Shillings in the House; let them be laid out, said he, for the Brother; we that
are in health, and have good Stomachs, will content our selves to day only with
bread. Two other Brothers, who were disign'd for Domestic services, the one a
Spaniard, and the other a Frenchman, were scarce entered into the Noviceship,
but a Fever took them. There were at that time many sick in the House, and all
the Chambers were full; besides Provisions at that time were very scanty in the
Family. Some advised Father Ignatius to send the two Brothers to the Hospital:
By no means, said he, it would be a great shame, that we should have no place
among us, for those, who have left all for God.

His business did never hinder him from often visiting the sick, and when the
Disease was dangerous, or very painful, he would many times rise in the night,
to see the Patient, and to ease his pain with consolatory Discourses. Nor could
he rest in his Bed, when any under his charge, had any Distemper extraordinary.
A young Brother being upon some urgent occasion let Blood in the night, the
General not content only with visiting him, and with leaving People to tend
him, sent twice or thrice to see him. Such as know not, how tender and
condescending Charity is, will perhaps be surpised, that to divert and
recreate a certain Father, whom Melancholy had made insupportable both to
himself and others, Father Ignatius should cause some of the Novices, that had
been trained to Music, to Sing and Play about his Bed.

But as tender as he was of his Children, he would have them in time of their
sickness, to be under a perfect submission, and to look upon their Disease, as
the gift of God. If any words of Impatience came from them, or if they were
froward and peevish, as soon as they were recovered, he faild not to punish
them.

To speak in general, when any had committed a fault, which deserved
Punishment, the first thing, which the Saint did, was to make the Offender
sensible of his Transgression, and then he engaged him to set his own Penance,
which if it were too rigorous, the Saint would always moderate it. When those,
who had Transgressed, did amend, he treated them afterward in the same manner,
as if they had never offended; he did not only forget the fault, but by his way
of proceeding, he made the Offender himself in a manner forget it too, and lose
part of that shame, which sticks after a fall, and which sometimes disheartens
Men in the way of Virtue.

He often gave very great Penances for light faults, His Zeal for regular
Discipline.
if they were against Religious Discipline, being persuaded, that if it were
not rigorously maintained in a new founded Order, it would after a while be
quite lost. He said, that what appeared nothing in it self, might be the rise
of greatest disorders, and that small faults publicly committed, were at least
bad examples, which lead to a dissolution of Government.

Nor would he suffer any innovation in the Society, but always vigorously
opposed it, even to the treating those, as Enemies, and Rebels, who offered to
change any thing in the Institute, though under pretense of making it more
perfect. He did not this, because he would have his subjects content themselves
with a common degree of Sanctity; for he continually excited them to get up to
the perfection of their State, proposing to them, what God required from them,
according to the Spirit of their Vocation; and this his Solicitude, was not
confined only to Rome, or to Italy, but extended it self over the whole body,
which now did increase daily, and spread it self; and his principal care was,
to banish out of it, the profane Spirit of the World.

Being informed, that Antonio Araos, whose Spiritual labors were very
successful in the Court of Spain, seemed a little too much to look after the
conversation, and favor of great Persons, upon supposition of gaining Credit to
his Ministry, he sent him a sharp reprimand, advertizing him, that the
necessary Authority for Ministers of the word of God, was much better gained by
the Exercises of Christian Humility, then by the Commerce of Great ones.

But it seems a little sttrange, that perceiving Simon Rodriguez to have a
great interest in the King, and the Court of Portugal, he should have the
thoughts of calling that holy Man back into Italy, fearing least the World
might insensibly change him. And this he had done, if the King of Portugal had
not himself opposed it, earnestly requesting Father Ignatius, that he would
leave him Rodriguez to instruct and educate the Prince, his Son.

A young Portuguez, called Antonio Monis, who had been received into the
Society about three or four years, fled out of the College of Conimbria, upon
the only motive of Libertinism. After having lurked some time at Lisbon,
without daring to appear, he rambl'd about all Spain, and his curiosity led him
to Montserrat. This holy Place put good thoughts into him: He grew sensible of
his Apostasy, when he beheld the Sword of Ignatius, which still hung up near
the Altar of our Lady; and his Heart being touched, he said, with the Prodigal
Child, I will go to my Father. He did so, but being come to Rome, he had not
the confidence to appear before Father Ignatius, who was informed of his
desertion; but he writ to him from the Hospital of St. Anthony of the
Portuguez, whither his necessities had forced him to retire.

The Father immediately took him out of the Hospital, and provided him with all
necessaries; but he would not receive him into his House, he made him lodge
close by, and so for twelve days kept him at a distance. Monis spent that time
in bewailing his Crime, and the fervor of his Repentance went so far, that he
visited the seven Churches of Rome, disciplining himself all the way. Father
Ignatius at last received him again among his Children, and by diverse marks of
his kindness, gave him to understand, that he no longer looked upon him, as a
Desertor: This Charitable Reception did not hinder the Portuguez, wounded with
remorse of his sin, from falling into a lingering Fever, which by degrees
brought him to his end. But he conceived no little comfort and joy, to die in
the Arms of his good Father, and he ceased not from praising the Mercy of God,
which had recalled him into the Society.

In this while, Le Jay, Laynez, and Salmeron, at the Council of Trent.
Father Ignatius had news, that the three Divines, who were come to Trent, to
assist in the Council which was now begun, did worthily maintain the Honor of
the Society, and the Interest of the Church. Le Jay, who first arrived there,
immediately entered into the good opinion, and esteem of the Cardinal of Trent,
who consulted with him upon the most difficult affairs. Salmeron pronounced
before the Fathers of the Council a very Eloquent Oration in Latin, which
gained the applause of the whole Assembly. Laynez made himself admired from the
first time, that he spoke; and they all three made their profound Learning so
eminently appear, that the Popes Legates gave them the Employment, of making a
Collection of all the errors of the Ancient, and Modern Heretics, with all the
Authorities of Scripture, Fathers, Councils, and Doctors, which directly oppose
them.

But that, which most pleased Father Ignatius, was, that when they were not
employed upon the business of the Council, they visited Hospitals, Catechized
Children, and begged Alms, not only for poor Catholic Soldiers, who had served
in Germany, of whom the Town was full, but also for themselves. The Popes
Legates seeing their Cassocks all worn out, caused new ones to be made for
them, that they might appear more decently in the Council; but they, when the
Sessions were over, did still put on their old ones again.

Of all the Transactions they duly gave an Account to their General, and asked
his Advice in difficult matters. Having once made their Application to him, to
know, how they were to carry themselves, upon the subject of certain new
opinions, proposed by some of the Prelates, which did a little lean toward the
Sentiments of Luther, though they seemed not to be very unreasonable, he
nevertheless expressly Commanded them, not to leave them unoppos'd, declaring to
them, that in matter of Religion, the most plausible Novelties were often the
most dangerous; that speculative Arguments did not render a Doctrine more
Catholic, and that, till such time as the Church shall decide, what we are to
believe of such suspected Opinions, we should have a care how we judge, or
speak favorably of them. They took his Answers for Oracles; and Laynez did
usually say, that if Father Ignatius were at the Council, he would do great
Service to the Church.

In the mean time, the Emperor not being able to resist the Prayers of the
Catholics, declared War against the Protestants, who would not acknowledge the
Council. Frederick Duke of Saxony, and William Landgrave of Hesse, were at the
Head of an Army of fourscore thousand Men, who were in their March against the
Emperor's Forces, so that, whereas the troubles of Germany for some time had
interrupted the Council, Father Ignatius, who had need of Laynez at Florence,
would have called him from Trent, during this Recess. But the Cardinal of
Sancta Croce, the Popes Legate, stopped him; not by his absolute Authority, nor
without writing to Father Ignatius: For after having represented to him, that
they could not spare Laynez at Trent, because he was appointed to make an exact
Collection of the Heresies, which regard the Sacraments, he entreated him not
to take it amiss, that he detained the Father, at least till such time, as the
Collection was finished; adding withal, that if his reasons did not seem to him
sufficient, he would dismiss him upon his next orders.

The Bishop of Trieste dying about that time, Le Jay nominated to the
Bishopric of Trieste.
Ferdinand King of the Romans, who had Zeal for Religion, and to whom Trieste
with its dependancies belonged, as being a Town within the Precincts of Istria,
of which the Archdukes of Austria are Supreme, thought this Diocese, being a
near Neighbor to Germany, would require a very Learned, and Vigilant Pastor.
He cast his eyes upon Claud le Jay, who was at Trent, and immediately wrote to
him about it. The Prince had been informed, what this Missioner of the Society
had done, at Ratisbon, at Ingolstat, and at Nurenburg, in the Conversion of
Heretics; and he had been himself a witness of the good effects, which his
Sermons had wrought at Worms, among the Faithful.

The nomination of le Jay was a stroke of Thunder to him, Le Jay refuses the
Bishopric of Trieste.
and its said, that he was like to die with grief: He was a Man of the greatest
modesty, and who had proposed to himself all his life time, to shun Honor and
Dignity, according to the Spirit of his Father Ignatius. He answered the King
of the Romans; that so heavy a charge was above his strength; that dignities
did not suit with the Society of Jesus, and that Bishops were not thence to be
chosen. At the same time he informed Father Ignatius of King Ferdinands design,
and humbly requested him vigorously to mediate with the Pope, to break it,
protesting withal, that if Obedience did not tie him to attend the Council, he
would hide himself where no body should find him.

This refusal served only to confirm Ferdinand in the choice which he had made.
He sent to Venice the Bishop of Labac, his Confessor, to prevail upon le Jay,
whom the Popes Legates had made go thither, against his will. But understanding
that the Bishop could work nothing upon a Man, whom principles of Conscience
had rendered inflexible, he earnestly entreated the Pope, that he would lay his
Commands upon Father le Jay, to accept of the Bishopric of Trieste; and he
ordered his Ambassador to follow the business with all Vigor at Rome.

Father Ignatius, St. Ignatius opposes the Promotion of le Jay.
who had been alarmed, when he first heard the nomination of le Jay, was much
more so, when he saw, that the Pope and the Cardinals did approve it. Whereas
he was persuaded, that the true interest of the Church required, that his
Society should be extempt from all Ecclesiastical Dignities, he spared no pains
to convince the Sacred College of it. But finding that they were not of his
sentiment, and that Ferdinand still persisted in his, he took a course, which
seemed to him the most Natural, and it was, to write to Ferdinand himself.
Having therefore according to his custom, implored the assistance of Heaven,
and caused the business to be retarded by the entermise of Margaret of Austria,
whose conscience he governed, after the death of Father Codurus, he writ in
these terms to the King of the Romans.

We are not ignorant of your Majesty's Zeal for the good of your People, nor of
the affection, you are pleased to have for our Society. We praise God for both,
and we humbly pray his Divine Majesty, to furnish you with means happily to
accomplish, what your Piety undertakes.

But in rendering you our most humble thanks, for the Favors and Graces you
vouchsafe to heap upon us, we must be bold to say, you cannot oblige us more,
then by assisting us to march in the strait way of our Institute.
Ecclesiastical Dignities are so contrary to it, that according to the Idea,
which we have of it, nothing is more capable to alter and destroy it. For
those, who formed this Society, made it their principal end, to Preach the
Gospel in all parts of the World; and its true Spirit, is to seek the Salvation
of Souls, and the Honor of God, without being confined to employments or
places. Religius Societies no longer can subsist, then they preserve their
primitive Spirit; and if ours be lost, or taken from us, how can our Body be
kept alive? We are but nine Professed, of which four or five have already refused
Prelatures: If one of us now should accept a Bishopric, will not the rest
believe, they have right to do the same? And when the Members are thus
separated, what will become of the Community? This little Order since its Birth
has made no small progress by the way of Humility, and of Poverty: If the
People should come to see us Clothed with Honors and Dignity, will they not be
scandalized at the change of our Maxims, and of our Conduct? And will they not
receive Impressions of us, which may render us useless in the Ministry of the
Gospel? But what need we offer our reasons to your Majesty, we implore your
Goodness and your Wisdom: We lay our selves under your Royal Protection: We
humbly supplicate for the service of Jesus Christ, and for the good of Souls,
that you will vouchsafe to maintain, to the Honor of his Divine Majesty, this
little new born Society. May it please the same Infinite Goodness, long to
preserve your Sacred Person, and to pour on you all sorts of Benedictions.

The Letter of the General had all the effect that could be desired. Ferdinand
laid down his thoughts of Father le Jay, for the Bishopric of Trieste; and he
charged his Ambassador to inform the Pope of it. The occasion seemed favorable
to Father Ignatius fully to instruct the Pope upon this Subject. One day he
represented to him, He declares his reasons to the Pope, of refusing
Ecclesiastical Dignities.
that this small Society, which in the whole number, did not contain more then
two hundred Persons, would in a little time grow weak, and be quite dissipated,
if their ablest Subjects, which are the support of the rest, should be drawn
from them; That the promotion of one might cause great disorders, by stirring
up Ambition in the rest; That when Religious Persons have once pretentions of
Greatness, they grow more Worldly then the very Men of the World; That those,
who had embraced the Institute of the Society, out of a Spirit of Charity, and
of Zeal, would easily fall off from their laborious Employments, through the
hope of Ecclesiastical Preferment, or at least, the prospect of it would make
their motives less pure, and their intentions less direct; That Jealousy would
not fail to insinuate it self among several Competitors, and that if all did
not aspire to Honors, there would at least be but little union among those, who
acted not by the same designs, and principles.

He added, that the Professed, being devoted to the Service of the Holy See, in
regard of Missions, and having more access in the Court of Rome, they would be
more in the occasion of seeking, and would have more opportunity of obtaining
Preferments; That laboring in the Courts of Princes, they would be less free,
and courageous in discharging the duty of their Ministry, if there were
something for them to hope here below, and that the Princes themselves would
perhaps make less use of them, if their services looked for Recompense: Nor did
he pretend herein to disapprove the accepting Ecclesiastical Dignities, nor to
condemn those Religious, who are thereunto raised, for the good of
Christianity, and who possess them, with the Edification of the Faithful; That
there is great difference between this Society, and other Orders; That these,
by their Antiquity, and long continuance, had acquired strength sufficient to
bear the weightiest charges, but that the other, being newly entered into the
world, was yet too weak for them. Holy Father (he said) recalling his Ancient
Idea's of the War) I consider all other Orders, in the Army of the Church
Militant, as so many Squadrons of Cuirassiers, who are to remain in the Post
assigned them, who keep their Ranks, and face the Enemy, always in the same
Order, and with the same manner of fighting. But for us (he continued) we are
as so many Light Horsemen, who must be always ready upon occasion of Alarms,
and Surpizes, to Attack, or make a Stand, according to different conjunctures;
to go every where, and to Skirmish on all sides.

He concluded, that Missioners, such as they were who must not only go from
Town to Town, from Province to Province, but must fly from one Pole to the
other, at the least beck of the Vicar of Jesus Christ, could not be fixed any
where.

With these reasons the Pope did acquiesce, and was persuaded, that their
refusal of Ecclesiastical Dignities would not be less beneficial to the Church,
then to the Society. Some have believed, that the business of Trieste gave the
first occasion to the General, of obliging the Professed, by Vow, not to seek
after Prelatures, and to refuse them, when offered. But it is certain, that he
had taken that Resolution before, and from the time, that he first came to Rome
with Faber and Laynez. For going one day with them to see the Marquess d'
Aquilar, then Ambassador of Charles the Fifth, with Paul the Third, and their
Discourse falling upon the reports, which were then spread against the new
Society, the Marquess told him, that he was suspected to cover a great Ambition
under an exterior Humility, and that it was publicly said, a Cap or a Miter
was the motive of his Journey. The Father was so surpised at this Discourse,
that at first he only answered it by making the sign of the Cross. Afterward,
as if he had been inspired on the sudden by God, he made a Vow before the
Marquess, never to accept any Ecclesiastical Dignity, unless he were obliged to
it, under pain of Sin, by the Vicar of Christ; and some time after he renewed
this Vow in the presence of a Cardinal.

The affairs of the Society were in this Posture, The Society begins to
Instruct youth in Learning.
when Father Ignatius thought it seasonable, that it should be employed in the
instruction of Youth. The Zeal of Francis de Borgia, Duke of Gandia, to whom
the sight of the dead Body of the Empress had given a disgust of the things of
this World, and who after the death of his Duchess, gave himself wholly to
God, was the first rise and occasion of beginning so profitable a work. There
being within his Lordships a great number of Baptized Moors, of which the
greatest part had renounced Mahometanism only in appearance, he judged that to
secure the Souls of the younger Brood, and wholly to extirpate that pernicious
Sect, he ought to provide for the Education of their youth: and in order
thereunto, to Found a College of the Society in his Town of Gandia, where the
Children of all his Vassals should be Educated in Virtue and Learning.

This design he communicated to Father Ignatius, and asked his advice, and
assistance for the Execution of it: Who immediately gave order to Father Faber,
then at Valladolid, to wait upon the Duke, and to serve him in the
Establishment of this College, before he came to Trent, whither Paul the Third
had called him, to be joined with Salmeron and Laynez. As soon as the Duke and
Father Faber had regulated matters, according to the Instructions of the
General, there were presently sent thither Professors out of five or six
different Nations, all able Men, and chosen by Father Ignatius himself, and
each of them opened his School with a Latin Harangue before the Duke, and all
his Court.

It was therefore in the year 1546, and six years after the Confirmation of the
Institute, that the Jesuits first opened their Schools in Europe, I say in
Europe, because in the year preceding, those of the Society, whom Father
Ignatius had sent out of Italy, and out of Portugal to Father Xaverius, having
been put into possession of the Seminary of Goa, Founded some few years before
by King John the Third, for Educating the Indian youth, Nicholas Lancillotti an
Italian, had begun to teach the Children the Principles of the Latin Tongue.

But at Gandia they did not only teach these first Elements of Sciences, The
General's Directions for good Order in the Colleges.
for besides Grammar, there were Schools of Poetry, Rhetoric, Philosophy, and
Divinity; and to give the greater Credit to the College, the Duke obtained
from the Pope, and from the Emperor, to have it Erected into an University, and
that the Scholars who there took Degrees, should have all the Privileges which
are enjoyed by the Graduats of Alcala, and of Salamanca. Father Ignatius
Ordained, for the good order of the College, that the Professors should be
very careful in their Method of teaching, that in each faculty they should
follow the most received Authors, as in Philosophy Aristotle, and in Divinity
St. Thomas: He recommended, that they should often exercise the memories of
those young Scholars, who were not yet come to ripeness of judgment, and that
in making them recite, what they had got without book, they should accustom
them betimes to pronounce well: That they should stir up young Wits by frequent
Disputations, quickening them with emulation, and sometimes setting the more
forward and capable, against those, who were behind them, that so both one and
the other, might either be animated with Glory, or excited by Shame; that the
Slothful and the Libertines should be punished, but that the Masters themselves
should not Chastize their Scholars; This last Order he made, both to observe
the Decency of a Religious state, and to prevent all passion in Corrections.

Besides this, insomuch as it was his principal Design to form the Manners of
Youth, he expressly forbad the reading any Author, either Latin or Greek, that
might corrupt their Innocence; unless such Authors be first purged of all that
is obscene. He ordered that the Scholars should every Day hear Mass; That every
Month they should go to Confession; That when they begin School, they should
all together say some short Prayer, to ask God's assistance in their Studies;
And that once a Week, by Catechisms and Exhortations, they should be Instructed
in the Verities of Faith, and in the Rules of good Life. He also prescribed to
the Masters, that upon every fit occasion, both in School and out of School, in
their familiar Discourses, they should speak to them of Heavenly things. These
Rules observed, made Doctrine and Piety flourish at Gandia, under the Conduct
of Father Andrew Oviedo, Rector of the College.

About this time it was, that Isabella Rosella coming to Rome to see Father
Ignatius took a Resolution of leaving the World, and of living according to the
Evangelical Counsels under the Obedience of the Society. Two Roman Ladies of
great Virtue joined with her in this Design, and they obtained leave of the
Pope to embrace this kind of Life. Though F. Ignatius well saw, that this sort of
Directions was not very agreeable to his Institute, yet his Gratitude toward
his Benefactrix, and the small number of these new Religious prevailed with
him, to take upon him the care of them. But he soon repented of it, and was
heard to say, That the Government of three Devotes was more troublesome, then
that of the whole Society: For in fine, there was no end with them; at all
hours their Doubts must be resolved, their Scruples must be cured, their
Grievances must be heard, and even their Quarrels must be reconciled.

This obliged him to represent to the Pope, He delivers the Society from the
Government of Religious Women.
how incongruous such an Employment would be to the Society, and how necessary
it was that his Holiness should deliver them from it; For he judged, that this
small Community of Jesuitesses, which yet consisted but of three Persons, would
in time become numerous, and multiply in other Towns: but the Consideration
which he had of the Catalonian Lady, from whom he had received so many good
Offices, and who so earnestly requested him not to abandon her, made him manage
the Matter with all possible fairness and condescendency. Here is the Copy of a
Letter which he writ to her upon this Subject.

Right Venerable Dame Isabella Rosella, my Mother and my Sister in Jesus
Christ.
TRuly I should be very glad, for the greater Glory of God, to satisfy your
good Desires, and to procure your Spiritual Advancement, in keeping you still
under my Direction, as you have been for the time past: but the continual
Indispositions to which I am subject, and all my other Employments in the
Service of God, and of his Vicar upon Earth, will no longer permit me so to do.
On the other side, being persuaded, according to the light of my Conscience,
that our little Society ought not to take upon them the particular Conduct of
any Women, who are not engaged in a Religious State by the Vows of Obedience,
as I have fully declared to our Holy Father the Pope; it appears to the, that
for the greater Glory of God, I ought not any longer to look upon as my
Spiritual Child, but only as my very good Mother, as you have been for many
years, to the greater Glory of God. So that, for the greater Service, and the
greater Honor of the Eternal Goodness, I Resign you, as much as in me lies,
into the Hands of the Sovereign Bishop, to the end, that taking his Judgment
and his good Pleasure for your Rule, you may find Repose and Consolation, to
the greater Glory of his Divine Majesty.

At Rome the First of October, 1549.

This Letter, which is so full of the Spirit of the Saint, and where those
Words, which he had always in his Mouth, are so often repeated, disposed the
Lady to receive with submission, what the Pope determined upon the Matter. For
Paul the Third having well considered, that Missioners designed over the whole
World, should not be tied by particular Engagements, caused his Apostolical
Letters to be expedited, by which he exempted the Jesuits from the Government
of Women, who either in Community, or living singly, would put themselves under
the Obedience of the Society.

The General rested not satisfied with these Letters; The more to Confirm so
Essential a Regulation, he obtained the Year following from the Pope, that the
Society should not be obliged to charge it self with the Direction of Religious
Women, even though they should obtain Bulls, to put themselves under whose
Conduct they pleased, unless such Bulls made express mention of the Society. It
is in virtue of these Exemptions granted by the Pope, that Ignatius in his
Constitutions forbids his Order to Govern Religious, or other Persons, with
that Authority, which Confessors in Ordinary, and Ecclesiastical Superiors
have. But he moderated this Prohibition, by giving leave to assist them in
their spiritual Advancement, and sometimes to hear their Confessions, upon
special Occasions.

But nothing more shows how his Judgment stood in reference to this Government
and Direction, His Proceeding with Hercules d' Este, Duke of Ferara.
of which we last spoke, as did his Proceeding two or three Years after with
Hercules d' Este, Duke of Ferara, a declared Protector, and faithful Friend of
the Society. This Prince, having built the College of Ferara, desired that the
Jesuits should Govern a Monastery of Women, of which the Princess his Mother
had been the Foundress. But Father Ignatius could not consent to it; and
notwithstanding all the Entreaties of the Duke, he continued firm in his
Resolution. According to the same Principle, he sent his Commands to the
Fathers of Valladolid, to give over the Conduct of a Monastery which they had
taken upon them, at the solicitation of several considerable Persons of the
Town.

This Proceeding of the General of the Jesuits did not hinder Hercules d' Este,
who had taken up the Resolution of a Christian Life, from having a Jesuit near
his Person. Guidoni, the holy Archdeacon of Modena, to whom he had imparted his
thoughts, very much approved the Design, and counseled him to take Father Le
Jay. The refusal of the Bishopric of Trieste had rendered him famous; and he
was besides known to the Prince, who had seen him some Years before at Ferara,
and had then Confidence in him. On the other side, being a Frenchman, he was
less odious to the Duchess of Ferara, who was Daughter to Lewis the Twelfth,
and was unhappily Engaged in the new Heresy, as we have already said. The Duke
made his Demand to the General, and to the Pope, for Father Le Jay. He was
granted to him without difficulty; because the Troubles of Italy raised by the
Murder of Peter Lewis Farnesius, caused a Cessation of the Council, which a
contagious Sickness had made to be transferred from Trent to Bologna.

Le Jay, before he parted for Ferara, consulted Father Ignatius about the
manner of his Deportment with the Duke. The Father told him, That being
appointed by the Vicar of Jesus Christ to the Service of one of the most
eminent Benefactors of the Society, he ought to Dedicate himself wholly to it,
and not to employ himself in any Charitable Actions abroad, without the
participation and goodliking of the Prince, who was to be in a manner to him
both Superior and General.

The Duke of Ferara in the first place made the Spiritual Exercises, under the
Conduct of Father Le Jay, as the Duke of Gandia had done before, under that of
Father Faber. It was the ordinary Method every where used by the Jesuits, for
the reformation of Manners: And the Practice of these Retirements grew very
common among Persons of the best Quality, after that many of the Fathers of the
Tridentine Council, had themselves made the Exercises of the Society under
Laynez, Le Jay, and Salmeron.

True it is, The Spiritual Exercise is approved by the Holy See.
that Don John Martinez Siliceo, Archbishop of Toledo, would have abolished the
Practice of them in Spain, upon pretense, that the Book of Exercises contained
dangerous Doctrine. But besides that the Doctors by him appointed to Examine it
found nothing in it but what was Catholic and Edifying, the Holy See approved
it the Year following by an express Bull, at the Request of Don Francis de
Borgia, Duke of Gandia. The Bull deserves to be recited, and the Reader will
not perhaps be troubled to see it.

Paulus Papa Tertius, ad perpetuam rei Memoriam.

Whereas the Duty of an Universal Pastor of the Flock of Jesus Christ, and the
Zeal of the Glory of God, obliges us to embrace all that concerns the good of
Souls, and their Spiritual Advancement, we cannot choose but give ear to their
Entreaties, who ask any thing of us, which tends to maintain the Piety and
Fervor of the Faithful.

Our dearest Son, Francis de Borgia, Duke of Gandia, has lately represented to
us, that Ignatius of Loyola, General of the Society of Jesus, by us Established
in our City of Rome, and Confirmed by our Apostolical Authority, has Written
certain Instructions, or Spiritual Exercises, Extracted out of the holy
Scriptures, and from the Experiences of a Spiritual Life, in such a Method and
Form as is very proper to touch the Heart. He has moreover declared, that he
knows, not only by common Fame, that these Exercises are very useful for the
Profit and Comfort of Souls, but more especially by what he himself has seen of
the good done by them at Barcelona, and at Gandia. Whereupon he has made his
Supplication to us, to have them Examined, and to Approve them, if we shall
find them worthy of Approbation, and Commendation; to the end, that the good
Effects of them may be made more universal, and that the Faithful with greater
Encouragement might make use of them.

We have accordingly caused them to be Examined, and upon the Testimony which
has been given us by our dear Son John of the Title of St. Clement, Priest,
Cardinal, Bishop of Burgos, and Inquisitor of the Faith; by our Venerable
Brother Philip, Bishop of Saluzzo, our Vicar General in Spirituals within Rome;
and by our dear Son Giles Foscarini, Master of the Sacred Palace: We have found
these Exercises to be filled with the Spirit of God, and to be very useful for
the Edification, and the spiritual Profit of the Faithful.

Having also regard, as we ought to have, to the great good, which Ignatius,
and the Society by him Founded, cease not to do in the Church, among all sorts
of Nations, and considering on the other side, how instrumental this Book of
Exercises is thereunto, we of our own certain knowledge Approve by these
Presents, Commend and Ratify with our Apostolical Authority, all that is
contained in that Book. We moreover exhort all the Faithful of both Sexes, in
what Place of the World soever they be, devoutly to practice such Christian
Exercises; and we give leave that the Book be Printed by any such Bookseller as
shall best like the Author: Provided nevertheless, that after the first
Edition, neither the Bookseller whom he shall first choose, nor any other, shall
presume to Print the same the second time, without the Consent of Ignatius, or
of his Successors, etc.

Given at Rome in the Palace of St. Mark, under the Seal of the Fisher, the
last Day of July, in the Year of our Lord 1548, and the Fourteenth of our
Pontificate.

The Approbation, and the Printing of the Book of the Exercises, which was
Translated out of Spanish into Latin, very much added to the Reputation of the
Founder of the Society.

Since the Establishment of his Order, He goes out of Rome upon a work of
Charity.
he always made his Abode in Rome, following therein his own Institution, that
the General ought to have a fixed Habitation: nevertheless, he went forth for a
short time upon a Charitable Account, and his Journey had a happy Success. The
Inhabitants of St. Angelo, and those of Tivoli their Neighbors, having a mortal
Feud one with the other, even to a kind of open War, Father Ignatius at the
Pope's Desire, went over to the Places themselves. Having first Treated with
Margaret of Austria, Wife to Octavius Duke of Parma, who was Lord of St.
Angelo, and next with the Magistrates of Tivoli, he brought those two Towns to
this Agreement, That the Cardinal De la Cueva should be the Arbitrator of their
Differences, and that in the mean time they should lay down their Arms.

It was upon this Occasion that Signior Lewis Mendoza, who Lodged the Father at
Tivoli, made the Offer to him of a commodious House, with very good Gardens,
and a Chapel of our Lady's, which had been built out of the Walls near the
stately Ruins of Moecenas's Villa. This new Establishment Father Ignatius
completed upon the Nativity of our Lady, which nevertheless came far short of
those which about this time were made in Sicily.

Don John de Vega, Viceroy of Sicily, who had great Communication with the
General of the Society, when he was Ambassador from Charles the Fifth at Rome,
and who did nothing of Importance without consulting him, according to the
Order which he had received, was no sooner at Messina, but he took the
Resolution of Erecting there a College for the Society. Palermo immediately
followed the Example of Messina: And these two Colleges, whither the General
sent Persons of great Virtue and Ability, were the first, after that of Gandia,
where Schools were opened.

At the departure of these excellent Workmen, of which the principal were Peter
Canisius a German, Andrew Frusis a Frenchman, and Jerome Nadal a Spaniard, he
told them what he usually said when he sent forth Missions: Go, Brethren,
inflame, spread about that Fire which Jesus Christ came to kindle on the Earth.
Before they went away, he would have those who were designed to Teach Schools,
make an Essay before him of their Method, and their Ability. He also would have
them all take leave of the Pope, to whom he himself conducted them. The Pope
received them with kindness, and exhorted them in the first place to be very
watchful against new Heresies.

But Father Ignatius, He tries the Obedience of his Subjects.
before he culled out the twelve which he sent into Sicily, gave himself the
satisfaction of sounding the bottom of their Souls, and of trying the Temper,
and the Obedience of his Subjects in Rome, by ordering every one of them to
tell him in Writing, after three days of Prayer, First, Whether they were
indifferent to go into Sicily, and whether that which the General should
determine (who to them is in the place of God) would be most welcome to them?
Secondly, Whether, in case they were sent into Sicily, they should be ready
either to Teach, and perform such other Functions as require Learning and
Ability, or to be employed in Domestical Offices? Thirdly, If it should so
happen, that they were appointed for Study, and Regency, whether they would be
disposed to Study what Science, and to Teach what School it should please the
Superior? Lastly, Whether they did believe, that what ever Obedience should
prescribe to them, was most proper for them, and most conducible to their
eternal good?

They every one brought in their Writing upon the Day assigned, and there was
not one of them in their whole number of Thirty six, who did not sincerely
declare, That he was ready to go not only into Sicily, but into the Indies; and
that he would willingly employ his whole Life in the meanest Offices, whenever
their good Father, and their honored Master in Jesus Christ, should give them
the least intimation of his Will.

It was not enough for a Man, who designed to do good to the whole Earth, The
Society enters into Africa and America.
to labor in Europe, and in Asia, for the gaining of Souls. John Nugnes, and
Lewis Gonzales, were sent, almost at the same time, into the Kingdoms of Fez
and Morocco, at the Instance of the King of Portugal, who concerned at the
Captivity of a great number of Christians, demanded some Fathers of the
Society, to Negotiate the delivery of the Slaves, and to confirm them in their
Faith.

A little time after, the Viceroy of Sicily having Orders from Charles the
Fifth, to pass over into Africa with a good Army, to make War upon Dragut, a
famous Pirate, who was possessed of a strong Place on the Coast of Barbary,
from whence he made his Excursions as far as Naples; Father Ignatius was
desirous that Laynez should leave Sicily, where he was Superior, and should
follow Don John de Vega in his Expedition against the Moors, to attend the
Hospital of the Army.

Four other Jesuits before this time were gone into the Western Parts of
Aethiopia, to the Kingdom of Congo, where the Gospel was quite extinguished,
which Don Emanuel, King of Portugal, had formerly there caused to be Preached
and Planted: And it was now, at the Instance of John the Third, Son and
Successor of Emanuel, that Father Simon Rodriguez sent those Evangelical
Laborers, in the Name of their common Father Ignatius. Lastly, under the
auspicious Protection of that Prince, the Society entered also into the
Southern Parts of America, when Don Soza, Captain General of the Portugal
Fleet, Landed in Brasile, to build a new Town in that new World.

God was not pleased to grant such happy Progress without some allay; The
Society ill used in Germany.
and at the same time that the Society spread it self over the whole World, it
was his Divine Pleasure to exercise it at home with troublesome Accidents. After
the Battle which the Protestants of Germany lost, and in which the Duke of
Saxony was made Prisoner, the Emperor, seeing that the Assembly at Bologna was
broken up, and that according to all appearances it would not be renewed in a
long time, undertook himself to Regulate the Faith of his People, till such
time as the Council should meet again to Decide about it.

Wherefore he caused to be published in the Diet of Auspurg a Formulary of
Faith, which was called The Interim, and contained Articles altogether contrary
to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church; as for Example, the Marriage of
Priests, and Communion under both Kinds. Among all the Doctors, who opposed
this Imperial Libel, Nicholas Bobadilla, whom Father Ignatius had still left in
Germany, was the most zealous and fervent. He was then at the Court of Charles
the Fifth, cherished by the Catholic Lords, whose Consciences he Directed, and
feared by the Protestants, whom he always vigorously opposed. His resolute and
untemporizing Humor was the cause, that declaiming against the Interim with
great heat, he let fall some sharp words, which reflected upon the Person of
the Emperor: He highly blamed such Condescendence and Compliance with
Heretics, and warmly maintained, even in the Presence of Charles the Fifth,
that nothing was more likely to keep Divisions still on foot, then a false
Peace.

Charles the Fifth, who thought his Honor concerned to justify what he had
done, and who looked upon all as Rebels that did not concur with him, could not
endure the liberty of Bobadilla: He not only forbad him the Court, but banished
him out of all the Territories of the Empire. Bobadilla obeyed* full of Glory
for having suffered Reproach in the Cause of God, and immediately came to Rome,
where the Agreement of Auspurg had but very little approbation. But Father
Ignatius did not think it expedient to receive, at his first coming, into the
House of the Society, a Man whose Zeal had carried him too far, and who in
defending the Church, had not shown due Respect to his Imperial Majesty. The
Saint hereby designed to make a public Satisfaction to the Emperor, and
moreover to teach the Religious of his Order how they ought to respect Princes,
Melchior Cano declares himself against the Society.
even when their Conduct is irregular.

The Indignation of Charles the Fifth gave occasion in Spain to the Enemies of
the Society to rise up against them. Melchior Cano, a Dominican, and Doctor of
Salamanca, being possessed, I know not how, with a Fancy that the end of the
World drew near, and that Antichrist would quickly appear, to make up his
Vision complete, would needs have it, that the Jesuits were the Praecursors of
Antichrist; the People called them Inigists from the Name of Inigo, which in
Spanish signifies Ignatius. Some gave them the Title of Theatines, for the
Reason formerly told; and this Appellation continued afterward, as Palafox
observes upon a Letter of St. Teresa: Note upon the Letter 29. Art. 12.
The Theatines of which she speaks (says he) are the Fathers of the Society of
Jesus; and it appears, that the Spirit with which they acted, was holy, and
great, since she compares them with the blessed Peter of Alcantara.

Cano grounded his Imaginations upon the newness of the Institute, which had no
resemblance with the ancient Orders; Their having no peculiar Habit seemed to
him a good cover for Libertinism: Their resort and Commerce with the People of
the World, and in the Courts of Princes, made him believe that they lived
according to the Maxims of the World. Lastly, the Retirements which they caused
their Proselytes to make, according to the Method and Spirit of their Founder,
were no less then Mysteries of Abomination, in the Judgment of Cano.

He uttered all he thought, and his great Reputation gave so much Credit to his
Words, that the People now treated those as Impostors and Malefactors, whom
before they looked upon as Men dropped from Heaven.

Father Ignatius, The Conduct of Ignatius in the Persecution raised by Cano.
when he heard of this Persecution, in the first place gave God thanks that the
Society was judged worthy to suffer Contumely for the Name of Jesus Christ: In
the next place he gave order to the Fathers of Spain, to show the Bull to Cano
which Confirmed their Institute, and modestly to represent to him, that the
Kingdom of God would be divided, if the Vicar of Jesus Christ should approve a
Society opposite to Jesus Christ; That of these pretended Forerunners of
Antichrist, Paul the Third had chosen two to be his Divines in the Council of
Trent, and that his Holiness had nominated another, to be his Legate Apostolical
in the Indies. He sent at the same time into Spain a new Copy of the Sentence,
pronounced by the Governor of Rome, Benedict Conversino, in favor of the
Society against false Accusations, and he joined thereunto a Brief from the
Pope, which constituted the Bishop of Salamanca Protector of the Reputation of
an Order Confirmed by the Holy See. The General of the Dominicans himself writ
a Circular Letter, in which after having magnified the Advantages which the
Church received from the Regular Priests, Established under the Title of The
Name of Jesus, he commanded all his Religious to love that Holy Order, and did
forbid them, in virtue of holy Obedience, to speak ill of them, under any
pretense whatsoever.

Cano's Imaginations were so deeply rooted in him, that he had no regard,
either to the Pope's Bull, or to the Letter of his General; for he continued
his Invectives with an Animosity, which bordered upon Fury. But such was his
Extravagancy, that it only served to undeceive those Men whom his Authority had
misled. All the World took the Society's part; there were none, even among the
Religious of St. Dominick, who did not declare in their behalf, against one of
their own Brethren. F. John Penna, a Doctor of Salamanca, and no less eminent
in Virtue then in Learning, was he who signalized himself most: for, not
content to refute the Visions of Melchior Cano in the Pulpit, he published an
Apologetick Manifesto in behalf of the new Order, and his Writing stopped the
Mouth of Calumny.

Don Francisco de Borgia, Oviedo inclined to a Solitary Life.
on his part, highly favored and protected the Children of Ignatius: yet
notwithstanding his Affection for them, he placed great confidence in a
Religious Man of the Order of St. Francis, called John Texeda, whom he had
known at Barcelona, and brought with him to Gandia: He was a Man of austere
Life, and of high Contemplation, wholly given to Solitude; and he lived at
Court, as the ancient Anchorites did in the Desert. Father Andrew Oviedo,
Rector of the College of Gandia, who had great Acquaintance with this holy
Man, being introduced to him by the Duke, entered by Degrees into his
Sentiments, and became so enamored with Solitude, that withdrawing himself
sometimes from the Company of his Brethren, he would abscond in some Wilderness
of a neighboring Forest, to attend the Exercises of an interior Life. This new
Spirit carried him so far, that he asked leave of his General to give over the
Government of the College, and to pass five or six years in an Hermitage. His
Motive was, that he might arrive to Evangelical Perfection, by flying from so
many dangerous Occasions, which are inevitable in the Commerce of the World.

Father Ignatius, Oviedo set right again.
by his great Talent in discerning Spirits, and by his long experience in a
spiritual Life, easily found out, that this new Project of Oviedo was an
Illusion. He made it manifest to him, by showing him, that when God had once
set out our way to us, we ought faithfully to follow it, and not to turn aside
into any other, under pretense that it seems to us the straiter and the surer;
That a solitary Life has its dangers no less then the Apostolical Life; That
indeed we ought not to commit the least Fault with a deliberate purpose for the
whole World, but we must not renounce the Employments of Charity through the
fear of small Faults, which human frailty is subject to; That on the other
side, nothing is more generous, nothing more divine, then to sacrifice our
Repose, and all our Concerns, to the good of Souls.

As much enamored as Oviedo was with his second Vocation, he quite lost the
thought of it, as soon as he received the Answer of Father Ignatius. Don
Francis de Borgia, to whom Oviedo had imparted his Designs of Retirement,
profited no less then he by the Advice of the Saint.

This Duke had made a Vow at Granada to embrace a Religious State, Francis de
Borgia called to the Society.
if he should happen to outlive his Duchess: yet in making of his Vow he was
not determined to any Religious Order in particular; and it was after that the
Holy See had Approved the Book of Exercises, that he made his choice of the
Society, against his natural Inclination, which inclined him to Solitude. He
opened his mind to Father Ignatius, and he had no great difficulty to make him
believe that his Vocation was a true one; for when Peter Faber died at Rome,
God did then reveal to him, that a Grandee of Spain should supply his Place,
and that this Grandee was the Duke of Gandia. Wherefore the Father approved the
Design of the Duke, and writ to him in these Terms.

Most Illustrious Lord,
THE Resolution, which you have taken, and which God has been pleased to
inspire you with, fills me with unspeakable joy. May the Angels, and all the
Saints praise his holy Name, and render him Eternal thanks in Heaven, for we on
Earth are not able to make any condign Acknowledgement of the transcendent
Blessing, which his Divine Goodness has bestowed upon his small Society, in
calling you to it.

I hope his Providence designs hereby considerable Advantages of Spiritual
Advancement, not only to your self, but to an infinity of Persons, who will
profit by so great an Example. For us, who are already in the Society of Jesus,
(we shall) excited by your fervor, begin a fresh to serve the Divine Father of
the Family, who gives us such a Brother, and who has made choice of such a
Workman for his new Vineyard, of which it has been his Pleasure, that I (though
unworthy) should have the Care.

Wherefore, from this time forward, I receive you, in the Name of our Lord, for
our Brother; and in this Quality, you shall always be most dear to me, as such
a Person ought to be, who enters into the House of God with so much generosity,
as you do, only, and perfectly to serve him.

For what you desire to know of me, concerning the time, and the manner of your
public Reception, after having seriously recommended the matter to God, both
in my own, and in the Prayers of many besides, it appears to me, that to the
end you may the better acquit your self of all your obligations, this change
ought to be made leisurely, and with a great deal of Circumspection, to the
greater Glory of our Lord. Thus you may by little and little settle your
affairs in such sort that without disclosing your self to any Secular Person,
you may in a short time find your self free, and disengaged from all, that may
retard the accomplishment of your holy Desires.

And the better to explicate my self, in coming to particulars, I am of
opinion, that since your Daughters are at an Age of being Married, you should
in the first place provide for them, according to their Quality; and also
dispose of the Marquess your Son, if a convenient Match be offered. For your
other Sons, it will not be sufficient for them to have their reliance upon
their Elder Brother, to whom the Dukedom will fall: You must leave them
wherewithal to go through their Studies in one of the principal Universities,
and to subsist honorably in the World: And you may reasonably expect, that if
they prove such, as they ought to be, and such as I hope they will be, the
Emperor will bestow his favors upon them in some proportion to your services,
and to that good will, which he has always manifested toward you.

I think it would be also convenient for you to dispatch those Buildings which
you have begun: For I would have all the business of your Family fully ended,
before you publish to the World your change of life. In the mean time, whereas
you are already well grounded in Learning, I should desire, that you would
seriously apply your self to the Study of Divinity, which Science will be most
useful to you for the service of God; nor would it be amiss, if it might be
done, that you took the Degree of Doctor in your University of Gandia: but in
regard that the World is not yet prepared for news of this nature, I would have
it done without any noise, and that it should be kept secret, until time, and
your occasions shall, with Gods permission, give you an entire Liberty.

Other matters we may settle, and determine from time to time, according to the
diversity of occurrences; wherefore, intending to keep a regular Correspondency
with you, I shall say no more at present. Be pleased to answer me at your first
leisure, and I shall always continue my Prayers to the Sovereign Goodness, more
and more to strengthen you with his Grace.


Though Don Francisco was very well inclined to follow the Councils of Father
Ignatius, yet still he found a Byas in himsel, which made his affections lean
toward Solitude; such resistance does Grace find, even in the most holy Souls,
when it does not comply with the natural temper. But what the Father had writ
to Ovideo, to confirm and fix him in his Vocation, did so strike the Duke, that
a holy Impatience took him of entering into the Society, before those things
were done which were prescribed to him. To this end he writ to Rome so
pressingly, that Father Ignatius, having obtained leave for him from the Holy
See, to make his Vows of Profession, without leaving the World, consented, that
he should make use of the Privilege.

The Duke of Gandia therefore consecrated himself to God, by the Solemn Vows of
the Society, in the Chapel of his Palace, in the presence of few persons,
retaining still his outward Grandeur, and the power of Possessing his estate
for three years, as may be seen more at large in his Life, which has been set
forth by one of our best Writers in a very moving and elegant Style.

Father Ignatius, He moderates the fervor of Borgia and others.
who from that time, called Don Francisco de Borgia by the Name of Father
Francis, and who looked upon him, as one of his own Children, began to direct
him in the ways of God, and to exercise the Authority of General upon him. The
Duke, who lived like a Religious man, before he had made the Vows of Religion,
thought himself obliged after his Profession to redouble his practices of Piety
and Penance: But his fervor led him into excesses, which were neither
convenient for a Man in the World, nor for a Member of the Society. Father
Ignatius thought it not fit to leave him to the transports of his Devotion: He
gave him to understand, that such as are destined by Heaven to instruct the
Ignorant, and to oppose Heresies, must not always be at the Foot of Altars; and
that sometimes they must leave Prayer for Study. The Father also declared to
him, that a Person like him, who had a weak Stomach, and a tender Complexion,
ought to moderate his Fasting, and in a reasonable manner to nourish himself
for the support of his health. You have received from God a Body, as well as a
Soul, (said the Saint in express terms,) and you must equally give an Account
to God, both of the one, and the other. But because the Duke did every day
discipline himself to Blood, in manner of the flagellation of the Son of God,
he forbad him these extremities, which might render him incapable of performing
the Functions of the Society.

It was one of the principal cares of Father Ignatius, to moderate the fervor
of his Children; and he was forced sometimes to make use of all his Authority
to restrain them, as he did toward Simon Rodriguez, whom the King of Portugal
had entrusted with the Education of the Prince Don John. Rodriguez, who
passionately desired to be employed in Foreign Missions, sought all occasions
to remove himself from Court. He would fain have accompanied the Missioners,
who parted from Portugal into Aethiopia: Afterward he desired to go to
Brasile; he was many times upon the point of embarking for the Indies; and he
would certainly have satisfied his Zeal, if the General, to whom he
communicated his designs, had not absolutely forbad him to leave his Post,
telling him withal, that the Educating in the fear of God the Children of
Kings, was virtually the saving a great many People; and that the Court was a
place of greater merit to us, then either Aethiopia, or Brasile, when we staid
there in Virtue of holy Obedience.

The Casa Professa was at that time reduced to great necessity, His confidence
in God recompensed.
by the death of Paul the Third, who constantly bestowed great Alms upon it,
and by that of Father Codacius, who had care of their temporals. However, the
General ceased not to receive those Novices, who presented themselves; and God
seemed to recompense his reliance on him, with miraculous assistance. For,
besides that the Cardinals in the Conclave were mindful of him, and sent him a
good supply of Money, Brother John de la Croce, who managed their household
Provisions, coming one Evening from St. John Laterans, and passing by the
Colizeum, met a Man, who without saying a word to him, gave him an hundred
Crowns in Gold.

Another time the same Brother, going out very early in the Morning, received
from an unknown Person a Purse full of pieces of Gold, newly Coined. It not
being quite day, so as to distinguish the Countenance of the Person, that put
the Purse into his hands, he began to fear, that it was an Illusion. The
Fathers, on their side, believed that the Pieces were Counterfeit, and that
some body had put a trick upon them; but at last they found, that the Gold was
very good. Near the same time, and when they were in great straits, Father
Polancus, Secretary of the Society, looking for some Papers in an open Chest,
found there a quantity of Crowns of Gold, which seemed to him to have been
newly stamped.

All these Miraculous recruits, as they very much confirmed Father Ignatius in
his reliance upon Providence, so they did not at all diminish in him his
prudential care for the subsistence of his Body. The household Affairs he put
into the hands of Father Pontius Gogordan, a very able Man, but without leaving
the Conduct wholly to him: For he himself would supervize, both to observe his
demeanor in that Office, and to assist him in so painful an Employment. In
gratitude to the Memory of Father Codacius, for procuring a subsistence to the
House in difficult times, and for having spent himself in the service of his
Brethren, he caused the same Honors to be done him after his death, which are
usually given to the Benefactors of the Society, and ordered a Marble stone to
be laid over his Grave, with an honorable Inscription.

The concern, His application to make Learning flourish in the Society.
which Father Ignatius had for the livelihood of his subjects, did not distract
him in his care of promoting Study, and of making Sciences to flourish in his
Order. He obliged the Professors of Messina, and Palermo, to send him an
Account every Week of their labors, and he caused to be sent to him from the
farther end of Spain, the Thesis of Philosophy and Divinity, together with the
Compositions both in Prose and Verse of the young Regents: And he expressly
Ordered, that they should be sent him, just as they came out of their hands,
without being touched over, or looked upon by any body else: Nor did the great
Affairs of his Government hinder him from reading them, and having them
examined in his presence, by the best judging Persons. Above all, he
solicitously informed himself of the progress, which the Scholars of the
Society made, who Studied at Paris, because he looked upon that University, as
the principal Seminary of his Order.

But if he understood, that any of the Professors of Spain, Italy, and Sicily,
did follow singular Opinions, in opposition to those commonly received in
Schools, he presently removed them, how great Wits soever they were; and he
said, that if he lived a thousand years, he would never give over crying down
all Novelties in Divinity, in Philosophy, and even in Grammar. After the same
fashion he treated those, whom their Learning had made self-conceited, or less
devout. And he was wont to say, that Science is lost upon him, who makes ill
use of it. By devotion he did not mean Spiritual Gusts, and Interior
Consolations, but a steady and faithful performance of Devout Exercises, and of
Religious Virtues: For he well knew, that the time of Studies, was not the
proper season of those Celestial Favors, which require a Spirit of
Recollection; and we read in one of his Letters, that we are not to be startled
at it, if speculative Sciences, and human Learning, should diminish in us that
kind of sensible Devotion; That provided in Studying, we only seek God, our
Studies are good Devotions; and that if we allot to Prayer the whole time,
which the Rule prescribes, we ought not to concern our selves, whether we find
in it sweetness or dryness. So that, there was nothing, which he recommended
more, both to the Professors and to the Scholars of his Order, then to Dedicate
all their Labors to the greater Glory of God, and to persuade themselves, that
Study, with so noble an intention, was more agreeable to Heaven, then continual
Prayer.

The Zeal of William Duke of Bavaria furnished Father Ignatius with a fair
occasion of showing the Abilities of three Learned Persons. He sends three
Divines to Ingolstadt.
This most Catholic Prince, who was the support of the Ancient Religion in
Germany, demanded of the General some able Divines, that might raise up the
Honor of Theology in the University of Ingolstadt, where the Heretics had
rendered Divine Sciences very contemptible. The Father chose Salmeron, and
Canisius, to whom he joined le Jay, whom the Duke by name required, and who was
spared for a time by the Duke of Ferara, at the instance of Cardinal Farnesius.

But to the end, that these three Divines might have a Character to Authorize
their Doctrine, he would have them, as they past through Bologna, to receive
the Degree of Doctor, after the usual Examens; And this was solemnly done by
the order of Cardinal John Maria de Monte, who was then Nuncius Apostolicus,
and was afterward chosen Pope, by the Name of Julius the Third. With this
Title of Doctors, of which the Germans are very fond, and which by the
Protestants was so much magnified in the Person of Luther, Le Jay, Canisius,
and Salmeron were well received at Ingolstadt. Salmeron undertook to explicate
the Epistles of St. Paul; le Jay the Psalms of David; and Canisius the Master
of the Sentences. Each of them performed their Readings with so much Credit,
and Fruit, that Duke William resolved to Build for them a magnificent College.
His death disappointed the design, but he recommended to his Son Albert the
care of these Children of Ignatius.

Though the Saint extremely desired, The Society makes small progress in France.
that the Society, which was born in France, should also grow and have Credit
there, as it had in Germany, and in many other places, yet in that Kingdom it
still remained obscure, without making any progress. The Jesuits of Paris were
shut up in the College of the Lombards where they lodged, applying themselves
only to Study, and to good works. True it is, that William de Prat, Bishop of
Clermont, who had known the new Society at the Council of Trent, very much
favored them: But the Bishop of Paris, who had received doubtful impressions of
them, was not their Friend; and a certain Doctor, who had the Bishops
friendship, declared War openly against them, every where saying, that this
newly born Society, had something of the Monster in it, and that it could not
be long lived; that he who had set it on foot, was a little Spanish Visionary;
that it was better to relieve Beggars, and Vagabonds, then these Jesuits; and
that it would not be ill done, to have them driven out of the Kingdom.

While this Doctor was so violent at Paris against Ignatius, Avila and Granada
favorable to the Society.
and his Order, the Father Master John Avila, that famous, and fervent
Preacher, and that enlightened Director, published in Spain, that the Society of
Jesus was the work of God; and that if his Age would have permitted it, he
should have embraced the Institute of Ignatius: He added, that he knew no man
more interior, and filled with more supernatural wisdom: That he had conceived
formerly within himself the same design, which this new Founder had executed;
but that he was in respect of Ignatius, but as a Child compared to a Giant, or
to a Man of great Strength, who carries a burden, without feeling it, which the
Child cannot lift up.

This Doctor very much approved, what Father Ignatius had writ to him,
concerning the invectives of Melchior Cano; That according to the Authorities
of the Doctors, and Fathers of the Church, we ought not to suffer the
Reputation of Evangelical Ministers to be run down; And that, when ill meaning,
prepossest Persons would bring suspicion, and infamy upon them, it was
necessary to implore the Assistance of the Holy See, to stop the career of
Calumny, or at least to show the injustice of it.

On the other side, Lewis de Granada, so famous for his Piety, and for his
Writings, one of the Chiefest Ornaments of the holy Order of St. Dominick,
highly exalted the Society in Portugal, and Preaching one day in the Town of
Ebora before Cardinal Henry, he said, that the new Society was an Assembly of
Apostolical men, chosen by God to renew in these latter times the sanctity of
the first Ages. He said upon another occasion, that he had received so much
light from the Spiritual Exercises of Father Ignatius, that his whole life
would not suffice to write down what God had communicated to him in the
Practice of those Exercises.

The affection which the Carthusians testified in all places to the Society,
The Order of the Carthusians affectionated to the Society.
did it no small Honor. This holy Order, which has always preserved its
primitive Spirit, and which respresents on Earth the life, which the Angels
lead in Heaven, not content to Favor the Jesuits upon all occasions, would
farther contract with them a strait Alliance, in making them participate of
their Prayers, their Sacrifices, and Abstinences, requiring the like from them,
to be made partakers of their Works of Charity.

To this effect the whole Order writ to Father Ignatius, in the time of their
General Chapter; and the Letter which was signed by Don Peter de Sardis, Prior
of the Grande Chartreuse, mentions, that he and his Religious, being edifi'd
with the innocent Life, the holy Doctrine, and the Apostolical labors of the
Society of Jesus, had given thanks to God for having raised it in so corrupt an
Age; And that they desired to aid and assist it, according to their Power, to
continue their Holy Ministry, notwithstanding all Contradictions, and
Persecutions, which inseperably attend the life of perfect Christians. Thus
these two Religious Orders, which seem to have the least of similitude in their
Institutes, were the most united by the Spirit of Charity; And after this, we
are not to wonder, if the Jesuits at this day have a particular friendship and
veneration for the Carthusians: They have inherited these sentiments from their
first Fathers, and they are glad of the Occasion to manifest them.

But that, Julius the 3d. grants many Favors to the General of the Society.
which gave the greatest Credit to the Society, was that Pope Julius the Third,
who had taken particular notice of it at the Council of Trent, being now chosen
in the room of Paul the Third, gave to Father Ignatius public marks of his
good Will. This was about the beginning of the Jubilee year 1550. The Father
went to do his Homage to the Pope, and to beg of his Holiness, that the
Laborers of the Society, who were in Africa, in Brasile, in the Indies, and in
Japan, might together with their Neophits, gain the Jubilee, without coming to
Rome. The Pope embraced him, and after having declared to him, how much he
loved his Order; As to the Favor which you ask of me, he said smiling, I grant
it with this restriction, that you shall have all my Power in that particular,
and that, for your Brethrens gaining the Indulgences of the holy Year, you
shall Prescribe them to do what you think fit. He granted him the same Favor,
not only for several persons in Messina, in Venice, and in Paris, but also for
the Troops, which Don John de Vega, Viceroy of Sicily, had carried into Africa,
and for the whole Town of Gandia, which in consideration of Don Francis de
Borgia, had this Pre-eminence above all the Towns in the World.

Besides this, Julius the Third, gave permission to Father Ignatius, and to all
the Priests of the Society, to exercise in the Jubilee year all those
Privileges, which Paul the Third had granted them; Though, according to the usage
of the Church, Religious Orders, who have Power from the Holy See to absolve in
reserved Cases, are not to use their Power in the time of the grand Jubilee. To
crown all his Favors, he again confirmed the Institute, and by an express Bull,
in which all things are cleared and explained. His Liberalites were also very
considerable to the Jesuits of Rome, and, what is worthy of remark, he
commanded the General, in virtue of holy Obedience, to come and tell him as
often as the professed House should be in any necessity.

In the mean time, He submits the Constitutions to the Censure of the Principal
Fathers.
Father Ignatius, having finished his Constitutions, had it in his thoughts to
Print them, but he would first submit them to the Judgment and Censure of the
chief among the Fathers, and the opportunity of the Jubilee year favored his
design. Wherefore he summoned to Rome all that were eminent in Merit, and
Authority, and they all came, except Simon Rodriguez, whom the King of Portugal
detained at Lisbon.

He put the Constitutions into their hands, praying them strictly to examine and
weigh them; and to tell him freely what they thought might need amendment, or
alteration. Intending that the Design and Spirit of the Society, should be
uniform in all places, and that the Rules of Government should be suitable to
different Nations, and Tempers; he was very glad that the Fathers Assembled,
who were of several Countries, and of unlike Constitutions, should be
themselves Judges of these Rules. He sent a Copy of the Constitutions to
Rodriguez, upon whose Judgment he much reli'd; he also sent one for the same
reason, to some of the Spiritual Coadjutors, who though not so Learned, were Men
of great Prudence.

After having heard the Opinions of those who were present, and received the
Answers of the absent, he touched over his work again, and joining their lights
with his own, he finished the Piece. Nevertheless, being persuaded that only
time and experience can demonstrate the Perfection of Laws, he would have no
absolute obligation laid upon the Society, of observing the Constitutions,
until the whole Order assembled in a Body, should approve them; and this did
not happen till after his death, under the Generalship of Laynez. They were not
only Reviewed, and Authorized by the first general Congregation, but they were
also confirmed by the Holy Apostolic See, after an exact discussion, which
four Cardinals made of them, without changing one word.

As the year of the Jubilee seemed very proper to Father Ignatius for convening
the Fathers in Rome, He endeavors to lay down the Generalship of his Order.
so the Opportunity of their being there appeared no less favorable to him, to
execute a design, which he had long in his thoughts. He at first took the
charge of Government upon him with great repugnancy, as we have already seen;
and when it was laid upon him against his will, he made account, that he should
be one day freed from it, to enjoy the ease of Obeying, and the merit of
Obedience. He did believe that the happy day was now come, and his continual
Infirmities, in an Age far advanced, seemed to promise him that, which he so
passionately desired. To this end, he called all the Fathers together; but
remembering the opposition they had made him, when he refused to receive the
charge of General, instead of being present at the Assembly, he sent them a
Letter, writ with his own hand, and couch't in these terms.

To my dearest Brethren in Christ, my Brethren of the Society of Jesus.
AFter diverse Reflections, which I have made at leisure, not being moved
thereunto by any Passion, I will tell you sincerly, as in the presence of my
Creator, and my God, who must judge me for an Eternity, what I believe to be
most for the Glory of his Divine Majesty.

Considering my Sins, my Defects, and all my Infirmities, Corporal and
Spiritual, I have often thought, that I was very far from having those
Qualities, which are requisite to sustain the Burden, which you have laid upon
me. I desire therefore, in the Name of our Lord, that you would find out, and
choose some Body, by whom this Office may be better, or at least not so ill
discharged; and though another should not do better, then I have done, yet I
desire to leave the Place.

After due consideration had upon it, in the Name of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, I depose my self, and simply and absolutely, I renounce
all pretentions to the Generalship. I Conjure, in the Name of our Lord, and
with all my Soul, the Fathers professed, and those, with whom they shall please
to consult, I Conjure them, I say, to receive my Demission, which I make in the
presence of God, for Causes so just. But if there should be diversity of
Opinions among you, I beseech you for the love of our Savior Jesus Christ,
well to recommend the matter to God, to the end his most holy Will may be done
in all things, to his greater Glory, and to the greater good of Souls, and of
the whole Society.


The Reading of this Letter did very much Surprise and Contristate the
Assembly; some with admiration extolled the humility of their Father, others
more astonished and inwardly touched, kept a profound silence; but in conclusion,
they all opposed his laying down his Office, Father Ovidoe only excepted, who
was a man, that had the plainness and candor of the first Ages. When it came to
his turn, he said, that to him it appeared, that Father Ignatius ought not to
be resisted; and when the Fathers asked him his reason, because (he replied) he
who is a Saint, has lights, which we have not. But opening his eyes, and
finding that Saints are sometimes unjust to themselves, he condemned his first
thoughts, and came in to the rest. They sent to declare the Resolution of the
Assembly to the General; which was, that as long as God should please to
preserve his life, they would have no other Head nor Superior.

So that, notwithstanding all his endeavors to the contrary, they would not
hearken to him, and he was forced to submit. This Submission lay heavy at the
bottom of his Heart, and was probably the cause of a great Sickness, which soon
after siez'd upon him. He fell ill upon Christmas Day, after he had said two of
the Masses. His Disease growing dangerous, he did believe, that God was pleased
by taking his Life, to free him from that Load of which Men would not discharge
him. This thought filled him with joy; and his hopes of being quickly loosed
from the Fetters of his Body, filled his Soul with the most sensible Delights
which Saints can taste in this World. He now desired nothing but to see his
God; and the approaches of Eternity did so inflame his Desires, that he was in
a continual Transport. The Physicians ordered him to moderate those ardent
Affections, least they should hasten his Death. Whether it were that he obeyed
them, or that they were deceived in their Conjectures, he by degrees recovered,
and entered again upon the Exercise of his Charge.

Don Francisco de Borgia, He Treats at Rome with the Duke of Gandia.
who was a Member of the Society, under the outward appearance of a Grandee of
Spain, and whom Father Ignatius had invited to Rome, was now arrived there,
with the Spanish and the Portuguez Fathers, after having Married his eldest Son
and his Daughters. He was Lodged in an Apartment of the Casa Professa,
separated from the Community; and all his delight was to entertain Father
Ignatius. He gave him an exact Account of his Interior, and he often conferred
with him about his manner of Prayer, his Pennances, and the whole Conduct of
his Life.

During these Entertainments, it came into the thoughts of the Duke of Gandia,
to do something which might make the Society more flourishing in Rome* which
was to Establish a College there. He gave Six thousand Crowns in Gold toward
the Foundation; whereupon Father Ignatius offering him the Title of a Founder,
he refused it, saying, That Honor was to be reserved for some other Person, who
should give a Foundation worthy of the Metropolis of the World: As if he had
foreseen that Pope Gregory the Thirteenth was one day magnificently to Erect
the Roman College.

The Society was not at Paris in the same Posture as at Rome. The Society ill
treated at Paris.
Many of the University, and of the Parliament, seemed to make it their
Business to discredit the Order. They disputed every thing with them, even to
their very Name. A certain Carmelite Preaching in the Church of St. Severin,
took an occasion to inveigh against the new Society, upon these words of St.
Paul, Brethren in Jesus Christ. Hereupon he was much offended, that they should
arrogate to themselves the Name of The Society of Jesus, not considering, that
the Sovereign Bishops, and the Fathers of the Council of Trent had named them
so. At the same time a Man of the long Robe, and of great Reputation and
Credit, set upon them, by calumniating their Manners and Doctrine. This Enemy
was so much the more to be feared, for that under the appearances of a holy
Life, he concealed Heretical Sentiments, which afterward he made manifest,
when retiring to Francfort, he publicly professed Heresy.

These new Persecutions raised no small hopes in Ignatius, of a happy success
in the conclusion, according to the word of David, that God revives, after
having mortified. As his hopes at length did not fail him, so neither did these
present difficulties deject him. The Bishop of Clermont still continued his
good Offices to the Jesuits of Paris, who yet Lodged in the College of the
Lombards; His desire was to bestow upon them Clermont House for their
Habitation, with annual Rents for their Subsistence. But there was no professed
Father among them to take possession of the House, and to accept of the
Foundation in the Name of the General. On the other side, there wanted the
King's Letters for their being received in the Kingdom, as Religious; and their
Enemies, who were powerful at Court, hindered their obtaining them.

The first of these Obstacles was easily removed by Father Ignatius: The
General endeavors to Establish the Society in France.
He ordered John Baptista Viola to make the Vows of Profession according to the
Form, which he sent him from Rome; and he humbly requested the Bishop of
Clermont to receive them. As to the King's Letters, which were looked upon as
impossible to be obtained, the General found an Expedient, which had effect.

The Cardinal of Guise, who after the death of his Uncle was called the
Cardinal of Lorain, being come to Rome to Negotiate a League between the Pope,
the Venetians, and the Duke of Ferara, against the Emperor, Father Ignatius
went to see him, and took occasion to inform him particularly concerning the
Institute of the Society, which had raised so much Jealousy in France. The
Cardinal promised his assistance and protection of them at Court, and desired
the Father to look out no farther for any other Intercessor or Patron. He kept
his Word; for as soon as he was returned to France, the first thing he did, was
to introduce Ignatius and his Society into the knowledge of Henry the Second,
and to obtain for them Letters of Reception, which had been formerly refused;

But since they could not procure these Letters to be Registered in Parliament,
where the Jesuits found more Enemies then at Court, all the Protection of the
Cardinal came to no more, then to give them Countenance for changing their
Abode. John Baptista Viola, who was chosen Provisor of the College of the
Lombards, and who had a Command from the General to quit a Title, so little
suitable to a Person Professed of the Society, went to Lodge with all his
Brethren in Clermont House, of which the Bishop gave them the use, not being
able to give them the Propriety, because their Letters were not Registered.
This House we may call the Origin, and as it were, the Cradle of the College
of Clermont, which came not to be opened, till some years after, and which was
rendered famous even at the beginning, by the Learned Men who came thither from
all Parts to Teach; and is more so at this time then ever, by the great number
of young Nobility, who are there Educated with so much care; and who have at
the Head of them a young Prince of the Blood, the most Ingenious, and the most
Amiable of the World.

Though this Business of Registring the Letters appeared to be desperate, yet
Father Ignatius did not doubt but the day would come, when it should take
effect; and for this reason, that all Enterprises which regard the good of
Souls, commonly find Opposition in the beginning; and that in great Affairs,
when the first difficulties are made smooth, time will bring on the rest.

The News which he the same year received from the Indies, He causes a House of
Catechumens to be Established in the Indies.
made some amends for what came out of France: Father Xaverius, who gave him a
constant Account of his Proceedings, as to his Superior, informed him of the
great progress which the Gospel had made in those Parts, and how much Heaven
had blessed the Labors of the Society. By other Letters at the same time he
understood, that with a a little too much precipitation Baptism was conferred
upon the converted Pagans, and that it often happened, that these new Converts
returned to Paganism, or did not well observe the Rules of Christianity, for
want of sufficient Instruction. To remedy this Disorder he gave Directions,
that they should erect in the Indies Houses for Catechumens, where the
Idolaters that would embrace the Christian Faith, might be well Instructed and
Tried before they received Baptism. According to this Advice, one of these
Houses was settled at Goa, which proved highly beneficial to all the Indies,
and out of which came forth some young Indians so fervent, that being taken by
the Turks, they animated and exhorted the Christian Slaves to Constancy.

These Nurseries were altogether according to the Spirit of Father Ignatius, as
well as those of young Ecclesiastics, who are designed for Holy Orders. From
the time that he sent Claude le Jay into Germany, he directed him to advise the
Bishops, who desired to have good Priests, and good Curates, that they would
Establish Seminaries in their Diocesses, where young Catholics, well chosen,
might be perfectly Instructed in the true Religion, and in all the Duties of
Men Consecrated to the Altar. Many Bishops, and amongst others, those of
Ausburg and of Salspurg Erected Seminaries in their Towns; and if Father
Ignatius might have had his Will, every Diocese should have had one.

While he thus labored to reform the World, Artifices of the Heretics to
pervert the Jesuits of Rome.
the Heretics, whom the Jesuits opposed in Germany and in France, not knowing
how to revenge themselves otherways, enterpriz'd even to pervent Ignatius
himself, and his Company: And to compass this, they found an Invention, which
only the Father of Lies could suggest. Philip Melancton, who after the death of
Luther was Head of the Protestants, together with another Heresiarch, sent to
Rome one of their Disciples called Michel, with Instructions to counterfeit
himself a Catholic, and to present himself to the General of the Jesuits, to
be received among them.

He was a Man in the flower of his Age, Ingenious, Modest, well shaped, and had
a promising Physiognomy. Father Ignatius did not stick at receiving him, being
led thereunto by such fair appearances. The counterfeit Novice did admirably
well disguise himself. No body so regular, nor so fervent, as he was: He was
the first at every thing; He Confessed, and Communicated several days in the
week; He even chastis'd his Body with great Rigor; and that which is most
wonderful, there did not appear in him any thing of Pride or of Self-love.

When Michel thought himself well settled, he began leisurely to disperse his
Venom, and he did it with a great deal of subtilty. They gave him the care of
the Refectory, and Oliver Manar for his Companion in the Office. Having
opportunity to speak to him alone, after having first insinuated himself into
his Friendship by his Behavior toward him, which was very civil, and also
edifying, he undertook by degrees to corrupt him. In several parts of the
Refectory there were many Pictures of Saints: he asked Manar one day by way of
Discourse, as if he meant no hurt, to what use those Pictures were, and whether
it were well done to be uncovered, or to kneel before them.

Manar, who had Learning, and had newly ended his Divinity, answered him not
only like a good Catholic, but like a good Divine. Look ye ( replied the
Hypocrite) how different Men's Opinions are about the same Point. I knew a great
many famous Doctors in Germany, who made a scruple of honoring these Images,
and who cited for it the Passage in St. John, Custodite vos a simulacris. Those
Doctors ( said Manar) were either inclining to Heresy, or not such able Men,
as you believe. The Passage of S. John intends only the Images of false Gods;
and you need but read the preceding words to be convinced of what I say: for
St. John in that place, showing the opposition between the false Gods and the
true God, says of Jesus Christ, It is he who is the true God, and life
everlasting; Keep your selves from Idols.

Michel made show of being satisfied with so clear an Explication, and drove
the Matter no farther. But another time he desired his Companion to Explicate
to him those Words of St. Peter, The Brethren which are in Babylon salute you.
Manar said, That the Apostle spoke there of Rome, which well deserved at that
time to be called Babylon, in regard of that confusion of Errors, of which it
was full. The Divines of Germany understood that Passage after the same manner
(replied Michel, and smiled); but they add, how truly I cannot tell, that St.
Peter did chiefly give that Name to Rome, because Antichrist was to have there
his Seat, which David calls the Chair of Pestilence. Manar was startled at such
a Discourse, but he dissembled his Surprise, the better to discover what he
began to fear, and what he hardly dared to believe. He informed Father Ignatius
of what had passed, and he received Orders from him to keep the Argument onfoot
with Michel, and by a faint resistance to give him hopes of victory, the better
to make him speak out, and to discover the bottom of his Soul.

In the very next Conference Manar clearly discovered Michel to be an Heretic;
and in few days there came from him above twenty Lutheran Propositions. He
entered into Argument with him upon three of them, which were the least
impious, and having prevailed upon him to set them down in Writing, he desired
him that they might choose an Umpire of their Controversy, and he named to him
Everard Mercurian, who was a Friend to both. Michel, who thought Manar half
gained, and had the vanity to believe that he might also pervert Mercurian,
agreed to it in the presence of Mercurian himself, whom Manar had preacquainted
with the Matter; and so Michel left a Paper of the Propositions in their hands,
that they might Examine them at leisure: But instead of Examining them, they
carried the Papers to Father Ignatius; whereupon the Father doubting no longer,
neither of the Doctrine, nor of the Intentions of Michel, informed the Grand
Inquisitor, John Peter Caraffa, who was afterward Pope, of the whole Matter,
and at the same time Expelled the Impostor. The Inquisitor caused him to be
Arrested, and after he had been kept some Months in close Prison, which obliged
him, though unwillingly, to confess the truth, he was condemned to the Galleys.

This Artifice not having succeeded with the Protestants, they had recourse to
another; which was to send to the Fathers at Rome two great Chests of Books, of
which the greatest part were very proper to poison Youth. Oliver Manar, who
opened the Chests, found that those at the top were Catholic Books, and all
the rest Heretical; he presently advertised Father Ignatius of it. The Father,
at the very first, divined whence such an Alms should come, and ordered that
all the Books should be burnt, and their Ashes to be thrown into the Wind, as
if he were afraid they should infect the House; nor could he, according to his
own Maxims, otherwise do, being persuaded, that all that comes from Heretics
ought to be suspected, and not permitting that any of their Books should be
read in the Society, how good soever they might be: For (said he) when we read
a good Book, writ by a bad Man, after having taken pleasure in the Book, we
grow insensibly affected to the Author, even sometimes to believe, that all
that such an Author writes is reasonable. This he particularly applied to
Erasmus, and to such like Authors, a great while before their Works were
condemned. And he grounded his Opinion upon the Authority of S. Basil, who says
in express terms, That a Religious Person ought not only to have in horror the
Doctrine of Heretics, but also not to read any Books but such as come from an
Orthodox Pen, and are approved by the Church, because the Words of the Impious,
according to the Sentiment of the Apostle, are like a Gangrene, which taints
and corrupts by degrees all that is sound.

But Father Ignatius had yet more troublesome Rencounters, The Archbishop of
Toledo opposite to the Society.
even with Catholics, and with a principal Prelate of the Church. The
Archbishop of Toledo newly declared himself again against the Society,
notwithstanding the Bulls which Approved the Institute and Exercises. His
pretense was, that the Jesuits, whom they called Theatines, did entrench upon
the Rights of Episcopacy, by the liberty which they took of Administering the
Sacraments in all Places, under color of their pretended Privileges. There
was but one College of the Fathers in his Diocese, which was that of Alcala;
He one day Interdicted them all, and thundered out a Sentence of
Excommunication against all Persons that should Confess to them. He commanded
at the same time all the Religious, and Curates within his Diocese, not to
suffer any of the Society either to Preach, or to say Mass in their Churches;
and that, which exceeds Imagination, he suspended all the Priests in Toledo
from hearing Confessions, who had made the Spiritual Exercise.

The General, far from being afflicted at this violent Persecution, did in some
manner rejoice at it. This new Tempest (said he to Ribadeneyra) is a good Omen:
If I am not mistaken, it is an evident sign, that God will be served by us in
Toledo. For Experience has taught us, that to our Society, Contradictions and
Persecutions always prepare the way; and that the more it is opposed in any
Place, the more fruit it there produces. In the mean time he writ into Spain,
that all Endeavors should be used to satisfy the Archbishop. Villanova, who
was Rector of the College of Alcala, a moderate and prudent Man, made to him
all manner of Submission; but the Archbishop grew more inflexible, by how much
the Rector was more submiss. All means were used to mollify and appease him:
The Friends of the Society, and especially Cardinal Francisco Men^za, who
designed to Erect a College in the Town of Burgos, of which he was Bishop,
left no means untried to procure their Peace.

When Father Ignatius understood that nothing could prevail with the
Archbishop, he at last informed Julius the Third with what had passed at
Toledo; and also ordered the Fathers of Alcala to ^^^sake their Complaints to
the Privy Council of Spain. The Pope caused a Letter to be writ to the
Archbishop by Cardinal Matheo, Secretary of State, which imported, That it was
much wondered at in Rome, that the Society of Jesus should be so ill treated at
Toledo, since it was in so good Esteem, and so well received in all other Parts
of the World.

On the other side, the King's Council having examined the Bulls, and the
Privileges of the order, and judging that the Conduct of the Archbishop did
directly oppose the Holy See, they made a Declaration in favor of the Fathers.
The ^^^ter from Rome, and the Declaration of the Coun^^ brought the Prelate to
reason: He presently annulled his former Acts, and reestablished the Jesuits
in all their Rights. As soon as Father Ignatius had news of it, he sent him his
most humble thanks in a Letter, full of Acknowledgment and submission; and the
more to gain him, he promised, that the Fathers of Alcala should make no use of
their Privileges, nor receive any Person among them, without his Approbation.

At this time the Society had two great Losses: Claude le Jay died at Vienna in
Austria, and Francis Xaverius in the Island of Sancian, near China. They were
also in danger the same year of losing Father Francis de Borgia, but after
another manner; and they would certainly have lost him, if Father Ignatius had
not preserved him by such means as I shall now relate.

Borgia upon his return out of Italy, retired himself into Biscay, and made
choice of the College of Ogniate, to consummate his Sacrifice, by renouncing
the Duchy of Gandia, and all the remainders of his Greatness. He chose that
Place, in regard of its Neighborhood to Loyola, whether his Devotion led him
before he came to Ogniate: And it is said, that entering into the Chamber where
Father Ignatius was born, he fell down upon his Knees, and kissed the Ground
with a Religious respect; and after having given thanks to the Divine Goodness
for having brought such a Man into the World, he made it his Prayer, that since
he had taken Ignatius for his Guide and his Master, he might have the Grace
exactly to follow his Counsels and his Example.

He departed from Loyola, animated with a new Spirit; and he lived so holily,
that all admired to see in him, at his very entrance into Religion, consummated
Sanctity. When the Emperor Charles the Fifth understood that Don Francisco de
Borgia, of a Grandee of Spain was thus transformed into a Jesuit, he sent to
the Pope to bestow upon him a Cardinal's Cap; for which his Holiness needed no
great Solicitation, for he had seen Father Francis the Year before, and was so
edified with his Virtue, that even then he had it in his thoughts to make him a
Cardinal: So that now he resolved to comply with the Emperor, and the Matter
was resolved with the general Approbation of the sacred College.

Father Ignatius being informed of the Pope's Resolution, The General hinders
the Promotion of Borgia.
thought himself obliged to oppose it for the Interest of the Society, and for
the Honor of Father Francis, whom the World would not fail to reproach with
having resigned his Dukedom of Gandia to his Son, in prospect of a Cardinal's
Cap. But the better to find out the Will of Heaven in a Matter so nice, and so
important, he shut himself up three days together, and communicated only with
God in Prayer. The first day he found himself altogether indifferent, without
inclining more on one side then on the other. The second day he felt a
propension in himself rather to break the Design, then to let it go on. But the
third day he was so convinced, that it was not the Will of God to have Father
Francis made a Cardinal, that he said to an intimate Friend, If all the World
should throw themselves at my Feet, to beg of me not to oppose the Promotion of
Father Francis, I would not desist.

In effect, notwithstanding all the Entreaties of the Emperor's Ministers, and
of those who pretended Zeal for the Honor of the House of Borgia, he would not
relent. He began his Solicitation by interessing those Cardinals in the Matter,
who were best instructed in the Nature of his Institute; but finding that they
more considered the Honor of the Sacred College, then the Advantage of the
Society, and the Reputation of Father Francis, he applied himself immediately
to the Pope, and plied him with so many strong Arguments, that his Holiness was
forced to yield.

The truth is, that he found an Expedient to content the Court of Rome, and the
Court of Spain, and also to do Honor to Father Francis, without doing wrong to
the Society: which was, That the Pope should offer him the Cap, but that if the
Father did refuse it, his Holiness should not compel him to take it. The thing
was Executed as Ignatius had laid it: And the Cap, of which the Offer was sent
to Father Francis in his Solitude at Ogniate, no otherwise pleased him, then in
giving him an occasion of Sacrificing to God the Dignities of the Church, after
his having made a Sacrifice to him of the Grandeurs of the World.

The Conduct of Father Ignatius, Don Antonio de Cordoua received into the
Society.
and the Example of Father Francis, caused a Resolution in Don Antonio de
Cordoua to enter into the Society. He was the Son of Laurence Suarez de
Figueroa, Conde de Feria, and of Catherine Fernandez de Cordoua: Being young,
and very well accomplished, he made himself a Churchman, only upon the Motives
of Piety. Philip Prince of Spain, who particularly loved him, desired the
Emperor to procure for him a Cardinal's Cap. Charles the Fifth did what the
Prince desired; but Don Antonio resolving wholly to leave the World, by the
Example of his Cousin Borgia, thought the surest way to avoid the Honor which
was prepared for him, would be to shelter himself in the Society of Jesus, as
in a Sanctuary. He writ a long Letter to Father Ignatius upon this Subject; in
which, after having laid open the Motives of his Vocation: Father, (he said to
him) since God has placed you in his Church to be the Refuge of those who are
out of their way, I desire you to receive me into the number of your Children.
The young Lord was received, and in time became one of the greatest Men of the
Society.

THE LIFE OF St. IGNATIUS. The Fifth BOOK.
WHereas Father Ignatius secluded his Order from Ecclesiastical Dignities, The
Foundation of the German College.
upon the only Motive of better Serving the Church, accordingly his thoughts
were always watchful to observe, and relieve the Necessities of Christianity;
and his Care extended it self even to the remotest Parts of the World. But his
principal Consideration was of the Northern Countries, desolated by Heresy.
The greatest part of Germany had in a manner quite lost their ancient Piety:
the Books of Heretics were every where scattered, and every where read with
Impunity. And the younger sort, out of those poisoned Fountains, drew their
first Principles of Religion. The greatest part of the Catholics could not
endure the Name of Papist, given them by the Protestants, and grew almost
ashamed of their Profession. The Priests and the Religious were in great
disorder; and notwithstanding the Zeal of many Bishops for the Reformation of
their Diocesses, they could hardly find sufficient Curates, to whom they might
confide the Care and Government of Souls.

Father Ignatius Discoursing one day upon this Subject with Cardinal Moron,
they were both of Opinion, that the only way to remedy so many Evils, was to
place in all Churches Pastors found in their Doctrine, and unstained in their
Life, which should be of the German Nation; but that it was necessary in the
first place, to have them well Formed and Trained, which could not be done
without Founding a College, where the young Men of the Country might be
Educated in Learning and Piety: That Germany being generally perverted, there
could be no Security there for the Establishing such a College; and that a
properer Place could not be chosen then Rome, where, not to speak of the
holiness of the Place, which would inspire Catholic Sentiments, the Presence,
and the Liberality of Popes, would much conduce to the rise and support of so
good a Work.

The Pope, to whom Cardinal Moron, and Cardinal Santa Croce first opened this
Matter, very much approved this Design, which he himself had formerly conceived
in his thoughts, and gave a beginning to it, by assigning a Fund for the
Maintenance of the College: After which he ordered Father Ignatius, not only
to seek out and choose young Students out of Germany, but also to Govern and to
Instruct them. The Father immediately gathered together Four and twenty out of
several Provinces of Germany, all of good Capacity and Education. He afterward
by the Pope's Order, drew up Rules and Statutes for their Government. He
appointed Fathers out of the Casa Professa, and the Roman College, to be their
Directors and Masters, but with the management of their Revenue he would have
nothing to do: He said that such Administrations, besides the fatigue and
trouble of them, often give occasion of suspicions and murmurings.

The principal Revenue of the German College failing, He supports the German
College in troublesome Times.
upon the death of Julius the Third, Father Ignatius was in some apprehension,
lest the College should break, by reason of the Dearth then at Rome, and of
the Disturbances in Italy, under the Pontificate of Paul the Fourth. He
therefore distributed a part of these young Strangers into several Colleges of
the Society abroad, and the rest he maintained in Rome upon such Charities as
he procured for them; and when those failed, he borrowed Money upon his own
Security. Thus he made them subsist till the bad Years were over, and the noise
of War did cease. It was observable in him, that when the Times were at the
worst, he showed most courage, and was often heard to say, That the German
College should one day have large Revenues. He sent word to the Cardinal of
Auspurg, who was Protector of this College, and who believed it would fall to
ruin, That the Work would not fail, if those who undertook it did not fail in
their Resolution, and their Confidence in God: But that if the Cardinals and
Princes would not go through with it, he, as poor as he was, would take it upon
him, and sell himself, rather then not bring it to pass.

The Words of Father Ignatius were made good by the Event; for the German
College was plentifully supplied by the Alms of Charitable Persons: and the
same Spirit which moved Julius the Third to begin the Foundation, excited some
years after Gregory the Thirteenth, to augment it, and to enlarge the Buildings
with a Magnificency worthy of the Head of the Church; as if God who had made
use of other Popes of the same Name, to Plant and to Propagate the Catholic
Faith in Germany, would also employ a Gregory to make it reflourish there.

About the end of the Year 1552, He makes a Reconciliation, and does other good
Works.
an important Occasion presented it self, which obliged Father Ignatius to go
out of Rome into the Kingdom of Naples. The Duke Ascanio Colonna, and Jane of
Arragon his Wife, were at variance upon some frivolous Matter, according to the
Custom of Great-ones; and their Differences growing wider and wider, they at
last separated with noise and scandal. The Father, who knew them both
particularly well, could not endure that this Breach should continue, and
undertook to make it up. Jane of Arragon was already retired to the Frontier of
the Kingdom of Naples: He followed her thither, as infirm as he was, and in a
very rigorous Season: for he thought it convenient to begin with the Duchess,
not doubting but that if she were gained, the Peace would be soon made. In
conclusion he prevailed with her, and he had no great difficulty afterward to
bring the Duke to reason; so that being brought again together, they lived more
peaceably then ever.

During this little Voyage, which took up but Ten days, Father Ignatius, with
his Companion John Polancus, did many other good Works under the Authority of
Cardinal Burgos, who was in those Parts. They Confessed the poor Country
People, as they passed through the Villages; and they introduced into two or
three Towns of the Kingdom of Naples, the Custom of Confessing and
Communicating every Month: And that so Christian a Practice might not be
discontinu'd, they engaged the Pastors frequently to excite their Parishioners
to the performance of it, and the principal Men of each Place to lead the rest
by their Example. He hinders the Incorporating the Barnabites, the Somasques,
and the Theatines with the Society.


Upon his return to Rome he received Letters from the Archbishop of Genoa, who
earnestly desired that the Congregation of the Barnabites of Milan might be
Incorporated into the Society of Jesus. This Prelate, who had a very good
meaning, but was ill instructed in the Institute of the Jesuits, represented to
Father Ignatius, that these two Congregations of Regular Clerics making up but
one Body, would be more beneficial to the Church; wherefore he very much
exhorted him to this Union. The Father very greatly esteemed the Virtue of the
Barnabites, and moreover he had been obliged to them for their Charity showed
to Father Emanuel Miona, when he fell sick at Milan, in his Journey from Paris
to Rome. Nevertheless he could not consent to the Proposition of the
Archbishop, and he answered him, That in his Judgment, the greatest Glory of
God required, that each Order should continue in their primitive Institution;
That for their being all of them Regular Clerics, and their wearing almost the
same Habit, they had never the more the same Rule, nor the same Design; and
that nothing would be more serviceable to the Church, then for each Order to
hold constantly to the Spirit of their first Vocation. He had made the same
Answer some years before, in reference to the Somasques, and the Theatines,
upon a like Motion of having them Incorporated with the Society; but his
Judgment was fixed, and never to be altered in this Matter.

About the same time he disapproved the Conduct of two very eminent Fathers of
his Order: He condemns the Conduct of Miron and Gonzales.
One of them was Father James Miron of Valentia, who was the first Rector of
the College of Conimbria, and made so even before he was a Priest; The other
was Father Lewis Gonzales, Son to the Governor of the Island of Madera, who was
come out of Africa into Portugal, to Treat with the King for the Redemption of
Slaves, and about the Means of advancing Religion among the Moors. They both
Resided at Lisbon, and led there a very holy Life.

John the Third of Portugal, of whom we have so often spoken, having twice or
thrice made use of Father Gonzales in Confession, resolved to choose him for his
Confessor in Ordinary, being at that time unprovided. But observing in him an
extreme aversion to the Court, and a great desire of returning back into
Africa, he would not force his Inclinations. He therefore cast his Eyes upon
Father Miron, and sending for him upon the Octave of the Blessed Sacrament, he
declared to him, that he had chosen him for his Confessor. The Father was so
surprised, and so troubled at such a Declaration, that at first he remained
speechless; but recovering himself again, he kneeled down to the King; and
after having humbly thanked his Majesty for the advantageous Opinion which he
was pleased to entertain of the Jesuits, he Protested, that as to his own
Person, his Majesty, if duly informed, could not make choice of him. I have
neither (said he) the Talents, nor the Age, which such an Office requires, and
besides this, I am a Stranger.

None of your Body are Strangers to me ( replied the King), and on the other
side, I see no necessity of such extraordinary Talents, to be my Confessor: for
by the Grace of God you shall always find me disposed to follow your good
Advice; but I am a little surprised, that you who are Confessors to all the
World, should make such a difficulty of being mine.

It is not, Sir, that we have the least unwillingness to Serve you in this
manner ( replied the Father), but only in regard that such Honorable
Employments agree not with our Vocation; which is to Visit Hospitals, to
Instruct the Poor, and to Exercise the most abject Functions for the saving of
Souls. We ought to fear nothing more then Worldly Esteem; and it is already
laid to our charge, that we hunt after the Favor of Princes. Wherefore I
humbly beseech your Majesty, upon this occasion, to moderate the Affection with
which you are pleased to honor us.

The King made Answer, That he would do nothing contrary to their Institute;
and that his Design was not to divert them from their Evangelical Functions;
that they should take a Days time to deliberate, and that on the Morrow they
should bring him their precise Answer. They failed not to do it, and deputed
Father Gonzales, with all Respect to tell the King, That the Humility of which
the Society made profession, was not consistent with the Honor which he
intended them; wherefore they humbly prayed his Majesty to excuse Father Miron
from being his Confessor.

The King had been so pressing upon them for their Answer, that he gave them no
time of first Writing to Rome about it; but they afterward certifi'd Father
Ignatius what Answer they had made. He absolutely condemned it, though it
proceeded from a good Principle; and gave them both to understand, that the
Humility of Apostolical Men was not so straightly confined as they thought; That
these Honorable Functions were not incompatible with a Vocation which obliges
to Preach the Gospel both to the Little and the Great, and to Kings as well as
to Subjects; That the Society must not refuse the meanest Functions, nor be
afraid of the highest, when Providence, without their seeking, presented them;
That they were not Monasticks, enclosed within a Monastery; That as they ought
to seek in Hospitals, in Cottages, in the Galleys, and in Prisons, whereupon to
exercise their Zeal; so on the other side, they were not to avoid the Palaces
of Princes: and that being engaged by their Institute to sanctify all
Conditions of Men, it would be a fault in them to abandon those who were at
farthest distance from the Kingdom of God.

Thus St. Ignatius instructed his Children upon Occasions; and he sharply
reproved them, even those of the greatest Merit, when he thought the
Reprehension was necessary. We have a memorable Example of this in the Person
of Father Laynez. This Father assisted the second time at the Council of Trent,
which Julius the Third immediately reassembled after his Promotion, according
to one of the Articles Stipulated in the Conclave; and he there gained so great
an Esteem, that having a Quartan Ague, the Congregations of the Divines and of
the Cardinals, was never held upon the Days of his Fits.

Whereas the War of Germany, which the Detention of the Landgrave of Hesse had
raised against the Emperor, and had put the whole Empire into disorder, did
also suspend the sitting of the Council for two years; Father Ignatius recalled
Laynez to Padua, and named him Provincial of Italy in the room of Pasquir
Brovet, whom he had sent into France, where the Affairs of the Society were in
a reasonable good plight. Laynez refused the Provincialship, and the reason
alleged for his refusal was, that he was not yet perfect enough at Obeying,
and therefore unfit to Command: But he was told that it was the Will of his
Superior, and consequently of God, that he should accept it; whereupon he was
forced to yield. When he was in his Government of the Province of Italy, he was
concerned, that all the best workmen were sent for to Rome, and he complained
by Letters, that the Colleges of Italy were left unfurnished.

Father Ignatius Answered him in short, He reprehends Laynez, and how Laynez
receives the Reprimand.
that the Capital City of the World ought to be more considered, then other
Towns; and whereas Laynez replied upon it, without taking due notice, as it
seems, of what had been Answered him, Father Ignatius wrote to him in these
words, I am displeased, that you continue to write to me upon the same Subject,
after what I have already Answered, that a common good must be preferred to a
particular one, and a greater concern to a less. Reflect a little upon your
Proceeding, and then send me word, whether you find that you have transgres'd,
and in case that you think your self Culpable, let me know what Penalty you are
ready to undergo for your fault.

Laynez writ back from Florence to Father Ignatius, that he had read over his
Letters several times; that he found matter in it to make him admire on one
side his Paternal Charity, and to praise the mercy of God; and on the other, to
humble himself, and to acknowledge his fault. He beseech'd him never to be
sparing toward him of such wholesome Reprehensions, and he acknowledged, that
upon this occasion he had been guilty of several considerable Faults. 1. For
having been so undiscreet, and so vain, as to oppose with his weak Reasons the
Sense of a Person so prudent and clear-sighted. 2. For having caused
Displeasure in his General. 3. For contradicting the Order of Providence, by
endeavoring to proceed in a different way from that prescribed him by his
Superior.

As to the Chastisement which I deserve ( he said), considering with my self of
late, that I have been now Twenty years under an Obligation of Serving God
according to the Evangelical Counsels, that for the doing it I have had so much
help and assistance, of which I have made so little use, and that the end of my
Life may possibly be near at hand, I found an ardent desire within me of dying
wholly to my self, and of living only to God; and it appeared to me, that to be
treated according to my Merits, I ought to be esteemed a miserable Wretch, and
as a mere Nothing.

Wherefore, my Reverend Father, upon the Receipt of your Letter, I fell down
upon my Knees, and having made my Prayer with many Tears, a thing not usual
with me, this was the result of my Desires, which I now send to your Reverence,
with Tears in my Eyes, for your Approbation. I humbly request you, into whose
hands I wholly resign my self, I say, I humbly request, and ask it of you by
the Bowels of our Savior Jesus Christ, that to punish my Sins, and to tame my
ill governed Passions, you would be pleased to withdraw me from Government,
from Preaching, from Study, so as to leave me no other Book but my Breviary; to
command me that I come to Rome upon Alms, and there to be employed in the
meanest of Offices in the House; or if I am not fit for them, to spend the rest
of my days in teaching Children the first Rudiments of the Latin Tongue, and
that I may be laid aside as the outcast of the Body. This is that which I choose
in the first place for my Penance.

Laynez fearing that Father Ignatius would not admit of all these Propositions,
he qualified them in a second Address, and submitted to the same Penalties with
a limitation of Time; that is, for two or three years, or so long as it should
please the General. And lest this second Offer should not be received, he at
last proposed several Disciplines; A four-weeks Fast, and that as often as he
writ to the General, he should first make his Prayer, and then meditate upon
his Letter; and after he had writ it, he should read it with attention, taking
great heed, not to say any thing which might cause in his good Father the least
Displeasure, and even endeavoring to make use of no Expressions but what may
give him comfort and satisfaction.

This only Example shows the Authority which Father Ignatius had in his Body,
and after what manner he would have Superiors subject to their General. But
hence we may also learn, how great the Humility was of a Man who had been
admired in the Council of Trent, and how tractable the greatest Wits are, when
they have the true Spirit of Religion.

Father Ignatius was highly edifi'd at the proceeding of Laynez; and so
Religious a Submission made him better amends then any penal Satisfaction. Far
from Interdicting Laynez his Study, or from humbling him to Teach a Grammar
School, he gave him Orders to write a Sum of Divinity, to serve as an Antidote
against the Books of Heretical Controvertists. And to the end that his Office
of Provincial should afford him leisure to attend this Work, he named two
Fathers to ease him in his Visitation of the Colleges of Italy: One of them
was Doctor Olavius, who before he was a Jesuit, was acquainted with Laynez at
the Council of Trent, and whom Father Ignatius Constituted Rector of the Roman
College presently after his Profession. The other was John Baptista Viola, a
prudent and zealous Man, who had been Regent of the young Jesuits at Paris in
the College of the Lombards, and in Clermont House.

This last, whom Zeal so transported, that to save the Provincial's trouble, he
took too much of it upon himself, even to be disquieted at any Proceedings that
were contrary to his Idea's, was once admonished by the General, that after he
had done his Duty, he should keep himself in repose, and imitate our
Guardian-Angels, who continually watch over the Souls which God has given them
in charge, but who lose nothing of their tranquillity or happiness, when their
care is unsuccessful.

Oviedo, He keeps up regular Discipline in the College of Naples.
whom Father Ignatius had recalled from Gandia, Governed at that time the
College of Naples, in Quality of Rector, and Bobadilla had the Charge there of
Supervisor, according to the Practice of the Society in the beginning. These
two Men, as holy as they were, each in his way, did not very well agree
together concerning the Conduct of the College: For the last, being easy and
condescending, was apt to let loose, what the other (more rigorous) held fast
in point of Discipline. Bobadilla thought it less generous to regulate Sanctity
by little outward Observances; and provided there were a serious Application to
solid Virtue, he did not much concern himself for the rest. Oviedo on the
contrary believed there was nothing to be reckoned little, that tended to the
Service of God; and that the best grounded Virtue could not long subsist, with
the neglect of those lesser Duties, which in themselves appear not very
considerable.

When Father Ignatius understood what past at Naples, he took from Bobadilla
the Office of Superintendent, and forbad him from giving any disturbance to the
Government of Oviedo, to whom he gave the whole Authority; that so Domestical
Discipline might be maintained, which began insensibly to relax, which is a
matter of dangerous Consequence to all Communities: For it was the General's
Opinion, that these was less danger in the violation of the greater Rules, then
in the neglect of the lesser; because the evil which the infraction of the
first brings with it, is evident and palpable; whereas that which proceeds from
the contempt of the second, is not for the most part seen nor felt, till it
becomes incurable.

The Affairs of Portugal proved much more troublesome and difficult to him,
Troubles in the Province of Portugal, and the General's Conduct in quieting
them.
then those of Naples. The College of Conimbria was in a flourishing
Condition, both for the number of the Jesuits, and for the Reputation of
Learning. More then a hundred young Men of good Parts, and most of them of
Quality, which Father Simon Rodriguez had received into the Body, followed the
Study of Human Learning, and of higher Sciences, with incredible vigor and
emulation. Some among them, too much intent upon their Study, and not enough
dead to the World, began to neglect their Exercises of Piety, and by degrees
degenerated into a Behavior altogether worldly. The mildness of Rodriguez's
Government was the principal cause of this Mischief. This holy Man, who had
formerly cured a Leprous Person by lying in Bed with him, and who lately had
restored Health to many sick People, with only embracing them, edifi'd all his
Inferiors by the exact regularity of his Life. But his natural Goodness
permitted them to live according to their Inclinations; and if sometimes he
reprehended them, he did it in so soft a manner, that it signified little, and
served rather to confirm them in their bad Customs.

Before these Disorders brake out, Father Ignatius had thoughts to remove
Rodriguez out of Portugal, where he had been twelve years Governor; and this he
designed upon the account of putting in practice what is set down in the
Constitutions, concerning the time to be limited in the Government of subaltern
Superiors, and of letting Provincials understand that they were not perpetual,
though the General might continue them for as long time as he pleased.

The bad Effects which the Indulgence of Rodriguez produced, absolutely
determined Father Ignatius to this Removal; and that which obliged him to do it
with speed, was, that the Jesuits of Portugal were so linked to their
Provincial, that they seemed to know no other Superior. His Facility was
pleasing to the Tepid, and his eminent Virtue charmed the Fervent. Father
Ignatius judged that this mighty adhesion and fondness was against the
perfection of Religious Obedience, which ought not so much to regard the Person
of the Superior, as that of Jesus Christ in the Superior.

He resolved therefore to take from him the Charge of Provincial, and moreover
to make him leave Portugal; both to the end that his Successor might have
entire liberty in the Government of the Province, and also that the Malcontents
might not have recourse to their ancient Superior, and that they being all
deprived of his Presence, their Obedience might be more pure and free.

But to save the Reputation of Rodriguez, he thought it expedient to put him in
Office elsewhere; for he believed, that when he should not have Portuguez to
Govern, his Conduct would not be so soft and easy. And whereas the General
well knew, that the Spanish Fathers had not much inclination to those of
Portugal, by reason of the natural Antipathy between the two Nations, and
desiring nothing more then to unite them all in Jesus Christ, he designed
Rodriguez for the Province of Arragon, and Miron for that of Portugal. But he
found great Obstacles in the Execution of this Project.

The King of Portugal, The General overcomes great Oppositions.
who did not permit that Rodriguez should go to Rome, to be present at the
Assembly in the Jubilee Year, and the Prince Don John, who still honored him as
his Master, could not resolve to let him go from them. Of the same mind were
Don Antonio d' Alencasire, Duke d' Aviro, Nephew to King John the Second, and
Don Antonio d' Ataide, Conde de Castenheira, his particular Friends; besides a
great many other Portuguez Lords, who had great confidence in him. Upon the
first rumor of the Alteration which the General of the Society intended to
make, the whole Court was in disorder. Some said, that the King should command
Father Rodriguez not to depart the Kingdom. Others offered themselves to make
the General change his Resolution. There wanted not those, who would have a
Brief sent for from Rome to detain him; and some advised the King to make the
Father accept of the Bishopric of Conimbria, which had formerly been several
times offered him, and was yet vacant.

On the other side, the young Jesuits spoke it openly, that they could obey
none but Father Simon; and began to talk of leaving all, if he were taken from
them. But Father Ignatius having foreseen these Stirs, writ to the King, to the
Queen, and to the Prince of Portugal, to make them sensible of his Reasons; He
did the same to Father Leon Henriquez, and to Father Lewis Gonzales, who had
great Credit in that Court: He conjured them, and commanded them to use all
their Industry to facilitate the Business. And at the same time he writ to
Father Rodriguez a Letter, in which his Expressions were very kind, but his
Orders very positive.

All these Leters had their effect; and it is hardly conceivable, with what
Reverence and Submission Rodriguez received the Order of his General: he
several times kissed the Letter; and it is said, that he was in such a
Transport of Joy, that sometimes he laid it to his Head, and sometimes to his
Heart, as if he had been out of himself. He also earnestly solicited for his
Departure with the Princes, whom the Reasons of Father Ignatius had convinced,
but whom their Affection for Rodriguez made unwilling.

As soon as he had obtained what he desired, he retreated to the farthest end
of Portugal toward Galicia, into a Country House, which belonged to the
College of Conimbria, called St. Felix, and is situated near Valenca de Mino,
among the Rocks and Mountains: He retired, I say, after having resigned the
Government of the Province to Father Miron, and after having excused himself by
Letters from the Provincialship of Arragon; so much was it his desire to live
only to God, and to himself.

Miron, who was a clear-sighted Man, exact, resolute, and severe, would also
have been very proper to re-settle Discipline in a short time, if he had a
little more considered Human weakness. Whereas he had high Idea's concerning
Religious Perfection, especially concerning that of his Society, he was not
satisfied, unless those under his Government were all perfect; not considering,
that things in Practice will not rise so high as our Speculation, and that
sometimes we must content our selves with what is best to be had, though not best
in it self.

A Conduct so severe, and so opposite to that of Rodriguez, which was fresh in
their memory, gave a general disgust. And whereas Miron naturally active and
restless, would see every thing done with his own Eyes, and in a manner do all
himself, the domestic Officers, and the subordinate Superiors, were
unsatisfi'd that he put no trust in them, and consequently grew negligent in
their Employments.

Father Ignatius, He sends a Visitor into Portugal.
whom the Provincial informed of the state of Affairs, and to whom the others
made their Complaints of the Provincial, was upon the point of going himself
into Portugal, to remedy these Disorders by his Presence; but after diverse
Reflections, he contented himself with sending a Visitor; and he chose for so
important a Commission, Father Michael de Torrez, Rector of the College of
Salamanca, and Doctor of Divinity in the University of Alcala, a Man of
Authority and of good Sense, in whom was joined the Mildness of Rodriguez with
the Resolution of Miron.

The Visitor, according to his Instructions, in the first place paid his Duty
to the King of Portugal, gratefully acknowledging him to be the principal
Benefactor and Protector of the Society. After which he humbly besought him to
give leave, that Father Rodriguez, who was appointed for the Government of the
Province of Arragon, and whose absence from Portugal seemed necessary for the
quiet of the College of Conimbria, might not remain useless in a Desert, but
might speedily repair to his Charge.

The King found great difficulty to consent to it; but at last he did consent,
and thereupon writ to Father Ignatius by Father Gonzales, who was called to
Rome when Father Rodriguez (who blindly obeyed his Orders) had left his
Solitude to proceed toward Arragon. This is the Copy of the King's Letter.

FAther, Master Ignatius, I have received your Letters, and with them a great
deal of Satisfaction. I am persuaded that the Service of God requires of me to
grant what you ask concerning the change of Father Master Simon, and that it
should be done in the manner which Father Lewis Gonzales will tell you. You may
rest assured, that I shall always be well pleased to favor your Society, in
consideration of the great good which God is pleased to do by it in all my
States. And because I have told Father Lewis Gonzales, what in particular
regards the Affection which I have for you, and the Concerns of your Order in
my Kingdom of Portugal, I refer my self to him, and you may give entire Credit
to what he shall say to you on my part. At Lisbon the 30th of January 1553.

The departure of Rodriguez did not a little advantage the Visitor, to quiet
the Minds of those whom the presence of their ancient Superior had rendered
less tractable. But that which much contributed to restore Order and
Tranquillity in the Province, was, that the new Provincial, according to the
Directions which he received from Rome, changed the Method of his Conduct.

The General advertised him, He gives Advice to the new Provincial.
that a new Administration does never succeed well in the beginning, by using
rigor; that at first some Faults must be dissembled, or pardoned; that young
Men cannot be perfect all on the sudden, and that there is no arriving to the
height of Virtue, or of Vice, but by degrees.

But in regard that Miron was too much inclined to Motion, and would do all
things himself, he told him, to allay his Activity, That it did not belong to
Superiors in Chief to pry into every little matter themselves; That Men were
made trusty by thinking them so; That it was better sometimes to be deceived,
then always to be in distrust; Lastly, that the first in Office should resemble
the Primum Mobile, which by its own steady Motion regulates the Courses of
other Celestial Bodies. Know all, order all (he said), but take heed of doing
all your self. Acting in this manner, you will do nothing unbecoming your
Place; and you will have this advantage, that if your Orders be ill Executed,
you may afterward rectify what you find amiss; whereas, if you make your self
the Actor, and things should not at first succeed, it would not be very
Honorable for you, that your Inferiors should mend your Faults.

All things being settled in this manner, He moderates the Fervor of the
Portuguez.
it happened by a strange Revolution, that the Portuguez passed from one
Extremity to the other, according to the nature of human things, which seldom
rest in an even poize, and in their just situation. The Fervor introduced into
the College of Conimbria, increased so fast, that at last it exceeded all
measure. Every one took upon him to be his own Director in Matters of Piety and
Mortification, only consulting his own Spirit, and following the heat of his
Devotion. Some consumed themselves with Austerities, to a degree of wasting
their Bodies and their Health; others, charmed with the Delights of
Contemplation, spent whole Days and Nights in Prayer, hardly minding their
Study.

Father Ignatius, to remedy this second Disorder, which was the more dangerous,
in regard that it proceeded from an excess of Virtue, endeavored by his
Instructions to discover to them their Illusion: but finding that the Advice
given them, had not its effect, and that an indiscreet Fervor reigned not only
in Portugal, but spread it self into Spain, he writ a long Discourse in form of
an Epistle, to reduce those into a right way, whom a mistaken Devotion had
misled.

This Epistle, The Epistle of Obedience.
Entitled, Concerning the Virtue of Obedience, and Addressed to the Portuguez,
begins with making it appear, That Obedience is the only Virtue, which brings
forth and nourishes all other Virtues; That this, in a peculiar manner, is the
Virtue of the Society of Jesus, and the distinguishing Mark and Character of
it: so that we may suffer our selves to be surpassed by other Orders, in
Fasting, in Watching, and in many other Practices of Austerity, which each of
them holily observes, according to the Spirit of their Vocation; but that in
matter of Obedience we ought not to yield to any, as being obliged by our
Vocation to be perfect in it.

The Saint in the next place, upon Reasons drawn out of Scripture and the
Fathers, lays down these Degrees of Obedience. The First and lowest, consists
in doing what we are commanded. The Second is, not only to execute the Orders
of a Superrior, but to conform our Will to his. The Third, to judge, that what
he Orders is best and most reasonable, and upon this ground alone, because the
Superior does judge it so. To arrive at this high degree, which is called the
Obedience of the Understanding, he says, that we are not to take notice,
whether he who Governs us be Wise or Imprudent, Holy or Imperfect; but only to
consider in his Person the Authority of Jesus Christ, Delegated to him for our
Conduct, and that his infinite Wisdom cannot permit his Delegate to deceive us.

The whole Letter, which may be called a Masterpiece in its kind, turns upon
these grand Principles, which the Father supports by solid Reasons, and
illustrates by diverse Examples. He particularly proves, in order to his present
Design, That it is a strange Illusion to believe, that one may go against the
Will of a Superior, in doing things which are good in themselves, as in
Praying, and Fasting, etc. And he declares, That according to the Doctrine of
the ancient Masters of a Spiritual Life, it is not a less Fault to break the
Laws of Obedience in Watching then in Sleeping, in Laboring then in doing
nothing.

Father Ignatius was not content to send this Letter of Obedience only into
Portugal and Spain, he transmitted it into all Parts, even to the Indies and
Japony. The Society had entered the Year before into the Island of Corsica, and
the two Workmen he sent thither by the Pope's Order, at the Request of the
Commonwealth of Genoua, found work enough to do in their new Mission. One of
them was called Silvester-Landino, and the other Emanuel de Monte-Mayor. The
whole Island had much of the Barbarity of a Heathen Country, and though Religion
for many Ages past had been planted there; yet in their manner of living there
was little of Christianity to be seen. The Priests had not so much as a
distinction of Habit, and for the most part led not only a Secular, but a
Libertine Life: There were among them, who neither knew how to say Mass, nor to
Administer the Sacrament of Penance. The People on their side lived in
profound Ignorance, and many up and down the Country, even old Men, could not
make the Sign of the Cross. This Ignorance was accompanied with all sorts of
Vices; Superstition, Sorcery, Incest, and Pligamy, did every where reign with
Impunity, and without Scruple.

No sooner had the two Missioners made their Circuit about the Island, Two
Missioners of the Society Accused, and Justified.
but the face of it was wholly changed, so great was the Blessing which it
pleased God to bestow upon their Labors: But this change drew upon them a
terrible Persecution. An Ecclesiastic, considerable for his Office of Grand
Vicar, and more famous for the Debauchery of his Life, could not endure the
Zeal, and the good Success of Landino and Monte-Mayor. Besides his own
Animosity against these Foreign Priests, whose Apostolical Conversation seemed
to reproach the Irregularity of his Life, and whose Character of the Pope's
Visitors appeared to lessen his Authority: He was also instigated against them
by some Apostates, who had taken Refuge in that Island; so that he sent an
Accusation to Rome against the two Fathers. He likewise Dispatched and Deputed
one of his Friends to maintain the Charge against them; viz. That Landino and
Monte-Mayor were insupportable Persons, extremely Arrogant, and outragiously
severe; that they treated the Religious of St. Francis with the lowest degree
of Contempt, and that they visibly abused the Authority of the Holy See.

This Deputy, who neither wanted Cunning, nor boldness, prevailed upon many
Cardinals to believe his false Suggestions against the Apostolical Visitors:
Insomuch that Cardinal Sancte Croce complained of them to Father Ignatius. The
Father, who perfectly well knew both Landino and Monte-Mayor, had difficulty to
believe what was said of them, and imagined it was a Calumny. But to know the
bottom of the Business, he sent into the Island of Corsica one of his own
People, in whom he could confide, called Sebastian Rome, who was not yet a
Priest; and he ordered him to disguise himself in the Habit of a Cavalier, and
narrowly to observe the Demeanor of the two Fathers, without making himself
known to them.

Rome remained in the Island as long as was necessary well to execute his
Commission. When he had thoroughly observed the Conduct of Landino and
Monte-Mayor, and had taken exact Informations of their manner of Life, he came
back to Rome with Letters from the Governor of the Island, from the Magistrates
and People, and from the Provincial himself of the Franciscans, so Advantageous
and Honorable for the two Persons accused, that the Cardinals, who had been
surprised, made their Excuses to Father Ignatius, for having too easily
believed false Reports.

He himself was newly again accused in Spain, A new Persecution in Spain.
for teaching Heretical Doctrine in his Book of Spiritual Exercises; and his
Accuser was an Ecclesiastic, instigated by Melchior Cano, who still had rancor
in his Heart against the Society, but hid himself behind the Curtain, fearing
the Displeasure of the Court of Spain, where the Jesuits had Credit.

Though the Book of Exercises, which was Printed with the Bull of Paul the Third,
ought to have been protected from Calumny by the Bull it self, yet there were
those who put it into the hands of the Inquisitors, and labored to get it
Censured. Good Men thought this Proceeding neither Equitable, nor Catholic.
The Doctors of Salamanca, who were consulted upon it, unanimously took upon
them the Defense of the Holy See, and of Father Ignatius; and among the rest,
Bartholomew Torrez, so famous for his Learning and Virtue. He it was, who writ
a very Learned Book upon the Mystery of the Trinity, and who was made Bishop of
Canary after his Return out of England, whither Philip, Prince of Spain, going
to Espouse Queen Mary, carried him, with other Divines, solidly to Establish
among the English the Catholic Faith.

Torrez writ several Papers upon this Subject of the Exercises, the principal
of which you have here Translated.

God is my Witness, A Testimony in favor of the Exercises of Father Ignatius.
that nothing could be asked of me more to my satisfaction, then to tell my
Opinion concerning the Spiritual Exercises of the Society of Jesus: For I
desire that all the World should know what I think of them, in the sincerity of
my Heart, and in the Presence of God. And in the first place, lest any body
should imagine that Interest makes me speak, I declare that I am no Jesuit,
though I ought to have been of this Society, or of some other Holy Order, if I
had a true zeal for the good of my Soul. Next I declare, that although I may be
perhaps the least capable of all the Doctors, yet I have knowledge enough to
answer the Question proposed to me: For besides that I have formerly
Entertained Ignatius in Salamanca, I have since familiarly been acquainted with
his Disciples: Moreover, I have attentively Examined the Tendency, and the
Spirit of this Order, continually observing their manner of Life, and judging
of their Institute by their Actions, which cannot long deceive.

I say therefore, that from the time I first knew the Society of Jesus to this
day, I never have perceived any Error or Crime (truly such) in any one Person
among them. I farther say, that for the Spiritual Exercises, no body can make a
true Estimate of them, who has not himself made them. For whereas their Design
is to establish Virtue in the Soul, and to purge it of Vices, they are not to
be sensibly understood, but by the Practice and Experience of them. I have my
self seen Learned Men, who could not comprehend them, though the Matter contained
in them be clear and Orthodox, and Extracted out of the Scriptures and holy
Fathers: and yet all those who have tried them, understand them without
difficulty. So that there is great difference between the Sciences learnt in
Schools, and the Science of the Saints, which besides acquired Knowledge,
requires the Exercise of Prayer, and of interior Virtues.

I declare, that I have made these Exercises at Alcala, and I speak it in the
Presence of God, that in the space of thirty years, all which time I have spent
in the Study of Divine Sciences, and a good part of it in teaching Divinity, I
never profited so much in true Knowledge, as I did in the few days of that
Retirement. If this shall seem strange to any Learned person, who is not of my
Opinion, I only desire him to make Experience of it himself: Let him but do,
what I have done, and he will think what I think. The Reason is clear for what
I say of my self: I Studied Divinity, that I might be able to teach others, but
I made the Exercises, that I might live well my self. Now, there is a great
deal of difference between knowing, how to explicate a Question, and how to
practice a Virtue.

Moreover I have known many persons, that have made these Exercises, and I have
engaged many of my Scholars both Religious and Secular, to make them, and I
never knew one, that did not reap great Spiritual advantages from them; and who
did not openly declare, that they infinitely valued that little Book. Might it
please God, that such a Treasure were esteemed by men as it deserves! for in
fine, whereas Prayer and Meditation are of so high a price, we may in a short
time advance more in them by the Method, which these Exercises prescribe, then
we can in many years, and with great Labor, by any other way.

Now if any one desires to know precisely, what these Exercises are, they
consist in Attentively and Sedately considering the verities of Faith, the
Benefits and Commandments of God; the Life and Death of Jesus Christ; and also
in making an exact review of our Life past, and in well regulating our
Conscience for the future. It is not to be wondered after all this, if the
Enemy of Mankind does his utmost endeavor to abolish so holy a practice; and
we may judge by all these Contradictions, that the work it self is Divine.

I also declare, that the Holy See having approved the Exercises, and his
Holiness having by his Bull Exhorted the Faithful to make them, no wise Man, no
good Christian, can averr, that they contain Errors: And I doubt not, but that
if the Society, which suffers contumely with Joy for the love of Jesus Christ,
should bring their Enemies before the Tribunal of the Inquisition, that Court
would severely punish them. For my own part I declare, that it is not lawful
for any person to charge a Book with Heresy, which is Printed with Approbation
and Authority from the Holy See, nor to prosecute the Censure or condemnation
of it. Such as shall find in it any thing, that is difficult and obscure to
them, ought to content themselves with asking to have it explained and made
clear to them. But for the Doctrine contained in it, I averr it to be Sound and
Orthodox, and that such Propositions as are contrary to those laid down in the
Book, are so many Errors.

The Testimony of Torrez, was of great weight and gave a check to the
Prosecution; but the indirect proceeding of Cano finally concluded it. This
Enemy, once so declared and now concealed, seeing that the Doctors of Salamanca
opposed his designs, endeavored to engage Mancio on his side, one of the most
famous Persons of his Order, who taught Divinity in the University of Alcala.
That he might securely gain the suffrage of this Divine against the Exercises
of the Society, he put a Copy of them in Manuscript into his hands, where
something was thrust in, which was not in the Printed Books. The Divine perused
the written Copy very exactly, and declared, that he found nothing in it, but
what was Orthodox, one passage only excepted, which could not be excused from
Heresy. This passage was further examined, and upon comparing the Printed
Books with this Manuscript, there was a plain discovery made of Cano's foul
dealing. Thus Truth carried the cause against Forgery, and the Inquisitors, of
Judges to Condemn, became Compurgators of the Spiritual Exercises.

While an Ecclesiastic, The King of Portugal demands of Father Ignatius a
Patriarch and Bishop for Aethiopia.
and a Religious Man, vainly endeavor to stain the Reputation of Father
Ignatius, and to overthrow his Order; the King of Portugal Solicited the Pope
to choose for Aethiopia a Patriarch, and Bishop out of the Society of Jesus. The
choice which was made, and the occasion of making it, cannot well be
understood, unless we look a little back into the Affairs of that Country.

The People of Aethiopia, which are at this day called Abyssins, are the most
Ancient Christians in the World; they received the Faith, in the very
beginning, from the Apostle St. Matthew, and from the Euenuch of Queen Candace,
who was Baptized by Philip the Deacon, as it is related in the Acts of the
Apostles. But in process of time they left the law of Jesus Christ, for that of
Moses; or rather they confounded these two Laws together, using both
Circumcision and Baptism; so that, intending to be at once Christians and Jews,
they were truly neither the one, nor the other. They acknowledged the Patriarch
of Alexandria for their Head in matters of Religion, from whose hands they
received their Abuna, or High Priest. They embraced with the Cophtes of Egypt
the Heresies of Dioscorus, and of Eutyches. On the other side, being mixed with
Mahometans and Idolaters, they every day contracted something of Mahometanism
and Paganism: In this manner their Religion was a mixture of all Sects. But
they had no Communication with Rome, both in regard of their great distance,
and that the Greeks infused Hatred into them against the Latin Church.

When the Portuguez in their Navigation to the East Indies discovered that part
of Aethiopia, which is under the Obedience of Prester John, or to speak
properly, the Kingdom of the Abyssins, whose King we call Prester John, by a
popular Error, which has prevailed in Europe, of attributing to this African
Potentate a Title Anciently used by the Monarchs of the Asian Tartars, he that
then Reigned among the Abyssins, was a young Prince, called David, naturally
Wise, and Virtuous. He was instructed by the Portuguez in the Mysteries of
Faith, and he so opened his Eyes to Truth, that relinquishing the Patriarch of
Alexandria, he writ to the Sovereign Bishop of Rome, Clement the Seventh, and
by a solemn Embassy yielded him Obedience in the Assembly at Bologna, and in
the Presence of Charles the Fifth, who was newly there Crowned Emperor.

David being dead, his Son and Successor, named Claude, who had been bread up
in the Roman Religion, and was a Man of good sense, judged that the true Faith
could not well be Propagated and Established in his Kingdom, unless the Pope
sent thither a Patriarch and Bishops. Whereas he had contracted an Amity with
John the Third, King of Portugal, who had assisted him with Money and Forces,
against the King of Zeilan Gradamete; he requested him likewise to procure
these Spiritual Succors for him from Rome. John the Third undertook the
business with a great deal of Zeal. But the troubles of the Church in those
times retarded the effecting it; nor was it dispatched till under the
Pontificate of Julius the Third, when it was brought to pass in this manner.

The King of Portugal writ to Father Ignatius to send him the Names of some of
his Order, whom he might propose to the Pope for Patriarch, and Bishops of
Aethiopia. These Titles of Dignity for any of his Subjects did at first very
much startle the Father: But upon reflection, that a Patriarcate, and
Bishoprics of this nature, were rather Crosses then Dignities, and that it was
a single Case, not likely to be drawn into Example, he took courage, and
consented to all, that the Prince required of him. He named to him three
Fathers, of profound Capacity, and of eminent Virtue, John Nugnez, Andrew
Oviedo, and Melchior Carnero, without determining which of them he would have
chosen for Patriarch, tho 'his desire was, that Nugnez should be the person
which he only showed by recommending him with a little more advantage then the
rest: He only declared himself upon this point, that those who were the Bishops
might succeed the Patriarch, when the case should require it.

Nugnez, The Fathers proposed by the General, oppose their promotion.
who had been employed many years in Africa about the Redemption of Slaves, and
the Conversion of Renegades, was then come to Lisbon, to procure Money to
redeem those Christians, whom the King of Algiers had taken from the King of
Fess, when he drove him out of his Kingdom. Upon the first rumor of his new
employment, he writ with all earnestness to Rome to break the design. He
represented to Father Ignatius, that he did not refuse the Mission of
Aethiopia, but that he could not yield to go thither with a Miter, and that he
had a great deal rather spend the rest of his days in a Chain, among the Slaves
of Barbary. He conjured him by the precious wounds of our Crucified Savior, to
have consideration of his weakness, and not to charge him with a Load, which
might possibly be the cause of his Damnation. He added, that if his good Father
would not relent, he should at least send him his Will in writing; to the end,
that an Order under his hand might be a comfort, and support to him in his
difficulties.

Carnero, who was then at Rome, and Oviedo, who was called thither from Naples,
made no less Resistance. They would themselves plead their cause before the
Pope. As painful as their designed Dignities seemed to be, they still thought
them more illustrious then painful, and the Luster gave them a Horror of them.
Though Father Ignatius had other thoughts, yet he praised their modesty, and was
well pleased, that all three upon this occasion had need of an absolute Command
from the Vicar of Jesus Christ.

But he made them understand, The General engages the three Fathers to submit.
that all the Honor, and all the Revenue of these Prelatures, consisted in
great Labors, in continual Dangers by Land and by Sea, in Poverty, and possibly
in Martyrdom. Julius the Third was so well satisfied with the Conduct of the
Father, and of his Sons, in this matter, that he said publicly before all the
Cardinals, that now it might be seen, what the Jesuits pretended to in this
World, since they refused Miters, that were more splendid then burdensome, and
accepted those, that had nothing belonging to them but Labors and Sufferings.

Though Father Ignatius did not fear, that any one of the three Fathers, was
capable of abusing the Patriarchal Authority, yet he judged, that the more
securely to oblige him, who should be Patriarch, to do his Duty, it was
convenient that an Apostolical Commissioner should reside at Goa, to make his
Visitation from time to time, and to observe the Conduct of the Patriarch.

Don Alphonso d'Alencastre, Grand Commander of the Order de Christo, the
Portugal Ambassador, had received a Letter from the King his Master, in which
he was Commanded to use his Interest with the Pope upon all occasions, in
behalf of the General of the Jesuits; which Letter was brought by Father Lewis
Gonzales, when he came to Rome; and in the same Letter the King declared to Don
Alphonso how great his Confidence was in that Father. Whereas the General
perceived, that the Ambassador was a little slow in the business of the
Ethiopian Mission, he ordered Father Gonzales to quicken him in it, and for
that end, to Visit him every third day; which the good Father so regularly
performed for three Months together, that it was said in Rome, by the way of
Raillery, that Gonzales visited the Portugal Ambassador like a Tertian Ague.

These Solicitations of the Fathers were not unprofitable, for Don Alphonso
vigorously took the business in hand, and ended it in a short time,
notwithstanding all the delays of the Court of Rome. The Pope named Nugnez
Patriarch of Aethiopia, according to the demand of the King of Portugal, who
had discovered the inclination of Father Ignatius therein. He sent him a little
after the Pall, with the Rights and Powers thereunto belonging, to be exercised
not only in Aethiopia, but in all the Neighboring Provinces. He made Oviedo
Bishop of Nice, Carnero Bishop of Hierapolis, and declared both the one, and
the other Successors to the Patriarch. Lastly he gave the Title and Authority
of Apostolical Commissary to Father Gasper Barzee, whom Father Ignatius named
to the Ambassador, and who was then Rector of the College of Goa. Father
Ignatius chose for the Patriarch, and the Bishops, ten Companions; and when
they all parted for Aethiopia, he writ to the King of the Abyssins this
following Letter.

My Lord, in our Lord Jesus Christ.
I Wish to your Highness, The Generals Letter to the King of the Abyssins.
all Grace, Happiness, and abundance of Spiritual Gifts. The most Serene King
of Portugal, nsov'd by his Zeal for the Glory of the holy Name of God, and for
the Salvation of Souls, which Jesus Christ has Redeemed with his precious
Blood, has more then once signified to me his Pleasure, that I should name
twelve Persons of our small Society, which is Entitled of Jesus, for the
Service of the States of your Highness; and that among them there should be a
Patriarch and two Bishops. I have executed the Orders of that Prince, being
obliged thereunto by the innumerable Favors, which our Society has received
from his Highness, and by the due Veneration, which we all owe to the Commands
of so great a King.

I have designedly imitated the Number of our blessed Savior and his Apostles,
in choosing besides the Patriarch, twelve Priests of our Body, to Sacrifice
their lives for the Salvation of your Subjects; and I have done it the more
willingly, in regard that we cannot better employ our selves, then in the
service of a Prince, like your Highness, who in the midst of so many Nations,
that are Enemies to the Christian Name, endeavor, by the Example of your
Ancestors, to maintain and augment within your Empire, the Religion of Jesus
Christ.

These Good intentions and Honorable endeavors of your Highness, did truly
stand in need of such Spiritual Pastors, by whose Ministry the Church of
Aethiopia might receive both Legitimate Power, derived from the holy Apostolic
See, and also the pure Doctrine of the Christian Faith: For those are the two
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, which our Lord Jesus Christ first promised to
St. Peter, and afterward entrusted him with.

He did but promise them, when he said to him, as we read in the Gospel of St.
Matthew, I say unto you that you are Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my
Church, and I will give you the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever
you shall bind upon Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever you shall
loosen upon Earth shall be loosened in Heaven. He Actually gave them to him,
when after his Resurrection, and before his Ascension, he said to him, as St.
John tells us, Feed my sheep. By these words the Son of God committed to his
charge not a part only, but the whole Flock, with a Plenitude of Power, much
more ample, then what he communicated to the rest of the Apostles. This is that
which our Lord seems to have figuratively signified by the Prophet Isaiah, when
speaking of the High Priest Eliacim, he said, I will give you the Key of the
House of David, that shall open, and no man shall shut, that shall shut, and no
man shall open. This Symbol is the Figure of St. Peter, and of his Successors;
and the Keys, which have the signification of a full and absolute Dominion,
denote the Power of the Sea of Rome.

This being so, your Highness has great reason to give thanks to Heaven, for
having vouchsafed, under your Reign, to send true Pastors, who have received
their Power and Authority from the Vicar of Jesus Christ, to your People, who
have strayed from the Fold of the true Church. And it is not without great
reason, that your Father and Grandfather had difficulty to receive a National
Patriarch from the hands of the Patriarch of Alexandria: A Member separated
from the Body, receives from it neither life nor motion; in like manner the
Patriarch of Egypt, whether he resides at Alexandria, or at Grand Cairo, being
a Schismatic, separated from the Holy Apostolic See and from the Supreme
Bishop, Head of the Universal Church, can neither receive for himself, nor
communicate to others, the life of Grace, or Pastoral Authority.

For in fine, as there is but one Catholic Church, so there cannot be one true
Church depending upon the Bishop of Rome, and another upon him of Alexandria.
As the Bridegroom is one, so is the Bride, and it is of her that Solomon,
representing the Person of Jesus Christ, says in the Canticles, My Dove is one.
The Prophet Osee speaks to the same purpose: The Children of Israel and of
Judah shall be assembled, and shall have but one Head. In the same Spirit St.
John along time after said, there is but one Fold and one Shepherd. And as we
read in Genesis, there was but one Ark of Noah, out of which none were saved
from the Deluge; so there was but one Tabernacle built by Moses; but one Temple
of Jerusalem built by Solomon, where they Sacrifiz'd and Adored; but one
Synagogue, whose Judgments were legal.

All these things were Figures of the Unity of the Church, out of which nothing
can avail: For whoever ever is not United to this Mystical Body, shall not
receive from the Head, who is Jesus Christ, Divine Grace, which gives life to
the Soul, and disposes it to Eternal happiness. To declare this Unity against
certain Heretics, it is Sung in the Creed, I Believe in the one Holy
Catholic, and Apostolic Church; and the holy Councils have Condemned of Error
the Opinion of those, who maintained, that the particular Churches of
Alexandria, or of Constantinople, were true Churches, without being United to
the Bishop of Rome, the common Head of the Catholic Church; out of which have
descended in a continual Succession, all the Popes from St. Peter to this day,
who, by the relation of St. Marcellus the Martyr, fixed his Chair at Rome by
order from Jesus Christ, and cemented it with his own Blood.

These Popes have been held, without Controversy to be the Vicars of Jesus
Christ by innumerable holy Doctors, Greek and Latin, and of all Nations; they
have been acknowledged by Anchortes, Bishops, and other Confessors, Illustrious
for Sanctity: Lastly they have been Authenticated by an infinity of Miracles,
and by innumerable Martyrs, who have died in the Union, and for the Faith of
the holy Roman Church.

It was therefore with good reason, that in the Council of Calcedon, all the
Bishops cried with one Voice, in Saluting the holy Pope St. Leo, Most Holy,
Apostolic, Universal; and that in the Council of Constance those were
Anathematized, who denied the Primacy and Authority of the Bishop of Rome over
all the Churches of the World. These Decrees so Express, and so Authentic, are
farther confirmed by the Council of Florence, which was held under Eugenius the
Fourth, and in which were present the Greeks, the Armenians, the Jacobites, and
other Nations, We Define, say the Fathers of this Council, that the holy See
Apostolic, and the Bishop of Rome has the Primacy over all the Churches in
the World; that he is Successor of St. Peter, the Vicar of Jesus Christ, the
Head of the whole Church, the Father, and Doctor of all the Faithful, that our
Lord Jesus Christ has given him, in the person of St. Peter, a full power to
instruct, to direct, and to govern the Universal Church.

Wherefore the most Serene King David, Father to your Highness, with great
right did formerly acknowledge, by a sollemn Embassy, the Church of Rome for
the Mother, and Mistress of all Churches. And amongst the many illustrious
Actions, by which both he and you have recommended your Names to Posterity, two
there are which will outshine all the rest, and for which your People ought to
render immortal thanks to God. Your Father is the first King of the Abyssins,
who put himself under the Obedience of him, who holds the place of Jesus Christ
upon Earth; and you are the first who has brought into your Dominions a true
Patriarch, a Legitimate Son of the holy See, and deputed by the Vicar of Jesus
Christ.

For if it ought to be reckoned the highest Blessing, as in effect it is, to be
United to the Mystical Body of the Catholic Church, which is enlivened, and
directed by the Holy Ghost, teaching her all Truths, according to the Testimony
of the Evangelist; If it be a great happiness to be enlightened with sound
Doctrine, to be settled, and to rest upon the Foundations of the Church, which
the Apostle St. Paul writing to Timothy, calls the House of God, the Pillar and
Basis of Truth, to which our Lord Jesus Christ has promised an Everlasting
Assistance, when he said to his Apostles, Behold I am always with you to the
end of the World, as we read in the Gospel of St. Matthew; These Nations have
certainly great reason to thank their Savior and Creator, whose merciful
Providence has made use of your Father, and of your self, to bestow such
benefits upon them; and their acknowledgment should the more show it self, in
regard also of the Temporal Advantages, which are likely to follow these
Spiritual Blessings. For we may justly hope, that by the means of this Reunion
with the Church, your Enemies will soon be vanquished, and your Empire enlarged.

The Priests, which are sent you, are indeed all, but principally the Patriarch
and the two Bishops, of tried Virtue, and selected out of our Society for so
important a Function, in regard of their eminent Learning, and of their perfect
Charity. They want neither Courage nor Zeal well to acquit themselves of their
Ministry, hoping that they shall Labor usefully for the Glory of God, for the
Conversion of Souls, and for the Service of your Highness. Their only desire
is, to imitate in some sort the Son of God, who willingly suffered death, to
redeem Mankind from Eternal Damnation, and who says, by the Mouth of the
Evangelist, I am the good Shepherd, the good Shepherd gives his Life for his
Sheep.

The Patriarch, and the rest, animated by the Example of our Savior, come
disposed, to relieve and gain Souls, by their Counsels, by their Labors, and
even by their Death, if need shall require. The more freely your Highness shall
be pleased to open your mind, and to communicate your thoughts to them, the
greater (I hope) your inward Consolation will be. And for what regards the
Credit to be given to what they shall say, either in private or in public,
your Highness is not Ignorant, that the words of these Missioners, sent by the
Holy See, and chiefly those of the Patriarch, have Apostolical Authority, and
in some sort are no less to be credited, then the voice of the Church, whose
Interpreters they are.

And in regard, that all the Faithful ought to adhere to the Sentiments of the
Church, obey her Decrees and consult her in doubtful Cases: I am persuaded that
your Piety will lead you to make an Edict, which may oblige all your Subjects
to follow, without resistance, the Orders and Constitutions, both of the
Patriarch, and of those whom he shall substitute in his place. The Deuteronomy
teaches us, that it was the Custom among the Jews, in the Controversies and
Difficulties which occurred, to have recourse to the Synagogue, which was the
Figure and Forerunner of the Christian Church. For this reason it was that
Jesus Christ said in the Gospel, the Scribes and Pharisees are seated on the
Chair of Moses; the wise Man teaches the same thing in the Proverbs, Do not
neglect the Precepts of your Mother; This Mother is the Church: And in another
place, pass not the bounds which your Fathers have set; these Fathers are the
Prelates of the Church. In conclusion, Jesus Christ requires of us to have so
great deference to his Church, that he plainly tells us by the Evangelist St.
Luke, He who hears you, hears me, and he who contemns you contemns me. And by
St. Matthew, If he hears not the Church, let him be to you as a Heathen and a
Publican.

Hence it follows, that we must not hearken to those who hold forth any thing,
that is not conformable to the Sense, and the Interpretation of the Catholic
Church; of which we are admonished by those words of St. Paul in his Epistle to
the Galatians, But although we, or any Angel from Heaven should Evangelize to
you, otherwise then we have Evangeliz'd to you, be he Anathema. In fine the
Testimony of the Holy Doctors, the Canons of Councils, the Consent and Practice
of all the Faithful, evidently prove this Truth.

The Patriarch, and his Companions are prepared to render to your Highness all
due Honor and Submission, and in their Function to use all the Indulgence,
which Piety and Religion will permit. For our parts who remain in these
Countries of Europe, your Highness may be assured, that as many as we are in
our Society, we shall ever be ready to serve you in Jesus Christ. We shall
continue our Prayers and our Sacrifices, that Heaven may Preserve your Royal
Person, and your whole Empire, in the service of Jesus Christ, and bestow upon
you all Temporal and Eternal Blessings. May it please his Divine Goodness to
give us all, light clearly to know his Holy Will, and strength duly to Execute
it.

From Rome the 28th. of February, 1555.

Before the Missioners went to meet the Patriarch Nugnez in Portugal, How the
General treats Rodriguez.
Simon Rodriguez, who upon the Order of his General, concerning his
Provincialship of Arragon, had made new instances to be discharged from it, and
whose Excuses were finally received, came to Rome whither he was called.
Whereas good Men sometimes forget themselves, which God permits for their
greater humiliation, Rodriguez had some resentment, that he was not sent into
Portugal. He also complained, that they had laid at his door, the troubles and
disorders of the Province, which he had Governed twelve Years; and his
discontent led him so far, as to demand justice of the General; Father
Ignatius, to content Rodriguez, appointed some of the Professed Fathers, that
were of the greatest Prudence and Candor, to judge the matter, and according to
the Forms of a Religious Tribunal, reserving to himself the appointment of the
Mulct, as the Case should deserve. The Judges named, whose Choice Rodriguez
approved, after having maturely Examined the Matter, upon the Informations
received, and upon his Answers thereunto made, unanimously declared upon their
Oaths, that they found him culpable upon two Points; First, for having been
negligent in causing to be observed that Form and Manner of Living in Portugal
which their common Father Ignatius had prescribed to the whole Society.
Secondly, for having used too much Mildness and Indulgence in his Government.
Rodriguez, whom they caused to come before them, to signify their Judgment to
him, submitted to it with a profound Humility; and casting himself at their
Feet, desired them to impose upon him a Penance proportionable to the Scandal
which he had given.

Father Ignatius, satisfied with the Submission of Rodriguez, whom he tenderly
loved, as his Brother and Son in Christ Jesus, would inflict no Punishment upon
him. He only forbad him to return into Portugal, lest his presence should renew
those Troubles, which his Absence had quieted; and he rather chose to let him
go into the Holy Land, whither his Inclination had led him ever since his
entrance into the Order, and where there was some Design of setting up a
College of the Society. Thus Rodriguez left Rome, and took the Way of Venice:
but his want of Health hindered him from putting to Sea, and so long stopped him
in Italy, till at last he was permitted to retire into Spain, where he led a
very holy Life.

The care which Father Ignatius had to preserve the Virtue and the Reputation
of his Children, He makes a Regulation for the Visits of Women.
in the midst of so many different Employments, in which they were engaged for
the good of Souls, caused him to make a Regulation, which was published over
his whole Body, importing, That none should go to visit Women alone, not even
those of the highest Quality, or those who were sick; That when they Discoursed
with them, or heard their Confessions, it should be so ordered, that the
Companion should see all that passed, without hearing what ought to be secret.
And to the end that all the World might know how strictly he would have this
Rule observed, being informed that a certain ancient Father, and of known
Virtue, had upon some Occasion deviated from it, he caused eight Priests to be
assembled, and ordered the Culpable to take a Discipline before them, during
the space that each of them recited one of the Penitential Psalms.

Whereas the General left nothing unthought of, He caused Rules of Behavior to
be published.
and well knew, that the modest Comportment of Religious Men did not only serve
to edify and gain Secular Persons, but also to contain the Religious
themselves in their Duty, he had formerly composed Rules in particular
concerning exterior Behavior. These Rules, which are Entitled Of Modesty, and
which contain thirteen Articles, descend into a great many Particulars, even to
prescribe how they ought to carry their Head, and to hold their Eyes. At this
time he ordered Father Lewis Gonzales to publish them in the Casa Professa, and
earnestly to Recommend the observance of them all the World over. This Father,
who had the care of Domestic Discipline, not having been so speedy in
publishing them as he was ordered, the General reprehended him openly for his
negligence, in these Terms; We take great pains in making Laws, and our
Ministers are negligent in having them observed, as if they had cost us
nothing; and yet these, of which I now treat, have cost me very dear. I have
consulted God many times in writing them, and my Prayers have been accompanied
with great store of Tears.

He so much valued these Rules of Modesty, that to the end the practice of them
might thoroughly be Established, he one day commanded Laynez at the end of
Dinner, to make an Explication of them before all the Fathers of the House, and
to demonstrate to them their Importance. While Laynez spoke, and all
attentively listened, a terrible noise was heard, which shook the Room: It
mightily frighted both the Speaker and the Hearers, but did not break off the
Conference. As soon as their Business was ended, they all had the curiosity to
know the cause of it, which their own Eyes quickly manifested to them, upon
their passing out of the Room where they were assembled. A Gallery, which
looked into the Garden, and in which the ancient Fathers always used to walk
after Meals, was entirely fallen down: So that if the General had not obliged
all the Fathers to be present at the Conference, some of them had certainly
perished under the Ruins of the Gallery. Father Ignatius adored the Providence
of God over his Servants, and making use of the Occasion, he told them, It well
appears, Brethren, that the Rules which have been Explicated to you, are not
unpleasing to God.

These Rules were not ineffectual: Every one observed them so exactly, that
those of the Society were known by their composed Behavior; And the General
being told that some of the World looked upon the Jesuits as Hypocrites, by
reason of this extreme Modesty which was seen in their Countenance: I pray God
(said he) that such an Hypocrisy may always increase among us. For my part,
(he added smiling) I know but two Hypocrites in all our Company; pointing at
the same time to Bobadilla and Salmenon: and he explained himself to the rest
that were about him, That although they both seemed very virtuous, yet their
inward Virtue was greater then it seemed.

Not long after, Discoursing familiarly with Father Lewis Gonzales, and upon
the occasion of News lately come from the Indies, their Discourse falling upon
the happy progress which the Society made in all Places, he said, That these
Prosperities caused in him more fear then joy; That when Persecution ceased, he
should be in apprehension, lest the Society should somewhere relax in the
observance of their Duty; That good Fortune was never to be trusted, and that
we are then most to fear, when all things go according to our Desires. But this
Calm which he so much feared, did not last long: A Storm arose, which was the
more terrible, in regard it proceeded from Pope Julius the Third, who had been
so kind to Father Ignatius.

Charles the Fifth made an Order in Spain, The Pope in^^^^d against the Society.
according to a Decree of the Council of Trent, That Priests, and such as were
Beneficed, should not absent themselves from their Diocese, nor from their
Churches. The Spanish Ecclesiastics, who were at Rome, and whom this Edict
particularly regarded, made their Complaint to the Pope of the Emperor's
Proceeding, as being derogatory to the Rights of the Holy See; and they
stickled so much in it, that at last the Pope complained of it to the Emperor;
Who briskly replied, That the Order came not from him, but from the National
Council, which would have the Decrees of the Council of Trent observed; and
that his Holiness, who assisted at the Council in Quality of Legate, ought
rather to maintain Ordinaces of this nature, then to oppose them.

The Pope more irritated at the Answer of Charles the Fifth, then at the Thing
it self in question, showed great Indignation at it. And because it was
reported, that the Jesuits at the Court of Castile were the Authors of the
Edict, or at least had a good share in it, his Holiness so changed his
Countenance toward them, that the Fathers at Rome were denied all access to
the Pope's Palace; and no body dared speak a word in their behalf, not Cardinal
de Carpi himself, who had great Credit with the Pope, and who was Protector of
the Society.

What much agravated this Misfortune was, that Father Ignatius, who possibly
might have found the Secret to appease his Holiness, lay dangerously sick in
this unhappy Conjuncture. But when the Matter seemed desperate, all was
unexpectedly healed again. Ferninand, King of the Romans, writing to the Pope
about some very important Affairs, desired him to give Credit to what the
General of the Jesuits, who had his Secret, should say to him, and whom he had
ordered to impart it to none but to his Holiness. The Pope, who had no less
Concern in the Business then Ferdinand himself, sent for Father Ignatius the
same Moment that he had received his Letters out of Germany. But the Father was
still sick, and in so bad a Condition, as would not permit him to hear any
Business spoken of.

As soon as he began to recover, The General appeases the Pope.
and was able to go abroad, he went straight to the Vatican, every body
wondering what should carry him thither: All the Fathers were startled at it,
that he should so little regard the Pope's Indignation, and no body could
divine upon what account he exposed himself to it. He had Audience immediately,
and the Pope seeing him very weak, would not permit him to speak upon his
Knees, nor Bare-headed. The Father imparted to the Pope what he had Order to
say to him from the King of the Romans: After which, taking occasion to speak
to him about the Edict of Spain; he so well justified the Society from those
Reports that had been raised against them, that his Holiness wholly changing
his Sentiments, or rather returning to his former Affection for the Jesuits,
told Father Ignatius, that he would never more believe what was said against
them; and at the same time made him a promise of Two thousand Crowns a year; or
of the first vacant Abbey, for the support of the Roman College.

The Pope in the next place asked the Father, if the Casa Professa were in no
want of Necessaries. The Father answered, That it wanted nothing, though all its
Subsistence was upon Alms; and that they had nothing to desire, but the good
Favor of his Holiness. Before the Father had ended his Audience, the Pope
called for his Maistro di Camera, and in the presence of Ignatius, I Order you
( he said), that as often as the Father shall demand Audience, you immediately
admit him, and that you give me notice of it, though Cardinals, or any other
Persons of Quality should be with me. The day following he sent to the Casa
Professa an Alms of Five hundred Crowns in Gold.

This return, or rather this increase of the Pope's Kindness toward the
Jesuits, enabled Father Ignatius to come off in a Business, which otherwise
might have been of pernicious Consequence: A young Neapolitan, called Octavius
Caesar, who was Son to the Duke of Mont-Leon, had been received into the
Society with the Consent of his Father; and after his Noviceship, he had been
sent to the College of Messina; and about this time the General called him to
Rome: His Father being also come thither about a Business of Importance, took a
Resolution of requiring his Son from the General, under pretense that he had
been taken from him against his Will; and he so well solicited the Matter with
the Pope, by the Mediation of Cardinal Caraffa, Archbishop of Naples, who was
his Friend, and no lover of the Jesuits, that the Pope referred the Business to
the Cardinal himself.

The Mother also came on purpose from Naples, to act her part in this Matter:
And whereas Octavius had been a great Darling, she made use of all those little
Arts which Passion usually instructs Women withal. She went up and down the
Town like a distracted Person, weeping, and calling for Justice from God and
Men, against those who had Spirited away her Son. The Cardinal, whether ill
informed of the Business, or touched with the Lamentations of the Mother, gave
Judgment, That the General should restore Octavius; and should be liable to
Ecclesiastical Censure, if he did not immediately obey the Sentence. Father
Ignatius, who well knew what S. Jerome prescribes concerning Children called by
God, and that such Orders are not to be submitted to, as contradict the Maxims
of the Gospel, went himself to the Pope, to inform him of it. His Holiness
annulled the Sentence of Cardinal Caraffa, and declared the Pretensions of the
Father and Mother to be unjust: But in regard the same Case might often recur,
to settle the Vocation of young Jesuits, against the Assaults of Flesh and
Blood, he appointed a Congregation of Cardinals, to Judge all Causes of this
nature.

Julius the Third continued even to his Death, The Affection of Popes for the
Society.
to protect the Society upon all Occasions. The Cardinal De Sancta Croce,
Marcellus Cervinus, a Man of extraordinary Virtue and Prudence, who succeeded
Julius, and took the Name of Marcellus the Second, had no less good will for
it, nor less esteem for the Founder. So that when Father Ignatius went the
first time to do his Homage to the new Pope, his Holiness embracing him with
great kindness, Conferred a long time with him about the Means of
Re-establishing the ancient Discipline of Manners, and to extinguish the new
sprung Heresies. He moreover charged him in his Name, to give the Apostolical
Benediction to all the Fathers of Rome; and declared to him, that when the
Crowd of the first Complements was over, he would see them all in particular.
But that which was most remarkable, was, that the Pope exhorting him to
increase his Body with more Laborers, to cultivate the Vineyard of the Church,
Choose us but Workmen of your Trainining (he said to him), and we will find them
Employment.

Besides this, he demanded of him two Divines, whom he might safely Consult in
difficult Matters, and who might assist him in some manner to bear the heavy
Charge which lay upon him; but he added, out of great Humility, I ask this
Succor of you upon condition, That you your self shall judge it necessary for
me. Father Ignatius, charmed and confounded with this Goodness of the Pope,
chose for him two Men of the Society, whom he knew to be most agreeable to his
Holiness, and most capable of filling that Post. The first was Father James
Laynez, with whom Marcellus had contracted a great Friendship at the Council of
Trent, and often made use of him for his Confessor. The second was Father
Martin Olavius, whom the Pope, when he was Cardinal, took with him to his
Bishopric of Eugubio the year before, and whom he ordinarily called his Master.

These good Intentions, and Marcellus himself, suddenly vanished. He died in
few days after his Promotion; and Cardinal John Peter Caraffa, who was chosen
in his Place, gave no hopes of so happy a Reign, at least for the Society. He
was Dean of the Sacred College, and wanted little of being Fourscore years
old. He was thought an Enemy to the Jesuits, both in regard that Ignatius had
refused to unite his Order to that of the Theatines, of which Caraffa was the
Founder, and that Julius the Third had made void the Sentence given by Caraffa,
in favor of the Mother of the Neapolitan Jesuit. The Fathers of Rome were all,
except the General, alarmed at his Election; but he, having made his Prayer,
was sufficiently satisfied, that Paul the Fourth would be very favorable to
the Society.

In effect, the Pope did not only the first time of his waiting upon him, treat
Father Ignatius with great kindness, but in many other particular Audiences,
concerning the Affairs of his Order, and those of Ferdinand, he would not
permit him to speak upon his Knees, or Bare-headed. The only thing which
displeased the Father, was, that his Holiness declared to him his Resolution,
as he did also in the Consistory, to make Laynez a Cardinal. Whereupon when he
came home, he was heard to say, If God does not prevent it, we shall see Laynez
in few Months made a Cardinal. But that which comforts me (he added) is, that
if his Holiness does not change his Resolution, the World will see by the
manner of Laynez 's receiving his Hat, whether the Society be covetous of
Ecclesiastical Dignities.

Father Ignatius was not deceived: He (...) Laynez (...) made a Cardinal.
He offered on his part many Vows to God, and shed great store of Tears at the
foot of the Altars, to allay the Tempest. Laynez no sooner knew the Design of
the Pope, but, not content to implore night and day the Aid of Heaven against
his Promotion, he applied himself with all earnestness to his Friends in the
Sacred College, to save him from it; and he did it with such an Air of
Sincerity, as caused in them both Belief and Admiration. The Pope understanding
the Reluctance of Laynez, in order to qualify, and a little to prepare him
before he named him Cardinal, caused him to Lodge in the Vatican, under
pretense of Employing him to Reform the Datary, into which of late years had
crept many Abuses. Laynez had scarce been one day in the Vatican, but he came
back to the Casa Professa, pretending to look upon some Books, and to consult
able Persons about the Affairs of the Datary; but his real Design was to
withdraw himself from the Eyes of the Court, and to fly into the Arms of his
Father, to save himself from the danger: And it was according to the
Principles, and by the Counsel of the General, that he made a solemn
Protestation, Written and Signed by his own Hand, to make known to all the
Society, and to the whole World, how much his Heart was averse from a
Cardinalship.

All these Endeavors had their effect: for, whether it were that God heard the
Prayers of his Servants, and so changed the Resolution of the Pope, or that,
persuaded by the Reasons of Laynez, the Pope himself laid the Matter down,
there was afterward no more talk of this Fathers Promotion. We cannot express
the Joy which Father Ignatius conceived, to see the Society delivered from a
Cardinal's Hat: He and his whole Family gave thanks to Heaven, and to his
Holiness, acknowledging it to be the greatest Favor which could be done them.
Paul the Fourth upon this Occasion came to understand the Spirit of the Founder
of the Jesuits; and the Esteem which he had for him did hereupon so much
increase, that in all great Affairs he followed his Counsels.

The Credit of Ignatius grew so great at Court, that the Cardinal of Ausburg,
then at Rome, was heard to say, That if he had any thing to ask of the Pope, he
should use the Mediation of Ignatius; And the occasion of his so speaking was,
that Cardinal John Michael Sarazin, who was chief Minister at the beginning of
the Pontificate, having one day Presented a Memorial to Paul the Fourth, for
obtaining some Graces, his Holiness referred the Petition to the General of the
Jesuits.

Paul the Fourth was not content with these particular Marks of Honor and
Kindness, but to give Ignatius and his Body more solid proofs of his goodwill,
he resolved to complete the Foundation of the Roman College, to the
Maintenance whereof, and for the Subsistence of Two hundred persons, which it
contained, the Liberality of Borgia, and the Two thousand Crowns of Julius the
Third, were not sufficient. But the War which broke out between the Pope and
the Catholic King Philip the Second, to whom Charles the Fifth had newly
Resigned his Kingdoms, postpon'd, and afterward quite defeated the Execution
of this Design: for it put the Holy See to a vast Expense, to Resist the Power
of Spain; and the Times grew so hard during the Wars of Italy, that the most
Wealthy were put to it how to live.

In this while the Charity of the Faithful did not cool toward the Jesuits of
Rome; The Confidence of Father Ignatius in the Providence of God.
they wanted nothing during the public Calamities: And when a certain Father
told the General, that this could not be done without a Miracle; What Miracle
(replied the General, with a serious Countenance, and with a severe Tone)? It
would be very strange, if things should go otherwise: for God has engaged his
Word upon it; let us Serve him, he will Conduct us, and we shall want nothing.

Whereas the War did every day augment the scarcity of Provisions, they advised
him to send away part of his Company into other Provinces. Far from following
this Counsel, he sent for an excellent Architect to come to him to Rome, called
Antonio Labaco, who had a Son in the Society, and caused him to draw Models for
the Roman College, and for the German College, and to cast up the Charges of
those two Buildings. So much he relied upon the Fund of Providence.

It was according to this Principle, that in the same Year he caused to be
built out of Town, near S. Balbina's Church, a pleasant and commodious House,
where Convalescents might sometimes take fresh Air, and the young Scholars
might once a Week Recreate themselves after their Studies. Some there were who
told him, it had been better to have laid up a Sum of Money; and that it was no
time to Build, when there was so much difficulty to Live. I prefer (said he)
the Health of the least in all the House, above all the Treasures in the World.

It pleased God to manifest, as formerly, by extraordinary ways, how much his
perfect Dependence, and his sincere Charity, were agreeable to his Divine
Majesty. For Father Polancus, who at that time managed the Temporals of the
Roman College, and had charge of the Building, not having Money one day to pay
the Workmen, and not knowing where to get it, went to the General, and told him
in what Straits he was. The General locked himself up to make his Prayer, which
being ended, he called for Father James Laynez, and Father Christopher de
Madrid, together with Father Polancus, and told them smiling, Though I am no
Prophet, nor the Son of a Prophet, yet I am assured, that our Lord will not
abandon us. Then turning to Father Polancus, he said to him with a gay
Countenance, Make but the College subsist for Six months, and afterward I Will
take care for it.

The Prediction of the General was verified almost at the same instant, for it
being then Night, yet as late as it was, two Persons of Quality sent him a
considerable Sum, though unacquainted with his Necessities; and before the Six
months were over, such plenty of Alms came in, as served to pay off all the
Debts of the College.

These unexpected, and seasonable Supplies, did so affect Father Martin
Olavius, that Writing to Father Ribadeneira, who was gone into Flanders, he
told him, That to be convinced of the Sanctity of their common Father, he
needed not to see the Sick cured, or the Dead raised; for what passed in Rome,
in sight of all the World, sufficiently proved, that Ignatius was a Saint,
without the help of any other Miracles.

The News received out of France did somewhat surprise Father Ignatius; The
Society Persecuted in France.
but as bad as they were, they did not afflict him. When all things seemed
disposed for Registring the Letters which the Jesuits had obtained from the
King, there was suddenly raised against them in Paris a furious Storm,
occasioned in this manner.

Henry the Second, into whose Mind the Cardinal of Lorain had infused a good
Opinion of the new Society, was informed by the Commissioners whom he appointed
to inspect the Matter, that the Institute of the Jesuits was neither
prejudicial to the Church, nor to the State; and being advertised that the
Parliament still refused to Register his first Letters, he sent them new ones,
with Order to proceed in Registring them, without having regard to the
Remonstrances of his Attorney General, who pretended, that the new Jesuits
destroyed the Authority Royal, and the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy.

The Parliament, not well pleased that the Jesuits should have so much Credit
with the King, protracted the Business as long as they could. But not being
able to avoid any longer, at least seemingly to obey so precise an Order, they
past a Decree, That whereas the Business of the Jesuits did principally concern
Religion, their Bulls should beshew'd to the Bishop of Paris, and to the Dean
of the Faculty of Divinity, and that both the one and the other should give
their Judgment of the Matter to the Court.

The Bishop, who was Eustace du Bellay, a declared Enemy of the Jesuits, made
his Report, that their Institute was repugnant to the Rights of Bishops, and to
the Concordates made between the Popes and the Kings of France. But the Dean of
the Faculty, devoted to the Bishop, and animated by a Doctor, whose near
Kinsman had, against his will, entered into the Society, drove the Matter a
great deal farther: For not contenting himself to deliver his Opinion in a full
Audience, with a great deal of passion and bitterness, he of his own head
called together the Faculty of Divinity; and in this Assembly it was that a
bloody Decree was Passed against the Society, much like to that which the same
Faculty in former days made against the Order of St. Dominick.

Though many Doctors of the Sorbon refused to Subscribe this Decree, yet they
failed not to publish it, and every where to disperse it; Pasquier Brouet, who
was Superior of the Jesuits in Paris, sent a Copy of it to Rome.

The Decree Imports, The Decree of the Faculty of Divinity at Paris against the
Jesuits.
That the new Society, which attributes to its self the Name of JESUS, receives
into their Body, without distinction, all sorts of People, how Criminal and
infamous soever they are; That they of it differ in nothing from Secular
Priests, having neither Habit nor Quire, nor Silence, nor Fastings, nor any of
those other Observances, which distinguish and constitute a Religious State;
That it seems to violate the Modesty of Monastic Profession, by so many
Immunities and Liberties, which they take in their Functions, chiefly in the
Administration of the Sacraments of Penance, and of the Holy Eucharist,
without any distinction of Places or Persons, and in Dispensing the Word of
God, and in the Instruction of Youth, to the prejudice of the Hierarchy, of
other Religious Orders, and even of Princes and Temporal Lords, against the
Privileges of the Universities, and to the great Charge of the People; That it
enervates the holy practice of Virtues, of Pennances, and of the Ceremonies of
the Church; That it gives occasion of Apostatizing from other Religious
Societies; That it refuses due Obedience to the Ordinaries; That it unjustly
deprives of their Rights, Ecclesiastical and Temporal Lords; That it brings
every where Lawsuits, Divisions, Jealousies, Quarrels, and Schisms; Lastly,
That for all these Reasons this Society seems Dangerous as to Faith, an Enemy
to the Peace of the Church, Destructive to Monastical Profession, and born more
for the Ruin, then for the Edification of the Faithful.

The Fathers of Rome, The General will have no Answer made to the Decree.
to whom the General communicated this Decree, were all of Opinion, that it
should be Answered in Form, to Disabuse the People of France, and to Instruct
the Doctors of Paris, who seemed to have little knowledge of the Institute of
the Jesuits; but the General was of another Opinion, as tender as he was of the
Reputation of his Order. Besides his Veneration for the Sorbon, which he looked
upon as one of the strongest Pillars of the Church, he believed that the
Censure had too much Heat and Passion in it to do much hurt, and that an
Answer, as modest as it could be drawn, would rather irritate then heal.

Being of this Mind, he said to them, Pray remember the Words which the Son of
God spoke to his Apostles, when he was returning to his Father, Peace I leave
to you, my Peace I give to you, and imagine with your selves, that our Savior
does at this present address these Words to you. My good Fathers, we must
neither Print, nor Write any thing, which may either show in us, or produce in
others, the least bitterness. In many Occasions it is better to be silent then
to speak; and there is no need to vindicate and defend our selves by Writing,
since Truth is strong enough alone to vindicate and defend her self. The
Divines of Paris are undoubtedly very considerable Persons, and for whom we
ought to have much Respect: But as great as their Authority is in the World, we
ought not much to fear it; for nothing can long prevail against Truth, which
may be set upon, but will never be overcome. God is our Defense, let us put our
Cause into his hands, and we shall triumph over Calumny.

After this general Discourse, he assured them in particular, that
notwithstanding all these Obstacles, which seemed to make their Reception in
France desperate, the Society would be there Established; and that the College
of Paris should be one of the most celebrated Colleges of Europe. However, he
neglected not to write to all the Society in the several Parts of the World,
where they had Houses, Ordering them to send him authentic Attestations of
their Doctrines, of their Manners, and of their Course of Life, from Princes,
Universities, Bishops, Magistrates, and Governors. His Design was, in case of
need, to set this Testimony of the whole Universe against the Judgment of a
particular, and not well instructed Body.

In the mean time some Doctors of the Sorbon being come to Rome with the
Cardinal of Lorain, He Confers with some Doctors of the Sorbon.
Father Ignatius, who never had opened his Mouth about the Decrees of Paris,
neither in the Town nor in the Vatican, thought it now convenient to Explicate
himself upon it with these Doctors before the Cardinal. The Day being set, he
took with him Laynez, Polancus, and Olavius; four Doctors were likewise present
at the Conference: One of them, called Benet, who had been a principal Actor in
the Censure, undertook to maintain it, Article by Article; But the Fathers so
fully Answered all the Contents, that the Cardinal, being himself convinced,
obliged the Doctors to acknowledge, that they had condemned the Jesuits,
without being well informed of their Institute. After this, he praised Father
Ignatius for having made no Complaints, neither to the Pope, nor to the
Cardinals; and Doctor Benet himself could do no less then commend him for it.

The publication of the Decree stirred up all Paris against the Jesuits: The
Professors, the Preachers, and the Curats, loudly declaimed against their
Institute, and made horrible Representations of it: In every corner of the Town
were fixed contumelious Papers, to decry their Doctrine and their Manners; And
the incensed Multitude treated them as Wretches hated and despised.

But the Storm was too violent to last: The Decree of the Faculty of Divinity,
according to the Destiny of false things, fell of it self. And though the Society
was not received in France by public Authority till five or six years after,
yet they lived quietly, and had free Exercise of their Functions. It began to
Teach even at that time, in the Town of Billon, where the Bishop of Clermont,
William du Prat. Founded a College, till that of Paris should be opened.

About this time it was, that the King of Portugal desired to have Pensioners
in the College of Conimbria, and that the Jesuits should have the Direction of
their Manners, and of their Studies. The General consented to it, upon
Condition that the Quarter of these Pensioners might be separated from that of
the ancient Fathers: And this is the Original of Pensioners, which are now
received by the Society in the principal Colleges of most Provinces.

Whereas Father Ignatius intended that the Roman College should be the Pattern
of all other Colleges, His Care for the Advancement of Learning in the Roman
College.
he spared no Industry to make it complete. Besides Latin, Greek, and Hebrew,
all Sciences were also Taught, even to the Mathematics; and great Care he had
to get the best Masters. He continually informed himself how their Studies
advanced; and to animate the Scholars and the Masters, he appointed frequent
Disputations and Combats of Wit in each School, where he would be oftentimes
present himself, and bring with him Cardinals, and other Persons of Quality.
The most solemn of these Disputations was that which lasted eight days
together, in which were maintained Theses of all the Sciences Taught by the
Society; which Theses he caused to be Printed, and to be every where dispersed.

And farther to give Reputation to the College, he Ordered, That at the
opening of the Schools, the Professors should every year make public
Harangues; and at the end of the year that Comedies or Tragedies should be
performed by the Scholars, to draw the Ingenious by the Beauty of the
Composition, and the People by the Ornaments of the Theater. And to give more
Encouragement to Industry and Study, he obtained of the Pope, that the Scholars
of the Roman College should be received to the Degrees of Masters of Art, and
of Doctors, after sufficient proofs had of their Capacity.

Moreover, though his greatest Concern was for the Learned Languages, yet he
would not have the vulgar Tongue neglected; insomuch that he himself in the
beginning of his Generalship, made it his Business to speak Italian correctly;
and to that end he ordered young Ribadeneira, who was perfect in the Tongue, to
note all the Faults he should commit in speaking: and he was so exact herein,
that with his own Hand he would write down the improper Words or Expressions
which were observed to come from him: So much it was his Judgment, that
Religious Men, who by their Institute are to have Commerce with the World,
ought to have an exact knowledge of the Language of the Country.

Upon this account it was that he then renewed a Rule which he had formerly
made, to maintain at Home an union of Hearts, and to make them abroad more
capable and fit to Serve their Neighbor. The Rule Imports, Orland. Hist. Soc.
l. 16. 11. 12.
That every one should Study the Language of the Country where he lives. For
the same Reason he ordered, that in the Roman College there should be every
day Lessons in the Italian Tongue. But nothing shows more how incongruous to
the Functions of his Order he esteemed a Barbarity of Language, then that
Passage of the Constitutions, Constitut. part 4. c. 8.
where he says, That they should be Trained to Preach, and to make Christian
Exhortations, in such a Way and Style as may edify the People, which Way is
very different from the Style and Terms of the School; And that, profitably to
perform these Functions, they should endeavor to be perfect in the vulgar
Tongue.

Hence it follows, that the Jesuit who neglects to speak correctly, neglects
his Rule; and that those who pretend that it agrees not with the Character of
their Profession, to study the purity of their native Language, do not well
consider what they say. They should remember, that since Heretics in all Ages
have endeavored to excel in politeness of Language, thereby to gain the People,
and to insinuate their Poison, the Society of Jesus, who are called and
designed by Heaven to oppose them, ought to employ their own Weapons against
them in behalf of Truth, and not to permit that the Enemies of the Church
should have the advantage of Speaking and Writing more elegantly then the
Defenders of it.

Father Ignatius had all these Cares upon him, His Infirmities oblige him to
give over Business
and Governed his whole Order with such bad Health, that he was often forced to
keep his Bed. And whereas his Strength every day decayed, and with the increase
of the Society, his Business still increased upon him, he thought it necessary
to associate some Person, to ease him of part of the Burden, or rather to
Execute his Charge under him; but he did not judge it expedient to make the
Choice himself. He assembled all the Fathers who were in Rome, except one or
two, who had not yet ended their Noviceship, and declaring to them his weak
Condition, he enjoined them to nominate and assign him some Person capable to
ease him of the weight of the Government.

After three days of continual Prayers, they all with one Voice named Father
Jerome Nadal, who was lately come out of Spain, whither the General had sent
him, and who had all the Qualities requisite for so important a Charge. Some of
the Assembly were of Opinion, that he should have the Title of Vicar, or
Commissary-General; but it was his own Sentiment, to have no Title at all, lest
it should seem to lessen the Authority of the General; and his Advice was
followed.

The General approved the Choice which was made, He reserves to himself the
care of the Sick.
and left the whole Care of Business to Nadal; he reserved only to himself that
of the Sick, out of a charitable tenderness, which made him judge that a
Superior was obliged in Person to provide for the Necessities of those who
acknowledged him for their Father. So that he made this his whole Business, nor
is it to be imagined how sensible he was of the least Indisposition of his
Children. He said it was by a particular Order of Providence, that he himself
had so little Health; and that the several Diseases to which he was subject,
gave him a truer feeling of others Sufferings, and a due Compassion for all
sick Persons. Notwithstanding his extraordinary Care in providing for them, he
never thought he did enough; and he has been heard to say, That the Charge of
the Sick made him tremble, when he considered what the Obligations are of a
good Superior.

This tenderness extended it self to all that were in Affliction, or in any
sort of Misery. A certain French Father having been taken on the Coasts of
Sicily by the Pirates of Algiers, upon his return out of Spain, we can hardly
express the Concern and Solicitude of Father Ignatius in his behalf. He
employed all his Credit with the Viceroy of Sicily; he writ in his own Hand to
the Fathers of Messina and of Palermo, and charged them to spare, and to omit
nothing for the deliverance of the Captive; he charged them every Week to give
him an Account what Course they took, and what Progress they had made in it.

Though his Infirmities, He Institutes the Prayers of Forty hours, during the
three last days of Carnivall.
which together with his Age increased daily upon him, suffered him not to
manage the Business of his Order, yet he would have an Account given him of all
remarkable Actions performed in the Service of God, either in Italy or
elsewhere. One day he was informed, that some young Men of Macerata having
prepared a Comedy, not very modest, for the Diversion of the Carnivall, the
Fathers who were sent in Mission from the College of Loretto, had exposed the
Blessed Sacrament in a Chapel magnificently Adorned, where Prayers of forty
Hours were made during the three last Days of Shrovetide; and that the People,
drawn by the newness of the Ceremony, had left the Theater to Adore Jesus
Christ upon the Altar.

This Devotion so pleased Father Ignatius, that he ordered the practice of it
to be every year observed in the Houses of the Society. And to him we owe the
Establishment of that solemn and seasonable Devotion, now universally
practiced, to withdraw the Faithful from the Follies and Debaucheries of the
Carnivall Days.

Finding himself grown weaker then ordinary, and it being much in his thoughts,
that Obedience was the Soul and Character of his Order, he caused the Secretary
of his Companion to come to him; and after having told him, that he could not
long hold out, Write (said he); I desire that the Society should know my last
thoughts concerning the Virtue of Obedience: And he Dictated to him what
follows.

I. WHen I enter into Religion, my first Business must be to give my self up
entirely to the Conduct of my Superior.

II. It were to be wished, that I might light into the Hands of a Superior,
resolute and industrious in subduing my Judgment.

III. In all things, where no Sin lies, I must follow the Judgment of my
Superior, and not my own.

IV. There are three manners of Obeying. The First, When we do that which is
Commanded us in virtue of Obedience; and this manner is good. The Second, which
is better, When we obey such Orders as oblige not under mortal Sin. The Third,
and most perfect of all, When, not waiting for the Superiors Order, yet knowing
his Will, we prevent it by an antecedent Conformity.

V. I must indifferently obey Superiors of every Degree, without making any
distinction between the highest and the lowest; but I must equally in all of
them consider God, whose Place they hold, and remember, that the Authority is
derived to the last by gradation from the first.

VI. If the Superior judges, that the thing which he Commands me, is good,
and I am of a different Opinion, without Evidence to the contrary, I ought to
obey; but if I find difficulty upon a scruple of Conscience, I am to consult
two or three intelligent Persons about it, and to rest upon their Judgments:
but if they concur with my Superior, and I should adhere to my own Opinion, I
am very remote from the Perfection and Excellency required in a Religious State.

VII. In short, I ought not to be at my own disposal, but at my Creator's and
at his under whose Conduct he has placed me. I ought to be in the Hands of my
Superior, as soft Wax, which takes any Form, and to do what he shall please;
for Example, to write Letters, or not to write them; to speak to a Person, or
not to speak to him, and the like.

VIII. I must look upon my self as a dead Body, which has no motion of it self,
or like the Staff in a Man's Hand, which he takes or leaves as he finds
convenient; so that the Order may make use of me in what manner, they shall
judge me Serviceable.

IX. I must not desire or my Superior to put me into such a Place, or to give
me such an Employment: I may notwithstanding declare to him my Thought, and my
Inclination, provided that I refer my self wholly to him, and think that to be
best which he shall Ordain.

X. This hinders not, but that we may ask things which are not of Consequence,
as to visit Churches, or to do any Devotions for obtaining some Favor of God;
but still provided we be equally content, whether our Superior grants or
refuses what we ask.

XI. Above all, I must depend upon my Superior in what concerns Poverty, having
nothing in Propriety, and in the use of things, to be as a Statue, which you
may cover or uncover without opposition or complaint.

This is the Will and Testament of Father Ignatius, and the last Action he did
for the common good of his Order. His corporal Infirmities did not hinder him
from his continual Mediation upon Divine Matters; and his Desire grew every day
more ardent to be loosened from the Fetters of his Body, and more closely to be
united with God. Whereas in his Lifetime he had desired three things, That his
Society should be Confirmed by the Popes, That the Book of Spiritual Exercises
might be Approved by the Holy See, and That his Constitutions might be
published among his Children in all Parts of the World: He said, all this being
done, he had nothing more to do, or to desire in this World; that he now was
unprofitable, and ought to think of nothing but Heaven. In such Meditations as
these he spent his Days and his Nights, longing and sighing for the sight of
God; and in his Prayers so violent were his Affections, that they did not a
little increase the Weakness of his Body.

Moreover, He disposes himself to die.
his Grief to see a War kindled between the Catholic King and the Pope, did
not a little contribute to shorten his Life. To lament in quiet this new
Calamity of the Church, and the better to dispose himself for Death now coming
on, he had a mind to leave Rome, where nothing was to be heard but the noise of
Arms, and to retire himself to the Villa of the Roman College, which he had
built the year before. But the ancient Fathers representing to him, that a new
Building might be unwholsom for him, and that removing in the great Heats of
the the Month of July, would be dangerous; he caused the Physicians to be
consulted about the Matter, that he might not seem to neglect the Counsel given
him, and a due care of his Health: for as great, as his desire was to die, and
as certain, as he was of his approaching Death, he always observed his ordinary
Train and Way of Living, being a great Enemy of Singularity, and a lover of
Conformity even to his last.

Alexander Petronius, the most famous Physician of Rome, gave him leave to go
to the Country House, after having first been himself upon the Place, to view
the Situation and Condition of it. But the Father had not been there many days
without finding a sensible change to the worse; so that he was brought back
again to the Town: and yet the Physician was not of Opinion that his Sickness
was mortal, but that it was only a weakness of Nature, without any bad Symptom,
and almost without any Fever. Insomuch that no body was much alarmed at it; and
among the many that were sick in the Casa Professa, the General was thought to
be the least in danger of Death.

Some there were, who hearing him speak of dying, ventured to tell him that his
Fears were groundless. He went not about to undeceive them, but following his
own insight, and silently leaving himself to the disposal of Heaven, he went to
Confession, and received the Blessed Sacrament, as having Death before his
Eyes. Two days after in the Evening he called for his Secretary Father
Polancus, and causing the rest to void the Chamber, My Hour is come (said he),
go and beg of the Pope his Benediction for me, and an Indulgence for my Sins,
that my Soul may have more assurance in the dreadful Passage. And tell his
Holiness, if I go into a Place where my Prayers may avail him, as through Gods
Mercy I hope I shall, I will not fail to pray for him, as I have always done,
even when I had most need to pray for my self.

And how, my dear Father! ( replied Polancus) are we in any danger of losing
you so soon? the Physicians do not judge that you are in danger, and I hope God
will yet preserve you for his Service. Go, ( replied the sick Man), and ask the
Pope's Benediction also for another Father. Polancus believed that this Father
was Laynez, who had received the last Sacraments; but the Event showed it to be
F. Olavius

Polancus was in great trouble what to do. He could not take Advice, not daring
to publish what Father Ignatius had told him in secret, nor could he believe
him in so much danger; for his Strength seemed to be increased, and every body
thought the worst was past. On the other side, his Order to go to the Pope was
positive, and reiterated. In this Anxiety he resolved to go back to Father
Ignatius, and to ask him whether he might not defer going to his Holiness till
the Morrow. Do what you will, replied the Father, fearing, perhaps, lest he
should have attributed a third Order to a certain Revelation. Polancus, who had
Letters to write into Spain that Night, upon the Father's Answer, put off the
performing his Commission to the Day following, and the rather, because the
Physicians who Visited him that Evening, said as formerly, that there was no
danger.

Two or three of the principal Fathers stayed with him till it was very late
before they parted; they Discoursed with him about a Business relating to the
Roman College, and he told them his Judgment in it with his usual presence of
Mind.

He passed that Night alone, his Communication being only with God; and when
they came in the Morning to see in what Condition he was, they found him in his
Agony. The Fathers came all about him full of Grief and Surprise. Polancus went
immediately to the Pope, condemning himself for having not gone sooner. His
Holiness granted all his Requests with great Demonstrations of Good Will, and
of Grief. In the mean time they pressed Father Ignatius to take something, in
hope that it might be only some faint Fit upon him; but he told them in a dying
Voice, that there was no more occasion for it: and with his Hands joined, and
his Eyes lifted up to Heaven, pronouncing the Name of JESUS, he quietly Expired
an hour after Sunrising. It was upon a Friday the last of July, in the Year
1556.

He was Sixty five years old. He died Thirty five years after his Conversion,
and Sixteen after the Society was Founded. He saw it before his Death, spread
over the whole World, and divided into twelve Provinces, which altogether
contained above a hundred Colleges. He had the happiness to see it Crowned
with Martyrdom in the Persons of Father Antonio Criminale, and of the
Lay-Brothers, Peter Correa, and John de Sosa, who were all three put to death
for Religion by the Barbarians.

He was of a middle Stature, rather low then tall; of a brown Complexion,
Bald-headed, his Eyes deep set and full of Fire, his Forehead large, and his
Nose aquiline; all Signs of Wisdom, according to the Physiognomists. He halted
a little, by reason of the Wound he received at the Siege of Pampelona, but he
so managed himself in walking, that it was hardly perceived. His natural Temper
was ardent and spritely in the highest degree; and yet the Physicians judged
him to be of a Phlegmatic Constitution; for he had labored so long to overcome
himself, that he had quite suppressed all the Propensions and Motions of his
Nature. In conclusion, in his Person there was an Air so grave and so winning,
so noble and so modest, all together, that who only looked upon him, must judge
him to be a great Man, and a Saint.

THE LIFE OF St. IGNATIUS. The Sixth BOOK.
AS dear, as Father Ignatius was to his Children, The effect which his death
produced.
and as great need, as yet they had of him, his loss caused no trouble in them,
nor gave them any discouragement. In loosing him they felt a certain inward
joy, springing from an assurance of his Eternal happiness, which promised
greater blessings to them, then ever.

The day that the Servant of God departed this life, Laynez was dangerously
ill, and in a manner given over by the Physicians; yet he had his Senses
perfect, and by some words let fall by those about him, he conjectured what
they would have concealed from him: For when some of the Ancient Fathers came
to see him, he said to them, The Saint then is dead. They confessed it to him,
and the first thing that he did, was to lift up his Eyes, and his Hands to
Heaven: Then he prayed to God, by the Mediation of so Holy a Soul, to set his
at liberty, that he might accompany his blessed Father, and enjoy with him the
happy repose, which he hoped from the Divine Mercy.

Instead of obtaining what he asked, he recovered his health; and probably, by
the means of the same Holy Saint, who some years before had foretold him, that
he should be the second General of the Society. The judgment of the first
Fathers of the Society, concerning St. Ignatius.
Nor are we to wonder, that Laynez in that manner did then recommend himself to
Father Ignatius, since even he was alive, he always Honored him as a Saint, and
when he saw the Society so increase in the World, in the midst of
persecutions, and every where to bring forth such good Fruits; he used to say,
that Christ was so in love with the Soul of his Servant Ignatius, that he could
deny him nothing. He was also wont to say, that Father Faber, a Man of great
Spirit and Illumination, was but a Novice, and a mear Child in respect of
Ignatius. Faber himself was much more of the same opinion: He always by his
Letters opened to him the state of his Soul, as to his Spiritual Master, he had
recourse to him to be resolved in all his doubts, and he proposed him to all
the World, as a Model of Christian perfection.

His other first Companions had no less veneration for him, then Laynez and
Faber. But the Apostle of the Indies, and Japony, Francis Xaverius, amongst the
admirors of St. Ignatius seems to challenge the first place. His common way of
writing to him was upon his Knees, he called him the Father of his Soul, and
one of his Letters he thus superscib'd; To my Father in Jesus Christ, St.
Ignatius. All his discourse of him was in the same style; and with his
Companions of the Mission in the Indies, the sanctity of Ignatius was the usual
Theme of his Conversation: So that, whenever he did engage them in any
enterprise of difficulty, he excited them to it by the love, and reverence,
which they owed to their Father Ignatius. In all his dangers by Sea and by
Land, he implored the succor of Heaven by the Merits of the holy Man Ignatius;
and in a Reliquary, which he always carried about him, he put the Signature of
one of his Letters, together with a Relic of St. Thomas, the Apostle of the
Indies. This is what was related before the death of Ignatius, by the Lay
Brother, Bernard of Japony, who was the first Christian of that Island,
Baptized by Xaverius, and whom, after he had admitted him into the Society, he
sent to Rome.

Father Lewis Gonzales, who had a long and intimate Conversation with Father
Ignatius, constantly used to say, that his Life was the Book of the Immitation
of Christ, reduced into practice.

It was not only amongst his own, He is Honored as a Saint in Rome.
that the Founder of the Society of Jesus was Honored, as a Saint, all Rome
gave him that Title, and when his Death was known about the Town, and common
saying was, The Saint is dead. When his Body lay exposed, the People in crowds
flocked about it, and he thought himself happy, who could come near to see it,
and to kiss his Hands. They all would have carried away with them some part of
his Garment, but the Fathers would not permit it. He was buried in the Church
of the Casa Professa, at the foot of the High Altar on the Gospel side. He had
been opened before he was laid forth, and his Bowels were found in a manner
dried up, his Liver extremely hard, with three petrifi'd Cores in it, which
were marks, and signs of an excessive Abstinence, by the report of the
Chirurgions, that opened him, and amongst the rest, of Realdus Columbus, the
most famous Anatomist of his time, who speaks of it in his Book of Anatomy.

Father Benedict Palmio, A Miracle wrought upon the day of his Interment.
Preached his Funeral Sermon. Amongst the Roman Ladies, who were present, the
Wife of Signior Andrea Nerucci was possessed, during the Ceremony with a strong
imagination, that her Daughter, who had the King's Evil, might be cured by the
Intercession of the holy Man, whose Obsequies were then performing. The
Physicians, after five Years fruitless endeavors, judged the Disease to be
incurable, and the Lady was resolved to carry her Daughter into France, where
the Kings have the gift of curing that Malady. She doubted not, but if she
could bring her Daughter, who was with her, near enough to touch the Body of
Father Ignatius, the cure would be effected.

But the crowd was so great, that it was not possible for them to get near the
Body, before it was laid into the Grave. However they did not lose courage, and
the Mother entreated the Fathers to apply something that had belonged to the
Saint, to the part affected of her Daughter. Father Cornelius Vischaven did
what she desired, and in the same moment the Evil left her, with all the marks
and effects of it.

His Body remained in the place where it was first laid, The place where his
Body lies, and his Epitaph.
till the Year 1568, at which time it was removed to another part of the
Church, by reason of the Foundations, that were there to be laid for the new
Church of the Giesu, built by Cardinal Alexander Farnesius: But in the Year
1587, when that Church was finished, Father Claudius Aquaviva, then General,
translated thither the Body of the Holy Founder, upon the 19th. of November,
and placed it on the right side of the High Altar, with this plain Epitaph upon
a Marble stone,

Ignatio Societatis Jesu Fundatori.

The Blessed Institutor of the Congregation of the Oratory, Testimonies of
several Persons in praise of St. Ignatius.
Philip Nerius, who was at Rome when Father Ignatius died, spoke of him after
his death, as he did when he was alive. He said, that he was a Man filled with
the Spirit of God; that he had often seen a Resplendency in his countenance;
that he had learnt from him the way of mental Prayer, and that all Christendom
was infinitely beholding to him.

As soon, as the news of the Fathers death was spread over Europe, many eminent
Persons writ to the Society, and their Letters were so many Elogiums of the
Saint. Cardinal de la Cueva in his, Extolled his Christian prudence, and said
that the Church had lost in him one of her ablest Subjects.

The Cardinal of Ausbourg writ in these terms. My very Reverend, and Religious
Brethren in Jesus Christ; I cannot say, whether the Death of our most Holy
Father Ignatius, has caused in me more joy or sadness. For on one side, if I
consider, that God has releast him out of this miserable World, to recompense
his Labors, it would be a kind of Impiety, for our own interest, to grieve at
his happiness: On the other side, we have great cause to be afflicted, seeing
our selves become Orphans, by the loss of such a Father, who was a Refuge to
us, and a safe Harbuor in all our Distresses. But in regard, that transitory
things must not enter into Competition with Eternal, we comfort our selves by
your Example, upon our assurance, that this happy Soul is at this time our
Advocate with God.

Don John de Vega, Viceroy of Sicily, expres'd his Sentiments in the Language
of a Soldier. The Servant of God ( said he) has left behind him Trophies of his
Virtue, which time will never destroy, as it has destroyed the proudest
Monuments of Human Vanity. Me thinks, I have before my Eyes the Solemnity, with
which a great and holy Captain is received into Heaven, loaded with the spoils
of Hell, who has gained so many signal Victories upon the Enemy of Mankind, in
reducing to the Christian Faith, by his Conduct, and the Valor of his Soldiers,
so many Barbarous Nations, who before knew not the Name of Jesus Christ. It
also appears to me, that upon a just account, his Standard may be raised in
Heaven, with those of St. Dominick, of St. Francis, and of the other Saints, to
whom God has given the strength to overcome the World, and to save a great
number of Souls.

I must not omit the Letter, which the Regular Clericks of St. Paul, commonly
called Barnabites, writ from Milan to Father Laynez, Vicar of the Society; And
I think it worth the while to set it down, as it lies, faithfully Translated
out of the Latin.

The news of the Decease of Venerable Father Ignatius, of happy memory, has
caused great sorrow in us, both upon your account, and of all the holy Society
of Jesus, who have lost such a Master, and such a Father, and upon our own, who
also have always looked upon him as our Father.

There is certainly great reason for us to be afflicted, to have him taken from
us in a time, when good Men are so scarce; but his happiness ought to out
balance with us our own loss. For Jesus Christ is the life of the just, and
their Death is their gain, because it brings them to their happiness, of being
with Jesus Christ, when they are loosn'd from the Fetters of the Body: Thus did
this holy Soul, going out of Prison, together with St. Peter, upon the first
day of August, take its place in Heaven. We only ought to fear, least our Sins
may have been the cause of our losing him; and least his death, in our regard,
may have been a punishment from God, like that of King Josias, who was taken
out of the World, before the wrath of Heaven broke out upon the Jewish people.

However it were, such was the Will of God, and may his holy Name be praised:
At least he is not wholly lost to us. This blessed Man, who has done so great
service to Christendom, will always live in the memory of the Faithful, and his
Name will be glorious in all the parts of the Earth, where the Name of Jesus
Christ is known. It was under the Conduct of this Governor, that the Christian
Faith was carried even to the Antipodes; and that in those unknown Climates are
at this time to be seen thousands of Souls Converted, and a new Church, every
way resembling the Ancient, Erected of new Apostles, and of new Martyrs.

He has sent his Children before him; and after having himself taken great
pains in the Service of Jesus Christ, he follows them, worn out and consumed
like them, with Labor and Fatigue, oppressed with the care of so many Churches,
and to conclude a Martyr in Peace. He has been for several Years the support of
your Family, and of many others; or rather a common Father of all good People.
What sad Hearts has he not relieved by his Discourses, full of Sweetness and
Charity? To whom has he not given profitable Counsel in difficult matters, and
Relief in greatest necessities? He has been the Foot of the Lame, the Eye of
the Blind, the Refuge of the Poor, and the Comfort of the sorrowful.

May Heaven reward him for all his good Works! On our parts, we cease not to
offer to God the holy Sacrifice of the Altar for so holy a Soul, which as we
verily believe, at this present enjoys the Beatifick sight of God. Let others
strew Flowers upon his Tomb, the proper Offerings of Priests, are the holy
Mysteries. At least, in paying him these last duties, now that he is delivered
from the miseries of corrupt Mortality, we shall testify to the end, the
affection we bore him, whilst he lived amongst us. To conclude, we desire you
to receive these Tears of Brotherly love, as most certain marks of our
Friendship, and respects, to return us love for love, and to remember us in
your Prayers. May our Lord Jesus Christ be for ever with you. Amen. From our
Monastery in Milan, the first of September, 1556.

They were not only some particular Persons, or some Societies who beheld
Father Ignatius after his Death, He is reverenced by the People as a Saint.
as a Saint; In many Nations the People had so great an opinion of his
Sanctity, that they implored his succor for obtaining Favors from Heaven.
This was principally done in Spain, and the Honor given to his memory, was
spread into the places Inhabited by him in his Life. The Castle of Loyola grew
venerable to the whole Country, and the Chamber where in his Sickness he was
Converted, was reverenced by all Spain, as a kind of Sanctuary: Those who
Lodged in it, felt in themselves a horror of Sin, and their Hearts turned to
Virtue. Nevertheless, it once happened, that a certain Gentleman, was came to
visit the Lord of Loyola, and was Lodged in the Chamber of Ignatius,
entertained unchaste thoughts in his mind: But at the same instant, the whole
House was shaken with a terrible Earthquake. as if Heaven could not endure
Impurity in a place, where Ignatius had received Visits from the Holy Virgin,
and had for ever renounced the pleasures of the senses.

The Hospital of Manreza, where he began his penitent Life, and the Cave where
he used his Body with so much rigor, became also places of public Veneration.
The People were led thither by their Devotion, and usually kissed the Ground,
which had been watered with the Tears, and sprinkled with the Blood of so Holy
a Man. Before the Hospital was erected a Pyramid in his Honor, with an
Inscription, which contained a Summary of his Life. The little Chamber, where
he had the Ecstasy of eight Days, was turned into a Chapel. The Cave was
adorned, as much as the horror of the place would permit, and the chiefest
Ornament of the place, was a great Picture, in which was represented the Saints
manner of living in that Grotte. He was drawn in his Sackcloth, girt with an
Iron Chain, his Countenance pale and lean, his Feet bare, and upon his Knees,
before the blessed Virgin, holding in her Arms her Child Jesus. He had his Eyes
fixed upon her, and his Arm was set in a posture of writing, as if Jesus and
Mary were dictating to him the Spiritual Exercises. In the bottom of the Piece
were these words: In the Year 1522, Ignatius in this place writ the Spiritual
Exercises, the first Book put forth by the Society of Jesus, which was approved
by a Bull of Paul the Third.

The many Cures wrought in Barcelona by the Hair shirt of Ignatius, which John
Pascal preserved as a Relick, did not a little increase the Peoples Devotion
toward the Servant of God: But the accomplishment of Ignatius his Prediction
to Pascal himself, was very wonderful.

When Ignatius left Barcelona, The prediction, and apparition of St. Ignatius.
to Study in the University of Alcala, Pascal who was very young, would have
followed him, and been his Disciple, together with Cazeres, Artiaga, and
Calisto. But the Saint told him that God would have him remain in the World,
and at the same time predicted to him, what should befall him; You shall Marry,
said he, a very virtuous Woman, and shall have many Children, you likewise
shall have many afflictions, and shall die very poor; but comfort your self,
for your afflictions shall be the means of saving your Soul. The event verified
the Prediction: For Pascal did Marry a Person of great Virtue, and had three
Sons and four Daughters. But his eldest Son was born deaf and dumb, his second
Son became distracted, and the third, who was a great Libertine, died suddenly.
Of his four Daughthers, he was able to Marry but one, and at last he was
reduced to beg Alms. These great misfortunes however did not dishearten him.
This is (said he) what the holy Man Ignatius foretold me: And when his Friends
would have made him hope for better Fortune; the Prophecy of the Saint (he
answered) must be fulfilled, and all that I ask of God, is Patience.

Ignatius, who before his Death, often comforted Pascal with his Letters, did
not forget him afterward. He once appeared to him at four a Clock in the
Morning after this manner. Pascal had a custom for many Years of hearing
Matines every Day in the great Church, near the Tomb of St. Eulalia, which
joins to the Altar. Being come one Morning too soon, he Prayed by himself, in
expectation of Matines; and his extreme necessity put him upon imploring the
succor of Heaven, by his mediation, who had foretold it to him, and of whose
Death he had been lately informed. Father (he cried, sighing and weeping) your
Predictions are but too true; and now you behold from Heaven, what was
beforehand revealed to you upon Earth. Have pity on me; and if you deliver me
not from my Miseries, at least obtain for me the Grace to endure them with
Constancy, and to merit by them, according to your promise, a future happiness.

He had scarce ended these words, when he heard a Melodious noise, and saw a
beautiful train of young Clergy men, who ranged themselves on each side of the
Altar, to make place for a Venerable Person, who followed them in his Priestly
Attire, all shining in Glory. This Priest of Figure more then Human, stopped at
the Tomb of St. Eulalia, and bowing to the ground before the blessed Sacrament,
took a Censor from the hand of one of the Assistants, and several times
Incensed the Altar.

Pascal astonished at the sight, and doubtful, whether his Eyes might not
deceive him, remained sometime without motion: But looking attentively upon the
Priest, he found him to be Ignatius. Ah Father, he cried, Ah my Father
Ignatius! The Saint comforted Pascal, by giving him fresh hopes of his
Salvation, and then disappeared, with the blessed Spirits that attended him.

The Canons, when they came into the Church to Sing Matines, found Pascal out
of himself, seized with admiration, fear and joy all at once: He then told
them, what he had seen, and he ever after retained so lively an Idea of it,
that in all his distresses, it never failed to give him present comfort.

This Apparition grew famous over all Spain; A Miraculous Cure.
but the cure of Bobadilla was no less notorious in Italy. This Father being
come from Tivoli to Rome, was taken with a violent Fever. Whereas they Lodged
him in the Chamber, where the Saint died, in the hight of his Disease he made
his Application to him, and immediately the Fever left him. He every where made
Public the favor from Heaven, which he had received by the intercession of
his Father Ignatius; and this Testimony was the more considerable, because he
was a Man not at all inclined easily to believe Miracles. Many other Persons
were cured in diverse parts of Europe, and of the new World, by imploring the
assistance of the Founder of the Society of Jesus.

Though in the following Years, the Opinion of Ignatius his Sanctity did every
day increase, time making his Virtues more conspicuous, yet the Fathers of Rome
would not permit, that any Vow-offerings should be made at his Tomb; and a
devout Person having once set up seven Lamps before it, Father Claudius
Aquaviva caused them to be taken away. But the Piety of two famous Cardinals
carried it against the Caution of the General of the Society.

The Children of Ignatius had a Custom once a Year to meet at the Tomb of their
Father, The Saint Religiouslp reverenced by Cardinal Baronius.
upon his Anniversary day, and one among them made a short Oration, setting
forth the principal Actions of the Saint. In the Year 1589, Cardinal Bellarmin,
who was the second of the Society, whom Clement the Eighth obliged by special
Command to receive the Hat, desired to make this Speech. Though the Cerimony was
only for the Jesuits, Cardinal Baronius would needs make one of the company, to
Honor the memory of a Man whom his Father Philips Nerius had esteemed a Saint.
Bellarmin proved in his Harangue that the Illustrious Person Deceased, had all
requisites for being Canonized among the Saints. Baronius touched, and convinced
with Bellarmins discourse, made a long Prayer upon the Tomb of Ignatius, and
many times kissed the Ground, which covered his Body: then suddenly rising up,
and turning toward the Fathers, I came with a resolution, said he, to hearken
and not to speak, but the words of Cardinal Bellarmin have been to me, as the
stream of a River to the wheel of a Mill: Though cumbersom and heavy of my self
they have put me into motion. He went on like a Man inspired, and enlarged upon
all that Cardinal Bellarmin had said before. After which, he reproved the
Fathers, for not having yet set up the Picture of their holy Founder over his
Tomb; and causing it to be immediately brought to him, he set it up with his
own hands, and kneeled before it with great Devotion, all the Company following
his Example with Tears of joy, and affection.

No sooner was it known in Rome, what Cardinal Baronius and Bellarmin had done,
but the People no longer doubted to give a Religious Veneration to Holy
Ignatius; which was Authorized, not only by the Example of two the most
Exemplary, and Learned Cardinals of the Sacred College, but also by a great
number of Miraculous Cures in all parts.

Paul the Fifth, The Pope orders informations to be taken of Ignatius his life.
moved by the reports of Father Ignatius his Holiness, found within himself a
strong impulse to have him honored as a Saint among all the Faithful. To
proceed in it according to the Rules of the Church, he began the business by
causing juridical Informations to be taken of the Life, and Actions of the
Servant of God. Wherefore in the Year 1605, which was the first of that Popes
Pontificate, an exact enquiry was made of the Virtues, that were most eminent
in the Person of Ignatius; and the account given by witnesses of known credit
was as follows.

He was so recollected in his Prayers, His gift of Prayer.
as if God were visibly present before him, and that he spoke to his Divine
Majesty, like Moses, face to face. At the beginning of his Prayer his
Countenance was inflamed, and commonly in the heat of his Devotion he had very
violent Palpitations of the Heart, and not unfrequent Raptures. For his manner
of Prayer it much resembl'd that of the Divine Hierotheus Master of St. Denis,
which by the Relation of St. Denis himself, consisted in passively receiving
the impressions of the Divine Spirit. And one day he told Father Laynez who
asked him about it, that God Acted in him much more then he Acted himself.

All Objects spoke to him of his Creator: He admired his beauty, his wisdom,
his power, in the least things; a Worm, a Flower, a blade of Grass, were any of
them sufficient to put him into Contemplation. But nothing raised him more to
God then looking up to Heaven, which he so frequently did, that some who did
not know his name, used to call him the Man that still lifts up his Eyes to
Heaven, and always speaks of God.

Being General of the Society, it was his Custom to go up into the Leads of the
House where he had a free prospect of Heaven. There he remained some while
standing with his Eyes sixth on Heaven; then he fell upon his Knees and adored
God with all possible reverence, next he sat down upon a little seat, because
his weakness did not suffer him long to remain otherwise, and there he spent
whole hours in great repose, his Head bare, his Face all in Tears, and his Soul
absorpt in God.

Not content to pass the Day in this Divine Exercise, he divided the Night into
three parts, one was for Sleep, another for Business, and the chiefest for
Prayer. When he was first made Priest, Illuminations and Tears came so thick
upon him in reciting the Divine Office, that he was forced to make a pause at
every Verse: but when he said Mass, he had such Lights and Affections as made
him sigh and weep at every Word.

One Christmas Day saying Mass in the Church of St. John Lateran, he was seized
with such tender Devotion, that he fell into a holy Passion of Weeping in the
middle of the Sacred Mysteries; insomuch that a Stander by who did not know
him, told Francis Strada, who served Mass, Certainly you have a very wicked
Priest there, sadly tormented in his Conscience; for all Mass-time he did
nothing but weep for his Sins.

These continual Tears did in time so exhaust him and dissipate his Spirits,
that he grew very infirm, and was in danger of losing his Sight. Being
admonished by the Physicians of the bad consequence of them to his Health, he
prayed to God that their course might be stopped, or at least that he might be
master of them. He obtained what he asked, and got so absolute a command over
his Tears, that he could keep them back, or let them flow at his pleasure; but
with this advantage, that when they were kept in, he felt in his Soul an
Inundation of spiritual Delights.

The better to know what his Communications were with God, it will not be amiss
to hear him speak himself in a Paper which contains his interior Dispositions
of four Months, where he sets down day by day, what passed in his Soul; which
Writing had the fortune to escape the Fire, when he caused all other Papers of
that nature to be burnt.

The Tears which I that day did shed, seemed very different from those which
formerly came from me: They dropped softly, without noise or agitation; they
issued out of so deep a Source, as I know not how to express. Every thing
excited me to the love of God, as well the interior Voice, as what I heard
abroad: but these divine Words had an unexpressible harmony, which penetrated
the bottom of my Heart. The next Morning in time of Mass, and also after Mass,
great store of Tears, as the day before. I then tasted a secret joy, produced
by the interior Voice; and this Voice was so melodious, that it seemed to me
the Music of Heaven. In proportion to my Tears, the ardor of Devotion
increased in me, and I seemed to know and to understand in a manner altogether
incorporeal.

Invocating the holy Virgin to Mediate for me to her Son and to the Eternal
Father, and then addressing my self to the Son of God to join with his holy
Mother their Intercessions for me to God the Father, I saw my self elevated in
the Presence of the First Person of the Trinity, and all my Hair stood an end.
I began my Prayer with a large profusion of Tears, a vehement Devotion, and
many Illuminations concerning the most blessed Trinity. So frequent and sweet
were these Illustrations, that I want Memory and Understanding to relate them.

I was so overflowed with divine Lights, with celestial Visits, with spiritual
Delectations, accompanied with continual Tears, that as often as I pronounced
the Name of God, or of Savior, I found my self struck with so profound a
Submission as cannot be expressed.

After Prayer, my interior Motions were extraordinary, producing outwardly
innumerable Sighs and Tears: My Heart was inflamed with the love of Jesus
Christ, and with the desire of dying with Him, rather then to live with all the
World besides.

When the Altar was prepared for the holy Sacrifice of Mass, having Jesus
Christ before my Eyes, I found my self ardently inclined to follow him, and
looking upon him under the notion of Head of the Society, I was by that Motive
more powerfully determined, then by all other Reasons, inviolably to practice
Evangelical Poverty. Calling then to mind the time when the Eternal Father gave
me to his Son, and when the Name of JESUS was printed so deeply in me, I fell
into a new Fit of Sighing and Weeping.

Speaking to the Divine Majesty, a torrent of Tears flowed from my Eyes, and
the flames of my Love seemed to have no bounds or limits, and even to be joined
and united with the Divine Love it self.

Being at the Altar, I had more tender Sentiments of Devotion, and I wept so
much, that I was in fear of losing one of my Eyes, if that course of Tears had
continued. At those Words of the Mass, Placeat tibi sancta Trinitas, there came
upon me a deluge of Tears, with an extraordinary ardency of Love. All these
Aspirations terminated in the most Holy Trinity, which led me, and drew me to
the love of it.

Addressing my self to the Holy Ghost, that I might be rightly disposed to say
the Mass, Instituted by the Church in his Honor, it seemed to me that I heard
him, and saw him in a visible Light, under the appearance and color of a
bright Flame.

I clearly knew, that the holy Virgin did Mediate for me to the Eternal Father.
I likewise saw at the time of Consecration, that the Grace which I had, came by
her Intercession, and that her Flesh was radically contained in that of her Son.

I had in time of Prayer, from the beginning to the end, great Sentiments of
God. In the Church, out of the House, it seemed to me that I beheld our Country
above, and the Lord of Heaven, by the intelligence I had of the three Persons
of the Trinity.

Entering into the Chapel to pray, I received a light and a power from above,
which enabled me to know, or rather in a manner to see the most blessed
Trinity. Jesus Christ was shown to me at the same instant, to have obtained for
me from the Trinity this intellectual Vision.

I had great Devotion in preparing my self for the Sacrifice of the Mass, upon
the consideration, that to approach the holy Altar I ought to be as an Angel;
and this Sentiment brought Tears into my Eyes, which were not of Grief, but of
Joy. During Mass, I made many Pauses, and upon the sudden I was so enlightened
concerning the Mystery of the Trinity, that I thought I could not have acquired
so much Knowledge by a long Study.

Another time in Prayer I felt so lively and fervent Devotion with such
spiritual Delectation, as raised me beyond, and above my Senses. After this, at
Mass more Tears then before came upon me, even to the loss of my Speech. In
this while I had Lights in so great number, and of such a nature, that
methought there was nothing more for me to learn concerning the most holy
Trinity.

Celebrating the Divine Mysteries with a great deal of Fervor, it seemed to me,
that when I Prayed to the Eternal Father, Jesus Presented to him my Prayers,
and accompanied them with his own: I had then a Feeling, and a View which
cannot be expressed.

By the Fireside I had again a Vision of Jesus, and once more without-doors in
the Streets, as I went to Cardinal de Carpi, and also as I came back from him,
and in diverse other Places. During these Apparitions I had many interior
Motions, and the sight of Jesus did so inflame me, that I thought nothing could
separate me from him.

This is part of what was contained in the Spanish Memoire, writ by the Hand of
Ignatius. Whence may be seen how far that holy Man was advanced in all the Ways
of an interior Life, and to what pitch he was arrived of Union with God.

Accordingly he loved him so ardently, His Love toward God.
and with so filial an Affection, that he proposed to himself in all his
Actions no other Motive whatsoever, but the Honor of his Divine Majesty. He
took for his Devise, To the greater Glory of God; not being content only to
glorify our Lord, but to do it in the most excellent and perfect manner that
Man is capable of, with the assistance of Grace.

Entertaining himself one day with Father Laynez, in the Company of Andrew
Oviedo and Peter Ribadeneira, What would you you do ( said he) if God should
tell you, in case you would be content to die instantly, I will give you
eternal Glory? but if you will still live, I give you no assurance of your
Salvation; but I will judge you according to the state you shall be in at the
hour of your death. If ( I say) our Lord should make this Promise to you, and
at the same time you should believe, that remaining longer in the World, you
might do some Service to his Divine Majesty, what would you choose? I confess,
Father, ( replied Laynez) that I should choose, without demurring, to be secure
of my Salvation. I should not do so ( replied the Saint); and if I thought that
I could in any thing advance the Glory of God, I should entreat him to let me
live; because it appears to me, that I should not hazard much in so doing. If a
King should offer a great Recompense to one of his Subjects, and this Subject
should not take it, upon the account only of being more at liberty to serve his
Prince; would not the Prince hold himself obliged to keep in store for him, and
even to increase the Recompense, which for the sake of his Service only was not
accepted? But if the Great-ones of the Earth, who are not over-inclin'd to be
Grateful, would proceed in that manner, what may we not hope from the King of
Kings, who always prevents us with his Grace, and of whom we hold what we have,
and what we are. How can we fear being unhappy and reprobate, for having
sacrificed our Interests to the Glory of our Master? Let others think what they
please, no such thing will enter into my thoughts of a God so good, so
faithful, and so magnificent.

When he writ the Constitutions of his Order, it came into his mind what his
Sentiments would be, if God should put him into Hell for his Sins; hereupon he
writ these following Words. On one side, I set before my Eyes the Torments I
should endure; On the other, the Blasphemies of the Damned: and it seemed to me
that the Pains I should endure, would not be so grievous to me, by many
degrees, as the Blasphemies I should hear against the holy Name of God.

It was his usual Saying, What shall I desire, or what can I desire, besides
you my God? He always ended his Catechisms with these Words, Love God with all
your heart, with all your soul, and with all your might. He many times in the
day repeated the fervent Prayer which he composed when he wrote the Book of the
Spiritual Exercises. Receive, O Lord, all my Liberty, my Memory, my
Understanding, and my whole Will. You have given me all that I have, all that I
possess; and I give back, and I surrender all to your Divine Will, that you may
absolutely dispose of all. Give me only your Love, and your Grace, and I am
rich enough: I have nothing more to ask.

He sighed, and longed Night and Day, for the sight of his Savior; and for
this end was desirous to be loosned from the Bands of Flesh: So that as often
as he thought of Death, he wept for joy, esteeming it better for him, according
to the Example of St. Paul, to live with Jesus Christ; but his principal End
was not his own Happiness, it was to see the Sacred Humanity of Jesus Christ in
Glory, in the same manner as we desire to see that Person promoted in Dignity,
whom we tenderly love.

He so much esteemed Contumely suffered for Gods sake, that the Chains with
which in Spain he was loaded, he said, were dearer to him then all the Crowns
of the Earth would be; and that nothing could give him greater joy, then what
he felt in having been a Prisoner for the sake of Jesus Christ.

Whereas he had continually before his Eyes what the Son of God suffered for
the love of Man, he imagined he did not love him, unless he also suffered
something for his sake; and it was his desire to give Life for Life, and to
requite him with a painful and opprobrious Death.

He once prayed to our Lord not to give him any inward Consolations, to the end
that his Love might be more pure and disinteressed. Another time he earnestly
begged of God to bestow upon him a profound Reverence for the holy Mysteries,
but that this Reverence might be of Love, and not of Fear. Give me, Lord, (said
he) a tender Veneration, Submission, and Humility, springing from Love. And
when he pronounced these Words, his Soul was filled with Delight.

Meeting a Lay-Brother, who did his Office negligently, Brother, ( said he)
that which you do, for whom do you it? The Brother answered, That he did it for
the Love of God. Certainly ( replied the Saint) if you do it for the Love of
God, you are highly to blame, and deserve an extraordinary Penance. The Sin is
not great, to be a little slack in Serving Men; but to Serve God negligently,
is intolerable.

Whereas he loved and sought nothing but God, he had no care but to please him,
and no fear but to offend him. Wherefore he was in a continual watchfulness
over himself; he every hour of the day Examined all the motions of his Heart,
and kept his Senses so recollected, that from his Conversion to his Death he
never looked a Woman in the Face, though by the Duty of his Function he was often
obliged to speak and treat with them.

For from the first years of his Renovation of Life, His Charity toward his
Neighbor.
he employed himself wholly in the Service of his Neighbor; all his Actions
and Designs had no other tendency. To relieve the Poor, to serve the Sick, to
instruct the Ignorant, to comfort the Afflicted, to do good to all the World,
was properly the Business of Ignatius's Life.

He had always care, not only not to return Evil for Evil, but, according to
the Counsel of the Apostle, To overcome evil with good. In the Year 1546, a
Spanish Religious Man, who was at Rome, and had formerly shown much Kindness to
Father Ignatius and his Children, altered all on the sudden, and declared
highly against him, so far as to maintain, That all the Jesuits in Spain, from
Perpignan to Sevil, deserved the Faggot, and that he would procure them to have
their Deserts. The General of the Society, to whom this Religious Man had sent
an Express with the Message, received the Indignity in a most Christian manner,
and afterward writ to the Bringer of the Message in these Terms. Pray tell the
good Father, that whereas he has a desire to have all the Jesuits burnt, from
Perpignan to Sevil, it is my desire, that he and all his Friends, not only
between Perpignan and Sevil, but all the World over, may burn with the Flames
of Divine You may also tell him, if you please, that the Governor of Rome, and
the Pope's Vicar, have our Business before them, and that if he has any thing
to say against me, he should make his Depositions before those Judges, to the
end that if I be guilty, I alone may suffer the Punishment of my Crimes, and
that the Innocent may not be involved in my Guilt.

A certain Father of the Society, unsatisfi'd with Father Ignatius, did one day
express his Resentment, and transgressed the bounds not of Obedience only, but
of Reason. The Saint fell to Prayer for the poor Man, and with Tears in his
Eyes, spoke thus to God. Pardon him, O Lord! my Creator, pardon him! for he
knows not what he does. God at the same time answered the Saint, as once he did
Moses, Leave it to me, I will revenge. And it after happened, that this Father
going to see some Relics in a Church in Rome, did behold, or so thought, the
Figure of a terrible Man, who had a Scourge in his Hand, and threatened to
Chastise him, if he did not obey Ignatius. This Vision brought him back to his
Duty: But though he became thereupon very tractable, he ceased not, during his
whole Life, to be inwardly tormented.

To maintain Peace with his Neighbor, Ignatius did always yield up his Right,
as far as Conscience would give him leave; and he said, that such a Proceeding
was not only fair, but advantageous: for God never failed to requite those whom
Charity induced to depart from their Right. Upon this account, the Refectory of
the Casa Professa being very dark, by reason that a troublesome Neighbor would
not suffer any Windows to be made in a middle Wall, though by Law it might be
done, the Father would not permit to have a Suit Commenced upon it, but rather
chose to Eat in the dark Eight years together, till such time as he was in a
Condition to purchase the Man's House, who of his own accor'd offered it to
Sale.

He equally prayed to God for the Friends, and the Enemies of the Society. The
same Duty he every day performed for the Pope, and for all Christian Princes,
on whom depends the public Tranquillity. In the Year 1555, he said upon the
occasion of Julius the Third being Sick, that when the Pope was in Health, he
constantly prayed for him once a day with Tears; but that when his Holiness was
Sick, he never failed to do it twice in the day. And in the Year 1556, after
that Charles the Fifth had Resigned his Kingdoms into the Hands of Philip the
Second, Eleonor Mascaregnas, who had been Governant to Philip, by her Letters
entreated Father Ignatius to recommend the new Monarch in his Prayers to God,
whose good Conduct was of so great Concern to the Church. He Answered her, That
it was his Custom once a day to Pray for the Prince before the Abdication of
Charles the Fifth, and that after it he had Prayed twice every day for him with
a particular Affection.

He commonly excused the Sins of others, upon the account of human Frailty, or
of suddenness of Passion. A blamable Action he would qualify, by supposing a
good Intention, and say, That what appeared Criminal before Men, was not always
so in the sight of God: But if the Action was so enormous, and so evident, that
it could in no manner be defended, he then said, with the Holy Ghost, Judge not
before the time, God only sees the bottom of Hearts.

But his love to his Neighbor did most of all appear in his concern for the
good of Souls. He refused no Labor that might be profitable to them; And he
usually said, That if for saving one, it were necessary for him to endure the
uttermost Misery, he should suffer it with a good will.

Being now old, and broken with Sickness, he was called upon to Confess a dying
Man: Though he was that day Sick himself, and though there wanted not Fathers in
the House, very fit for that Employment, yet would he go himself, and spend the
whole Night in assisting the dying Person to make a Christian End.

To conclude, all his Passion was for the Conversion of Sinners, and his Zeal
embraced no less then the whole Earth. He had even for Sinners a certain
tenderness, more then for other Men; and this was so notorious, that the
Brother of Father Francis de Borgia, in a Letter to desire his Friendship,
wrote thus to him, I have nothing in me to deserve your love, unless it be that
I am the Brother of Father Francis, or that I am a great Sinner, and of these
two Motives I know not which will be the strongest, to make you grant the Favor
which I ask.

From his beginning to Serve God, His Humility.
he had so deep an apprehension of his own nothingness, and so low an Idea of
himself, that he has been often heard to say, that vain Glory was the Vice
which he least feared. He was not of so affected an humility, as not to own the
gifts which God had bestowed upon him; and comparing one day with another, the
present state of his Soul with the past, he said, that Manreza, which he called
his Primitive Church, was only his Noviceship, and that our Lord went on every
day perfecting the work, of which he then made only a rough draft. But all
those extraordinary favors, of Interior dispositions, of Divine Illustrations,
of frequent Apparitions, of continual Delights flowing from a sensible
Devotion, only served to increase the bad Opinion, he had of himself. It must
necessarily be, that I am very weak, he said, since I have need of so many
extraordinary props to support me.

He also said, that the more faults he committed, the more Favors he received
from Heaven; as if his negligences and infidelities were the measure of the
Liberalities and Favors of the Father of Mercies: And this was it which made
him say, that perhaps he was the only Man in the World, in whose Person were
united such distant Extremes, so much Sin, and so much Grace.

Being once rapt in Spirit, and raised from the ground, environed with
Celestial light, he was heard to cry, O God! thou art infinitely Good, since
thou do support so miserable a sinner as I am. So that the sight of his
Miseries, even in his Ecstasies, never left him.

After this, one would think, that he might have spoken of his Raptures and
Ecstasies, without any fear of Vanity: And yet he was so reserved in speaking of
them, that unless it were to fortify his Companions, upon some very
extraordinary occasion, and only at the first planting of the Society, he
suppressed all mention of them: For when his Order was once thoroughly Founded, he
used incredible industry to conceal all supernatural Favors of that kind,
conferred on him by God.

He never spoke of what past within his Soul, but in modest and humble terms;
and because, toward the end of his days, he had the most tender Sentiments of
Piety, he said, that the Divine Goodness bestowed on him Devotion, for that
being Old and Infirm he was only fit for the Exercises of an Interior life.
Sometimes he signed his Letters in this manner, Destitute of all Good,
Ignatius. He generally called his Order the little Society of Jesus. When
mention was made before him of the good fruits it produced in the World, and of
its being spread in so little time over the whole Earth, or when any Discourse
was held, which turned to his Commendation, he presently gave a check to it,
and commonly it raised in him Blushes and Tears.

Father Laynez asked him one day in confidence, whether it were true, what was
said of him, that he had an Archangel for his Angel Guardian. The Saint made
him no Answer, but blushed, and to use Father Laynez's Expression, showed such
trouble as a chaste Virgin would do, if surpised by a Visit of some unknown
Person, at an undue hour.

Being informed, that a lay Brother told his Companion, that their Father
Ignatius was a great Saint, he severely reprehended him for it. You vilify, he
said to him, and dishonor Sanctity by supposing it to be in such a sinner as I
am: He added, that an expression of this nature was little less then Blasphemy.

A saying like this, did perhaps cost Father James d'Eguia his life; he was
Confessor to Father Ignatius. Though the Saint who discovered to him his interior
(that he might not march in the ways of God without a guide) had recommended to
him a profound silence, and had likewise Penanc'd this good Father, for having
been to free in talking, yet Eguia could not so well contain himself, but that
some words slipped from him, importing something which he durst not speak out. It
was much his desire to outlive the Saint, at least some few hours, that he
might without scruple reveal what he knew, and he said, he had things to tell,
which could not be heard without Astonishment. This wish of the Confessor came
to the Ears of Father Ignatius, and it was the Opinion of the Fathers then
alive, that the Saint begged of God, that Eguia's wish might not be
accomplished. However it were, the Good Confessor died some few Days before
Father Ignatius, and it was never known what it was, that the Saint so much
feared, least Eguia should reveal it. He desired to be thrown upon a Dunghill
after his Death, being as he said, nothing but Dirt and Corruption. He one day
said, that all those of the House, gave him an Example of Virtue, and matter of
Confusion; and that he was Scandalized by no body, but by himself. He once writ
to a Person of intimacy, that he never treated of the things of God, even with
the greatest sinners, that he did not learn and gain something.

Never was Man less adhearing to his own judgment, and when the matter
deliberated upon did not appear evident to him, he easily followed the Opinion
of others. Lastly, though he had in an eminent degree all the qualities necessary
to govern well, by the common consent of all wise Men that knew him, yet he
still thought himself not capable to be Superior, and protested in the Presence
of God, that he was only fit to Obey.

His Children did several times entreat him, and with great earnestness, to
leave them Memoires of his life for their Instruction, at first he would not
hear of it, but at last he condescended to them, fearing least they should
believe, that his modesty hindered him from telling them great matters.
Wherefore toward the end of his days, he dictated to Father Lewis Gonzales a
plain and short Relation of what had happened to him from the time of his
Conversion to the year 1543: For what followed, he referred them not to Father
James d'Eguia his Confessor, but to Father Hierome Nadal, to whom from time to
time he had given some account of himself

He would have it believed that he concealed nothing, and that what he himself
had said, and what Nadal could say, was the sum total. This is that which is
called, covering humility with humility, in flying the reputation of being
humble.

From the time when he first left the World, His disingagement from the World.
he had in great abhorrency all that, which Worldly Men most greedily court,
and he ardently sought what they most abhorred. If he had only regarded himself,
he would by his good will have passed for a Fool or a Madman, in the
apprehension of the wise Men of the World; and if his Charity to his Neighbor,
or common decency would have permitted him, he would have made no difficulty to
expose himself to the Eyes of the People in an extravagant dress.

The contempt in general, which Ignatius had of the World, did particularly
extend to the Pomp, and Magnificences of Courts, to the Enterprises and
Conquests of Princes: all this appeared very little in his Eyes; and this it
was which caused in him that frequent Ejaculation, when he considered the Stars
in the silence of a clear Night, How vile is the Earth, when I look upon Heaven!

Accordingly, he had no Commerce with great Ones, any farther then the Glory of
God, and the Interest of Religion required. Whereas he was much looked upon,
for the very reason, because he would not be so, many Persons made their
Applications to him, by his Mediation to make their Fortunes; but he plainly
declared to them, that he had no interest, but in the Court of Heaven, and
that, if there they desired Access, he would endeavor to assist them with his
Counsels and Prayers. He said, that the duty of a Religious Man was not to
introduce People into Court, but thence to withdraw them into Solitude; and
when a secular Person at any time did press him to recommend him to some Prince
or Cardinal, Brother (he Answered) I know no Master greater, or better, then
him whom I serve; if you have a mind to be one of his Domestics, I will assist
you with a very good will.

He exactly practiced, what is said by the Apostle St. Paul, No man listed in
the Service of God, intangleth himself in secular affairs. He would not have
any thing to do, even in the concerns of his nearest Relations; and once upon a
Winter day, when he was at Prayer in his Chamber, the Porter bringing him
Letters from Loyola, which were said to be of Consequence, he took the Packet,
and threw it into the Fire without opening it.

His Niece, who was Daughter to his Eldest Brother Don Martin Garcias, and who
became the sole Heir of the House of Loyola, was sought in Marriage by several
Lords. The Duke de Najare, and the Duke d'Albuquerque writ to Father Ignatius
in Favor of one of the Pretenders, and desired him to use his Interest for the
Person recommended, because he was a Man of great Quality and Estate. The
Father Answered them, that he had no concern in the Marriage of his Niece; that
such secular Affairs had no congruity with his Profession; that for many years
he had renounced the World, and that such as renounce it for the Love of Jesus
Christ, ought to forget Earthly things, that they may be only employed in those
of Heaven.

By long combating his natural Inclinations, His Command over his Passion.
he had got such a Mastery over them, that there appeared in him no irregular
motion. His Countenance was always equal, as was his mind; and his own People
used to say, that he had an Heavenly Air, because there was always serenity in
his Forehead, and in his Eyes: So that, to treat with him upon any Matter, or
to obtain any thing of him, there was no need of studying his Humor, or of
observing Times, or favorable Conjunctures.

His Moderation however was not languid; for though he had quite suppressed the
risings of his Bilious and Irascible Nature, he had not lost the Fire which was
necessary for Action. He has been often seen, whilst he Entertained some of the
Fathers with all mildness and tranquillity, to send for some one whom he had a
mind to rebuke before them, and suddenly changing his Countenance, to speak in
a Tone which made them all tremble: and then, as soon as the Culpable had
turned his back, to reassume his Air of mildness, and to hold on the
Conference with the same tranquillity, as before.

The most surprising and strange Accidents made no visible Impression upon him;
and whether they were happy, or otherwise, it seemed all one with him, he was
never the more sad, nor more cheerful. Being one day upon a Visit in a House at
Rome, whilst he was, according to his custom, speaking of Heavenly matters, a
Messenger sent from the Fathers, showing great haste and concern, came to tell
him something in his Ear; having heard his Tale, he sent him back without any
Answer, and then proceeded in his Discourse with the Company for the space of
an hour. Upon taking his leave, some that were present had the curiosity to ask
him, whether the Man that came in such haste, had not brought some bad News.
It Is nothing (he said) but that the Bailiffs are in our Hourse, and carry away
all our Goods. But this does not much trouble me; (he added, smiling) If they
take away our Beds, we will lie upon the Ground, as it becomes poor Men, such
as we are.

Once being fick, the Physicians ordered him to keep himself quiet, and to
banish all thoughts that might cause the least sadness. This made him think
what there was that could afflict him in this World, or give any disquiet to
his Soul. One thing only occurred to him capable of doing it; which was, if he
should live to see the Society come to an end. He went on farther, and
considered with himself, how long that trouble would last upon him, in case
that Disaster should happen; and he concluded, that if without any fault of his
it should come to fail, he should recover his Tranquillity in a quarter of an
hours Recollection.

A Man who is Master of his Passions, His Reserv'dness in Speaking, and how
weighty his Words.
is easily so of his Words. Ignatius observed in Speaking, all the Measures
which Reason and Charity prescribe. He related things plainly, without
exaggeration, leaving to the Hearers the liberty of weighing Circumstances,
drawing Consequences, and of making Reflections. Were the Conduct of Great Men
never so irregular, or their Vices never so public, he would not suffer any
mention of it. He covered with a profound silence the Faults of his Subjects;
and once made it a matter of his Confession, that he had declared to three
Persons what might have been declared only two, for the amendment of the
Culpable. Some years before his Death he promised a certain Person to assist
him in a Business; but finding afterward that it was a Matter not very proper
for a Religious Man to solicit, he repented him of his Engagement, and said
upon this Occasion, I do not remember in twelve years time that I have made
such a slip, or that I have promised any thing, which I afterward repented.

Those who knew him, used to say of him, that he was a Man of few words, but
the little which he said had great weight, and such force, that no body could
resist it; so that he turned the Judgment of his Hearers as he pleased.
Ribadeneira being young, was not very regular, nor very discreet; his
unruliness went so far as to shake off the yoke of Obedience, and not to endure
the sight of Father Ignatius, against whom he conceived a secret Aversion. The
Father one day calling him, did not speak to him above two or three words:
Ribadeneira immediately threw himself at his Feet, and with Tears in his Eyes,
I will do Father, (he said) I will do what you will have me. The Business was
about the Spiritual Exercises, which the young Man had no mind to make: he made
them, and put himself under the Direction of the Saint, with an entire
Confidence and Resignation.

Before there was in Rome a House of Catechumens, the Jews who asked Baptism,
were Instructed in the Casa Professa. One of these Catechumens, called Isaac,
who had shown great fervor, and desire of Conversion, and came every day with
great diligence to the Catechisms, I know not by what Impulse, changed his Mind
on the sudden, and breaking out into impious Expressions, in the middle of the
Exhortation, went out of the Church in a fury. Father Ignatius overtook him,
Remain with us, Isaac (he said to him). These words alone appeased the Jew; he
immediately returned to the Company, and to his former Intentions, with a new
fervor, and at last received Baptism.

When the Saint had taken in hand any thing for the Honor of God, His Constancy
in what he undertook for God, and his Greatness of Soul.
the Obstacles and Difficulties which he met with in the Execution of it, did
rather animate then discourage him. He waited one day fourteen hours together,
to speak with a Cardinal about a Work of Charity. Another day, when he was to
go out of Rome toward Naples, the Weather was so bad, that his Companion
Father Polancus advised him to put off his Journey. These thirty years (he said
to Polancus) no Accident of this nature has made me put any thing off till to
Morrow.

Being broken with Sickness, and having all the Business of the Society upon
him, he had great need of help in many Occasions. Nevertheless, he left himself
destitute of it, when the greater Glory of God did require it; and he has been
sometimes left alone in Rome, to bear the whole weight of the Business there,
having sent into diverse Parts all those Fathers who were capable to ease him.
As infirm as I appear to be, (he said) with this Staff I would go a foot even
into Spain, if there were need.

If Sickness obliged him to keep his Bed, and that any difficult Affair
occurred, he seemed to forget his Disease, and to recover Health in a moment: so
that when he fell sick, his Children used to say, Let us pray to God that some
Business of Consequence may happen to our Father Ignatius, and we shall have
him presently recovered. He bore Adversities with invincible courage; and being
asked which was the surest way to come to Perfection in a short time, he
answered, Generously to suffer great Crosses for the Interest of God. The Grace
of Persecutions (as he called it) of all Divine Favors, was that which he most
esteemed; and it looked, as if by his Prayers he had obtained it: for it has
been often observed, that the other Fathers, when they were from him, lived in
a Calm; and that as soon as the Saint came amongst them, Tempests did arise on
all sides.

In all the Storms of his Life, His Confidence in God.
the Confidence which he had in God so kept him up, that he feared nothing,
when every thing was to be feared. In difficult Matters which he undertook for
the Service of the Faithful, he sometimes to that degree abandoned himself to
Providence, that such as in these Occasions looked upon his Conduct with carnal
Eyes, thought him Rash and Imprudent. He made it one of his chief Maxims, That
whoever would do great things in God's Cause, must have a care of being too
wise; and he said, That if the Apostles had consulted the Dictates of Human
Prudence, they never had undertaken the Conversion of the World.

According to this Principle he once said, That if God should call him beyond
the Seas, and the Vicar of Jesus Christ commanded him speedily to depart, he
would put himself into the first Ship, though never so badly Equipped, and even
without Sails or Rudder. What Prudence, Father, would be in this (said one that
stood by). Prudence (replied Ignatius) is the Virtue of him that Commands, not
of him who Obeys.

In a very hard Time, and when there was no appearance of Relief by way of
Charity, he ceased not to receive many into the Society; and he told a Father
who wondered at it, That the more desperate things did appear, the more hope we
ought to place in God. What merit is there to hope (said he), when we have a
secure Fund, and certain Recruits? If we see what we hope for, it is no longer
hope; for no body hopes for what he sees.

Nicholas Bobadilla, not being able to comprehend whence Father Ignatius got
wherewithal to maintain so many People, and asking him one day about it, the
Father made him a particular Recital of all the Alms constantly received. All
this ( said Bobadilla) is not enough for half our Company. What then ( replied
the Saint), shall we depend in nothing upon Providence? And must we rely upon
the Care of our Heavenly Father no farther, then the Charity of the Faithful
shall give us leave? For my part, what comes short from the Hands of Men, I
always find in the Hands of God; and should they give me nothing, in him I
should find all things.

The Marquess de Sarria, Ambassador with the Pope from the Catholic King, once
received Father Ignatius with more coldness then usually, which was occasioned
by the Father's making little use of the Marquess in the Business and Concerns
of the Society. Father Ignatius, who smelt out the Cause of the Embassador's
reservedness, told Ribadeneira, who was his Companion, That for above thirty
years God had taught him so to make use of human Succors, as not wholly to
rely on them; and that he would let the Ambassador understand, That Religious
Men ought not to build upon the Credit of Great Men, to the prejudice of their
Confidence in God.

He had a particular Grace in the Direction of Souls, His Prudence in Spiritual
Matters.
and this Gift of God he had in so eminent a degree, that many Persons
consulting him about their inward Troubles, and not being able well to
explicate them to him, he so clearly Explained and laid them forth before their
Eyes, as if with his own he had seen the bottom of their Consciences.

It was his Maxim, That we should not accommodate Business to our selves, but
our selves to the Business; and he applied this prudential Rule to Matters of
Piety. Wherefore he condemned those Directors, who would reduce all the World
to their manner of Prayer, and to their way of Living. He said that this sort
of Conduct is very dangerous, and that such Directors have little understanding
in a Spiritual Life, as not knowing that the Gifts of Heaven are of different
kinds, and that all the Faithful come not to God by the same way. He also said,
That although in Virtues and their Acts there were several degrees of Excellence,
the most sublime and perfect was not always the best for every Person in some
Circumstances; and that if God in time of Prayer excites a Soul to Compunction,
she ought not to turn away from it, nor, for Example, apply her self to rejoice
in the Infinite Perfections of his Divine Majesty.

He used to say, That such as made long Prayers, ought to be very much upon
their guard, not to abuse that Commerce which they have with God; That there
are a sort of People of a wilful Nature, who by much Praying without observing
the Rules of Discretion, and wanting a true desire to overcome their own
Judgment, dry up their Brain, and are so possessed with their own Imaginations,
that there is no getting them out of their Head; That others there are, who
persuaded that all comes from God which enters into their thoughts in time of
Prayer, take their own Fancies for their Conduct, and in this manner only
follow the Impulse of Nature, mistaking it for that of Grace. He added, That
Persons thus seduced, often fell into gross Errors, and that their Miscarriage
discredited Prayer amongst the People of the World, who wrongfully attribute
the Disorder to Prayer it self, and not to the bad use made of so holy an
Exercise. Finally, that how much soever illuminated we may think our selves to
be, we are not to judge of divine Matters by human Measures; but we ought
always to submit our Judgment to the Principles of Faith, and the Authority of
the Church; it being unreasonable, that things certain should be regulated by
those which are doubtful; whereas on the contrary, the certain ought to
overrule the uncertain.

He valued more the Spirit of Mortification then the Spirit of Prayer; or
rather, he judged that these two Spirits, if true, were inseparable, and that
the one could not subsist without the other. Some body in his presence praising
a Religious Person, by saying he was a Man of great Prayer, Add (said he), that
he is a Man of great Mortification; by which word he meant the Mortification of
the Will, more then that of the Body: for though he judged Austerities to be
necessary for curbing the rebellion of Flesh and Blood, or for expiating Sins,
yet he made no great reckoning of them, unless they were joined with an inward
Abnegation. And for this Reason, in his Constitutions he Orders, That the
principal care of those of the Society, should be to serve God with the
greatest Self-denial, and as much as may be, with a continual Mortification of
their Will.

When any body desired him to tell them the nearest way to Perfection, he said,
The shortest and the surest, was to overcome themselves. He once told a young
Brother, who was of a violent Temper; Tame and master your self, (Brother;) for
if you do it, your Reward will be much greater in Heaven then theirs, whose
Virtue costs them little. Another time, Father Lewis Gonzales, who had the care
of Domestic Discipline, complaining of the same Brother: Have patience (said
the same Saint to him), he with whom you are so unsatisfi'd, is more come on in
a Month, then such, and such a one in a Year; and he named to him two other
Brothers of a mild Temper, who went for Patterns of Discretion.

Being informed, that a Father naturally choleric and hasty, withdrew himself
from the Company after Meals, to avoid Occasions of transgressing: You deceive
your self (he said to him); it is by Fighting, and not by running away, Vices
are overcome.

He preferred the least Act of Charity, Humility, or of Patience, before the
highest Knowledges acquired, or infused. Accordingly, he more esteemed a plain
simple Man, full of Spirit, and the Love of God, then a great Scholar, less
Fervent and Devout: though generally speaking, he took more care of the Learned
Man, because he was more useful for the Service of our Neighbor.

He principally regarded, that his Children should be applied to the Exercises
of true Devotion, without looking after spiritual Gusts, Raptures, or Visions.
Though God continually regaled him with those extraordinary Favors, yet he said,
that we never ought to desire them, but rather to fly them, and to have them
in suspicion; that when God did communicate them, they were to be received with
fear, and not to be spoken of without being obliged to it by Obedience, or by
Charity. To conclude, he judged of the Perfection of a Soul, only by the
practice of solid Virtues, even to say, that it was better to know our own
Nothing, then to have Revelations or Ecstasies; and that to raise the Dead was
not so much, as to mortify our Passions.

In the Year 1553, a Religious Man of the Order of St. Dominick, called Father
Reginald, Venerable for his Age and his Piety, came one day to see the General
of the Society, and told him in the presence of Ribadeneira, that there was at
Bologna a Religious Woman of their Order, endowed with an extraordinary Gift of
Prayer; that she had frequent Raptures, and that during her Ecstasies she had no
feeling, not so much as of Fire, when applied to her; but that she always came
to her self when her Superior commanded her any thing. He moreover said, that
this Nun had sometimes the Stigmata in her Feet, her Hands, and her Side, and
that the Blood trickled down from her Head, as if she had been Crowned with
Thorns. He added, That not believing the common report of all these things, he
went himself to be ascertained of the truth with his own Eyes, and that after
what he had seen he could no longer doubt of it. Then he asked Father Ignatius
what he thought of so wonderful a thing. Of all that you tell me (said the
Saint) nothing seems to me less suspicious, then that ready Obedience; and
farther he would not Explicate himself.

When the Religious Man was departed, Ribadeneira desired Father Ignatius to
tell him what he thought of that Saint of Bologna. The Father told him, That
God Almighty did operate in the Soul, and infuse into it the Unction of his
Spirit, sometimes in so great abundance, that in a manner it overflowed, and
wrought outward Effects upon the Body; but that this happened very seldom, and
only to Persons much in the favor of God. He added, That the Devil, who could
act nothing within the Soul, had a custom to counterfeit outwardly Divine
Operations, and by such Appearances to impose upon the Credulous. Ribadeneira
understood by this Discourse, that the Nun might be deceived with her Raptures,
and Stigmata; and in conclusion it was found out, that all her pretended
Holiness was but an Illusion of the bad Spirit.

In the Year 1541, Martin de Sancta Cruce, who was then a Novice of the
Society, and afterward Rector of the College of Conimbria, and died in great
Sanctity in the Year 1557, being in Conversation with Father Ignatius, happened
to speak of the famous Magdalen de la Croce. He related the mavelous things
he had heard of her in Spain: he said that he had seen her at Cordoua, and that
she seemed to him to be one of the wisest and most holy Women of the World. The
Father gave a great Reprehension to the Novice, for so highly crying up this
Woman, and told him, That those of the Society should not esteem and measure
Sanctity by outside, and ostentation.

Another time he severely checked a Father, who in Discoursing with a Novice,
proposed to him the Example of some Men, who had the repute of having
extraordinary Gifts, and Ecstasies in their Prayer: for he judged, that
beginners ought not to hear such things spoken of, especially the Novices of
the Society, least instead of being well grounded in solid Virtues, they should
run after the specious part of an interior Life.

Upon the same account he treated with utmost rigor a Priest of the Society,
who was a great Divine, called Soldevilla, a Catalonian, for teaching some of
the Students in the Roman College new ways of Prayer, very different from the
common Method. He was a Man of very holy Life, but a little Visionarily given,
and in whom the vivacity of his Imagination had got the better of his Judgment.
This contemplative Father assembled by Night his Disciples, to Explicate to
them his Mystical Doctrine, and to make them practice it in secret, as if
Contemplation were an Art, and had any other Teacher then the Holy Ghost.
As Soon as Ignatius understood these Proceedings, he failed not vigorously to
suppress them: for after having caused Soldevilla publicly to Discipline
himself in the Refectories of the Roman College, and of the Casa Professa, he
turned him out of the Society; and he had no more regard to his profound
Learning, then he had to the Illustrious Birth of a Kinsman to the Viceroy of
Sicily, and of a Son of the Duke of Braganza, both whom he had Dismissed some
days before, for being proud and unquiet.

In his Conversation he drew People to God, by gently insinuating into them the
things of Heaven; and he said that this way of gaining Souls was the proper way
of his Institute. It was not his Custom, at first dash, to force upon Men of
the World Discourses of Piety: he commonly began his Entertainment with Matters
agreeable to their Profession and Capacity. He spoke of Trade with Merchants,
of War with Soldiers, of Policy with Statesmen; and after a while, turning the
Discourse to his main purpose, he exhorted them to gain Heaven, to overcome
their Vices, to govern their Passions: This is that which he called, To go in
at their Door, and to come out at his own.

But when certain idle People, whose Business was only to pass away their time,
came to Visit him, he without Ceremony immediately fell upon the Subjects of
Death, Judgment, and Hell: and he was wont to say, That if they liked his
Discourse, they would be the better for it; if they liked it not, he should be
rid of them for the future.

It was his Maxim, That Familiarity with all Women ought to be avoided, even
with the most Devout; that the most innocent Commerce with them, if it wounds
not our Conscience, it leaves some stain upon our Reputation; and the Smoke
blackens, though the Fire does not burn us.

He said, That few People understood what God would do with them, if they left
themselves to him; That Apostolical Men ought to do for the saving of Souls,
what the Devil does to destroy them; that is, they should study the natural
Motions in general of Man's Heart:, and the particular Inclination of each
Person; That natural Qualities ought to be set to work by the interior Spirit,
and that the Means which make the Instrument pliable, and handy for God to work
with it, such as are Humility, Contempt of the World, Purity of Intention, and
the like, are much better then the Means which render the Instrument capable to
work of it self, such as are Wit, Learning, and Eloquence; That Evangelical
Laborers better attain their End by yielding, then by resisting; and that a
little obscure Good, done with Edification, does more glorify God, then a
thousand good Works which make a Blaze in the World, and raise Murmuring and
Envy; That we must not suffer our selves to be seduced by a certain Zeal, which
makes us unquiet for the Disorders of the World; That we must begin by
reforming our selves, and afterward look, as to other People, what it is that
God will ask us an account of at the Day of Judgment; Lastly, That Reason,
which distinguishes us from Beasts, must serve not only as a Bridle to our
Passions, but as a Rule to our Virtues, in such sort, that in the Good which we
do, we may act by Measure and Compass, and that our Fervor may not carry us
beyond the Bounds of our State.

These were the Virtues, and principal Maxims of the Saint, gathered from
unquestionable Testimonies, an Extract of which was Presented to the Pope. At
the same time a Collection was made of the miraculous Cures obtained by the
Intercession of Ignatius; and amongst them was inserted the Deliverance of a
possessed Person, out of whom the Saint had chased the Devil, at the time when
he was chosen General of the Society.

This poor Wretch was a Servant of the House, a Basque, called Matthew. The
evil Spirit entered into him in the absence of Ignatius, when he went to
consult Father Theodosius the Franciscan, about his Election, as we have
formerly mentioned, and remained in the Convent three Days together in
retirement. The Devil, who had taken possession of this poor Man, tormented him
in a dreadful manner: Sometimes he threw him against the Ground, sometimes he
lifted him up into the Air; then again he made him so lumpish and heavy, that
ten Men could scarce move him. Some that were present, threatened the Devil,
that Ignatius would quickly return, and dislodge him. At these words the
Malignant Spirit growing more furious, horribly cried out, that he detested the
Name of Ignatius, that he was his mortal Enemy. The Saint being returned, made
a short Prayer over the person possessed, and he was immediately delivered from
the Devil.

Since that time, the Name of Ignatius grew terrible to the powers of Hell, and
the Possessed have been sometimes heard to cry out in the middle of the
Exorcisms, before a Picture of the Servant of God, Where is thy power, O
Lucifer, since a bit of Paper with the figure of a Priest makes us fly without
resistance? Ah God, why do thou deprive us of glory to bestow it upon a
little lame Priest?

One of his Letters had the same effect upon some of these Evil Spirits, which
haunted the College of Loretto, and which the ordinary Exorcisms could not
drive away: for as soon as the Letter was publicly read in the House, the
noise ceased, and the Specter disappeared.

Though the Persons, His Beatification.
who made their report of all these things, which I have now related, were of
known sufficiency and probity, yet all was strictly examined, according to the
ordinary forms. After these proceedings, in the Year 1609, Paul the Fifth at
the request of the greatest Princes of Europe, Beatifi'd Ignatius, and gave
leave to have him Celebrated in the Mass, and in the Office. In the following
Years the Process of his Canonization was set on foot, and a new enquiry was
made into his Virtues and Miracles. Six hundred and sixty witnesses,
Juridically interrogated, made their depositions upon the Holiness of his life.
Above two hundred Miracles well attested, were produced at the same time,
which were related in the Acts of the Canonization, the Principal of which have
been Collected by diverse Authors.

Those Towns and People, who had most obligation to blessed Ignatius, writ to
Paul the Fifth, to hasten the Canonization of their Holy Benefactor, and these
their requests were seconded by many Princes and Princesses, particularly by
Philip the Second, and Philip the Third, Kings of Spain, by Sigismond King of
Poland, by Henry the Great, King of France, by Margaret Queen of Spain, and by
Mary of Austria Emperess, and Wife of Maximilian the Second.

After the Death of Paul the Fifth, Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, and Ferdinand
the Emperor did write to the same purpose with great instance to Gregory the
Fifteenth. The first asked no other recompense from the Holy See for all the
Service he had done in the War of Bohemia against Heretical Rebels, but the
Canonization of Ignatius; And the other said, that it was for the Honor and the
Interest of the Empire, to have Enrolled in the Catalogue of Saints, the
Founder of an Order, which seemed to be chosen by God for the defense of
Germany.

But the King of France, Lewis the Thirteenth, of all Christian Princes was he,
who most warmly solicited this matter. He declared to the Pope in his Letter of
the 14th. of February, of the year 1621, that having received the first
rudiments of Faith, and of good manners from the Children of Ignatius, and
being very well satisfied with them, in what regarded his Conscience, which he
had put into their hands, it was his desire, that they might upon this occasion
feel the effects of his good will toward them; that all the most signal
Favors, which he could possibly receive from his Holiness, could not more
affect him, then this which he now asked; that such a request he reckoned to be
worthy of the Eldest Son of the Church; that this Glorious Title which he
Inherited from his Predecessors, and which inspired him with Zeal for the
Advancement of Catholic Religion, obliged him to pursue the Canonization of
Ignatius, as hoping that the Intercession of that Saint would be a powerful
succor to him for the banishing Heresies, and Vices out of his Kingdom;
Lastly, that France having had the Honor to have this Servant of God not only
to acquire his Learning, and choose his Companions in the University of Paris,
but also to lay the Foundation of his Society in the Church of Montmartyr, he
had reason to hope for new Benedictions by contributing to the speedy
Canonization of the Saint.

Gregory the Fifteenth could not resist these entreaties, His Canonization.
so pressing, and so reasonable. He Canonized blessed Ignatius with all the
usual Ceremonies upon the 12th. of March in the Year 1622, which is the day on
which the Church honors the Memory of St. Gregory the great. Urban the Eighth,
who succeeded Gregory, did afterward put the Saint into the Roman Matyrology,
and amongst the diverse Forms presented to him, he chose the following, which he
partly composed himself, The one and thirtieth day of July, at Rome, Saint
Ignatius Confessor, Founder of the Society of Jesus, Illustrious for his
Saintity, his Miracles, and for his Zeal, to extend the Catholic Faith over
the whole World.

Without departing from the Character of an Historian, I may add to the words
of Urban the Eighth, those of Gregory the Fifteenth, spoken by him, when he
Canonized St. Ignatius: They are taken out of Ecclesiasticus, and the Holy
Ghost spoke then of Josue, He was great in his Name, most great in saving the
Elect of God, in subduing their Enemies, that he might obtain an Inheritance
for Israel.

But in ending the Life of this glorious Patriarch, if I were worthy to offer
any thing in his Praise, I should apply to him, what St. Jerome writes of St.
Augustine.

Catholics Reverence and Admire you, Tom. 2. Ep. 50.
as the restorer of the Ancient Faith, and what seems yet more Honorable, all
Heretics Hate and Persecute you.

FINIS.
The Letter of Lewis the Thirteenth, King of France, and of Navarre, to Pope
Gregory the Fifteenth.
Most Holy Father,
SInce there is no better beginning then by an Action tending to the Glory of
God, it must needs be acceptable to your Holiness, that my first demand, upon
your entering into the Government of the Church, should be for a thing, which
will no less show your Paternal Piety, then increase the Devout sentiments,
which God has been pleased to bestow upon me. The first Instructions, which I
received in Faith and Manners, were from the Fathers of the Society. They have
had to this present day the direction of my Conscience, very much to my
satisfaction, which makes me desirous, that their whole Order may experience
the effects of my goodwill. Hereupon being informed, that the process of
Canonization of Blessed Ignatius, Founder of the said Order, was so far
finished, that there wanted nothing, but the good pleasure of your Holiness to
perfect so good a Work: I have thought good to entreat you, as I do with great
affection, that you will be pleased to declare, and place him in the number of
the Saints, Reverenced and Honored by our Holy Mother the Church. The Favors
(how great soever) which I may for the future receive from your Holiness, all
of them put together, cannot give me greater satisfaction, then this alone,
which besides the Benedictions I hope to reap for my self, will also heap
Prosperities upon your Government. The Divine Providence which inspires Hearts
and governs their motions, has not permitted that this Devotion, for many Years
impressed in my Heart should be sooner manifested; Reserving thereby to your
Holiness the performance of an Action so praise worthy, and to me the happiness
of making a request so well becoming the Eldest Son of the Church. This Title,
no less engraved in my Soul, then deservedly enjoyed by my Predecessors, gives
me a strong emulation for the advancement of our Holy Religion; and makes me
more Zealous for the said Canonization, upon the hopes I have, that the
Intercession of this blessed Man will powerfully aid me to do that, for which
God sent him into the World, and wherein this Order is so profitably employed.
My Kingdom has been formerly blessed with the presence of this Servant of God; He
studied at Paris, he there Assembled his first Companions, and Founded his
Society in the Church of Montmartyr: I now expect new Benedictions, if your
Holiness, at my request, shall consent to his Canonization. As it is my first
Prayer, so I desire it may have a place amongst those Holy and Good Actions,
which are expected from your Pontificat, which I beseech our Creator, that it
may succeed to his Honor and Glory, to the Edification of his Church, and to
the good of all Christendom. From Paris the 14th. of February 1621.

Signed Louis.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most
Excellent Majesty, for his Household and Chapel, 1686.
REflections upon the Answer to the Papist Misrepresented, etc. Directed to the
Answerer. Quarto.

Kalendarium Catholicum for the Year 1686, Octavo.

Papists Protesting against Protestant-Popery. In Answer to a Discourse
Entitled, A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Vindication of
the Papist Misrepresented and Represented, and the Reflections upon the
Answer. Quarto.

Copies of Two Papers Written by the late King Charles II. Together with a
Paper Written by the late Duchess of York. Published by his Majesty's Command.
Folio.

The Spirit of Christianity. Published by his Majesty's Command. Twelves.

The First Sermon Preached before their Majesty's in English at Windsor, on the
first Sunday of October 1685. By the Reverend Father Dom. Ph. Ellis, Monk of
the Holy Order of St. Benedict, and of the English Congregation. Published by
his Majesty's Command. Quarto.

Second Sermond Preached before the King and Queen, and Queen Dowager, at their
Majesty's Chapel at St. James's, November 1. 1685. By the Reverend Father Dom.
Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of St. Benedict, and of the English
Congregation. Published by his Majesty's Command. Quarto.

The Third Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, in the Majesty's Chapel
at St. James's, on the third Sunday in Advent, December 13. 1685. By the
Reverend Father Dom. Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of St. Benedict, and of
the English Congregation, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty. Published by his
Majesty's Command. Quarto.

The Fourth Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, in their Majesty's
Chapel at St. James', on Newyears-day, 1685-86. By the Reverend Father Dom.
Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of St. Benedict, and of the English
Congregation, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty. Quarto.

Sixth Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, in their Majesty's Chapel at
St. James's, upon the first Wednesday in Lent, Febr. 24. 1685. By the Reverend
Father Dom. Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of St. Benedict, and of the
English Congregation. Published by his Majesty's Command. Quarto.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church in Matters of
Controversy. By the Right Reverend James Benign Bossuet, Counselor to the
King, Bishop of Meaux, formerly of Condom, and Preceptor to the Dauphin: First
Almoner to the Dauphiness. Done into English with all the former Approbations,
and others newly Published in the Ninth and Last Editions of the French.
Published by his Majesty's Command. Quarto.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, in their Majesty's Chapel at St.
James's, upon the Annunciation of our Blessed Lady, March 25. 1686. By Jo.
Betham Doctor of Sorbon. Published by his Majesty's Command. Quarto.

An Abstract of the Douay Catechism, for the Use of Children and Ignorant
People. Now Revised, and much Amended. Published with Allowance. Twentyfours.

A Letter from the Lord Bishop of Mea^^x, to the New Catholics of his Diocese,
Exhorting them to keep their Easter, and giving them Necessary Advertisements
against the False Pastoral Letters of their Ministers. With Reflections upon
the Pretended Persecution. Published with Allowance. Quarto.

The Answer of the New Converts of France, to a Pastoral Letter from a
Protestant Minister. Done out of French, and Published with Allowance. Quarto.

All which Books are to be sold next Door to his House in Blackfryers, by
Richard Cheese.


