Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That
Hubart Bourk and John Macnamara, have hereby leave given them, to Print and
Publish their respective Informations or Narratives concerning the Popish Plot
formerly by them given in at the Bar of this House.

JOHN BROWN Cleric. Parlimentorum.

By Virtue of the Order above mentioned I do appoin Randolph Tailor, near
Stationers Hall, to Print this my Information; and that no other person or
persons do Print the same.

December. 14. 1680. HVBERT BOVRK.

THE INFORMATION OF Hubert Bourk Gent. Touching the POPISH PLOT IN IRELAND,
Carried on by the Conspiracies of the Earl of Tyrone. And others his
Confederates, To deliver up that Kingdom to the French King, and Establish the
Popish Religion therein. Being all matter of Fact, delivered first by this
Informant before the Lord Lieutenant and Council in Ireland in March 1678. And
to his Majesty and both Houses of Parliament in November 1680.

LONDON, Printed for Randolph Tailor, and are by him sold, at his House, near
Stationers' Hall,

TO THE High and Mighty MONARCH OF Great Britain, CHARLES THE SECOND, etc,
May it please your Majesty,
I most humbly presume to lay at your Feet, this my true and loyal Information
of the Earl of Tyrones Treasons against your Sacred Person. Some there are who
did ill in transgressing against your Majesty, but did well in repenting and
detecting their own and the foul Crimes of others. As to the latter of these in
being a Discoverer, I account my self happy: as to the former, doubly that
Providence gave me the means to discover without ever being disloyal. What I
was, and what my Progenitors always were, I am, a true and faithful Subject to
my Prince. Nor was it any other motive then my Allegiance and disdain of
treacherous propositions that urged me to a speedy Discovery. From whence I
hope I shall not offend your Majesty, if I claim that advantage to my self of
being the first that openly appeared in this detection in Ireland, the first
that cut the Knot for others to unravel the mystery of this deep Design. And I
also hope the rude dress of my Information will show how void it is of subtlety
or contrivance. I must confess, I did not think to meet within your Majesty's
Dominions with so severe and cruel usage, for doing my Duty to my Sovereign.
But so severe it was, that had I been the Guilty person, I could not have met
with more, while the grand Criminal triumphed over me in those Calamities with
which his power had almost overwhelmed me. And in this Condition such was the
Terror that lay upon our Friends, that they of equal Rank durst not afford me
the Comfort of their kind Visits, nor they of superior quality appear to give
me any Countenance. However, having now made my appeal to the Fountain of
Justice, Your Royal self, I make no question, but the great preserver of Kings,
will for your sake maintain the Innocence of my Proceedings, as being only such
as tended to the preservation of your Majesty, and the detection of your secret
Enemies, according to the Dictates of my Religion and allegiance. Not desiring
longer to live, then while I may be able to approve my self,

May it please your Majesty, Your Majesty's most Loyal, most faithful, and most
obedient Subject, HOBERT BOVRK.

THE INFORMATION OF Hobert Bourk, First Discoverer of The Popish PLOT In
IRELAND.
Who says,
THAT he is Son and Heir apparent to Redmond Bourk, late of Poole-more in the
County of Clare, Gent That after his said Fathers decease, his Mother placed
him with an Attorney, with whom this Informant lived, until he was able to
Practice for himself; which said Practice the Informant followed until he was
hindered and molested, as the ensuing passages will declare.

This Informant going into the County of Waterford, about five years ago, to
visit some Relations of his, was by them earnestly courted and invited to stay
with them in the said County of Waterford, in regard he the said Informant was
a single person, and for that there was greater employment and business to be
had for an Attorney in that County than in the County of Clare, by which
persuasions and encouragements of his Relations, this Informant was prevailed
upon to stay with them; and after that spent most of his time at one Major John
Butlers House, at Crebanaugh, who was married to a Kinswoman of this Informants.

This Major Butler living within a Mile and a half of the Earl of Tyrone's, was
wont always to visit the said Earls House twice a Week, and thither I must
also bear him Company. At length it came to that pass, that if he, or this
Informant, failed to go every Week once or twice to the said Earls House, then
there was a Letter sent for Major Butler, if not for this Informant too: By
which means this Informant grew familiar and well acquainted with the said
Earl, his Lordship frequently allowing this Informant the Honor of his Company
when he went a Hunting, or played at Tables, or sometimes to read Irish,
sometimes to go a Fishing with him, and in such like Exercises and Pastimes
wherein his Lordship most delighted: Besides this, the Informant was appointed
Deputy- Seneschall to his Lordship; in which Employment he continued for the
space of two years and a half, or thereabouts, and so might have done till this
time, if the Informant had kept his Lordships Sedrets in Relation to the Plot.

This Informant further says, That he was seldom or never in the said Earls
Company, but he and Major Butler would always be talking of high matters,
praying for the French Kings prosperity, and discoursing how little England and
Ireland would be in his hands, if he would but come amongst them; and saying
further, That the English were good Soldiers in their Tongues over a Cup of
Ale, with long Pipes of Tobacco in their Mouths; but that they were too tender
now to lie in the Fields after thirty years rest, and that they were so Foggy,
so Fat, and full of Guts, that they were not able to fight any better than a
company of Swine; and that he the said Earl, with three hundred French or
Irish, of his own choosing, would undertake to rout and break a thousand of
them.

And this Informant says further, That if he should go about to take notice of
all the Treasonable passages and words that were spoken by the Earl of Tyrone,
Major John Butler, Father James Power, Father John Power, Father Robert Power,
and Father Patrick Ronane. (the Earl of Tyrone's Parish Priest) who were
altogether most commonly at the said Earls House, contriving of Plots, or
preaching their Treasonable Lectures, relating thereunto; he could be able to
make up, together with what the Informant mentions here, a large Volume.

This Informant further says, That he has observed, that John Power, and
Dynough Macnemarrah, came very often to the Earl of Tyrone's House, and went
from thence into the Counties of Typperary, Limbrick, Clare and Gallaway, and
in a short time returned again very Brisk and Gay, well Horsed and Armed, with
their Cases of Pistols themselves, their men, and their followers.

These two Gallants are both Papists; the one of them John Power, that killed
(as they say) the Lord Moon, and fled into Ireland, and the other a Soldier
of Fortune, that had left the French service in discontent. Both Persons of no
Estates, nor any other concerns in any of the Counties aforesaid, as the
Informant has reason to believe, but only to ride about upon Messages from the
Earl of Tyrone in reference to the Plot.

The Informant further says, That he has seen and observed the Intelligencers
that were sent by the Earl of Tyrone to the several Counties, viz. Pierce
Power, alias Pierce, and Grenane to the Counties of Clare and Gallaway, and
William Fench into another part of the said County of Clare, whose answers to
any that questioned them, were, that their business was to order and settle the
Earl of Angleseys chief Rents, having had but very little or nothing to do
formerly in either of those two Counties. Lawrence Sullivane was employed to
the County of Kerry, and William Butler employed by his Brother, Major John
Butler, or the Earl of Tyrone, into the County of Wexford: All these Messengers
were constantly employed upon Messages in the Months of May, June, July,
August, September and October, 1678. In which Month of October, the Informant
was also sent for to join in the said Plot by the Earl of Tyrone; in reference
whereunto I shall here give a Relation of what passed between his Lordship and
this Informant as follows.

The Informant being at a place in the County of Waterford, called Kill Mr.
Thomas, in company of one Richard Power, Gent. on the last day of October,
1678. which was of a Friday, and being then at Breakfast, one Thomas Samson,
Gent. and Steward to the Earl of Tyrone, came into our Company, who after
Breakfast was over, spoke to the Informant in these words; Mr. Bourk, my Lord
and Master desired me to pray you to come to him to Coroughmore, this night, or
to morrow following, telling me he had some earnest business to speak with you
about, but what it is I know not.

The Informant told the said Mr. Samson, that he the Informant had been at that
House in Kill Mr. Thomas at a Sheriffs Court all the day before, and that his
Horse was either strayed or stolen; and farther told the said Samson, that if
the Informant thought that his Lordships sending for him was of any consequence
or haste, he the Informant would hire a Horse to wait upon his Lordship that
night. The said Samson answered, He did not know what the matter was, but that
was the Message which his Lord bid him deliver.

Mr. Samson was but then newly come to my Lords Service, so that he having
summoned a Court Baron at Kill Mr. Thomas aforesaid that day, where the
Informant was to appear as Attorney for the Earl of Tyrone in a Cause depending
in that Court, betwixt the said Earl and some of his Neighbors and Tenants,
concerning certain Trespasses, it behoved this Informant to stay till the Court
was discharged. But that being done, this Informant hired a Horse and went with
the said Samson to my Lords House. So soon as this Informant arrived there,
this Informant was given to understand that his Lordship was at Supper with
Strangers, but returned his thanks to the Informant for traveling so far in a
dark night to visit his Lordship, and withal to desire this Informant to come
to his Lordship the next Morning: Which accordingly this Informant did, being
the first day of November, 1678.

This Informant attending his Lordship upon the Morning already mentioned, his
Lordship bad the Informant welcome; after which his Lordship asked this
Informant, What News? This Informant answered, he presumed his Lordship had the
best Correspondency of any on that side the Country, and that for the
Informant's part he had none worth his Lordships hearing. His Lordship then
told the Informant that he had received Intelligence out of France, wherein he
understood that the French were very powerful, and that Parlez vous Francois
should be plentifully heard here (meaning in Ireland) e're long. This Informant
asking his Lordship what great Exploits the French King has done? Done, says
he, he has done wonders, and we may without doubt call him the Defender of the
Faith, for he best deserves it, and I am sure the Hand of God is with him. This
Informant told his Lordship, that a man would be apter to think, that if the
French were intended that way, he would rather venture upon England first, than
come into Ireland* His Lordship answered he had received a Letter from one
Robert Power* who studied the Law at one of the Ihns of Court in London, which
declared that the French had a great stroke in England already; and then, said
his Lordship to this Informant, before you are half a year older the French
will subdue England and Ireland, and little harm thereby: For they in England
have no Faith in them; for they no sooner grant a thing but they recall it
again; just as they have dealt with me about the Lands of Dea^e: But, said he,
before the^ (...) (...), by Goge I will lose the best Blood in my Body. The
Informant was astonished to see in what temper his Lordship was; yet told his
Lordship, That if the French should come there, they would kill all as that
were the poor Subjects. His Lordship answered, As for that, said he, I have
made my Conditions for this side of the Country; and if you will but join with
me, I will put you in a quick way to get an Estate. The Informant told his
Lordship, That he wanted it, but could not tell how to come at it. Then his
Lordship drew out of his Pocket a great quantity of Papers rolled up, and
desired the Informant to subscribe his Name in one of those Papers, wherein,
upon a sudden glance, the Informant could read the Names of Paul Strange,
Richard and John Power; and, as this Informant verily believes, there were the
Names of above a hundred Subscribers in all. This Informant desired his
Lordship to excuse him for the present, alleging, That he was not fit to be
employed in Matters of such high concernment; and the Informant said further,
That he never heard of any of his Name that had ever proved Traitors to their
Kings, and that he, this Informant, would not be the first. With that, his
Lordship called this Informant Coward, and drew his Sword almost out of his
Scabbard to kill the Informant: But, as God would have it, his Lordship espied
a Gentleman coming toward him, who was Sir John Ponsopy's Son: Upon which his
Lordship went to salute him, and left me* However, after he had walked with him
into his House, his Lordship went himself to the Bridge of Corroghmore, before
the Informants face, and called forth one William Power a Broag-maker, and
commanded him in all haste to go and bring him John Daniell to inform against
this Informant for that this Informant had struck the said Daniell half a vear
before; though the Business amounted to no more than two slight Blows with this
Informants bare Hands, in the Informants own defense, and for which the said
Daniell had released the Informant the next Morning after he had struck him,
before four Witnesses. However, at my Lord's Command, the said Daniell came to
Corroghmore, and was forced to inform against this Informant for the said
Battery, his Lordship threatening the said John Daniell, that he would crop his
Ears if he did not inform against the Informant. Thereupon, upon the said
Daniell's Accusation, this Informant was disarmed, and by a Mittimus from the
said Earl was to be sent to the Gaol of Waterford; but it being Saturday late
at night, the Constable took the Informant's word to meet him at a certain
Place on Monday following. In the mean time the Informant procured Bail, and
brought them to Corroghmore, to his Lordship's House; but his Lordship refused
to take any Bail for the Informant, and moreover ordered, that if the Constable
made any delay to obey his Warrant, and did not go forthwith with the Informant
to Waterford, he would send the Constable to Gaol too: And more than that, his
Lordship sent to the several Justices of the Peace himself, that they should
not bail the Informant upon any account. His Lordship said further, That if the
Informant did not starve in Gaol, he would hang him the next Assizes.

By the way, as the Informant was going toward Waterford, the Informant writ a
Letter to William Smith Esquire desiring him to speak to my Lord to take Bail for
the Informant. My Lord, at his Request, promised the said Mr. Smith he would;
but when it was tendered, he would take none. Then, since it could not be
avoided, the Informant was put into Waterford Gaol, about the beginning of
November, and there remained until the Fourteenth of March following; during
which time, the Informant wrote Five Letters to his Grace the Lord Lieutenant
of Ireland, complaining of the hard Usage he had received, and containing what
further he had to say as to the Plot: Of which Letters, two of them were sealed
by the Recorder of Waterford's Lady, because there was neither Fire or Candle
allowed where the Informant was kept: But neither of those two, nor of three
more, the Informant could ever have an Answer; so that either they miscarried,
or were taken up at the Postmaster's Office in Waterford: for it seems the Lord
Lieutenant received none of them, as his Grace was pleased to tell this
Informant afterward.

As to the rest of my Condition, it was such, that if any body out of
Friendship came to see this Informant, he durst not come the second time, for
fear of the Earl, or purchasing his Indignation. At length came the Assizes,
and then the Earl of Tyrone's Servants, viz. Thomas Samson his Steward, Thomas
Cowdall his Solicitor, and William Buckner his Attorney, went to work with
great eagerness against the Informant, in ordering an Indictment against the
Informant, and brought the said Daniell to prove it: But the Informant
traversed the said Indictment, and was acquitted by the Jury. Upon my
Acquittal, the Judges, finding that there was something more than ordinary in
the matter, and wondering that a Man of the Informants Capacity should be kept
four Months in Gaol, without Bail, for only striking another Man in his own
defense, began to inquire a little further into the matter; whereupon the
Informant gave them his Information in Writing: upon which, Sir William Davis,
one of the Judges, advised the Informant to stay in Gaol three or four days
longer, and that he would send to Dublin for a Messenger, to have the Informant
brought before the Lord Lieutenant and Council.

The further Examination of Hobert Bourke, who says, That after he was
discharged at Waterford from the beating of John Daniell, he was sent for by
the Lord Lieutenant and Council, to appear before his Grace and the Council, to
give Evidence for the King concerning the Designs of the Earl of Tyrone, which
was the Informants chief aim and desire. In short, a Warrant was given to a
Messenger, directed to the Sheriff of the County of Waterford, commanding him
to send the Informant well guarded to Kilkenny, where he should be relieved,
and a fresh Guard be appointed for safe Conduct of the Informant: but in stead
of a good Guard, the Sheriff aforesaid, William Dobbin by name, being a great
Friend to the Earl of Tyrone, and knowing that the Informant had impeached the
said Earl, sent only two of his Livery-Boys along with the Messenger as
Guards, and Cords to tie the Informants Legs under the Horses Belly, which was
done accordingly.

At length the Informant coming to Dublin, was examined by Sir John Davis
Secretary of State, who told the Informant, that he knew the Earl of Tyrone so
well, that he would not believe any thing the Informant should say of him; and
would often say to the Informant, Pray answer me, Mr. Bourke, and let alone
your telling of Stories; of a set purpose to put the Examinant out of the way
of telling the true Contents of his Information. For, as for this Informant, he
could not add or diminish from what he had delivered to Sir William Davis at
the Assizes in Waterford: but Sir John's intent was to see whether he could
catch the Informant in any disadvantage, or derogation from what he had
delivered in Writing, as aforesaid. But for all this, the Earl of Tyrone was
confined to his Chamber, and afterward gave Bail to answer the Informants
Challenge at the Kings Bench the next Term, which was Easter Term, at what time
his Lordship and this Informant were both to appear. In the mean time the Earl
made it his business to make the Informant the greatest Rogue in the World: To
which purpose, he was charged by the said Earls People, viz. his Attorney Mr.
Buckner, his Solicitor Thomas Cowdall, and one Mr. Cartie Deputy Clerk of the
Assize for Munster Circuit; which Persons brought an Indictment against the
Informant, for stealing of a Horse out of the County of Clare, which, as they
pretended, was about three years before. But as the same was but a mere
Contrivance, so it was found upon trial by the Judges of the Kings Bench;
thereby to render the Informant infamous, that his Evidence against the said
Earl might be of no value.

When they could not prevail against the Informant by this means, the Earl of
Tyrone gave Bail to answer the Informant at Waterford Assizes then next
ensuing, hoping in all that time among his Friends and Relations to find some
other means to ruin and destroy the Informant.

Note, That this Thomas Cowdall was a Servant to Robert Bower, that sent the
Letter to the Earl of Tyrone, which Letter was mentioned in my first
Information; and Mr. Cartie was a Person who was under Promises to discover all
Secrets to the Earl of Tyrone, that he knew as a Clerk of the Assize. But this
Informant being bound to appear in Waterford, to prosecute the said Earl at his
own Door, and amongst his Tenants and Relations, the Informant thought it a
very hard Task: and besides all this, he was terrified from appearing there, by
several People, who told the Informant, That he must never look to return from
thence in safety, in regard the said Earl had procured his own Counsel to be
Judge of the Assize, and his own Tenants and Relations to be Tryers of the
Matter of Fact, in his own Country. So that this Informant finding himself in
such danger of his Life, chose rather to hazard his Recognisance, and the
forfeiture of his Bond, than to run into apparent peril of his Life, which he
understood was both eagerly and craftily sought for. Yet for all these Threats,
before the Trial came on, this Informant did go to Waterford Assizes; but
finding the Earl of Tyrone, and his Cousin Lieutenant Thomas Power, at Supper
with Chief Justice Keeling and Sir Richard Reynolds, and understanding that
they Lodged and Dieted in one House, and at one Table, this Informant then
began to think it was in vain to expect any favor. Which, together with the
Warning and Notice that was given him, this Informant, in Waterford, That if he
opened his Lips against the Earl of Tyrone, he must not think to sleep the
Night following, unless he slept to Eternity, absolutely daunted the Courage of
this Informant. Nor was this all; for he wanted also the Assistance of John
Macnamarrah, his Chief Testimony, who by Promises of Rewards from the said
Earl, was secured from appearing in this Informants behalf; and at the same
time also, neither Mr. Samson appeared to bring in his Testimony, nor Mr. Ivy
his Asistance, who I knew could both of them discover much of the Matter: nor
had this Informant any Power from the Court to bring them in. All which were
the Causes why this Informant left the Court, and absented himself, thinking it
would be better to appear at the Kings Bench, by which time he hoped to get
sufficient Authority to bring in the forementioned Persons to his Assistance.

In order thereunto the Informant wrote a Letter to the Judges then in
Waterford, that the Informant was not then prepared to proceed, in regard the
Witnesses were not brought in, nor any care taken to bring them in. But the
Informant fearing that the Letter should not be delivered, and not daring to go
to the Judges Chamber, by reason of the Earl of Tyrones being there with them,
and his Friends and Servants about him, the Informant was resolved to venture
into the Court. But he was no sooner within the Door when the Chief Justice
Keating, as the Informant believes, or if not he, some Body else, called to the
Jailer to take the Informant into Custody, which so affrighted the Informant,
that he made all the have he could back again out of Court, and was presently
followed with such a Hue and Cry after him by the Jailer, Constables and
Bailiffs, that he was glad to slip privately into one Mr. Fullers Tan-House,
without the Gates of Waterford, and there to stay all that Night. In the mean
time the Jailer goes where the Informants Horse stood, and told the People he
was ordered by the Judges to secure the said Horse. The next Morning by break
of Day this Informant hired a Boat to Ferry him over to the Slip-house on the
other side of the River in the County of Kilkenay, and went to one Mr. William
Wilkinsons house an Inkeeper, who about 4 a Clock in the afternoon, told this
Informant that it was not safe for him to be there, in regard there was such a
strict enquiry made for him in Waterford. Whereupon the Informant departed from
thence, intending to have gone to attend his Grace the Duke of Ormond, who was
then in Kilkenny, to acquaint his Grace with the Judges proceedings in
Waterford.

In the way as this Informant going a Foot, above two miles onward in the Road
to Kilkenny aforesaid, one Major Richards's Coachman overtaking this Informant,
and knowing him, rode before to an Alehouse, and there wrote a Letter to the
Earl of Jyrone's Coachman, giving him notice that this Informant was going
toward Kilkenny aforesaid, and desiring him to tell the same to my Lord
Tyrone. The writing of this Letter being by chance discovered by this
Informant, caused him to leave the Road, and to turn four miles out of the way
to Kilkenny and make have to a place called Gurteenes, where he stayed four or
five days, until John Macknamara, who had discoursed the matter with the Earl
of Tyrone, sent the Informant a Letter in which he gave this Informant to
understand, that the said Earl had sworn and damned himself to Eternity, that
he owed the Informant no ill will at all, praying this Informant to come to the
said Macknamara's house. But this Informant being afraid of the Earl, and not
daring to trust him, sent the said Macknamara word, that he would not come.
However this Informant writ a Letter in few days after, to the said Macknamara
for his Portmantle, Lynnen and other things which were at his house, who sent
the Messenger back without the Lynnen, etc. but with a Letter, wherein he
mentioned, that he would meet the Informant next morning at Waterford, and
bring his Lynnen with him, and that he had several things to impart to the
Informant concerning or from the Earl of Tyrone, which he durst not write.
Thereupon the Informant did meet the said Macnamara, together with his Wife and
Father in Law, Teige Funnican, at Mr. Carties house; being met, this Informant
told the said Macnamara, that he was ready to take Shipping for England* To
which the said Macnamara said, do not trouble your self any further, for I will
get you a good consideration and liberty to stay at home. The aforesaid
Funnican also promised this Informant Twenty Shillings in Money, and his share
of a Barrel of Bear, and his Horse to ride upon, upon condition the Informant
would alter his mind and go home with them that Night. Macnamara, further said,
you are not in condition to Travel at present, meaning for England, and told me
it would be better to stay till I were better provided. And thus they flattered
the Informant with them home, though he well understood it was still upon the
Earl of Tyrone's account that they so friendly invited him. Within two days
after the Informant's coming to Macnamara's House, the said Mr. Macnamara, went
to the Earl of Tyrone's House, and informed his Lordship, that he had the
Informant at home. The said Macnamara, also told this Informant at his return
from the said Earl, that the said Earl presented his service to him this
Informant; and desired him to give Major John Butler, and Mr. John Ronane a
meeting at a certain place, in order to an agreement betwixt the said Earl, and
this Informant. All which things this Informant imparted to Mr. Ivy, then
living in the same Town with Macnamara. Mr. Ivy, desired the Informant to be
very wary, for fear they should entrap him. Upon which this Informant told Mr.
Ivy, he would go and see what they would be at. In order to which resolution,
Mr. Macnamara, and this Informant went, and met Major Butler, and Mr. Ronane,
about four Miles from M. Macnamara's House, at a public Ale House. Where,
discoursing the matter together, the said Major Butler, desired this Informant,
to desist from troubling of the Earl any more, upon which consideration, the
said Earl would give this Informant a good Farm and Stock; and he should have
his Lordships favor more then ever he had showed him before. He desired this
Informant also, to nominate any sum of money that this Informant pleased, so
that he did not exceed a thousand pound, and he the said Butler would be bound
for the payment of it; on condition, that this Informant should say, that
Squire Villiers, Captain Nichols, Mr. May, Mr. Bradley, Mr. Peter Anthony, were
his Promoters and Abettors in this Discovery and Design against the said Earl.
To which the Informant answered, that neither of the Parties mentioned, ever
spoke a word to him in their Lives, or if they had, he would not have been
prompted to do any unjust Action by any of them all. And this Informant told
the said Butler, that he never charged the said Earl with any thing but what
his Lordship was pleased to tell and show him himself. Thus after they had kept
the Informant a whole day to entice him with proffers of that kind, and seeing
they could not prevail. Major Butler sent Mr. Ronan home to the Earl of Tyrone,
and Major Butler himself returned along with the Informant and Macnamara, back
to Macnamara's house, where the said Butler and the Informant lay together that
night.

The next day, this Informant acquainted Mr. Ivy with all the Discourse, at
the aforesaid Meeting, and with the proffers made to this Informant, and then
again this Informant was resolved to go for England, but Mr. Ivy told him it
was not safe to go before he had the Lord Lieutenants pass: which put this
Informant to another stand, in regard he did not know what to do for want of a
convenience to apply himself to the Lord Lieutenant, and being also afraid to
go alone. In these perplexities this Informant then went to Waterford, where he
met with one of the Earl of Tyrones Servants, by name John Whelane, who told
him, that it was well for him, that he was so wise as to run away from the
Assizes, for if he had stayed, the Judges were resolved, at least, to have
cropped this Informants Ears; and further, Mr. Wilkinson the Innkeeper
aforenamed, told the Informant, that the Judges were resolved to have taken him
along the Circuit with them, and to have got some body to have sworn something
against him that might have amounted to the taking away his Life. The Informant
then wrote a Letter to the Earl of Orrery, which the aforesaid Mr. Ivy
promised to deliver to the said Earl, the said Ivy having some occasions of
his own into those parts; which Letter the said Ivy read before it was sealed:
the Contents of which Letter were, to pray the Earl of Orrery to send for, and
examine the aforesaid Sampson, who was then at Youghall near the said Earls
house, and to write to the Lord Lieutenant with a Request to his Grace, to send
for the said Sampson, Mr. Ivy and the Informant. But Mr. Ivy was so very
busy in getting in his Harvest, that he could not go so soon as he intended to
the Earl of Orrery, and so that Letter took no effect.

In the mean time, the Earl of Tyrone, finding he could not by Bribes or
otherwise, prevail with the Informant to desist his Prosecution, he then
Petitioned the Lord Lieutenant against the Informant, and thereupon a Messenger
was sent to the Earl of Tyrones house first, which said Messenger told the said
Earl, that he was ordered to take his directions from his Lordship for the
securing of this Informant, and that so soon as he should be taken, he was to
be brought to the said Earl first. Whereupon the said Earl, to conceal his
knowledge, where the Informant was, as though he were ignorant of the same, sent
several of his Servants to search for him, though they all knew very well where
this Informant was; having often sent tome before. At length, after a long
pretended search, coming into the aforenamed Macnamara's house (whither I was
then returned from Waterford) about Tenn or eleven a Clock at night, the said
Earls Servants apprehended this Informant first, and bound him with Cords. In
which condition the Informant seeing the Messenger, asked him whether he had
any Warrant so to do? who said that he was but a Spectator only, and that the
Earl of Tyrones people were the Officers, and Withal, the said Messenger bad
the Informant to take his last leave, and farewell of his Friends.

Then they hurried this Informant away from Mr. Macnamara's house, four miles
that night; the next morning they conveyed him out of the direct way to
Waterford, to put the Informant to greater pains and trouble, and brought him
in at the West-Gate of the said City of Waterford, and so all along the Street,
bound as he was, until they came to the Cross, which is about the middle of the
City, where they alighted, and carried this Informant into one Mr. Guddriges an
Inkeepers house In which place they kept the Information the condition
aforesaid, until they had gathered all the Earl of Tyrones Friends, that were
in that City, and all the Officers of the same, to see how they had hampered
this Informant, and then, when they had satissted the scorn and contempt of the
Spectators, they procured a lame little Galloway without Shoos for this
Informant to ride upon, and then tying this Informants Legs under the said
Galloways Be (...) with his hands tied behind him* they carried (...) through
the Town to be seen in dirision, where he had not been seen before, and so
having showed this Informant from one end of the Town to the other for a second
pastime to the Multitude, they then carried him a way to the Earl of Tyrone's
house, so bound as before, where the Earl had gathered together all his Friends
and Neighbors, to see the Informant in that condition. Among the rest, the
said Earls Mistress, by name Mrs. Mortimeer, gave to the Messenger nine Cobs
sterling; that she also might have a sight of this Informant in his ignominious
entertainment, and at the mercy of his Enemy, then the Judge of his own Cause
and in his own house.

After they had kept this Informant at the Earl of Tyrones, after the manner
aforesaid, to make sport for the space of two hours, then they carried him on
the way to the next Garrison, which was Carrickmashure. One Thomas Power, the
Earl of Tyrones Gentleman, who was at the apprehending of this Informant and
one of his Guard, riding before to a place called Crehanough, where dwelt the
forementioned Major John Butler. His business was to desire the said Butler to
meet this Informant in the way to Carrickmashure, which he accordingly did.
When he came he asked the Informant what was the matter? As though he had not
known before; who answered him that for his part he did not know. The said
Major Butler then asked the Informant, whether he could be spoken to in
private? This Informant made answer, that that place was no place for this
Informant to talk in, being wet and durty with riding so far in foul ways
without Boots and his Legs tied under the Horses Belly. With that the said
Butler followed this Informant to Carrickmashure, and brought with him Mr. John
Ronan, before mentioned, and Quartermaster Ely. Upon their coming into this
Informants Company at his Lodging in Carrickmashure aforesaid, the said
Quartermaster Ely's first Complement was* That he knew the rest of the Company,
but the Informant he knew not. To which this Informant answered, that he knew
this Informant well enough too if he pleased; but this Informant told him he
was indifferent whether he did or no. Upon which he the said Ely said, he knew
him this Inofrmant so well, and that one Rope was too little for him.

Then Major Butler and Mr. Ronan fell to their old way of tampering with this
Informant by turns, to which purpose the said Major Butler promised, that if
the Informant would do as he the said Butler would have had him do before, he
would follow the Informant next Morning to Kilkenny, and get him quit of all
his Troubles for the future; that is to say, if he would take their former
profers, and excuse the forementioned Gentlemen. And the said Major farther
told this Informant, that there were some People gone before him to Kilkenny
that would be very glad to bring in those Gentlemen aforesaid to the saving of
the Earl of Tyrone. But this Informant refused and scorned their offers
notwithstanding the great shame and pain they put him to. Then Major Butler
took this Informant by the hand and said, old friend, farewell now for
evermore. Then Quartermaster Elie began an Health to the Prosperity of the
Earl of Tyrone, and to the confounding and utter subversion of all his Enemies,
and forced the Health to go round.

This Ely is Quartermaster to the Lord Lieutenant of Irelands Troop, and
charged by the aforesaid Mr. Macnamara in his Information, for being in the
Conspiracy with the Earl of Tyrone, and one that was to have been a Major under
the said Earl for the French, and confessed he was a Papist heretofore.

From Kilkenny this Informant was carried to Dublin, and then committed to the
Messengers hands, under a Guard of Musketeers both night and day, without the
Liberty of Pen, Ink or Paper, or so much as to speak to any body, but what the
Guard should understand, and in their presence; to which end they watched in the
Informants Room all night. Under which restraint, this Informant was closely
kept for several days, until he was examined by hi good friend the
Lord-Chief-Justice Keating. Then he Petitioned the Lord Lieutenant and Council,
to send a Summons for the bringing in of Mr. Sampson and Mr Ivy, etc. to the
end, they might give in their Evidences, which the Informant alleged were
material. Within a fortnight after those Gentlemen came to Dublin but none of
them could be admitted to come to see the Infotmant, until they all had
delivered their several Informations, and then this Informant had his Liberty.

This Informant further faith, that he and the rest of the Witnesses were then
bound in Recognizance to appear at Waterford Assizes next ensuing, which was to
be held the tenth day of March last past. The Judges for that Circuit were Sir
Richard Reynolds and Sir William Davis.

When the Assizes came to be held, the Informant and the rest of the Witnesses
appeared, and after the usual Ceremonies of the Court, the Grand Jury was
called, and then one Mr. Porter of the Earls Council, a Papist, stood up, and
made a short motion to this effect. My Lords, here is a Peer of this Nation in
Question for his Life, and then he prayed leave to appear for the Earl, which
was granted for him, and Counselor Long, another Papist.

When the Jury was called, and going to be sworn, Mr. Long stood up and said, I
am for the party Impeached; and then both the Counsel and the Atturnies of
which there were three, craved liberty to accept against some of the Jury,
which exceptions were made against none but Protestants.

As for the Informant he had neither Counsel nor Atturnies allowed him though
often demanded the privilege, and though the Informant and the rest of the
witnesses excepted against some of the Jury, as being of kindred and Tennants,
and in particuagainst Paul Sherlack, Pierce Walch, and one Carry; yet upon their
bare words denying themselves to be kindred or Tennants, they were admitted of
the Jury, notwithstanding, that this Informant knew they were either Related to
the Plotters, or concerned in the Conspiracy.

After Dinner, the Informant went to the Judges Chambers, where the said Judges
swore this Informant and the rest of the Witnesses, to attend the Grand Jury.
In order whereunto, this Informant went, and after a tedious attendance at the
Door of the Grand-Jury-Room, he prayed admittance, and desired to be heard. But
the Jury told this Informant, they had seen all the Informations already, and
had no Orders to hear any more new thing or matter.

The next morning, this Informant being in the Judges Chamber, in came Major
Richards and Captain Grant, two of the Jury, who declared to Judge Reynolds,
that the Bill against the Earl of Tyrone was found Ignoramus Whereupon, Judge
Reynolds asked Major Richards, whether they were all agreed to it? To which he
answered, that seven were for finding the Bill, and ren against it, and so they
were out-Voted. However, some of the Jury were pleased to say after, that they
durst not but agree with the rest, and that the Papists that were there
threatened them in such a manner, that the Protestants durst not agree to what
they would have them do. And so the next day the Jury brought in the Bill
Ignoramus.

Upon that, this Informant desired that the Jury might be sent for into Court,
and called over one by one; and that enquiry might be made concerning the
persons* and which were of most Value as to the Kings Interest and the
Protestant Religion, whether they that were for finding the Bill, or they that
voted against it? Upon which, the Judges sent for the Jury, and ordered them to
be called over one by one: but there were no other questions put to them, but
only whether they were all agreed in their Verdict? To which, the foreman
answered, they were agreed according to the way they commonly use in Juries,
which was to put it to Votes. But whether it were true or no, that they left to
the Judges: and so the Bill was received Ignoramus.

The Names of the Jurors that were for finding the Bill.
William Bolton Ar. Andrew Richards Ar. Thomas Osborn Knight. John Morris Gent.
Robert Whitby Gent. John Stephens Gent. Henry Jaques Gent.
The names of them that would not find the Bill.
Jaspar Grant Ar. Pierce Walsh Ar. Tho. Neal Gents Robert Cook Gent. Robert
Carry Ar. Michael Carry Gent. Roger Carry Gent. Paul Sherlock Gent. Anthony Obryan
Gent. James Oldfield Gent.


Queries touching the Earl of Tyrones, and Mr. Bradleys Trials.
1. Whether all the Examinations taken against the said Earl, and Mr. Bradley,
or either of them, before the Lord Lieutenant and Council, on which the Lord
Lieutenant and Council declared the Earl to be Guilty of High Treason, should
not have been delivered to the Grand Jury? 2. Whether the Evidence for the King
ought not to have been heard by the Jury, when they were sworn to that intent?
3. Whether the Kings Evidence ought not to have had Council assigned them, as
well as the Party accused, who had both Council and Attorneys granted him
according to his own desire. 4. Whether the Bill could be found, or returned
Ignoramus, twelve not agreeing thereto? 5. Whether all those Letters mentioned
in the Examinations, should not have been sent for and examined, when desired
by the Witnesses, for the strengthening their Evidence, especially when notice
was given of the place where they might be had. 6. Whether those persons were
sit Evidence for the King upon their Oaths, that gave it out they would clear
the Party accused on their bare words? 7. Whether all that were charged should
not have been taken into Custody and disarmed. 8. Whether a person accused for
several Treasons upon a Trial for some, can be cleard af all, especially when
all the Examinations were neither heard, nor all the Witnesses known to the
Jury?
This Informant further faith, that when he found that neither he nor his
Witnesses could be heard in Ireland, he came into England, and made his Appeal
to the King and Council in April last, together with another of the Witnesses,
Mr. John Macnamara by name. Which being done, this Informant and the said Mr.
Macnamara, were by Order of the King and Council, commanded back into Ireland,
having first entered into Bond to make their appearance in Dublin, before the
Lord Lieutenant and Council within so many days after the date thereof; which
we did accordingly, the last day of April, or very near it. Ever since which
time, till our second return into England, this Informant and the other Witness
were delaid and kept there in such a condition, that we could not be discharged
of our attendance, nor be made use of as we desired. Neither could this
Informant be allowed one Penny toward his charges and expenses, though this
Informant had been forced to keep several of his Witnesses for several Weeks at
his own costs. It being the Design of the Conspirators to hinder this Informant
from all necessary supply and encouragement, hoping that at length he might be
laid in Jail for Debt, or that they might lay some train to accuse him of
something that might amount to the taking away his life* or keeping him in
perpetual imprisonment; which is the more likely, for that those devices not
prevailing, they thought to have done their business by Assassination* For,
this Informant further says, that one day, as he was coming out of the Four
Courts of Dublin, one John Power, the Earl of Tyrone's Cousin German, and a
Papist, being also one that had been an Officer in France, together with no
less then Thirty more, fell upon this Informant, without the least provocation
given by him this Informant, or so much as speaking to them one word, but only
at the Instigation of the said John Power, who cried to the rest, There goes
that Rogue Bourk. Upon which, as upon a signal given; they all, or as many as
could come at him, laid at this Informant with all the fury imaginable, so
that he was not only wounded and bruised in several places of his Head, but in
most parts of his Body* And though this Informant cried often out for help, yet
not one Person would stir to his Assistance, only a young man, that was with
this Informant, kept off as many blows as he could, in so much that this
Informant expected no other then Death; till at last espying a door open, he
made a shift, as weak as he was, to retreat backward into an Entry, where he
drew his Sword and kept them off till he got into the House: after which they
had like to have murdered the young man before mentioned in revenge. Yet, all
the remedy this Informant had, was to complain to Sir Robert Booth, Lord Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, who issued forth his Warrant for the apprehending
so many as we could tell the names of. Three were taken, the foresaid John
Power, Richard Mansfield, and John Barry, all Papists, (the rest running away
and not being to be found) who were bound to answer the Fact, the next ensuing
Term at the Court of Kings Bench, and in the mean time to be of the good
Behavior.

And this Informant further says, that having after a tedious and chargeable
cure, at length recovered himself, being unwilling to expose himself any more
to the malice of such kind of Persons, he Petitioned the Lord Lieutenant for a
Pass to come for England, which his Grace was pleased to refuse, saying, That
the Informant had gone into England already without his Pass, and therefore he
might go or stay as he pleased, but for his part he would give him none. So
that this Informant was forced to come for England without it, for the
preservation of his life, not daring to stay any longer in Ireland.

FINIS.

