The ROYAL LAW: OR, THE GOLDEN RULE OF Justice and Charity. A SERMON AT THE
ANNIVERSARY MEETING OF THE Gentlemen, Inhabitants of London, and Others, Born
within the County of Worcester; at St. Lawrence Church, Nov. 29. 1683.

By George Boraston, M. A. Rector of Hever in Kent.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1684.

To my Worthy Friends the STEWARDS for the present Year. John Jolliffe, Francis
Wright, Thomas Twittey, Thomas Clifford, John Harris, Richard Boraston, John
Cooper, Thomas Thornbury, John Butler, William Bacon, William Jefferyes, Walter
Bowyer.

Gentlemen,
THIS Sermon Preached at your Feast, is now at your request made Public, and
presented as an acknowledgment of your undeserved Respects to me, and your kind
Apprehensions of the Discourse it self: It was not any opinion of the
performance (to the weaknesses of which I am not a little conscious) that has
made me comply with your desires to Print what I then Delivered; but an earnest
desire and hope of Contributing in some measure to your Love, Veneration, and
Practice of the Duties therein recommended, which so nearly concern the Vitals
and Honor of Religion, and all the great Interests of Mankind; which great
ends, if these Papers shall any ways promote, either in you or others, as you
will have no cause to repent in desiring, so neither shall I, in consenting to
the Publication of them; especially since thereby I have the opportunity of
Publishing to the World how much,

I am, Gentlemen, Your Humble Servant, and Affectionate Countryman, George
Boraston.

MATTHEW. 7.12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would, that Men should do unto
you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets.


TO the performance of all those Duties we owe to God or Man, we have no surer
Guides, than those natural notions interwoven in our make and constitution; and
revealed Religion, designed by infinite Goodness, and Wisdom, to assist us
against those Weaknesses, and to repair those Ruins, we have contracted, by our
vicious Education, our Evil customs, our Corrupt inclinations, our Imperfect
and false reasonings. Between these two, there is so fair and necessary a
correspondence, that it is to all considering Men, no slender support of their
Faith in things revealed, that they are so agreeable to the common notices
implanted in them by Nature.

And yet in this unhappy age, we have a sort of Men (Christians I may not call
them) who are as fond of Sacrificing Christianity to their Lusts, as ever the
Primitive Christians were Zealous to Sacrifice their Lusts to the Laws of
Christianity, and their Lives for the Testimony of its Truth, and Excellency:
Men who desire to be known by the name of Deists, which is but a disguise for
an Atheist, since by it they well enough secure the effects of Atheism, even
when they are ashamed to own the principles of it.

Hence it is they not only Quarrel and Affront, but Burlesque, and make Sport
with the Holy Scriptures; and if they durst speak out, would call the Gospel a
contrivance, and our Lord an Impostor. What else means that cried up assertion;
that the Scriptures have no Authority, but what the Civil Power gives them?
What else the revival of late of that long since baffled attempt, Philostr.
life of Apollon.
by which Apollonius Tyanaeus that Impostor, and Magician, is made a Corrival,
if not an Overmatch, to our Savior, both in Miracles, and Sanctity of Life?
And what is the drift, and secret tendency, and design of all this? But under
the great respects they would seem to pay to the Law of Nature, to undermine,
and justle all revealed Religion out of the World, and to set these two in
direct opposition, and contradiction the one to the other; that so they may
thereby evacuate the Christian Law, and gain the greater Liberty and Scope in
gratifying their Lusts; to which they imagine that to be a severer Enemy, and
to lay greater restraints on them, than the Law of Nature does. But by this, as
well as other reasons, it is evident, that it is not any strength of reason, or
conviction of their understandings, but a kindness to their beloved Lusts, that
prevails over their minds, and influences their Faith, and makes them believe
those things, which are contradicted by common sense, and plain demonstration.

For our Blessed Lord never designed to cancel the Laws of Nature, but every
where supposes, and owns them, and superstructs Christianity on that Basis and
Foundation. He intends not to divest Men, either of the principles, or passions
belonging to Human Nature, by converting them to Christianity, or to deprive
them of such helps, as either right reason affords them, or former Revelation
had furnished them with, but to improve, and heighten both.

The Law and the Prophets, were given by God, as a fuller, and plainer
description, and delineation of these natural Notions, and Duties which he has
Written and Engraven on our Hearts, which our Lord was so far from effacing or
blotting out, that his design was to fill up, and completely finish that ruder
draught, and (...), and so to furnish us with a perfect Picture of Virtue, in
its full proportion; in its lively Colors; in its goodly and beautiful
lineaments; that so it might have that effect upon our minds, which Plato
affirmed, Virtue drawn to the life would have, if it could be seen, to wit,
that it would kindle, and inflame, our affections, and ravish our Hearts with
its loveliness.

This our Lord affirms of himself toward the beginning of this best of Sermons,
St. Matthew. Chap. 5.17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law and the
Prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill, that is, by adding other
instances, by explaining it more fully, and intelligibly in many things and in
more things rescuing it from those corruptions which the false glosses of the
Scribes, and Pharisees, had mixed with it.

'Twere easy to instance several Precepts in this Sermon, in which he directs
his hearers, and in them all Men, what to do as Men, and as Christians, by
advancing Moral and Political Virtues into Spiritual Graces.

Of all which my Text may justly challenge the precedence; being the
abbreviature of the Law of Nature; the Scope and Design of the Law and the
Prophets; the most comprehensive Rule, not only comprizing all those Duties,
that are useful for the conduct, and happiness of Human Society, but also
sufficiently directing us to those Duties, which we owe to God himself. For
when we consider his goodness toward us, and his kind usage of us; sparing us
even when we deserve punishment, and treating us with the affections and
indearments of a most indulgent Parent; so that we our selves, cannot desire or
wish, that he should do to us any otherwise, then he has done; his beneficence
to us, and the good things he has prepared for us, exceeding not only our
greatest hopes, but even the conceptions of our Hearts: I say, when we consider
this, we cannot but manifestly perceive our Obligations to the greatest
Veneration, Gratitude, and Thanksgiving imaginable, to so Gracious a Lord; to
so obliging and adorable a Benefactor; in as much as we our selves do justly
and reasonably expect some proportionable returns, of those, even of those
inconsiderable benefits, we have conferred on others. However I shall not treat
of the words in this utmost extent, and latitude; but shall consider them as
they are an absolute rule of our actions and dealings; enjoining Charity and
Justice toward all Men, in all conditions, and relations. A lesson we are sent
to learn no further, and from no other Tutor, than our own breasts; our own
regular and well-governed desires, what we are willing other Men should do, or
not do to us, are a sufficient direction, and admonition, what we in the like
cases, ought to do, or not do to them: A Law written in such legible
Characters, that none can plead Ignorance, and of so easy a dispatch, that the
pleasure that attends the performance, is a powerful invitation to indear, and
a sufficient reward to encourage our obedience; Therefore all things whatsoever
ye would that Men should do unto you; do ye even so to them; for this is the
Law and the Prophets.

In Discoursing of this Rule I shall observe three things.

1. The Law or Rule it self, with some of its due proportions and measures.

2. The Authority and Sanctions of this Law.

3. Some Irregularities, and deflections from this Rule, by which the purposes,
and proper uses of it are perverted.

1. The Royal Law, or Golden Rule to be observed in all our Intercourses, and
Commerce,
All things whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye even so to
them.

A Law which is deduced from that common natural inclination implanted in every
one by God himself; from whence it is, that every Man does naturally seek his
own preservation, and welfare: That then which is naturally, and sufficiently
grounded in every Man, is laid there as a pattern for the exercise of Charity
and Justice toward all other Men: For by this Native Law, we are obliged to
deal with others, as if we had exchanged Persons, and Circumstances with them,
and they were in ours. But then it must be remembered, that this self-love,
which is the measure of our actings toward others, must be regular, and
well-grounded in its self; not measured by the disordered appetites of every
distempered mind, of every Vitiated and Exorbitant Will, which if once
admitted, would soon introduce all the disorders, and mischiefs in the World;
is the Original of all those Sins, which make the times Perilous, overturns
all Governments Sacred and Civil, throws all ranks and degrees of Men into
Disorder and Confusion, as St. Paul observed long ago in his Epistle to Tim. 1
Epist. 3.1-5. The love then we owe to our selves, which is the measure of our
actings to others, must be regular, and duly bounded, by rectified reason,
common good, and to tend to an object really good. To give some plain instances
of what we would, or would not have done to us; for the negative is included in
the affirmative. Do we abhor to be imposed upon with Lies, Mental Reservations,
and Equivocations? And are not we equally obliged; or can we without great
partiality to our selves, not acknowledge our obligations, never to hide the
true sense of our minds, under any covert of reserve, and ambiguous meanings?
Is it by us reputed dishonesty in others, when they perform not their promises
(those more solemn securities of Men's intentions) when they lawfully may or
can? And should not we be ever most punctual in performing our own? Do we stick
to charge such with Treachery, as well as Injustice, who in trusts committed to
them, act not with the same fidelity, they would do for themselves? And should
it not oblige us, in all trusts deposited, to be so Faithful and Just, as never
to abuse the confidence reposed in us? Would we have others take no advantage
of our ignorance, or necessity; so as to impose upon us either false Wares; or
cheat us with fallacious weights and balances? It certainly obliges us, that
all fraud and deceit, all unjust weights and measures should in our commerce be
abominable to us, as the Lord says they are to him?

Do we in all our Straits (the common lot of Humanity being liable to such
portions of sorrow) not only desire, but lay claim to the compassions and
assistances of others? And should not this draw forth our bowels toward
others; and move us to pour Wine and Oil into their Wounds; to allay their
Sorrows; to clear up their doubts; to remove their burdens; to Minister as we
are able to the necessities of all who stand in need? Do we upon all occasions
desire to be treated with sweetness, and affability; that every petty
provocation should not raise, and break forth in storms and rage against us;
much less settle in rancor and malice; but rather that every one would be easy
and forward to accommodation and all good offices? And should not we go and do
likewise? Are we tender of our reputation? Are we desirous others should be
fair and candid Interpreters of our words and actions? And does it not concern
us to be so far from making havoc of our Neighbors reputation; that we should
not so much as hearken to, or take up a reproach against it? But should be
always ready rather to conceal a real fault, than be forward in divulging those
that are supposed only; and by the most charitable construction, and fairest
Apologies, endeavor rather to render a great one less, then by sly
insinuations, perverse reporting, and malicious suggestions to make a small one
great. These are some of the greater strokes, and lines, measures and
proportions of this excellent Law, whereby most of the cases that occur, may
with ease be determined, if our wills are not more deeply concerned than our
understandings; which Rule is not more useful in it self then Venerable and
Sacred in its Authority which is my next consideration.

2. The Authority and Sanctions of this Law
being, 1. A Law of Nature. 2. A Law of Moses and the Prophets. 3. A Law of the
great Prophet and Lawgiver himself.

1. A Law of Nature; a Law taken out of the Notices and Records of Nature, and
most agreeable to it; providing sufficiently for the necessities and equally
advancing the happiness of Mankind; without which, we were not capable of
receiving any Good, or avoiding Evil; but all private intercourse and public
Societies, must sink into Ruin, and Confusion. A Law of such prime Evidence,
that none can overlook it; of such apparent equity, that none can dispute it;
visible not only to Philosophers and Wisemen; but even to little Children;
whom Nature it self has taught, in all the petty injuries, and unkind usages,
which are offered to them, to rebuke the offender, with such like words as
these: You would not be willing I should serve you so; you would not willingly
be served so your self. This is their ready and almost only protection and
defense, to which on all occasions, they have recourse: This seems to be one of
the first Efforts, and Sallies that their reason makes, and the only Rule to
direct and guide their conversation with one another, and to secure themselves
from wrong: So open and obvious is the equity of this Rule, that it seems to
lie uppermost in the principles of Human Reason.

But then although this is a Law of such apparent evidence, of such undoubted
certainty; yet because of the shortness of Human Reason, and the uncertainty of
its deductions; and that what seems evident to some, to others seems
inconsequent; and that the highest pretenders even in Mathematical and sensible
demonstration are sometimes miserably mistaken (of which Mr. Hobs himself is a
most shameful instance.) it would not be amiss, if we had some infallible
Guide, to secure us, even from the possibility of being mistaken: This
therefore is my next particular proposed for the sacredness of its Authority
and Sanction, it being not the Law of nature only, but

2. The Law, and the Prophets.

This Law is not only recommended to us by right Reason, but established also by
Divine Authority, so that there is no possibility, either of doubting its Truth
and Equity, or escaping from its Obligation. For who is there that dares
question the reasonableness of that Duty to which Nature it self prompts him,
and the God of Nature directs him? What Chains can hold, what Fetters can
secure that Man, who can break from two such powerful engagements, who will not
submit to two such mighty inducements? To whom can we imagine that, that Man
will hearken, who is Deaf to Natures kindly Voice, and to that of Almighty
Power. It Is true this Law in terminis occurs not either in the Law, or in the
Prophets, but there we may find others of the same import, of like equivalence
with it; and in it are contained all the several Duties concerning the Justice
and Charitableness of our deportment toward others, which are scattered up and
down, and are more largely insisted on, in the Law and the Prophets. This is
the Fountain from whence they all flow, and from whence they may without Tort,
or Violence, be fairly deduced; the Center in which they meet, and to which
they may with congruity be referred. This Rule contains in it the reason, and
the equity upon which the numerous, and more particular instances of our Duty
to others therein prescribed, is founded. This like an universal Soul, does
permeate and run through them all, giving Life and Vigor, Force and Authority
to them. The shortness of humane Life, and the difficulty and tediousness of
Learning, and the intricacy of Knowledge, and the multiplicity of particular
Cases, Exceptions and Restrictions, has in all Arts, and Sciences, recommended
the usefulness of short Aphorisms, of compendious Axioms, of little Summaries,
and comprehensive Abridgments, in which are contained the Substance, Pith, and
Marrow of things; and which are as so many Pole-Stars to direct us in all our
doubts, as so many Clues to guide and extricate us in the Labyrinths of
Knowledge, in the variety, and Meanders of Human Affairs: Accordingly our good
Lord, our gracious Lawgiver in Condescension to our infirmity, in Compassion to
our Weakness, has in this Art of Godly living; this Art of Arts: Epitomized our
Duty, and comprised in one easy and plain Rule, all those numerous and
sometimes difficult precepts, which are diffused, and are more largely
commented upon in the Law, and the Prophets; that so neither their intricacy
might perplex and puzzle our minds, or their numbers burden and oppress our
memories; and both discourage our endeavors, and abate our industry. Would we
know what the Law, and the Prophets in the several Periods of the World have
delivered; would we behold it with one view, and cast of the Eye? It is briefly
comprehended in this saying: To this in all emergent difficulties, in all
doubtful perplexities, in new and unforeseen cases; when other means of
resolution are dubious, and intricate, or unsatisfactory, or quite fail us, we
may have recourse with the greatest Ease, Security, and Safety: For if we will
but consult, and interrogate our selves, what it is we desire, that others
should do to us in the like case, we cannot miss of sufficient information to
direct our practice. Lastly, As this is the First, so it is the only Precept,
to which our Lord has vouchsafed so high an Honor, has given so great a
Character, that it is the Law and the Prophets. For that of loveing our
Neighbor as our Selves, and the like, to which this high Character is also
assigned, is not different from it, but of the same purport, and equivalence
with it: Only this before us, seems by far to have the preeminence of that;
For, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy Self, not only looks more imperative,
and commanding without any reason annexed, or implied in it, to invite our
love; but also by requiring it in so high a degree, and at first sight in so
seemingly impossible a measure, that it seems rather to deter us, and to render
the Duty unpracticable. Whereas this by carrying such apparent equity in its
forehead; by making our selves Judges in the case; and appealing to the
natural sentiments of our minds, does recommend it self to our practice, and
does engage our hearts with the choicest endearments.

But then Thirdly, Lest any may imagine that this comprehensive rule, that
contains in it the Law and the Prophets, concerns those only that lived under
that dispensation; and that the men in the Text, are of that narrow extent, and
signification, that our Neighbor was under the Law; our Lord adopts this into
his own Religion, and makes the Precept as Catholic as his Church; Nay, the
truth is, it is of a much wider extent, and we have the warrant of his own
exposition (in the Parable of the Samaritan) to extend it, in a sort to all men
whatever, with whom we have any thing to do, or who live within the compass,
and reach of our Charity. Accordingly his blessed Apostles do press this Duty
on us, in this unlimited, and universal extent, exhorting us as we have
opportunity, to do good to all men, to distribute liberally; to be Patient and
Gentle; to abound in love; to make Supplications, Intercessions, and
Thanksgiving for all Men. To which consideration we may add, that this command
of Love and Charity one toward another, is that command, which our blessed
Lord did select, and choose out, above all the rest; every where thereto
expressing a dear affection, a singular regard; claiming in it a special
Interest, a peculiar Propriety; recommending, and pressing the practice of it
to his Disciples, with an extraordinary concern, with urgent importunity, with
unusual Zeal; exemplifying, and outdoing the command in the whole tenor, and
course of his life; having loved us not only beyond all former example, but
also beyond all imagination and knowledge [(...), Ephesians. 3.19.] urging, and
enforcing our love to one another, from the consideration of this excessivelove
of his to us: Which that we may be in some measure able to perform and
exercise, he has given us his Holy Spirit to excite, and stir up, to shed
abroad that Love in our Hearts, to multiply, and make it perfect in us. Which,
what effect that loving Spirit has upon us, how it is we behave, and demean
our selves in the performance of this peculiar command; He in a signal manner
takes special notice of, and peculiar inspection, awarding to us our final Doom
and Sentence, either of everlasting happiness or misery, according as we have
either conscientiously, or negligently behaved our selves therein. So that if
his commands, and example, if the assistance and aids of his Spirit; if the
greatest rewards to the observers, and severest denuntiations to the
disobedient, import any thing, the Authority is most Sacred, and the Sanctions
most weighty. And though it is so Sacred, in its Authority; though in its self
so necessary, to the welfare of mankind, yet how miserably it is wrested and
perverted, will appear in the consideration of,

Thirdly; Some irregularities, and deflections from this Golden Rule,
whereby the right purposes, and proper uses of it, are perverted. Some
willingly claim an interest in the first part of the Rule, but reject the
latter; would have all do well to them, but themselves not obliged to do good
to any. Not unlike some narrow Factions in Religion, who take all acts of Grace
done to them, as their due, and therefore can never be thankful for any; but
when power is gotten into their hands, can breath forth nothing but ruin, Root
and Branch, to all that dissent from them. Such is the Issue of that lewd
Doctrine, Dominion is founded in Grace.

Others live and act as if the Rule run, All whatsoever ye would, that do ye;
these do not bend their Wills to the Rule, but bow the Rule to their Wills; as
if our Primitive State were indeed what Mr. Hobbs fancied it, a State of War in
which every one has right to all things; that Power only gives right, and is
the measure of Just and Honest; and that Men were to live on the Land, as
Fishes do in the Sea, the greater to devour the less, and more helpless fry.
Some multilate the Rule, or clog it with such a Proviso our great Lawgiver
never intended, they put out, As ye would they should do unto you; and read it,
as ye are done unto, though never so unjustly and uncharitably: They act not by
the measures of just, and regular appetites, but of other Men's Evil demeanor
toward them, contrary to the true temper of the Law, and Spirit of the Gospel,
which is so far from allowing the least revenge in case of injury, and wrong
received, that on the contrary, it not only commands us to forgive the
Offender, but also to oblige him; to return him love for hatred; Blessing for
Cursing; good Offices for despiteful usage; Prayers and Intercessions for
Mockery and Persecution, St. Matt. 5.44.

This is the Noblest, the Best, the only revenge allowed us; best in regard of
our Enemy, whom by this means, if by any, we shall either convert, and gain, or
mollify and sweeten; best for our selves, who by so doing shall become the Sons
of God, and resemble our Heavenly Father, in his excessive goodness, in his
exuberant Beneficence, in his unparallelled Philanthropy. Again some leave out
(...), all things whatsoever, and put in (...), some things, and to some sort
of persons. In lesser things, they are contented to be exactly just, and
merciful, but then they are not uniform in greater; when some considerable
damage may be avoided, or advantage acquired, they must be excused, be the
means never so indirect; the advantages of the end, and the great emolument,
and the goodly purchase they expect and hope for, will according to their
opinion, and Gospel, be sufficient to Sanctify the means, be they never so
unjust and uncharitable. And as their Justice and Charity is thus narrowed, and
crampt to some things, so also their huckstering kind of Love is confined to
some Men, that is, Men of their own Party. Some Men's Religion infects their
minds with such a four leaven, that they look upon the rest of Mankind as
reprobates; and will hardly allow their Christian Friends or Governors, if they
are not of their way and Faction, a room in their Prayers. This Partiality has
been the bane of the Churches Peace, the chiefest cause of most of those
Schisms, and Differences, under which Christendom has from time to time, and
does still groan; this has thrust the Flock of Christ into a far narrower
compass than ever the Donatists did, concluding the Communion of Saints only to
their Sect or Party. And no wonder this uncouth humor has got into their civil
commerce and dealings, who if they do not think it their interest, to Trade
only with such, yet think Mercy and Justice owing only to them: So that a
Pharisaical Corban shall evacuate those Duties toward all other Men; and as
they are apt to reckon it no Duty to exercise Justice and Mercy to them, so
they are no less forward to account it no Sin, to defraud and overreach them.
Among this latter sort of Men, if we may judge of them by their practice, I
fear some reckon the King himself, whose customs they dare so frequently steal,
without any conscience of the greatness of the Sin: Though the King has as
undoubted a right to them, as any Subject has to the estate he possesses; yea,
though our Lord himself, for whose commands and example they profess so great a
reverence, was at the charges of a Miracle, to pay Caesar his Custom; from
whence we may safely infer, he would never have given his Vote to disenable
Caesar to pay his debts.

But let such Men be assured the Righteousness of Christ, though of infinite
Virtue and Value to penitents, will never serve their turn, nor answer for
this, or any other act of Injustice, without restitution, according to their
ability. You have heard what this Law is with some of the principal measures
and proportions of it; the sacredness of its Authority; and the miserable
perverting of it to ill purposes from its proper uses.

What now remains, but that as we esteem and look upon the Creed, as a short
Summary, comprehending the Fundamental Articles of our Religion, in reference
to our Faith; in like manner, we take this Royal Law, as a brief Compendium for
the direction of our Practice? That we by no means allow our selves in any
course or action, which this Golden Rule disallows; that we be at all times so
far from invading other Men's Rights, whether in their Lives, Liberties,
Reputation, or Estates, that we rather account it our happiness, as it is our
Duty, to be sensible of their Distresses, and stoop to their Necessities, when
we see any Afflicted; to gratify them with our Beneficence, when we see them
in any kind or degree to stand in need of it; to bear patiently with their
offenses, if they forget themselves so far as to do us any; to be so far from
offering any Injury, that we will not return the greatest, unless it be with
Prayers and Intercessions, and all kind Offices; never to use our power to
oppress, or skill to deceive any that deal with us, or who repose any Trust in
us; to be more afraid to take away another Man's Goods, Life, or Reputation
[which is dearer than Life] unjustly, than to lose our own.

And give me leave [Worthy Countrymen] to hope, that to speak Truth; to perform
your Promises; to be saithful to your Trusts; to act without Disguise; to be
sincere and upright in all your Dealings; to do the utmost good, and bear the
greatest Injuries without Retaliation, are things so Sacred in themselves, and
by you as such esteemed and looked upon; that you will rather suffer the loss
of any thing, than be false to any of your Obligations. Yea give me leave to
believe, your Meeting this Day to be no less than a living Comment upon my
Text; that you are transcribing into your Practice the Characters of Primitive
Christianity, when Truth and Honesty, when Goodness and Charity, were not only
acknowledged Duties, but in fashion also; that, as I persuade my self, you are
exactly just in all your Intercourses, so the design of your Feast, is not so
much any Ostentation of your Riches, Plenty, and Magnificence, as a Testimony
to God of your thankfulness for what you enjoy; not for excess and luxury, but
for the promoting of this Law of Love and Friendship among your selves; and
which is Godlike too, and the best return you can make to God, to make others
partake of your Plenty, to change Conditions and Circurnstances with them, who
want what you enjoy, by the real exercises of your Charity to them. But if any
among us can act contrary to this Royal Law of Justice and Charity, let them

1. Recollect with what Conviction, and shame many Heathens will rise up in
Judgment, and condemn such Christians.

Shall Marcus Antoninus the Heathen Emperor, and Philosopher, propose to his
own breast that Question, What is that we must bestow most of our Care and
Diligence upon, and answer himself, even upon this only, that our Minds and
Wills be Just; that our Actions be Charitable; that our Speech never be
Deceitful? And shall Christians be negligent and careless of the Justice of
their Minds and Wills; of the Charity of their Actions, and the Integrity of
their Words? Shall an Heathen have so great reverence for Truth, that he would
not allow a Lie to be spoken, no not in jest? And shall Christians be lovers
and makers of Lies; and Lying among them, be made an Holy Artifice? Shall an
Heathen tell us that he is the worst of Villains, who will deceive that Man,
who had been safe, if he had not trusted him? And shall not only private, but
public trust, and even for pious uses too, be lost carelessly, be embezel'd
prodigally, or converted to their own uses by Christians? Shall the Clerks of
the Market in Heathen Rome enact, that whosoever sold any Commodities, should
discover their faults to the Buyer; that false Weights and Wares should be cast
into the River, and mulcts, or corporal punishments should be inflicted on the
Offender? And are Deceits and Frauds, false Weights and Balances, Mysteries of
Iniquity, not only practiced, but continued in notwithstanding the rebukes of
their Consciences? Shall an Heathen cause his Servants continually to attend
him with great Sums of Money, that by the readiness of his relief, he might not
leave any appearance of the least denial, by the delay? Shall the same Heathen
frequently cover those he saw in poor and ragged Garments, with his own? And
shall Christians see others who partake of the same Nature and Redemption with
them, naked and not clothe them, hungry and thirsty, and not feed, and give
them to drink? Shall an Heathen when that Man was in his power, who maliciously
had put out one of his Eyes, be so far from revenging the Injury; that besides
the courteous usage of him, he never gave over his friendly Counsels, till he
had made him in love with Philosophy, and had instructed him in the Principles
and Rules of the happiest Life? Shall another Heathen [as the same Author,
Origin in his last Book against Celsus relates] when one said to him, let me
perish if I do thee not a mischief, answer him, and let me perish if I do not
my utmost to make thee my friend: And shall the Lives and Language of
Christians be full of animosities and sourness, ill offices, revenge and
hatred? Shall an Heathen Prince reverence Christ and Christianity, for this
saying in my Text, shall he cause it to be engraven on his Plate, written on
the Walls of his Palace, and Courts of Judicature? Shall He sometimes in his
own Person, at other times by an Officer, when Malefactors were punished,
ingeminate this expostulation, while the punishment was inflicted; Would thou
have this done to thy self, and thy own possessions, which thou have done to
another; thereby to convince them the more fully of the Iniquity of their
doings, and the Equity of their sufferings? And shall Christians be so far from
making use of such apposite means of imprinting this excellent Rule in their
own and others memories; of recalling it to their minds; of declaring their
high esteem and value they have for it; that on the contrary, either through
Sloth or Negligence, they seldom or never think of it, or else through vicious
practice, endeavor to efface and obliterate it out of their minds? Once more,
shall the Lex Julia in Heathen Rome, allot the same punishment to Sacrilege
and Treason; and Marcellus a great Statesman, lay it down for an undoubted
Rule, that Subjects may wish for good Princes, but ought to bear with any? And
shall these who seem to own Christ under the greatest demonstration of self
denial, count Sacrilege no Sin, and a design of rising against their Sovereign
no Treason; and be so far from bearing with Evil Governors, that they Libel,
Defame, Persecute, and thirst after the Blood of the best? With what face can
any Christian appear before the Righteous Judge, who has greater aids and
obligations, and does less; more Grace, and yet lives worse than an Heathen? As
not an ordinary Confusion will cover their faces, so an ordinary Hell will not
serve the turn of such prodigious Christians. Especially

2. When they shall remember that the Name of Christ is more dishonored by such
pretenders, than by those who declare open hostility against him. Did a Man
design to Stabb his Religion deeply, and do as great despite as malice it self
could contrive to the Founder of it, he could not take a more effectual way to
do both, than to make high pretenses to tenderness of Conscience in lesser
things, and show great Zeal for God and the mysteries of Religion, and yet be
Knavish, Unjust and Uncharitable in his dealings. I doubt not to say that few
considerations have more contributed to the Irreligion and Debaucheries of the
Age, than the known prevarications of many, who have made great professions of
Religion, but yet have lived in the practice of Sacrilege, Sedition, Rebellion
and Perjury, taking Oaths contrary to their former, and breaking all, as they
served, or disserved their interest. Without doubt Orthodox manners are the
best demonstration, as well as the greatest Honor of Orthodox belief; Men know
not what we believe, but they know what we do, and by that will judge what we
believe, and what we are; strangers and standers by are easily tempted to
believe that there is no Religion, or that Religion is nothing, when they see
that the most Zealous pretenders to it are not only careless in observing, but
living even in open and direct contradiction to its Precepts. May I add,

3. That the practice of these Duties is the surest evidence of our being good
Men, approved of God, Favorites of Heaven, Citizens of Sion; for these Duties
being regularly performed include Faith in God as their great root and
principle, are those Graces which as they do derive from God, so they do most
assimilate and recommend us to him who is most just and merciful: And what
better evidence can there be of a Man's being good, than being most like to, and
approved by him who is perfectly so? And as it would be an evidence that we are
good Men, so it would make us peaceable Christians, for

4. It would have a mighty tendency [which all good Men Wish and Pray for] to
allay our heats about notional Doctrines and Circumstantial things, which serve
only to distinguish Clans and Sects, and expose all that is dear to us, to
those, whom we cannot gratify more [could we see it] than by our divisions. But
these Duties, as they are such in which all are agreed, so were we as careful
in the conscientious practice of them, we should have both less list, or less
leisure to find faults, and hunt after scruples, or raise needless, and
unprofitable disputes; or if any did arise, they would be managed so amicably,
that the Peace of the Church should not be disturbed by them. And as it would
make us Peaceable Christians, so it would also

Lastly, Render us Loyal and Obedient Subjects: Instead of turning Politicians,
and Statesmen, meddling with things above our Sphere, and Plotting with our
heads; we should study to be quiet, and to do our own business, and work with
our hands. We should be as forward to render Caesar his due, as we are to
demand our own; we should be as tender of invading or incroaching on his
undoubted Prerogative, as we are scrupulous of preserving our own
unquestionable privileges; we should obey our Superiors, with the same willing
subjection, with which we desire our Children, and Servants should obey us. We
should have their persons in great Veneration, and Honor for their high Office
and Character which they bear; we should put a fair and candid construction on
all their actions, and make a just allowance for the unavoidable miscarriages
they are liable to; considering the arduous, and intricate affairs, which they
are to manage; the subtle intrigues to which they are exposed; the unforeseen
difficulties that arise; the uncertainty of Human affairs; the many and great
tentations, with which they are a^^aulted; we should never Quarrel, much less
grow Turbu^^^t, and Seditious upon the account of small miscarriages which are
incident to the best of Governments.

To say no more, this would verify and make good that Prophesy concerning the
peaceable and happy condition of Christ's Kingdom, that the Lion should lie down
with the Lamb, that we should beat our Swords into Plough-shares, and our
Spears into pruning Hooks, that our Nation should not lift up Sword against our
Nation, nor should we learn War any more.

This World would be as quiet an Habitation as it can possibly be, and it would
make us as happy in our selves, Dutiful to our Superiors, helpful and
propitious one to another in all our converse, as we can desire or wish; It
would be the best Human means to recover this Sinful Nation, and oppressed
Church, from the Miseries Spiritual and Civil, under which they groan: However
let what will be our lot in this World, it will undoubtedly secure us an
interest in a better, which God of his infinite mercy, for the sake of his Son,
through the assistance of his good Spirit, grant us. Amen.

FINIS.

