

THE LIFE OF St. FRANCIS XAVIER, OF THE SOCIETY OF JESUS, Apostle of the
INDIES, and of JAPAN.

Written in French by Father Dominick Bohours, of the same Society.

Translated into English By Mr. DRYDEN.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Iudges-Head in Chancery Lane,
MDCLXXXVIII.

TO THE QUEEN.
MADAM,
THE Reverend Author of this Life in his Dedication to his most Christian
Majesty, affirms, that France was owing for him to the intercession of St.
Francis Xavier. That Ann of Austria, his Mother, after twenty years of
barrenness, had recourse to Heaven by her fervent Prayers, to draw down that
blessing, and addressed her devotions in a particular manner, to this holy
Apostle of the Indies. I know not, Madam, whether I may presume to tell the
World, that your MAIES^Y has chosen this great Saint for one of your Celestial
Patrons, though I am sure you will never be ashamed of owning so glorious an
Intercessor; not even in a Country, where the Doctrine of the holy Church is
questioned, and those religious Addresses ridiculed. Your MAJESTY, I doubt not,
has the inward satisfaction of knowing, that such pious Prayers have not been
unprofitable to you, and the Nation may one day come to understand, how happy
it will be for them to have a Son of Prayers ruling over them. Not that we are
wholly to depend on this particular Blessing, as a thing of certainty, though
we hope, and pray for its continuance. The ways of Divine Providence are
incomprehensible, and we know not in what times, or by what methods, God will
restore his Church in England, or what farther trials and afflictions we are
yet to undergo. Only this we know, that if a Religion be of God, it can never
fail, but the acceptable time we must patiently expect, and endeavor by our
lives not to undeserve. I am sure if we take the example of our Sovereigns, we
shall place our confidence in God alone: we shall be assiduous in our
devotions, moderate in our expectations, humble in our carriage, and forgiving
of our Enemies. All other Panegyricks I purposely omit; but those of
Christianity are such, that neither your MAJESTY, nor my Royal MASTER need be
ash^m'd of them, because their commemoration is instructive to your Subjects.
We may be allowed, Madam, to praise Almighty God for making us happy by your
means, without suspicion of flattery; and the meanest Subject has the
privilege of joining his thanksgiving with his Sovereigns, where his happiness
is equally concerned. May it not be permitted me to add, that to be remembered,
and celebrated in after Ages, as the chosen Vessel, by which it has pleased the
Almighty goodness to transmit so great a blessing to these Nations, is a secret
satisfaction, which is not forbidden you to take; the blessings of your People
are a prelibation of the Joys in Heaven, and a lawful ambition here on earth.

Your MAJESTY is authorized by the greatest example of a Mother, to rejoice in
a promised Son. The Blessed Virgin was not without as great a proportion of
joy, as Humanity could bear, when she answered the Salutation of the Angel in
expressions, which seemed to unite the contradicting terms of calmness, and of
transport. Be it to thy Handmaid, according to thy word.

It Is difficult for me to leave this Subject, but more difficult to pursue it
as I ought; neither must I presume to detain your MAJESTY by a long Address.
The Life of Saint Francis Xavier, after it had been written by several Authors
in the Spanish and Portuguese, and by the Famous Padre Bartoli in the Italian
tongue, came out at length in French, by the celebrated Pen of Father Bohours,
from whom I have Translated it, and humbly crave leave to Dedicate it to Your
Patronage. I question not but it will undergo the censure of those men, who
teach the People that Miracles are ceased. Yet there are, I presume, a sober
party of the Protestants, and even of the most learned among them, who being
convinced by the concurring testimonies of the last Age, by the suffrages of
whole Nations in the Indies, and Iapan, and by the severe scrutinies that were
made before the Act of Canonization, will not dispute the truth of most matters
of Fact as they are here related; nay, some may be Ingenuous enough to own
freely that to propagate the Faith amongst Infidels and Heathens, such
miraculous operations are as necessary now in those benighted Regions, as when
the Christian Doctrine was first planted by our Blessed Savior and his
Apostles.

The honouroble Testimonies which are cited by my Author, just before the
conclusion of his Work, and one of them in particular from a learned Divine of
the Church of England, though they slur over the mention of his Miracles, in
obscure and general terms, yet are full of Veneration for his Person. Farther
than this I think it needless to prepossess a Reader; let him judge sincerely,
according to the Merits of the Cause, and the Sanctity of his Life, of whom
such wonders are related, and attested with such Clouds of Witnesses: For an
impartial man cannot but of himself consider the Honor of God in the
publication of his Gospel, the Salvation of Souls, and the Conversion of
Kingdoms, which followed from those Miracles; the effects of which remain in
many of them to this day.

But that it is not lawful for me to trespass so far on the Patience of Your
Majesty, I should rather enlarge on a particular Reflection, which I made in my
Translation of this Book, namely, That the Instructions of the Saint, which are
copied from his own Writings, are so admirably useful, so holy, and so
wonderfully efficacious, that they seem to be little less than the product of
an immediate Inspiration. So much excellent matter is crowded into so small a
compass, that almost every Paragraph contains the value of a Sermon. The
nourishment is so strong, that it requires but little to be taken at a time.
Where he exhorts, there is not an expression, but what is glowing with the love
of God; where he directs a Missioner, or gives Instructions to a Substitute, We
can scarcely have a less Idea than of a Saint Paul, advising a ^imothy or a
Titus. Where he writes into Europe, he inspires his Ardour into Sovereign
Princes, and seems with the Spirit of his Devotion, even to burn his Colleagues
at the distance of the Indies.

But, Madam, I consider that nothing I can say, is worthy to detain You longer
from the perusal of this Book, in which all things are excellent, excepting
only the meanness of my performance in the Translation. Such as it is, be
pleased with Your inborn goodness to accept it, with the offer of my unworthy
Prayers for the lasting happiness of my Gracious Sovereign, for Your own Life
and Prosperity, togegether with the Preservation of the Son of Prayers, and the
farther increase of the Royal Family; All which Blessings are continually
implored from Heaven, by,

MADAM; Your Majesty's most Humble, and most Obedient Subject and Servant, John
Dryden.

THE Author's Advertisement TO THE READER.
HAving already presented you with the Life of St. Ignatius, I thought my self
obliged to give you that of St. Francis Xavier. For besides that it was just
that the Son should attend the Father, it seemed to me, that these two Saints
being concerned so much together, the History of the Apostle of India and
Japan, would give you a clearer knowledge of him who was Founder of the
Jesuits. I may add likewise, that many considerable persons, and particularly,
of the Court, have testified so great a desire to see a complete History of St.
Xavier in our Language, that I thought my labor would not be unacceptable to
them; and that in satisfying my own private Devotion, I might at the same time
content the Curiosity of others.

The Writings out of which I have drawn this Work, have furnished me with all I
could desire for the perfection of it in what regards the Truth, and the
Ornaments of this History: For without speaking of Turselline and Orlandino, I
have diligently read Lucena and Bartoli; the first of which wrote in Portuguese
with this Title, The History of the Life of Father Francis Xavier, and of what
was done in the Indies by the Religious of the Society of Jesus. He informs us,
That he had in his Hands, the Authentic Copies of the Informations which were
made by order of John the Third, King of Portugal, concerning the Actions of
the Blessed Father Xavier, and the Originals of many Letters, written from the
Indies on that Subject, which are to this day deposited in the Archives of the
University of Coimbra. As for Bartoli, who is so famous by his Writings, and
who is accounted amongst the best of the Italian Authors, he has extracted from
the Archives of the Casa Professa at Rome, and from the Acts of the
Canonization, what he relates of our Saint in the first part of the History of
the Society, entitled, Asia.

Though these two Historians have in some sort collected all that can be said
concerning St. Francis Xavier, I omitted not to take a view of what others have
written on that Subject; and chiefly the Book of Ni^remberg, which bears for
Title Claros Varones, or Illustrious Men, the History of India, by Ma^^eus, and
that of Jarrio, the Church History of Iapan, by Solia, the Castilian History of
the Missions, which the Fathers of the Society have made to the East Indies,
and the Kingdoms of China and Iapan, Composed by Lew^s de Gusman; and lastly,
The Portuguese History of the Travels of Ferdinand Mendez Pinto.

But seeing St. Francis Xavier himself has written some parts of those
Accidents which have befallen him in India and Japan, I have faithfully copied
his Letters, and from thence have drawn those particulars which have much
conduced to my Information, and clearing of the Truth. These Letters have also
furnished me with materials to make the Narration appear more lively and
moving, when you hear the Saint himself speaking in his proper words, and
mixing his own Thoughts and Reflections with his Actions. I had almost finished
this my work, when I received from Spain and Italy, two other lives of St.
Francis Xavier, which before that time I had not seen: The one very new, which
was written in Italian by Father Joseph Massei, the other more ancient, written
in Spanish by Father Francis Garcia. I found nothing in those two Books, which
I had not observed in others; but read them with great pleasure, as being m^st
exactly and elegantly written, each in their several Tongue.

For what remains, amongst all those Historians which I have cited, there is
only the Author of the new Italian Life, who has not followed the common
error, in relation to the Age of St. Francis Xavier: For the rest of them not
precisely knowing the year and day of his Birth, have made him ten years elder
than he was; placing his Nativity about the time when the passage to the
East Indies was discovered by Vasco de Gama.

But Father Massei has taken his measures in that particular, from Father
Poussines. that judicious person, to whom we are owing for the new Letters of
St. Xavier, and who has composed a Dissertation in Latin, touching the year of
our Apostles Birth.

He pr^duces, in the said Treatise, a Latin Paper, written in all appearance,
in the year 1585, and found in the Records of the house of Don Juan Antonio,
Count of Xavier. That Paper wherein is treated of the Ancestors and Birth of
the Saint, and which very probably, as Poussines judges, is the minute of a
Letter sent to Rome, where Doctor Navarra then resided, to whom it refers you,
that Paper I say, has these words in it. Non scitur certo Annus quo Natus est
P. Franciscus Xaverius. Vulgo tamen invaluit, a quibusdam natum eum dici anno
Millesimo quadragintesimo nonagesimo-sexto: which is to say, the year is not
certainly known, in which Father Francis Xavier was Born; but it is generally
held, that some have reported he was born in the year 1496.

But it is to be observed, That these words, Non scitur certo Annus quo Natus
est P. Franciscus Xaverius, are dashed out with the stroke of a Pen. There is
also a line drawn over these other words, Natum eum dici millesimo,
quadragintesimo, nonagesimo-sexto: and this is written over head. Natus est P.
Franciscus Xaverius Anno Millesimo quingentesimo sexto. Father Francis Xavier
was Born in the year one thousand five hundred and six. There is also written
in the Margin, Natus est die 7. Aprilis, anni 1506. He was Born on the 7th. of
April, 1506.

That which renders this Testimony more authentic, is, that at the bottom of
the Letter, these words in Spanish are written by the same hand, which
corrected those two passages of which I spoke. Hallo se la razon del tiempo que
el S. P. Francisco Xavier nacio, en un libro manual de Su hermano el Capitan
Juan de Azpilcueta: la qual Saco de un libro, de Su padre Don Juan Jasso.
(videlicet) The time when the Blessed Father Francis Xavier was Born, is found
in the Iournal of his Brother Don Juan de Azpilcueta, who extracted it from the
Iournal or Manual of his Father Don Juan Jasso It Is on this foundation, that
before I had read the Life, written by Father Massei, I had already closed with
the Opinion of Father Poussines.

As to the precise day of the Father's death, I have followed the common
opinion, which I take to be the most probable, in conformity to the Bull of his
Canonization. For the Historians who have mentioned it, agree not with each
other, on what day he died. It Is said in Herberts Travels to the Indies and
Persia, translated out of the English, St. Francis Xavier the Jesuit of
Navarre, dyed the fourth of December, 1552. Ferdinand Mendez Pinto, the
Portuguese affirms that he dyed at Midnight, on Saturday the second of
December, the same year. A Manuscript Letter, pretended to be written by
Anthony de Saint Foy, Companion to Xavier for the Voyage of China, (the truth
of which I suspect) relates that the Saint dyed on a Sunday night, at two of
the Clock, on the second of December, 1552. Now it is most certain, that in the
year 1552, the second of December fell on a Friday. So, that it is a manifest
mistake to say, that St. Xavier dyed that year either on Saturday or Sunday the
second of December.

I should apprehend, lest a Life so extraordinary as this, might somewhat shock
the profaner sort of men, if the reputation of St. Francis Xavier were not well
established in the World; and that the wonderful things he did, had not all the
marks of true Miracles, as the Author who made the Collection of them has well
observed. The Mission of the Saint, gives them an authority, even in our first
conceptions of them: for being sent from God for the conversion of Infidels, it
was necessary that the Faith should be planted in the East, by the same means,
as it had been through all the World, in the beginning of the Church.

Besides which, never any Miracles have been examined with greater care, or
more judicially than these. They were not Miracles wrought in private, and
which we are only to believe, on the attestation of two or three interessed
persons, such who might have been surprised into an opinion of them: they were
ordinarily public matters of fact, avowed by a whole City or Kingdom, and
which had for Witnesses the body of a Nation, for the most part Heathen, or
Mohammedan. Many of these Miracles have been of long continuance; and it was an
easy matter for such who were incredulous, to satisfy their doubts concerning
them. All of them have been attended by such consequences as have confirmed
their truth beyond dispute: such, as were the Conversions of Kingdoms, and of
Kings, who were the greatest Enemies to Christianity; the wonderful ardency of
those new Christians, and the heroical constancy of their Martyrs. But after
all, nothing can give a greater confirmation of the Saint's Miracles, than his
Saint-like Life; which was even more wonderful, than the Miracles themselves.
It was in a manner of necessity, that a man of so holy a conversation, should
work those things, which other men could not perform; and that resigning
himself to God, with an entire confidence and trust, in the most dangerous
occasions, God should consign over to him, some part of his Omnipotence, for
the benefit of Souls.

THE LIFE OF St. FRANCIS XAVIER.
BOOK 1.
I Have undertaken to write the Life of a Saint, who has renewed in the last
Age, the greatest Wonders which were wrought in the Infancy of the Church; and
who was himself a living proof of Christianity. There will be seen in the
Actions of one single Man, a New World converted by the power of his Preaching,
and by that of his Miracles: Idolatrous Kings with their Dominions, reduced
under the Obedience of the Gospel; the Faith flourishing in the very midst of
Barbarism; and the Authority of the Roman Church, acknowledged by Nations the
most remote, who were utterly unacquainted with Ancient Rome.

This Apostolical Man, His Birth.
of whom I speak, is St. Francis Xavier, of the Society of Jesus, and one of
the first Disciples of St. Ignatius Loyola. He was of Navarre, and according to
the Testimony of Cardinal Antonio Zapata, who examined his Nobility from
undoubted Records, he derived his Pedigree from the Kings of Navarre.

His Father was Don Iuan de Iasso, a Lord of great merit, well conversant in
the management of Affairs, and who held one of the first places in the Council
of State, under the Reign of King John the Third.

The name of his Mother was Mary Azpilcueta Xavier, Heiress to two of the most
Illustrious Families in that Kingdom, for the chief of her House, Don Martin
Azpilcueta, less famous by the great Actions of his Ancestors, than by his own
Virtue, married Iuana Xavier, the only Daughter and remaining hope of her
Family. He had by her, no other Child, but this Mary of whom we spoke, one of
the most accomplished persons of her time.

This Virgin equally beautiful and prudent, being married to Don Iasso, became
the Mother of many Children; the youngest of whom was Francis, the same whose
Life I write. He was born in the Castle of Xavier, on the seventh of April, in
the year 1506. That Castle situate at the foot of the Pyrenean Mountains,
seven or eight Leagues distant from Pampeluna, had appertained to his Mother's
House for about two hundred and fifty years. His Progenitors on her side having
obtained it in gift from King Thibald, the first of that name, in recompense of
those signal services which they had performed for the Crown. It Is from thence
they took the name of Xavier, in lieu of Asnarez, which was the former name of
their Family.

This Surname was conferred on Francis, as also on some of the rest of his
Brothers, lest so glorious a name, now remaining in one only Woman, should be
totally extinguished with her.

That Providence which had selected Francis for the Conversion of such
multitudes of People, His natural Endowments, and first Studies.
endued him with all the Natural Qualities which are requisite to the Function
of an Apostle. He was of a strong habit of Body, his Complexion lively and
vigorous, his Genius sublime, and capable of the greatest designs, his Heart
fearless, agreeable in his Behavior, but above all, he was of a gay,
complying, and winning Humor: This notwithstanding, he had a most extreme
aversion for all manner of immodesty, and a vast inclination for his Studies.

His Parents, who lived a most Christian Life, inspired him with the fear of
God from his Infancy, and took a particular care of his Education. He was no
sooner arrived to an age capable of Instruction, than instead of embracing the
Profession of Arms, after the example of his Brothers, he turned himself, of
his own motion, on the side of Learning; and, as he had a quick Conception, a
happy Memory, and a penetrating Mind, he advanced wonderfully in few years.

Having gained a sufficient knowledge in the Latin Tongue, and discovered a
great propensity to Learning, he was sent to the University of Paris, the most
celebrated of all Europe, and to which the Gentlemen of Spain, Italy and
Germany resorted for their Studies.

He came to Paris in the eighteenth year of his age, and ^ell immediately on
the study of Philosophy. It Is scarcely credible with how much ardour he
surmounted the first difficulties of Logic. Whatsoever his Inclinations were
toward a knowledge so crabbed and so subtle, he tugged at it with incessant
pains, to be at the head of all his fellow Students; and perhaps never any
Scholar besides himself could join together so much ease and so much labor.

Xavier minded nothing more, His Father purposes to recall him from his
Studies, and is diverted from that Resolution.
than how to become an excellent Philosopher, when his Father, who had a
numerous Family of Children, and who was one of those Men of Quality, whose
Fortunes are not equal to their Birth, was thinking to remove him from his
Studies, after having allowed him a competent maintenance for a year or two. He
communicated these his thoughts to Magdalen Iasso his Daughter, Abbess of the
Convent of St. Clare de Gandia, famous for the austerity of its Rule, and
established by some holy Frenchwomen of that Order, whom the calamities of War
had forced to forsake their Native Country, and to seek a Sanctuary in the
Kingdom of Valencia.

Magdalen, in her younger days, had been Maid of Honor, and Favorite to the
Catholic Queen Isabella. The love of Solitude, and of the Cross had caused her
to forsake the Court of Arragon, and quit for ever, the pleasures of this
World. Having chosen the most reformed Monastery of Spain for the place of her
retreat, she applied her self with fervor to the exercises of Penitence and
Prayer; and became even from her noviciate, a perfect pattern of Religious
Perfection.

During the course of her life, she had great Communications with God; and one
day, he gave her to understand, that she should dye a sweet and easy death:
But on the contrary, one of her Nuns was preordain'd to dye in strange
torments. The intention of God was not thereby to reveal to the Abbess, what
was really to happen, but rather to give her an opportunity of exercising an
heroic act of Charity. She comprehended what her Heavenly Father exacted from
her, and petitioned him for an exchange.

God granted to her what himself had inspired her to demand; and was pleased to
assure her by a new Revelation, that he had heard her Prayers. She made known
to her Ghostly Father, what had passed betwixt God and her, and time verified
it. For the Sister above mentioned, died without sickness, and appeared in
dying to have had a foretaste of the Joys to come. On the other side, the
Abbess was struck with a terrible disease, which took all her Body, as it were
in pieces, and made her suffer intolerable pains; yet even those pains were
less cruel to her, than those inward torments which God at the same time
inflicted on her. She endured all this with wonderful Patience and Resignation,
being well assured, that in the whole series of these Dispensations there was
somewhat of Divine.

For what remains concerning her, from the first years of her entry into a
Religious Life, the gift of Prophecy shone so visibly in her, that none doubted
but that she was full of the Spirit of God; and it is also probable, that she
left a Legacy of her Prophetic Gifts to her Spiritual Daughters. For, after
her decease the Nuns of Gandia foretold many things, which afterward the event
confirmed. As, amongst others, the unhappy success of the Expedition to Algier;
of which the Duke of Borgia Viceroy of Catalonia, gave the Advertisement from
them to Charles the Fifth, when he was making his Preparations for that
Enterprise.

It was six years before the death of Magdalen, that Don Iasso her Father writ
to her concerning Xavier. After she had received the Letter, she was
illuminated from above, and according to the dictates of that Divine Light, she
answered Don Iasso, That he should beware of recalling her Brother Francis,
whatsoever it might cost him for his Entertainment in the University of Paris.
That he was a chosen Vessel, preordain'd to be the Apostle of the Indies, and
that one day he should become a great Pillar of the Church.

These Letters have been preserved for a long time afterward, and have been
viewed by many persons, who have deposed the truth judicially in the process of
the Canonisation of the Saint.

Don Iasso received this Answer from his Daughter, as an Oracle from Heaven;
and no longer thought of recalling his Son from his Studies.

Xavier, (...)
thereupon, continued his Philosophy, and succeeded so well in it, that having
maintained his Theses, at the end of his course, with a general applause, and
afterward taking his degree of Master in Arts, he was judged worthy to teach
Philosophy himself. His Parts appeared more than ever in this new Employment,
and he acquired an high Reputation in his public Lectures on Aristotle. The
Praises, which universally were given him, were extremely pleasing to his
Vanity. He was not a little proud to have augmented the Glory of his Family by
the way of Learning, while his Brothers were continually adorning it by that of
Arms; and he flattered himself, that the way which he had taken, would lead him
onward to somewhat of greater consequence.

But God Almighty had far other thoughts than those of Xavier, and it was not
for these fading Honors that the Divine Providence had conducted him to Paris.

At the same time, when this young Master of Philosophy began his course,
Ignatius Loyola, who had renounced the World, and cast the model of a learned
Society, wholly devoted to the Salvation of Souls, came into France to finish
his Studies, which the obstacles he found in Spain, after his Conversion, had
constrained him to interrupt.

He had not continued long in the University of Paris, before he heard talk of
Xavier, and grew acquainted with him. Our new Professor, who taught at the
College of Beauvois, though he dwelt in the College of St. Barbe, with Peter
le Fevre a Savoyard, was judged by Ignatius to be very proper for the preaching
of the Gospel, as well as his Companion. To gain the better opportunity of
insinuating himself into their acquaintance, he took Lodgings with them, and
was not wanting to Exhort them to live up to the Rules of Christianity.

Le Fevre, who was of a tractable nature, and was not enamored of the World,
resigned himself without opposition. But Xavier who was of a haughty Spirit,
and whose head was filled with Ambitious thoughts, made a fierce Resistance at
the first. The Discipline and Maxims of Ignatius, who lived in a mean
Equipage, and valued nothing but that Poverty, made him pass for a low minded
Fellow in the Opinion of our young Gentleman. And accordingly Xavier treated
him with much contempt; rallying him on all occasions, and making it his
business to ridicule him.

This notwithstanding, Ignatius omitted no opportunities of representing to him
the great consequence of his Eternal welfare, and urging the words of our
Blessed Savior, What profit is it to a Man to gain the whole World, and to
lose his ow^ Soul? But perceiving that he could make no impression, on a heart,
where self-conceit was so very prevalent, and which was dazzled with vainglory,
he bethought himself of assaulting him on the weaker side.

When he had often Congratulated with him for those rare talents of Nature with
which he was endowed, and particularly applauded his great Wit, he made it his
business to procure him Scholars, and to augment his Reputation by the crowd of
his Auditors. He conducted them even to his Chair, and in presenting them to
their Master never failed to make his Panegyric.

Xavier was too vain, not to receive with a greedy satisfaction, what ever
Incense was given him of that kind: Applause was welcome from what ever hands
it came; and withal, he was too grateful, not to acknowledge those good
Offices which were done him, by a Person whom he had used so very ill: He was
the more sensible of such a kindness, by being conscious to himself how little
he had deserved it. He began to look with other eyes, on him who had the
appearance of so mean a Creature, and at the same time, was informed that this
Man of so despicable a presence, was Born of one of the Noblest Families in
Guypuscoa; that his Courage was correspondent to his Birth, and that only the
fear of God had inspired him with the choice of such a Life, so distant from
his Inclination, and his Quality.

These considerations, in favor of Ignatius, led him to hearken without
repugnance, to those Discourses which were so little suitable to his natural
bent; as if the quality and virtue of him who made them, had given a new charm
and weight to what he said.

While things were passing in this manner, Xavier's Money began to fail him, as
it frequently happens to Foreigners, who are at a great distance from their own
Country: And Ignatius who was newly returned from the Voyages which he had made
into Flanders and England, from whence he had brought back a large contribution
of Alms; assisted him in so pressing an occasion, and thereby made an absolute
Conquest of his affections.

The Heresy of Luther began to spread it self in Europe: He is preserved from
falling into Heresy.
and it was an artifice of those Sectaries, to procure Proselytes in the
Catholic Universities, who by little and little might insinuate their new
Opinions into the Scholars, and their Masters. Many knowing Men of Germany,
were come on that design to Paris, though under the pretense of seconding the
intentions of Franc^s the first, who was desirous to restore Learning in his
Kingdom. They scattered their Errors in so dextrous a manner that they made
them plausible, and principally endeavored to fasten on young Scholars, who
had the greatest reputation of Wit. Xavier who was naturally curious, took
pleasure in these Novelties, and had run into them of his own accord, if
Ignatius had not withdrawn him. He gave an account of this very thing not long
afterward in a Letter to his Elder Brother, Don Azpilcueta, of which Ignacius
himself was the Bearer; who made a Voyage into Spain, for those Reasons which I
have set down in another place. And these are his words, which well deserve to
be related.

He has not only relieved me, by himself, and by his Friends, in those
necessities to which I was reduced; but, which is of more importance, he has
withdrawn me from those occasions which I had to contract a Friendship with
Young Men of my own standing, Persons of great Wit and well accomplished, who
had sucked in the Poison of Heresy, and who hid the corruptions of their
heart, under a fair and pleasing outside. He alone has broken off that
dangerous commerce in which my own imprudence had engaged me: And has hindered
me from following the bent of my easy Nature, by discovering to me the snares
which were laid for me: If Don Ignatius had given me no other proof of his
kindness, I know not how I could be able to return it, by any acknowledgments I
could make. For, in short, without his assistance, I could not have defended my
self from those young men, so fair in their outward carriage, and so corrupt in
the bottom of their hearts.

We may conclude from this Authentic Testimony, that Xavier, far from
carrying the Faith to the remotest Nations of Idolaters, was in danger to make
Shipwreck of his own; had he not fallen into the hands of such a Friend as was
Ignatius; who detested even the least appearance of Heresy; and whose sight was
sharp enough to discover Heretics, how speciously soever they were disguised.

It was not sufficient to have only preserved Xavier from Error; but it was
farther necessary, to wean him altogether from the World; these favorable
dispositions which appeared in him, encouraged Ignatius to pursue his Design,
and gave him hope of a fortunate success. Having one day found Xavier more than
ordinarily attentive, he repeated to him these words more forcibly than ever:
What will it profit a Man to gain the whole World, and to lose his own Soul?
After which he told him, that a mind so noble and so great as his, ought not to
con^ine it self to the vain honors of this World; that Celestial Glory was
the only lawful Object of his Ambition: And that right reason would require
him, to prefer that, which was eternally to last, before what would vanish like
a Dream.

Then it was, His change of Life.
that Xavier began to see into the emptiness of Earthly Greatness; and found
himself touched with the love of Heavenly Things. But these first impressions
of Grace, had not all their effect immediately: He made frequent Reflections
within himself, of what the Man of God had said to him: and it was not without
many serious thoughts, and after many a hard struggling, that ^eing overcome at
length, by the power of those Eternal Truths, he took up a ^^lid resolution, of
living according to ^^e Maxims of the Gospel, and of tread^^g in his
Footsteps, who had made him sensible of his being gone astray.

He resigned himself therefore to the Conduct of Ignatius, after the Example of
Le Fevre, who had already reformed ^is Life, and was Inflamed with the Zeal of
edifying others. The directions of a Guide so well enlightened, made easy to
Xavier the Paths of that Perfection, which were hitherto unknown to him. He
learnt from his new Master, that the first step, which a sincere Convert is to
make, is to labor in the subduing of his darling Passion. As vainglory had
the greatest dominion over him; his main endeavors from the very beginning,
were to humble himself, and to confound his own pride in the sense of his
emptiness, and of his sins. But well knowing that he could not tame the
haughtiness of the Soul, without mortifying the Flesh, he undertook the
Conquest of his Body, by Haircloath, by Fasting, and other Austerities of
Penance.

When his time of vacancies was come, he performed his Spiritual Exercises,
which his Lectures of Philosophy had till then hindered. Those very Exercises I
mean, which Ignatius, Inspired of God, had Composed at Manreze; and of which I
have drawn the Model, in the Life of that Holy Founder of the Society of Jesus.

He began his retirement with an extraordinary fervor, His retirement, and
total Conversion.
even to the passing of four days entire, without taking any nourishment. His
Contemplations were wholly busied day and night on Divine Matters. And an
Ancient Memorial assures us, that he went to his Devotions with his hands and
feet tied; either to signify, that he was desirous to do nothing, but by the
Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, or to give himself the same usage, which was
given to the Man in the Parable of the Gospel; Who dar'^ to appear ^n the
Wedding-Room, without Clothing himself in Wedding-Garments.

By meditating at his leisure on the great truths of Christianity, and
especially on the Mysteries of our Savior, according to the Method of
Ignatius, he was wholly changed into another Man; and the humility of the Cross
appeared to him more amiable than all the Glories of the World. These new
insights, caused him without the least re^ugnance to refuse a Canonry of
Pampe^una, which was offered him at that time, and was very considerable, both
in regard of the Profits and of the Dignity. He formed also, during his
solitude, the design of glorifying God by all possible means, and of employing
his whole Life for the Salvation of Souls.

On these foundations, having finished the course of Philosophy which he read,
and which had lasted three years and a half, according to the custom of those
times, he studied in Divinity, by the Counsel of Ignatius, whose Scholar he
openly declared himself to be.

In the mean time Ignatius, who found in himself an inward Call to the
HolyLand, for the Conversion of Jews and Infidels; discovered his intentions to
Xavier, which he had already communicated to Le Fevre, and four other Learned
young men, who had embraced his form of Life.

All the seven, engaged themselves, by promise to each other, and by solemn
Vows to God Almighty, to forsake their worldly goods, and undertake a Voyage to
Jerusalem; or, in case, that in the compass of a Year they could not find an
accommodation of passing the Seas, that they would cast themselves at the feet
of our Holy Father, for the Service of the Church, into what ever part of the
World he would please to send them.

They made these Vows at Montmartre, He Conse^rates himself to God, by a Vow.
on the day of our Ladies Assumption, in the year 1534. That holy place, which
has been watered with the Blood of Martyrs, and where their Bodies are still
deposited, inspired a particular Devotion into Xavier, and possessed him with a
^ervent desire of Martyrdom.

Toward the end of the year following, he went from Paris, in the Company of
Le Fevre, Laynez, Salmeron, Rodriguez, Bobadilla, and three other Divines, whom
Le Fevre had gained in in the absence of Ignatius, who for important Reasons,
was obliged to go before, and who was waiting for them at Venice.

Somewhat before their departure, What happened to him in his Journey to Venice.
Xavier, who was sometimes too far transported, by the servency of his Soul,
had tied his Arms and Thighs with little Cords, to morti^ie himself, for some
kind of vain satisfaction which he took in out-running and overleaping his
young Companions; for he was very active; and amongst all the Recreations used
by Scholars, he liked none but the exercises of the Body.

Though the Cords were very straight about him, yet he imagined they would not
hinder him from traveling on foot. But he had scarcely begun his journey, when
he was taken with extreme pains. He bore them as well as he was able; and
dissembled them, till his strength failed him. His motion had swelled his
Thighs, and indented the Cords so deep into his flesh, that they were hardly
visible: Insomuch that the Chirurgions, to whom his Fellows discovered them,
plainly said, that any incisions which could be made, would serve only to
increase his pains, and that the ill was incurable.

In this dangerous conjuncture, Le Fevre, Laynez, and the rest, had recourse to
Almighty God, and not in vain. Xavier waking the next morning, found the Cords
fallen down, the swelling wholly taken away from his Thighs, and the marks of
the Cords only remaining on his Flesh. They joined in actions of Thanksgiving
to the Almighty, for his providential care already shown in their behalf; and
though the ways were very rugged, in the inclemency of that Season, yet they
cheerfully pursued their Journey.

Xavier was serviceable to his Companions on all occasions, and was always
before hand with them in the duties of Charity: whether it were, that being
naturaly officious, and of a warm temper, he was more eager to employ himself
for them; or that his health, miraculously restored, rendered him more
obligeing and charitable toward those by whose prayers it was recovered.

When they were arrived at Venice, their breathings were only after the holy
places. Ignatius, whom they were ravished to see again, and whom they
acknowledged for their common Father, was of opinion that while they were
waiting the opportunity, of going to receive the Pope's blessing for their
Voyage to Jerusalem, each of them should employ himself on works of Charity, in
the Hospitals of the Town.

Xavier whose lot fell, What he did at Venice.
in the Hospital of the Incurable, was not satisfied only with busying himself
all day, in dressing sick men's sores, in making their Beds, and doing them
more inferior service, but also passed whole nights, in watching by them. But
his care and pains were not confined to the succor of their Bodies. Though he
was wholly ignorant of the Italian Tongue, he frequently spoke of God to them,
and above all things exhorted the greatest Libertines to repentance, by causing
them to comprehend, in the best manner he was able, that though their corporal
maladies were incurable, yet the diseases of their Souls were not so: that how
enormous soever our offenses were, we ought always to rely on God's mercy, and
that a desire of being sincerely converted, was only requisite in Sinners for
obtaining the grace of their Conversion.

One of these sick Alms-men had an Ulcer, which was horrble to the sight, but
the noysomness of the stench was yet more insupportable: Every one shunned the
miserable Creature, not enduring so much as to approach him: and Xavier once
found a great Repugnance in himself to attend him: But at the same time, he
called to his remembrance a Maxim of Ignatius, that we make no progress in
Virtue, but by vanquishing our selves; and that the occasion of making a great
Sacrifice, was too precious to be lost. Being fortified with these thoughts,
and encouraged by the example of St. Catharine de Sienna, which came into his
Mind, he embraced the sick person, applied his Mouth to the Ulcer, surmounted
his natural loathing, and sucked out the Corruption; at the same moment, his
Repugnance vanished; and after that, he had no farther trouble in the like
cases; of so great importance it is to us, once to have thoroughly overcome our
selves.

Two Months were passed away in these exercises of Charity. (...)
After which he set forward on his Journey to Rome with the other Disciples of
Ignatius, who himself stayed behind alone at Venice. They underwent great
hardships in their way. It rained continually, and Bread was often wanting to
them, even when their strength was wasted. Xavier encouraged his Companions,
and sustained himself, by that Apostolic Spirit, with which God replenished
him from that time forwards; and which already made him in love with pain and
sufferings.

Being arrived at Rome, his first care was to visit the Churches, and to
conse^rate himself to the Ministry of the Gospel, upon the Sepulcher of the
Holy Apostles. He had the opportunity of speaking more than once before the
Pope. For the whole Company of them being introduced into the Vatican, by Pedr^
Ortiz, that Spanish Doctor, whom they had formerly known at Paris, and whom the
Emperor had sent to Rome for the Affair concerning the marriage of Catharine
of Arra^on, Queen of England, Paul the Third, who was a lover of Learning, and
who was pleased to be entertained at his Table, with the Conversation of
learned Men, commanded that these Strangers, whose Capacity he had heard so
extremely praised, should be admitted to see him for many d^ys successively;
and that in his presence they should discourse concerning diverse points of
School Divinity.

Having received the Benediction of our Holy Father for their Voyage to the
Holy Land, and obtained the permission for those amongst them who were not in
Sacred Orders, to receive them, they returned to Venice. Xavier there made his
Vows of Poverty and perpetual Chastity, together with the rest in the hands of
Ieronimo Veralli the Popes Nuncio, and having again taken up his Post in the
Hospital of the Incurable, he resumed his Offices of Charity, which his Journey
to Rome had constrained him to interrupt, and continued in those Exercises till
the time of his Embarquement.

In the mean time, the War which was already kindled betwixt the Venetians and
the Turk, had broken the Commerce of the Levant, and stopped the passage to the
Holy Land. Insomuch, that the Ship of the Pilgrims of Jerusalem, went not out
that year according to the former Custom.

This disappointment wonderfully afflicted Xavier, and the more, because he not
only lost the hope of seeing those places which had been Consecrated by the
presence and the Blood of Jesus Christ, but was also berest of an occasion of
dying for his Divine Master. Yet he comforted himself in reflecting on the
method of Gods Providence; and at the same time, not to be wanting in his duty
to his Neighbor, he disposed himself to receive the Orders of Priesthood, and
did receive them with those considerations of awful dread, and holy confusion
which are not easy to be expressed.

The Town appeared to him an improper place, He prepares himself to celebrate
his first Mass.
for his preparation, in order to his first Mass. He sought out a solitary
place, where being separated from the communication of Man, he might enjoy the
privacies of God: He found this convenience of a retirement near Monteselice,
not far from Padoua: It was a miserable Thatched Cottage, forsaken of
Inhabitants, and out of all manner of repair. Thus accommodated, he passed
forty days, exposed to the injuries of the Air, lying on the cold hard Ground,
rigidly disciplining his Body, fasting all the day, and sustaining nature only
with a little pittance of Bread, which he begged about the Neighborhood: But
tasting all the while, the sweets of Paradise, in contemplating the Eternal
Truths of Faith. As his Cabin did not unfitly represent to him the Stable of
Bethlehem, so he proposed to himself, frequently, the extreme poverty of the
Infant Jesus, as the pattern of his own; and said within himself, That since
the Savior of Mankind, had chosen to be in want of all things, they who
labored after him for the Salvation of Souls, were obliged by his example to
possess nothing in this World.

How pleasing soever this loneliness were to him, yet his forty days being now
expired, he left it, to instruct the Villages and Neighbor-towns, and
principally Monteselice, where the People were grossly ignorant, and knew little
of the duties of Christianity.

The Servant of God made daily Exhortations to them, and his penitent Aspect
gave authority to all his words; insomuch, that only looking on his Face, none
could doubt but he was come from the Wilderness to instruct them in the way to
Heaven: He employed himself during the space of two or three Months in that
manner. For though there was no appearance that any Vessel should set ^ail for
the Holy Land, yet Ignatius and his Disciples, who had obliged themselves to
wait one Year in expectation of any such opportunity, would not depart from the
Territories of the Republic, till it was totally expired, that they might have
nothing to upbraid themselves, in relation to the Vow which they had made.

Xavier being thus disposed, He celebrates his first Mass, and falls sick after
it.
both by his Retirement, and his exterior Employments, at length said his
first Mass at Vicenza; to which place Ignatius had caused all his Company to
resort. And he said it with Tears flowing in such abundance, that his Audience
could not refrain from mixing their own with his.

His Austere, Laborious Life, joined with so sensible a Devotion, which often
makes too great an impression on the Body, so much impaired the strength of his
Constitution, that he fell sick, not long after his first Mass. He was carried
into one of the Town-Hospitals, which was so crowded, and so poor, that Xavier
had in it but the one half of a wretched Bed, and that too in a Chamber, which
was open on every side. His Victuals were no better than his Lodging, and never
was sick Man more destitute of Humane Succors, but in requital, Heaven was not
wanting to him.

He was wonderfully devoted to St. Jerome; St. Jerome appears to him.
and had often had recourse to that blessed Doctor of the Church, for the
understanding of difficult places in the Scripture. The Saint appeared to him
one night, refulgent in his Beams of Glory, and gave him Consolation in his
Sickness. Yet, at the same time, declaring to him, that a far greater
affliction than the present was waiting for him at Bolognia, where himself and
one of his Companions were to pass the Winter; that some of them should go to
Padoua, some to Rome, others to Ferrara, and the remainder of them to Sienna.

This Apparition fortified Xavier so much, that he recovered suddenly; yet
whether he had some doubts concerning it, or was of opinion that he ought to
keep it secret, he said nothing of it at that time. But that which then
happened to him, made it evident, that the Vision was of God. For Ignatius, who
was ignorant of what had been revealed to Xavier, having assembled his
Disciples, gave them to understand, That since the Gate of the Holy Land was
shut against them, they ought not any longer to de^er the offering of their
Service to the Pope; that it was sufficient if some of them went to Rome, while
the rest of them dispersed themselves in the Universities of Italy, to the end,
they might inspire the fear of God into the Scholars, and gather up into their
number, some young Students of the greatest parts. Ignatius appointed them
their several stations, just as they had been foreshewn by St. Jerome; and that
of Bolognia, fell to the share of Xavier and Bobadilla.

After their arrival at Bolognia, He goes to Bolognia, and labors there with
great success.
Xavier went to say a Mass at the Tomb of St. Dominick; for he had a particular
Veneration for the Founder of that Order, whose institution was for the
preaching of the Gospel.

A devout Virgin, whose name was Isabella Casalini, seeing him at the Altar,
judged him to be a Man of God. And was led by some interior motion to speak to
this Stranger Priest when his Mass was ended. She was so much edified, and so
satisfied with the discourse of Xavier, that she immediately informed her
Uncle, at whose House she lodged, of this treasure which she had discovered.

Jerome Casalini, who was a very considerable Clergyman, both in regard of his
noble Blood, and of his Virtue, went in search of this Spanish Priest, upon the
account which was given of him by his Niece: And having found him at the
Hospital, he importuned him so much, to take a Lodging in his House, that
Xavier could not in Civility refuse him. But the Holy Man would never accept of
his Table, of whose House he had accepted. He begged his Bread from Door to
Door according to his usual custom; and lived on nothing but the Alms which
was given him in the Town.

Every day, after having celebrated the Divine Mysteries in St. Luc^e's Church,
of which Casalini was Curate, he there heard the Confessions of such as
presented themselves before him: After which he visited the Prisons and the
Hospitals, Catechized the Children, and Preached to the People.

It Is true, he spoke but very ill; and his Language was only a kind of Lingua
franca, a confused medley, of Italian, French and Spanish: But he pronounced it
with so much vehemenco, and the matter of his Sermons was so solid, that his
ill accent, and his improper Phrases were past by. His Audience attended to
him, as to a Man descended from above, and his Sermon being ended, came to cast
themselves at his Feet, and make Confession.

These continual labors, He rela^ses into his sickness, and yet continues
preaching.
during a very sharp Winter, threw him into a relapse of sickness, much more
dangerous than the former; as it were to verify the Prediction of St. Jerome;
for he was seized with a Quartan Ague, which was both malignant and obstinate:
insomuch that it cast him into an extreme faintness* and made him as meagre as
a Skeleton. In the mean time, lean and languishing a^ he was, he ceased not to
crawl to the public places, and excite Passengers to Repentance. When his
Voice ^ail'd him, his wan and mortified Face, the very picture of Death, seemed
to speak for him, and his presence alone had admirable effects.

Jerome Casalini profited so well, by the Instructions and Example of the holy
Man, that he arrived in a short space to a high degree of Holiness: The greater
knowledge he had of him, he the more admired him, as he himself related. And it
is from this virtuous Churchman chiefly, that we have this account of Xavier,
that having labored all the day, he passed the Night in Prayer; that on Friday
saying the Mass of the Passion, he melted into Tears, and was often ra^ish'd in
his Soul; that he spoke but seldom, but that all his words were full of sound
Reason, and heavenly Grace.

While Xavier was thus employing his Labors at Bolognia, He is recal^^d to
Rome by Father Ignatius, and labors there with great succes^.
he was recalled to Rome by Father Ignatius; who had already presented himself
before the Pope, and offered him the Service both of himself and his
Companions. Pope Paul the Third accepted the good Will of these new Laborers,
enjoining them to begin their Work in Rome, and preach under the Authority of
the Holy See. The principal Churches were assigned them; and that of St.
Laurence in Damaso was allotted to Xavier.

Being now freed from his Quartan Ague, and his strength being again restored,
he preached with more vigor and vehemence than ever.

Death, the last Judgment, and the pains of Hell, were the common Subject of
his Sermons. He proposed those terrible truths after a plain manner, but
withal, so movingly, that the People, who came in Crowds to hear him preach,
departed out of the Church in a profound silence; and thought less of giving
Praises to the Preacher, than of Converting their own Souls to God.

The Famine which laid waste the City of Rome, at that time, gave opportunity
to the ten Stranger-Priests, to relieve an infinite number of miserable People,
oppressed with want, and unregarded. Xavier was ardent above the rest, to find
them places of accommodation, and to procure Alms for their Subsistence. He
bore them even upon his Shoulders to the places which were provided for them,
and attended them with all imaginable care.

In the mean time, The occasion of the Mission into the Indies.
James Govea a Portuguese, who had been acquainted with Ignatius, Xavier, and
Le Fevre at Paris, and who was Principal of the College of Saint Barbe, when
they lived together there, being come to Rome on some important business for
which he was sent thither by John the Third, King of Portugal, and seeing the
wonderful effects of their Ministry, wrote to the King, as he had formerly done
from Paris, on the Reports which were spread of them, that such Men as these,
Knowing, Humble, Charitable, inflamed with Zeal, inde^atigable in Labor,
lovers of the Cross, and who aimed at nothing but the Honor of Almighty God,
were fit to be employed in the East Indies, to plant, and propagate the Faith.
He adjoin'd, That if his Majesty were desirous of these excellent Men, he had
only to ask them, from the Pope, who had the absolute disposition of them.

John the Third, the most Religious Prince then living, wrote thereupon to his
Ambassador Don Pedro Mascaregnas, and ordered him to obtain from his Holiness,
^ix at least of those Apostolic Men, which had been commended to him by Govea.
The Pope having heard the Proposition of Mascaregnas, remitted the whole
business to Father Ignatius, for whom he had already a great consideration: and
who had lately presented to his Holiness the model of the new Order, which he
and his Companions were desirous to establish.

Ignatius who had proposed to himself no less a design, than the Reformation of
the whole World, and who savv the urgent necessities of Europe, infected with
Heresy on every side, returned this answer to Mascaregnas, that of ten, which
was their whole number, he could spare him at the most but two persons. The
Pope approved this answer, and ordered Ignatius to make the choice himself.
Thereupon Ignatius named Simon Rodriguez a Portuguese, and Nicholas Bobadilla a
Spaniard. The first of these was, at that time employed at Sienna, and the
other in the Kingdom of Naples, as they had been Commissioned by the
Holy-Father. Though Rodriguez was languishing under a Quartan Ague, when he
was recalled from Sienna, yet he failed not to obey the Summons; and shortly
after embarking on a Ship of Lisbonne which went off from Civita Vecchia,
carried with him Paul de Camerin, who, some month before, had joined himself
to their Society*

As for Bobadilla, he was no sooner come to Rome, than he fell Sick of a
continued Fever; and it may be said, that h^^ Distemper was the hand of
Heaven, which had ordained another in his stead, for the Mission of the
Indies. For sometimes that which appears but chance, or a purely natural effect
in the Lives of men, is a disposition of the Divine Providence which moves by
secret ways to its own proposed ends; and is pleased to execute those designs,
by means as easy as they are powerful.

Mascaregnas who had finished his Embassy, He is named for the Mission of the
Indies.
and was desirous to carry with him into Portugal, the second Missioner who had
been promised him, was within a day of his departure, when Bobadilla arrived.
Ignatius seeing him in no condition to undertake a Voyage, applied himself to
God for his direction, in the choice of one to fill his place, or rather to
make choice of him whom God had chosen. For he was immediately enlightened from
above, and made to understand, that Xavier was that Vessel of Election. He
called for him at the same instant, and being filled with the Divine Spirit,
Xavier (said he) I had named Bobadilla for the Indies, but the Almighty has
nominated you this day. I declare it to you from the Vicar of Jesus Christ.
Receive an Employment committed to your charge by his Holiness, and delivered
by my mouth, as if it were con^err'd on you by our blessed Savior in person.
And rejoice for your finding an opportunity, to satisfy that ^ervent desire,
which we all have, of carrying the Faith into remote Countries. You have not
here a narrow Pa^^stine, or a Province of Asia in prospect, but a vast extent
of ground; and innumerable Kingdoms. An entire World is reserved for your
endeavors, and nothing but so large a Field, is worthy of your courage and
your zeal. Go, my Brother, where the voice of God has called you; where the
Holy See has sent you, and kindle those unknown Nations, with the flame that
burns within you.

Xavier, wholly confounded in himself with these expressions of Ignatius, with
tears of a tender affection in his eyes, and blushing in his Countenance,
answered him, that he could not but be astonished, that he should pitch upon a
man, so weak, and pusilanimous as himself, for an enterprise, which required no
less than an Apostle: that nevertheless he was ready to obey the commands of
Heaven; and that he offered himself, with the whole power of his Soul, to do
and suffer all things, for the salvation of the Indians. After which, giving
leave to his internal joy, to break out, and to diffuse it self, he more
confidently said to Father Ignatius, that his desires were now accomplished.
That for a long time he had sighed after the Indies, without daring to declare
it* And that he hoped, from those Idolatrous Nations, to have the honor of
dying for Jesus Christ, which had been denied him in the Holy Land.

He added, God mysteriously reveals to him, his intended Mission, to the Indies.
in the height of these transports, that at length he saw that clearly, of
which God had often given him a glymps, under some misterious Figures. In
effect, Xavier had frequently dreamt by night, that he carried on his
shoulders, a Gigantick, and very swarthy Indian; and oppressed with this strong
imagination, he groaned and sighed, in that uneasy slumber, as one out of
breath, and laboring under an intolerable burden; insomuch that the noise of
his groans and heavings, waked those who were lodged in the same Chamber: and,
one night, it happening that Father Laynez being awakened by it, asked him what
it was that troubled him: Xavier immediately told his Dream, and added that it
put him into a sweat, with big drops over all his body.

Besides this, he once beheld, either in a dream, or in a trance, vast Oceans
full of Tempests and of Rocks, desert Islands, barbarous Countries, hunger and
thirst raging every where, nakedness, multiplicity of labors, with bloody
persecution, and imminent dangers of death and of destruction. In the midst of
this ghastly Apparition, he cried aloud, yet more, O my God, yet more! and
Father Simon Rodriguez heard these words distinctly, but however he importuned
him to declare their meaning, he would discover nothing at that time; 'till
embarking for the Indies he revealed the Mystery.

Such Ideas, (...)
always present in his imagination, filled his familiar discourses with notions
of a new World, and the Conversion of In^idels. While he was speaking on that
subject his face was on a fire, and the tears came into his eyes. This was
testified of him by Father Jerome Dominec, who before he entered into the
Society, had conversed with him at Bolognia, where a strict friendship was made
betwixt them.

As Xavier was advertised of this Voyage to the Indies but the day before
Mascaregnas departed, he had but time enough to piece up his Cassock, bid his
friends farewell, and go to kiss the feet of our Holy Father.

Paul the third, overjoyed, that under his Pontificate, a gate should be opened
to the Gospel, in the Oriental Indies, received him with a most Fatherly
affection, and excited him to assume such thoughts, as were worthy of so high
an undertaking. Telling him for his encouragement, that the eternal wisdom, is
never failing to supply us with strength, to prosecute the labors to which it
has ordained us, even though they should surpass all humane abilities. He must,
indeed prepare himself for many sufferings, but the affairs of God, succeeded
not, but by the ways of suffering, and that none could pretend to the honor of
an Apostleship, but by treading in the steps of the Apostles, whose Lives were
but one continual cross, and a daily death* That Heaven had employed him in the
mission of St. Thomas, the Apostle of the Indies, for the Conquest of Souls;
That it became him to labor generously, in reviving the Faith in those
Countries, where it had been planted by that great Apostle; and that if it were
necessary for him to shed his blood, for the glory of Christ Jesus, he should
account it his happiness to die a Martyr.

It seemed that God himself had spoken by the mouth of his Vic^-gerent, such
impression had these words on the mind and heart of Xavier. They inspired into
him a divine vigor; and in his answer to His Holiness, there shone through a
profound humility such a magnanimity of Soul, that Paul the third, had from
that very minute, a certain presage of those wonderful events, which afterward
arrived. Therefore the most Holy Father* having wished him the special
assistance of God in all his Labors, tenderly embraced him, more than once,
and gave him a most ample Benediction.

Xavier departed in the company of Mascaregnas the 15th. of March, He departs
from Rome.
in the year 1540, without any other equipage besides his Breviary. In giving
his last adieu to Father Ignatius, he cast himself at his feet, and with all
humility desired his blessing. And in taking leave of Laynez, he put into his
hands a small Memorial, which he had written, and signed.

This Memorial, which is still preserved at Rome, contains, that he approves,
as much as depends on him, the Rules and Constitutions, which shall be drawn
up, by Ignatius and his Companions; that he elects Ignatius to be their
General, and in failure of him, Le Fevre. That he consecrates himself to God,
by the three vows, of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, in the Society of
Jesus, when it shall be raised into a Religious Order, by the Apostolical
Authority.

The conclusion of that affair, was daily expected; and indeed it was happily
finished, before the ending of the year, in that almost miraculous manner, as
is related in the Life of St. Ignatius.

His Journey from Rome to Lisbonne, How he employed himself, during his journey.
was all the way by Land: and was above three months. Xavier had a Horse
allowed him, by order from the Ambassador; but they were no sooner on their
way, than he made him common. The Father often alighted to ease the Servants
who followed on foot; or exchanged his Horse, with others who were not so well
mounted. At the Inns he was every man's Servant, even to the rubbing of the
Horses, by an excess of humility, which, on those occasions, caused him to
forget the Dignity of his Character. He resigned his Chamber and his Bed, to
those who wanted them; and never lodged but either on the ground or on the
litter in the Stable. In the rest of his actions, ever cheerful, and pleasant
in discourse, which made all men desirous of his Company: but always mixing
somewhat with that gayety, which was edifying both to the Masters and the
Servants, and inspired them alike with thoughts of Piety.

They went by Loretto, where they rested at the least eight days; after which
they continued their Journey by Bolognia. From thence, Xavier wrote to
Ignatius, in this manner.

I Received, His letter to Ignatius.
on the Holy Day of Easter, the Letter which you wrote and enclosed in the
Packet of my Lord Ambassador. God only knows my joy in receiving it.
Believing as I do, that we shall never entertain each other in this World, by
any other way than that of writeing, and tha^ we shall never see each other but
in Heaven, it concerns us, that little time we have to live, in this place of
Exile, to give our selves the mutual consolation of frequen^ Letters. The
correspondence, on my part* shall be exactly kept; for being convinced by the
Reasons which you gave me at (...) parting; that a Commerce of this nature
ought to be established, in a Regular Met^^d, betwixt the Colonies and the
Mothe^ Country, I have resolved, that in what (...) parts of the World I shall
reside, or (...) Members of our Society with me, to mai^tain a strict
communication with you, (...) with the Fathers at Rome, and send (...) as large
an account, as possibly I can, of any ^ews concerning us. I have taken my
opportunity of seeing the Cardinal of Invrea, as you gave me in command, and
have discoursed at leisure with him. He received me with much goodness, and
offered me with great Civility, his interest, for our common cause. In the
midst of the discourse which we had together, I threw my self at his feet, and
kissed his hand, in the name of all our Society. As much as I can gather by his
words, he extremely approves the manner of our Living.

As concerning my Lord Ambassador, he loads me with so many Favors, that I
should never conclude, if I began to relate them. And I know not how I could
suffer the many good Offices he does me, if I had not some hope of repaying him
in the Indies, at the he expense of my Life it self. On PalmSunday I heard his
Confession, and after him many of his Domestic Servants; I communicated them
afterward* in the Holy Chapel of Loretto: where I said Mass. I (...) wise
Confessed them, and gave them the Communion, on Easter Sunday. My Lord
Ambassadour's Almoner, recommends himself to your good Prayers; and has
promised to bear me Company to the Indies. I am more taken up with Confessions
here, than I was in Rome, at St. Lewis. I heartily salute all our Fathers, and
if I name not every one of them in particular, I desire them to believe, it is
neither from my want of Memory, or Affection.

From Bolognia, March 31. 1542 Your Brother and Servant In Jesus Christ,
Francis.


The whole Town of Bolognia was in motion at the approach of Father Xavier:
They were wonderfully affected to him, and in a manner esteemed him their
Apostle: Both great and small were desirous of seeing him, and most of them
discovered the state of their Conscience to him; many of them proffered
themselves to go along with him to the Indies; all of them shed Tears at his
departure, as thinking they should never more behold him.

Jerome Casalini, Curate of St. Lucy, who had lodged him the year before, was
most particularly kind to him at his return: He obliged him to accept of h^^
House once more; and his Church became as it were the public Rendezvous where
Xavier heard an infinite numbe^ of Confessions.

In the rest of this long Journey, Some remarkable accidents in his Journey to
Lisbonne.
ther^ happened two or three passages, which were sufficiently remarkable. A
domestic Servant to the Ambassador, (...) rode before, as H^rbinger, to take
up L^dgings for the Train, a violent and brutal Man, being reprehended by his
Lord, for having been negligent in his duty, ^ell into a horrible fit of
Passion, as soon as he was out of Mascaregnas his presence. Xavier heard him,
but took no notice of it, at that time, for fear of provoking him to any
farther extravagance. But the next morning, when the same person, set out
before the Comp^ny, according to his custom, he ^^urr'd after him at full
speed. He found him, lying under his Horse, who was fallen with him from a
Precipice, the Man ^orely bruised, and the Horse killed outright. Wretched
creature, said the Father to him, what had become of thee, if thou ^^dst died
of this fall? These few words made him sensible of his ^^rious expressions, for
which he sincerely asked pardon of Almighty God. And Xavier alighting, mounted
him on his own Horse, and ^^lked on Foot by him, to their Lodging.

Another time the Gentleman of the Horse attempting to pass a small River,
which was very deep and rapid, the Current carried away both^ Man and Horse,
and the whole Company gave him for lost. Xavier, moved with Compassion, for the
danger of his Soul, because having had a call from Heaven, to enter into a
Relig^ous Life, he had not followed the motions of Grace, but remained in the
World, began to implore God in his behalf. The Ambassador, who had a great
kindness for him, joined in that devout Action, and commanded the whole Train
to follow their Example. They had scarcely opened their Mouths for him, when
the Man and Horse, who were both drowning, came again above Water, and were
carried to the Bank* The Gentleman was drawn out, pale in his Countenance, and
half dead. When he had recovered his Senses, Xavier demanded of him, what
thoughts he had* when he was at the point of perishing He freely acknowledged,
That the Religious Life, to which God had called him then struck upon his Soul;
with disma apprehensions, for having neglected the means of his Salvation.

He protested afterward, as Xavier himself relates, in one of his Letters
That, in that dreadful moment, the remorse of his Conscience, and the senc^ of
Gods Judgments, on Souls unfaithf^^ to their Vocation, were more terrible (...)
him, than the horrors even of Death (...) self. He spoke of Eternal
Punishment^ with expressions so lively and so strong, as if he had already felt
them, and was returned from Hell. He frequently said, (as the Saint has assured
us) that by a just Judgment of Eternal God, those, who during their Life, made
no preparations for their Death, had not the leisure to think on God, when
Death surprised them.

The Ambassador, and all his People doubted not, but the safty of this
Gentleman, was to be ascribed to the Merits of ^he Saint: But Xavier himself
believed it ^o be the pure effect of the Ambassadors Devotion: for thus he
writes to Father Ignatius concerning it. -- Our Lord was pleased to give ^ar to
the fervent Prayers ^f his Servant Mascaregnas, which he ^ade with Tears in his
Eyes, for the deli^erance of the poor Creature, whom we looked upon as lost;
and who was taken from the ^aws of Death by a most evident Miracle.

In passing over the Alps, the Embas^^dour's Secretary alighting to walk in a
^ifficult way, which he could not well ^bserve, by reason of the Snows, his
^oot happened to slip on a sharp descent; and he rolled down into a Precipice:
he had tumbled to the very bottom, if, in falling, his Clothes had not taken
hold ^n one of the Crags of the Rock, where he remained hanging over the depths
without ability, either to disingage himself, or get up again. Those who
followed, made toward him, but the horror of that Abyss stopped short the most
daring: Xavier, only, made not the least demur, he descended the Precipice, and
lending his Hand to the Secretary, by little and little, dragged him up.

Being gotten out of France, He (...) by the Castle of Xavier without going to
it.
and having passed the Pyreneans, on the side of Navarre, when they were now
approaching Pampeluna, Mascaregnas bethought himself, that Father Francis, for
by that name Xavier was usually called, had not spoken one word of going to the
Castle of Xavier, which was but little distant from their Rode: He remembered
him of it, and was even so importunate with him, as to say, That since he was
about to leave Europe, and perhaps never more to see it, he could not in
decency dispense with giving a visit to his Family, and taking his last leave
of his Mother, who was yet living.

But all the Arguments of Mascaregnas, wrought no effect upon a Man, who having
forsaken all things for the love of God, was of Opinion, that he had nothing
remaining in this World; and who also was persuaded, that Flesh and Bloo^ are
Enemies to the Apostolical Spirit. He turned not out of the Rode, but only said
to the Ambassador, That he deferred the sight of his Relations, till he should
visit them in Heaven; that this transient view would be accompanied but with
Melancholy and Sadness, the common products of a last farewell, but in Heaven he
should eternally behold them with pleasure, and without the least allay of
^orrow.

Mascaregnas had already a high Idea of Xavier's Virtue; but this wonderful
disingagement from the World, yet more increased the esteem which he had of
him; insomuch, that before they reached Portugal, he sent an Express to King
John the Third, with no other errand* than to inform of the Holiness of this
second Missioner to the Indies.

They arrived at Lisbonne toward the end of June: He arrives at Lisbonne, and
cures Rodriguez immediately after his coming.
And Xavier retired to the Hospital of All Saints, where Rodriguez, who came by
Sea, had taken up his ^odging. He found him much weakened ^ith a Quartan Ague,
which had not left ^im; and embraced him just at the moment, when his ^it was
coming on him. But whether it were, that the extreme joy which Rodriguez found,
so unexpectedly to see him, dissipated the Humor which caused his Disease, or
that the Embraces of Xavier, had from that time an healing Virtue; certain it
is that the ^it came not; and from thence forward, the Sick-man entirely
recovered of that Distemper.

Three or four days after, He is called to Court.
they were both called to Court. The King and Queen, who were in company
together, received Xavier as a Saint, on the report of Mascaregnas, and
entertained him with all imaginable shows of kindness. They asked them diverse*
Questions, concerning their way of living; by what accident their new Society
came to be formed; and what was the ground, and ultimate design of it; and at
last, desired to be informed by them, from whence proceeded that strange
Persecution, which was raised in Rome against their Body, which had made so
great a noise over all Europe Xavier made answer to all these demands in few
words, but so very pertinently, as much satisfied both their Majesty's: They
gave great approbation, (as himself relates in his Letter from Lisbonne to
Ignatius,) to what we said, concerning the Discipline of our Houses, the
Quality of our Ministry, and the Spirit and Mode^ of our Foundation.

In the midst of the Conversation the King sent for the Prince of Portugal his
Son Don Iuan; and the Infanta Maria, his Daughter, that the two Missioners
might see them. And from thence his Majesty took occasion of relating to them,
how many Children he had still living, and how many he had lost; which turned
the Discourse on the Education of Youth, and before the Fathers were dismissed,
the King recommended to their care, an hundred young Gentlemen, who were bred
at Court.

Though an Officer of the Palace had orders to prepare an handsome Lodging, The
manner of his Life at Lisbonne.
with good Accommodation for Xavier and Rodriguez, they returned to their
Hospital, and there continued. They would not so much as receive their
Entertainment of Diet, which was assigned them from Court, but went the round
of the City begging Alms at their appoin^ed hours, and lived in Poverty,
according to the manner of Life, which they ^ad prescribed themselves.

The Fleet, not being to set Sail till ^he next Spring, and these Apostolical
^ersons not knowing what it was to live ^n idleness, Xavier was not satisfied
only to instruct those young Gentlmen in Piety, whom the King had committed to
his charge: He gave himself an Employment, and did at Lisbonne, what he had
done at Venice, Bolognia and Rome, for the space of two years and more. But
besides that, he assisted the sick in the Hospital day and night, visited the
Prisoners every day, and catechis'd the Children many times in the week, he
often discoursed with the principal persons of the Court, and engaged them in
the Spiritual Exercises of Ignatius.

At first, he preached not in the Churches, judging, that the Ministries of the
Gospel, ought to begin with less public Actions, and went not into the Pulpit,
without being first requested by the King, who one day sending for him to the
Palace, acquainted him with the desire he had to hear him preach; and told him*
That the Bishop of Lisbonne was of Opinion, that he ought not any longer to
deferr his public Exhortations.

Father Simon Rodriguez, labored also on his part, in the Service of his
Neighbor according to the same Method, and with the same Spirit.

In the mean time, He refuses to visit his Uncle, the Doctor of Navarre.
Martin d' Azpilcueta, surnamed the Doctor of Navarre, who was Uncle to Xavier,
on the Mother's side, and who was chief Professor o^ Divinity, in the
University of Coimbra, having heard the news of his Nephew's arrival, wrote
earnestly to the King, That it would please him to send Father Francis to him.
He added, That in case the Father might have leave to remain with him till the
departure of the Fleet, he would oblige himself to make two new Lectures, at
his own expense, the one in Canon Law, the other in Mystical Divinity* And
farther, That in few years afterward he would follow Xavier to the Indies, and
preach the Gospel in conjunction with him, to the Eastern Idolaters.

These Letters prevailed nothing; the Man, who had refused so much as to turn
out of his way, to see his Mother, was bent against the taking of a Journey,
and forsaking his important business to visit one of his Relations. The King
retained Xavier at Lisbonne, at the request of Xavier himself: And the Father
wrote a Letter of excuse to the Doctor of Navarre, who had written two to him
full of tenderness and friendship. As that Doctor was unsatisfied with that
kind of Life, which his Nephew had embraced, so Xavier resolved him, on that
point, in this manner. For what concerns our Institute, of which so many
reports are now raised, I have but one word, at present, to say of it. It Is of
little consequence, Illustrious Doctor, to be judged by Men, especially by
such, who will needs be judging before they understand the matter, and know the
merits of the cause.

As to his intention of going to the Indies, he desired him to think no farther
of it, for thus Navarre relates that passage in his Manual* I had resolved to
have ended my days* in those parts, if Xavier in consideration of my great Age,
had not thought me incapable of those labors which attend his Mission: and if
he had not written to me at his departure, that I should comfort my self for
his absence, by the hope of seeing each other in the Celestial Kingdom.

Our two Missioners labored not in vain at Lisbonne. (...)
From the very beginning of their Ministry, Devotion began to spread amongst
the people. All Men ran to the blessed Sacrament, which before, was never
thought on, but in Lent: And this holy Custom diffused it self insensibly
through all the Towns of Portugal. Many, who had deferred their Conversion from
time to time, now on the sudden gave themselves up to God, and even renounced
the World. The most inveterate Enemies were sincerely reconciled, and the most
impudent Harlots abandoned their prostitute way of living.

But this change of Manners, was most particularly apparent at the Court: the
King, who was truly Religious, and full of goodness, was the first to declare
himself against those Vices, which usually in^ect the Palaces of Princes. And
that he might introduce a Reformation by degrees, not only into his House, but
also dilate it through his whole Kingdom, he obliged all the young Courtiers to
confess themselves once a week; for he said, That if the Lords and Gentlemen,
would accustom themselves from their tender years, to the service and fear of
God, they would live with greater Christianity in their riper age: and if
Persons of Quality came once to give good examples of Religion, the Commonalty,
who form themselves according to their Model, would not fail to regulate their
manners; and therefore the reformation of all degrees in the Kingdom, consisted
chiefly in the virtuous education of young Noblemen.

The example of the Prince, and the young Courtiers drew the rest; and
thereupon Xavier writes to Ignatius in these terms.

Nothing can be more regular than the Court of Portugal: it resembles rather a
Religious Society, than a Secular Court. The number of Courtiers who come to
Confession, and are afterward communicated, every eight days, is so very
great, that we are in admiration of it, and are in perpetual thanksgiving for
it. We are so taken up with hearing Confessions, that if we were twice so many
as we are, there would be employment more than enough for us. We are sitting on
the Confession-Seat all the day long, and part of the night, though none but
Courtiers are permitted to come to us.

I remember, that I observed, when the King was at Almerin, those who waited on
him, from all parts of the Kingdom, about their own Affairs, as the custom is,
were in great admiration at this new Court-mode; and when they beheld the young
Gentlemen at the Sacrament of the Altar* every Sunday and Holiday, with great
reverence, they thought themselves in another World. But the greatest part of
them imitating that which they admired, drew near to the Tribunal of Penance,
and the Holy Table. Had we Confessors ^now to attend the Crowds that come to
Court, no Man would venture to apply himself to the King for any business,
before he had been first with God, and were well with him.

The two laborers in God's Harvest were so exhausted with their pains, that at
length they were constrained to accept of the Diet which was provided for them
by the Kings appointment. For they judged their time was better employed in the
service of Souls, than in begging their daily Bread about the Streets. Yet they
omitted not to ask Alms once or twice a week, that they might not difuse
themselves from the Spirit of Mortification and Poverty. With these
considerations they reserved but little of what was sent them from the Palace,
and distributed the rest among the poor.

On the other side, the perpetual labor of Confessions, reduced them to preach
but very seldom, for want of leisure. But all things duly examined, they
thought it of more consequence to Gods Service, to administer the Sacrament of
Penance, than to preach the Word; because the Court of Portugal was furnished
with able Preachers, but was much wanting in judicious Confessors; which was
the very observation that Xavier made in the Letter above cited.

These visible, and wonderful Operations, The Reputation he (...) at Lisbonne.
caused the two Missioners to be respected as Men sent down from Heaven, and
replenished with the Spirit of the Most High* Insomuch that all men gave them
the Surname of Apostles, which glorious Title still remains with their
Successors in Portugal. The King, on all occasions, showed them a most
particular affection: And Xavier, ravished with so many expressions of his
goodness to them, gives this account of it to Father Ignatius.

Our whole Society stands obliged to his Majesty, for his singular favor to
us; as well the rest of you at Rome, as we in Portugal. I am given to
understand from the Ambassador Mascaregnas* that the King told him, he should
be very glad, that all the Members of our Company might be gathered together,
and established here; though on that condition he employed a good part of his
Revenue for our entertainment.

This Pious Prince, says Xavier in another of his Letters, who has so tender an
inclination for our Society, and who wishes our advancement as much as if he
were one of us, has thereby engaged us for ever to his service. And we should
be guilty of a most horrible ingratitude, even to be unworthy of Life, if we
made not a public profession of our Service to him, and if every day of our
Lives, we endeavored not to acknowledge by our Prayers, as far as our weakness
will give us leave, all the favors of so generous a Protector, and so
magnificent a (...).

The Prince Don Henry, who was nominated Cardinal not long after, and in
process of time, came to the Crown, by the death of Don Sebastian, had not less
affection for them, than the King his Brother. Being grand Inquisitor, he gave
the Fathers an absolute power in his Tribunal; and permitted them to disourse
freely with all the Prisoners of the Inquisition.

Some of the Greatest Quality in the Court, were so much edified with the
Apostolic Life of Xavier and Rodriguez, that they were desirous to embrace
their Institute; as some Learned persons of the City had already done. In
short, every thing succeeded with them, so that Xavier had some apprehensions
concerning this tide of happiness; he bemoaned it sometimes to himself, and
said that Prosperity was always ^ormidable, even in the most pious
undertakings; that Persecution was more desirable, and a much surer mark of
Christ's Disciples.

The two Missioners appointed for the Indies, They would retain him in Portugal.
lived in this manner; and impatiently waited for the proper season of
Navigation. But the King weighing in his mind, the great good which they had
done, in so short a time, both amongst the Nobility, and the Common people, was
desirous to retain them still in Portugal. It seemed reasonable to him, that
the interest of his own Kingdom ought to be dearer to him, than that of foreign
Nations; and that these new Laborers would produce a larger increase in
Catholic Countries, than amongst Barbarians.

Yet that he might undertake nothing without mature deliberation, he called a
Council, and himself proposed it to them. All of them approved the Kings
Opinion, excepting only the Prince Don Henry; who strongly urged, that Xavier
and Rodriguez having been nominated for the new World, by the Vicar of our
Savior, it was in a manner to disturb the Order of Providence, if he thwarted
their intended Voyage: that the Indies were equally to be considered with
Portugal it self, since they had been Conquered by the Portuguese, and were
annexed to the Imperial Crown. That those Idolaters had better inclinations
toward Christianity, than was generally thought; and that they would come over
to the faith of their own accord, when they should see amongst them
disinterested Preachers, free from Avarice and Ambition.

As the Opinions of Kings are always prevalent, the Reasons of Don Henry were
slighted, and it was concluded in Council, that the two Missioners should not
depart the Realm. This resolution afflicted them the more sensibly, because
they both breathed after those eastern Countries; their last recourse was to
write to Rome, and interpose the mediation of Father Ignatius. He accordingly
moved the Pope in their behalf, but His Holiness refused to make an absolute
decision, and remitted the whole affair to Portugal Insomuch that Ignatius sent
word to the two Fathers, that the King, was to them in the place of God, and
that it was their duty to pay him a blind obedience. At the same time he also
wrote to Don Pedro Mascaregnas, that Xavier and Rodriguez were wholly at the
King's Command: And that they should always remain in Portugal, in case his
Majesty desired it. Notwithstanding which, he thought a temperament might be
found, which was, that Rodriguez might be retained in Portugal, and Xavier
permitted to go for India.

The King was satisfied with this proposal of Ignatius: He is permitted to go
to the Indies, and the King discou^ses with him before his departure.
and believed it to be inspired by God himself. Xavier transported with joy at
the news of it, gave thanks to the Divine Goodness, which had chosen him anew
for the Mission of the Oriential Parts, or rather which had executed its
eternal purpose, notwithstanding humane opposition.

The time of embarquement being come, he was called one day to the Palace: The
King discoursed fully with him, concerning the present condition of the Indies,
and recommended particularly to him the affairs of Religion. He likewise gave
him in charge, to visit the Fortresses of the Portuguese, and take notice how
God was served in them: and withal to give him an account of what more was
requisite to be done for the establishment of Christianity in those new
Conquests; and to write frequently on that Subject, not only to his Ministers,
but to his own person.

After this he presented him the four Briefs, which had been expedited from
Rome the same year: in two of which, our Holy Father had constituted Xavier
Apostolical Nuncio, and endued him with ample power for the extending and
maintenance of the Faith, throughout the East. In the third his Holiness
recommended him to David Emperor of Ethiopia; and in the fourth to all the
Princes who possessed the Isles of the Sea, or the Continent from the Cape of
Good-Hope, even beyond the Ganges.

John the Third had requested these Briefs, He refuses the Provisions offered
him for his Voyage.
and the Pope had freely granted them, with design thereby to make the Mission
of Father Francis the more Illustrious and Authentic. The Father received
them from the hands of the King, with profound respect, saying that as much as
his weakness was capable of performing, he should endeavor to sustain the
burden, which God and Man had laid upon him.

Some few days before he went to Sea, Don Antonio d' Ataida Count of
Castagnera, who supervis'd the Provisions of the Naval Army, advertised Xavier
to make a Note of what things were necessary for him in order to his Voyage,
assuring him from his Majesty, that he should be furnished to his own desire.
They want nothing, replied the Father with a smile, who have occasion for
nothing. I am much obliged to the King for his Liberality, and to you for your
care of me; but I owe more to the Divine Providence, and you would not wish me
to distrust it.

The Count of Castagnera, who had an express Order from the King, to make a
large Provision for Father Xavier, was very urgent with him, and importuned him
so strongly to take something, for fear, said he, of tempting Providence, which
does not every day work Miracles, that Xavier, not to appear either obstinate
or presumptuous, demanded some few little Books of Devotion, for which he
foresaw he should have occasion in the Indies, and a thick Cloth Habit against
the excessive colds, which are to be endured in doubling the Cape.

The Count amazed that the Father asked for nothing more, besought him to make
a better use of the Kings offers: but seeing that all his entreaties prevailed
nothing, you shall not be Master in every thing, said he, with some kind of
heat, and at the least you cannot possibly refuse a Servant to attend you,
because I am sure you cannot be without one.

So long as I have the use of these two hands, replied Xavier, I will have no
other Servant: But decency, rejoined the Count, requires that you should have
one, if it were but to maintain the dignity of your Character. How shameful
would it seem to behold an Apostolical Legate washing his own Linen on the
Deck, and dressing his own Victuals. I will take upon me for once, said Xavier,
to serve my self and others too without dishonouring my Character. So long as I
do no ill, I am in no fear of scandalizing my Neighbor; nor of debasing that
Authority with which I am entrusted by the Holy See. They are these humane
considerations, and false notions of decencies and punctilios which have
reduced the Church to that condition, in which we now see it.

This positive answer stopped Castagnera's mouth; but afterward, he gave great
commendations of Xavier, and publicly said, that he found it much more
difficult to combat the denials of Father Francis, than to satisfy the craving
desires of other men.

The day of his departure being come at length, He goes for the Indies, and
what he said to Rodriguez at parting.
and all things in a readiness to set Sail, Xavier went to the Port, with his
two Companions, whom he carried with him to the Indies, namely Father Paul de
Camerino an Italian, and Francis Man^illa a Portuguese, who was not yet in
Priests Orders. Simon Rodriguez bore him Company to the Fleet; and then it was,
that embracing each other with much tenderness, My Brother, said Xavier, these
are the last words which I shall ever say to you: We shall see each other no
more in this present World; let us endure our separation with patience: for
most certain it is, that being well united with our Lord, we shall be united in
our selves; and that nothing shall be able to divide us from the Society which
we have in Jesus Christ.

As to what remains, I will, for your satisfaction, added he, discover to you a
Secret, which hitherto I have concealed from your knowledge: You may remember,
that when we lodged as Chamber-Fellows, in the Hospital at Rome, you heard me
crying out one night, yet more, O my Lord, yet more: You have often asked what
that exclamation meant? and I have always answered you, that you should not
trouble your self about it; I must now tell you, that I then beheld, but,
whether sleeping or waking, God only knows, all I was to suffer for the glory
of Jesus Christ; Our Lord infused into me so great a delight for sufferings,
that not being able to satiate my self, with those troubles which he had
presented to my imagination, I begged of him yet more. And that was the sense of
what I pronounced with so much serven^y, yet more, yet more. I hope the Divine
goodness, will grant me that in India, which he has ^oreshewn to me in Italy,
and that the desires which he inspired into me shall be shortly satisfied.

After these words they embraced each other anew, and parted both of them in
tears. When Rodriguez was returned on shore, they gave the signal of departure,
and set Sail. This was on the 7th. of April, in the year 1541, under the
Command of Don Martin Alphonso de Sosa, Viceroy of the Indies, a man of known
Integrity, and consummate experience, in what related to those parts, where he
had formerly lived for many years. He was desirous of Xavier's Company, in the
Admiral, which was called the St. James. Xavier went aboard on his own
Birthday, entering then on his six and thirtieth year. He had resided eight
months entire at Lisbonne; and for seven years and somewhat more, had been the
professed Disciple of Ignatius Loyola.

THE LIFE OF St. FRANCIS XAVIER.
BOOK II.
WHile the Christian Religion flourished in Asia, By what way he ^a^^es to the
Indies.
under the Emperors of Constantinople, there were two ordinary passages, and
both of them short enough toward the Indies: The one by Syria, over the
Euphrates and the Persian Gulf; the other by Ezypt, over the Arabian Gulf,
commonly called the Red Sea. But after the Sara^ens had possessed themselves of
those places, the European Christians finding those passages unsecure for
traveling* sought out ways of a larger circuit, to avoid falling into the
hands of their most mortal Enemies.

The Portuguese were the first, who bethought themselves of Coasting all
Afric, and one part of Arabia and Persia; by taking this compass, the Indies
are distant from Portugal about four thousand Leagues, and the Passengers are
constrained to suffer twice the scorching heats of the Torrid Zone, in going
under the Equinoctial Line, which divides Africa almost into two equal parts.

Don Henry, Son of King John the First, the most skilful Prince of that Age in
the Mathematics, was he who attempted the discovery of those Seas, and
undertook to double the Cape of good hope, upon the account of traffic, which
he desired to establish betwixt the Crown of Portugal, and the Emperor of
Ethiopia, commonly called Prester John. This Enterprise having succeeded, the
Kings of Portugal, Alphonso the Fifth, John the Second, and Emanuel the First,
followed it so happily, that by little and little, they completed the passage
to the Indies.

This was the course that Father Xavier held with the Fleet of Portugal: (...)
He found himself sufficient employment, during the time of the Navigation: His
first study was to put a stop to those disorders which are commonly occasioned
by an idle li^e on Shipboard: And he began with gaming, which is the only
recreation, or rather the whole employment of the Seamen.

That he might banish Games of Chance, which almost always occasion Quarrels
and Swearing, he proposed some little innocent diversions, capable of
entertaining the Mind, without stirring up the Passions. But seeing that in
spite of his endeavors, they were bent on Cards and Dice, he thought it not
convenient to absent himself, but became a looker on, that he might somewhat
awe them by his presence; and when they were breaking out into any
extravagance, he reclaimed them by gentle and soft reproofs. He showed
concernment in their gains, or in their losses, and offered sometimes to hold
their Cards.

There were at least a thousand persons in the Admiral, men of all conditions:
The Father made himself all to all, thereby to gain some to Jesus Christ;
entertaining every Man with such discourse as was most suitable to his Calling.
He talked of Sea Affairs to Mariners, of War to the Soldiery, of Commerce to
Merchants, and of Affairs of State to men of Quality. His natural gayety, and
obliging humor, gained him a general esteem: The greatest Libertins, and most
brutal persons sought his Conversation, and were even pleased to hear him speak
of God.

He instructed the Seamen daily, in the Principles of Religion, of which the
greater part were wholly ignorant, or had at the best but a smattering of it;
and preached to them on every Holiday, at the foot of the main Mast. All of
them profited by his Sermons, and in little time nothing was heard amongst
them, which was offensive to the honor of God, or that wounded Christian
Charity; or touched upan obsceneness, or ill manners. They had a profound
veneration for him; with one word only, he appeased their Quarrels, and put an
end to all their differences.

The Viceroy, Don Martin Alphonso de Sosa, invited him from the very first day
to ^at at his Table; but Xavier humbly excused it, with great acknowledgments,
and during all the Voyage, lived only on what he begged about the Ship.

In the mean time the insufferable colds of Cabo Verde, and the excessive heats
of Guine^* together with the stench of the fresh Waters, and putrisaction of
their Flesh Provisions under the Line, produced many dangerous distempers. The
most common was a pestilential Fever, accompanied with a kind of Cancer, which
bred in the Mouth, and ulcerated all the Gums: The Sick being crowded together,
spread the infection amongst themselves; and as every one was apprehensive of
getting the disease, they had been destitute of all succor, if Father Francis
had not taken compassion on them. He wiped them in their Sweats, he cleans'd
their Ulcers, he washed their Linen, and rendered them all the most abject
services; but above all things, he had care of their Consciences, and his
principal employment was to dispose them to a Christian Death.

These were his perpetual Employments, being at the same time himself seized
with continued sits of Vomiting, and extreme Languishments, which lasted two
whole Months. For his ease and refreshment, Sosa caused him to be accommodated
with a larger Cabin than was first appointed for him; he accepted of it, but it
was only to lodge in it, those who were most desperately ill: As for himself,
he lay bare upon the Deck, without other Pillow, than the tackling.

He received also the Dishes which the Viceroy sent him from his Table, and
divided them amongst those, who had most need of nourishment. So many actions
of Charity, gained him the surname of the Holy Father from thence forward,
which continued to him all his life, even amongst Mahometans and Idolaters.

While Xavier employed his time in this manner, the Navy following its course
met with Rocks and Tempests, and contrary Tides. After five Months of perpetual
Navigation it arrived at Mozambique, toward the end of August.

Mosambique is a Kingdom, situate on the Eastern Coasts of Africa, He arrives
at Mozambique, and what he does there.
inhabited by Negro's, a barbarous people, but less Salvage than their
Neighbors the Ca^res; by reason of the trade which they continually maintain
with the Ethiopians and Arabs. There is no Port on all the Shore to secure
Shipping from the Winds; only one little Island is shaped into a Haven both
convenient and safe.

This Isle which is but a mile dis^ant from the main Land, bears the name of
Mozambique, together with the whole Kingdom. It was formerly subject to the
Sar^cens, and a Xeriffe Moor commanded it. But since, the Portuguese have made
themselves Masters of it, and built a Fort, to secure the passage of their
Vessels, and refresh their Sea-beaten men, who commonly stay there for some
time.

The Army under Sosa, was constrained to Winter in this Island, not only
because the season was far spent, but also because the sick Passengers could no
longer support the incommodities of the Sea. The place notwithstanding was not
very proper for in^irm persons, for the Air is unwholesome; which proceeds from
hence, that the Sea overflowing the Low-lands of the Isle, at the Spring Tides,
the Mass of Waters there gathered and enclosed, is corrupted by the heats: For
which reason, the Inhabitants are commonly shortliv'd, but more especially
Strangers* Upon which occasion Mozambique, is generally called, The Sepulcher
of the Portuguese. Besides the intemperance of the Air, at the same time, an
infectious disease was raging in the Country.

Being come ashore, Sosa gave immediate orders to carry the Sick of every Ship
to the Hospital, which is in the Island, of which the Kings of Portugal* are
Founders. Father Xavier followed them, and with the assistance of his two
Companions, undertook to attend them ^ll. The undertaking was beyond his
Strength; but the Soul sustains the Body of Apostolical Men, and Charity can do
all things.

Animated with this new ^ervour, he went from Chamber to Chamber, and from Bed
to Bed, giving remedies to some, and administering the last Sacrament to others.
Every one desired to have him by him, and all acknowledged that the only sight
of his Countenance, availed them more than a thousand Medicines.

Having passed the day in continual labor, he watched all night with dying
men, or laid himself down by those who were in most danger, to steal a short
unquiet slumber, which was interrupted almost every moment: At the least
complaint, or even at a sigh, he was awake, and ran to their relief.

So many fatigues, He falls sick himself, and yet conti^^es to serve the sick.
at the length overwhelmed Nature, and he fell sick himself of a Fever, so
violent, and so malignant, that he was blooded seven times in a little space,
and was three days in a Delirium. At the beginning of his sickness, many were
desirous to have withdrawn him from the Hospital, where the Contagion was
frightful; and offered him their own Lodgings. He constantly refused their
offers, and told them. That having made a Vow of Poverty, he would live and die
amongst the poor.

But when the violence of his Distemper was somewhat abated, the Saint forgot
himself to think on others. Sometimes, not being able to sustain his Body, and
burning with his Fever, he visited his dear Patients, and attended them as much
as his weakness would permit him. The Physician having one day met him, going
hither and thither as his Charity called him, in the middle of his Fit^, after
having felt his Pulse, plainly told him, that in all the Hospital, there was
not one man in more danger than himself, and prayed him that he would take some
small repose, and but give himself a breathing time, 'till his Fever were in
the declension.

I will punctually obey you, replied the Father, when I have satisfied one part
of my duty which calls upon me: it concerns the Salvation of a Soul, and there
is no time to be lost on such an occasion. Immediately he ordered to be carried
to his own Bed, a poor Ship-Boy who lay stretched out on a little straw, with a
burning Fever upon him, without Speech or knowledge. The Youth was no sooner
placed upon the Saints Bed, but he came to himself: Xavier made use of the
opportunity, and laying himself by the sick Person, who had led a most
dissolute Life, exhorted him so strongly all that night to abominate his sins,
and to rely on the mercy of Almighty God, that he saw him dye, in great
contrition, mixed with saving hope.

After this, the Father kept the promise which he had made to the Physician:
and took a greater care of his own preservation; insomuch that his Fever abated
by degrees, and at length left him, of it self; but his strength was not yet
recovered, when the Navy put to Sea again. The Viceroy who began to find
himself indisposed, would make no longer stay upon a place so much infected,
nor attend the recovery of his People, to continue his Voyage. He desired
Xavier to accompany him, and to leave Paul de Camerino, and Francis Mansilla to
attend the Sick in the Hospital: where indeed they both performed their duty as
became them.

Thus having made a six months residence on Mozambique, they embarked once
more on the 15th. of March, and in the year 1542. But they went not aboard the
St. James, in which they came thither; changing her for a lighter Vessel, which
made better Sail.

It Is here proper to observe, His first prediction (...) by the success.
that the Father, according to the report of the Passengers who came with him
from Portugal to Mozambique, began to manifest that Spirit of Prophecy, which
he had to the end of his days, in so eminent a degree. For hearing those of the
St. James commend that Ship, as a Vessel of the strongest built, and the best
equipped of all the Fleet, he said in express words, that she would prove
unfortunate. And in effect, that Ship, which the Viceroy left behind him at
Mozambique, in the Company of some others, pursuing her course afterward to
the Indies, was driven against the Rocks, and dashed in pieces toward the
Island of Salseta.

The Galeon, He arri^e^ at Melinda, and there comfers with the Mahomet^us.
which carried Sosa and Xavier, had the wind so favorable, that in two or
three days she arrived at Melinda* on the Coast of Afric, toward the
Equinoctial Line. It Is a Town of Saracens, on the Sea side, in a flat Country,
well cultivated, planted all along with Palm Trees, and beautified with fair
Gardens. It has a large enclosure, and is fortified with Walls, after the
European fashion. Tho the building is Moresque, the Houses notwithstanding, are
both pleasant and convenient. The Inhabitants are warlike, they are black, and
go naked; excepting only that they are covered with a kind of an Apron of
Cotton or Linen, from the wast to the mid thigh. And indeed the heat of their
Clymat will permit them to wear no more; Melinda being distant from the Line,
but three degrees, and some few minutes.

They have always maintained a good correspondence with the Portuguese, by
reason of the Commerce established betwixt them. The Flag of Portugal was no
sooner seen, but the Saracen King came down to the Port, attended by the most
honorable Persons of his Court, to receive the new Governor of the Indies:
The first object which presented it self to Father Francis when he stepped
ashore, drew tears from his eyes; but they were tears of joy and pity mingled
together. The Portuguese having there a constant trade, and now and then some
of them happening to dye, are allowed a Burying-place near the Town, full of
Crosses set upon their Graves, according to the custom of the Catholics: And
above the rest there was a very large one of hewn stone, placed in the middle,
and all over gilded.

The Saint ran to it, and adored before it; receiving an inward consolation, to
behold it raised so high, and, as it were, triumphing amongst the Enemies of
Jesus Christ. But at the same time, he was sensibly afflicted, that this sign
of our Salvation served less to ^di^i^ the Living, than to honor the memory of
the Dead. And lifting up his hands to Heaven, he besought the Father of all
Mercies to imprint in the hearts of the Infidels, that Cross, which they had
suffered to be planted on their ground.

His next thoughts prompted him to con^er of Religion with the Moors, that he
might endeavor to show them the extravagancies of the Mohammedan Belief, and
gain an opportunity of revealing to them the eternal truths of Christian faith.
One of the Principal Inhabitants, and wonder^ully bigoted to his Sect,
prevented him, and immediately demanded of him, if Piety were not wholly
extinguished in the Towns of Europe, as it was in Melinda. For to confess the
truth, said he, of seventeen Mosques which we have, fourteen are quite
forsaken; there are but three remaining, at which we pay our Devotions; and
even those three are but little visited, and by few Persons.

This proceeds, without all question, added the Mohammedan, from some enormous
sin, but what it is, I know not: and whatsoever reflections I can make, I am
not able to find what has drawn upon us so dreadful a misfortune. There is
nothing more clear, replied Xavier; God, who detests the Prayer of Insidels,
has permitted a worship to moulder away, which is displeas^ng to him; and gives
you thence to understand, that he condemns your Sect. The Sacra^en, was not
satisfied with this reason, nor with any other argument which Xavier used
against the Alcoran. While they were thus disputing, a Caciz, or Doctor of the
Law, joined company with them, having made the same complaint concerning the
Mosquees, how little they were frequented, and how cold was grown the devotion
of the People. I have taken my measures, said he, and if in two years Mahomet
comes not in Person to visit the Congregations of the Faithful, who acknowledge
him for God's true Prophet, I will certainly look out for some other Religion.
Xavier took pity on the folly of the Caciz, and endeavored all he could to
convert him at that instant from Mahometanism; but he could not prevail upon an
obstinate mind blinded with the opinion of its own reason; and therefore the
Father acquies'd in the Decrees of that Providence, which hasfix'd the times
and revolutions, for the conversion of In^idels and Sinners.

Having left Melinda, He passes over to Socotora; his opinion concerning that
People.
where they continued but few days, and still coasting Africa, they cast
Anchor at Socotora, which is beyond Cape Guardafu, and over against the
Straight of Mecca. The Moors of that Country, call it the Isle of Amazons, and
the reason they allege, is because it is governed by Women. The Inhabitants
believe their Isle to be the Earthly Paradise; which notwithstanding, there is
scarcely to be found in all the World, a spot of ground less deserving that
glorious Title. The Air is in a perpetual ^ultry heat, the Soil is dry and
barren; and excepting only for the Aloes which is there produced, and is indeed
the best, which grows in those Eastern Parts, even the name of Socotora would
not be mentioned. It Is not certainly known what Religion they prosess, so
monstrous is their Belief. They hold from the Saracens the Worship of Mahomet,
from the Jews the use of Circumcision and Sacrifices, and yet give themselves
the name of Christians. The Males bear the name of some or other of the
Apostles, the most part of the Women are called Mary, and yet they have no
knowledge of Baptism. They adore the Cross, and hang it in little about their
necks. They chiefly venerate St. Thomas; and it is an ancient Tradition amongst
them, that this Holy Apostle in going to the Indies, was cast by a Tempest on
their Coast: that being come ashore, he Preached Jesus Christ to those of
Socotora, and that from the wreck of that Ship which brought him thither, they
built a Chapel in the middle of their Island.

The condition of these Islanders, sensibly afflicted Father Xavier; yet he
despaired not of reducing them to a right understanding of the Faith, because
as barbarous as they were, they still preserved some footsteps of Christianity
amongst them. Having no knowledge of their Tongue, which bears not the least
^esemblance to any of our European Languages, and is also wholly different from
the Ethiopian, and Arabique; at the first, he was constrained to testi^ie his
sorrow to them by dumb signs, for their ignorance and errors. Afterward,
whether it were, that some one amongst them understood the Portuguese, and
served as Interpreter to all the rest, or that counting from this very time, he
began to receive from above, the first fruits of the gift of Tongues, which was
so abundantly bestowed (...) him in the Indies, on sundry occasions, he spoke
to them concerning the necessity of Baptism, and let them know, that there was
no possibility of Salvation, without a sincere belief in Jesus Christ: but that
the Faith allowed of no mixture, and that to become Christians, they must of
necessity cease to be Jews or Mahometans.

His words made a wonderful impression on the Souls and Hearts of those
Barbarians: Some of them made him presents of their wild Fruits, in token of
their good will; others offered him their Children to be Baptized; All promised
him to receive Baptism themselves, and to lead the Life of true Christians, on
condition he would remain with them. But when they beheld the Portuguese Galeon
ready to depart, they ran in crowds to the Waterside, and besought the Holy
man with tears in their eyes, not to forsake them.

So moving a Spectacle wrought compassion in Xavier, he was earnest with the
Viceroy for leave to stay upon the Isle, at least till the arrival of the
Vessels, which he had left at Mozambique. But he could obtain no part of his
request: and Sosa told him, that Heaven having designed him for the Indies, it
was to be wanting to his Vocation, if he endeavored this Exchange; and stopped
in the beginning of his race. That his Zeal would find a more ample field,
wherein to exercise it self, than in Socotora; and People of better inclination
than those Islanders, naturally unconstant, and as ready to forsake the Faith,
as they were easy to receive it.

Xavier submitted to these reasons of the Viceroy, which on this occasion
seemed to interpret to him the good pleasure of Almighty God. Instantly they
hoisted Sail, but the Saint was pierced with sorrow to behold those poor
creatures, who followed him with their eyes, and held up their hands from a^ar
to him; while the Vessel was removing into the deep, he turned his head toward
them, breathing out profound sighs, and looking mournfully upon them. But that
he might leave nothing upon his conscience, to upbraid him concerning the
Socotorins, he engaged himself solemnly before Almighty God, to return to them,
so soon as possibly he could; or in case he could not, to procure for them some
Preachers of the Gospel, to instruct them in the way of their Salvation.

This last part of his Navigation was not long. He arriv^^ at Goa.
After having crossed the Sea of Arabia, and part of that which belongs to
India, the Fleet arrived at the Part of Goa, on the sixth of May, in the year
1542, being the thirteenth Month, since their setting out from the Port of
Lisbonne.

The Town of Goa, is situate on this side of the Ganges, in an Island bearing
the same name. It Is the Capital City of the Indies, the Seat of the Bishop and
the Viceroy, and the most considerable place of all the East for Traffic. It
had been built by the Moors, forty years before the Europeans had passed into
the Indies: and in the year 1510, Don Alphons^ d'Albuquerque, surnamed the
Great, took it from the Infidels, and subjected it to the Crown of Portugal.

At that time was verified the famous Prophecy of St. Thomas the Apostle, that
the Christian Faith which he had planted in diverse Kingdoms of the East, should
one day flourish there again; which very Prediction he left graven on a Pillar
of living Stone, for the memory of future Ages. The Pillar was not far distant
from the Walls of Meliapore, the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Coromandel; and
it was to be read in the Characters of the Country, That when the Sea, which
was forty Miles distant from the Pillar, should come up to the foot of it,
there should arrive in the Indies, white Men, and Foreigners, who should there
restore the true Religion.

The Infidels had laughed at this Prediction for a long time, not believing
that it would ever be accomplished, and indeed, looking on it as a kind of
impossibility that it should: Yet it was accomplished, and that so justly, that
when Don Vasco de Game set foot on the Indies, the Sea, which sometimes usurps
upon the Continent, and gains by little and little on the dry land, was by that
time risen to the Pillar, so as to bathe its lower parts.

Yet it may be truly said, that the Prophecy of St. Thomas had not its full
effect, till after the coming of Father Xavier; according to another prediction
of that holy Man Peter de Couillan, a Religious of the Trinity, who going to
the Indies with Vasco de Gama, in quality of his Ghostly Father, was Martyred
by the Indians on the seventh of July 1497, forty three years before the
beginning of the Society of Jesus, who being pierced through with Arrows, while
he was shedding his Blood for Christ, distinctly pronounced these following
words. In few years there shall be bor^ in the Church of God, a new Religious
Order of Clergymen, which shall bear the name of Jesus: and one of its first
Fathers, conducted by the Spirit of God, shall pass into the most remote
Countries of the East Indies, the greatest part of which shall embrace the
Orthodox Faith, through the Ministry of this Evangelical Preacher.

This is related by Iuan de Figueras Carpi, in his History of the Order of the
Redemption of Captives, from the Manuscripts of the Trinity Convent in
Lisbonne, and the Memoirs of the King of Portugal's Library.

After Xavier was landed, he went immediately to the Hospital, and there took
his Lodging, notwithstanding the instances of the Viceroy, who was desirous to
have had him in his Palace. But he would not begin his Missionary Function,
till he had paid his respects to the Bishop of Goa; whose name was Iuan d'
Albuquerque, of the Order of St. Francis, a most excellent person, and one of
the most virtuous Prelates which the Church has ever had.

The Father having informed him of the reasons for which his Holiness and the
King of Portugal had sent him to the Indies, He visits the Bish^p of the Indies.
presented to him the Briefs of Pope Paul the Third, at the same time declaring
to him, that he pretended not to use them, without his approbation and good
liking: After this, he cast himself at his Feet, and desired his Blessing.

The Prelat, edified with the modesty of the Father, and struck with that
venerable Air of Sanctity which appeared in his Countenance, took him up
immediately, and embraced him with great tenderness. Having often kissed the
Briefs, he restored them to the Father, with these words, An Apostolical Legate,
sent from the Vicar of Jesus Christ, has no need of receiving his Mission from
any other hand: Use freely that power, which the holy Seat has conferred upon
you: and rest assured, that if the Episcopal Authority be needful to maintain,
it shall never be wanting to you.

From that moment they contracted a most sacred friendship, whose Union was so
strict, that ever after, they seemed to have but one Heart, and one Soul:
Insomuch that Father Xavier undertook not any thing, without consulting the
Bishop first; and the Bishop on his side, imparted all his designs to Father
Xavier: and it is almost incredible, how much this holy Correspondence,
contributed to the Salvation of Souls, and exaltation of the Faith.

Before we pass farther, The estate of Religion in the Indies at his arrival.
it is of consequence to know the estate of Religion at that time in the Indies.
It Is true, that according to the Prophecy of St. Thomas, they who discovered
the East Indies, had new planted Christianity in some parts of them, where all
was in a manner quite forgotten. But Ambition and Avarice, in short time after,
cooled the zeal of these new Conquerours; instead of extending the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, and of gaining Souls to him, they thought of nothing more, than
of enlarging their Dominion, and enriching themselves. It happened also, that
many Indians newly converted to the Faith, being neither cultivated by wholesome
Instructions, nor edified by good Examples, forgot insensibly their Baptism,
and returned to their ancient Superstitions.

And if any amongst them kept con^tant to his Christianity, and declared
himself a Believer, the Mahometans, who were uppermost in many places, along
the Coast, and very wealthy, persecuted him with great cruelty, without any
opposition on the part of the Portuguese Governor or Magistrates. Whether the
Power of Portugal, were not yet sufficiently established, or that Interest was
predominant over Justice and Religion. This cruel usage deterred the new
Christians from professing Jesus Christ, and was the reason, that amongst the
Infidels, all thoughts of Conversion were laid aside.

But what yet appears more wonderful, the Portuguese themselves lived more like
Idolaters than Christians. For to speak somewhat more particularly of their
corrupt manners, according to the relation which was sent to King John the
Third of Portugal, from the Indies, by a Man in power, and worthy of belief:
some few Months before the arrival of Father Xavier, every Man kept as many
Mistresses as he pleased, and maintained them openly in his own House, even in
the quality of lawful Wives. They bought Women, or took them away by force,
either for their Service, or to make Money of them. Their Masters taxed them at
a certain Sum by the day, and for fault of payment, inflicted on them all sorts
of punishment: Insomuch, that those unhappy creatures not being able sometimes
to work out the daily rate imposed on them, were forced upon the infamous
traffic of their Bodies, and become public prostitutes, to content the
Avarice of their Masters.

Justice was sold at the Tribunals, and the most enormous crimes escaped from
punishment, when the Criminals had wherewithal to corrupt their Judges.

All methods for heaping up Money, were accounted lawful, how indirect soever,
and Extortion was publicly professed. Murder was reckoned but a venial
trespass, and was boasted as a piece of bravery.

The Bishop of Goa, to little purpose, threatened them with the wrath of Heaven,
and the thunder of Excommunications: No dam was sufficient for such a Deluge,
their Hearts were hardened against Spiritual Threatening and Anathema's. Or to
speak more properly, the deprivation of Sacraments was no punishment to such
wicked wretches, who were glad to be rid of them.

The use of Confessions, and the Communion, were in a manner abolished; and if
any one by chance, was struck with a remorse of Conscience, and desired to
reconcile himself to God, at the foot of a Priest, he was constrained to steal
to his Devotions by night, to avoid the scandal to his Neighbor.

So strange a depravation of manners, proceeded from these causes. Its rise was
taken from the license of Arms, which permit, and almost authorize the greatest
disorders in a conquered Country. The Pleasures of Asia, and the Commerce of
Infidels, aided not a little to debauch the Portuguese, as starched and
regular, as they naturally are. The want of spiritual Directors, contributed
largely to this growing mischief.

There were not four Preachers in all the Indies: nor any one Priest without
the Walls of Goa: Insomuch, that in many fortified places whole years were
passed, without hearing a Sermon or a Mass.

Behold a Draught, not unresembling the face of Christianity in this new World,
when Father Xavier arrived in it.

The Author of the Relation from whence mine is copied, seems to have had some
kind of foresight of his coming: for, in the conclusion of his Memorial, he
prays Almighty God, and ^arnestly desires the King of Portugal, to send some
holy Man to the Indies, who might reform the manners of the Europeans, by his
Apostolic Instructions, and his exemplary Virtues.

As for the Gentiles, the life they led, resembled that of Beasts, rather than
of Men. Uncleanness was risen to the last excess amongst them; and the least
corrupt were those who had no Religion. The greatest part of them adored the
Devil under an obscene Figure, and with Ceremonies which modesty forbids to
mention: Some amongst them changed their Deity every day, and the first living
Creature, which happened to meet them in the Morning, was the Object of their
Worship; not excepting even Dogs or Swine: In this they were uniform, that they
all offered bloody Sacrifices to their Gods; and nothing was more common, than
to see bleeding Infants on the Altars, slaughtered by the hands of their own
Parents.

Such manifold abominations, inflamed the Zeal of Father Xavier: He wished
himself able at the same time, to have applied remedies to them all; yet
thought himself obliged to begin with the household of Faith, according to the
precept of St. Paul; that is to say, with the Christians; and amongst them he
singl'd out the Portuguese, whose example was like to be most prevalent with
the Baptized Indians. Behold, in what manner he attempted this great enterprise
of Reformation.

To call down the Blessing of Heaven on this difficult employment, His first
work at Goa.
he consecrated the greatest part of the night to Prayers, and allowed himself
at the most but four hours of Sleep: and even this little repose, was commonly
disturbed. For lodging in the Hospital, and lying always near the sick, as his
custom had been at Mozambique, his slumber was broken by their least complaint,
and he failed not to rise to their relief.

He returned to his Prayers at break of day; after which he celebrated Mass: He
employed the forenoon in the Hospipitals; particularly in that of the Lepers,
which is in one of the Suburbs of Goa. He embraced those miserable Creatures
one after the other; and distributed amongst them, those Alms which he had been
begging for them, from Door to Door. After this he visited the Prisons, and
dealt amongst them the same effects of Charity.

In coming back, he made a turn about the Town, with his Bell in his hand, and
gave a loud Summons to the Fathers of Families, that, for the love of God, they
would send their Children and their Slaves to Catechism.

The holy Man was convinced in his Heart, that if the Portuguese Youth were
well instructed in the principles of Religion, and formed betimes to the
practice of good Life* Christianity, in a little time, would be seen to revive
in Goa, but in case the Children grew up without instruction or discipline,
there was no remaining hope, that they who sucked in Impiety, and Vice, almost
with their Milk, should ever become sincere Christians.

The little Children, (...)
gathered together in Crowds about him, whether they came of their own accord,
through a Natural Curiosity, or that their Parents sent them, out of the
respect which they already had for the holy Man, howsoever vicious themselves.
He led them to the Church, and there expounded to them, the Apostles Creed, the
Commandments of God, and all the practices of Devotion, which are in use
amongst the Faithful.

These tender Plants, received easily the impressions which the Father made on
them, and it was through these little Babes that the Town began to change its
Face. For by daily hearing the Man of God, they became modest and devout: their
Modesty and Devotion, was a silent censure of that debauchery which appeared in
persons of riper age: Sometimes they even reproved their Fathers, with a
liberty which had nothing of childish in it, and their reproofs put the most
dissolute Libertines to the blu^h.

Xavier then proceeded to public Preaching, whether, all the people slock'd;
and, to the end that the Indians might understand, as well as the Portuguese,
he affected to speak that Language, in a gross and clownish dialect, which
passed at that time amongst the Natives of the Country. It was immediately
seen, what power a Preacher animated by the Spirit of God, had over the Souls
o^ perverted men. The most scandalous Sinners, struck with the horror of their
Crimes, and the fear of eternal Punishment, were the first who came to
Confession: Their example took away from others the shame of confessing;
insomuch that every one now strove who should be foremost, to throw himself at
the Fathers Feet, knocking their Breasts, and bitterly lamenting their offenses.

The fruits of Penitence, accompanying these Tears, were the certain proofs of
a sincere Conversion. They cancelled their unlawful Bonds and Covenants of
Extortion; they made restitution of their ill gotten Goods; they set at liberty
their Slaves, whom they had oppressed, or had acquired unjustly; and lastly,
turned away their Concubines. Whom they were unwilling to possess by a lawful
marriage.

The Saint acted with the Concubinarians, His industry to gain the
Concubinarians.
almost in the same manner, as our Savior dealt with the Publicans and
Harlots. Far from treating them severely, the deeper they were plunged in that
darling Vice, the more tenderly he seemed to use them. On all occasions he
declared himself their Friend; he made them frequent visits, without fear of
being upbraided with so infamous a Conversation. He invited himself sometimes
to eat with them; and then assuming an Air of gayety, he desired the Master to
bring down the Children to bear him company. When he had a little commended
their prettiness, he asked to see their Mother, and showed her the same
Countenance, as if he had taken her for an honest Woman. If she were beautiful
or well shaped, he praised her, and said, she looked like a Portuguese: After
which, in private Conversation, ^ou have, said he to the Master, a fair Slave,
who well deserves to be your Wife. But if she were a swarthy, ugly Indian, Good
God! he cried out, what a Monster do you keep within your doors! and how are
you able to endure the sight of her? Such words, spoken in all appearance,
without design, had commonly their full effect: The Keeper married her, whom
the Saint had commended, and turned off the others.

This so sudden a change of manners, was none of those transient sits of
Devotion, which pass away, almost as soon as they are kindled; Piety was
established in all places; and they who formerly came to confession once a
year, to speak the best of it, now performed it regularly once a month. They
were all desirous of confessing themselves to Father Xavier, so that Writing
from Goa to Rome on that Subject, he said, that if it had been possible for
him, to have been at once in ten places, he should not have wanted for
emplo^ment. His Catechizing having had that wonderful success which we have
mentioned, the Bishop Don John d' Albuquerque ordained, that from thence
forward, the Children should be taught the Christian Doctrine, in all the
Churches of the Town. The Gentlemen and Merchants applied themselves to the
regulation of their Families, and banishment of vice. They gave the Father
considerable Sums of Money, which he distributed in their presence, in the
Hospitals and Prisons. The Viceroy accompanied the Saint thither once a week,
to hear the complaints of the Prisoners and to relieve the Poor. This Christian
practice was so pleasing to the King of Portugal, John the Third, that
afterward he writ to Don John Don de Castro, Governor of the Indies, expressly
ordering him, to do that once a month, which Don Martin Alphonso de Sosa never
failed of doing every week; in short, the Portuguese of Goa, had gained such an
habitude of good Life, and such an universal change of manners had obtained
amongst them, that they seemed another sort of People.

This was the state of affairs, He is told of the C^ast of Fish^ry, and goes
thither. This Coast is called in the Maps La Pescaria.
when Michael Vaz, Vicar General of the Indies, a Man of rare virtue, and
wonderful zeal for the propagation of the Faith, gave Xavier to understand,
that on the Oriental Coast, which lies extended from Cape Comorin, to the Isle
of Manar, and is called the Coast of Fishery, there were certain People called
Paravas, that is to say, Fishers, who had caused themselves to be Baptized some
time since, on occasion of succors which had been given them by the Portuguese
against the Moors, by whom they were cruelly oppressed: That these People had
nothing more of Christianity, than Baptism, and the name, for want of Pastors
to instruct them; and that it would be a work well-pleasing in the sight of God
to accomplish their Conversion. He concealed not from him, that the Land was
barren, and so destitute of the conveniences of life, that no stranger was
willing to settle there. That interest alone drew the Merchants thither, in the
season of Pearl-Fishing, and otherwise the heats were insupportable.

There could not have been made to Xavier a Proposition more according to his
hearts desire. He offered himself without the least hesitation, to go and
instruct that People: and he did it so much the more freely, because his
presence was no longer so necessary at Goa, where Piety was now grown into a
habit, by a settled form of five months standing.

Having received the Benediction of the Bishop, he embarked about the midst of
October, in the year 1542, in a Galiot, which carried the new Captain of
Comorin; and took with him two young Ec^l^s^asticks of Goa, who had a tolerable
insight into the Language of the Malabars, which is spoken in the Coast of
Fishery. So^a offered to have furnished him with money ^or all his occasions:
But Apostolic men have no greater treasures than their Poverty, nor any fund
more certa^n than that of Providence. He accepted only a pair of Shoes, to
defend him in some measure from the burning Sands upon the Coasts; and, at
parting, desired the Viceroy to send him his two Companions, who were left
behind at Mozambique, so soon as they should arrive at Goa.

The Cape of Comorin, is at the distance of about six hundred Miles from Goa:
It Is a high Promontory, jutting out into the Sea, and facing the Isle of
Ceylan. The Father being there arrived, immediately fell in with a Village of
Idolaters. He could bear to go no farther, without Preaching the Name of Jesus
to the Gentiles. But all he could declare by the mouth of his Interpreters
signified nothing. And those Pagans plainly told him, that they could not
change their Faith, without consent of the Lord, of whom they held. Their
obstinacy, however, was of no long continuance, and that Omnipotence, which had
preordain'd Xavier to the Conversion of Idolaters, would not that his first
Labors should be unsuccessful.

A Woman of the Village had been three days in the pains of Childbirth; and
had endured great torments, He (...) Como^^.
without being eased, either by the Prayers of the Brachmans, or any natural
remedies. Xavier went to visit her, accompanied by one o^ his Interpreters. And
then it was, says he, in one of his Letters, that forgetting I was in a strange
Country, I began to call upon the name of the Lord; though at the same time, I
could not but remember, that all the Earth, is equally his, and all its
Inhabitants are (...) to him.

The Father expounded to the Sick Woman the Principles of our Faith; and
exhorted her to repose her trust in the God of the Christians. The Holy Ghost
who by her means had decreed to save that People, touched her inwardly;
insomuch, that being asked, if she believed in Jesus Christ? and if she desired
to be Baptized? ^he answered yes; and that she spoke from the bottom of her
heart. Xavier, then read the Gospel to her, and Baptized her: she was
immediately delivered of her Child, and perfectly recovered. ^his visible
Miracle immediately filled that poor Cabin, with astonishment and gladness. The
whole Family threw themselves at the Father's feet, and asked to be instructed:
and being sufficiently taught, not one amongst them but received Baptism. This
news ^^ing ^lown abroad, through all the Country, the chief of the place, had
the curiosity to see a person so wonderful in his Works, and in his Words. He
Preached to them the words of Eternal Life, and convinced their reason of the
truth of Christianity; But convinced though they were, they durst not as they
said, become Christians, without the permission of their Prince.

There was at that time, in the Village, an Officer; sent expressly from the
Prince, to collect a certain annual Tribute. Father Xavier went to see him, and
expounded so clearly to him, all the Law of Jesus Christ, that the Pagan
presently acknowledged, there was nothing in it which was ill; and after that,
gave leave to the Inhabitants to embrace it. There needed no more, to a people,
whom nothing but fear witheld from it; they all offered themselves to be
Baptized, and promised thenceforth to live in Christianity.

The Holy man, encouraged by so happy a beginning, He Labors in the salvation
of the Paravas.
followed his way with more cheerfulness; and came to Tutucurin, which is the
first Town belonging to the Paravas. He found in effect, that this People,
excepting only their Baptism, which they had received rather to shake off the
Moorish Yoke, than to subject themselves to that of Jesus Christ, were wholly
Infidels; and he declared to them the Mysteries of our Faith, of which before,
they had not received the least tincture. The two Churchmen who accompanied
him, served him in the nature of Interpreters: But Xavier reflecting within
himself, that these Churchmen frequently altered those things, which passed
through their mouths; and that our own words, when spoken by our selves, have
more vigor in them, bethought himself of finding some expedient, whereby to be
understood, without the assistance of another. The way he took was to get
together some People of the Country, who understood the Portuguese Language:
and to join them with the two Ecclesiastiques, who were knowing in the Malabar.
He consulted both Parties for many days together, and drudging at his business,
Translated into the Paravas tongue, the words of the sign of the Cross, the
Apostles Creed, the Commandments, the Lords Prayer, the Salutation of the
Angel, the Consiteor, the Salve Regina, and in sine, the whole Catechism.

The Translation being finished, the ^ather got without book, what he could of
it; and took his way about the Villages of the Coast, in number thirty, about
half of which were baptized, the rest Idolaters.

I went about, with my Bell in my hand, says he himself, and gathering together
all I met, both Men and Children, I instructed them in the Christian Doctrine:
The Children learnt it easily by heart, in the compass of a month, and when
they understood it, I charged them to teach it their Fathers and Mothers, all
of their own Family, and even their Neighbors.

On Sundays I assembled the Men and Women, His manner of teaching the Christian
faith.
little Boys and Girls in the Chapel; all came to my appointment, with an
incredible joy, and most ardent desire to hear the Word of God* I began with
the confessing God to be one in nature, and trine in Persons. I afterward
repeated, distinctly, and with an audible voice, the Lords-Prayer, the
Angelical Salutation, and the Apostles Creed. All of them together repeated
after me; and it is hardly to be imagined, what pleasure they took in it. This
being done, I repeated the C^eed singly; and insisting on every particular
Article, asked if they certainly believed it? They all protested to me with
loud cries, and their hands across their breasts, that they firmly believed it.
My practice is to make them repeat (...) Creed oftener than the other Prayers;
and I declare to them, at the same time, that they who believe the Contents of
it are true Christians.

From the Creed I pass to the Ten Commandments, and give them to understand,
that the Christian Law is comprised in those ten Precepts, that he who keeps
them all according to his Duty, is a good Christian; and that Eternal Life is
decreed to him: That on the contrary, whoever violates one of these
Commandments, is a bad Christian, and that he shall be damned eternally, in
case he repent not of his Sin: Both the new Christians and the Pagans admire
our Law, as Holy, and Reasonable, and consistent with it self.

Having done as I told you, my custom is to repeat with them, the Lords Prayer,
and the Angels Salutation. Once again we recite the Creed, and at every
Article, besides the Pater noster and the Ave Maria, we intermingle some short
Prayer: for having pronounced aloud the first Article, I begin thus, and they
say after me, Jesus, thou Son of the living God, give me the Grace to believe
firmly, this first Article of thy Faith, and with that intention we offer thee
that Prayer, of which thou thy self art Author. We add, Holy Mary, Mother of
our Lord Jesus Christ, obtain for us, from thy beloved Son, to believe this
Article, without any doubt concerning it. The same method is observed in all
the other Articles, and almost in the same manner, we run over the Ten
Commandments. When we have jointly repeated the first Precept, which is, To
love God, we pray thus: O Jesu Christ, thou Son of the living God, grant us thy
Grace to love thee above all things! and immediately after we say the Lords
Prayer: Then, immediately we subjoin, O holy Mary, Mother of Jesus, obtain for
us, from thy Son, that we may have the Grace to keep this first Commandment.
After which we say the Ave Maria. We observe the same method through the other
nine Commandments, with some little variation, as the matter requires it.

These are the things which I accustom them to beg of God, in the common
Prayers, omitting not sometimes to assure them, that if they obtain the thing
for which they pray, even that is a means for them to obtain other things more
amply than they could demand them.

I oblige them all to say the Con^iteor, but principally those who are to
receive Baptism, whom I also enjoin to say the Belief. At every Article I
demand of them, if they believe it without any scruple, and when they have
assured me that they do, I commonly make them an Exhortation, which I have
composed in their own language; being an Epitome of the Christian Faith, and of
the necessary duties incumbent on us in order to our Salvation. In conclusion,
I baptize them, and shut up all, in singing the Salve Regina, to implore the
assistance of the blessed Virgin.

It Is evident, by what we have already said, concerning the instruction of the
Parava^, that Xavier had not the gi^t of Tongues, when he began to teach them.
But it appears also, that after he had made the Translation, which cost him so
much labor, he both understood and spoke the Malabar Tongue, whither he had
acquired it by his own pains, or that God had imprinted the Species of it in
his Mind, after a supernatural manner. It Is at least probable, that being in
the Indies, when he studied any Tongue, the holy Spirt seconded his
application, and was in some sort his Master. For it is constantly believed,
that in a very little time, he learnt the most difficult languages; and by the
report of many persons, spoke them so naturally, that he could not have been
taken for a Foreigner.

Father Xavier having for the space of a month, He estab^shes C^techists and
Teachers of the Faith to supply his pla^^.
instructed the Inhabitants of one Village, in the manner above said, before he
went farther, called together the most intelligent amongst them, and gave them
in writing what he had taught, to the end, that as Masters of the rest, on
Sundays and Saints days, they might congregate the people, and cause them to
repeat, according to his Method, that which they had learnt formerly.

He committed to these Catechists, (who in their own Tongue are called
Canacopoles) the care of the Churches, which he caused to be built in peopled
places; and recommended to them the ornament of those Sacred Buildings, as far
as their poverty would allow. But he was not willing to impose this task on
them, without some kind of Salary; and therefore obtained from the Viceroy of
the Indies, a certain Sum for their subsistence, which was charged upon the
annual Tribute, payable to the Crown of Portugal, from the Inhabitants of that
Coast.

It Is hardly to be expressed, The fruit of his labors on the Coast of Fishery.
what a Harvest of Souls was reaped from his endeavors; and how great was the
fervor of these new Christ^ans. The holy Man, writing to the Fathers at Rome,
confesses himself, that he wanted words to tell it. He adds, That the multitude
of those who had received Baptism, was so vast, that with the labor of
continual Christnings, he was not able to lift up his Arms: and that his Voice
often failed him, in saying so many times over and over, the Apostles Creed,
and the Ten Commandments, with a short instruction which he always made
concerning the duties of a true Christian before he baptized those who were of
Age.

The Infants alone, who died after Baptism, amounted according to his account
to above a thousand. They who lived, and began to have the use of Reason, were
so affected with the things of God, and so covetous of knowing all the
Mysteries of Faith, that they scarcely gave the Father time to take a little
nourishment, or a short repose. They sought after him every minute, and he was
sometimes forced to hide himself from them, to gain the leisure of saying his
Prayers, and his Breviary.

By the administration of these Children, He ma^es use of Children to (...) the
(...).
who were so ^ervently devout, he performed diverse extraordinary works, even
many of those miraculous Cures, which it pleased God to operate by his means.
The Coast of Fishery was never so full of Diseases, as when the Father was
there. It seemed, as he himself has expressed it in a Letter, that God sent
those Distempers amongst that People, to draw them to him almost in their own
despite. For coming to recover on an instant, and against all humane
appearance, so soon as they had received Baptism, or invoked the name of Jesus
Christ, they clearly saw the difference betwixt the God of the Christians and
the Pagods, which is the name given in the Indies, both to the Temples and the
Images of theirs false Gods.

No one fell sick amongst the Gentiles, but had immediate recourse to Father
Xavier. As it was impossible for him to attend them all, or to be in many
places at the same time, he sent there Christian Children where he could not go
himself. In going from him one took his Chapelet, another his Crucifix, a third
his Reliquiary, and all being animated with a lively Faith, dispersed
themselves through the Towns and Villages. There gathering about the sick as
many people as they could assemble, they repeated often, the Lords Prayer, the
Creed, the Commandments, and all they had learnt by heart of the Christian
Faith; which being done, they asked the Sick, If he believed unfeignedly in
Jesus Christ, and if he desired to be baptized? When he had answered, ^es, they
touched him with the Chaplet, or Cruci^ix belonging to the Father; and he was
immediately cured.

One day, while Xavier was preaching the Mysteries of Faith to a great
Multitude, some came to bring him word from Manapar, that one of the most
considerable persons of that place, was possessed by the Devil, desiring the
Father to come to his relief. The Man of God thought it unbecoming of his Duty,
to break off the Instruction he was then making. He only called to him some of
those young Christians, and gave them a Cross which he wore upon his Breast;
after which he sent them to Manapar with Orders to drive away the Evil Spirit.

They were no sooner arrived there, than the possessed person fell into an
extraordinary fury, with wonderful contorsions of his Limbs, and hideous
yellings. The little Children, far from being terrified, as usually Children
are, made a ring about him, singing the Prayers of the Church. After which they
compelled him to kiss the Cross; and at the same moment, the Devil departed out
of him. Many Pagans there present, visibly perceiving the Virtue of the Cross,
were converted on the instant, and bec^me afterward devout Christians.

These young Plants, whom Xavier employed on such occasions, The Zeal of the
Children against Id^ls and Idolaters.
were in perpetual Disputations with the Gentiles, and broke in pieces as many
Idols as they could get into their power: and sometimes burnt them, throwing
their Ashes into the Air. When they discovered any, bearing the name of
Christianity, and yet keeping a Pagod in reserve to adore in secret, they
reproved them boldly; and when those rebukes were of no effect, they advertised
the holy Man, to the end, he might apply some stronger remedy. Xavier went
often in their company, to make a search in those suspected Houses; and if he
discovered any Idols they were immediately destroyed.

Being informed, that one who was lately baptized, committed Idolatry sometimes
in private, and that the admonitions which he had received were useless, he
bethought himself to frighten him; and in his presence commanded the Children
to set Fire to his House: that thereby he might be given to understand, how the
the worshipers of Devils, deserved eternal burning like the Devils: they ran
immediately to their task, taking the Command in a literal sense; which was not
Xaviers intention: But the effect of it was, that the Infidel detesting, and
renouncing his Idolatry, gave up his Pagods to be consumed by Fire, which was
all the design of the holy Man.

Another In^idel was more unhappy; (...)
He was one of the first rank in Manapar: a Man naturally Violent and Brutal.
Xavier, one day going to visit him, desired him, in courteous words, that he
would listen to what he had to say to him, concerning his eternal welfare. The
Barbarian vouchsafed not so much as to give him the hearing, but rudely thrust
him out of his House, saying, That if ever he went to the Christians Church, he
was content they should shut him out: Few days after he was assaulted by a
Troop of armed Men, who designed to kill him: All he could do, was to disingage
himself from them, and fly away. Seeing at a distance, a Church open, he made
to it, as fast as he could run; with his Enemies at his heels pursuing him. The
Christians, who were assembled for their exercises of Devotion, alarmed at the
loud cries they heard, and fearing the Idolaters were coming to plunder the
Church, immediately shut their Doors; insomuch that he, who hoped for safety in
a holy place, fell into the hands of Murderers, and was assassinated by them;
without question by a Decree of the Divine Justice, which revenged the Saint,
and suffered the Wretch to be struck with that imprecation which he had wished
upon himself.

These Miracles which Xavier wrought by the means of Children, raised an
Admiration of him, both amongst Christians and Idolaters: but so exemplary a
punishment, caused him to be respected by all the World: and even amongst the
Brachmans there was not one, who did not honor him. As it will fall in our way
to make frequent mention of those Idol-Priests, it will not be from our
purpose, to give the Reader a description of them.

The Brachmans are very considerable amongst the Indians, The Original, and
Character of the Brachmans..
both for their Birth, and their Employment. According to the ancient Fables of
the Indies, their Original is from Heaven. And it is the common Opinion, that
the Blood of the Gods is running in their Veins. But to understand how they
were born, and from what God descended, it is necessary to know the History of
the Gods of that Country, which in short, is this.

The first, and Lord of all the others is Parabrama; that is to say, a most
perfect Substance, who has his Being from himself, and who gives Being to the
rest. This God being a Spirit free from matter, and desirous to appear once
under a sensible Figure, became Man; by the only desire which he had, to show
himself, he conceived a Son, who came out at his Mouth, and was called Maiso.
He had two others after him, one of them whose name was Visnu, was born out of
his Breast, the other called Brama, out^ of his Belly. Before he returned to
his invisibility, he assigned Habitations and Employments to his three
Children. He placed the eldest in the first Heaven, and gave him an absolute
Command over the Elements, and mixed Bodies. He lodged Visnu beneath his elder
Brother, and established him the Judge of Men, the Father of the Poor, and the
Protector of of the Unfortunate. Brama had for his Inheritance the third
Heaven, with the superintendance of Sacrifices, and other Ceremonies of
Religion. These are the three Deities which the Indians represent by one Idol,
with three Heads growing out of one Body, with this mysterious signification,
that they all proceed from the same principle. By which it may be inferred,
that in former times they have heard of Christianity; and that their Religion
is an imperfect Imitation, or rather a Corruption of ours.

They say that Visnu has descended a thousand times on earth, and every time
has changed his shape; sometimes appearing in the figure of a Beast, sometimes
of a Man; which is the Original of their Pagods, of whom they relate so many
Fables.

They add, that Brama, having likewise a desire of Children, made himself
visible, and begot the Brachmans, whose Race has infinitely multiplied: The
People believe them Demigods, as poor and miserable as they are. They likewise
imagine them to be Saints, because they lead a hard and solitary life; having
very often no other Lodging than the hollow of a Tree, or a Cave, and sometimes
living exposed to the Air on a bare Mountain, or in a Wilderness, suffering all
the hardships of the weather, keeping a profound silence, fasting a whole year
together, and making profession of eating nothing which has had Life in it.

But after all, there was not perhaps a more wicked nation under the Canopy of
Heaven. The fruit of those austerities which they practice in the desert, is to
abandon themselves in public, to the most brutal pleasures of the Flesh,
without either shame or remorse of conscience. For they certainly believe, that
all things, how abominable soever, are lawful to be done, provided they are
suggested to them, by the light which is within them. And the People are so
(...) with them, that they believe (...) become holy, by partaking in (...)
^^mes, or by suffering any outrage (...) them.

On the other side, they are the greatest Impostours in the world; their talent
consists in inventing new Fables every day, and making them pass amongst the
vulgar for wonderful mysteries. One of their cheats is to persuade the simple,
that the Pagods eat like men; and to the end they may be presented with good
cheer* they make their Gods of a Gigantique figure, and are sure to endow them
with a prodigious paunch. If those offerings, with which they maintain their
Families come to fail, they denounce to the People that the offended Pagods
threaten the Country with some dreadful judgment, or that their Gods in
displeasure, will forsake them, because they are suffered to die of hunger

The Doctrine of these Brachmans is nothing better than their Life: one of their
grossest errors is to believe that (...) have in them, somewhat of Sacred and
Divine. That happy is the man, who can be sprinkled over, with the ashes of a
Cow, burnt by the hand of a Brachman; but thrice happy he, who in dying, lays
hold of a Cow's tail, and expires with it betwixt his hands. For thus assisted,
the Soul departs out of the Body purified, and sometimes returns into the Body
of a Cow. That such a favor, notwithstanding, is not conferred but on Heroic
Souls, who contemn life, and dye generously, either by casting themselves
headlong from a Precipice, or leaping into a kindled Pile, or throwing
themselves under the Holy Chariot-wheels, to be crushed to death by the Pagods,
while they are carried in Triumph about the Town.

We are not to wonder, after this, that the Brachmans cannot endure the
Christian Law; and that they make use of all their credit, and their cunning to
destroy it, in the Indies. Being favored by Princes, infinite in number, and
strongly united amongst themselves, they succeed in all they undertake, and as
being great Zealots for their ancient superstitions, and most obstinate in
their Opinions, it is not ^asie to convert them.

Father Xavier, He treats with the Brachmans.
who saw how large a Progress the Gospel had made amongst the People, and that
if there were no Brachmans in the Indies, there would consequently be no
Idolaters, in all those vast Provinces of Asia; spared no labor to reduce that
perverse Generation, to the true knowledge of Almighty God. He conversed often
with those of that Religion, and one day found a favorable occasion of
treating with them: passing by a Monastery, where above two hundred Brachmans
lived together, he was visited by some of the chiefest, who had the curiosity
to see a man, whose Reputation was so universal. He received them with a
pleasing countenance, according to his custom, and having engaged them by
little and little, in a discourse concerning the eternal happiness of the Soul;
he desired them to satisfy him what their Gods commanded them to do, in order
to it after death. They looked a while on one another, without answering. At
length a Brachman, who seemed to be fourscore years of age, took the business
upon himself, and said in a grave tone, that two things brought a Soul to
glory, and made him a companion to the Gods; the one was to abstain from the
murder of a Cow, the other to give Alms to the Brachmans. All of them
confirmed the Old man's answer, by their approbation, and applause, as if it
had been an Oracle given from the mouths of their Gods themselves.

Father Xavier took compassion on this their miserable blindness, and the tears
came into his eyes. He rose on the sudden, (for they had been all sitting) and
distinctly repeated, in an audible tone, the Apostles Creed, and the ten
Commandments, making a pause at the end of every Article, and briefly
expounding it, in their own language, after which he declared to them, what
were Heaven and Hell, and by what actions the one and other were deserved.

The Brachmans who had never heard any thing of Christianity before, and had
been listening to the Father with great admiration, rose up, as soon as he had
done speaking, and ran to embrace him, acknowledging that the God of the
Christians was the true God, since his Law was so conformable to the Principles
of our inward light. Every one of them proposed diverse questions to him; if the
Soul were immortal, or that it perished with the Body, and in case that the
Soul died not, at what part of the Body it went out, if in our sleep we dreamt
we were in a far Country, or conversed with an absent Person, whether the Soul
went not out of the Body for that time; of what color God was, whether black
or white, their Doctors being divided on that point: the white Men maintaining
he was of their color, the black of theirs: the greatest part of the Pagods
for that reason being black.

The Father answered all their questions, in a manner to suitable to their
gross understanding, which was ignorant alike of things divine and natural,
that they were highly satisfied with him. Seeing them instructed and disposed
in this sort, he exhorted them to embrace the Faith of Jesus Christ, and gave
them to understand, that the truth being made known to them, ignorance could no
longer secure them from eternal Punishment.

But what victory can Truth obtain, over Souls which find their interest in
following Error; and who make profession of deceiving the common people? They
answered (said the Saint in one of his Letters) that which many Christians
answer at this day, what will the world say of us, if they see us change? and
after that, what will become of our Families, whose only subsistence is from
the offerings which are made to the Pagods? Thus humane interest, and worldly
considertions, made the knowledge of the truth serve only to their greater
condemnation.

Not long afterward, The conference of Xavier with a Famous Brachman.
Xavier had another conference with a Brachman who lived in the nature of an
Hermit: He passed for the Oracle of the Country, and had been instructed in
his youth, at one of the most famous Academies of the East. He was one of those
who was knowing in their most hidden Mysteries, which are never entrusted by
the Brachmans but to a certain select number of their Wise men. Xavier, who had
heard speak of him, was desirous to see him, and he on his side, was as
desirous to see Xavier. The intention of the Saint was to try, in bringing over
this Brachman, if he could gain the rest, who were proud of being his Disciples.

After the first civilities which commonly pass betwixt two men, who mutually
covet an acquaintance, and know each other by reputation, the discourse ^ell
upon Religion; and the Brachman found in himself at the very first, so great an
inclination for Xavier, that he could not conceal from him those secrets, which
a religious Oath had bound him never to disclose to any. He confessed plainly to
him, that the Idols were Devils, and that there was only one God, Creator of
the world, and that this God alone deserved the adoration of men; that those
who held the rank of wisdom amongst the Brachmans, solemnized the Sunday in his
honor, as a holy day, and that day they only said this Prayer, O God I adore
thee at this present, and for ever. That they pronounced those words softly,
for fear of being overheard, and to preserve the Oath which they had made, to
keep them secret. In ^in^, said he, it is to be read in our ancient Writings,
that all the false Religions should one day cease, and the whole world should
observe one only Law.

The Brachman having disclosed these Mysteries to Father Xavier, desired him in
his turn, to reveal to him, what was most mysterious in the Christian Law; and
to engage him to deal the more freely with him, and without the least disguise,
swore, that he would inviolably, and for ever, keep the secret. I am so far,
said the Father, from obliging you to silence, that I will inform you of
nothing you desire to know, but on condition that you shall publish in all
places what I tell you. The Brachman having given him his word, he began to
instruct him, by these words of Jesus Christ, He who will believe, and be
baptized, shall be saved. This he expounded to him at large; at the same time
declaring to him, how Baptism was necessary to Salvation: and passing from one
Article of Faith to another, he placed the truth of the Gospel in so
advantageous a light before him, that the Brachman declared upon the place, he
would become a Christian, provided he might be so in secret; and that he might
have a Dispensation from some certain duties of Christianity.

This so wicked a disposition made him unworthy of the Grace of Baptism; he
remained unconverted. Notwithstanding which, he desired to have in writing, the
Apostles Creed, together with our Savior's words, which had beeen expounded to
him.

He saw Father Xavier a second time, and told him he had dreamt he was
baptized, and that afterward he became his Companion, and that they traveled
together preaching the Gospel in far Countries: but this Dream had no effect,
and the Brachman would never promise to teach the people, that there was one
only God, Creator of the World, for fear, says he, that if he broke that Oath
which obliged him to secrecy, the Devil should punish him with death.

Thus the Master, though convinced, yet not submitting, He (...) diverse
Miracles.
though Scholars all stood out, and in the sequel, of so great a multitude of
Idol-Priests, not one embraced the Christian Doctrine from the Heart.
Nevertheless, Xavier in their presence wrought many Miracles which were capable
of converting them. Having casually met a poor Creature, all naked, and full of
Ulcers from Head to Foot, he washed him with his Hands, drank part of the Water
wherewith he had washed him, and prayed by him with wonderful ^ervency; when he
had ended his Prayer, the Flesh of the diseased person was immediately healed,
and appeared as clean as that of an Infant.

The process of the Saints Canonization, makes mention of four dead persons, to
whom God restored their life, at this time by the Ministry of his Servant. The
first was a Catechist, called Antonio Mirand^, who had been slung in the night,
by one of those venomous Serpents of the Indies, whose Stings are always
mortal. The second was a Child who fell into a Pit, and was drowned: The two
others were a young Man, and a Maid, whom a pestilential Fever had carried off,
after a short sickness.

But these Miracles, He declar^^ himself against the Brachmans.
which gave to the Father the name of Saint amongst the Christians, and caused
him to be called, The God of Nature amongst the Gentiles, had no other effect
upon the Brachmans than to harden their Hearts, and blind their Understandings.
Xavier, despairing of their Conversion, thought himself bound to publish all
their wicked Actions, and bring them into disrepute. And he performed it so
successfully, that those Men, who were had in veneration by the people, came to
be despised by all the World; insomuch, that even the Children laughed at them;
and publicly upbraided them with their Cheats. They began at first to threaten
the People, according to their custom, with the anger of their Pagods; but
seeing their menaces turned to scorn, they made use of another Arti^ice, to
regain their Credit.

What malice soever they harbored in their Hearts against Father Xavier, they
managed it so well, that to see their conduct, they might have been taken for
his Friends. They made him visits, desired him to have some kindness for them,
they gave him many Commendations: they presented him sometimes with Pearls and
Money. But the Father was inex^rable, exorable, and for their Presents, he
returned them, without so much as looking on them.

The decrying of those Idol-Priests, (...)
contributed not a little to the destruction of Idolatry, through all that
Coast. The life which Xavier led, contributed full as much. His Food, was the
same with that of the poorest people, Rice and Water. His Sleep was but three
hours at the most, and that in Fishers Cabin on the Ground: for he had soon
made away with the Matteress and Coverlet, which the Vic^roy had sent him from
Go^. The remainder of the night he passed with God, or with his Neighbor.

He owns, himself, that his labors were without intermission; and that he had
sunk under so great hardships, if God had not supported him. For to say nothing
of the Ministry of Preaching, and those other Evangelical Functions, which
employed him day and night; no quarrel was stirring, no difference on foot, of
which he was not chosen Umpire. And because those Barbarians, naturally
chole^ick, were frequently at odds, he appointed certain hours, for clearing up
their misunderstandings, and making Reconciliations. There was not any Man fell
sick, who sent not for him; and as there were always many, and for the most
part distant from each other, in the scattering Villages, his greatest sorrow
was, that he could not be present with them all. In the midst of all this
hurry, he enjoyed those Spiritual Refreshments and Sweets of Heaven, which God
only bestows on Souls, who regard nothing but the Cross: And the excess of
those delights was such* that he was often forced to desire the Divine Goodness
to moderate them: according to what himself testifies in a Letter to his Father
Ignatius* though written in general terms, and in the third person.

Having related what he had performed in the Coast of the Fishery, I have no
more to add ( says he) concerning this Country, but only that they, who come
hither, to labor in the Salvation of Idolaters, receive so much Consolation
from above, that if there be a perfect Joy on Earth, it is that they feel. He
goes on, I have sometimes heard a Man saying thus to God, O my Lord, give me
not so much comfort in this life; or if, by an excess of Mercy, thou wilt heap
it on me, take me to thy self, and make me partaker of thy Glory, for, it is too
great a punishment, to live without the sight of thee.

A year and more was already past, He returns to Goa, and for what reason.
since Xavier had labored in the Conversion of the Paravas: and in all this
time, his two Companions, Paul de Camerine, and Francis Mansilla were not come
to his assistance, though they had been arrived at Goa some months since. The
number of Christians daily multiplying to a Prodigy, and one only Priest, not
being sufficient to cultivate so many new Converts in the Faith, or advance
them in Christian Piety, the Saint thought it his duty, to look out for
succor. And besides, having selected some young Men, well natured, and of a
good Understanding, qualified for the Studies of Divinity, and Humane Sciences,
who being themselves well modeled, might return with him, to instruct their
Countrymen, he was of Opinion, that he ought to conduct them himself, without
deferring his Voyage any longer.

On these con^iderations he put to Sea, on his return, about the conclusion of
the year 1543. and having got to Cochin, by Mid- January, he arrived at Goa not
long after. For the better understanding of what relates to the Education of
those young Indians, whom Xavier brought, it will be necessary to trace that
matter from its Original.

Before the coming of Father Francis to the Indies, The beginning, and
establishment of the Seminary of holy Faith.
Christianity had made but little progress in those Countries, and of an
infinite number of Pagans, inhabiting the Isle of Goa, and the parts adjoining,
scarce any Man thought of forsaking his Idolatry. In the year 1541, James de
Borba, a Portuguese Preacher, and Divine, whom King John the Third, had sent to
India, searching out the cause of so great a misfortune, found, that it was not
only because the Europeans could not easily learn the Indian Tongue, but also,
because if an Indian happened to be converted, they exercised no Charity
toward him; and that the Children of the Faithful, who died poor, were
destitute of succor in their wants.

He gave notice of this to the Grand Vicar, Michael Vaz, to the Auditour
General, Pedro Fernandez, to the Deputy^Governour, Rodriguez de Castle Blanco,
and to the Secretary of State, Cosmo Ann^z, who were all of them his particular
Friends, and virtuous Men. These being in the Government, considered of the
means to remedy the growing evil, the Foundation of which had been discovered
to them by Borba; and he himself excited the people to be instrumental in so
good a work. For one day, preaching, he passionately bemoaned the damnation of
so many Indians, and charged it on the Conscience of his Auditory, that the
Salvation of that Idolatrous People depended, in some sort on them. I pretend
not, said he, that you should go your selves to the conquest of Souls, nor
learn barbarous Languages on purpose, to labor in the Conversion of Gentiles.
What I beg of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, is, that each of you, would
contribute something toward the maintenance of the new Christians. You will
perform by that, what it is not in your power to do, by the preaching of the
Gospel; and gain by your temporal goods, those immortal Souls, for which the
Savior of the World has shed his Blood.

The holy Spirit, who had inspired his Tongue, gave efficacy to his Words, by
touching the Hearts of those who heard them. Many of them being joined
together, it was resolved to form a Company, which should provide for the
subsistence of those young Indians newly converted; and that Society* at first
was called, the Brotherhood of St. Mary of the (...), (or Illumination) from
the name of that Church where the Fraternity assembled, to regulate that new
Establishment.

It Is true, that as great works, are not accomplished all at once; in the
beginning of this, there was only founded a small Seminary, for the Children of
Goa, and those of the Neighborhood: but the Revenues were increased so much
afterward by the liberality of Don Estevan de Gama, Governor of the Indies,
and by the bounty of John the Third, King of Portugal, that all the Idolatrous
Children, who turned Christians, of what Country soever, were received into it.

There was also a Fund sufficient for the building a fair House and a
magnificent Church in a larger Plot: and the Seminary, over which Borba
presided, was then called, The Seminary of holy Faith.

Matters being thus disposed, above threescore Children, of diverse Kingdoms,
and nine or ten different Languages, were assembled, to be educated in Piety
and Learning. But it was soon perceived, that these Children wanted Masters,
capable of instructing and forming them, according to the intention of the
Institute. God Almighty had pre-ordain'd the Seminary of Holy Faith, for the
Society of Jesus: and it was by a particular disposition of the Divine
Providence, that the same year, wherein the Seminary was established, brought
over the sons of Ignatius to the Indies.

Accordingly, when Xavier, first arrived at Goa, Borba offered him the conduct
of this new Establishment, and used his best endeavors to engage him in it.
Xavier, who found an inward call, to something more important, and who already
was conceiving in his Mind, the Conversion of a Heathen World, would not co^p
himself up within a Town, but in his secret intentions, designed one of his
Companions for that employment, which was pre^ented to himself. In the mean
time Borba wrote into Portugal, to Simon R^driguez, and earnestly desired from
him, some Fathers of the new Society, for whom, he said, the Almighty had
prepared a House in the new World, before their coming.

During these Transactions, Paul de Camerin, and Francis Mansilla arrived at
Goa, from Mozambique: Borba retained them both in the Seminary, by permission
from the Viceroy; and that was the reason, why they followed not Father Xavier,
to the Coast of Fishery.

Xavier put into the Seminary, (...)
those young Indians, whom he had brought along with him; and whatever want he
had otherwise of his Companions, he gave the charge of the Seminarists to
Father Paul de Camerin, at the request of Borba, who had the chief Authority in
the Seminary. For it was not till the year 1548, after the death of Borba, that
the Company possessed it in propriety, and without dependence. It then received
the name of a College, and was called the College of St. Paul, from the title
of the Church, which was dedicated to the Conversion of the Apostle of the
Gentiles. From thence it also proceeded, that the Jesuits were called in that
Country, the Fathers of St. Paul, or the Fathers Paulists, as they are called
in that Country even at this day.

Father Xavier remained but a little time at Goa; He returns to the Coast of
Fishery; his actions there.
and returned with all expedition to his Paravas, with the best provision of
Gospel Laborers, which he could make. He was then desirous of sending a
Missioner of the Company to the Isle of Socotora, not being in circumstances of
going thither in Person; For he had not forgotten the promise, which he made to
God in behalf of that People, when he left them. But the small number of
Companions which he had, was not sufficient for the Indies; and it was not till
three or four years afterward, that he sent Father Alphonso Ciprian to
Socotora.

Besides Mansilla, who had not yet received the Order of Priesthood, he carried
with him to the Coast of Fishery, two Priests, who were Indians by nation, and
one Bis^ayner, called John Dortiaga; when they were arrived there, he visited
all the Villages with them; and taught them the method of converting Idolaters
to the Faith, and of confirming those who were already Christians, in it. After
which, having assigned to each of them a division at his particular Province in
the Coast, he entered farther into the Country, and without any other Guide,
than the Spirit of God, penetrated into a Kingdom, the Language of which was
utterly unknown to him, as he wrote to Mansilla in these terms.

You may judge, what manner of Life I lead here; by what I shall relate to you.
I am wholly ignorant of the Language of the People, and they understand as
little of mine; and I have no Interpreter. All I can perform, is to Baptize
Children, and serve the Sick, an Employment easily understood, without the help
of an Interpreter, by only minding what they wan^.

This was the Preaching, by which he declared Jesus Christ, and made the
Christian Law appear amiable in that Kingdom. For amongst those Barbarians who
reduce all humanity to the notion of not being inhumane, and who acknowledge no
other duties of Charity, than forbearing to do injuries; it was a thing of
admiration, to see a stranger, who without any interest, made the sufferings of
another man his own; and performed all sorts of services to the Poor, as if he
had been their Father, or their Slave. The name of the Country is neither
known, nor the fruits which these works of Charity produced. ^Tis only certain,
that the Saint continued not there any long time; and that a troublesome affair
recalled him to the Coast of Fishery, when it was ^east in his intentions to
return.

The Badages, He goes to the relief of the Christians, on the Coast of Fishery.
who are a great multitude of Robbers, in the Kingdom of Bisnagar, Idolaters,
and Enemies of the Christian name, naturally fierce, always quarrelling amongst
themselves, and at war with their Neighbors, after they had seized by force of
arms on the Kingdom of Pande, which is betwixt Malabar, and the Coasts of
Fishery, made ^n irruption into the said Coast, in the absence of Xavier; The
Paravas were under a terrible consternation at the sight of those Robbers,
whose very name was formidable to them, not daring so much as to gather into a
Body, nor to hazard the first brunt of War; they took flight, and abandoned
their Country, without any other thought than of saving their Lives. In order
to which, they threw themselves by heaps into their Barques, some of them
escaping into little de^art Islands, others hiding amongst the Rocks and Banks
of Sand, betwixt Cape Comorin, and the Isle of Ceylan. These were the places of
their retreat, together with their Wives and Children, while the Badages
overran the Coast, and destroyed their Country.

But what profits it to have escaped the Sword, when they must dye of hunger?
Those miserable Creatures, exposed to the burning heats of the Sun, wanted
nourishment in their Isles, and on their Rocks, and numbers of them daily
perished.

In the mean time, the news of this Excursion of the Robbers, and the flight of
the Christians was spread about, and Xavier heard it, in the Country where he
then resided. The misfortunes of his dear Paravas touched him in the most
tender part, he made have to their relief, and having been informed, that they
were pressed with Famine, he passed speedily to the western Coast, and
earnestly solicited the Portuguese, to supply them in this their extreme
necessity. He obtained twenty Barks, laden with all manner of Provision, and
himself brought it to their places of retreat, where the poor Paravas, as many
as were left alive of them, were languishing without hope of comfort, and
expecting death to end their misery.

The sight of the Holy man, whom all of them regarded as their common Father,
caused them to forget some part of their misfortune; and seemed to restore them
to Life. He gave them all imaginable consolation, and when they had somewhat
recovered their strength, he brought them back to their Habitations, from
whence the Badages were retired: Those Plunderers had swept all away, and the
Christians were more poor than ever; he therefore procured Alms for them, and
wrote a Letter earnestly to the Christians of another Coast, to supply their
Brethren in distress.

The Paravas being resetled by degrees, Xavier left them under the conduct of
the Missioners, whom he had brought for them, and turned his thoughts
elsewhere. He was desirous to have carried the sound of the Gospel into the
more Inland Countries, which had never heard of Jesus Christ: yet he ^orbore it
at that time, upon this account, that in those Kingdoms where there were no
Portuguese to protect the new Christians, the Idolaters and Saraceus would make
war on them, or constrain them to renounce their Christianity to buy their
Peace.

Returning therefore by the western Coasts, He goes to the Kingdom of
Travan^or, and there (...) with great success.
which were in the possession of the Portuguese, he traveled by Land, and on
foot, according to his custom, toward the Coast of Travancor, which beginning
from the point of Comorin, lies extended thirty Leagues along by the Sea, and
is full of Villages.

Being come thither, and having by the good offices of the Portuguese obtained
permission from the King of Travancor to publish the Law of the true God, he
followed the same method, which he had used at the Fishery. And that practice
was so successful, that all that Coast was converted to Christianity in a
little space of time, insomuch, that forty five Churches were immediately
built. He writes himself, that in one month he Baptized with his own hand ten
thousand Idolaters. And that frequently in one day, he Baptized a well Peopled
Village. He says also, that it was to him a most pleasing object, to behold,
that so soon as those Infidels had received Baptism, they ran, vying with each
other, to demolish the Temples of the Idols.

It was at that time, God communicates to him the gift of Tongues.
properly speaking, when God first communicated to Xavier the gift of tongues
in the Indies; according to the Relation of a young Portuguese of Coimbra,
whose name was Vaz, who attended him in many of his Travels; and who being
returned into Europe, related those Passages, of which himself had been an eye
witness. The Holy man spoke very well the Language of those Barbarians, without
having learnt it, and had no need of an Interpreter, when he instructed. There
being no Church, which was capable of containing those who came to hear him, he
led them into a spacious Plain, to the number of five or six thousand Persons,
and there getting up into a Tree, that he might the farther extend his voice,
he Preached to them the words of Eternal Truth. There it was also, that to the
end the compass of the Plain might serve in the nature of a Church, he
sometimes celebrated the Divine Mysteries, under the Sails of Ships, which were
spread above the Altar, to be seen on every side.

The Brachmans He is Persecuted by the Brachmans.
could not suffer the Worship of the Pagods to be abandoned in this manner; but
were resolved to be revenged on the Author of so strange an alteration. In
order to execute their design, they secretly engaged some Idolaters to lie in
wait for him, and dispatch him privately. The Murderers lay in Ambush more
than once, and in the silence of the night endeavored to shoot him with their
Arrows. But divine Providence would not suffer their malice to take place: of
all their Arrows, one only wounded him, and that but slightly; as it were
rather to give him the satisfaction of shedding some blood, in testimony of the
Faith, than to endanger his Life.

Enraged, and desperate for having missed their aim, they sought him every
where, and not finding him, they set fire on three or four houses, where they
thought he might possibly be lodged. The Man of God was constrained one day, to
hide in the covert of a Forest, and passed the following night upon a Tree, to
escape the fury of his Enemies, who searched the whole Forest to have found
him: There was a necessity sometimes, that the faithful should keep guard about
him day and night, and to that purpose they placed themselves in Arms, about
the house, where he was retired.

In the mean time, the Badages, who had ravaged the Coast of Fishery, the year
before, animated of themselves against the Christians, and perhaps pushed
forward by the Devils, who saw their Empire decaying day by day, excited also
by the desire of glory, and above all things by the hope of booty, entered into
the Kingdom of Travancor, on the side of one of those Mountains, which confine
on the Cape of Comorin: Their former success had rendered them so haughty, and
so insolent, that they flattered themselves with an imagination that every
thing would bend before them. But not having now to do as they had before, with
simple Fishers, they were come in good order, and well armed under the conduct
of the Naiche, or Lord of Modure, a valiant, and experienced Captain.

The Inhabitants of the Maritime Villages, took fright at the noise of an
hostile Army; and retiring, for the most part with great haste and confusion,
into the Inland Country, carried even to the Court the news of the invasion.

The King of Travancor, whom the Portuguese call the great Monarch, because
indeed, he is the most powerful of all the Kings of Malabar, recollecting his
Army with all speed, put himself at the head of it, and marched toward the
Enemy. The Battle, in all appearance, was likely to be bloody, and the Victory
seemed assured, to those Vagabond Robbers, who were more in number, and better
Disciplined.

Father Xavier so soon as he understood, (...)
that the Badages were drawing near, falling prostrate on the ground, O Lord,
said he, Remember that thou art the God of Mercies, and Protector of the
Faithful: give not up to the fury of these Wolves that Flock, of which thou
have appointed me the Pastor. That these new Christians, who are yet so feeble
in the Faith, may not repent their embracing it, and that the Infidels may not
have the advantage of oppressing those, who repose their confidence in none but
thee.

His Prayer being ended, he arose, and inspired with a more than humane
courage, which made him incapable of ^ear, he takes a troop of fervent
Christians, and with a Crucisix in his hand, runs with them toward the Plain,
where the Enemies were marching in Battalia: When he arrived within distance of
being heard, he stopped and said to them, in a threatening voice, I forbid you in
the name of the Living God, to pass farther, and on his part, command you to
return the way you came.

These few words cast a terror into the minds of those Soldiers who were at
the head of the Army; they remained confounded, and without motion. They who
marched after them, seeing the foremost advanced not, asked the reason of it:
answer was returned from the first ranks, that they had before their eyes an
unknown Person habited in black, of a more than humane Stature, of a terrible
aspect, and darting fire from his eyes. The most hardy were desirous to
satisfy themselves concerning what was told them: they were seized with
amazement at the sight, and all of them fled with a precipitate confusion.

The new Christians who had followed Xavier, He prevails upon the King of
Travancor to favor the Gospel.
ran to declare to the neighboring Villages this wonderful event. The same of
it was suddenly spread abroad, and the King, who was marching toward the Enemy
with great speed, heard the report of it on his way. He caused Xavier to be
brought into his presence, and embraced him as the Redeemer of Travancor; and
after he had publicly thanked him for so eminent a service, he said thus to
him: I am called, the Great Monarch, and from henceforth you shall be called,
The Great Father.

The Saint gave the King to understand, that it was only Jesus Christ, to whom
he ought to pay his acknowledgmen^^* and as for himself, he ought only to be
regarded as a weak instrument, who could do nothing of his own power. The Pagan
King comprehended nothing of his meaning, an^ the two Vices which are the
common Obstacles to the Conversion of the Great* that is to say, the
Concupiscence of the Flesh and Pride of Heart, hindered him, afterward, from
embracing of the Faith: which notwithstanding, he caused an Edict to be
published throughout his Kingdom, whereby all Men were commanded to obey the
Great Father, as they would his proper person: and that whoever desired to be a
Christian, might be so, without any apprehension of danger to ensue. He went so
far, as even to call Xavier his Brother; and bestowed on him large sums of
Money, (...) which the Servant of God employed in Charities on the poor.

An Edict so favorable to the Law of our Belief, made many Christians even in
the Court, though contrary to the Example of the Prince. But the Miraculous
Actions of Xavier, finished the Conversion of the whole Kingdom. Besides his
curing all sorts of diseases, he raised four persons from the Dead; two Women
and two Men. The Act of Canonization, relates no more of the Resurrection of
the Women, but the bare matter of fact, without any Circumstances; but the
Resurrection of the Men is related at large, of which the substance is in the
ensuing account.

Xavier preached in one of the Maritime Villages of Travancor, called Coulan
near Cape Comorin. Some were converted by his first Sermons, but the greater
party remained in their ancient Superstition, after having often heard him. The
most obstinate, it is true, listn'd to him with delight, and found the Maxims of
the Gospel, to be most conformable to the light of Reason; but the pleasure
which they took in hearing produced nothing; and they satisfied themselves with
admiring the Christian Law, without troubling themselves to follow it.

The Father, He raises two from death.
one day finding, that he spoke to them of God, without working any thing upon
their Hearts, prayed fervently to the Almighty in their behalf: and with his
Eyes lifted up to Heaven, his Countenance more than ordinarily inflamed, and
with abundance of Tears, besought him to take pity on those obstinate
Idolaters. O Lord, said he, all Hearts are in thy Hands, thou can bend, as it
pleases thee, the most stubborn, and soften the most obdurate: do that honor,
on this day, to the Blood, and the name of thy beloved Son. Scarcely had he
ended his Prayer, when he was assured, it was answered: turning himself to his
Audience, with the Air of one inspired; Well, said he, since you will not
believe me on my word, behold that which will make me be believed. What
testimony do you desire from me, of those truths which I have declared to you?
At the same instant he recalled to his remembrance, that a Man had been there
buried the day before. Then resuming his discourse in the same tone that he
began it; Open, said he, the Sepulcher which you closed yesterday, and bring
out the Body: but observe carefully, whether he who was buried be truly dead.

The most incredulous ran hastily to take up the Corpse, far from finding any
the least sign of life, they perceived it began to putrisie with a noisome
scent. They took off the Linen in which he was wrapped, and laid the dead Man
at the Feet of the Father, who was come to the place of burial. The Barbarians
gazed with astonishment on the dead Body; and impatiently expected the event.
The Saint fell upon his Knees, and after a short Prayer, addressing himself to
the Dead, I command thee, said he, in the holy name of the living God, to
arise, for the confirmation of that Religion, which I preach. At these words
the Dead arose of himself, and appeared, not only living, but vigorous, and in
perfect health. All who were present, cried out, with a loud voice, That the
God of the Christians was Omnipotent: and that the Law which the great Father
preached, was true. In consequence of which, they threw themselves at his Feet,
desired Baptism, and received it on the place.

The other dead person, whom the Apostle raised to life, was a young Man, and a
Christian, who died at Mutan, on the same Coast, betwixt Carjapatan and
Alicale. He had been dead above four and twenty hours, of a pestilential Fever.
Xavier met the Corpse by chance, as they were carrying it to the Grave. The
Parents of the dead man, who were of the greatest quality in all the Country,
accompanied the Funeral-Pomp, with all their kindred, according to the custom
of that Nation. As comfortless as they were, yet upon sight of the Saint, they
recovered courage; and embracing his Knees, implored him to restore their Son
to life; being persuaded, that what was not to be effected by the power of
Nature, would cost him only a word speaking. Xavier moved by their affliction,
and excited by their Faith, begged the assistance of the Most High, made the
sign of the Cross, and threw Holy. Water on the Dead; after which he took him
by the Hand, raised him up in the name of the Lord, and restored him living to
his Father and Mother.

To preserve the memory of an Action, so wonderful, and so authentic, the
Parents of the Man they raised, erected a great Cross, on the place where the
Miracle was done; and were accustomed afterward to go often thither, and pray
to God before it. These Resurrections were so famous through all the Country,
and made so great impressions, on the Souls of the Inhabitants, that the people
came thronging from all parts to behold the great Father, and to receive
Baptism from his hands. Insomuch, that the whole Kingdom of Travancor, was
subjected to Christ Jesus, in few Months: And the King with some few of his
chief Courtiers, were the only remaining Idolaters in the Land; by a terrible
Judgment of Almighty God, who sometimes abandons Princes, to their unruly
Passions; and departs from the Great, while he communicates himself, to those
of the lowest quality.

The End of the Second Book.
THE LIFE OF St. FRANCIS XAVIER.
BOOK III.
THE Reputation of Xavier was not confined to the Kingdom of Travancor: it was
spread abroad through all the Indies; and the God of the Christians at the same
time was had in so great veneration, that the most Idolatrous Nations sent to
desire the Saint, that he would come and give them Baptism. His joy was
infinite, to find the Gentiles of their own free motion, searching after the way
of Eternal Life, but on the other side he was afflicted, that he was not
sufficient alone, to instruct so many vast Countries as were gone astray from
it.

Seeing the Harvest so great, and the Laborers so few, He writes into Europe
for a supply of (...)
he wrote earnestly to Father Ignatius, in Italy, and to Simon Rodriguez in
Portugal, for a supply of Missioners. He had such transports of Zeal on that
occasion, as to say in one of his Letters, I have often thoughts to run over
all the Universities of Europe, and Principally that of Paris, and to cry aloud
to those who abound more in Learning than in Charity, Ah how many Souls are
lost to Heaven, through your default! It were to be wished, that those People
would apply themselves as diligently to the Salvation of Souls, as they do to
the study of Sciences; to the end they might render to Almighty God a good
account of their Learning, and the Talents which he has bestowed on them: Many,
without doubt, moved with thoughts like these, would make a spiritual retreat,
and give themselves the leisure of meditating on Heavenly things, that they
might listen to the voice of God. They would renounce their Passions, and
trampling under foot all worldly Vanities, would put themselves in condition of
following the motions of the Divine Will. They would say from the bottom of
their hearts, behold me in readiness, O my Lord, send me wheresoever thou shall
please, even to the Indies if thou command'st me.

Good God, how much more happily would those Learned men then live, than now
they do! with how much more assurance of their Salvation! and in the hour of
death, when they are ready to stand forth, before the dreadful Iudgment-Seat,
how much greater reason would they have, to hope well of God's Eternal Mercy,
because they might say, O Lord, thou have given me five Talents, and behold I
have added other five.

I take God to witness, that not being able to return into Europe, I have
almost resolved to write to the University of Paris, and namely to our Masters.
Cornet and Picard, that Millions of Idolaters might be easily converted, if
there were more Preachers, who would sincerely mind the interests of Jesus
Christ, and not their own concernments.

It Is pity that his Letter to the Doctors of Sorbonne, The Saints Letter to
the Doctors of Sorbonne.
is irrecoverably lost, for certain it is, he wrote to them from the midst of
the Indies, to engage them to come, and Preach the Gospel. And for this, we
have the testimony of Don John Derada, one of the chief Magistrates of the
Kingdom of Navarre, who studying at Paris, saw the Letter sent from Father
Xavier, admired the Apostolical Charity, with which it was replenished, and
took a Copy of it, as did also many Divines, to whom it was directed.

Amongst those Idolatrous Nations, which breathed after Baptism, Ambassadors
from the Isle of Manar to the Saint.
and desired to be instructed, the Manarois were the first, who made a
deputation to the Saint.

The Isle of Manar, is situate toward the most Northern point of Ceylan, and
at the head of the Sands of Remanancor. It has a very convenient Port, and is a
place of great Trafick. But the Soil is so sandy and so dry, that it produces
nothing, unless in some few places, which also are cultivated with much care
and labor. For Manar has no resemblance to Ceylan, though placed so near it:
Ceylan being the most delicious and most fruitful part of all the East; where
the Trees are always green, and bear fruits and flowers in every Season: where
there are discovered Mines of Gold and Silver, Crystal, and Precious Stones:
which is encompassed with Forests of Ebony, Cynamon, and Coco; and where the
Inhabitants live to an extreme old Age, without any of the incommodities which
attend it. The wonder is, that being distant from the Equinoetial but six
degrees, the Air is temperate and pure, and the Rains which water it from
Heaven regularly once a Month, joined with the Springs and Rivers, which pass
through it, refresh the Ground in a greater measure, than the scorching heats
can parch it.

Father Xavier was employed in establishing Christianity in Travancor, He sends
a Missioner to the Isle of Manar.
when he received this Embassy from Manar. As he could not forsake an Infant
Church, without a reasonable apprehension of its ruin, he sent to Manar, one
of the Priests whom he had left on the Coast of Fishery. And God so blessed the
labors of that Missioner, that the Manarois not only became Christians, but
died generously for the Faith; and this was the occasion of their Martyrdom.

The Isle of Manar, was at that time under the Dominion of the King of
Iafanatapan: for by that name the Northern part of Ceylan is called. This
Prince, had usurped the Crown from his elder Brother; and enslaved his
Subjects. Above all things he was an implacable Enemy of the Christian Faith;
though in appearance he was a Friend to the Portuguese, whose Forces only could
set Bounds to his Tyranny. When he understood that the Manarois were converted
to Christianity, he entered into that fury, of which Tyrants only can be
capable. For he commanded, that his Troops should immediately pass over into
the Island, and put all to the Sword, excepting only the Idolaters. His Orders
were punctually executed: and Men, Women and Children, were all destroyed, who
had embraced the Christian Faith.

It was wonderful to behold, ^he constancy of he Christians ^f Manar.
that the Faithful being examined one by one, concerning their Religion, and no
more required for the saving of their lives, than to forsake their new Belief,
there was not one amongst them, who did not openly declare himself a Christian.
The Fathers and Mothers, answered for the newly baptized Infants, who were not
able to give testimony of their Faith: and offered them to the death, with a
Resolution, which was amazing to their Executioners. Six or seven hundred of
these Islanders gave up their lives for the name of Jesus Christ; and the
principal place which was consecrated by so noble Blood, from Pasim, which it
was called before, now took the name of the Field of Martyrs.

This dreadful Massacre, far from abolishing the Christian Law, served only to
render it more flourishing. The Tyrant had even the shame of seeing his
Officers and Domestic Servants, forsake their ancient Superstition in despite
of him. But what most enraged him, was the Conversion of his eldest Son. This
young Prince, inspired of God, caused himself to be instructed by a Portuguese
Merchant, who had dealings at the Court: which yet could not be so secretly
performed, but that the King had notice of it. At the first news, he cut his
Throat, and threw the Body into the Fields, to serve for food to Salvage Beasts.

But Heaven permitted not, A miraculous C^^ss, and its effects.
that a death which was so precious in the sight of God, should be without
honor, in the sight of Men. The Portuguese Merchant, buried his Disciple by
night; and on the next morning, there appeared a beautiful Cross, printed on
the Ground which covered the Body of the Martyr. The spectacle extremely
surprised the Infidels. They did what they were able, to deface, (and if I may
so say) to blot out the Cross, by treading over it, and casting Earth upon it.
It appeared again the day following, in the same Figure, and they once more
endeavored to tread it out. But then it appeared in the Air, all resplendent
with light, and darting its Beams on every side. The Barbarians who beheld it,
were affrighted; and, being touched in their Hearts, declared themselves
Christians. The Kings Sister, a Princess naturally virtuous, having privately
embraced the Faith, instructed both her own ^on, and her Nephew, who was
Brother to the Martyr. But while she directed them in the way of Heaven, she
took care to preserve them from the cruelty of the Tyrant. To which purpose she
addressed her self to the Merchant above mentioned, and intrusting him with the
lives of the two Princes, ordered him to convey them to the Seminary of Goa.

This Portuguese managed all things so discreetly, with the concurrence of the
Princess, that he escaped out of the Island, with the two Princes,
undiscovered. He took his way by the Kingdom of Travancor, that he might behold
Father Xavier, and present to him, these two illustrious new Converts. The
Father received them as Angels descended from above, and gave immortal thanks
to God, for so noble a Conquest. He fortified them in the Faith, gave them
excellent instructions, and promised so to mediate in their favor, with the
Viceroy of the Indies, that they should have no occasion of repenting
themselves, for having abandoned all things for the sake of Jesus Christ.

When the King of Iafanatapan, had notice of the flight of his Son and Nephew,
he broke out into new fury against the Christians, and put to death great
numbers of them. Being apprehensive, that his Brother, from whom he had usurped
the Crown, and who now led a wandering life, might possibly change his Religion
also, and beg protection from the Portuguese; he sent Officers round about,
with orders to bring him into his Hands, or at the least, to bring back his
Head. But he failed of getting him in his power either alive or dead. For this
unhappy Prince, attended by ten Horsemen, having passed to Negapatan, came by
Land to Goa, after having suffered extreme hardships, in a Journey of more than
two hundred Leagues.

Father Xavier, The Enterprise of Xavier against the Persecutour.
who was informed of all these proceedings, thought it necessary to make
advantage of these favorable opportunities, without loss of time. He
considered, with what perfection Christians might live in a Kingdom where they
died so generously for the Faith, with so imperfect a knowledge of it. On the
other side, he judged, that if the injustice and cruelty of the Tyrant remained
unpunished, what an inducement it might be to other Idolatrous Kings, for them
to persecute the new Converts in their turn. That the only means for repairing
the past, and obviating future mischiefs, was to dispossess the Tyrant of the
Crown, which he so unjustly wore, and restore it to his Brother, to whom it
rightfully belonged: That for these Considerations, recourse ought to be had to
the Portuguese, to engage them by a principle of Religion to take Arms against
the Usurper of the Kingdom, and the Persecutour of the Christians.

In order to this, the Father caused M^nsilla to be recalled from the Coast of
Fishery, and having entrusted him with the care of Christianity in Travancor,
took his way by Land to Cambaya, where the Viceroy of the Indies then resided.

Besides these reasons, (...)
relating to the King of Iafanatapan, the Saint had other Motives, which
obliged him to take this Journey. The greatest part of the Eur^peans, who were
in the Indies, and chiefly the Officers of the Crown of Portugal, lived after
so infamous a manner, that they made the Christian Faith appear odious, and
scandalized alike, both the Idolaters and the Faithful.

The public Worship of the Pagods was tolerated at Goa; and the Sect of the
Brachmans daily increased in Power; because those Pagan Priests had bribed the
Portuguese Officers. The people professed Heathenism freely, provided they made
exact payments of their Tribute, as if they had been conquered only for the
sake of gain. Public Offices were sold to Saracens, and the Christian Natives
stood excluded, for want of Money, which does all things with corrupt
Ministers. The Receivers of the Kings Revenues* who were to pay the Paravas of
the Coast of Fishery, constrained those poor Fishers to deliver their Pearls
almost for nothing; and thus the exaction of a lawful Tribute in the
Constitution, became Tyranny and Oppression in the managment. Men were sold
like Beasts, and Christians i^slav'd to Pagans at cheap pennyworths. To
conclude, the King of Cochin, an Idolater, but tributary to the Crown of
Portugal, was suffered to con^iscate the Goods of his Subjects, who had
received Baptism.

Father Francis was wonderfully grieved to perceive, that the greatest
hindrance to the growth of Christianity, in those vast Dominions of Asia,
proceeded only from the Christians. He bewailed it sometimes to God, in the
bitterness of his Heart, and one day said, that he would willingly return to
Portugal, to complain of it to the King, not doubting, but so Religious and
Just a Prince, would order some remedy, for this encroaching evil, if he had
notice how it spread.

Xavier had taken the way of Cochin, along by the Sea Coast. (...)
He arrived there the sixteenth of December 1544. where he happend' to meet
with Michael Vaz, Vicar General of the Indies. In acquainting him with the
Reasons of his Journey, he made him sensible, that the weakness of the
Government was the principal cause of the Avarice and Violence of the Officers.
That Don Alphonso de Sosa, was indeed a Religious Gentleman, but wanted Vigor;
that it was not sufficient to will good Actions, if at the same time he did not
strongly oppose ill ones: In a word, that it was absolutely necessary for the
King of Portugal to be informed, of all the Disorders in the Indies, by a
person who was an eye witness of them, and whose Integrity was not liable to
Suspicion. Vaz immediately entered into the Opinions of the Father; and his
Zeal carried him to pass himself into Portugal, in a Vessel which was just
ready to set Sail. Xavier praised God for those good intentions, and wrote a
Letter by him to King John the Third; the beginning of which, I have here
transcribed.

YOur Majesty ought to be assured, His Letter to the King of Portugal.
and often to call into your Mind, that God has made choice of you amongst all
the Princes of the World for the Conquest of India, to the end he may make
trial of your Faith, and see what requital you will make to him for all his
Benefits. You ought also to consider, that in conferring on you the Empire of a
new World, his intention was not so much, that you should fill your Coffers
with the Riches of the East, as that you should have an opportunity of
signalizing your Zeal, by making known to Idolaters, (through the means of
those who serve you,) the Creator and Redeemer of Mankind.

The Saint, after this beginning, gave the King to understand the good
intentions of Michael Vaz, and the ill conduct of the Portuguese, who were in
the Government of the Indies. He suggested to him the means of putting a stop
to those disorders, and advised him above all things, not only to recommend by
Letters, the interest of Religion, but rigorously to punish all those Officers,
who were wanting to their duty in that respect. For there is danger, said he,
that when G^d shall summon your Majesty to Judgment, that will then come to
pass, (...) y^u least expect; and which is not to be avoided; there is danger,
Great Prince, that you may then hear these words of an ^ffended God; Why have
you not punished t^ose, who under your Authority, have made War against me in
the Indies? you who have p^^ish'd them so severely, when they were ne^ligent,
in gathering your Revenues. ^^ur c^^se will be little helped, by your return of
this answer to Jesus Christ; Lord I have not wanted yearly to recommend ^y
Letters to my Subjects, all that c^ncerns (...) honor and thy service. For, ^
ubt n^^, it will be thus answered; But your Orders were never put in Execution,
and you le^t your Ministers at their own dispose, to do what ever they thought
good.

I therefore beg your Majesty, by that fervent Zeal, which you have for the
Glory of our Lord, and by the care which you have always testify^d, of your
Eternal Salvation, to send hither a vigilant and resolute Minister, who will
bend his Actions to nothing more, than to the Conversion of Souls; who may act
independantly to the Officers of your Treasury; and who will not suffer himself
to be led and governed by the p^liticks of worldly men, whose foresight is
bounded with the profit of the State. May your Majesty be pleased, a little to
inspect your Incomes from the Indies; and after that, look over the Expenses
which are made for the advancement of Religion; that having weighed all things
equally on either side, you may make a Judgment, if that which you bestow,
bears any proportion with that which you receive. And then perhaps you will
find a just Subject to apprehend, that of those immmense Treasures, which the
Divine Goodness has heaped upon you, you have given to God but an
inconsiderable pittance.

For what remains, let not your Majesty defer any longer the payment of so just
a debt, to so bountiful a giver; nor the healing of so many public wounds.
What remedy soever you can apply, what diligence soever you can make, all will
be too little, and of the latest. The sincere and ardent Charity of my Heart
toward your Majesty, has constrained me to write to you in this manner;
especially when my imagination represents to me, in a lively sort, the
complaints which the poor Indians send up to Heaven, that out of so vast a
Treasure with which your Estate is enriched by them, you employ so little for
their Spiritual necessities. -- The Letter ended in begging this favor of
Almighty God, that the King in his Life time, might have those considerations,
and that conduct, which he would wish to have had, when he was dying.

Michael Vaz, (...) success of the Voyage undetaken by Michael Vaz.
negotiated so well with King John the third, pursuant to the instructions of
Father Xavier, that he obtained another Governor of the Indies; and carried
back such Orders and Provisions, signed by his Majesty's own hand, as were in a
manner the same which the Father had desired.

These Orders contained, That no Toleration should be granted for the
Superstition of the Infidels in the Isle of Goa, nor in that of Salseta. That
they should break in pieces all the Pagods which were there, and make search in
the houses of the Gentiles for concealed Idols; and whosoever used or made them,
should be punished according to the quality of his Crime. That as many of the
Brachmans as were found to oppose the publication of the Gospel, should be
Banished: That, out of a yearly Rent of three thousand Crowns, charged on a
Mosquee at Bazain, a subsistence should be made for the Poor, newly converted
from Idolatry: That hereafter no public Employment should be given to Pagans;
That no exaction should remain unpunished. That no Slaves should henceforth be
sold, either to Mahometans, or Gentiles. That the Pearl-sishing, should only be
in the hands of Christians, and that nothing should be taken from them, without
paying them the due value. That the King of Cochin should not be suffered to
despoil, or oppress the Baptized Indians; and last of all, That if Sosa had not
already revenged the Murder of the Christians in Manar, who were Massacred by
the King of Iafanatapan's Command, Castro who succeeded in his place, should
not fail to see it done.

To return to Father Xavier, he put to Sea at Cochin, He converts a debauched
Portuguese.
and sailed toward Cambaya; in the Ship there was a Portuguese Gentleman, much
a Libertine, and one of those declared Atheists, who make a boast of their
impiety. This was motive enough for the Holy man to make acquaintance with him.
He kept him company, and was even so complaisant as to entertain him with
pleasant conversation. The Portuguese was much delighted with his good humor,
and took pleasure in hearing him discourse on many curious Subjects. But, if
Xavier offered to let fall a word concerning the Salvation of his Soul, he
laughed it out, and would hear no more. If the Father mildly reproved him for
his profane and scandalous way of living; he flew out into a fury, against the
holy practice of the Church, and swore he would never more come to Confession.

These ill inclinations did not at all discourage Xavier from his undertaking:
He treated this hardened Sinner after the manner that Physicians use a Patient
raving in his Sickness, with all manner of compassion and soft behavior. In
the mean time they came to an Anchor, before the Port of Cananor, and going
ashore together, they took a walk into a Wood of Palm Trees, which was near
their place of Landing. After they had made a turn or two, the Saint stripped
himself to the wast, and taking a Discipline pointed at the ends with wire,
struck so hard and so often on his naked body, that in a very little time his
back and shoulders were all bloody. It Is for your sake, said he to the
Gentleman who accompanied him, that I do what you see; and all this is nothing
to what I would willingly suffer for you. But, added he, you have cost Christ
Jesus a much dearer price: will neither his passion, his death, nor all his
blood suffice to soften the hardness of your heart? After this, addressing
himself to our blessed Savior, O Lord, said he, be pleased to look on thy own
adorable blood, and not on that, of so vile a Sinner as my self. The Gentleman
amazed and confounded both at once, at such an excess of charity, cast himself
at the feet of Xavier, beseeching him to forbear, and promising to confess
himself, and totally to change his former life. In effect, before they departed
out of the Wood, he made a general Confession to the Father, with sincere
contrition for his Sins, and afterward lived, with the exemplary behavior and
practice of a good Christian.

Being returned to the Port, they went again on Shipboard; He ingages the
Viceroy of the Indies to make War on the King of Jafanatapan.
and continued their voyage to Cambaya. When they were arrived at that place,
Xavier went to wait on the Viceroy, and easily persuaded him to what he
desired, in reference to Iafanatapan: For besides that Sosa repos^d an entire
confidence in Father Xavier, and was himself zealous for the faith, the
Expedition which was proposed to him, was the most glorious that the Portu^uese
could undertake; since the consequence of it was to punish a Tyrant, to
dispossess an Usurper, and to restore a lawful King.

The Viceroy therefore wrote Letters, and dispatched Couriers, to the Captains
of Comorine, and of the Fishery, commanding them to assemble all the Forces
they could make, at Negapatan, and make a sudden irruption into the Tyrant's
Country, without giving him time to provide for his defense. He gave them also
in charge, to take the Tyrant alive, if possibly they could; and put him into
the hands of Father Francis, who desired his Conversion, not his death; and
hoped the blood of the Martyrs of Manar, might obtain the forgiveness of his
Crimes.

Xavier, Diverse Predictions of the Saint.
encouraged by these hopes, returned toward Cochin, where he proposed to
himself to follow his Ministerial vocation, while the preparations of War were
making. Coming back by Cananor, he lodged in the house of a Christian, who
himself was religious, but his Son debauched, and subject to all sorts of
vices. The good man sensibly afflicted at the ill conduct of his graceless Son,
wept day and night; and Xavier began at first to comfort him, saying those
vices were ordinary in youth; and riper age would reclaim him from them. Having
done speaking, he stood mute a while, and recollected himself; then suddenly
lifting up his eyes to Heaven, Know, said he, that you are the most happy
Father in the world: this Libertine Son, who has given you so many disquiets,
shall one day change his manners: He shall be a Religious of the Order of St.
Francis, and at last shall dye a Martyr. The event verified the Prediction; the
young man, afterward took the Habit of St. Francis, and went to Preach the
Faith in the Kingdom of Cande is a Kingdom in the I^land of Ceylan.
Cande, where he received Martyrdom from the Barbarians.

Father Xavier being come back to Cochin, was very kindly received by the
Secretary of State, Cosmo Annez, his intimate friend, who was there, on some
important business. Being one day together, and talking familiarly, Xavier
asked Annez, if the year had been good for the Portugal Merchants? Annez
answered him, that it could not have been better: that not long since, seven
Vessels had been sent off, which were now in their passage to Europe, and
richly laden. He added, that himself had sent the King of Portugal a rare
Diamond, which had cost six thousand Ducats at Goa, and would be worth more
than thirty thousand at Lisbonne. Xavier had a farther curiosity to enquire,
which of the Ships had carried the Diamond, and Annez told him, it was the Ship
called the Atoghia, and that he had entrusted the Jewel to John Norogna, who
was Captain of the Ship.

Xavier then entered into a profound meditation, and after he had kept silence
for some time, all on the sudden, thus replied, I could have wished that a
Diamond of so great value had not been entrusted to that Ship. And for what
reason answered Annez? is it not because the Atoghia, has once formerly sprung
a Leak? but, Father, she is now so well refitted, that she may be taken for a
new Vessel. The Saint explained himself no father; and Annez, upon a second
consideration, began to conjecture, both from the Father's words, and
afterward from his silence, that there was some danger in the matter,
whereupon he desired him, to recommend that Ship to the protection of Almighty
God; for in conclusion, said he, the Atoghia cannot be lost without a very
considerable damage to me. I have had no order, said he, to buy that Diamond,
so that in case it should miscarry, the loss will be wholly mine.

Sitting one day together at the Table, and Xavier observing Annez to be in
great concernment, give thanks to God, said he, your Diamond is safe, and at
this very time, in the hands of the Queen of Portugal. Annez believed Xavier on
his word; and understood afterward, by Letters from Norogna, that the Ship
opened in the midst of her Voyage, and let in so much water, that being upon
the point of sinking, the Mariners had resolved to have forsaken her, and
thrown themselves into the Sea, but after having cut down the main Mast, they
changed their thoughts without any apparent reason; that the Leak stopped of it
self, and the Ship pursuing her Course, with only two Sails, arrived safely in
the Port of Lisbonne.

The Man of God, He goes to join the Portuguese Fleet, and raises one from the
dead.
remained about three months in Cochin, and toward the end of May, set sail
for Negapatan, where the Portuguese Fleet, was now in a readiness, passing by
the Isle of de las Vaccas, which is near the Flatts of Ceylan, toward the
North, he raised to Life, a Saracens Child, which is all that is known of that
Miracle. He was desirous in his passage to see the Isle of Manar, where so many
Christians had been Massacred for the Faith, and going ashore, he often kissed
the ground, which had been sprinkled with the blood of Martyrs at Pasim. While
he rejoiced at the happy destiny of the dead, he had cause to be afflicted, for
the misfortune of the living: a contagious Disease, laid wast the Island; and
there died an hundred every day.

When the Manar^is had notice, that the great Father, so famous in the Indies
was at Pasim, they assembled together, above three thousand of them, for the
most part Gentiles, and being come to the Village, besought him humbly to
deliver them from the Pestilence.

Xavier asked three days, (...)
wherein to implore of God, for that which they had begged from him. During all
which time, he only offered up to our Lord, and set before him the merits of
those blessed Martyrs, who had suffered for his name at Pasim. Before those
days were ended, his Prayers were heard, the Plague ceased; and all the Sick
were restored to health at the same moment* So visible a Miracle wrought on all
of them to believe in Jesus Christ; and the Apostle Baptized them with his own
hand. He could make no longer stay with them; for the Naval Army then expected
him, and his presence was necessary to encourage the Soldiers, and mind the
Captains of the performance of their duty.

He passed over from Manar, The Enterprise of ^afanatapan defeated.
to Negapatan; but there he found all things in a far different condition, from
what he hoped. The Portuguese Navy diminished daily; and the Commanders who at
the beginning, had been so zealous for the Holy War, were now the first to
condemn it. It was in vain for him, to set before their eyes the honor of
their Nation, and that of God: Interest did so blind their Understanding, that
they forgot they were either Portugueses or Chr^stians: behold in short, what
overthrew so glorious an expedition.

While they were equipping the Fleet, it happened that a Portuguese Vessel,
coming from the Kingdom of Pegu, and laden with Rich Merchandise, was driven by
Tempest upon the Coast of Iafanatapan. The King made seizure of it, and
possessed himself of all within it, according to the custom of the Barbarians.
The Captain, and the Ships Company foreseeing, that if in this conjucture, War
should be made against the Heathen Prince, they should never be able to
retrieve their wealth out of his hands, corrupted the Officers of the Fleet
with large Presents, to desist from their undertaking. Thus, the Tyrant, whom
Father Xavier designed to drive out from his ill-gotten Kingdom, was maintained
in it, by the covetousness of Christians; or or rather by the secret decrees of
Providence, which sometimes permits the Persecutors of the Church, to reign in
peace, to the end a trial may be made, of such, as dare to continue constant in
their Faith.

As holy men resign their Will, to that of God, Xavier wholly abandoned the
Enterprise of Iafanatapan; and thought only of returning to the Kingdom of
Travancor. Being now on Sea, he cast back his eyes on the Isle of Ceylan, which
he saw from far; and cried out, lamenting for it, Ah! unhappy Island, with how
many Carcasses do I behold thee covered? and what Rivers of blood, are making
inundations on all sides of thee? These words were Prophetical of what happened
afterward, when Don Constantine de Braganza, at one time, and Don Hurtado de
Mendoca at another, destroyed all those Islanders with the Sword, and the King
of Iafanatapan, being himself taken, together with his eldest Son, was put to
death in his own Palace: As if the Divine Justice had not deferred the death
of this Persecutor, but only to render it more terrible, and more memorable.

Father Xavier was very desirous of returning to Travancor; He designs the
Voyage of Macassar; and the Conversion of many Kingdoms.
but the Winds blew so contrary, that they always drove him from the Coast. By
this he judged that God had called him to some other place; and thereupon
formed a resolution of carrying the light of the Gospel, from Isle to Isle, and
from Kingdom to Kingdom, even to the utmost limits of the East. The news he
heard, during his Navigation, caused him suddenly to cast his thoughts on an
Island situate under the Equinoctial, betwixt the Molucca's and Borneo,
stretched in length two hundred Leagues from North to South, and divided into
sundry Kingdoms, called by the Geographers Celebes, by the Historians Macassar;
from the names of the two Capital Cities, of the two Principal Kingdoms, as to
the rest, well peopled, and abounding in all sorts of Riches.

It was related to him, that about the year 1531, two Brothers, both Idolaters,
as were all the Inhabitants of Macassar, going on their private business to
Ternate, the chief of the Molucca's, had some conference, relating to Religion,
with the Governor Antonio Galvan a Portuguese, one of the most famous
Warriors of his age; and celebrated in History, both for his Piety and Valor.
That having learnt from him, the Vanity of their Idols, they embraced the
Christian Faith, and at their Baptism took the names of Antonio and Michael.
That being returned into their Country, they themselves taught publicly the
Faith of Jesus Christ: That all their Contrymen with one accord, sent their
Ambassadors to the Governor of Ternate, desiring him to send them some to
instruct them in the Principles of Faith: and that the Heads of this Embassy
were the two Brothers, known to Galvan: that these Ambassadors found a very
kind reception; and that for want of a Priest, Galvan gave them a Soldier for
their Teacher, whose name was Francis de Castro; a Man knowing in Religion, and
of exemplary Piety. In conclusion, that Castro, who was thus chosen to instruct
that people, imbarking for Macassar, was driven by a Tempest another way.

Besides this, Xavier was likewise informed, that not long before, a Portuguese
Merchant, called Antonio Payva, going to Macassar in the name of R^ys Vaz
Pereyra Captain of Malacca, for a Ships lading of Sandal, a precious Wood,
growing in that Island, the King of Supa, which is one of the Kingdoms of
Macassar, came in person to see him, and asked diverse questions relating to the
Christian Faith: that this honest Merchant, better acquainted with his
Traffic, than his Religion, yet answered very pertinently, and discoursed of
the Mysteries of Faith, after so reasonable a manner, that the King, then
threescore years of age, was converted, with all his Family and Court. That
another King of the same Island, called, the King of Sion, followed his
Example; and that these two Princes, who were solemnly baptized by the hand of
Payva, not being able to retain him with them, desired him to send them some
Priests, who might administer the Sacraments, and baptize their Subjects.

These pious inclinations, appeared to Father Xavier, as an excellent
groundwork for the planting of the Gospel. He wept for joy at the happy news;
and adored the profound judgments of the Divine Providence, which after having
refused the Grace of Baptism to the King of Travancor, when all his Subjects
had received it, began the Conversion of Sion and of Supa, by that of their
Sovereigns. He even believed, that his Evangelical Ministry, exacted from him,
to put the last hand to the Conversion of those Kingdoms.

In the mean time, He (...) to the Sepulcher of St. Thomas, to consult (...),
concerning his Voyage to Macassar.
he thought it his duty, that before he resolved on the Voyage of Macassar, he
should ask advice from Heaven concerning it; and to perform it as he ought, it
came into his mind to implore the enlightnings of Gods Spirit at the Sepulcher
of St. Thomas, the ancient Founder, and first Father of Christianity in the
Indies, whom he had taken for his Patron and his guide, in the course of all
his Travels. What happened to him in his passage to Meliapor.
He therefore resolved to go in Pilgrimage to Meliapor, which is distant but
fifty Leagues from Negatapan, where the Wind had driven him back. And imbarking
in the Ship of Michael Pereyra, on Palm Sunday, which fell that year 1545, on
the 29th of March, they shaped their Course along the Coasts of Coromandel,
having at first a favorable Wind, but they had not made above twelve or
thirteen Leagues, when the Weather changed on a sudden, and the Sea became so
rough, that they were ^orc'd to make to Land, and cast Anchor under covert of a
Mountain, to put their Ship into some reasonable security. They lay there for
seven days together, in expectation of a better Wind; and all that time the
holy Man passed in Contemplation, without taking any nourishment, either of
Meat or Drink, as they observed who were in the Vessel with him, and as James
Madeira, who was a Witness of it, has deposed in form of Law. He only drank on
Easter-Eve, and that at the request of the said Madeira, a little Water, in
which an Onyon had been boiled, according to his own direction. On that very
day, the Wind came about into a favorable quarter, and the Sea grew calm, so
that they weighed Anchor, and continued their Voyage.

But Xavier, to whom God daily imparted more and more of the Spirit of
Prophecy, foreseeing a furious Tempest, which was concealed under that
fallacious Calm, asked the Pilot, If his Ship were strong enough to endure the
violence of bad Weather, and ride out a Storm? The Pilot confessed she was not,
as being an old crazy Vessel. Then, said Xavier, it were good to carry her back
into the Port. How, Father Francis, said the Pilot, are you fearful with so
fair a Wind? You may assure your self, of good Weather by all manner of signs,
and any little Bark may be in safety. 'Twas in vain for the Saint to press him
farther, not to believe those deceitful appearances; neither would the
Passengers follow his advice, but they soon repented of their neglect. For, far
they had not gone, when a dreadful Wind arose, the Sea was on a Foam, and
mounted into Billows. The Ship was not able to withstand the Tempest, and was
often in danger of sinking, and the Mariners were constrained to make toward
the Port of Negapatan, from whence they set out, which with much ado they at
length recovered.

The impatience of Father Xavier, to visit the Tomb of the Apostle St. Thomas
caused him to make his Pilgrimage by Land; and he traveled with so much
ardour, through the rough and uncouth ways, that in few days he arrived at
Meliapor.

That City is now commonly known by the name of St. Thomas; He comes to
Meliapor, the Monuments which he there finds of the Apostle St. Thomas.
because that blessed Apostle lived so long in it, and there suffered
Martyrdom. If we will give credit to the Inhabitants, it was once almost
swallowed by the Sea; and for proof of this Tradition, there are yet to be seen
under Water, the Ruins of great Buildings. The new Town of Meliapor was built
by the Portuguese; near the Walls there is a Hill, which they called the little
Mount, and in it a Grott, wherein they say St. Thomas hid himself, during the
Persecution. At the entry of this Cave, there is a Cross, cut in the Rock, and
at the foot of the Mountain, there arises a Spring, the Waters of which are of
such virtue, that sick people drinking of them, are ordinarily cured.

From this small ascent, you pass to a higher, and much larger Mountain; which
seems formed by nature, for a lonely, contemplative life. For on one side, it
looks upon the Sea, and on the other is covered with old Trees, always green,
which at once make a fruitful and a pleasing Object. Hither St. Thomas retired,
to pray with his Disciples; and here it was also that he was slain by a
Brachman with the thrust of a Spear.

The Portuguese, who rebuilt Meliapor, found on the top of the Mountain, a
little Chapel, of Stone-work, all in Ruins. They were desirous to repair it,
in memory of the holy Apostle, and as they were rummaging all about, even to
the Foundations of it, they drew out a white Marble, whereon was a Cross, with
Characters engraved round about it, which declared, That God was born of the
Virgin Mary, that this God was Eternal, that the same God taught his Law to his
twelve Apostles, and that one of them came to Meliapor, with a Palmers Staff in
his hand; that he built a Church there; that the Kings of Malabar, Coromandel
and Pandi, with many other Nations, submitted themselves to the Law, preached
by St. Thomas, a man holy and penitent.

This Marble of which we make mention, having on it diverse stains of Blood, the
common Opinon is, that the Apostle suffered Martyrdom upon it. Howsoever it be,
the Marble was placed upon the Altar, when the Chapel was rebuilt, and the
first time, that a solemn Mass was said there, the Cross distilled some drops
of Blood, in the sight of all the people: which also happened many times in the
following years, on the day whereon his Martyrdom is clebrated.

When Xavier was come into the Town, the Vicar of Meliapor, who had heard speak
of him as a Successor of the Apostles, and a Man sent from God, for the
Conversion of the Indies, came to offer him a Lodging in his House: The Father
accepted of it, because it was adjoining to the Church, wherein were kept the
Relics of St. Thomas; and that he could easily step from thence by night, to
consult the Will of God, concerning his intended Voyage to Macassar.

In effect, He is the ^^ten'd by D^^il^, and afterward beaten by them.
as soon as the Vicar was laid to Sleep, for they were lodged in the same
Chamber, Xavier rose as softly as he could, and went to the Church, through a
Churchyard which parted it from the House. The Vicar perceived it, and
advertised Xavier, that this passage was not over-safe by night; and that
horrible Phantomes, had been often seen in it. The Saint believed this only
said to frighten him, and hinder him from rising before day; so, he continued
his usual Prayers; but it was not long, before he found, that the advice was
true. For the nights ensuing, as he passed through the Churchyard, he saw
those dreadful Specters, which endeavored to have stopped him; yet he saved
himself from them, and even laughed at them as vain Illusions.

The Demons are too proud, to bear contempt, without revenge, when God permits
them. One night, when the Saint was at his Devotions before the Image of the
blessed Virgin, they assaulted him in great numbers, and beat him so violently,
that he was all over bruised, and forced to keep his Bed, for some days
together. He said nothing of his adventure to the Vicar; but it was discovered
by a young Man of Malabar, who lodged with the Church, and was awakened with
the noise: rising from his Bed, he heard the Blows, distinctly, and what Father
Xavier said to the holy Virgin, invoking her assistance against the Infernal
Powers: Insomuch, that the Vicar, to whom the young Man had related the words
which he had heard, sometimes repeated them to Xavier, with an inoffensive kind
of Railery.

The Servant of God having recovered some little strength, returned to the
Church, and there continued all the night. What rage soever the Devils had
against him, they durst no more attempt his person, nor so much as endeavor to
affright him. They only made a noise, to distract him in his Prayers; and one
time, disguised in the Habit of Canons, they counterfeited so well the
midnight Matins, that he asked the Vicar, Who were those Cha^ters who sung so
admirably?

But the favors which Xavier received from Heaven, He lea^ns the Will ^f God
(...) his des^^n.
made him large amends, for all the injuries of Hell. For though the
particulars of what passed betwixt God and him were kept secret, it is known at
least, in regard of the principal affair, for which he consulted God, that he
had an Interior Light, which gave him clearly to understand, that he was
commanded to pass to the more Southern Islands, and to labor in their
Conversion. The Christian strength with which he found himself animated at the
same time, caused all the dangers, which naturally he might apprehend, to
disappear; as is manifest by what he wrote from Meliapor, on that occasion, to
two of his Friends at Goa, Paul de Camerin and, James Borba, of whom we have
made so frequent mention.

I Hope that God will conferr many favors on me, in this Voyage; since through
his infinite mercy, I have learnt, with so much spiritual joy, that it is his
holy pleasure, I should go to those Kingdoms of Macassar, where so many
Christians have been made in these latter years. For what remains, I am so much
resolved on executing, what our Lord has revealed to me, that if I should be
wanting on my part, I should go, to my thinking, in direct opposition to his
Orders, and render my self unworthy of his Favor, both in this life and in the
next. If I cannot find this year any Portuguese Vessel, bound for Malacca, I
will ^mbark my self on any Ship, belonging to the Gentiles or the Saracens. I
rep^se, withal, so great a confidence in God, for the love of whom I undertake
this Voyage, that if there should only pass this way, some little Bark of
Malacca, I should go aboard, without the least deliberation. All my hope is in
God, and I conjure you by his Love, to remember always in your Prayers, so
great a sinner as my self.

Though his intentions in coming to The Conversions which he makes at Meliapor.
Meliapor were only to receive the instructions of Heaven in his solitude, yet
he employed some part of his time, in the good of others. His holy Life gave a
luster and value to his Discourse, and the sight of him alone, was of efficacy
to touch the Heart. The people had received it as a Maxim, That whoever
followed not the Counsel of Father Francis, should dye an Enemy of God. And
they related the unhappy end of some sinners, who being urged by Xavier, to
make a speedy Repentance, had deserr'd the work of their Conversion. This
popular Opinion contributed much, to the change of Manners in the Town; and the
fear of a disastrous death, served frequently to break off in one moment the
criminal commerce of many years.

There was in Meliapor, a Portuguese Gentlemen, He bring^ a great sinner to
Repentance.
who lived a debauched, and scandalous life. His House was a Seraglio, in
little: and the greatest part of his business was making a Collection of
beautiful Slaves. Xavier went one day to visit him about Dinner time: Are you
willing, said the Father, that we should begin an acquaintance by dining
together? The Portuguese was somewhat discomposed, both at the Visit and the
Compliment: yet he forced himself into good humor, and made show of being very
glad of the honor which the Father had done him. While they were at Table,
Xavier spoke not one word to him, concerning his debauchery, and only
entertained him with ordinary talk: though they had been served by young
Damsels, whose Habit was not over modest, and whose Air was very impudent. He
continued in the same way he had began, after they were risen from Dinner, and
in conclusion, took his leave, without making him the least reproach.

The Gentleman, surprised at the conduct of Father Francis, believed his
silence to be a bad omen to him; and that he had nothing else to expect, but an
unhappy Death, and a more unhappy Eternity. In this thought he went with all
diligence to find the Father, and falling down before him, Tour silence (said
he) has spoken pow'rfully to my Heart: I have not enjoyed one moment of repose,
since you parted from me: Ah, Father, if my everlasting. Damnation be not
already sfix'd, I put my self into your hands, do with me what you shall judge
necessary for the Salvation of my Soul, behold me ready to pay you a blind
obedience.

Xavier embraced him, and after he had given him to understand, that the
mercies of the Lord are infinite, that it is our duty never to despair, that he
who sometimes refuses to Sinners the hour of repentance, always grants pardon
to the Penitent; he caused him to put away those occasions of his sin, and
disposed him to a general Confession, the fruit of which, was a chaste and
Christian Life.

In short, the Father did what he could desire to be done at Meliapore; and
Witnesses of known Integrity have deposed on Oath, that he left the Town so
different from what it was, at his coming thither, that it was hardly to be
known, for the same place: which also gave him so entire a satisfaction, that
giving it a thousand Benedictions, he said that there was not in all the
Indies, a more Christian Town. And at the same time he Prophesied, that one day
it should become flourishing and wealthy; which Prediction was accomplished
some few years afterward.

Though all these Conversions, Diverse wonderful events which increase his Fame.
drew the public veneration on Father Francis, it seemed that God took
pleasure in making the name of his Servant yet more illustrious, by certain
wonderful events. A Merchant of Meliapore, being just ready to imbark for
Malacca, went to take his leave of him. In receiving his blessing, he begged of
him some little token of his friendship. The Father who was very poor, could
find nothing to give him, but the Chaplet which was hanging at his neck: This
Chaplet, or Beads.
said he to the Merchant, shall not be unprofitable to you, provided you repose
your trust in the Virgin Mary. The Merchant went away, in full assurance of the
Divine Protection, and without fear of Pirates, Winds, or Rocks: but God would
make a trial of his Faith. He had already almost crossed, without the least
hazard, the great Gulf, which is betwixt Meliapore and Malacca, when suddenly
there blew a furious Storm, the Sails were torn, the Rudder broken, and the
Mast came by the Board; and the Vessel, afterward being driven against the
Rocks, was split: The greatest part of the Seamen and Passengers were drowned;
some of them held upon the Rocks, where they were cast away; and the Merchant
himself was of that number. But, being upon the wide Sea, and not having
wherewithal to supply Nature, to avoid dying by hunger, they took a resolution,
which only despair could have inspired: having gathered up some floating Planks
of their wrecked Vessel, and joining them together the best they could, they
put themselves upon them, and abandoned their safety to the mercy of the Waves,
without other hope, than of lighting on some current, which might possibly
carry them on shore.

The Merchant full of confidence in the Blessed Virgin, had still preserved the
Chaplet of Xavier, and feared not drowning, while he held it in his hand. The
float of Planks was hardly adrift upon the waves, when he found he was
transported out of himself, and believed he was at Meliapore with Father
Francis. Returning from his ecstasy, he was strangely surpised, to find
himself on an unknown Coast, and not to see about him the Companions of his
Fortunes, nor the Planks to which he had entrusted his Life. He understood from
some People, who casually came that way, that it was the Coast of Negapatan,
and, in a transport mixed with joy and amazement, he told them, in how
miraculous a manner, God had delivered him from death.

Another Portuguese, by profession a Soldier, called Jerome Fernandez de
Mendoza, received a considerable assistance from Xavier, in a different manner,
but full as marvelous. Fernandez, having put off, from the Coast of Cormandel,
in a Ship belonging to him, wherein was all his wealth, to go to another Coast
more westward, was taken near the Cape of Comorin, by the Malabar Pirates,
equally covetous and cruel. To save his life, in losing his goods, he threw
himself into the Sea, and was happy enough, in spite of his ill fortune, to
swim to land, on the Coast of Meliapore. Meeting there Father Francis, he
related his misfortune to him, and begged an Alms. The Father was almost sorry,
at that time for his being so poor himself, that he had not wherewithal to
relieve the miserable man, yet he put his hand into his Pocket, as if he were
searching there for something, but finding nothing, he lifted up his eyes to
Heaven, and afterward turning to Fernandez, with looks full of compassion,
have courage, Brothe^, said he to him, Heaven will provide for you. After
which, walking forward four or five paces, he once more put his hands into his
Pockets, and pulled out fifty pieces of Gold, receive added he, what Heaven
sends you: Make use of it, but speak not of it: The surprise and joy of
Fernandez were so great, that it was impossible for him to keep silence. He
published in all places, the bounty of his Benefactour; and the pieces of Gold
were found to be so pure and fine, that it was not doubted but they were
miraculous.

But perhaps nothing is more admirable, He pe^swades a ri^h Merchant to
Evangelical perfection.
than what passed betwixt the Father, and John Duro, or Deyro, as some have
called him. He was a man, of about five and thirty years of age, who had
formerly born arms; afterward became a Merchant, and owner of a Ship, very
wealthy, and fortunate in all his traffic: all which notwithstanding, he was
ill satisfied with the world, uneasy to himself, unquiet in the midst of all
his wealth, and persuaded that God alone could content his Soul. He went one
day to see the Holy man, and told him, that for many years he had a desire of
changing his condition; and of serving God as perfectly as he was able, but,
that two reasons had always hindered him: the one was, that he never yet, could
meet with any person, who was capable of showing him the way of perfection; the
other was, that he was afraid of falling into Poverty. He added, that he was
now out of pain concerning those two points. That for the first, he hoped he
should walk surely in the way of Heaven, having so able a guide as he; and for
the second, he had got sufficiently, for his maintenance in an honest and
comfortable way, during the remainder of his life. He begged leave of Father
Xavier, that he might follow him, and promised on all occasions to defray his
charges.

The Father made Deyro understand, how far he was yet from the Kingdom of
Heaven; that to arrive at perfection, he must perform what our Savior
counseled the young man, who seemed willing to follow him, that is to say, he
must practice these words in the litteral sense, sell all thou have, and give
it to the Poor. Deyro, thus undeceived, immediately desired the Father to take
all his goods, and distribute them amongst the Poor; but the Father, would
neither do what Deyro had proposed to him, nor permit that he should himself
dispose of any thing, before he had made Confession to him. Foreseeing, without
doubt, that being so Rich, he should be obliged to make restitution of some
part of that which he had gained.

The Confession of the Merchant, was three days in making: after which, having
sold his Ship, and his Merchandise, he restored what he had got unjustly, and
gave great Alms. And in consequence of this, under the direction of the Saint,
he gave himself to the exercises of Piety and Penitence, thereby to lay a solid
Foundation of that perfection, to which he aspired.

But these fair beginnings, The new Convert falls from grace, and becomes
suspected to the Saint.
were not attended with any answerable fruit, and that Spirit of Retirement, of
Mortification, and of Poverty, was soon extinguished in a man accustomed to the
turmoyls of the world, who had always lived in plenty, and who passionately
loved his profit. He returned to the thoughts of his former condition, and
having recovered some jewels, and bought a small Vessel in secret, he set
himself to follow his former way of living.

When he was just on the point of setting Sail, a Catechist, called Antonio,
came and told him, that Father Xavier desired to speak with him. Deyro, who
thought of nothing more, than of making his escape, and who had not entrusted
his design to the knowledge of any person, made as if he took him for another.
But Antonio persisting in it, that it was himself, whom the Father meant, he
durst not dissemble any longer, and went to find him, resolved however of
denying all, as thinking the Father at most could have but a bare suspicion of
his change, and intended flight. He therefore assumed an air of Confidence, and
presented himself boldly before the Saint, but God had given him knowledge of
Deyro's intentions. You have sinned, said Xavier, as soon as he beheld him, you
have sinned. These few words so deeply struck him, that he threw himself at the
feet of the Father, all trembling, and crying out, It Is true, my Father, I have
sinned; Penitence then, my Son, replied the Father, Penitence! Deyro confessed
himself immediately, went to sell off his Ship, and distributed all the money
to the Poor; He returned afterward, and put himself once more under the
conduct of the Father, with a firm resolution of following his counsels more
sincerely, and of serving God more faithfully.

How un^eign'd soever the repentance of Deyro seemed, Xavier had no confidence
in it; and these new fervours were suspected by him. He would not receive him
into the Company of Jesus, which requires solid Spirits, and such as are firm
to their Vocation.

Yet he refused not to admit him for his Companion, in quality of a Catechist,
and carried him with him to Malacca: for having continued four Months at
M^liapore, he parted thence in September 1545, notwithstanding the tears of the
people, who were desirous of retaining him; and held the course of Malacca,
designing from thence to pass to Macassar.

Before he went on Board he wrote to Father Paul de Camerine at Goa, that when
the Fathers of the Society, who were daily expected from Portugal, should
arrive, two of those new Missioners should accompany the Princes of
Iafanatapan, whenever the Portuguese should think ^it to re-establish the
lawful King. For there was a report, that the expedition should be renewed,
which a base interest had set aside. But this Project was not put in execution;
and both the Princes died one after the other, in less than two years after
their Conversion, which was only profitable to their Souls.

While the Ship that carried Xavier was crossing the Gulf of Ceylan, His
Charity to to a Soldier, who ha^ lost all his Money at Play.
an occasion of Charity was offered to the Saint, which he would not suffer to
escape. The Mariners and Soldiers passed their time, according to their
custom, in playing at Cards. Two Soldiers set themselves to it, more out of
avarice than pleasure, and one of them played with such ill fortune, that he
lost not only all his own money, but the stock which others had put into his
hands to traffic for them. Having nothing more to lose, he withdrew, cursing
his luck, and blaspheming God. His despair prevailed so far over him, that he
had thrown himself into the Sea, or run upon the point of his Sword, if he had
not been prevented. Xavier had notice of these his mad intentions, and
execrable behavior, and immediately came to his relief. He embraced him
tenderly, and said all he could to comfort him: But the Soldier who was still
in the transports of his fury, thrust him away, and forbore not even ill
Language to him. Xavier stood recollected for some time, imploring God's
assistance and counsel; then went and borrowed fifty Royals of a Passenger,
brought them to the Soldier, and advised him once more to try his fortune. At
this the Soldier took heart, and played so luckily, that he recovered all his
losses with great advantage. The Saint, who looked on, took out of the overplus
of the winnings, what he had borrowed for him; and seeing the Gamester, now
returned to a calm temper, wrought upon him so successfully, that he, who
before refused to hear him, was now overpowr'd by his discourse, never after
handled Cards, and became exemplary in his Life.

They arrived at Malacca, He arrives at Mal^cca, a digression conce^nit.
the 25th. of September. As this is one of those places in the Indies, where
the Saint, whose Life I write, had most business, and whither he made many
Voyages, it will not be unprofitable to say somewhat of it. It Is s^i^uate
beyond the Gulf of Bengale, toward the head of that great Peninsula, which
from the mouth of the Ara, is extended to the South, almost to the Equinoctial
Line; and is of two Degrees and a half of Elevation, over against the Island of
Sumatra, which the Ancients, who had not frequented this Channel, believed to
be joined to the Continent.

Malacca was under the Dominion of the Kings of Siam, 'till the Saracens, who
Traded ^hither, becoming powerful, first made it Mohammedan, then caused it to
revolt against the lawful Prince, and set up a Monarch of their own Sect,
called Mahomet. There was not at that time, any more famous Mart Town than
this, and where there was a greater concourse of different Nations. For,
besides the People of Guzuratte, Aracan, Malabar, Pegu, Sumatra, Iava, and the
Molucca's, the Arabs, the Persians, the Chinese, and the Iaponians, traffick'd
there: and accordingly the Town lay extended all along by the Sea side, for the
convenience of Trade.

Amongst all the Nations of Asia there is not any, more inclined to pleasure;
and this seems chiefly to proceed, from the mild temper of the air. For there
is an eternal Spring, notwithstanding the neighborhood of the Line. The
Inhabitants follow the natural bent of their complexion; their whole business
is Perfumes, Feasts, and Music; to say nothing of Carnal Pleasures, to which
they set no bound. Even the Language, which they speak, participates of the
softness of the Country. It Is called the Malaya Tongue, and of all the Orient,
it is the most delicate, and sweet of Pronunciation.

D^n Alphonso Albuquerque, conquered Malacca, in the year 1511, and thirty
thousand men, with eight thousand pieces of Artillery, and an infinite number
of Elephants and Ships were not able to defend it. It was taken by force, at
the second Assault, by eight hundred brave Portugueses, seconded by some few
Malabars. It was given up to pillage, for three days, and the Moor King, after
all his endeavors, was forced to fly with only fifty Horsemen to attend him.
The Portugueses built a Citadel, which the succeeding Governors took care to
fortify: yet not so strongly, as to be proof against the attempts of the
Barbarians; who many times attacq'd it, and half ruined it.

As soon as Xavier came on shore, he went to visit the Governor of the Town,
to inform him of his intended Voyage to Macassar. The Governor told him, that
he had lately sent thither a Priest, of holy life, with some Portuguese
Soldiers; and that he expected to hear of them very suddenly. That in the mean
time he was of opinion, that the Father and his Companion, should stay at
Malacca, till the present condition of the Christians in Macassar were fully
known. Xavier gave credit to the Governor, and retired to the Hospital, which
he had chosen for the place of his abode. The People ran in Crowds to behold
the countenance of that great Apostle, whose fame was spread through all the
Indies; and over all the East. The Parents showed him to their Children; and it
was observed, that the Man of God, in caressing those little Portugueses,
called every one of them by their proper names, as if he had been of their
acquaintance; and were not a stranger newly come on shore.

For what remains, he found the Town, In what condition he found the Town; and
what he did in order to reform it.
in a most horrible corruption of manners. The Portugueses, who lived there at
a distance, both from the Bishop, and the Viceroy of the Indies, committed all
manner of Crimes, without fear of Laws, either Ecclesiastical or Civil.
Avarice, Intemperance, Uncleanness, and forgetfulness of God were every where
predominant, and the Habit only, or rather the excess and number of their
Vices, distinguished the Christians from the Unbelievers.

This terrible Prospect of a sinful Town, gave Xavier to comprehend, that his
stay in Malacca was necessary, and might possibly turn to a good account; but
before he would undertake the Reformation of a Town, so universally corrupted,
he employed some days in serving of the Sick: he passed many nights in Prayer,
and performed extraordinary Austeri^i^s.

After these Preparatives, he began his public instructions according to the
methods which he had frequently practiced at Goa. Walking the Streets at
evening, with his Bell in his Hand, he cried with a loud voice, Pray to God for
those who are in the state of Mor^at Sin: and by this, he brought into the
minds of Sinners, the remembrance and consideration of their Offenses. For
seeing the ill habits of their Minds, and that the disease was like to be
inflamed, if violent remedies were applied, he tempered more than ever the
ardour of his Zeal. Though he had naturally a Serene Countenance, and was of a
pleasing Conversation, yet all the charms of his good humor seemed to be
redoubled at Malacca, insomuch, that his Companion, John Deyro, could not but
wonder at his gayety, and soft behavior.

By this procedure, He labors with success at Malacca.
the Apostle gained the Hearts of all, and became in some manner, Lord of the
City. At the very first, he rooted out an established custom, which permitted
the young Maids to go in the Habit of Boys, whenever they pleased, which
occasioned a world of scandal. He drove out of Doors, the Concubines, or turned
them into lawful Wives, according to his former method. As for the Children,
who had no knowledge of G^d, and who learnt Songs of Bibaldry, and Obsceneness,
as soon as they began to speak, he formed them so well in a little time, that
they publicly recited the Christian Doctrine, and set up little Altars in the
Streets, about which they sung together the Hymns of the Catholic Church. But
that in which he was most successful, was to restore the practice of
Confession, which was almost entirely lost. But now, Men and Women crowded the
Tribunal of holy Penitence; and the Father was not able to supply the
necessities of so many.

He labored in the knowledge of the Malaya Tongue, which is spoken in all the
Isles beyond Malacca, and is as it were the Universal Language. His first care
was to have a little Catechism translated into it, being the same he had
composed on the Coast of Fishery: together with a more ample instruction, which
treated of the principal duties of Christianity. He learnt all this without
Book, and to make himself the better understood, he took a particular care of
the Pronunciation.

With these helps, and the assistance of Interpreters, who were never wanting
to him at his need, he converted many Idolaters, as also Mahometans and Jews;
amongst the rest, a famous Rabbi, who made a public Abjuration of Judaism.
This Rabbi, who before had taken for so many Fables, or juggling tricks, all
those wonders which are reported to have been done by Xavier, now acknowledged
them for Truths, by the Evidence of his own Eyes. For the Saint never wrought
so many Miracles as at Malacca. The Juridical Depositions of Witnesses then
living, have assured us, that all sick persons, whom he did but touch, were
immediately cured; and that his Hands had an healing virtue, against all
Distempers. One of his most famous cures, was that of Antonio Fernandez, a
Youth, not above fifteen years of age, was sick to death. His Mother, a
Christian by profession, but not without some remainders of Paganism in her
Heart, seeing that all natural Remedies were of no effect, had recourse to
certain Enchantments frequently practiced amongst the Heathens, and sent for an
old Sorceress, who was called N^i. The Witch made her Magical Opeperations, on
a Lace brayded of many thrids, and tied it about the Arm of the Patient. But
instead of the expected cure, Fernandez lost his Speech, and was taken with
such violent Convulsions, that the Physicians were called again; who all
despaired of his recovery. It was expected every moment he should breath his
last, when a Christian Lady, who happened to come in, said to the Mother of the
dying Youth, Why do you not send for the holy Father? he will infallibly cure
him. She gave credit to her words, and sent for Xavier. He was immediately
there: Fernandez, who had lost his Sense, and lay gasping in death, began to
cry out, and make violent motions, so soon as the Father had set his Foot
within the Doors: but when he came into the Room and stood before the Youth, he
fell into howlings, and dreadful wreathings of his Body, which redoubled at the
sight of the Cross, that was presented to him. Xavier doubted not but there was
something of extraordinary in his Disease, nor even that God, for the
punishment of the Mother, who had made use of Diabolical Remedies, had
delivered her Son to the evil Spirits. He fell on his Knees by the Bedside,
read aloud the Passion of our Lord, hung his Reliquiary about the Neck of the
sick person, and sprinkled him with Holy Water. This made the fury of the Devil
cease: and the young Man, half dead, lay without motion as before. Then Xavier
rising up, Get him somewhat to eat, (said he) and told them, what nourishment
he thought proper for him. After which, addressing himself to the Father of the
Youth, When your Son, added he, shall be in condition to walk, lead him your
self, for nine days successively, to the Church of our Lady of the Mount, where
to morrow I will say Mass for him. After this he departed, and the next day,
while he was celebrating the Divine Sacrifice, Fernandez, on the sudden came to
himself, spoke very sensibly, and perfectly recovered his former health.

But how wonderful soever, He (...) a (...) Mu^.
the cure of this Youth, appeared in the Eyes of all Men, the Resurection of a
young Maid was of greater admiration. Xavier was gone on a little Journey,
somewhere about the Neighborhood of Malacca, to do a work of Charity, when
this Girl died. Her Mother, who had been in search of the holy Man during her
Daughter's sickness, came to him, after his return, and throwing her self at
his Feet, all in Tears, said almost the same words to him, which Martha said
formerly to our Lord, That if he had been in Town, she who was now dead, had
been alive: but if he would call upon the name of Jesus Christ, the dead might
be restored to life. Xavier was overjoyed to behold so great Faith in a Woman,
who was but lately baptized, and judging her worthy of that blessing which she
begged, after having lifted up his Eyes to Heaven, and silently prayed to God
some little space, he turned toward her, and said to her with much assurance,
Go; your Daughter is alive. The poor Mother seeing the Saint offered not to go
with her to the place of Burial, replied betwixt hope and fear, That it was
three days since her Daughter was interred: It Is no matter, answered Xavier,
open the Sepulcher, and you shall find her living. The Mother, without more
reply, ran full of Con^idence to the Church, and in presence of many persons,
having caused the Gravestone to be removed, ^ound her Daughter living.

While these things passed at Malacca, He recei^es Letters from E^rope, by the
new* Missi^ners, who are sent him.
a Ship from Goa brought Letters to Father Xavier from Italy and Portugal:
which informed him of the happy progress of the Society of Jesus, and what it
had already performed in Germany for the public service of the Church. He was
never weary of reading those Letters, he kissed them, and bedewed them with his
Tears, imagining himself, either with his Brethren in Europe, or them present
with himself in Asia. He had news at the same time, that there was arrived a
supply of three Missioners, whom Father Ignatius had sent him, and that Don
John de Castro, who succeeded Alphonso de Sosa, in the Government of the
Indies, had brought them in his company. These Missioners were Antonio
Criminal, Nicholas Lancilotti, and John Beyra, all three Priests; the two first
Italians, and the last a Spaniard: Apostolical Men, and of eminent Virtue,
particularly Criminal, who of all the Children of Ignatius was the first, who
was honored with ^he Crown of Martyrdom. Xavier disposed of them immediately,
commanding by his Letters, That Lancilotti should remain in the Seminary of
holy Faith, there to instruct the young Indians in the knowledge of the Latin
Tongue, and that the other two should go to accompany Francis Mansilla on the
Coast of Fishery.

For himself, (...)
having waited three Months for news from Macassar, when he saw the season,
proper for the return of the Ship, which the Governor of Malacca had sent, was
now expired, and that no Vessel was come from those parts, he judged, that
Providence would not make use of him at present, for the instruction of those
people, who had a Priest already with them. Nevertheless, that he might be more
at hand to succor them, when ever it pleased God to furnish him with an
occasion, it was in his thoughts to go to the Neighboring Islands of that
Coast, which were wholly destitute of Gospel Ministers.

God Almighty at that time, He fore^nows, and foretells the ruin of Malacca.
revealed to him the Calamities which threatened Malacca; both the Pestilence
and the War, with which it was to be afflicted in the years ensuing; and the
utter desolation to which it should one day be reduced for the punishment of
its Crimes. For the Inhabitants, who since the arrival of the Father, had
reformed their Manners, relapsed insensibly into their Vices, and became more
dissolute than ever, as it commonly happens to Men of a debauched life, who
constrain themselves for a time, and whom the force of ill Habits, draws
backward into Sin. Xavier failed not to denounce the Judgments of God to them,
and to exhort them to Piety, for their own interest. But his Threatenings and
Exhortations were of no effect: and this it was that made him say of Malacca,
the quite contrary of what he had said concerning Meliap^re, that he had not
seen, in all the Indies, a more wicked Town.

He embarked for Amboyna the first of January 1546, with John Deyro, (...)
in a Ship which was bound for the Isle of Banda. The Captain of the Vessel was
a Portuguese, the rest, as well Mariners as Soldiers, were Indians; all of
them ^^most of several Countries, and the great part Mahometans, or Gentiles.
The (...) converted them to Jesus Christ, during the Voyage, and what convinced
the Infidels of (...) truth of Christ^an^ty, was, that when Father Xavier
expounded to them the Mysteries of Christianity in one Tongue, they understood
him severally, each in his own Language, as if he had spoken at once in many
Tongues.

They had been already six weeks at Sea, without discovering Amboyna; the Pilot
was of Opinion they had passed it, and was in pain concerning it, not knowing
how to tack about, because they had a full ^ore-Wind. Xavier perceiving the
trouble of the Pilot. Do not vex your self, said he, we are yet in the Gulf;
and to morrow at break of day, we shall be in view of Amboyna. In effect, at
the time mentioned, the next morning, they saw that Island. The Pilot being
unwilling to cast Anchor; Father Xavier, with some of the Passengers, were put
into a Skiff, and the Ship pursued its course. When the Skiff was almost ready
to Land, two light Vessels of Pirates, which usually cruis'd on that Coast,
appeared on the sudden, and pursued them swiftly. Not hoping any succor from
the Ship, which was already at a great distance from them, and being also
without defense, they were forced to put off from Shore, and ply their Oars
toward the main Sea: insomuch that the Pirates soon lost sight of them. After
they had escaped the danger, they durst not make to Land again, for fear the
two Vessels should lie in wait to intercept them at their return. But the
Father assured the Mariners, they had no further cause of fear: turning
therefore toward the Island, they landed there in safety, on the sixteenth of
February.

The Isle of Amboyna is distant from He arrives at Amboyna: What he performs
there.
Malacca about two hundred and fifty Leagues, it is near thirty Leagues in
compass, and is famous for the concourse of Merchants, who frequent it from all
parts. The Portuguese, who conquered it, during the time that Antonio Galvan
was Governor of Ternata, had a Garrison in it; besides which, there were in
the Island seven Villages of Christians, Natives of the place, but without any
Priest, because the only one in the Island was just dead. Xavier began to visit
these Villages, and immediately baptized many Infants, who died suddenly after
they were Christened. As if, (says he himself in one of his Letters) the Divine
Providence, had only so far prolonged their lives, till the Gate of Heaven were
opened to them.

Having been informed, that sundry of the Inhabitants, had retired themselves
from the Seaside, into the midst of the Woods, and Caves of the Mountains, to
shelter themselves from the rage of the Barbarians, their Neighbors and their
Enemies, who robbed the Coasts, and put to the Sword, or made Slaves of all,
who fell into their Hands, he went in search of those poor Salvages, amidst the
horror of their Rocks and Forests; and lived with them as much as was
necessary, to make them understand the duties of Christianity, of which the
greatest part of them was ignorant.

After having instructed the Faithful, He (...) the Idol^ter^ and Moors of
Amboyna.
he applied himself to preach the Gospel to the Idolaters and Moors, and God so
blessed the endeavors of his Servant, that the greatest part of the Island
became Christians. He built Churches in every Village, and made choice of the
most reasonable, the most able, and the most servent, to be Masters over the
rest, till there should arrive a supply of Missioners. To which purpose he
wrote to Goa, and commanded Paul de Camerine to send him Francis Mansilla, John
Beyra, and one or two more, of the first Missioners, which should arrive from
Europe: He charged Mansilla in particular, to come. His design was to establish
in one of those Isles a House of the Company, which should send out continual
supplies of Laborers, for the publication of the Gospel, through all that
Archipelago.

While Xavier labored in this manner A Spanish Fleet arrives at Amboyna.
at Amboyna, two Naval Armies arrived there: One of Portugal with three Ships,
the other of Spaniards with six Men of War. The Spaniards were come from Nueva
Espagna, or Mexico, for the Conquest of the Molucca's in the name of the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, as they pretended; but their Enterprise succeeded
not. After two years cruising, and long stay with the King of Tidore, who
received them, to give Jealousy to the Portuguese, who were allied to the King
of Ternate, his Enemy, they took their way by Amboyna, to pass into the Indies,
and from thence to Europe. They were engaged in an unjust Expedition, against
the Rights of Portugal, and without Order from Charles the Fifth, for that
Emperor, to whom King John the third addressed his Complaints thereupon,
disavow'd the Proceedings of his Subjects, and gave permission, that they
should be used like Pirates.

Yet the Portuguese proceeded not against them with that severity. But it seems
that God revenged their quarrel; in afflicting the Spaniards with a contagious
Fever, which destroyed the greatest part of their Fleet. It was a sad spectacle
to behold the Mariners and Soldiers, lying here and there in their Ships, or
on the shore, in Cabins, covered only with Leaves. The Disease which consumed
them, kept all men at a distance from them, and the more necessity they had of
succor, the less they found from the People of the Island.

At the first report which came to Xavier of this Pestilence, (...) the Spanish
(...), during the (...) them.
he left all things to relieve them: And it is scarce to be imagined, to what
actions his Charity led him on this occasion. He was day and night in a
continual motion, at the same time administering to their Bodies and their
Souls; assisting the dying, burying the dead, and Interring them even with his
own hands. As the Sick had neither Food nor Physic, he procured both for them
from every side; and he who furnished him the most, was a Portuguese called
John d' Araus; who came in his company from. Malacca to Amboyna. Nevertheless
the Malady still increasing day by day, Araus began to fear he should
impoverish himself by these Charities, and from a tender hearted man, became so
hard, that nothing more was to be squeezed out of him. One day Xavier sent to
him for some Wine, for a sick man who had continual faintings: Araus gave it,
but with great reluctance, and charged the Messenger to trouble him no more;
that he had need of the remainder for his own use, and when his own was at an
end, whither should he go for a supply? These words were no sooner related to
Father Francis, than inflamed with a holy indignation, What, says he, does
Araus think of keeping his Wine for himself, and refusing it to the Members of
Jesus Christ; the end of his Life is very near, and after his death, all his
Estate shall be distributed amongst the Poor. He denounced death to him with
his own mouth, and the event verified the Prediction, as the sequel will make
manifest.

Though the Pestilence was not wholly ceased, and many Sick were yet aboard the
Vessels, the Spanish Fleet set Sail for Goa, forced to it, by the approach of
Winter, which begins about May, in those quarters. Father Xavier made
Provisions for the necessities of the Soldiers, and furnished them, before
their departure, with all he could obtain from the Charity of the Portuguese.
He recommended them likewise to the Charity of his Friends at Malacca, where
the Navy was to touch, and wrote to Father Paul de Camerine at Goa, that he
should not fail to Lodge in the College of the Company, those Religious of the
Order of St. Augustine, who came along with the Army from Mexico, and that he
should do them all the good Offices, which their Profession, and their Virtue
claimed from him.

After the Spaniards were departed, He passes into diverse I^lands.
Xavier made some little Voyages to places near adjoining to Amboyna: and
visited some Islands which were half unpeopled, and desert, waiting the
convenience of a Ship, to transport him to the Molucca's, which are nearer to
Macassar than Amboyna. One of those Isles is Baranura; where he miraculously
recovered his Crucifix, in the manner I am going to relate, according to the
account which was given of it by a Portuguese, called Fausto Rodriguez, who was
a witness of the Fact, has deposed it upon Oath, and whose Juridical Testimony
is in the process of the Saints Canonisation.

We were at Sea, says Rodriguez, He recovers his Crucifix, which was fallen
into the Sea.
Father Francis, John Raposo, and my self, when there arose a Tempest which
alarmed all the Mariners. Then the Father drew from his bosom a little
Crucifix, which he always carried about him, and leaning over deck, intended to
have dipped it into the Sea; but the Crucifix dropped out of his hand, and was
carried off by the Waves. This loss, very sensibly afflicted him, and he
concealed not his sorrow from us. The next morning we landed on the Island of
Baranura; from the time when the Crucifix was lost, to that of our landing, it
was near 24 hours, during which, we were in perpetual danger. Being on shore,
Father Francis and I, walked along by the Sea side, toward the Town of Tamalo,
and had already walked about five hundred paces, when both of us beheld arising
out of the Sea, a Crab-Fish, which carried betwixt his Claws, the same
Crucifix, raised on high. I saw the Crab-Fish come directly to the Father by
whose side I was, and stopped before him. The Father, falling on his knees, took
his Crucifix, after which the Crab-Fish returned into the Sea. But the Father,
still continuing in the same humble posture, hugging and kissing the Crucifix,
was half an hour praying with his hands across his breast, and my self joining
with him in thanksgiving to God, for so evident a Miracle: after which we
arose, and continued on our way. Thus you have the Relation of Rodriguez.

They staid eight days upon the Island, and afterward set sail for Rosalao;
where Xavier Preached at his first coming, as he had done at Bara^ura. But the
Idolaters who Inhabited these two Islands, being extremely vicious, altogether
brutal, and having nothing of humane in them, besides the figure, gave no
credit to his words, and one only man amongst them, more reasonable than all
the rest, believed in Jesus Christ. Insomuch, that the Holy Apostle, at his
departure from Rosalao, took off his Shoos, and shook off the dust, that he
might not carry any thing away with him, which belonged to that execrable Land.

Truly speaking, He foretells the holy death of a new Convert.
the Conversion of that one man was worth that of many. The Saint gave him in
Baptism him own name of Francis, and foretold him that he should dye most
piously, in calling upon the name of Jesus. The Prophecy was taken notice of,
which has recommended the fame of this new Convert to Posterity; and which was
not accomplished, till after forty years. For this Christian, forsaking his
barbarous Island, and turning Soldier, served the Portuguese, on diverse
occasions, 'till in the year 1588, he was wounded to death in a Battle given by
Don Sancho Vasconcellos, Governor of Amboyna, who made War with the Saracen
Hiamo* Francis was carried off, into the Camp, and many, as well Indians as
Portuguese, came about him, to see the accomplishment of the Prediction, made
by the blessed Francis Xavier. All of them beheld the Soldier dying, with
extraordinary signs of Piety, and crying without ceasing, Jesus assist me.

The Island of Vlate, He goes to the I^land of Ulate and the Miracle there
wrought by him.
which is better Peopled, and less Salvage, than those of Baranura, and
Rosalao, was not so deaf nor so rebellious to the voice of the holy man. He
found it all in arms, and the King of it besieged, in his Town, ready to be
surrendered, neither through want of courage, nor of Defendants, but of Water.
Because the enemy had cut off the Springs, and there was no likelihood of Rain;
insomuch, that during the great heats, both Men and Horses, were in danger of
perishing by thirst.

The opportunity appeared favorable to Father Xavier, for gaining the
vanquished Party to Jesus Christ, and perhaps all the Conquerours. Full of a
noble con^idence in God, he found means to get into the Town, and being
presented to the King, offered to supply him with what he most wanted. Suffer
me, said he, to erect a Cross, and trust in the God, whom I come to declare to
you. He is the Lord and Governor of Nature, who, when ever he pleases, can
open the Fountains of Heaven, and water the Earth. But in case the Rain should
descend upon you, give me your promise, to acknowledge his power, and that you,
with your Subjects, will receive his ^aw. In the extremity to which the King
was then reduced, he consented readily to the Father's conditions, and also
obliged himself on the public faith, to keep his word, provided Xavier failed
not on his part, of the promised Blessing. Then Xavier causing a great Cross to
be made, set it up, on the highest ground of all the Town, and there, on his
knees, amongst a crowd of Soldiers, and Men, Women, and Children, attracted by
the novelty of the sight, as much as by the expected succor; he offered to God
the death of his only Son, and prayed him, by the merits of that Crucified
Savior who had poured out his blood for the sake of all Mankind, not to deny a
little water, for the Salvation of an Idolatrous People.

Scarcely had the Saint begun his Prayer, when the Sky began to be overcast
with Clouds, and by that time he had ended it, there fell down Rain in great
abundance, which lasted so long, 'till they had made a plentiful provision of
water. The Enemy, now hopeless of taking the Town, immediately decamped, and
the King, with all his People, received Baptism from the hand of Father Xavier.
He commanded also, that all the neighboring Islands who held of him, should
adore Christ Jesus; and engaged the Saint to go and publish the Faith amongst
them. Xavier employed three months and more, in these little voyages; after
which returning to Amboyna, where he had left his Companion John Deyro, to
cultivate the new growing Christianity, and where he left him also for the same
intention, embarked on a Portuguese V^ssel, which was setting Sail for the
Molucca's.

That which is commonly called by the name of the Molucca's, He goes to the
Molucca's.
is a Country on the Oriental Ocean, divided into many little Islands, situate
near the Equator, exceeding fruitful in Cloves, and famous for the Trade of
Spices. There are five principal Islands of them, Ternate, Tidor, Motir,
Macian, and Bacian. The first of these, is a degree and half distant from the
Equinoctial, to the North, the rest follow in the order above named; and all
five are in sight of one another. These are those celebrated Islands,
concerning which Ferdinand Magellan raised so many disputes amongst the
Geographers, and so many quarrels betwixt Spain and Portugal. For the
Portuguese having discovered them from the East, and the Spaniards from the
West, each of them pretended to enclose them, within their Conquests, according
to the Lines of Longitude, which they drew.

Ternate, What happens t^ him in his way.
is the greatest of the Molucca's; and it was on that side, that Father Xavier
took his course. He had a Gulf to pass of ninety Leagues, exexceeding
dangerous, both in regard of the strong Tides, and the uncertain Winds, which
are still raising Tempests though the Sea be never so calm. The Ship which
carried the Father, was one of those Vessels, which in those parts are called
Caracores, of a long and narrow built, like Galleys, and which use
indifferently Sails and Oars. Another Vessel of the same make, carried a
Portuguese called John Galvan, having aboard her all his goods; they set out
together from Amboyna, keeping company by the way, and both of them bound for
the Port of Ternate.

In the midst of the Gulf, they were surpised with a storm, which parted them
so far, that they lost sight of each other. The Caracore of Xavier, after
having been in danger of perishing many times, was at length saved, and
recovered the Port of Ternate, by a kind of Miracle: As for that of Galvan, it
was not known what became of her; and the news concerning her, was only brought
by an evident Revelation.

The first Saints day, when the Father Preached to the People, he stopped short
in the middle of his discourse, and said after a little pause, Pray to God for
the Soul of John Galvan, who is drowned in the Gulf. Some of the Audience, who
were friends of Galvan, and interessed in the Caracore, ran to the Mariners,
who had brought the Father, and demanded of them, if they knew any certain
news, of this tragical adventure? They answered, that they knew no more, than
that the storm had separated the two Vessels. The Portugueses recovered courage
at those words, and imagined that Father Francis had no other knowledge than
the Seamen. But they were soon undeceived by the testimony of their own eyes,
for three days after they saw washed on the shore, the Corpse of Galvan, and the
wreck of the Vessel, which the ^ea had thrown upon the Coast.

Ver^ near this time, He (...) John Ar^^s.
when Xavier was saying Mass, turning to the People to say the Orate Fratres,
he added, pray also for John Araus, who is newly dead at Amboyna. They who were
present, observed punctually the day and hour, to see, if what the Father had
said, would come to pass; ten or twelve days after, there arrived a Ship from
Amboyna, and the truth was known not only by diverse Letters, but confirmed also
by a Portuguese, who had seen Araus dye at the same moment, when Xavier
exhorted the People to pray to God, to rest his Soul. This Araus, was the
Merchant, which refused to give Wine for the succor of the Sick, in the
Spanish Fleet, and to whom the Saint had denounced a sudden death. He fell sick
after Xavier's departure, and having neither Children nor Heirs, all his Goods
were distributed amongst the poor, according to the custom of the Country.

The Shipwreck of Galvan, He makes many Converts at Ternate.
and the death of Araus, gave great Authority to what they had heard at
Ternate, concerning the Holiness of Father Francis, and from the very first,
gained him an exceeding Reputation. And indeed it was all necessary, I say not
for the reformation of Vice in that Country, but to make him even heard with
Patience by a dissolute people, which committed without shame, the most
enormous crimes, and such as Modesty forbids to name.

To understand how profitable the Labors of Father Xavier were to those of
Ternate, it is sufficient to tell what he has written himself. That of an
infinite number of debauched persons living in that Island, when he landed
there, all excepting two, had laid aside their wicked courses, before his
departure. The desire of Riches was extinguished with the love of Pleasures.
Restitutions were frequently made; and such abundant Alms were given, that the
House of Charity, set up for the relief of the necessitous, from very poor,
which it was formerly, was put into stock, and more flourishing than ever.

The change of Manners, Conve^si^n of a Queen at Ternate.
which was visibly amongst the Christians, was of no little service to the
Conversion of Saracens and Idolaters. Many of those I^fidels embraced
Christianity. But the most illustrious conquest of the Saint, was of a famous
Saracen Lady, called Neachile Pocaraga, Daughter to Alman^or King of Tidore,
and Wife to Boliefe, who was King of Ternate, before the Portuguese had
conquered the Island. She was a Princess of great Wit and Generosity, but
extremely bigoted to her Sect, and a mortal Enemy to the Christians, that is
to say, to the Portuguese. Her hatred to them was justly grounded; for having
received them into her Kingdom, with great civility, and having also permitted
them to establish themselves in one part of the Island, for the conveni^nce of
their Trade, she was dealt with so hardly by them, that after the death of the
King her Husband, she had nothing left her, but the bare Title of a Queen: And
by their Intrigues, the three Princes her Sons, lost the Crown, their Liberty,
and their Lives. Her unhappy fortune constrained her to lead a wandering life,
from Isle to Isle: But Providence, which would accomplish on her its good
designs, brought her back at last to Ternate, about the time when Xavier came
thither. She lived there, in the condition of a private person, without
Authority, yet with Splendor, and retaining still in her Countenance and
Behavior, somewhat of that haughty Air, which the Great sometimes maintain,
even in their Fetters.

The Saint gained access to her, and found an opportunity of conversing with
her. In his first discourse, he gave her a great Idea of the Kingdom of God:
yet withal informed her, That this Kingdom was not difficult to obtain; and
that being once in possession of it, there was no fear of being after
dispossessed. Insomuch, that the Saracen Princess, who had no hopes remaining
of ought on Earth, turned her thoughts and her desires toward Heaven. It Is
true, that as she was indu'd with a great Wit, and was very knowing in the Law
of Mahomet, there was some need of Argumentation; but the Father, still
clearing all her doubts, the dispute only served to make her understand more
certainly the falseness of the Alcoran* and the truth of the Gospel. She
submitted to the Saints Reasons, or rather to the Grace of Jesus Christ, and
was publicly baptized by the Apostle himself, who gave her the name of
Isabella.

He was not satisfied with barely making her a Christian. He saw in her a great
stock of Piety, an upright Heart, a tenderness of Mind, inclinations truly
great and noble; which he cultivated with admirable care, and set her forward
by degrees, in the most sublime and solid ways of a spiritual life: So that
Neachile, under the conduct of Father Xavier, arrived to a singular Devotion;
that is to say, she grew humble and modest, from disdainful, and haughty as she
was, mild to others, and severe to her self, suffering her Misfortunes without
complaint of Injuries; united to God, in her Retirements, and not appearing
publicly, but to exercise the deeds of Charity to her Neighbor: but more
esteemed and honored both by the Indians and Portugueses, than when she sat
upon the Throne, in all the pomp and power of Royalty.

During the abode which Xavier made in Ternate, H^ (...) of the (...) del Moro.
he heard speak of certain Isles, which are distant from it about sixty Leagues
Eastward; and which take their name from the Principal, commonly called, the
Isle del Moro. It was reported to him, that those Islanders, Barbarians as they
were, had been most of them baptized, but that the Faith had been abolished
there, immediately after it was introduced, and this account he heard of it.

The Inhabitants of Momoya, which is a Town in the Isle del Moro, would never
embrace the Law of Mahomet, though all the neighboring Villages had received
it. And the Prince, or Lord of that Town, who chose rather to continue an
Idolater, than to become a Mohammedan, being molested by the Saracens, had
recourse to the Governor of Ternate, who was called Tristan d' Atayda,
promising, that himself and his Subjects would turn Christians, provided the
Portugueses would take them into their protection. Atayda receiving savourably
those Propositions of the Prince of Momoya, the Prince came in person to
Ternate, and desired Baptism; taking then, the name of John, in honor of John
the Third, King of Portugal. At his return to Momoya, he took along with him a
Portuguese Priest, called Simon Vaz, who converted many Idolaters to the Faith.
The number of Christians, thus daily increasing more and more, another Priest
called Francis Alvarez, came to second Vaz, and both of them labored so
happily in conjunction, that the whole people of Momoya renounced Idolatry, and
professed the Faith of Jesus Christ.

In the mean time the Portuguese Soldiers, whom the Governor of Ternate had
promised to send, came from thence to defend the Town, against the Enterprises
of the Saracens. But the cruelty which he exercised on the Mother of Cacil
Aerio, Bastard Son to King Boliefe, so far exasperated those Princes and the
neighboring People, that they conspired the death of all the Portugueses, who
were to be found in those quarters. The Inhabitants of Momoya naturally
changeable and cruel, began the Massacre by the murder of Simon Vaz, their
first Pastor; and had killed Alvarez, whom they pursued with flights of Arrows
to the Seaside, if accidentally he had not found a Bark in readiness, which
bore him off, all wounded as he was, and saved him from the fury of those
Christian Barbarians.

The Saracens made their advantage of these disorders, and Mastering Momoya,
changed the whole Religion of the Town. The Prince himself was the only Man,
who continued firm in the Christian Faith, notwithstanding all their
threatening, and the cruel usage which he received from them. Not long after
this, Antonio Galvan, that Portug^ese, who was so illustrious for his Prudence,
his Valor, and his Piety, succeeding to Tristan d' Atayda, in the Government
of Ternate, sent to the Isle del Moro, a Priest, who was both able and zealous,
by whose Ministry, the people were once more reduced into the Fold of Christ,
and the Affairs of the Infidels were ruined. But this Priest remained not long
upon the Island, and the people destitute of all Spiritual Instructions,
returned soon after, through their natural inconstancy, to their original
Barbarism.

In this condition was the Isle del Moro, Great endeavors are used* to
dissuade the Saint from going* to the Isles del M^ro.
when it was spoken of to Father Xavier, and for this very reason, he
determined to go, and preach the Gospel there, after he had stayed for three
Months at Ternate. When his design was known, all possible endeavors were used
to break it. His Friends were not wanting to inform him, that the Country was
as hideous as it was barren: That it seemed accursed by Nature, and a more
^itting Habitation for Beasts than Men. That the Air was so gross, and so
unwholesome, that Strangers could not live in the Country. That the Mountains
continually vomited flakes of Fire and Ashes, and that the ground it self, was
subject to terrible and frequent Earthquakes. And besides, it was told him,
that the people of the Country, surpassed in cruelty and faithlessness, all
the Barbarians of the World. That Christianity had not softened their Manners;
that they poisoned one another; that they fed themselves with Humane Flesh; and
that when any of their Relations happened to die, they cut off his Hands and
Feet, of which they made a delicate Ragou. That their Inhumanity extended so
far, that when they designed a sumptuous Feast; they begged some of their
Friends to lend them an old unprofitable Father, to be served up to the
Entertainment of their Guests, with promise to repay them in kind, on the like
occasion.

The Portugueses, and Indians, who loved Xavier, added, that since those
Salvages spared not their own Countrymen, and their Parents, what would they
not do to a Stranger, and an unknown person? That they were first to be
transformed into Men, before they could be made Christians. And how could he
imprint the Principles of the Divine Law into their Hearts, who had not the
least sense of Humanity? Who should be his Guide through those thick entangled
Forests, where the greatest part of them were lodged, like so many wild Beasts*
and when, by rare fortune, he should atchieve the taming of them, and even
convert them, how long would that Conversion last? at the longest, but while he
continued with them. That no Man would venture to succeed him in his
Apostleship to those parts, for that was only to be exposed to a certain death;
and that the Blood of Simon Vaz was yet steaming. To conclude, there were many
other Isles, which had never heard of Jesus Christ, and who were better
disposed to receive the Gospel.

These reasons were accompanied with Prayers and Tears; but they were to no
purpose, and Xavier was steadfast to his Resolution. His Friends perceiving they
could gain nothing upon him by Entreaties, had recourse in some measure to
Constraint. So far as to obtain from the Governor of Ternate* a Decree,
forbidding, on severe penalties, any Vessel, to carry the Father to the Isle
del Moro.

Xavier, He complains of those, who make opposition to his Voyage to the I^le
del Moro.
then resented this usage of his Friends, and could not forbear to complain
publicly of it. Where are those people, said he, who dare to confine the Power
of Almighty God? and have so mean an apprehension of our Savior's Love and
Grace? Are there any Hearts hard enough to resist the Influences of the Most
High, when it pleases him to soften and to change them? can they stand in
opposition to that gentle, and yet commanding force, which can make the dry
Bones live, and raise up Children to Abraham from Sto^es? What shall he, who
has subjected the whole World to the Cross, by the Ministry of the Apostles,
shall he exempt from that subjection, this petty corner of the Universe? Shall
then the Isle del Moro be the only place, which shall receive no benefit of
Redemption? And when Jesus Christ has offered to the Eternal Father, all the
Nations of the Earth as his Inheritance, were these people excepted out of the
Donation? I acknowledge them to be very barbarous and brutal, and let it be
granted they were more inhumane than they are, it is because I can do nothing of
my self, that I have the better hopes of them. I can do all things in him who
strengthens me, and from whom alone proceeds the strength of those who labor
in the Gospel.

He added, That other less Salvage Nations, would never want for Preachers:
That these only Isles remained for him to cultivate, since no other Man would
undertake them. In sequel, suffering himself to be transported with a kind of
holy Choler, If these Isles, (pursued he) abounded with precious Woods, and
Mines of Gold, the Christians would have the courage to go thither; and all the
dangers of the World, would not be able to affright them; they are base and
fearful, because there are only Souls to purchase. And shall it then be said,
That Charity is less daring than Avarice? You tell me they will take away my
life, either by the Sword or Poison; but those are favors too great for such a
Sinner as I am to expect from Heaven. Yet I dare confidently say, That whatever
torment or death they prepare for me, I am ready to suffer a thousand times
more, for the Salvation of one only Soul. If I should happen to die by their
Hands, who knows but all of them might receive the Faith? for it is most
certain, that since the primitive times of the Church, the Seed of the Gospel
has made a larger increase in the Fields of Paganism, by the Blood of Martyrs,
than by the Sweat of Missioners.

He concluded his Discourse, by telling them, That there was nothing really to
fear in his undertaking: That God had called him to the Isles del Moro; and
that Man should not hinder him from obeying the Voice of God. His Discourse
made such impressions on their Hearts, that not only the Decree against his
passage was revoked, but many offered themselves to accompany him in that
Voyage, through all the dangers which seemed to threaten him.

Having thus dis-ingag'd himself, He goes for the I^le del Moro; and wr^tes to
Rome.
from all the encumbrances of his Voyage, he embarked with some of his Friends,
passing through the Tears of the people, who attended him to the Shore, without
ex^ectation of seeing him again. Before he set (...) wrote to the Fathers of
the Company at (...) to make them acquainted with his Voyage.

The Country, whither I go, (says he in his Letter) is full of danger, and
terrible to Strangers by the barbarity of the Inhabitants, and by their using
diverse Poisons, which they mingle with their Meat and Drink. And it is from
hence, that Priests are apprehensive of coming to instract them. For my self,
con^idering their extreme necessity, and the duties of my Ministry, which
oblige to free them from Eternal Death, even at the expense of my own Life; I
have resolved to hazard all, for the Salvation of their Souls. My whole
confidence is in God, and all my desire is to obey, as far as in me lies, the
word of Jesus Christ; He who is willing to save his Life shall lose it, and he
who will lose it for my sake, shall find it ^^lieve me, dear Brethren, though
this Evangelical Maxim in general is easily to be understood, when the time of
Practicing it calls upon us, and our business is to dye for God, as clear as
the Text seems, it becomes obscure; and he only can compass the understanding
of it* to whom God by his mercy has explained it. For then it will be seen how
frail and feeble is humane nature. Many here, who love me tenderly, have done
what possibly they could to divert me from this Voyage; and seeing that I
yielded not to their requests, nor to their tears, would have furnished me wiih
Antidotes. But I would not take any, lest by making provision of Remedies, I
might come to apprehend the danger: and also, because, having put my Life into
the hands of Providence, I have no need of preservatives from death. For it
seems to me, that the more I should make use of remedies, the less assurance I
should repose in God.

They went off with a favorable wind, God reveals to to him, what is doing in
a distant I^land.
and had already made above an hundred and fourscore miles, when Xavier on the
sudden, with a deep sigh, cried out, Ah Jesus, how they Massacre the poor
People! saying these words, and o^tentimes repeating them, he had turned his
countenance, and fixed his eyes toward a certain part of the Sea. The Mariners
and Passengers affrighted, ran about him, enquiring what Massacre he meant;
because for their part, they could see nothing. But the Saint was ravished in
Spirit, and in this ecstasy, God had empowered him to see this sad ^^ctacle

He was no soon^r (...) than they continued (...) know the occasion of his
(...) cries. But he, blushing for (...) words which had escaped him in his
transpo^^, would say no more, but retired to (...) Devotions It was not long
before they beheld with their own eyes, what he refused to tell them; having
cast Anchor before an Isle, they found on the shore the Bodies of eight
Portugueses, all bloody, and then comprehended, that those unhappy creatures,
had moved the compassion of the holy man. They buried them in the same place,
and erected a Cross over the grave; after which they pursued their Vo^age, and
in little time arrived at the Isle del Moro.

When they were come on shore, H^ (...) at del Moro, (...) it.
Xavier went directly on to the next Village, the greatest part of the
Inhabitants were Baptized; but there remained in them only a confused notion of
their Baptism: and their Religion was nothing more, than a mingle^of
Mahometa^ism and Idolatry.

The Barbarians fled, at the sight of the strangers, imagining they were come
to revenge the death of the Portuguese, whom they had killed the precedent
years. Xavier followed them, into the thickest of their Woods; and his
countenance full of mildness, gave them to believe, that he was not an Enemy
who came in search of them. He declared to them the motive of his Voyage;
speaking to them in the Malaya Tongue. For though in the Isle del Moro, there
were great diversity of Languages, insomuch that those of three Leagues
distance, did not understand each other in their Island Tongues, yet the Malaya
was common to them all.

Notwithstanding, He gains the Inhabitants of the Isle del Moro.
the roughness and barbarity of these Islanders, neither of those qualities
were of proof against the winning and soft behavior of the Saint. He brought
them back to their Village, using all expressions of kindness to them by the
way; and began his work, by singing aloud, the Christian Doctrine, through the
streets. After which he expounded it to them, and that in a manner so suitable
to their barbarous conceptions, that it passed with ^ase into their
understanding.

By this means he restored those Christians to the Faith, who had before
forsaken it: and brought in to it those Idolaters, who had re^us'd to embrace
it, when it was Preached to them by Simon Vaz, and Francis Alvarez. There was
neither Town nor Village, which the Father did not visit; and where those new
Converts, did not set up Crosses, and build Churches. Tolo, the chief Town of
the Island, Inhabited by twenty five thousand Souls, was entirely converted,
together with Momoya.

Thus the Isle del Moro, was now to the Holy Apostle the Island of (...)
Divine Hope, as he desired it thenceforth to be named. Both because those
things which were there accomplished, by God himself, in a miraculous manner,
were beyond all humane hope and expectation; and also because the fruits of his
labors, surpassed the hopes which had been conceived of them, when his friends
of Ternat^, would have made him fear, that his Voyage would prove unprofitable.

To engage these new Christians, (...)
who were gross of apprehension, in the practice of a holy life, he threatened
them with Eternal Punishments, and made them sensible of what Hell was, by
those dreadful Objects which they had before their eyes. For sometimes, he led
them to the brink of those Gulphs, which shot out of their bowels, vast masses
of burning Stones, into the air, with the noise and fury of a Cannon; and at
the view of those Flames which were mingled with a dusky smoke, that obscured
the day, he explained to them the nature of those pains, which were prepared in
an Abyss of fire, not only for Idolaters and Mahometans, but also for the true
Believers, who lived not according to their Faith. He even told them the gaping
mouths of those flaming Mountains were the breathing places of Hell, as appears
by these following words, extracted out of one of his Letters, on that subject,
written to his Brethren at Rome -- It seems, that God himself, has been pleased
in some measure to discover the habitation of the Damned, to People who had
otherwise no knowledge of him.

During their great Earthquakes, He exhorts them to repent^n^e.
when no man could be secure in any place, either in his house, or abroad in
the open air, he exhorted them to penitence; and declared to them that those
extraordinary accidents were caused, not by the Souls of the dead, hidden under
ground, as they imagined, but by the Devils who were desirous to destroy them,
or by the Omnipotent hand of God, who adds activity to natural Causes, that he
may imprint more deeply in their hearts, the fear of his justice and his wrath.

One of those wonderful Earthquakes happened on the 29th. of September, He says
Mass in the midst of an Earthquake.
on that day, consecrated to the honor of St. Michael, the Christians were
assembled in great numbers, and the Father said Mass. In the midst of the
Sacrifice, the Earth was so violently shaken, that the People ran in a hurry
out of the Church. The Father feared lest the Altar might be overthrown, yet he
^orsook it not, and went through with the Celebration of the Sacred Mysteries,
thinking, as he said himself, that the blessed Archangel, at that very time
was driving the Devils of the Island down to Hell; and that those Infernal
Spirits made all that noise and tumult, out of the indignation which they had,
to be banished from that place, where they had held dominion for so many Ages.

The undaunted resolution of Father Xavier amazed the Barbarians, (...)
and gave them to believe, that a man who remained immovable, while the Rocks
and Mountains trembled, had something in him of Divine. But that high Opinion,
which most of them had conceived of him, gave him an absolute Authority over
them. And with the assistance of Gods grace, which operated in their Souls,
while he was working by outward means, he made so total a Change in them, that
they who formerly, in respect of their manners, were like Wolves and Tigers,
now became tractable and mild, and innocent as Lambs.

Notwithstanding this, He is persecuted by a cruel and salvage People.
there were some amongst them who did not divest themselves fully and at once
of their natural Barbarity; either to signify that Divine Grace, how powerful
soever, does not work all things in a man it self alone, or to try the patience
of the Saint. The most rebellious to Gods Spirit, were the Iavares; a rugged
and inhumane People, who inhabit only in Caves, and in the day time roam about
the Forests. Not content with not following the instructions of the Father,
they laid diverse ambushes for him; and one day, while he was explaining the
Rules of Morality to them out of the Gospel, by a River side, provoked by the
zeal, wherewith he condemned their dissolute manners, they cast stones at him,
with design to kill him. The Barbarians were on the one side of him, and the
River on the other; which was broad and deep: Insomuch, that it was in a manner
impossible for Xavier to escape the ^ury of his Enemies: but nothing is
impossible to a man whom Heaven protects. There was lying on the bank a great
beam of wood; the Saint pushed it without the least difficulty into the water,
and placing himself upon it, was carried in an instant to the other side, where
the stones which were thrown, could no longer reach him.

For what remains, His sufferings in the I^le d^l Moro; and the consolations
which he there received.
he endured in this barren and inhospitable Country, all the miseries
imaginable, of hunger, thirst, and nakedness. But the comforts which he
received from Heaven, infinitely sweetened all his Labors; which may be
judged, by the Letter he wrote to Father Ignatius. For after h^ had made him a
faithful description of the place; I have, said he, given you this account of
it, that from thence you may conclude, what abundance of Celestial
Consolations I have tasted in it. The dangers to which I am exposed, and the
pains I take for the i^terest of God alone, are the inexhaustible Springs of
Spiritual Ioys: insomuch that these Islands, bare of all worldly necessaries,
are the pl^^es in the World, for a man to lose his sight with the excess of
weeping, but they are tears of joy. For my own part, I remember not ever to
have tasted such interior delights; and these Consolations of the Soul, are so
pure, so exquisite, and so perpetual, that they take from me all sense of my
Corporeal Sufferings.

Xavier continued for three Months in the Isle del Moro: He goes for Goa; and
the reason that induced him.
after which he repassed to the Molucca's, with intention from thence to Sail
to Goa. Not only, that he might draw out Missioners from thence, to take care
of the new Christianity, which he had planted in all those Isles, and which he
alone was not sufficient to cultivate, but also to provide for the affairs of
the Company, which daily multiplied in this new World.

Being arrived at Ternate, He returns to Ternate.
he lodged by a Chapel, which was near the Port, and which, for that reason,
is called our Lady of the Port. He thought not of any long stay in that place,
but only 'till the Ship which was intended for Malacca, should be ready to set
out. The Christians, more glad of his return, because they had despaired of
seeing him again, begged of him to continue longer with them, because Lent was
drawing near; and that he must however stay all that Holy time, in the Island
of Amboyna, for the proper season of Navigation to Malacca. The Captain of the
Fortress of Ternaet, and the Brotherhood of the Mercy, engaged themselves to
have him conducted to Amboyna, before the setting out of the Ships. So that
Xavier could not deny those People, who made him such reasonable propositions;
and who were so desirous to retain him, to the end they might profit by his
presence, in order to the Salvation of their Souls.

He remained then almost three Months in Ternate; His proceedings at Ternate.
hearing Confessions day and night, Preaching twice on Holy Days, according to
his custom; in the Morning to the Portugueses, in the Afternoon to the
Islanders newly converted. Catechizing the Children every day in the week,
excepting Wednesday and Friday, which he set apart for the instruction of the
Portuguese Wives. For seeing those Women, who were either Mahometans or
Idolaters by birth, and had only received Baptism in order to their Marrying
with the Portugueses, were not capable of profiting by the common Sermons, for
want of sufficient understanding in the Mysteries and Maxims of Christianity;
he undertook to expound to them the Articles of Faith, the Commandments, and
other Points of Christian Morality. The time of Lent was passed in these
Exercises of Piety, and Penitence, which fitted them for the Blessed Sacrament
at Easter. All People app^oach'd the Holy Table, and celebrated that Feast with
renewed Fervor, which resembled the Spirit of Primitive Christianity.

But the chief Employment of Father Xavier, He endeavors the Conversion of the
King of Ternate.
was to endeavor the Conversion of the King of Ternate; commonly called King
of the Molucca's. This Saracen Prince, whose name was Cacil Aerio, was Son to
King Boleife, and his Concubine, a Mohammedan, and Enemy to the Portuguese, whom
Tristan d'Atayda Governor of Ternate, and Predecessor of Antonio Galvan,
caused to be thrown out of a Window, to be revenged of her. This unworthy and
cruel usage, might well exasperate Cacil; but fearing their power who had
affronted him in the person of his Mother, and having the violent death of his
Brothers before his eyes, he curbed his resentments, and broke not out into the
least complaint. The Portuguese mistrusted this over-acted moderation, and
affected silence; and according to the Maxim of those Politicians, who hold,
that they who do the injury should never pardon, they used him afterward as a
Rebel, and an Enemy, upon very light conjectures. Jordan de Treitas, then
Governor of the Fortress of Ternata, a man as rash and imprudent, as Galvan
was moderate and wise, seized the person of the Prince, stripped him of all the
Ornaments of Royalty, and sent him Prisoner to Goa, in the year 1546, with the
Spanish Fleet, of which we have formerly made mention.

The Cause having been examined, in the Sovereign Tribunal of Goa, there was
found nothing to condemn, but the injustice of Treitas: Cacil was declared
innocent; and the new Viceroy of the Indies, Don John de Castro, sent him back
to Ternata, with Orders to the Portugueses, to re-place him on the Throne, and
pay him so much the more respect, by how much more they had injured him. As for
Treitas, he lost his Government, and being recalled to Goa, was Imprisoned as a
Criminal of State.

The King of Ternata was newly restored, when Xavier came into the Isle for the
second time. King Tabarigia, Son of Boleife, and Brother to Cacil, had suffered
the same ill fortune, some years before. Being accused of Felony, and having
been acquitted at Goa, where he was Prisoner, he was also sent back to his
Kingdom, with a splendid Equipage; and the equity of the Christians so wrought
upon him, that he became a Convert before his departure.

Xavier was in hope, that the example of Tabarigia, would make an impression on
the Soul of Cacil, after his restoration; at least if any care were taken of
instructing him. And the hopes of the Saint, seemed not at the first to be ill
grounded. For the Barbarian King received him with all civility, and was very
affectionate to him, insomuch that he could not be without his company. He
heard him speak of God, whole hours together; and there was great appearance,
that he would renounce the Mohammedan Religion.

But the sweet Enchantments of the Flesh, What hindered the King of Ternata's
Conversion.
are often an invinsible obstacle to the grace of Baptism. Besides a vast
number of Concubines, the King of Ternata, had an hundred Women in his Palace,
who retained the name and quality of Wives. To confine himself to one, was
somewhat too hard to be digested by him. And when the Father endeavored to
persuade him that the Law of God, did absolutely command it. He reasoned on his
side, according to the Principles of his Sect, and refined upon it in this
manner. The God of the Christians and of the Saracens is the same God: why then
should the Christians be confined to one only Wife, since God has permitted the
Saracens to have so many.

Yet sometimes he changed his Language; and said that he would not lose his
Soul, nor the friendship of Father Xavier, for so small a matter. But, in
conclusion, not being able to contain himself, within the bounds of Christian
purity, nor to make the Law of Jesus Christ agree with that of Mahomet; he
continued fixed to his pleasures, and obstinate in his errors. Only he engaged
his Royal word, that in case the Portugueses, would invest one of his Sons in
the Kingdom of the Isles del Moro, he would on that condition receive Baptism.

Father Xavier obtained from the Viceroy of the Indies, what ever the King of
Ternate had desired; but the Barbarian, far from keeping his promise, began
from thence-forward a cruel Persecution against his Christian Subjects. And the
first strokes of it, fell on the Queen Neachile, who was dispossessed of all
her Lands, and reduced to live in extreme poverty, during the remainder of her
days. Her Faith supported her in these new misfortunes: And father Xavier, who
had baptized her, gave her so well to understand, how happy it was to lose all
things, and to gain Christ, that she continually gave thanks to God, for the
total overthrow of her Fortune.

In the mean time, He labors with great fruit, in the Court of Ternate.
the Labors of the Saint, were not wholly unprofitable in the Court of
Ternate. He converted many persons of the Blood Royal; and amongst others, two
Sisters of the Prince, who preferred the quality of Christians, and Spouses of
Christ Jesus, before all earthly Crowns; and chose rather to suffer the ill
usage of their Brother, than to forsake their Faith.

Xavier, He leaves to the Islanders a Christian Instruction written with his
own Hand.
seeing the time of his departure drawing near, composed, in the Malaya Tongue,
a large Instruction, touching the Belief and Morals of Christianity. He gave
the People of Ternate this Instruction written in his own Hand, that it might
supply his place during his absence. Many Copies were taken of it, which were
spread about the neighboring Islands, and even through the Countries of the
East. It was read on Holidays, in the public Assemblies; and the Faithful
listened to it, as coming from the Mouth of the holy Apostle.

Besides this, he chose out, some virtuous young Men, for his Companions in his
Voyage to Goa, with design to breed them in the College of the Company, and
from thence send them back to the Moluccas, there to preach the Gospel. These
things being thus ordered, and the Caracore, which was to carry him to Amboyna,
in a readiness, it was in his thoughts to depart by night, in the most secret
manner that he could, not to sadden the Inhabitants, who could not hear of his
going from them, without a sensible affliction. But whatsoever precautions he
took, he could not steal away without their knowledge. They followed him in
Crowds to the Shore, Men, Women and Children, gathering about him, lamenting
his loss, begging his Blessing, and beseeching him, with Tears in their Eyes,
That since he was resolved on going he would make a quick return.

(...)
The holy Man was not able to bear these tender farewels without melting into
Tears himself. His Bowels yern'd within him for his dear Flock: and seeing what
affection those people bore him, he was concerned lest his absence might
prejudice their spiritual welfare. Yet reassuring himself, by considering the
Providence of God which had disposed of him another way; he enjoined them to
meet in public every day, at a certain Church, to make Repetition of the
Christian Doctrine, and to excite each other to the practice of Virtue. He
charged the new Converts to learn by Heart the Exposition of the Apostles
Creed, which he had left with them in Writing: But that which gave him the
greatest comfort, was, that a Priest, who was there present, promised him, to
bestow two hours every day, in instructing the People; and once a week to
perform the same to the Wives of the Portugueses, in expounding to them the
Articles of Faith, and informing them concerning the use of the Sacraments.

After these last words, Father Xavier left his well-belov'd Children in Jesus,
and immediately the Ship went off. At that instant, an universal cry was raised
on the Shore; and that last adieu went even to the Heart of Father Xavier.

Being arrived at Amb^yn^, he there found four Portuguese Vessels, wherein were
only Mariners and Soldiers, that is to say, a sort of people, ill instructed
in the duties of Christianity, and little accustomed to put them in practice,
in the continual hurry of their life. That they might profit by that leisure,
(...)
which they then enjoyed, he set up a small (...) on the Seaside, where he
conversed with them, sometimes single, sometimes in common, concerning their
eternal welfare. The Discourses of the Saint, brought over the most debauched
amongst them; and one Soldier, who had been a Libertine all his life, died
with such evident signs of true Contrition, that being expired, Father Xavier
was heard to say, God be praised who has brought me hither, for the Salvation
of that Soul: which caused people to believe, That God Almighty had made a
Revelation of it to him.

By the same supernal illumination, (...)
he saw in spirit, one whom he had left in Ternate in the vigor of health, now
expiring in that place: for preaching one day, he broke off his Discourse
suddenly, and said to his Auditors, Recommend to God James Giles, who is now
in the (...) the news of his death, cam^ (...) long after, which entirely (...)
the words of Xavier.

The four Ships, continued at Amboyna, but twenty days; after which they set
Sail toward Malacca. The Merchant-Ship, which was the best equipped, and
strongest of them, invited the Saint to imbark in her, but he refused, out of
the horror which he had for those enormous Crimes, which had been committed in
her. And turning to Gonsalvo Fernandez; This Ship, said he, will be in great
danger, God deliver you out of it. Both the Prediction and the Wish of the
Saint were accomplished; for the Ship at the passage of the Straight of Saban,
struck against a hidden Rock, where the Iron-work of the Stern was broken; and
little wanted, but that the Vessel had been also split; but she escaped that
danger, and the rest of the Voyage was happily performed.

The Father staying some few days longer on the Isle, visited the seven
Christian Villages which were there; caused Crosses to be set up in all of
them, for the Consolation of the Faithful; and one of these Crosses, in process
of time, became famous for a great Miracle, of which the whole Country was
witness.

There was an extreme drought, A Cross erected by Xavier becomes famous.
and a general dearth was apprehended. Certain Women, who before their Baptism
were accustomed to use Charms for Rain, being assembled round about an Idol,
adored the Devil, and performed all the Magic Ceremonies; but their
Enchantments were of no effect. A devout Christian Woman, knowing what they
were about, ran thither, and having sharply reprehended those impious
Creatures; As if, said she, having a Cross so near us we had no expectations of
succor from it! and that the holy Father had not promised us, That whatsoever
we prayed for at the foot of that Cross, should infallibly he granted. Upon
this, she led those other Women toward a Riverside, where Xavier had set up a
Cross with his own Hands, and falling down with them before that sacred sign of
our Salvation, she prayed our Savior, to give them Water, to the shame and
confusion of the Idol. At the same moment the Clouds began to gather on every
side, and the Rain poured down in great abundance. Then, all in Company they
ran to the Pagod, pulled it down, and trampled it under their Feet; after which
they cast it into the River, with these expressions of contempt, That though
they could not obtain from him one drop of Water, they would give him enough in
a whole River.

A Faith thus lively, (...)
answered the hopes which the Saint had conceived, of the Faithful of Amboyna.
He compared them sometimes, to the Primitive Christians; and believed their
constancy was of proof against the cruelty of Tyrants. Neither was he deceived
in the judgment he made of them: and they showed themselves, when the Iaveses,
provoked, by their renouncing the Law of Mahomet, came to invade their Island.
While the Saracene Army destroyed the Country, six hundred Christians retired
into a Castle, where they were presently besieged. Though they were to fear all
things, from the fury of the Barbarians, yet what they only apprehended, was
that those Enemies of Jesus Christ, might exercise their malice against a
Cross, which was raised in the midst of all the Castle; and which Father Xavier
had set up with his own hands.

To preserve it therefore, inviolable from their attempts; they wrapped it up in
Cloth of Gold, and buried it in the bottom of the Ditch.

After they had thus secured their treasure, they opened the gate to the
Unbelievers, who knowing what had been done by them, ran immediately in search
of the Cross, to revenge upon it the contempt which had been shown to Mahomet.
But not being able to find it, they turned all their fury upon those who had
concealed it, and who would not discover where it was.

Death, seemed to have been the least part of what they suffered. The Mohammedan
Soldiers cut off one Man's Leg, another's Arm, tore out this Man's eves, and
the others tongue. So, the Ch^^stians dyed by degrees; and by a slow
destruction; but without drawing one sigh, or casting out a groan, or showing
the least apprehension; so strongly were they supported in their Souls, by the
all-powerfull grace of Jesus Christ, for whom they suffered.

Xavier at length parted from Amboyna; and probably it was then, if we consider
the sequel of his Life, that he had the opportunity of making the Voyage of
Macassar.

For though it be not certainly known, at what time he visited that great
Island, nor the fruit which his Labors there produced; it is undoubted that he
has been there; and in confirmation of it, we have, in the process of his
Canonization, the juridical Testimony of a Portuguese Lady, of Malacca, called
Jane Melo; who had many times heard from the Princess Eleonor, Daughter to the
King of Macassar, that the Holy Apostle, had Baptized the King her Father, the
Prince her Brother, and a great number of their Subjects.

But at whatsoever time he made this Voyage, he returned to Malacca, in the
Month of July, in the year 1547.

The End of the Third Book.
THE LIFE OF St. FRANCIS XAVIER.
BOOK IV.
XAvier found at Malacca, He arrives at Malacca; and there meets three
Missioners of the Company.
three Missioners of the Company, who were going to the Molucca's, in obedience
to the Letters he had written. These Missioners were John Beyra, Nugnez Ribera,
and Nicholas Nugnez, who had not yet received Priests Orders. Mansilla came not
with them, though he had precise orders for it: Because he rather chose to
follow his own Inclinations, in laboring where he was, than the command of his
Superior, in forsaking the work upon his Hands; but his disobedience cost him
dear: Xavier expelled him out of the Society; judging that an ill Brother would
do more hurt, than a good Labourer would profit the Company.

These three Missioners above mentioned, had been brought to the Indies in the
Fleet, by Don Perez de Pavora, with seven other Sons of Ignatius; part of whom
was already left at Cape Comorine, and the Fishing Coast, to culvitate those
new Plants of Christianity, which were so beloved by Father Xavier: Now the
Ships which were bound for the Molucc^'s, being not in a readiness to sail
before the end of August, Beyra, Ribera and N^gnez had all the intermediate
time, which was a month, to enjoy the Company of the Saint, in which space they
were formed by him, for the Apostolic Function. For himself, he remained four
months at Malacca, in expectation of a Ship to carry him to Goa; and during all
that time, was taken up with continual service of his Neighbor.

He had brought with him from Amboyna, His condu^t with John Deyro.
his old Companion John Deyro. Though Deyro was in his attendance, yet he was
not a Member of the Society; for the causes already specified, and deserved not
to be of it, for those which follow. Some rich Merchants having put into his
Hands a sum of Money, for the subsistence of the Father, he concealed it from
him. Xavier, who lived only on the Alms which were daily given him, and who
hated Money as much as his Companion loved it, looked on this Action of Deyro,
as an injury done to Evangelical Poverty, and the resentment which he had of
it, caused him to forget his usual mildness to Offenders. Not content to make
him a sharp reprimand, he confined him to a little desert Isle not far distant
from the Port; enjoining him, not only continual Prayer, but fasting upon Bread
and Water, till he should of his own accord recall him. Deyro who was of a
changeable, and easy temper, neither permanent in good, nor fsix'd in ill,
obeyed the Father, and lived exactly in the method which was prescribed.

He had one night a Vision, Deyro has a Vision, which God reveals to Xavier.
whether awake or sleeping has not been decided by the juridical Informations
of the Fathers life. It seemed to him, that he was in a fair Temple, where he
beheld the blessed Virgin, on a Throne all glittering with precious Stones. Her
Countenance appeared severe, and he, making his approaches to her, was rejected
with indignation, as unworthy to be of the Company of her Son. After which she
arose from the Throne, and then all things disappeared. Deyro being recalled
from his solitude some time after, said nothing of his Vision to Father Xavier,
to whom God had revealed it. He even denied boldly to have seen any, though the
Father repeated it to him, with all the Circumstances. Xavier, more scandalized
than ever with this procedure of Deyro, refused all farther communication, with
a Man, who was interes^ed, and unsincere. He rid his Hands of him, but withal
foretold him, That God would be so gracious to him, as to change his evil
inclinations, and that hereafter he should take the Habit of St. Francis. Which
was so fully accomplished, that when the Informations were taken in the Indies,
concerning the Holiness and Miracles of Xavier, Deyro then wore the Habit of
St. Francis, and lived a most religious life.

After the three Missioners were gone for the Molucca's, Xavier alone bore the
The Actions of the Sa^nt at Malacca.
whole burden of the work. The knowledge which the Portugueses and Indians had
of his Holiness, made all Men desirous of treating with him, concerning the
business of their Conscience. Not being able to give audience to all, many of
them were ill satisfied, and murmured against him: But since their discontent
and murmurs proceeded from a good principle, he comforted himself, and rather
rejoy^'d than was offended, as he says himself expressly in his Letters. His
ordinary Employment, was Preaching to the Christians and Gentiles, instructing
and baptising the Catech^mens, teaching Children the Christian Doctrine,
visiting the Prisoners and the Sick, reconciling Enemies, and doing other works
of Charity.

While the Saint was thus employed, there happened an Affair, which much
increased his Reputation in all the Indies. For the understanding of the whole
business, it will be necessary to trace it from its Original.

Since the Conquest of Malacca by the The occasion of the King of Achen's
enterprise against Malacca.
Portuguese, the neighboring Princes grew jealous of their Power and made many
attempts to drive that Nation out of the Indies, which came to brave them at
their own Doors. Thereupon, they set on foot many great Armies, at diverse
times, but always unsccessfully, and learning by dear-bought experience, that
multitude can hardly prevail against true valor.

These disgraces provoked the Sultan Alaradin, King of Achen, instead of
humbling him. Achin, is the greatest Kingdom of the Island of Sumatra, distant
above twelve Leagues from the terra firma of Malacca. This Prince was a
Mohammedan, an implacable Enemy of the Christians by his Religion, and of the
Portuguese by interest of State. Yet he durst not immediately assault the
Fortress of Malacca. All his Fury was spent in cruising about the Coasts, with
a strong Fleet, thereby to break the trade of the Portugueses, and hinder the
Succors which they had from Europe. His design was then to attack the Town,
when it should be bare of Defendants, and unprovided of Stores of Victuals: But
to compass his Enterprise, he was to assure himself of a Port, which was above
Malacca toward the North; which might serve for a convenient retreat to his
Fleet, and had also occasion for a Fortress, to secure himself from the Enemy.
He therefore made himself Master of that Port, and ordered the building of a
Citadel.

As for his Preparations of War, The preparation of the Barbari^ns, for the
(...) of (...)
he made them so secretly, that the Portuguese had neither any news, nor even
the least suspicion of them. Five thousand Soldiers, trained up in Wars, and
well experienced in Naval-Fights, were chosen out, for this glorious
Expedition; and five hundred of them, called Orabalons, were the flower of the
whole Nobility; and accordingly wore Bracelets of Gold, as a distinguishing
mark of their high Extraction. There was besides a great number of Iannisaries,
newly arrived at the Court of Achen, who served as Volunters, and were eager of
showing their courage against the Christians. The Fleet consisted of sixty
great Ships, all well equipped, and manned, without reckoning the Barks, the
Fregats, and the Fireships. It was commanded by the Saracen, Bajaja Soora, a
great Man of War, and so famous for his Exploits in Arms, that his Prince had
honored him with the Title of King of Pedir, in reward of his taking Malacca,
even before he had besieged the Town.

There was no other intelligence of The Army of Achen comes before Malacca, its
landing, and re^^eat.
this at Malacca, but what the Army of Achen brought it self. They came before
the place, and entered the Port, on the 9th of October, in the year 15. 17,
about two a Clock in the morning, resolved to assault it, while they were
savored by the darkness. They began by a discharge charge of their Artillery;
and sending in their Fireships against the Portuguese Vessels. After which,
the most daring of them landed; ran without any order, against that part of the
wall, which they believed weakest, filled up part of the Ditch, and mounted the
Ladders with a furious assault. They found more resistance, than they expected:
The Garrison, and the Inhabitants, whom the shouts, and Artillery of the
Barbarians had at first affrighted, recovering courage through the imminence of
danger, and the necessity of Conquering, or dying, ran upon the Rampart, and
vigorously repulsed the Assailants; overthrowing their Ladders, or tumbling
their Enemies headlong from them, insomuch that not a man of them entered the
Town, and great numbers lay dead or dying in the Ditch.

Soora comforted himself for the ill success of his assault, by the execution,
which his fire Ships, and Cannon had done. All the Vessels within the Port,
were either burnt, or disabled. And the Rain which immediately fell, served not
so much to extinguish the Flames, as the violent wind which then arose,
contributed to kindle them. Those of Achen, proud of that action, appeared next
morning on their Decks, letting fly their pompous Streamers, and shouting, as
if already they were Victorious. But their insolence was soon checked: The
Cannon from the Fortress forced them to retire, as far off, as the Isle of Vpe.
In the mean time, seven poor Fishermen, who had been out all night about their
employment, and were now returning to the Town, fell into an Ambuscade of the
Insidels, were taken and brought before the General. After he had cut off their
Ears and Noses, he sent them back with a Letter, directed to Don Francisco de
Melo, Governor of Malacca, of which these were the Contents.

I Bajaja Soora, The Letter of the General of Achen, to the Governor of
Malacca.
who have the honor to carry in Vessels of Gold the Rice of the Great Souldan,
Alaradin King of Achen, and the Territories washed by the one and the other
Sea, advertise thee to write word to thy King, that in despite of him, I am
casting terror into his Fortress, by my fierce roaring, and that I shall here
abide as long as I shall please. I call to witness of what I declare, not only
the Earth, and all Nations which inha^it it, but all the Elements, even to the
Heaven of the Moon; and pronounce with these words of my mouth, that thy King
is a man of no Reputation, nor courage; that his Standards, now trampled under
foot, shall never be lifted up again, without his permission who has Conquered
him; that by the Victory already by us obtained, my King has under his Royal
foot, the head of thine; that from this day forward, he is his Subject, and his
Slave; and to the end, that thou thy self may confess this truth, I defy
thee to mortal Battle, here on the place of my abode, if thou feel'st in thy
self sufficient courage to oppose me.

Though the Letter of So^ra, was in it self ridiculous, and full of fustian
Bravades according to the style of the Barbarians, yet it put the Governor and
Officers of the Fortress to a shrewd demurr: for how should they accept the
Challenge, without Ships to sight him, and how could they refuse it with their
honor? A Council of War was summoned to deliberate on this weighty and nice
affair; when Father Xavier came amongst them. He had been saying Ma^s, at the
Church of our Lady Del Maute; so called, from its being built on a Mountain
near the City; and dedicated to the Blessed Virgin. Don Francisco, who had sent
for him, to consult him in this troublesome business, gave him the General of
Achen's Letter to peruse, and demanded his advice what was to be done on this
occasion?

The Saint, Xavier's advice to the Governor of Malacca.
who knew the King of Achen's business, was not only to drive the Portuguese
out of Malacca, but also, and that principally, to extirpate Christianity out
of all the East; having read the Letter, lifted up his eyes to Heaven, and
answered without the least pause, that the affront was too great to be endured,
that the honor of the Christian Religion was more concerned in it, than that
of the Crown of Portugal: If this injury should be dissembled, to what
audaciousness would the Enemy arise; and what would not the other Mohammedan
Princes attempt after this Example? In conclusion, that the Challenge ought to
be accepted, that the Infidels might see the King of Heaven was more powerful
than their King Alaradin.

But how, said the Governor, shall we put to Sea, and on what Vessels, since
of eight Gally-foysts, which we had in port, there are but four remaining, and
those also almost shattered in pieces, and half burnt: and in case we could
resit them, what could they perform against so numerous a Fleet? Suppose,
answered Xavier, the Barbarians had twice so many Ships, are not we much
stronger, who have Heaven on our side; and how can we choose but overcome, when
we fight in the name of our Lord and Savior?

No man was so bold to contradict They f^^l^w his C^unsel.
the Man of God: and they all went to the Arsenal. There they found a good
sufficient Bark, of those they call Catur: besides seven old Foysts, fit for
nothing but the fire. Duarte de Bareto, who by his Office had the
super-intendance of their Naval Stores, was commanded to fit out these Foysts
with all expedition. But he protested it was not in his power; for besides
that, the King's Magazins were empty of all necessaries for the equipping of
them, there was no Money in the Treasury for Materials.

The Governor, They prepare to Eng^ge the Enemy.
who had no other fund, was ready to lose courage; when Xavier, by a certain
impulse of Spirit, suddenly began to embrace seven Sea Captains, there present,
who were of the Council of War. He begged of them to divide the business
amongst them, and each of them apart, to take care of fitting out one Gally: At
the same time, without waiting for their answer, he assigned every man his
task. The Captains durst not oppose Xavier, or rather God, who inclined their
hearts to comply with the Saints request. Above an hundred Workmen, were
instantly employed on every Vessel; and in four days time the seven Galleys
were in condition of fighting. Melo gave the Catur, to Andrea Toscano, a man of
Courage, and well versed in Sea affairs. He divided amongst the seven Captains,
an hundred and fourscore Soldiers, chosen men, and appointed Francis Deza,
Admiral of the Fleet. Xavier was desirous to have gone along with them, but the
Inhabitants who believed all was lost, if they lost the Father, and who hoped
for no consolation, but from him alone, in case the Enterprise should not
succeed, made such a disturbance about it, that upon mature deliberation, it
was resolved to keep him in the Town.

The day before their embarkment, He exhorts the Soldiers, and Captains to do
their duty.
having called together the Soldiers and the Captains, he told them that he
should accompany them in Spirit; and that while they were engaging the
Barbarians, he would be lifting up his hands to Heaven for them. That they
should sight valiantly, in hope of glory, not vain and perishable, but solid
and immortal. That in the heat of the Combat, they should cast their eyes on
their Crucified Redeemer, whose quarrel they maintained, and beholding his
wounds, themselves should not be afraid either of wounds or death: and how
happy should they be to render their Savior life for life.

These words inspired them with such generous and Christian thoughts, that with
one voice they made a Vow, to fight the Insidels, to their last drop of blood.
This solemn Oath was so moving to Xavier, that it drew tears from him; he gave
them all his blessing, and for their greater encouragement, named them The Band
of our Savior's Soldiers: in pursuit of which, he heard every man's
confession, and gave them the Communion with his own hand.

They embarked the day following, The Fleet set out: and what ^appen'd at that
time.
with so much cheerfulness, that it seemed to presage a certain Victory. But
their joy continued but a moment. They had scarcely weighed Anchor, when the
Admiral split, and immediately went to the bottom, so that they had hardly time
to save the men. The crowd of People, who were gathered together on the shore
to see them go off, beheld this dismal accident; and took it for a bad omen of
the expedition, murmuring at the same ^ime against Father Xavier, who was the
Author of it; and casting out loud cries to recall the other Vesseis. The
Governor, who saw the People in an uproar, and apprehended the consequences of
this violent beginning, sent in haste to seek the Father. The Messenger found
him at the Altar, in the Church of our Lady del M^^te, just ready to receive
the Blessed Sacrament; he drew near to whisper the business to him, but the
Father beckoned him with his hand, to keep silence, and retire. When Mass was
ended, Return, said Xavier, without giving the man leisure to tell his Message,
and assure the Governor from me, that he has no occasion to be discouraged for
the loss of one Vessel. By this the Saint made known, that God had revealed to
him what had happened. He continued some time in Prayer before the Image of the
Virgin, and these words of his were overheard. O my Jesus, the desire of my
heart, regard me with a favorable eye; and thou, holy Virgin, be propitious to
me! Lord Jesus, (he continued) look upon thy sacred wounds, and remember they
have given us a right to ask of thee every thing conducing to our good.

His Prayers being ended, He upbraids the Governor with his dissidence.
he goes to the Citadel: The Governor alarmed with the cries and murmurs of
the People, could not dissemble his disturbance, but reproached the Father, for
having engaged them in this Enterprise. But Xavier upbraided him with his
distrust of God; and said smiling to him, What are you so dejected for so
slight an accident? after which, they went in company to the shore, where the
Soldiers belonging to the Admiral, stood in great consternation, for the
hazard they had run so lately. The Father re-assur'd them, and exhorted them to
remain constant, in their holy resolution, notwithstanding their petty
misadventure: he remonstrated to them, that Heaven had not permitted their
Admiral to sink, but only to make trial of their faith; neither had themselves
been saved from shipwreck, but only that they might perform their Vow. In the
mean time, the Governor held it necessary to summon the great Council. All the
Officers of the Town, and the principal Inhabitants, were of opinion to give
over an Enterprise, which as they thought, was begun rashly, and could have no
fortunate conclusion. But the Captains and Soldiers of the Fleet, encouraged
by the words of the holy man, and inspired with vigor which had something in
it, of more than humane, were of a quite contrary judgment. They unanimously
protested, that they had rather dye, than violate that Faith, which they had
solemnly engaged to Jesus Christ. For the rest, said they, what have we more to
fear this day, than we had yesterday? our number is not diminished, though we
have one Vessel less: and we shall fight as well with six ^oysts, as we should
with seven. But, on the other side, what hopes ought we not to conceive, under
the auspices, and promise of Father Francis.

Then Xavier, taking the word, He foretells what is suddenly accomplished.
The lost Gally shall be soon made good, said he with a Prophetic voice;
before the Sun goes down, there shall arrive amongst us two better Vessels than
that which perished. And this I declare to you from Almighty God. This positive
Prediction amazed the whole Assembly; and caused them to put off the
determination of the Affair, 'till the day ensuing. The remaining part of the
day was passed with great impatience, to see the effect of the Father's
promise; when the Sun was just on the point of setting, and many began to fear
the accomplishment of the Prophecy, in the very minute, marked out by the
Father, they discovered from the Clock-house of our Lady del Monte two European
Ships which were Sailing directly from the North. Melo sent out a Skiff
immediately to hale them, being informed that they were Portuguese Vessels, one
belonging to James Soarez Gallego, and the other to his own Son Balthazar, who
came from the Kingdom of Patan, but who took the way of Pegu, without
intentions of casting Anchor at Malacca, to avoid paying Customs; he went in
search of Father Francis, who was at his Devotions, in the Church del Monte,
and told him, that his Prophecy would be accomplished to little purpose, if the
Ships came not into the Port. Xavier took it upon himself to stop them: and
going into the Skiff, which had hailed them, made directly to the two Vessels.
The Masters of the Ship, seeing the man of God, received him with respect. He
made them understand the present juncture of affairs, and earnestly besought
them, by the interests of their Religion, and their Country, to assist the Town
against the common Enemy of the Christian name, and the Crown of Portugal. And
to engage them farther, by their particular concernment, he let them see the
danger into which they were casting themselves, in case they should obstinately
pursue their Voyage, and that they were going without consideration, to
precipitate themselves into the hands of the Barbarians.

They yielded to the reasons of the Father, and the next morning entered the
Port, amidst the shouts and acclamations of the People. After this, there was
no farther dispute of fighting the Enemy, and the most timorous came about, to
the Opinion of the Captains and the Soldiers.

All things being in a readiness to set The Portuguese Fleet goes in search of
the Enemy.
sail, the Admiral Francis Doza received the Flag from the hands of Xavier, who
had solemnly blessed it, and mounted the Ship of his Brother George Deza,
instead of his own which was already sunk. The rest of the Captains, who had
been on shore, returned on Shipboard, and with the two newly arrived Vessels,
the whole Fleet consisted of nine, their number also being increased by fifty
men, they were in all, two hundred and thirty Portugueses. The Fleet went out
of Port, the 25th of October, with strict Orders from the General, not to pass
beyond the Pulo Cambylan, which is the farthest bounds of the Kingdom of
Malacca on the West. His reason was, that since they were so much inferior in
strength to the Enemy, who vastly out-number'd them, in men and shipping; their
glory consisted in driving them from off their Coasts; and not in farther
pursuit of them. That what hope soever we have in God, yet it becomes us not to
t^mpt him, because Heaven is not accustomed to give a blessing to rashness and
presumption.

Thus setting out full of assurance and of joy, they arrived in four days at
Pulo Cambylan, without having any news of the Enemy, notwithstanding their
endeavors to find him out. The Admiral, in obedience to the Governor, was
thinking to return, though the courage of his Soldiers prompted them to pass
beyond the Bounds prescribed them; and to go in search of the Barbarians, into
whatsoever corner of the World they were retired. The Admiral I say was
disposed to have gone back, when the Moon suddenly went into an Eclipse. It was
one of the greatest which had ever been observed, and seemed to them to
Prognosticate the total defeat of the Mahometans. But the same night there
arose so violent a wind, that they were forced to stay upon their Anchors, for
the space of three and twenty days successively. Their Provisions then
beginning to grow short, and the Wind not suffering them, to turn to the Coast
of Malacca, they resolved on taking in fresh Provisions at Tenasserim, toward
the Kingdom of Siam.

In the mean time, Troubles in Malacca, concerning their Fleet.
all things were in confusion at Malacca. The hopes which Father Xavier had
given the People, supported them for some few days. But seeing a month was now
expired, without any intelligence from the Fleet, they believed it was either
swallowed by the Waves, or defeated by the Achenois, and that none had escaped
to bring the news. At the same time, the Saracens reported confidently, they
had it from good hands that the Fleets had met, that the Achenois had cut in
pieces all the Portugueses, and had sent the heads of their Commanders, as a
Present to their King. This bruit was spread through all the Town, and was
daily strengthened after the rate of false rumors, which are full of Tragical
Events. The better to color this report, they gave the circumstances of time
and place, and the several actions of the Battle. The Sorcerers and Soothsayers
were consulted by the Pagan Women, whose Husbands and Sons were in the Fleet:
and they confirmed whatever was related in the Town. It came at last to a
public rising against Xavier; and the Governor himself was not wholly free
from the popular contagion.

But Xavier, far from the least despondence in the promises of God, and of the
knowledge he had given him concerning the condition of the Fleet, with an
erected countenance assured, they should suddenly see it return victorious.
Which notwithstanding, he continued frequent in his Vows and Prayers; and at
the end of all his Sermons, recommended to their Devotions, the happy return of
their desired Navy. Their Spirits were so much envenomed, and prejudiced
against him, that many of them treated him with injurious words, while he was
rallied by the more moderate, who were not ashamed to say, his Prayers might be
of use, for the Souls of the Soldiers, who were slain in fight, but were of
little consequence, to gain a Battle which was lost.

Some fresh Intelligence, A new cause of Cons^ernation.
which arrived from Sumatra, increased the disorders, and consternation of the
Town. The King of Bintan, Son to that Mahomet, whom Albuquerque the Great, had
despoiled of the Kingdom of Malacca, sought for nothing more, than an
opportunity of re-conquering of what his Father had lost by force of Arms.
Seeing the Town now bare of Soldiers, and hearing that the Achenois had beaten
the Portuguese, he put to Sea, with three hundred Sail, and put in at the River
of Muar, within six Leagues of Malacca, toward the West.

That he might the better execute his design, by concealing it, he wrote from
thence to the Governor Melo, That he had armed a Fleet against the King of
Patan, his Enemy, but that having been informed of the defeat of the
Portuguese, he was come as a Friend and Brother of the King of Portugal, to
succor Malacca, against the King of Achen, who would not fail to master the
Town, if the course of his Victories was not stopped; that therefore he desired
only to be admitted into the place before it came into the possession of the
Conqueror; after which he had no farther cause of apprehension.

Melo, whom the Constancy of Father Xavier had reassur'd, discovered the Snare,
which was laid for him; and tricked those, who had intended to circumvent him:
He answered the King of Bintan, That the Town had no need of relief, as being
abundantly provided both of Men and Ammunition. That so great a Conqeurour as
he, ought not to lay aside an Expedition of such importance; nor to linger by
the way. That for themselves, they were in daily expectation of their Fleet,
not de^eated, according to some idle Rumors concerning it, but triumphant, and
laden with the Spoils of Enemies. That this Report, was only spread by
Saracens, whose Tongues were longer than their Lances; For these were the
Expressions which he used.

The Mohammedan Prince, judging by the Governors Reply, that his Artifice was
discovered; and that in reason he ought to attempt nothing, till it were
certainly known, what was become of the two Fleets, kept himself quiet, and
attended the success.

To return to the Christian Navy, (...)
before they could get to Tenasserim, their want of fresh Water forced them to
seek it nearer hand, at Queda, in the River of Parlez; where being entered,
they perceived by night a Fisher-boat, going by their Ships. They stopped the
Boat, and the Fishermen being examined, told them, That the Achenois were not
far distant, that they had been six weeks in the River: That they had plundered
all the Low-lands, and were now building a Fortress. This news filled the
Portuguese with joy: And Deza infinitely pleased, to have found the Enemy, of
whom he had given over the search, putting on his richest Apparel, ^ir'd all
his Cannon, to testify his joy, without considering that he spent his Powder to
no purpose, and that he warned the Barbarians to be upon their Guard. What he
did with more prudence, was to send three Galleys up the River, to discover the
Enemy, and observe their Countenance, while he put all things in order for the
Fight. The three Foysts, in their passage, met with four Brigantines, which the
Enemies had detached, to know the meaning of the Guns which they had heard.
Before they had taken a distinct view on either side, the three Foysts had
grappel'd each a Brigantine, and seized her; the fourth escaped. The Soldiers
put all the Enemies to the Sword, excepting six, whom they brought off,
together with the Brigantines. These Prisoners were all put to the Question;
but whatsoever Torments they endured, they could not at first get one Syllable
out of them, either where the Enemy lay, or what was the number of his Men, or
of his Ships. Two of them died upon the Rack; and other two, they threw over
Board; but the remaining couple, either more mortified with their Torments, or
less resolute, being separated from each other, began at last to open. And told
the same things apart; both where the Achenois were lying; and that their
number, was above ten thousand, reckoning into it, the Mariners, which were of
more consideration than the Soldiers; that the King of the Country, where now
they lay, had been constrained to avoid a shameful death, by slight; that
having massacred two thousand of the Natives, and made as many Captives, they
were building a Citadel, on the passage which the Ships ordinarily make, from
Bengale to Malacca, and that their design was not only to block up that Rode,
but to murth^r all the Christians, who should fall into their hands.

This report inflamed anew, (...)
the Zeal and Courage of the Soldiers. The Admiral was not wanting to
encourage them to fight Entering into a Skiff, with his drawn Sword, he went
from Vessel to Vessel, exhorting his Men, to have Christ crucified before their
Eyes; while they were in fight, as Father Francis had enjoined them; and ever
to keep in mind the Oath which they had taken; but above all things, to have an
assured hope of Victory, from the intercession of the holy Father, who had
promised it.

All unanimously answered, That they would fight it out to death; and should be
happy to dye in defense of their Religion. Deza, animated, by this their
answer, posted himself advantageously on the River, so as to be able from
thence to fall upon the Enemy, without indangering his little Fleet, to be
encompassed by their numbers.

The Achenois no sooner were informed by their Brigantine, of the Portuguese
Navy, than they put themselves into a condition of attacking it. They were not
only insolent by reason of their strength, but provoked also by the late
affront, they had received in their Brigantines; so that full of fury, without
the least ballancing of the matter, they set Sail with all their Navy,
excepting only two Vessels, and two hundred Land-Souldiers, which were left in
Guard of two thousand Slaves, and all their Booty. Having the Wind for them,
and coming down the River, they were carried with such swiftness, that Deza was
hardly got aboard the Admiral, when he heard their Drums, and their yelling
shouts, which re-eccho'd from the Shores, and neighboring Mountains. They were
divided into ten Squadrons, and each of them composed of six Vessels, excepting
only the first, which consisted but of four, but those the strongest of the
Fleet. The Admiral, on which the King of Pedir was on board, was in the first
Squadron, and with him were three Turkish Galions.

That fury which transported the Barbarians, (...)
caused them at the first ^ight of the Portuguese Navy, to discharge against it
their whole Artillery. But they aimed so ill, that they did them little or no
mischief. Immediately after, the two Admirals met, and stemmed each other. They
engaged on either side with so much resolution, that the advantage was not
s^^on, till a shot was made from the Vessel of John Soarez, and out of the
Cannon, called the Camel. It took place so justly, that So^ra's Vessel sunk to
rights. The three Galions which were in Front with him, on the same time,
immediately changed their order, and left off fighting, to save their General,
and the principal Lords of his Retinue. But these Galions which were a cross
the Stream, and took up half the breadth of it, stopped their own Vessels,
which followed File by File. Insomuch, that those of the second rank striking
against the first, and those of the third against the second, they fell foul on
each other, with a terrible confusion.

The Portuguese, The Achenois defeated.
seeing the Army of the Enemy, on a heap together, without being able to
disingage their Ships, encompassed them, and battered them with their Cannon.
They discharged every tire, three rounds successively, and ^o to purpose, that
they sunk nine great Ships, and disabled almost all the rest. Then four of the
Portuguese Foysts, set upon six Mahometans, which the Cannon had used more
favorably than the rest; the Soldiers boarded them with their Swords in their
Hands, and calling on the name of Iesus^ in less than half an hour they
destroyed above two thousand Men. The fright and the disorder of the Enemies
was redoubled, at the sight of this ^laughter, and at the thundering of the
Guns, which did such dreadful Execution: Insomuch that the Achenois leapt into
the River of their own accord, choosing rather to die in that manner, than by
the hands of the Christians.

Their General being taken up, when he was just drowning, and drawing new
Courage from despair, endeavored to have heartn'd up, the remainder of those,
who were about him. But having himself received a Musket Shot, he lost all
manner of resolution, and made away with only two Vessels. The five hundred
Gentlemen Orobalans, were either slain or drowned, with all the Ianisaries.
None escaped, but those who followed Soora in his flight. On the side of the
Christians, there were six and twenty slain, of whom, four only were Portuguese
by Nation. The Spoil was great; for besides the two Guard-ships which came into
the power of the Conquerours, and wherein was all the Pillage, which the Enemy
had gained; they took at least forty five Vessels, which might again be made
serviceable. There was found amongst the Spoils, a prodigious quantity of
Saracen and T^rkish Arms; three hundred pieces of Cannon of all sorts: And what
was yet more pleasing, sixty two pieces of Ordnance, whereon were graven the
Arms of Portugal, and which had been lost in diverse Wars, returned at length to
the possession of their lawful Lord and owner.

The King of Parlez, no sooner had notice of the Enemies defeat, than issuing
out of the Woods where he lay concealed, he came with five hundred Men, and
fell upon the Workmen, who by So^ra's Orders were building a Fortress, and on
the Soldiers appointed for their Guard. Having cut them in pieces, he went to
visit Captain Deza, and congratulated the Valor of the Portuguese, and their
success: He owned the preservation of his Kingdom to their Arms; and offered by
way of acknowledgment, a yearly Tribute to the King of Portugal.

Deza immediately ordered a Frigate, to carry the news of his Victory to
Malacca; but it was fully known in that City, with all its Circumstances,
before the Frigate was sent off, and thus it happened.

Father Xavier, The Saint declares the Victory, to the people of Malacca.
preaching in the great Church, betwixt nine and ten of the Clock, on Sunday
morning, which was the fourth of January, according to the old Calendar, at the
same time, when the two Fleets were actually engaged, stopped short on the
sudden, and appeared transported out of himself; so manifest a change appeared,
both in his Countenance, and his whole person. Having somewhat recovered
himself, instead of following his Discourse, inspired with a Divine Impulse, he
declared to his Audience the encounter, and shock of the two Navies, but in a
Mysterious and Figurative manner.

The Assembly, not comprehending their Preachers meaning, were of Opinion that
he was distracted; still as the Fight grew warmer, and the engagement came to
be more close, he seemed to be more and more inflamed, with all the motions of
a Man inspired, and speaking still Prophetically. At the length, fixing Eyes on
the Crucifix that was before him, he said with tears in his Eyes, accompanied
with sighs, but with an audible and distinct voice, Ah Jesus, thou God of my
Soul, and Father of all Mercies, I most humbly implore thee by the Merits of
thy sacred Passion, not to forsake those who sight thy Battle. After these
words, he hung down his Head, as overweary'd, and leaned upon his Pulpit,
without farther speaking. Having continued in that posture for some time, he
sprung up, on the sudden, and said aloud, with all the motions of Joy, which he
could not master. My Brethren, Jesus Christ, has vanquished for you. At this
moment, while I am speaking, the Soldiers of his blessed name, have completed
their Victory, by the entire defeat of the Enemies Navy. They have made a great
slaughter, and we have lost but four of our Portugueses. You shall receive the
news of it on Friday next, and may shortly expect the return of your victorious
Fleet.

How incredible soever this appeared, yet Melo, and the principal persons of
the Town there present, gave credit to it, without the least scr^ple:
considering the manner of his speaking, and his Air, which had somewhat of
Divine in it, and bore the testimony of its Truth. Yet the Wives and Mothers of
the absent Soldiers, apprehending still it might be false, and fearing the
more, the more they desired it should be true. The Father assembled them all in
the Afternoon, at the Church of our Lady del Monte, and there repeated so
distinctly, the whole series of what he had said in the Morning, that they
durst no longer doubt of it.

Even in the beginning of the week, The certain news of the Victory is brought.
they had almost evident signs of the Victory; by the ^^ws which came of the
King of Bintan; who having sent on all sides to be informed, whether the
Portuguese had been defeated, being advertised from the River of Parlez, of
what had passed, forsook M^ar, and retired with expedition, bewailing the
misfortune of his Allies, and ashamed of his ill timed Enterprise.

The Frigate dispatched away by Deza, The return of the victorio^s Fleet.
under the conduct of Emanuel Godigno, arrived exactly on the day mentioned by
the Saint. The Fleet followed shortly after; and made a triumphant entry into
the Port, with Trumpets sounding, and a general discharge of all their
Artillery. The Town received them with repeated shouts of welcome, and Father
Francis, who was at the head of the People on the shore, held forth a Crucifix
in his hand, to give both the Inhabitants, and Soldiers to understand, that
they owed their Victory to Christ alone.

Both the one and the other joining their voices, gave solemn thanks to the
Savior of Mankind: But they also broke out into the praises of the Saint, upon
the truth of his Predictions; and could not hold from publishing, that it was
he, who had obtained from Heaven, this wonderful success.

The Burden of these ^raises, Anger arrives at Malacca, when the Saint was
re^dy^ to ^ pa^^ from it.
did no less hasten the Saints intended Voyage to Goa, than the necessity of
those affairs which called him thither. He had remained four Months together at
Malacca, since his return from the Molucca's and was just on his departure,
when the Ships, which early come from China, arrived in the Port. A Iapponesse,
whose name was Anger, came with these Vessels, expressly to see Xavier. He was
about five and thirty years of Age, Rich, Nobly born, and one whose life had
been sufficiently libertine. The Portuguese, who two years before had made the
discovery of Iapan, had been acquainted with him at Cangoxima, the place of his
birth, and understood from his own mouth, that having been much troubled with
the remembrance of the sins of his youth, he had retired himself amongst the
solitary Bonzes. But that neither the solitude, nor the conversation of those
Heathen Priests, had been able to restore him the tranquillity of his Soul, and
that thereupon, he had returned into the World, more disquieted than ever, with
his remorse of Conscience.

Some other Portuguese Merchants, who at that time came to Cangoxima, and who
had seen Father Francis at Malacca, the first Voyage he had made thither, made
an intimate acquaintance, and friendship with Anger. And this Iaponnese,
discovering to them the perplexity of his Soul, which augmented daily, more and
more, they told him that in Malacca, there was a Religious man, eminent for his
holy Life, well experienced in the conduct of Souls, and most proper to settle
his perplexed Conscience, and that if he would try this remedy, they would
facilitate the means to him, and bring him to the Saint, of whom they had
spoken. That it was Father Francis Xavier, their friend, the refuge of Sinners,
and comforter of troubled minds.

Anger found himself possessed with a Diverse adventures of Anger.
strong desire of going to see the holy man, but the length of the Voyage,
which was eight hundred leagues, the dangers of a tempestuous Sea, and the
considerations of his family, somewhat cooled him. A troublesome affair, which
he had upon his hands at the same time, at length resolved him. For having
killed a man in a quarrel, and being pursued by Justice, he could not find a
more secure retreat, than the Ships of Portugal, nor a surer way of preserving
his life, than to accept the offer they had made him.

Alvarez Vaz, who had most importuned him to take this Voyage, and who had many
times offered to bring him to Father Xavier, had not yet finished all his
business, when this Iaponnese came to take sanctuary in his Ship. He therefore
gave him Letters of recommendation to another Portuguese, called Ferdinand
Alvarez, who was at another Port of Iapan, and who was suddenly to set sail for
Malacca.

Anger departed by night, attended by two Servants; being arrived at the Port,
and enquiring for Ferdinand Alvarez, he lighted accidentally on George Alvarez,
who was just ready to weigh Anchor. This George was a wealthy Merchant, a man
of probity, and who had an extreme affection for the Father. He received the
Letters of Alvarez, as if they had been addressed to himself, took the three
Iaponians into his Ship, entertained them with all kindness, and brought them
to Malacca, taking great satisfaction in the good Office he should do in
presenting them to the man of God, who might perhaps make them the first
Christians of their Country. But the misfortune was, that they missed of the
Father, who was just gone for the Molucca's: Anger, more disquieted in a
foreign land, than he had been at home, and despairing of ever seeing him, whom
he had so often heard of from his friends, had it in his thoughts to have
returned to Iapan, without considering the danger to which he exposed himself,
and almost forgetting the murder which had caused his flight; according to the
custom of Criminals, who blind themselves in those occasions, and whom divine
justice oftentimes brings back to the same place, where they had committed
their offense. Whereupon, he went again to Sea, and having made some little
stay in a Port of China, he pursued his Voyage. Already some Iaponian Islands
were in sight, when there arose a furious Tempest, which endangered the sinking
of the Ship, and which in four days brought him back into the same Port of
China, from whence he had set out. This was to Anger a favorable effect of
Gods Providence; for the same hand which drives the guilty to the Precipice,
sometimes preserves them from falling into it, and pulls them back, after a
miraculous manner.

The Iaponnese very happily for himself, met there, Alvarez Vaz, just ready to
set sail for Malacca. The Portuguese, who loved Anger, reproved him for his
impatience, and offered to re-conduct him to the place, which he had so
abruptly left; withal telling him that according to all appearances, the
Father by this time was returned from the Molucca's. Anger, who still carried
about him a troubled Conscience, and thereby was easily induced to any
proposition which tended to compose it, followed the advice of Vaz, and
returned with him.

Coming on shore, Anger is brought to the Father, who sends him to (...).
he there found George Alvarez, the same Person, who had brought him the first
time to Malacca. Alvarez surpised to see him once again, told him, that Father
Xavier was returned from the Molucca's, and immediately brought Anger to his
presence. The Father, who foresaw, not only that this Iaponian, should be the
first Christian of that Kingdom, but also by his means, the Gospel should be
Preached in it, was transported with joy at the first sight of him, and
embraced him with exceeding tenderness. The sight of the Saint, and his
embracements, gave such consolations to Anger, that he no longer doubted of
receiving an entire satisfaction from him. Understanding in some measure the
Portuguese Language, Xavier himself assured him, that the disquiets of his mind
should be dissipated, and that he should obtain that Spiritual repose, in
search of which, he had undertaken so long a Voyage: But that before he could
arrive to it, it concerned him first to understand and practice the law of the
true God, who alone could calm the troubles of his heart, and set it in a
perpetual tranquillity. Anger, who desired nothing so much, as to have his
Conscience in repose, and who was charmed with the great goodness of the
Father, offered himself to be directed in all things by him. The Servant of
God, instructed him in the Principles of Faith, of which his Friends the
Portuguese, had already given him some knowledge; as (...) as men of their
Profession were capable of teaching him. But to the end his Conversion might be
more solid* he thought it convenient to send him, and his Servants, to the
Seminary of Go^, there to be more fully taught the truths and practice of
Christianity before their Baptism. The Father had yet a further purpose in it,
that these first fruits of Iaponian Christianity, should be con^ecrated to God,
by the Bishop Don John d'Albuquerque, in the Capital City of the Indies.

Since in his Voyage to Goa, he was to visit the Fishing Coast, he would not
take the three Iaponians with him; and gave the care of conducting them to
Georg' Alvarez. He only wrote by them to the Rector of the College of St.
Paul, giving him Orders to instruct them with all diligence. He put on board
the ship of another Portuguese, called Gonsalvo Fernandez, twenty or thirty
young men, whom he had brought from the Molucca's, in order to their Studies in
the same College. After which, himself embarked in another Vessel, which went
directly for Cochin.

In passing the Straight of Ceylan, (...)
the Ship which carried Xavier, was overtaken with the most horrible Tempest,
which was ever seen. They were constrained, at the very beginning of it, to
cast overboard all their Merchandise, and the winds roared with so much
violence, that the Pilot not being able to hold the Rudder, abandoned the
Vessel to the fury of the Waves. For three days and nights together, they had
death continually present before their eyes: and nothing reassur'd the
Mariners, but the serene countenance of Father Xavier, amidst the cries and
tumults in the Ship. After he had heard their Confessions, implored the help of
Heaven, and exhorted all of them to receive with an equal mind, either life or
death, from the hand of God, he retired into his Cabin. Francis Pereyra looking
for the man of God, in the midst of the Tempest, to have comfort from him,
found him on his knees before his Crucifix, wholly taken up, and lost to all
things but to God. The Ship driven along by an impetuous current, already
struck against the Sands of Ceylan, and the Mariners gave themselves for lost,
without hope of recovery; when the Father coming out of his Cabin, asked the
Pilot for the Line and Plummet, with which he was accustomed to fathom the Sea:
having taken them, and let them down to the bottom of the Ocean, he pronounced
these words, Great God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, have mercy on us. At the
same moment, the Vessel stopped, and the Wind ceased. After which, they pursued
their Voyage, and happily arrived at the Port of Cochin, on the 21st of
January, 1548.

There the Father gave himself the leisure of writing diverse Letters into
Europe, He writes to the King of Portugal.
by a Vessel of Lisbon which was just in a readiness to set sail. The first was
to the King of Portugal, John the third; the Letter was full of prudent
Counsels, concerning the duties of a King, he advertised him anew, that his
Majesty should be guilty before God of the evil Government of his Ministers,
and that one day an account must be given of the Salvation of those Souls,
which he had suffered to perish, through neglect of application, or want of
constancy in his endeavors. But he did it, with all manner of precaution, and
softened his expressions with Christian Charity.

I Have long deliberated, (...)
said he, whether I should certify your Majesty, of the Transactions of your
Officers in the Indies, and what ought farther to be done, for the
establishment of our Faith. On the one side the Zeal of God's service, and his
glory, encouraged me to write to you; on the other, I was diverted from that
resolution, by the fear I had of writing to no purpose. But at the same time, I
concluded that I could not be silent, without betraying my Ministerial
Function: and it also seemed to me, that God gave me not those thoughts without
some particular design; which probably was, that I might communicate them to
your Majesty, and this Opinion, as the more likely, has at length prevailed
with me. Nevertheless, I always feared, that if I should freely give you all my
thoughts, my Letter would only serve for Evidence against you, at the hour of
your death, and would augment against your Majesty the rigor of the last
Judgment, by taking from you the excuse of ignorance. These considerations
gave me great anxieties, and your Majesty will easily believe me. For in fine,
my heart will answer for me, that I desire not to employ all my strength, or
even my life it self for the Conversion of the Indians, out of any other
prospect, than to free your Majesty's Conscience, as much as in me lies, and to
render the last Judgment less terrible to you. I do in this but that which is
my duty; and the particular affection which you bear our Society, well
deserves, that I should sacrifice my self for you.

After he had informed his Majesty, how much the jealousies and secret
divisions of his Officers, had hindered the Progress of the Gospel, he
declares, that he could wish the King would bind himself by a solemn Oath, to
punish severely, whosoever they should be, who should occasion any prejudice to
the farther propagation of Faith in the Indies. And farther assured him, that
if such, who had the authority in their hands, were made sensible, that their
faults should not escape punishment, the whole Isle of Ceylan, all Cape
Comorine, and many Kings of Malabar would receive Baptism in the space of one
year; that as many as were living in all the extent of the Indies, would
acknowledge the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and make profession of his Doctrine,
if those Ministers of State, who had neglected the interests of the Faith, had
been deprived of their Dignities, and their Revenues.

After this, (...)
he Petitions the King, to send him a supply of Preachers, and those Preachers
to be of the Society, as judging them, more proper than any others for the new
world. I beg, and adjure your Majesty, says he, by the love you bear to our
blessed Lord, and by the real wherewith you burn, for the Glory of the Divine
Majesty, to send next year, some Preachers of our Society, to* your faithful
Subjects of the Indies. For I assure you, that your Fortresses are in extreme
want of such supplies; both in reference to the Portugueses who are there in
Garrison, and to the new Christians established in the Towns and Villages
depending on them. I speak by experience; and that which I have seen with my
own eyes, obliges me to write concerning it. Being at Malacca, and at the
Molucca's, I Preached every Sunday, and all Saints days twice; and was forced
upon it; because I saw the Soldiers and People had great need of being
frequently taught the word of God.

I Preached then, in the morning to the Portugueses at Mass: I went again into
the Pulpit, in the afternoon, and instructed their Children, their Slaves and
Idolaters newly converted, accommodating my discourse, to the measure of their
understanding, and expounding to them the Principle Points of Christian
Doctrine, one after another. Besides which, one day in the week, I assembled in
the Church, the Wives of the Portugueses, and Catechis'd them on the Articles
of Faith, on the Sacraments of Penance, and the Eucharist. Much fruit would be
gathered in few years, if the same method mere constantly observed in all
places. I preached also, every day, in the Fortresses, the Principles of
Religion, to the Sons and Daughters of the Soldiers, to their Servants of both
Sexes; in fine, to the Natives of the Country, who were born Christians: and
these Instructions had so good effect, that they totally renounced the
Superstitions and S^rceries, which were in use amongst those stupid and
ignorant new Converts.

I descend into all these petty circumstances, to the end your Majesty may
judge, according to your prudence, what number of Preachers may be necessary
here; and that you may not forget to send many to us. For if the Ministry of
Preaching, be not more exercised amongst us, we have reason to apprehend, that
not only the Indians, who have embraced the Faith, will l^ave it, but that the
Portugueses also may forget the dutie^ of Christianity, and live afterward
like Heathens.

As Father Simon Rodriguez, He writes t^ (...) Simon Rodrig (...).
who governed the Society in Portugal, had great Credit at the Court, Father
Xavier writ to him at the same time, desiring him, he would support his
Demands, with his Interest. He recommended to him in especial manner, That he
would make choice of those Preachers, who were Men of known Virtue, and
exemplary Mortification. He subjoined, If I thought the King would not take
amiss, the Counsel of a faithful Servant, who sincerely loves him, I should
advise him to meditate one quarter of an hour, every day, on that Divine
Sentence, What does it profit a man to have gained the World, and to lose his
Soul? I should counsel him, I say, to ask of God, the understanding, and taste
of those words, and that he would finish all his Prayers with the same words,
What will it profit a man, to gain the World, and to lose his Soul? It Is time,
said Xavier, to draw him out of his mistake, and to give him notice, that the
hour of his death is nearer than he thinks: that fatal hour when the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, will summon him to Judgment, saying to him these
dreadful words, Give an account of your Administration. For which reason, do in
such manner, my dear Brother, that he may fulfill his whole duty; and that he
may send over to the Indies, all needful supplies, for the increase of Faith.

Xavier also wrote from Cochin, He sends an account to the Fathers at Rome, of
his Voyages.
to the Fathers of the Society at Rome; and gave them an account at large, of
his Voyages to Malacca, to Amboyna, to the Molucca's, and the Isle del Moro;
with the success which God had given to his labors. But he forgot not the
relation of his danger in the Straight of Ceylan, and made it in a manner,
which was full of consolation to them.

In the height of the Tempest, said he in his Letter, I took for my
Intercessours with God, the living persons of our Society, with all those who
are well affected to it; and joined to these, all Christians, that I might be
assisted with the merits of the Spouse of Christ, the holy Catholic Church,
whose Prayers are heard in Heaven, though her Habitation be on Earth.
Afterward I addressed my self to the Dead, and particularly to Piere le Fevre,
to appease the wrath of God. I went through all the Orders of the Angels, and
the Saints, and invoked them all. But to the end, that I might the more easily
obtain the pardon of my innumerable sins, I desired for my Protectress and
Patroness, the most holy Mother of God* and Queen of Heaven, who without
difficulty obtains from her beloved Son, whatsoever she requests. In
conclusion, having reposed all my hope in the infinite merits of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, being encompassed with this protection, I enjoyed a
greater satisfaction, in the midst of this raging tempest, than when I was
wholly delivered from the danger.

In very truth, being as I am, the worst of all Men, I am ashamed to have shed
so many tears of joy, through an excess of heavenly pleasure; when I was just
upon the point of perishing. Insomuch, that I humbly prayed our Lord, that he
would not free me from the danger of my Shipwreck, unless it were to reserve me
for greater dangers, to his own Glory and his Service. For what remains, God
has often shown me by an inward discovery, from how many perils and sufferings
I have been delivered, by the Prayers, and Sacrifices, of those of the Society;
both such as labor here on Earth, and such who enjoy the fruits of their
labors in the Heavens. When I have once begun the mention of our Society, I
can never leave; but the departure of the Vessels constrains me to break off:
and behold what I have judged most proper for the conclusion of my Letter. If I
ever forget thee, O Society of Jesus, let my right hand be unprofitable to me,
and may I even forget the use of it. Si oblitus unquam suero tui, Societas
Jesus, oblivioni detur dextera mea. I pray our Lord Jesus Christ, that since,
during the course of this miserable life, he has gathered us into his Society,
he would reunite us, in a blessed Eternity, in the Company of Saints, who
behold him in his Glory.

After he had written these Letters, and given some time to the service of his
Neighbor, he took the way of Comorine, doubled the Cape a second time, and
arrived at the Coast of Fishery. The Paravas, who were his first Children in
Jesus Christ, were overjoyed at the sight of their Saint, and Good Father, as
they called him. All the Villages came to meet him, singing the Christian
Doctrine, and praising God for his return. The satisfaction of the Saint was
not less than theirs: but above all things his Consolation was unspeakable, to
see the number of Christians so much augmented, by the labors of his Brethren.
There were in that place, many of the Society, of whom the chief were Antonio
Criminal, Francis Henriquez, and Alphonso Cyprian; for Father Xavier, having
written from Amboyna, for the greatest number of Missioners whom they could
spare, toward the cultivation of those new Plants at the Coast of Fishery, all
those who came from Portugal, after his own arrival in the Indies, went
thither, excepting the three, who went to the Molucca's, and two who stayed at
Goa, for the instruction of the Youth.

The fervency of those new Converts, He receives great comfort, from the
fer^ency of the (...) Converts.
did not less edify Xavier, than their number. In visiting a certain Village,
they showed him a young Man, a Native of the Country, who having embarked in
company of a Portuguese, had been cast by Tempest, on the Coast of Malabar. The
Saracens, who inhabit that place, having murdered the Portuguese, would have
forced his Companion to renounce his Faith Thereupon they brought him into a
Mosquee, where they promised him great store of Money and Preferments, in case
he would forsake the Law of Jesus Christ, and take up that of their Prophet
Mahomet. But seeing their Promises could not prevail, they threatened him with
Death, and held their naked weapons over his Head, to fright him. But neither
could they shake his Resolution, with that dreadful spectacle; then they loaded
him with Irons, and used him with extraordinary cruelty, till a Portuguese
Captain informed of it* came suddenly upon them, with a Troop of Soldiers, and
rescued the young Man out of their hands. Xavier embraced him many times, and
blessed Almighty God, that his Faith was imprinted so lively, in the Heart of a
Barbarian. He heard also with great satisfaction, of the constancy of some
Slaves, who having fled from the Houses of their Portuguese Masters, and living
amongst Gentiles, far from being corrupted with the superstitions of the
Infidels, complied exactly with the obligations of their Baptism, and lived in
a most religious manner. It was reported to him of these Slaves, that when any
of them died, they suffered not his Body to be burnt, according to the custom
of the Pagans, neither would they leave it without S^pulture; but buried it
according to the Ceremonies of the Church, and set up a Cross over the Grave.

Though these Infidels, whom they served, did not hinder them from continuing
in Christianity, and that every one of them in particular, was resolved to
persevere in his Faith, even in the midst of Idolatry, yet they had a longing
desire, to return into the company of the Faithful, where they might be
supplied with those Spiritual Succors, which they wanted, and lead a life yet
more conformable to their Belief. So, that as soon as they had the news of
Father Xavier's return, who had baptized the greatest part of them, they came
to desire him, That he would make their peace with their Masters, whom they had
left to free themselves from slavery, and declared, that they were content,
once more to lose their Liberty in prospect of the Salvation of their Souls.
Xavier received them with open Arms, as his well-belov'd Children, and
afterward obtained their Pardon.

After he had visited all the Villages, he made some stay at Manapar, He stays
at Manapar, and what he performed there.
which is not far distant from Cape Comorine. As the only end, which he
proposed to himself, was to plant the Gospel in the Indies; and that in order
to it, he must there establish the Society, he began to regulate all things,
according to the Principles, and in the Spirit of Father Ignatius, General of
the Order. Having reassembled all the Laborers in the Gospel, of that Coast,
he examined their several Talents, and Virtues, in familiar conversation with
them, by causing them to give an account of what passed betwixt God and them in
their own Hearts. After he had assigned to each of them, the places which were
most convenient for them, both in regard of their bodily strength, and of their
spiritual endowments. He constituted Father Antonio Criminal, superior of all
the rest: And to the end they might be more capable of serving that people, he
ordered every one of them, with all possible care, to apply himself to the
study of the Malabar Language; which obtains through all that Coast. Upon this
account he commanded Father Francis Henriquez, to reduce that Tongue into the
Rules of Art, and to compose an exact Grammar of it, according to the method of
the Greek and Latin Grammars. The work seemed impossible, especially to one,
who was newly come from Europe, and who had little knowledge in the Indian
Tongues: Nevertheless Henriquez compassed it in a small time, which was
apparently a Miracle of Obedience. In the mean while, Xavier judging, that the
Exposition of the Christian Doctrine, which he had made for those of Molucca,
might be of use to his dear Paravas, ordered a Malabar Priest, who was well
versed in the Portuguese, to translate it into his own Language. But to the end
that the conduct of the Missioners might be Uniform, and that the same Spirit
might animate all of them, besides the instructions which he gave them by word
of Mouth, he gave them the following Rules in writing.

In the first place, The Rule^ which he prescribes to the (...) of the F^^hing
Coast.
Where ever the lot of your Ministry shall fall, be mindful of baptising
Infants newly born; and perform it your selves, without trusting the care of
it, to any other person. There is nothing at present, of more importance. Do
not wait till the Parents bid you come; as they may easily neglect it, it
behooves you to run through all the Villages, to enter into the Houses, and to
Christen all the Infants you can find.

After the great concernment of giving Baptism, you ought to be careful of
nothing more, than of entering those little Children into the principles of
Faith, who are grown capable of Instruction. Not being able to be in all
places, you shall cause the Canacapoles, and the Teachers of the Catechism, to
perform their duty, and religiously to observe the Customs established. To
which purposes, when you visit the Villages, to take an account of what passes
there, assemble the Masters, with their Scholars, and know from the Children,
in the presence of those who are accustomed to instruct them, what they have
learnt, or forgotten since your last visit; this will double the ardency of the
Scholars, and the diligence of their Teachers.

On Sundays, gather the Men together in the Church, to repeat their Prayers,
and observe well* whether the Pantagatins, or chief of the people are there
present. You are to expound the Prayers which they repeat; and reprove them for
the Vices then in fashion: which you are to make them comprehend by using
familiar Examples. In fine, you are to threaten the more stubborn sinners with
the wrath of God; and tell them, that if they do not reform their lives, their
days shall be shortened, by all manner of Diseases: that the Pagan Kings shall
inslave them, and that their immortal Souls shall become fuel to the
everlasting flames of Hell.

When you come to any place, you shall inform your selves, what quarrels are
stirring in it, and who are the parties; after which you shall endeavor to
reconcile them. These Reconciliations are to be made in the Church, where it
will be fitting to assemble all the Women on Saturdays, as the Men on Sundays.

When the Malabar Priest, shall have translated the Exposition of the Creed,
you shall take Copi^s of it, which you shall cause to be carefully read to the
Women on Saturdays, to the Men on Sundays. If you are there present, you shall
read it your selves, and add to the Exposition, what you think convenient for
the farther clearing i^.

Distribute to the Poor those Collections which are made for them in the
Churches, by the Charity of the Congregation; and beware of taking any part of
them for your own uses.

Fail not every Saturday and Sunday, to put the Faithful in mind, of giving you
notice, when any one falls sick, to the end you may visit them. And give them
to know, that if they do not advertise you, and that the sick person dies, you
will not allow him burial amongst* Christians, in punishment of their neglect.

When you visit the sick, take especial care that they repeat to you, the
Apostles Creed in their Mother Tongue. Interrogate them on every Article and
ask them, if they believe sincerely. After this make them say the Con^^teor,
and the other Catholic Prayers, and then read the Gospel over them.

For the burial of the dead, you shall assemble the Children, and coming out of
the Church with them, the Cross being at the head of the Procession, you shall
sing the Christian Doctrine, coming and going. You shall say the Prayers of the
Church, at the House of the dead person; and before he is put into the ground.
You shall also make a short Exhortation to the Assembly, before the Corpse, upon
the necessity of death, the amendment of life, and the practice of Virtue.

You shall give notice to the Men on Sunday, and to the Women on Saturday, to
bring their sick Children into the Church, that you may read the Gospel over
them, for their cure; and that the Parents from thence may receive increase of
Faith, and respect to the Temples of our Lord.

You shall your selves determine all litigious causes; and if you cannot end
them on the place, defer them to the next Sunday; and after Divine Service
cause them to be expedited by the principal Inhabitants of the place. Yet I
will not that these sort of Affairs, should take up too much of your time: Nor,
that you prefer the care of your Neighbor's temporal Concernments, before
works of Charity, which respect the Salvation of Souls; and am of opinion, That
when any important business of that kind shall happen, you should remit it to
the Portuguese Commandant.

Do all things in your power, to make your selves beloved by those people; for
by that you will be able to do more good upon them, than by being feared.
Decree no punishment against any person, but by the advice of Father Antonio
Criminal: And if the Commandant of the Portuguese be present, do nothing
without his order. In case any Man or Woman, shall make a Pagod, or Idol,
banish them from the Village if Father Criminal consent to it. Testify great
affection to the Children who frequent the Christian Schools; pardon, and wink
at their faults sometimes, lest a severe usage should fright them from us.

In presence of a Portuguese, abstain from reproving and condemning the Natives
of the Country, who are Christians; on the contrary, commend and excuse them,
on all occasions. For considering how lately they have embraced the Faith, and
what assistance is wanting to them, to live like good Christians, it is only to
be admired, that they are not more vicious.

Be serviceable in all you can to the Malabar Priests, in what relates to their
Spiritual Advantage: take care that they confess themselves, and say Mass, and
give good Examples, and write nothing against them to any person whatsoever.

Live so well with the Portuguese Commandants, that no misunderstanding be ever
perceived betwixt you, and them. For the rest of the Portugueses, use all sort
of means, to make them your Friends: Have never any quarrel with any of them,
though they should bring you into Law, or quarrel with you without the least
provocation on your part. If they use the new Christians hardly, oppose them,
but with much mildness; and if you find your opposition may be likely to
succeed, make your Complaint to the Portuguese Commandant; with whom, I once
again beseech you, never to have any difference.

Let your Conversation with the Portugueses be alwa^s confined to Spiritual
Subjects; of Death, of Judgment, of Purga^^ry, of Hell, of the frequentation of
Sacraments, and the exact observation of Gods Commandments: For if you never
speak to them, but concerning these matters, they will never rob you of those
hours which are set apart for your Function.

Fail not to write to Goa, to the Fathers and Br^thers of our Society, giving
them an account of the Fruit of your Labors; and proposing to them, what you
think may be to the advancement of Piety. You shall write also to the Bishop,
but with much Reverence and Submission, as to the Common Father, and Pastor
General of this new World.

What (...) all things I recommend to you, and which I can never sufficiently
repeat, (...), That whatsoever Voyage you make, and wheresoever you shall be,
(...) shall endeavor to gain the love of all p^^ple, by your good Offices, and
fair dem^^nour: by which means you will have greater opportunities for the
gaining of S^^ls; which God Almighty grant you all the Grace to do, and abide
for ever with you.

Things being thus regulated on the Cost of Fishery, (...)
the ^ather would pass into the Isle of Ceylan, before his return to Goa. His
design was to gather the fruit of that precious Blood, which two years before
was shed by the King of Iafanatapan* or at least to see what inclination those
people had to receive the Gospel, who had beheld the constancy of the Martyrs.
Indeed, the death of the two young Princes converted, who pretended to the
Crown of Iafanatapan, destroyed almost all hopes of planting Christianity in
that Isle. Notwithstanding which, Xavier converted the King of Cande; who is
one of the Kings of Ceylan. After which he went to the Tyrant, who had treated
the Christians with so much cruelty, to try if he could work him, though
against all humane appearances, to suffer the Law of Jesus Christ, to be
preached in his Dominions, and to bring him also to be a Christian.

As Reasons of State prevail most with Princes, so the Father represented to
this Infidel, That his Throne could never be established, but by the Arms of
the Portugueses; that if he once contracted with them a strict alliance, he had
n^thing farther to apprehend, either from his Enemies or his Subjects. The
Barbarian, who feared all things, both from within and from without, forgetting
that D^^ Alphonso de Sosa, would have made War upon him, in favor of the two
baptized Princes, hearkened to the Propositions of Peace, and even permitted
the Father to explain to him, the Mysteries of the Christian Faith. The
instructions of the Saint wrought so much upon the Tyrant, that being changed,
in a very short space of time, he promised to embrace the Faith, and labor to
bring his Subjects into it, offering for the pledge of his word, to put his
Kingdom into the Hands of the King of Portugal, and to pay him such Tribute as
should be thought sitting, without any farther demand in his own behalf, than
of two things. The one was, That the Governor of the Indies, should conclude a
firm Alliance with him, as he had done with other Indian Kings, who had made
themselves Vassals to the Crown of Portugal: The other, That in order to hinder
those revolts and troubles which might arise from the change of Religion, he
might have a Company of Portuguese Soldiers, to ^e entertained at his own
charges.

Father Xavier, He depart^ for Go^, and ^inds the Vice^^y at Ba^ain.
well satisfied, to have thus succeeded beyond his expectations, set Sail for
Goa, with an Ambassador of the In^idel King, and arrived there on March the
20th. in the year 1548. Understanding there, that the Viceroy Don John de
Castro, was at Bazain, toward the Gulf of Cambaya, he embarked anew,
notwithstanding, that the season was improper for Navigation; as judging that a
business of such consequence, could not be too soon concluded, and that delays
frequently ruined the most hopeful Affairs. Castro had never seen Xavier, but
all he had heard related of him, gave him an earnest longing to behold him. He
received him with all those Honors which are due to a Saint, at the first
meeting, and willingly accepted what the King of Iafanatapan had offered, on
the Conditions above mentioned. But he retained for some time, the Man of God,
both to hear him preach, and to consult him on some difficult Affairs, where
the Interests of State, and those of Religion were joined together.

In the mean time, He obtains whatever he demands of the Viceroy.
he designed Antonio Monis Barreto, a man of Authority, and very brave, for the
Garrison of Iafanatapan, with an hundred Soldiers, well disciplined, and
worthy of such an Officer. At the same time he ordered a magnificent
Entertainment, for the Ambassador, who remained at Goa: And that if any of his
Train would receive Baptism, no cost should be spared at that Solemnity. But
the King of Iafanatapan, failed afterward in Fidelity, both to God and Man,
and in all probability, it was that failure, which drew the last misfortunes on
his person, and his Kingdom.

The stay which Xavier made at Bazain, He converts a young Gentleman who was
very much debauched.
was not unprofitable to a young man of Quality, who was much debauched, called
Rodrigue Segueyra, whom he had known two years before. For Segueyra having
committed a Murder at Malacca, when the Father made his first Voyage to the
Town, retired into the Hospital to avoid the pursuit of Justice. There it was
that the Father knew him, and grew into his Familiarity, by his engaging ways
of Mildness and Courtesy; which always succeeded with him. When he had gained
the affection of Segueyra, he spoke to him of Eternity, with so much power,
that the young Gentleman, entered into serious thoughts, and made a general
Confession to him. Xavier, to engage him the more in the ways of Goodness, and
to free him from that confinement of the Hospital, where his Crimes had forced
him to take Sanctuary, made up the business with his Adversaries, and obtained
his pardon from the Governor of Malacca: But seeing the soft and dissolute
manner of living in Malacca, was capable of ruining all his good intentions, he
advised him to leave the Indies, and return into Europe. Segueyra, who was
sensible of his own weakness, and desired to save his Soul, promised the Father
to obey him, and put himself into a condition, of executing his promise. In
effect he took the way of Goa, with design from thence to go for Portugal. But
being made a Receiver of the public Revenues by the Viceroy Don John de
Castro, he thought no more of Portugal, but relapsed into his first Debauches.

Xavier, was wholly lost to his remembrance, when he happened to meet him at
Bazain, the sight of the Father surprised him at first, and almost confounded
him. But straight recovering, he came up boldly to him, and took his hand, to
have kissed it according to his former custom. The Father as courteous and
civil as he was, yet thrust him back, st^rnly enough; yet mollifying himself a
little* How, my Son, said he, are you still in the Indies? were you not advised
to leave Malacca, and return to Portugal?

The Portuguese, in great disorder, and not knowing how to excuse himself; laid
all the blame upon the Governor, who had detained him, in some sort against
his will. But, replied Xavier with a holy indignation, is it the Governor who
has obliged you to lead the life of a Beast, and to continue for two years
without going to Confession? However it be, continued the Father, know that we
two shall never be well with one another, so long as you are upon ill terms
with God. At these words Segue^ra pierced with a lively sorrow, asked pardon of
the Father, for his breach of promise, and his unfaithfulness to the Divine
Grace. He Confessed himself the same day; and wholly changed his life, under
his direction, whom God had sent to bring him back into a better wa^.

Don John de Castro, who was desirous of profiting by the Father's Counsels,
for the regulation of his own life, would have been glad, to have retained him
longer; but seeing him resolved on going, gave him leave to depart; yet begging
him at the same time, that he would pass the Winter at Goa, that after his own
return thither, he might use his assistance in the affairs of his Conscience.

The Father returned, He (...)
very seasonably, for the good of Cosmo de Torrez, a Spanish Priest, and Native
of Valenti^; one of the greatest Wits, and most knowing Persons of that Age.
Torrez, was embarked on the Fleet, which came from Mexico to the Molucca
Islands; and which, having sailed over so many Seas, to little purpose, stayed
at Amboyna, as we have already related. He there met Xavier, and was so charmed
with his manner of life, that he had thoughts of becoming his Disciple. But
besides, that the labors which are unseparable from the Ministry Apostolical,
somewhat shocked him, he judged, that he ought to undertake nothing, but by the
Counsel of the Bishop of the Indies. Insomuch, that he le^t Amboyna, without
forming any resolution, and even without opening himself to Father Xavier.

When the Spanish Fleet was arrived at Goa, he presented himself to the Bishop,
who being in want of Spiritual Substitutes, gave him one of the chief Vicariats
of his Diocese. Torrez was of Opinion that God required nothing farther of him;
and for the space of four or five months, performed all the functions of that
Office, which the Bishop had given him in charge. But the continual disquiets
of his Soul, rendered him suspicious of his own condition, and brought him to
believe, that God had punished him, for not following the new Apostle of the
East.

Being one day, much troubled in his mind, he went to the College of St. Paul,
and opened himself to Father Lancilotti, desiring him, to unfold to him the
nature of that Institute, with which he was so much taken, by seeing Father
Xavier at Amboyna. As some interior motions had of late, pushed him on, to the
performance of somewhat that was great, and of suffering all things for the
glory of Jesus Christ, he found the Institute of Ignatius, so conformable to
the present dispositions of his Soul, that without farther ballancing the
matter, he was resolved to go through the Spiritual Exercises, to ^it himself
for the change of his condition. From the second day, he received such light,
and so much comfort from above, that he believed himself in Heaven already. He
could not sufficiently admire, that those plain, and easy truths, which he had
often read, without any taste of them, should make such lively impressions in
him, as now they did. And he discovered this to Lancilotti, with expressions
full of astonishment.

Nevertheless being assrighted at the prospect of a perpetual engagement, and
perhaps tempted by the Devil, he could not settle to it, and was every day,
more and more irresolute.

Xavier arrived just at that point of time. He had scarcely seen Torrez, when
behold a man, fixed on the sudden, and resolved, and pressing to be received
amongst the Children of Ignatius. The Apostle received him, and took pains
himself to form him, according to the spirit of the Society. He also admitted
some Portugueses, who had great Talents for the Mission, and were inflamed with
the zeal of Souls.

They lived together in the College of St. Paul, where that ^ervour reigned,
not only amongst the Jesuits, but also amongst those of the Seminary, whose
numbers increased daily. The Iaponnese, Anger, was amongst them, leading a most
regular life, and breathing after that Baptism, which had been deferred 'till
the return of the Holy man.

Xavier did not satisfy himself, He instructs Anger a new, and causes him to
be farther taught by Torrez.
with having instructed him anew: he consigned over to the care of Torrez, who
fully explained to him all the Mysteries of Faith. Anger with his two Servants,
who received the same instruction, were at length solemnly Baptized, on
Whit-Sunday, by the Bishop of Goa, Don John d' Albuquerque; so, that the Church
began to take possession of the most remote Nation in the World, on the same
day of Pentecost, when the holy Spirit descending on the Apostles, gave them
their Mission to carry the Gospel, to all the People of the Earth.

Anger was desirous to be named Paul de Saint Foy, in memory of the College,
belonging to the Society of Jesus, where he had received the particular
knowledge of the Divine Law, which was sometimes called the College of St.
Paul, and sometimes the Seminary of the Holy Faith. One of his Servants took
the Name of John, and the other of Anthony. In receiving Baptism, he received
the peace of Soul, which he never could obtain before; and writ word of it to
Rome, the same year, in a Letter to Father Ignatius, dated November the 25th.

But to the end, that the new Converts might have the true Principles of
Christian Morality, and that their behavior might be answerable to their
Belief, Father Xavier entrusted Torrez, with giving them the spiritual
Exercises of the Society.

During the thirty days, that these Iaponians were in retirement, it is not to
be expressed, what Celestial illuminations, what holy thoughts, what interior
delights the Holy Spirit infused into them. Anger could speak of nothing but of
God; and spoke of him with so much servency, that it seemed even to burn him
up. The Mystery of the Passion, moved him above all the rest, and he was so
ravished with the goodness of God, so possessed with love, in considering a God
Crucified, that he breathed nothing but Martyrdom, and the Salvation of his
Brethren. So that he was often heard to cry out, in the midst of his Devotions,
How glad should I be to dye for thee, O my God. O my dear Japonians, how much
are you to be lamented, and what Compassion do you raise in me!

The Master and Servants came out of their retirement with so much ardour, that
Xavier wrote into Europe, that he was animated by their Example to the service
of God, and that he could not look on them, without blushing at his own
Cowardice.

In conversing with them, He hears news from ^apan, and designs a (...)
thither, to (...) the Gospel.
he understood, what he had formerly learnt by hear say, from George Alvarez*
and other Portugueses, that the Empire of Iapan, was one of the most populous
in the World: That the Iaponneses were naturally curious, and covetous of
Knowledge, and withal docible, and of great Capacity. That being generally
ingenious, and very rational, if they were instructed in the Morals of
Christianity, they would easily submit to them; and that if the Preachers of
the Gospel, lived according to Gospel Rules, the whole Nation would subject it
self to the yoke of Jesus Christ, not perhaps so readily at first, but in
process of time, and after clearing of their doubts.

There needed no more, to induce Xavier to carry the Faith into Iapan, the
mildness, the civility, and the good parts of the three Baptized Iaponians,
made him conceive a high opinion of all the rest: And the Portuguese Merchants
newly returned from Iapan, confirmed it so fully to him, that in these three,
he had the pattern of the whole Nation, that he doubted not, but that the
Christian Religion would make an admirable progress there. But that which Anger
told him, that there were in his Country many Monasteries of Heathen Priests,
that some of them led their lives in solitude and contemplation, that every
Monastery had its Superior, who was a Person venerable for his Age and
Learning: that they came abroad from their lonely abode, once a week, with
morti^i'd looks, and uncouth habits, to Preach to the People; that in their
Sermons they drew such lively Figures of Hell, that the Women wept, and cried
out, at those dismal representations. All this, I say, appeared to Xavier, as
so many doors, and in-letts for the Faith; and he praised God, that by the
admirable conduct of his Providence, which secretly manages the Salvation of
men, the Spirit of Lies, had thus prepared the ways for the Spirit of Truth.

He adored also the wisdom of the same Providence, which taking the occasion of
a man who fled from Justice, and sought repose for his troubled Conscience, had
led three Iaponians from their native Country, and brought them to Goa, that
they might serve for Guides to a Missioner. But, that these Guides might be the
more serviceable, he thought fit they should learn to Read and Write, in the
Portuguese Language. Anger, whom from henceforth we shall name Paul de Saint
Foy, was easily instructed, in all they taught him; for besides that he was of
a quick and lively apprehension, he had so happy a memory, that he got by heart
almost all the Gospel of St. Matthew, which Father Cosmo de Torrez, had
Expounded to him before his Baptism.

In the mean time Don John de Castro, was rigging out a Fleet, with design to
possess himself of Aden, one of the strongest Towns of Arabia Felix, and
situate at the foot of a high Mountain, which reached even to the Sea, by a
narrow tongue of Earth. This Port is of great importance, to shut up the
passage of the Indies to the Turks and Saracens, who go thither by the red Sea;
and from this consideration it was, that Albuquerque the Great, endeavored to
have Mastered it in the year 1513, but the vigorous resistance of the Achenois
forced him to forsake the Siege. After that time, they were desirous of their
own accord, to have delivered it up to the Portugueses, thereby to free
themselves from the tyranny of the Turks. Yet it was not then done, through the
fault of a Captain called Soarez, who having no Orders to take Possession of
the Town, was so weak a Politician as to refuse it, when it was offered to the
Crown of Portugal.

That People, whom the Turk used worse than ever, testified the same
inclination, under the Government of Castro, and it was on that occasion* that
he sent a Fleet toward the Straight of Mecca, under the Command of his Son,
Alvarez de Castro. Eight Foysts of Goa, full of Soldiers, set out for the
Expedition of Aden. Amongst these there was one very brave Fellow, renowned for
his Military Actions, but blackened with all sorts of Crimes, and more infamous
by his Debauched Manners, than known by his Valor. He seemed a kind of salvage
Beast, who had no more of Man in him, than the bare Figure, nor any thing of a
Christian, besides the name. Above eighteen years he had abstained from
Confession; and that he once presented himself to the Bishop of Goa, was less
to reconcile himself to God, than to take off the imputation, of being either a
Mohammedan, or an Idolater.

Father Xavier had cast an eye upon this wretch, He undertakes the Conversion
of a Soldier.
and waited only an opportunity, to labor in so difficult a Conversion.
Understanding that this Soldier was imbarking on one of the Foysts, which were
going to join the Fleet, he went out of the College of St. Paul, at the first
notice of it, taking nothing with him, besides his Br^viary, and entered into
the same Vessel. It was believed by those who saw the Father, that he had
Orders from the Viceroy to accompany his Son Alvarez, and every one was glad of
it, excepting only he, for whose sake he came. He drew near the Soldier, and
when they had weighed Anchor, began to make acquaintance with him, and grew
familiar to that degree, that the rest of the Soldiers, who were less
debauched, could not sufficiently admire it, and some of them said of Xavier,
what a Pharisee said formerly of our Lord, If this Man were indeed a Prophet,
he would discern what manner of man he was, in whom he takes so much delight.

These Discourses, did not at all daunt the Father. He saw his Soldier playing
whole nights together, for he was a great Gamester. He took no notice of his
extravagancies, and sometimes heard him Swear without seeming to regard it.
Only one day he said to him, that Gaming required a Composed Spirit, and if he
took not the better heed, that Passion, which he had in Play, would make him
lose.

The Soldier, brutal as he was, grew insensibly to have a kindness for a man,
who was so much concerned in his advantages, and took pleasure in hearing him
discourse not only of War, and Sea Affairs, but also of Religion and Morality.
In conclusion, he made some reflections on the horror of his life, and felt
even some remorse of Conscience for it. Being one day together with the Father,
in a private part of the Ship, Xavier asked him, to whom he had Confessed
himself before he went on Shipboard? Ah Father, said the Soldier, I have not
been at Confession these many years. And what do you imagine would become of
you, said the holy man, supposing you should be killed in this action, and in
the condition you now are? I would once have Confessed my self, replied the
Soldier, at least for fashion, and decency, but the Vicar of Goa would not so
much as hear me, but told me I was a Reprobate, and deserved nothing but
Hellfire. The Vicar was, in my Opinion, said Xavier, somewhat too severe, to
treat you in that manner. He had perhaps his Reasons for that usage, and I have
mine to treat you otherwise. For indeed the Mercies of our Lord are infinite,
and God would have us as indulgent to our Brethren, as he himself is to us:
Thus, when the Sins of which you find your self guilty, were a thousand times
more numerous and more crying, than they are, I shall have the patience to hear
them all, and shall make no difficulty of giving you absolution, provided you
take those thoughts and resolutions, which I shall endeavor to in^u^e into you.

By these words he brought the Soldier to a general Confession, He (...)
he disposed ^im for it, by causing him, to recall into his memory his past
life, and drawing him into the particulars of those Sins, which a man of his
Character and Profession, might possibly have committed. While they were upon
these terms, the Ship cast Anchor at the Port of Cey^an, for refreshment. Many
of the Fleet went on shore, and amongst the rest, the Father and the Soldier,
they went together to a wild solitary place: there the Soldier made his
Confession with abundance of tears, resolved to expiate his Crimes, with
whatsoever Penance the Father should enjoin him* were it never so rigorous. Bu^
his Confessor gave him only a P^ter Noster, and an Ave to say. Whereat the
Penitent being much amazed, from whence proceeds it, my Father, said he, that
being so great a Sinner as I am, you have given me so light a Penance? Be
content, answered Xavier, O my Son, we shall appease the Divine Justice: and at
the same instant, he withdrew into a Wood, while the Soldier performed his
Penance. There he did, what he had formerly done on the like occasion: he barred
his Shoulders, and disciplined himself so rigorously, that the Soldier heard
the noise of the strokes, and came running to him, beholding the Father all in
blood, and rightly judging what was the motive of so strange an action, he
snatched the Discipline out of his hands, and crying out, it was the Criminal
who ought to endure the punishment, and not the innocent to bear the pains of
Sin; he immediately stripped himself, and chastis'd his body with all his
strength. Xavier oftentimes embraced him, and declared, that it was for his
sake alone that he came on Shipboard. So having given him wholesome Admonitions
to confirm him in the Grace of God, he left him, and returned to Goa on the
first Vessel which went out of the Port, where they made the stay. As for the
Soldier, he followed the Fleet, and after the Expedition of Aden was ended, he
entered into Religion, choosing one of the most austere Orders, where he lived
and died, in extraordinary holiness.

Not long after the Father was returned to Goa, He assists the Vicer^y of the
Indies at his death.
the Governor Don John de Castro returned also; but very ill of a Hectic
Fever, which had been consuming him for some months before. Finding himself in
a daily decay of health and strength, and doubting not the end of his life was
near approaching, he quiet laid aside all business, and substituted others to
supply his place. After which his thoughts were wholly employed on death, and
the great concernments of Eternity. He had many long conversations with Father
Xavier, on that Subject, and refused to see any one but him. During these
Transactions, a Ship, which came from Lisbonne, brought Letters to the Viceroy
from the King of Portugal, who gave great praises to his management, and
continued him for three years longer, in the Government of the Indies. As Don
John was much beloved, so on this occasion, public rejoycings were made over
all the Town. But the Sick Viceroy, hearing the discharge of the Artillery, and
seeing almost from his Bed the Bonefires that were made, could not forbear
laughing at it, though he was almost in the agonies of death. How deceitful and
ridiculous is this World, said he, to present us with honors of three years
continuance, when we have but a moment more to live! The Father assisted him,
even to the last drawing of his breath, and had the consolation to behold a
great man of this world, expiring with the thoughts of a Saint in Holy Orders.

Xavier being Master of himself, in some manner, after the decease of Don John
de Castro, who had desired him not to stir from Goa, during the Winter, had
thoughts of visiting once more the Coast of Fishery, before his Voyage to
Iapan; his resolutions of which, he had not hitherto declared. But the
incommodities of the season hindered him; for at one certain time, the Sands so
choke up the Channels of the Isle, that no Ship can either go out of the Port,
or enter into it.

In waiting 'till the Navigation became free; He applies himself more than ever
to the exercises of an interior Life.
the Saint applied himself particularly to the exercises of a Spiritual Life,
as it were to recover new strength after his past Labors, according to the
custom of Apostolical men, who in the communications which they have with God,
refresh themselves, after the pains which they have taken with their Neighbor.

Then it was, that in the Garden of Saint Paul's College, sometimes in
walking, at other times in retiring into a little Hermitage, which was there
set up, he cried out, It Is enough, O my Lord, it is e^ough! And that he opened
his Cassock before his Breast, to give a little Air to those ^lames which burnt
within him, by which he declared, that he was not able to support the abundance
of heavenly Consolations, and at the same time gave us to understand, that he
would have rather chosen to suffer any Torments for the service of God, than to
have enjoyed all those spiritual delights: so that his ^rue meaning, was a
Prayer to God, that he would please to reserve for him those pleasures in
another life, and in the mean time, would not spare to inflict on him, any
pains or sufferings in this present World.

These interior Employments, (...)
did not hinder him from the labors of his Ministerial Vocation, nor from
succouring the distressed, in the Hospitals and Prisons. On the contrary, the
more lively and ardent the love of God was in him, the more desirous he was, to
bring it forth, and kindle it in others. His Charity caused him often to
relinquish the quiet of Solitude, and the delights of Prayer; therein following
the Principle of his Father Ignatius, that it was necessary to forsake God for
God.

The Season ^egan to be more moderate, (...)
and Xavier was disposing himself to set Sail for the Cape of Comorine, when a
Portuguese Vessel arrived from Mozambique, which brought in her, five
Missioners of the Society. The most considerable of these Missioners, and of
five others which came along with the Fleet, was Gaspar Barzeus, a Flemming by
Nation. Father Francis, had already heard speak of him, as an excellent
Labourer, and a famous Preacher; but his Presence and the Testimony of all the
Ship, gave the Saint such great Idea's of his Merit* that he looked on him from
thence forward, as an Apostle of the Eastern Countries.

He passed five days with these new Companions, on the fourth of which, he
caused Father Gaspar to preach before him, that he might see his Talent for the
Pulpit; and discovered in him all the Qualities of a perfect Preacher. Many
Portuguese Gentlemen, who had been much edified, by the Virtues and
Conversation of Barzeus during all the Navigation, which had been exceeding
dangerous, came and fell at the Feet o^ Xavier, desiring that he would please
to receive them into the Society. The Captain of the Ship, and the Governor of
one of the chief Citadels, which the Portuguese enjoy in India, were of the
number. He admitted some of them before his departure, and deferred the rest
till his return: but he would that all of them should perform the Spiritual
Exercises of Father Ignatius.

At length Xavier embarked on the ninth of September, He goes (...) the Fishing
Coast, hi^ Acti^ns there.
for the Fishing Coast: There he comforted and confirmed the Faithful, who were
continually persecuted by the Badages, those mortal and irreconcilable Enemies
of the Christian name. He also encouraged the Gospel Laborers of the Society,
who for the same reason, went in daily hazard of their lives. Having
understood, that Father Francis Henriquez, who cultivated the Christianity of
Travancor, was somewhat dissatisfied, and believed he lost his time, because
some of those new Converts, shaken either by the Promises or Threatenings of a
new King, who hated the Christians, had returned to their former Superstitions,
he writ him Letters of Consolation, desiring him to be of good courage, and
assuring him, that his Labors were more profitable than he imagined: that when
all the Fruit of his Zeal, should be reduced to the little Children who died
after Baptism* God would be well satisfied of his endeavors, and that after
all, the Salvation of one only Soul, ought to comfort a Missioner, for all his
pains; that God accounted with us for our good intentions, and that a Servant
of his, was never to be esteemed unprofitable, who labored in his Vineyard,
with all his strength, whatever his success might prove.

Father Xavier was not content, to have fortified the Missioners, both by word
and writing in his own person, he desired of Father Ignatius, that he would
also encourage them with his Epistles; and principally, that he would have the
goodness to write to Henry Henriquez, a Man mortified to the World, and
laborious in his Ministry.

Having ordered all things in the Coast of Fishery, He speaks to the Deputy
G^vernour of the Indies, concerning his Voyage to Japan.
he returned by Cochin, where he stayed two Months; employing himself without
ceasing, in the instruction of little Children, administering to the sick, and
regulating the manners of that Town. After which he went to Bazain, there to
speak with the Deputy Governor of the Indies, Don Garcia de Saa, whom Don John
de Castro, had named upon his Deathbed* to supply his place. The Father was
desirous to obtain his Letters of Recommendation to the Governor of Malacca.
that in virtue of them his passage to Iapan, might be made more easy.

It Is true, the news he received, that the Chinois, ill satisfied of the
Portugueses, had turned them out of their Country, seemed to have broken all
his Measures, because it was impossible to arrive at the Isles of Iapan, by the
way of Malacca, without touching at some Port of China. But it is the property
of Apostolical Zeal, to make no account of those seeming impossibilities, which
appear in the greatest undertakings.

When Xavier was come back to Goa, All endea^^u^s are used, (...) break the
Father^ intended Voyage (...) Japan.
and it was known that he designed a Voyage to Iapan, his Friends made use of
all their endeavors to divert him from it. They first set before him the
length of the way, which was thirteen hundred Leagues: The certain and
inevitable dangers, to which he must expose his life, not only by reason of
Pirates, which continually infest those Seas, and murder all who come into
their Hands, but also for the Rocks, unknown to the most skilful Pilots, and of
certain Winds called Typhons, which reign from China even to Iapan, in a vast
extent of Sea. They said, That those impetuous ^urricanes, were used to whirl a
Vessel round, and founder it, at the same mom^n^; or else drive it with fury
against the Rocks, and split it in a thousand pieces. They added, If by Miracle
he should happen to escape the Pirates, and avoid the Tempests, yet he could
promise no manner of safety to himself, in the Ports of China, from whence the
Portugueses were expelled; and for what remained, if he were possessed with an
unsatiable Zeal, there were other vast Kingdoms of the East, where the light of
the Gospel had not shone; that even in the Neighborhood of Goa there were
Isles remaining, and Territories of Idolaters: That he might go thither in Gods
name, and leave the thoughts of those remote Islands, which Nature seemed to
have divided from the Commerce of Mortals; and where the power of the
Portugueses not being established, Christianity could not be able to maintain
it self, against the Persecution of the Pagans.

Xavier was so well persuaded, He slights the reasons alleged against his
Voyage to Japan.
that God would have him travel to Iapan, that he would not listen to the
reasons of his Friends. He laughed at their fears, and told them, That perhaps
he should not be more unfortunate than George Alvarez, or Alvarez Vaz, who had
performed the Voyage of Japan, in spite of all those Pirates, and those
Hurricanes, with which they would affright him. This he said smiling, after
which, resuming a serious Air, Verily, said he, I am amazed, that you would
endeavor to hinder me, from going for the good of Souls, whither you your
selves would go, out of the sordid con^ideration of a small transitory gain!
and must plainly tell you, I am ashamed of your little Faith. But I am ashamed
for my self, that you have prevented me in going thither first, and cannot bear
that a Merchant should have more courage than a Missioner. In conclusion, he
told them, That having so often experienced the care of Providence, it would be
an impiety to distrust it; that it had not preserved him from the Swords of the
Badages, and the poisons of the Is^e del Moro, to abandon him in other dangers:
that India was not the boundary of his Mission; but that in coming thither, his
design had always been, to carry the Faith, even to the utmost limits of the
World.

He then wrote to Father Ignatius, (...)
to give him an account of his intended Voyage, and of the thoughts of his
Heart, concerning it. I cannot express to you, said he, with what joy I
undertake this long Voyage. For it is all full of extreme dangers; and ^e who
out of four Ships, can preserve one, thinks he has made a saving Voyage; though
these perils are surpassing all I have hitherto proved, yet I am not
disc^urag'd a j^t the more from my undertaking: So much the Lord has been
pleased to ^ix it in my mind, that the Cross shall produce great fruits in
those Countries, when once it shall be planted there.

He wrote at the same time to Father Simon Rodriguez; and some passages of the
Letter, well describe the disposition of the holy Man. There are arrived here,
some Ships from Malacca, who confirm the news, that all the Ports of China are
armed, and that the Chinese, are making open War with Portugal: which
notwithstanding, my Resolutions still continue for Japan, for I see nothing
more sweet, or pleasing in this World, than to live in continual dangers of
Death, for the honor of Jesus Christ, and for the interests of the Faith. It
being indeed the distinguishing Character of a Christian, to take more pleasure
in the hardships of the Cross, than in the softness of repose.

The Apostle being upon the point of his departure, (...)
for Iapan, established Father Paul de Camerine, Superior General in his
place; and Father Antonio Gomez, Rectour of the Seminary at Goa. At the same
time he prescribed Rules to both of them, in what manner they should live
together, and how they should govern their In^eriours.

Behold in particular, what he recommended to Father Paul, I adjure you, said
he, by the desire you have to please our Lord, and by the Love you bear to
Father Ignatius, and all the Society, to treat Gomez, and all our Fathers and
Brothers, who are in the Indies, with much mildness; not ordering them to do
any thing, without mature deliberation, and in modest terms, without any thing
of Haughtiness, or Violence. Truly, considering the knowledge I h^ve, of all
the Laborers of the Society, at this present day employed in the new World, I
may easily conclude, they have no need of any Superior; nevertheless not to
bereave them of the merit of Obedience, and because the Order of Discipline so
requires, I have thought convenient, to set some one above the rest, and have
chosen you for that purpose; knowing, as I do, both your M^desty and your
Prudence. It remains, that I c^mmand and pray you, by that voluntary ^bedience,
which you have vowed to our Father Ignatius, to live so well, with Antonio
Gomez. that the least appearance of misunderstanding betwixt you, may be
av^ided, ^ay, and ev^n the least coldness: but ^n the contrary* that you may be
always seen in a holy Union, and conspiring with all your strength, to the
common welfare ^f the Church.

If our Bre^h^e^ who are at Comorine in the Molucca^s, or otherwhere, wri^^ to
you, that you w^u^d obtain any (...) them, from the Bishop or the Viceroy, or
demand any Spiritual or Temporal Supplies from you, leave all things, and
employ your selves, entirely to effect what they desire. For those Letters,
which you shall write to those unwearied Laborers, who bear the heat and
burden of the day, beware that there be nothing of sharpness, or dryness in
them. Rather be careful of every line, that even every word may breath nothing
but tenderness and sweetness.

Whatsoever they shall require of you, for their Diet, their Clothing, for
their preservation of Health, or toward their recovery of it, furnish them
liberally, and speedily; for it is reasonable you should have compassion on
them, who labor uncessantly, and without any humane Consolation. What I have
said, points chiefly to the Missioners of Comorine, and the Molu^ca's. Their
Mission is the most painful, and they ought to be refreshed, lest they sink
under the burden of the Cross. Do then, in such manner, that they may not ask
you twice for necessaries. They are in the Battle, you are in the Camp; and for
my own part, I find those duties of Charity so just, so indispensable, that I
am bold to a^jure you in the name of God, and of our Father Ignatius, that you
would perform your Duties, with all exactness, with all diligence, and with all
satisfaction imaginable.

Father Xavier since his return, (...)
had sent Nicholas Lancilotti to Coulan, Melchier Gons^lez to Bazain, and
Alphonso Cyprian to Socotora. Before his departure, he sent Gasper Barzeus to
Ormuz, with one Companion, who was not yet in Orders. This famous Town,
situate at the entry of the Persian Gulf, was then full of enormous vices,
which the mingle of Nations and different Sects had introduced. The Saint had
thoughts of going thither himself, to prepare the way for other Missioners,
according to his own Maxims, to send none of the Priests, to any place, which
he knew not first, by his own Experience. But the Voyage of Iapan, superseded
that of Ormuz.

How great soever his Opinions were, (...)
of the Prudence and Virtue of Father Gasper, yet he thought ^it to give him in
writing some particular instructions, to help him in the conduct of that
important Mission. I imagine those instructions, would not be unpleasing to the
Reader, I am sure, at least, they will not be unprofitable to Missioners; and
for that reason I shall make a recital of them. You shall behold them, neither
altered, nor in that confusion, which the^ are in other Authors; but faithfully
translated from the Copy of a Manuscript, extant in the Archieves of Goa.

1. Above all things have care of perfecting your self; He recommends to him
the perfecting of himself.
and of discharging faithfully, what you owe to God, and your own Conscience.
For by this means you will become most capable of serving your Neighbor, and
of gaining Souls. Take pleasure in the most abject employments of your
Ministry; that by exercising them, you may acquire ^umility, and daily advance
in that Virtue.

Be sure your self to teach the Ignorant those Prayers, He charges him to
instruct the Children himself.
which every Christian ought to have by Heart; and lay not on any other person,
an Employment, so little ostentatious. Give your self the trouble of hearing
the Children and Slaves repeat them word by word, after you. Do the same thing
to the Children of the Christian Natives of the Country: they who behold you
thus exercised, will be edified by your Modesty. And as modest persons easily
attract the esteem of others, they will judge you proper to instruct
themselves, in the Mysteries of Christian Religion.

You shall frequently visit the poor in the Hospitals, He recommen^s the poor
to him.
and from time to time exhort them to confess themselves, and to communicate;
giving them to understand, that Confession is the remedy for past Sins, and the
Communion a preservative against Relapses. That both of them destroy the cause
of the miseries of which they complain, by reason that the ills they suffer,
are only the punishment of their offenses. On this account, when they are
willing to confess, you shall hear their Confessio^s, with all the leisure you
can afford them. After this care taken of their Souls, you are not to be
unmindful of their Bodies, but recommend the distressed with all diligence and
affection, to the Administratours of the Hospital, and procure them, by other
means, all relief within your power.

You shall also visit the Prisoners, (...)
and excite them to make a general Confession of their lives. They have more
need than others, to be stirred up to it, because among that sort of people,
there are few to be found, who ever made an exact Confession. Pray the
Brotherhood of Mercy, to have pity on th^se wretches, and labor with the
Judges for their enlargement; in the mean time providing for the most
necessitous, who oftentimes have not wherewithal to subsist.

You shall serve, (...)
and advance what lies in you, the Brotherhood of Mercy. If you meet with any
rich Merch^nts, who poss^ss ill gotten Goods, and who being confessed, are
willing to restore, that which app^rtains not to them, though of themselves
they entrust you with the Money for Restitutions, when they are ignorant to
whom it is due, or that their Creditors appear not, remit all those sums into
the Hands of the Brotherhood of Mercy, even though you know of some necessitous
persons, on whom such Charities might be well employed.

Thus you shall not expose your self to be deceived by those wicked Men, who
affect an Air of Innocence and Poverty; and w^o cannot so easily surprise the
Brotherhood, whose principal application is to distinguish betwixt
Counterfeits, and those who are truly indigent.

And besides, you will gain the more leisure for those Functions, which are
yours in a more especial manner, which are devoted to the Conversion of Souls,
and shall employ your whole time therein, some of which must otherwise be taken
up, in the distribution of Alms; which cannot be performed, without much
trouble and distraction. In fine, by this means* you shall prevent the
complaints and suspicions of a sort of people, who interpret all things in the
worst meaning, and who might perhaps persuade themselves, that under the
pretense of pa^ing other Men's debts, you divert the i^^ention of the Money
given, and employ (...) uses some part of what was entrusted ^^th you.

Transact in such manner, He prescribes him some precautions in his dealings
with his Friends.
with secular persons, with whom you have familiarity or friendship, as if you
thought they might one day become your Enemies: By this management of your
self, you will neither do nor say any thing, of which you may have reason to
repent you, and with which they may upbraid you in their Passion. We are
oblig^d to these precautions, by the Sons of a corrupt Generation, who are
continually looking on the Children of light, with mistrustful and malignant
Eyes.

You ought not to have less circumspection, He recommends to him the practice
of the particul^r Examen.
in what relates to your spiritual advancement, and assure your self, you shall
make a great progress, in contemning of your self, and in union with God, if
you regulate all your Words and Actions, by Prudence. The Examen, which we call
particular, will assist you much in it. Fail not of doing it twice a day, or
once at least, according to our common method, whatsoever business you have
upon your hands.

Preach to the People, H^ (...) him to pre^^^, an^ giv^s him Rules for
preaching.
the most frequently that you can; for preaching is an universal good; and
amongst all Evangelical Employments, there is none more profitable; but beware
of advancing any doubtful propositions, on which the Doctors are divided. Take
for the Subject of your Sermons, clear and unquestionable truths, which tend of
themselves to the regulation of manners. Set forth the enormity of Sin, by
setting up, that infinite Majesty, which is offended by the Sinner. Imprint in
Souls, a lively horror of that Sentence, which shall be thundered out against
Reprobates at the last Judgment. Represent with all the colors of your
Eloquence, those pains which the damned are eternally to suffer. In fine,
threaten with death, and that with sudden death, those who neglect their
Salvation; and who having their Conscience loaded with many Sins, yet sleep in
security, as if they had no cause of fear.

You are to mingle with all these considerations, that of the Cross, and the
death of the Savior of Mankind; but you are to do it, in a moving pathetical
manner; by those figures, which are proper to excite such motions, as cause in
our Hearts a deep sorrow for our Sins, in the presence of an offended God, even
to draw Tears from the Eyes of your Audience. This is the Idea, which I wish
you would propose to your self, for preaching profitably.

When you reprove Vices in the Pulpit, He institutes him in the way of
correcting Sinners.
never characterise any person, especially the chief Officers, or Magistrates.
If they do any thing which you disapprove, and of which you think convenient to
admonish them; make them a visit, and speak to them in private, or, when they
come of themselves to Confession, tell them at the sacred Tribunal of Penance,
what you have to say to them; but never advertise them in public of it: for
that sort of People, who are commonly proud and nice of hearing, instead of
amendment by public admonitions, become furious, like Bulls, who are pricked
forward by a Goad: Moreover, before you take upon you, to give them private
admonition, be careful to enter first into their acquaintance, and familiarity.

Make your admonition, either more gentle, or more strong, according as you
have more or less access to them. But always moderate the roughest part of your
Reproof, with the gaiety of your Air, and a smiling Countenance, by the
civility of well-manner'd words, and a sincere protestation, that all you do,
is but an effect of the kindness you have for them. It Is good also to add
respectful submissions to the pleasingness of your Discourse, with tender
Embraces, and all the marks of that Consideration and good Will you have for
the person of him, whom you thus correct. For if a rigid Countenance, and harsh
Language should accompany Reproof, which of it self, is hard of digestion, and
bitter to the taste, it is not to be doubted, but Men accustomed to Flatteries,
will not endure it: and there is reason to apprehend, that a burst of rage
against the Censor, will be all the fruit of the Reprimand.

For what concerns Confession, He prescribes him a method, for administrating
the Sacrament of Penance.
behold the method which I judge the fittest for these Quarters of the East,
where the License of Sin is very great, and the use of Penance very rare. When
a Person, hardened in a long habit of Vice shall come to Confession, exhort him
to take three or four days time of preparation, to examine his Conscience
thoroughly, and for the assistance of his memory, cause him to write down the
Sins which he has observed in all the Course of his Life, from his Childhood to
that present time. Being thus disposed, after he has made his Confession, it
will not be convenient, that you should be too hasty in giving him absolution.
But it will be profitable to him, to retire two or three days, and abstain from
his ordinary conversation, and dealings with men, and to excite himself to
sorrow for his sins, in consideration of the love of God, which will render his
Sacramental Absolution of more efficacy to him. During that little interval of
retirement, you shall instruct him in the way of Meditation, and shall oblige
him to make some meditations, from the first week of Exercises. You shall
counsel him to practice some mortification of his Body; for example, to Fast,
or to Discipline himself, which will help him to conceive a true sorr^w for his
offenses, and to shed the tears of Penance. Besides this, if the Penitents have
enriched themselves by sinister ways, or if by their malicious talk, they have
blasted the reputation of their Neighbor, cause them to make restitution of
their ill-gotten Goods, and make reparations of their Brethren's honor, during
the space of those three days. If they are given to unlawful Love, and are now
in an actual commerce of Sin, cause them to break off those Criminal
engagements, and forsake the occasions of their Crime. There is not any time
more proper, to exact from Sins those duties, the performance of which is as
necessary as it is difficult; for when once their ^ervour is past away, it will
be in vain to demand of them the execution of their promise; and perhaps you
will have the trouble of seeing them fall back into the Precipice, for want of
removing them to a distance from it.

In administering the Sacrament of Penance, He continues to instruct him, on the
Subject of Confession.
take heed of discouraging those, who begin to discover the wounds of their
Souls to you, by appearing too rashly and too hastily severe. H^w enormous
soever their Sins may be, hear them, not only with patience, but with mildness;
help out, even their bashfulness, by testifying to them your compassion, and
not seeming to be amazed at what you hear. Insinuate into them, that you have
heard in Confession sins of a much more crying nature: and lest they should
despair of Pardon for their faults, speak to them of the infinite Mercies of
the Lord.

When they declare a crime in such a manner, that you may perceive they are in
trouble how to speak, interrupt them, by letting them know, that their sin is
not altogether so great as they may think: that by God's assistance you can
heal the most mortal wounds of the Soul; bid them go on without any
apprehension, and make no difficulty of telling all. You will find some of
them, whom either the weakness of their Age or Sex will hinder from revealing
to you their more shameful sins. When you perceive that bashfulness has tied
their tongue, be before hand with them, and by the way of a charitable
prevention, let them know, that they are neither the first, nor the only
Persons, who have fallen into disorder, that those things which they want the
confidence to tell you, are little in comparison of what you have heard from
others, on the same Subject. Impute some part of their offense to the
corruption of Nature, to the violence of the Temptation, and to the unhappiness
they had to be engaged in such Occasions and pressing Circumstances, where
their fall was almost unavoidable. In fine, I must advertise you, that to
remove from such persons, that unseasonable shame-fac'dness, which keeps them
silent; from such Persons, I say, whom the Devil has made as bashful after a
Crime, as they were impudent before it, it may be necessary sometimes, to
discover to them in general, the frailties of our own past Lives. For what can
a true and servent Charity refuse. for the safety of those Souls who have been
redeemed with the blood of Jesus Christ! But to understand, when this is proper
to be done, how far to proceed, and with what precautions, is what the
interior Spirit, and your experience must teach you, in those particular
Conjunctures.

You will ordinarily meet with some Christians, He instructs him how to deal
with those, who want faith, concerning the blessed Sa^rament.
who believe not the truth of the Holy Sacrament of the Altar, either by not
frequenting it, or by their Conversation, with Pagans, Mahometans and
Heretics, or by the scandal, which is given them by some Christians, and
principally (which I speak with shame and sorrow) by such Priests, whose Life
is not more holy, than that of the People. For, beholding some of them,
approaching the Altar, without any preparation, assisting at it, without
modesty and reverence, they imagine, that Jesus Christ is not, as we say he is,
in the Sacrifice of the Mass, for if he were there present, he would never
suffer such impure hands to touch him. Make it your business, that those
mis-believing Christians should propose to you all their doubts, and discover
to you all their imaginations, which being known, then prove to them the real
presence of Jesus Christ, by all those reasons which are capable of
establishing it; and show them, that the surest means for them to come out of
their errors, and leave their Vices, is often to approach that Sacrament, with
suitable preparations to it.

Though your Penitents may be well prepared for Confession, He instructs how to
deal with Penitents.
think not when they shall declare their Sins, that your business is done. You
must dive into the bottom of their Conscience, and by examination, draw out of
them, what themselves know not. Ask then of them, by what ways and in what
manner, they make advantage of their Money: what are their Principles, and what
their Practice, in their Sails, in their Borrowing, and in all their Business.
You shall find Usury reigning throughout their Traffic; and that they who have
no stings of Conscience, in relation to unjust dealings, have by indirect ways
scraped together, the greatest part of their Estates. But in things, where
money has to do, many are so hardened, that being charged with rapine, they
have either no scruple concerning it, or so very light, that it never breaks
their sleep.

Use particularly this Method, toward the Governors, the Treasurers, the
Receivers, and other Officers belonging to the Revenue. Whenever they present
themselves before you in the Sacred Tribunal, interrogate that sort of People,
by what means they grow so rich, what secret they have to make their Offices
and employments bring them in such mighty Sums? If they are slye of telling
you, turn and wind them every way, and the most mildly that you can, make them
speak, in spite of themselves. You shall soon discover their tricks, and
secret ways of management, by which, an inconsiderable number of those they
call men of Business, divert to their own private advantages, what was designed
for the public profit. They buy up Commodities with the King's Money, that by
selling them again, they may be able to make up their Accounts. And by taking
up all the Commodities in the Port, they put the people upon a necessity of
buying at their Price, that is, at most intolerable Rates.

Too often also, they make men languish at the Treasury, with long delays, and
canning shifts, or some other captious Trick; men I say, to whom the Exchequer
is owing, that they may be driven to Compound with those Sharks of State, for
half their due, and let them go off with the other half: this open Robbery,
this manifest Villainy, those Gentlemen call by a mollify'd name, the fruits of
their industry. When you have squeezed out of them the Confession of these
Monopolies, and the like, by wiredrawing them, with apt questions, you will
come more easily to the knowledge of their ungodly gains, and what they ought
to make restitution of, to their Neighbor, in order to their being reconciled
to God, than if in general, you should interrogate them concerning their
injustice. For example, demand of them, what persons they have wronged, they
will immediately answer, that their memory upbraids them not with wronging any
man; and behold the reason! Custom is to them, in the place of Law; and that
which they see done before them every day, they persuade themselves may be
practiced without Sin. As if Custom can authorize by I know not what kind of
prescription, that which is vicious and Criminal in its own nature. You shall
admit of no such right; but shall declare to such People, that if they will
secure their Conscience, they must restore, what they possess unjustly.

Remember especially, He recommends to him, the obedience due, to
Ecclesiastical Superi^urs.
to obey the Vicar of the Bishop: When you are arrived at Ormuz, you shall go
to wait on him, and falling on your knees before him, you shall humbly kiss his
hand. You shall neither Preach, nor exercise any other Employment of our
Institute, without his permission, above all things, have no difference with
him, for any, whatsoever cause: on the contrary, endeavor by all submissi^ns,
and all possible services, to gain his friendship, in such sort, that he may be
willing to be taught by you, to make the meditations of our Spiritual
Exercises, at least those of the first week, use almost the same method, with
all the other Priests; if you cannot persuade them to retire for a month,
according to our custom, engage them to a retreat of some few days, and fail
not to visit them every day, during that recess, to explicate to them the
Subjects of those meditations.

Pay a great respect to the Person of the Governor; (...)
and make it apparent, by the most profound submissions, how much you honor
him. Beware of any difference with him, on whatsoever occasion; even though you
should observe, that he performs not his duty, in matters of importance; but
after you perceive, that your demeanor has instated you in his favor, and
good graces, go boldly to visit him: and after you have testified the
concernment you have for his safety and his honor, by a principle of good will
to him, then declare with all modesty, and softness of expression, the sorrow
you have to see his Soul and Reputation endangered, by what is reported of him
in the World.

Then you shall make known to him the discourse of the People; you shall desire
him to reflect, on the bad consequences of such reports; that they may possibly
be put in writing, and go farther, that he would willingly they should; if he
bethinks him not in time, of giving satisfaction to the Public. Nevertheless,
take not this upon you, before you are in some sort satisfied of his good
disposition, and that it appears probable to you, that your advertisement may
sort to good effect.

Be yet more cautious in charging your self, with bearing to him the complaints
of particular Persons, and absolutely refuse that Commission, by excusing your
self on your Evangelical Functions, which permit you not to frequent the
Palaces of the Great, nor to attend whole days together, for the favorable
minutes of an Audience, which is always difficult to obtain. You shall add,
that when you should have the leisure to make your Court, and that all the
doors of the Palace were open to you at all hours, you should have little hopes
of any fruit from your remonstrances; and that if the Governor be such a man
as they report, 'he will have small regard to you, as being ^o way touched,
either with the fear ^f God, or the duties of his own Conscience.

You shall employ, He gi^es him advice concerning his (...) Functions.
in the Conversion of In^idels, all the time you have free, from your ordinary
labors, which indispensably regard Christians. Always prefer those
Employments, which are of a larger extent, to those which are more narrowly
con^in'd. According to that Rule, you shall never omit a Sermon in public, to
hear a private Confession. You shall not set aside the Catechizing, which is
appointed every day, at a certain hour, to visit any particular person, or for
any good work of the like nature. For the rest, an hour before Catechism,
either you, or your Companion, shall go to the places of most concourse in the
Town, and invite all men with a loud voice, to come and hear the exposition of
the Christian Doctrine.

You shall write from time to time, (...)
to the College of Goa, what Functions you exercise for the advancement of
God's glory, what order you keep there, and what blessing God gives on your
endeavors. Have care* that your Relations be exact, and such that our Fathers
at Goa, may send them into Europe, as so many authentic proofs, of what you
perform in the East, and of what success it shall please God to bestow, on the
labors of our little Society* Let nothing slip into those accounts, which may
reasonably give offense to any man; nothing that may seem improbable, nothing
which may not edify the Reader, and give him occasion to magnify the name of
God.

When you are come to Ormuz, He counsels him to inform himself of the manner of
the Town, at his arrival.
I am of opinion that you should see particularly those who are of greatest
reputation for their probity, the most sincere, and who are most knowing in the
manners of the Town. From such, inform your self exactly, what Vices are most
reigning in it what sorts of Cheats, enter most into contracts, and Societies
of Commerce, that so understanding all things thoroughly, and truly, you may
have your words and reasons in a readiness, to instruct and reprove those, who
being guilty of covert Vsuries, false Bargaining, and other wicked actions, so
common in a place which is ^^'d with such a concourse of different Nations,
shall treat with you in familiar Conversation, or in Sacramental Confession.

You shall walk the Streets, He recommends to his Prayers the S^uls in
Purgatory.
every night, and recommend the Souls of the Dead to the Prayers of the Living.
But let those expressions, which are used by you, be proper to move the
compassion of the Faithful, and to imprint the thoughts of Religion, in the
bottom of their Souls. You shall also desire their Prayers to God, for such as
are in mortal Sin; that they may obtain the grace of coming out of so
deplorable a condition.

Endeavor at all times, He exhorts him not to show either sadness, or anger.
to make your humor agreeable, keep a gay and serene Countenance, without
suffering the least shadow of choler, or sadness to appear in it; otherwise,
those who come to visit you, will never open their hearts to you, and will not
repose all that confidence in you, which it is necessary they should have, to
the end they may profit by your discourse: speak always with civility and
mildness, even in your reprehensions, as I have already told you, and when you
reprove any one, do it with so much charity, that it may be evident, the fault
displeases you, and not the Person.

On Sundays, (...)
and Saints days, you shall preach at two of the Clock in the Afternoon, At the
Church of the Misericordia, or in the Principal Church of the Town; sending
first your Companion about the Streets, with his Bell in his hand, to invite
the People to the Sermon.

If you had not rather perform that Office in your own Person, you shall carry
to Church that Exposition of the Apostles Creed, which I have put into your
hands, and the practice which I have composed, how to pass the day in Christian
duties. You shall give Copies of that Practice, to those whose Confessions you
hear; and shall enjoin them for their holy Penance, to do for certain days,
that which is contained in it. By this means they shall accustom themselves to
a Christian Life, and shall come to do of their own accord, by the force of
custom, that which they did at the first, only by the command of their
Confessor. But, foreseeing, that you cannot have Copies ^now for so many
People, I advise you, to that Practice written out in a fair large hand, and
expose it in some public Place, that they who are willing to make use of it,
may read, and Transcribe it, at their own convenience.

They, He gives him instructions, touching the conduct, of such as shall be
received into the Society.
who shall be desirous of being received into the Society, and whom you shall
judge to be proper for it, you may send them to Goa, with a Letter, which shall
point out their Design, and their Talents for it, or else you may retain them
with you. In this last Case, after you have caused them to perform the
Spiritual Exercises for a month together, you shall make a trial of them, in
some such manner, as may edify the People, without exposing them to be
ridiculous. Order them, therefore, to serve the Sick in the Hospitals, and to
debase themselves to the meanest, and most distastful Offices. Make them visit
the Prisoners, and teach them how to give comfort to the miserable. In fine,
Exercise your Novices, in all the practices of humility, and mortification, but
permit them not to appear in public, in extravagant habits, which may cause
them to be derided by the multitude; suffer it not, I say, far from imposing it
upon them. Engage not all the Novices, indifferently to those trials, which
their nature most abhors; but examine well the strength of each, and suit their
mortification to their temper, to their education, to the advance they make in
Spirituals, in such sort, that the trial may not be unprofitable, but that it
may produce its effect, according to that measure of grace, which is given
them. If he who directs the Novices, has not all these considerations, it will
fall out, that they who were capable of making a great proficience in Ver^ue,
with good management, will lose their courage, and go backward. And besides,
those indiscreet trials, too difficult for Beginners, take off the love of the
Master from his Novices, and cause his Disciples to lessen their confidence in
his directions. In the mean time, whoever forms young People to a Religious
Life, ought to leave nothing untried, to bring them to a candid and free
discovery of their evil inclinations, and the suggestions of the Devil, at the
same moment, when they are tempted, for without this, they will never be able
to disintangle themselves, from the Snares of the Tempter; never will they
arrive to a religious perfection. On the contrary, those first seeds of evil
being brooded over, and nourished, as I may say, by silence, will insensibly
produce, most lamentable effects; even so far, 'till the Novices come to grow
weary of regular Discipline, to nauseate it, and at length throw off the yoke
of Jesus Christ, and re-plunge themselves in the pollutions of the World.

They, amongst those young men, whom you shall observe, to be most subject to
vainglory, and delighted with sensual pleasures, and other vices, ought to be
cured, in this following manner. Make them search for reasons, and for proofs,
against those Vices, to which they are inclined: And when they have found many,
help them to compose some short Discourses on them. Cause them afterward to
pronounce those Discourses, either to the p^^ple in the Church, or in the
Hospitals, to those who are in a way of recovery, so as to be present at them,
or in other places; there is reason to hope, that the things which they have
fixed in their Minds, by constant study, and strong application will be at
least as profitable to themselves, as to their Audience. Doubtless they will be
ashamed, not to profit by those Remedies, which they propose to others, and to
continue in those Vices, from which they endeavor to dissuade their Hearers.
You shall use proportion^bly the same industry, toward those Sinners, who
cannot conquer themselves so far, as they commonly say, to put away the
occasions of their Sin, or to make restitution of those goods, which they have
gotten unlawfully, and detain unjustly from other men. After you have indear'd
your self to them, by a familiar acquaintance, advise them to say that to their
own Hearts, which they would say to a Friend, on the like occasion, and engage,
as it were for the exercise of their parts, to devise such Arguments, as
condemn their Actions in the prson of another.

Sometimes you will see before you, He teaches him the methods of reducing
obstinate Sinners.
when you are seated in the Tribunal of Pe^ance, Men, who are enslaved to their
Pleasures, and their Avarice, whom no motive of Gods Love, nor thought of
Death, nor fear of Hell, can oblige to put away a Mistress, or to restore
ill-gotten Goods. The only means of reducing such people, is to threaten them,
with the misfortunes of this present life, which are the only ills they
apprehend: Declare then to them, that if they hasten not to appease Divine
Justice, they shall suddenly suffer considerable losses at Sea, and be ill
treated by the Governors; that they shall lose their Lawsuits, that they
shall languish many years in Prison, that they shall be seized with incurable
Diseases, and reduced to extreme poverty, without any to relieve them; in fine,
that they and their Posterity, becoming infamous, shall be the Objects of the
public hate, and curses. Tell them by way of reason, for those accidents, that
no Man, who sets God at naught, remains unpunished; and that his vengeance is
so much the more terrible, by how much longer his Patience has been abused. The
Images of these temporal punishments, will affright those Carnal Men, who are
not to be wrought on but by their Senses, and will bring forth in their
insensible Souls, the first motions of the fear of God, of that saving fear
which is the beginning of Wisdom.

Before you treat with any one, He advises him to find out the Dispositions of
the people, before he treats with them.
concerning his Spiritual Affairs, endeavor to understand how his Soul stands^
affected. Whether it be calm, or tossed with any violent passion, whether he be
ready to follow the right way, when it shall be shown to him, or whether he
wanders from it of set purpose. Whether it be the Tempter, or the Bias of his
own Inclination which seduces him to evil, whether he be docile, and disposed
to hear good Counsel, or of that untractable humor, on which no hold is to be
fastened, it will beh^ve you to vary your Discourse, according to these several
dispositions: but though more circumspection is to be taken with hardened
Souls, and difficult of access, you are never to flatter the Disease, nor say
any thing to him, which may weaken the virtue of the Remedy, and hinder its
effect.

Wheresoever you shall be, (...)
even though you only pass through a place, and stay but little in it,
endeavor to make some acquaintance, and enquire of those who have the name of
honest and experienced Men, not only what Crimes are most frequently committed
in that Town, and what deceipts most used in Traffic, as I have already taught
you in relation to Ormuz; but farther learn the Inclinations of the people, the
Customs of the Country, the form^ of Government, the received Opinions, and all
things respecting the commerce of Humane Life. For believe me, the knowledge of
those things, is very profitable to a Missioner, for the speedy curing of
Spiritual Diseases, and to have always at hand, wherewithal to give ease to
such as come before you.

You will understand from thence, on what point you are most to insist in
preaching, and what chiefly to recommend in Confessions. This knowledge will
make, that nothing shall be new to you, nothing shall surprise, or amase you;
it will furnish you with the Address of conducting Souls, and even with
Authority over them. The Men of the World, are accustomed to despise the
Religious, as people, who understand it not. But if they find one, who knows
how to behave himself in Conversation, and has practiced Men, they will admire
him as an extraordinary person; they will give themselves up to him, they will
find no difficulty, even in doing violence to their own Inclinations, under his
direction, and will freely execute^ what he injoys, though never so repugnant
to their corrupt Nature. Behold the wonderful fruit of knowing well the World;
so that you are not at this present, to take less pains in acquiring this
knowledge, than formerly you have done, in learning Philosophy, and Divinity.
For what remains, this Science is neither to be learnt, from ancient
Manuscripts, nor printed Books; it is in living Books, and the Conversation of
knowing Men, that you must study it: With it, you shall do more good, than if
you dealt amongst the people, all the Arguments of the Doctors, and all the
Subtilties of the School.

You shall set apart one day of the week, He gi^es him Counsel c^ncerning
Reconciliations.
to reconcile differences, and regulate the Interests of such as are ^t
variance, and are preparing to go to Law. Hear them one after the other, and
propose terms of Accommodation to them. Above all things, give them to
understand, that they shall find their account in a friendly Reconciliation,
sooner than in casting themselves into eternal Suits, which without speaking of
their Conscience, and their Credit, ever cost much Money, and more trouble. I
know well, that this will not be pleasing to the Advocates and Proctors, whom
the spinning out a Process, and tricks of wr^ngling, still enrich: But trouble
not your self, with what those Bawlers say, and make even them comprehend, if
it be possible, that by perpetuating Suits, by these numberless Formalities,
they expose themselves to the danger of eternal Damnation. Endeavor also to
engage them into a Retirement of some few days, to the end, their spiritual
Exercises, may work them off to other courses.

Stay not till your arrival at Ormuz before you preach. He instracts him in the
way of preaching well.
Begin on Shipboard, and as soon as you come there. In your Sermons, affect
not to make a show of much Learning, or of a happy Memory, by citing many
passages of ancient Authors; some few are necessary, but let them be chosen and
fitted to the purpose. Employ the best part of your Sermon, in a lively
description of the interior estate of worldly Souls. Set before their Eyes in
your Discourse, and let them see, as in a Glass, their own disquiets, their
little cunnings, their trif^ing projects, and their vain hopes. You shall also
show them, the unhappy issue of all their designs. You shall discover to them,
the snares which are l^id for them, by the evil Spirit, and teach them the
means of shunning them. But, moreover, you shall tell them, That if they suffer
themselves to be surprised by them, they are to expect the worst that can
happen to them; and by this you shall gain their attention: for a man never
fails of attentive A^dience, when the Interest of the Hearer, is the Subject of
the Discourse. Stuff not out your S^rmons, with sublime Speculations, knotty
Q^estions, and Scholastical Controversies. Those things which are above the
level of men of the World, only make a noise and signify nothing. It Is
necessary to represent men to themselves, i^ you will gain them. But well to
express, what passes in the bottom their Hearts, you must first understand them
well; and in order to that, you must practice their Conversation, you must
watch them narrowly, and fathom all their depths. Study then those living
Books, and assure your self, you shall draw out of them, the means of turning
Sinners, on what side you please.

I do not forbid you, nevertheless, to consult the holy Scriptures on requisite
occasions, nor the Fathers of the Church, nor the Canons, n^r Books of Piety,
nor Treatises of Morality, they may furnish you with solid proof^, for the
establishment of Christian Truths, with Sovereign Remedies against Temptations,
and Heroical Examples of V^rtue. But all this will appear too cold, and be to
no purpose, if Souls be not disposed to profit by them; and they cannot profit
but by the ways I have prescribed. So, that the duty of a Preacher, is to sound
the bottom of Humane Hearts, to have an exact knowledge of the World, to make a
faithful Picture of man, and set it in so true a light, that every one may know
it for his own.

Since the King of Portugal, What he orders him concerning his subsistence, and
touching Presents.
has ordered, that you shall be allowed from the Treasury, what is needful for
your subsistence, make use of the favor of so charitable a Prince, and receive
nothing but from his Ministers. If other persons will giv^ you any thing,
refuse it, though they should offer it of their own mere motion. For as much,
as it is of great consequence to the liberty of an Apostolical Man, not to owe
his subsistence to those whom he ought to conduct in the way of Salvation, and
whom he is bound to reprove, when they go astray from it. One may truly say of
those presents, That he who takes, is taken. And it is for this, that when we
are to make a charitable Reprehension, to such of whom we receive Alms, we know
not well, how to begin it, or in what words to dress it. Or if our Zeal
imboldens us to speak freely, our words have less effect upon them, because
they treat us with an assuming Air of loftiness, as if that which we received
from them, had made them our Masters, and put them in possession of despising
us. What I say, relates chiefly to a sort of persons, who are plunged in Vice,
who would willingly be credited with your friendship, and will endeavor by all
good Offices, to make way to your good Will. Their design is not to profit by
your Conversation, for the amendment of their lives; all they pretend to, is to
stop your Mouth, and to escape a Censure, which they know they have deserved.
Be upon your guard against such people; yet I am not of opinion, that you
should wh^lly reject them, or altogether despise their Courtesy: If they should
invite you to their Table, refuse it not; and yet less refuse their Pre^ents of
small value, such as are usually made in the Indies, by the Portugueses to each
other, and which one cannot refuse, without giving an affront; as for example,
Fruits, and Drinks. At the same time, declare to them, that you only receive
those little Gifts, in hope they will also receive your good Advice; and that
you go to eat with them, only that you may dispose them, by a good Confession,
to approach the holy Table. For such Presents as I have named, such I mean, as
are not to be refused, when you have received t^em, send them to the Sick, to
the Prison^rs, or to the Poor. The people will be ed^^y'd with this procedure,
and no occasion left of susp^cting you, either of niceness or (...).

For (...) relates to your abode, (...)
you will see, at your arrival, and having prudently c^^sider'd the state of
things, you may judge where it will be most convenient for you to dwell, either
in the Hospital, or the House (...) Mercy, or (...) little lodging, in the
neighborhood. If I think fit to call you to Japan, you shall immedately give
notice of it, by writing to the Rectour of this College, by two or three
different conveyances, to the end, he may supply your place, with one of our
Fathers, a man capable of assisting, and comforting the City of Ormuz. In fine,
I recommend you to your self; and that in particular, you never forget, that
you are a member of the Society of Jesus.

In the Conjunctures of Affairs, experience will best instruct you, what will
be most for Gods service; for there is no better Master than Practice, and
Observation, in matters of Prudence. Remember me always in your Prayers; and
take care, that they who are under your direction, recommend me in theirs, to
the common Master, whom we serve. To conclude this long, Instruction, the last
advice I give you, is, To read over this Paper carefully, once a week, that you
may never forget any one of the Articles contained in it. May it please the
Lord, to go along with you, to conduct you in your Voyage, and at the same
time, to continue here with us.

Eight days after Gasper Barzo^us was gone for Ormus, He (...) f^^ Japan.
with his Companion Raymond Pereyra, Father Xavier went himself for Iapan: It
was in April 15^19. He embarked in a Galley, bound no farther than Cochin,
where waited for him a S^ip, which was to go toward Malacca. He took for
Companions, Father Cozmo de Torrez, and John Fernandez, besides the three
Iaponneses, Paul de Saint Foy, and his two Servants, John and Anthony.

It Is true, there embarked with him, in the same Galley, Emanuel Moralez, and
Alphonso de Castro, but it was only that the Father might carry them to
Malacca, from whence both of them were to be transported to the Molucca's. The
Ship, which attended the Father at Cochin, being just ready to set sail, they
made but a short stay, in that place: but it was not unprofitable. The Saint
walking one day, through the Streets, happened to meet a Portuguese of his
acquaintance; and immediately asked him, how he was in health? The Portuguese
answered, he was very well: yes, replied Xavier, in relation to your body, but
in regard of your Soul, no man can be in a worse condition. This man, who was
then designing in his heart a wicked action. knew immediately that the Father
saw into the bottom of it; and seriously reflecting on it, followed Xavier,
Con^ess'd himself, and changed his evil life. The Preaching of Castro, so
charmed the People, that they desired to have retained him at Cochin, there to
have established the College of the Society: But Xavier, who had designed him
for the Molucca's, opposed it. And Providence, which destined the Crown of
Martyrdom to that Missioner, suffered him not to continue in a place, where
they had nothing but veneration for him.

They left Cochin on the 25th of April, He arrives at Malacca, and what he
performs there.
and arrived at Malacca on the last of May. All the Town came to meet Father
Xavier, and every particular Person was overjoyed at his return. Alphonso
Martinez, grand Vicar to the Bishop, at that time lay dangerously Sick, and in
such an Agony of Soul, as moved compassion. For having been advertised to put
himself in condition of giving up his Accounts to God, of that Ministry which
he had exercised for thirty years, and of all the actions of his life, he was
so struck with the horror of immediate death, and the disorders of his life,
which was not very regular, for a man of his Profession, that he fell into a
deep Melancholy, and totally despaired of his Salvation. He cast out
lamentable cries, which a^^righted the hearers; they heard him name his Sins
alo^d, and detest them, with a furious regret, not that he might ask Pardon for
them, but only to declare their enormity. When they would have spoken to him of
Gods infinite m^^c^, he broke out into a rage, and ^r^'d out as loud as he was
able, that there was no forgiveness for the Damned, and no mercy in the
Bottomless Pit. The sick man was told, that Father Francis was just arrived;
and was asked (...) he should not be glad to see him* Martinez, who formerly
had been very nearly acquainted with him, seemed to breathe anew, at the
hearing of that name, and suddenly began to raise himself, to go see (said he)
the man of God. But the attempt he made, served only to put him into a fainting
Fit. The Father, entering at the same moment, found him in it. It had always
been his custom, to make his first visit, to the Ecclesiastical Superiors; but
besides this, the sickness of the Vicar, hastened the Visit. When the sick man,
was come by little and little to himself, Xavier began to speak to him of
Eternity, and of the conditions requisite to a Christian death. This discourse
threw Martinez back again, into his former terrors; and the Servant of God, in
this occasion, found that to be true, which he had often said, that nothing is
more difficult, than to persuade a dying man to hope well of his Salvation, who
in the course of his life, had ^latter'd himself with the hopes of it, that he
might Sin with the greater boldness.

Seeing the evil to be almost past remedy, he undertook to do violence to
Heaven, that he might obtain for the Sick man, the thoughts of true repentance,
and the grace of a religious death. For he made a Vow upon the place, to say a
great number of Masses, in honor of the most Holy Trinity, of the Blessed
Virgin, of the Angels, and some of the Saints, to whom he had a particular
devotion. His Vows were scarcely made, when Martinez became calm; began to have
reasonable thoughts, and received the last Sacraments, with a lively sorrow for
his Sins, and a tender relyance on Gods Mercies; after which, he died gently in
the arms of Xavier, calling on the name of Jesus Christ.

His happy death gave great consolation to the Holy man; His (...) for the
success of his Breth^en in their F^^^^^ions.
but the Apostolic labors of Francis Perez, and Roch Oliveira, increased his
joy. He had sent them the year before to Malacca, there to found a College of
the Society, according to the desire of the People, and they had been very well
received. Perez had begun to open a public School, for the instruction of the
youth in Learning, and Piety, according to the Spirit of their Institute.
Oliveira had wholly given himself to the Ministry of Preaching, and the conduct
of Souls, but tying himself more especially to the care of Turks and Jews, of
which, there was always a vast Concourse in the Town. For the first, came
expressly from Mecca, and the last from Malabar, to endeavor there to plant
Mahometism, and Judaism, where Christianity then flourished.

The Example of the two Missioners, drew many Portugueses to that kind of life,
He receives a young Gentleman, into the Society.
of which they both made profession. The most considerable of all, was a young
Gentleman, whose name was Iuan Bravo; who by his noble Birth and Valor, might
justly hope to raise his fortunes in the World. But he pre^erring Evangelical
Poverty, and Religious Humility, before all those earthly expectations, and
establishments, was just then ready to have taken Ship for Goa, there to
execute those thoughts, with which Heaven had inspired him, when he was
informed, that Xavier would take Malacca in his way. He therefore waited for
him, and in the mean time lived with Perez and Oliveira, as if he had been
already of the Society. At least he conformed himself as much as he was able,
to their manners, and habited himself like them: that is to say, instead of
rich Garments, he put on an old threed-bare Cassock, with which he looked the
World in the face, without having yet forsaken it. He performed the Spiritual
Exercises for a month together, and never came out of his retirement, but to
employ himself in works of Charity in the Hospital: There for three months, he
attended the Sick, living in Poverty, and begging his Bread from door to door,
even in the sight of James Sosa his Kinsman, Admiral of the Fleet, which was
Rigging out for the Molucca's.

These Trials obliged the Father to receive Bravo into the Society. He admitted
him almost immediately, to take the first Vows, and finding in him an excellent
foundation, for all the Apostolical Virtues, he took care to cultivate him;
even so far, as to leave him in writing these following Rules, before his
departure to Iapan.

See here, The instructions which he gives to Bravo.
my dear Brother, the from of life, which you are constantly to practice every
day. In the morning, as soon as you are awakened, prepare your self to meditate
on some Mystery of our Lord; beginning from his holy Nativity, and continuing
to his glorious Ascension; the Subjects of the Meditations are marked, and put
in Order, in the Book of Exercises. Employ at the least half an hour in
Prayers; and apply your self to it, with all those interior dispositions,
which you may remember you practiced, in your retirement of a month. Consider
every day one Mystery, in such manner, that if, for Example, on Monday, the
Birth of our Savior, was the Subject of your Meditation, that of his
Circumcision shall be for Tuesday; and so in course, 'till in a months time,
having run through all the actions of Jesus Christ, you come to contemplate him
ascending into Heaven in Triumph. You are every Month, to begin these
Meditations again, in the same order.

At the end of every Meditation, you shall renew your Vows of Poverty,
Chastity, and Obedience, to which you have obliged your self. You shall make
them, I say, anew, and offer them to God with the same serven^y, wherewith you
first made them. This renewing of your Vows, will weaken in you the motions of
Concupiscence, and render all the Powers of Hell less capable of hurting you;
for which reason, I am of opinion that you ought never to omit them.

After Dinner, you shall resume your mornings Prayer, and reflect on the same
Mystery, half an hour; you shall also renew your Vows, at the end of your
Meditation. You are to employ your self in this manner interiourly through all
the variety of your outward business; giving an hour in every day, to the
consideration of the most holy life of our Lord Jesus, in whatsoever Affair, or
in whatsoever Encumbrance you are engaged. You may practice this with most
convenience, by allowing half an hour in the morning, and another half in the
afternoon, according to my direction.

Before you lie down at night, examine well your Conscience, in calling over
your thoughts, words, and actions of all the day; and even observing, if you
have not failed of doing something, which it was your duty to have done; let
this discussion be as exact, as if you were just ready to Confess your self.
After you have conceived a most lively sorrow for your faults, by the motive of
God's love, you shall humbly ask Pardon of Jesus Christ, and vow amendment to
him. In fine, you shall so dispose your self to rest, that your sleep may come
upon you, in thoughts of Piety, and in resolutions of passing the next day,
with greater holiness.

On the morrow, at your waking, think on the Sins which you observed in the
examen of the night before: and while you are putting on your Clothes, ask the
assistance of Gods Grace, that you may not that day, relapse into your
yesterdays offenses. Then perform your mornings Meditation, and proceed through
your whole days work, as I have ordered you. ^ But be so punctual, and so
constant in all these spiritual practices, that nothing but sickness cause you
to forbear them. For if, when you are in health, you should deferr, or leave
them off, under some pretense of business, be sure you make a scruple of it,
and let not the day pass over you, till in the presence of your Brethren, you
confess your fault, and of your own free motion, demand Penance, for having
omitted or neglected that which was so strictly commanded by your Superior.

For what remains, whatsoever you do, or in whatsoever condition of Spirit you
may be, labor with all your power, still to overcome your self. Subdue your
Passions, embrace what is most abhorring to your sense, repress all natural
desire of Glory, most especially; and spare not your self in that particular,
till you have torn out of your Heart, the very Roots of Pride; not only
suffering your self to be debased beneath all men, but being glad to be
despised. For, hold this for certain, that without this Humility and
Mortification, you can neither advance in Virtue, nor serve your Neighbor as
you ought, nor be acceptable to God, nor, to conclude all, persevere in the
Society of Jesus.

Obey in all things, the Father with whom you live; and however displeasing, or
difficult the things may be, which he commands you, perform them with much
cheerfulness, never opposing his Orders, nor making any exceptions on your
part, on any account whatsoever. In fine, hearken to him, and suffer your self
to be directed in all things by him, as if Father Ignatius were personally
present, speaking to you, and directing you.

With whatsoever temptations you shall find your self assaulted, discover them
all sincerely to him who governs you; and remain persuaded, that this is the
only means of subduing them. Besides this advantage, there accrue other
spiritual pro^its, in making known the secret motions of your Heart, for the
violence which you do to your self, to surmount that natural shamefacedness
which hinders you from acknowledging your Imperfections and Frailties, draws
down the Grace of God upon you: And on the other side, This Overture, and
Franckness of your Heart, ruins the designs of the evil Spirit, who can never
do mischief, but when he is in disguise; but when once discovered, is so far
disarmed, and despicably weak, that they, for whom he lies in ambush, laugh at
him.

'^was in this manner, that the holy Apostle, Francis Xavier, instructed the
young men of the Society, and nothing, perhaps, could better explain to us, the
great resemblance, that was betwixt the Souls of Xavier, and Ignatius.

At this time, The n^ws which (...) ^^a^s from Japan.
there came news from Iapan, and some Letters reported, That one of the Kings
of that Island, had desired some Preachers to be sent to him, by an express
Embassy to the Viceroy of the Indies. That this King had learnt somewhat of the
Christian Law, and that a strange accident had made him desirous of knowing
more. This accident was related in those Letters, after this following manner.

Some Portuguese Merchants, being landing at the Port, belonging of the Capital
City, of one of those Kingdoms of Iapan, were lodged by the King's order, in a
forsaken House, which was thought to be haunted by evil Spirits; the common
opinion, was not ill grounded, and the Portugueses soon perceived, that their
Lodging was disturbed. They heard a horrible rumbling all the night; they felt
themselves pulled out of their Beds, and beaten in their sleep, without seeing
any one. One night being awakened, at the cry of one of their Servants, and
running with their Arms toward the place, from whence the noise was heard,
they foun^ the Servant on the ground, trembling for fear. They asked him the
occasion of his outcry, and why he shook in that manner: He answered, That he
had seen a frightful Apparition, such a one, as Painters use to draw for the
picture of the Devil* As this Servant, was not thought either ^aint-hearted, or
a liar, the Portugueses no longer doubted, what was the meaning of all that
rattling and clutter, which they heard every night; to put an end to it, they
set Crosses in all the Rooms, after which they heard no more of it.

The Iaponneses were much surprised, to hear the House was not at quiet: The
King himself, to whom the Portugueses had said, That the Christian Cross had
driven away the evil Spirits, admired that wonderful effect, and commanded
Crosses to be set up in all places, even in his own Palaces, and in the
Highways. In consequence of this, he desired to be informed, from whence the
Cross derived that Virtue? and for what cause the Devils so much feared it.
Thus, by little and little, he entered into the Mysteries of Faith. But as the
Iaponneses are extremely curious, not content to be instructed by Soldiers and
Merchants, he thought of sending for Preachers, and in that prospect, sent an
Ambassador to the Indies.

This news gave infinite satisfaction to Father Xavier, He disposes himself for
the Voyage of Japan, more earnestly than ever.
and so much the more hastened his Voyage, by how much, he now perceived the
Iaponians were disposed to receive the Gospel. There were in the Port of
Malacca, many Portuguese Vessels, in readiness to set Sail for Iapan, but all
of them were to make many other Voyages by the way, which was not the Saints
business. His only means, was to have recourse to a Iunck of China, (so they
call those little Vessels) which was bound directly for Iapan. The Master of
the Vessel, called Neceda, was a famous Pirate; a Friend to the Portugueses,
notwithstanding the War which was newly declared against them; so well known by
his Robberies at Sea, that his Ship was commonly called, The Robers Vessel. Don
Pedro de Sylva, Governor of Malacca, got a promise from the Chines Captain,
that he would carry the Father, safely, and without injury, and took Hostages,
to engage him inviolably to keep his Faith; but what can be built on the word
of a Pirate, and a wicked man?

Xavier, He goes from Malacca to Japan; and wh^^^ happens to him in the way.
and his Companions embarked on the twenty fourth of June, in the dusk of the
Evening; and set Sail the next Morning at break of day with a favorable Wind.
When they were out at Sea, the Captain, and Ships Crew, who were all Idolaters,
set up a Pagod on the Poop; sacrifis'd to it in spite of Xavier, and all his
Remonstrances to the contrary, and consulted him by Magical Ceremonies,
concerning the success of their Voyage. The answers were sometimes good, and
sometimes ill: In the mean time they cast Anchor at an Isle, and there
furnished themselves with Timber, against the furious gusts of those uncertain
Seas. At the same time they renewed their Interrogatories to their Idol; and
cast Lotts, to know whether they should have good Winds. The Lotts promised
them a good passage, whereupon the Pagans pursued their course merrily. But
they were no sooner got out to Sea again, when they drew Lotts the third time,
to know, whether the Iunk should return sa^ely from Iapan to Malacca. The
answer was, That they should arrive happily at Iapan, but were never more to
see Malacca. The Pirate* who was extremely superstitious, resolved at the same
instant, to change his Course; and in effect, tacked about, and passed his
time, in going to every Isle, which was in view. Father Xavier was sensibly
displeased, that the Devil should be Master of their destiny, and that all
things should be ordered, according to the Answer of the Enemy of God and Man.

In cruising thus leisurely, they made the Coast of Cochin China; and the
Tempests, which ro^e at the same time, threatened them more than once with
Shipwreck. The Idolaters had recourse to their ordinary Superstitions. The Lot
declared, that the Wind should fall, and that there was no danger. But an
impetuous Gust so raised the Waves, that the Ma^iners were forced to lower
their Sails, and cast Anchor. The shog of the Vessel, threw a young Chinese
(whom Xavier had Christened, and carried along with him) into the Sink, which
was then open. They drew him out half dead, much bruised, and hurt in the Head
very dangerously. While they were dressing him, the Captain's Daughter fell
into the Sea, and was swallowed by the Waves, notwithstanding all they could do
to save her.

This dismal accident, drove Neceda to despair; And it was a lamentable sight,
says Xavier himself* in one of his Letters, to behold the disorder in the
Vessel. The loss of the Daughter, and the fear of Shipwreck, filled all with
tears, and howlings, and confusion.

Nevertheless, the Idolaters, instead of acknowledging, that their Idol had
deceived them with a lie, took pains to appease him, as if the death of the
Chinese Woman, had been an effect of their Gods displeasure. They sacri^is'd
Birds to him, and burnt Incense in honor of him; after which they cast Lotts
again, to know the cause of this disaster which had befaln them. They were
answer*d, That if the young Christian, who had fell into the Sink, had d^'d the
Captain's Daughter had been preserved. Then Neceda, transported with fury,
thought to throw Xavier and his Companions overboard. But the Storm ceasing in
an instant, his mind grew calmer by degrees, he weighed Anchor, and set Sail
again, and took the way of Canton, with intention there to pass the Winter. But
the Designs of Men, and Power of Devils, can do nothing against the Decrees of
Providence. A contrary Wind broke all the projects of the Captain, constraining
him, in his own despite, to enter with full Sails into the Ocean of Iapan. And
the same Wind carried the Iunk of the Pirate, toward Cangoxima, the birthplace
of Anger, sirnam'd Paul de Saint Foy, they arrived there on the fifteenth of
August, in the year 1549.

The End of the Fourth Book.
THE LIFE OF St. FRANCIS XAVIER.
BOOK V.
I Undertake not to make an exact description of japan after those which have
been made of it by Geographers, The Situation of Japan, and the nature of the
Country.
and Travelers: By an ordinary view of the Chartes, and common reading of the
Relations of the Indies. it is easy to understand that Iapan is situate at the
extremity of Asia, over against China, that it is a concourse of Islands which
compose as it were one body; and that the chie^est of them, gives the name to
all the rest: that this World of Islands, as it is called by a great Geographer,
is filled with Mountains, some of which are inaccessible, and almost above the
Clouds, that the Colds there are excessive, and that the Soil, which is
fruitful in Mines of Gold and Silver, is not productive of much Grain, of any
sort necessary to life, for want of cultivation. Without dwelling longer,
either on the situation or nature of the Country, or so much as on the Customs
and Manners of the Inhabitants, of which, I have already said somewhat, and
shall speak yet farther, as my Subject requires it. I shall here only touch a
little on the Government and Religion, which of necessity are to be known, at
the beginning, for the understanding of the History which I write.

Iapan was anciently one Monarchy. (...)
The Emperor, whom all those Isles obey*d, was called the Dairy: and was
descended from the Camis, who according to the popular Opinion, came in a
direct line from the Sun. The first Office of the Empire was that of the Cubo,
that is to say, Captain General of the Army. For the raising of this Dignity,
which in it self was so conspicuous, in process of time, the name of Sama was
added to that of Cubo; for Sama in their Language signifies Lord. Thus the
General of Iapan, came to be called Cubo Sama.

Above three hundred years ago, the Cubo Sama then being, beholding the Scepter
of Iapan in the hands of a Dairy, who was cowardly and es^eminate, revolted
from him, and got possession of the Regal Dignity. His design was to have
reduced the whole Estate under his own Dominion: but he was only able to make
himself Master of Meaco, where the Emperor kept his Court, and of the
Provinces depending on it. The Governors of other Provinces, maintained
themselves in their respective Jurisdictions by force of Arms, and shook off
the yoke, as well as he. Insomuch that the Monarchy came to be suddenly
divided, into Sixty six Cantons, which all assum*d the names of Kingdoms.

Since these revolutions, the King of Meaco, took the Title of Cubo Sama, and
he who had been deprived of it, still retained the name of Dairy: and,
excepting only the Power, there was still le^t him all the privilege of
Royalty, in consideration of the Blood of the Camis; his Descendants have had
always the same Title, and enjoyed the same advantages. This in general, was
the face of the Government, in the times of St. Francis Xavier: for some years
afterward, Nabunanga, one of the Neighbor Kings to him of Meaco, defeated the
Cubo Sama in a pitched Battle, and followed his blow with so much success; that
having destroyed all those petty Princes, he reunited the whole Empire of
Iapan, under his sole obedience.

As to what concerns a Religion, all the Iaponians, The Religion of the
Japonneses when the Father arrived in that Country
. excepting some few who make profession of Atheism, and believe the Soul
mortal, are Idolaters, and hold the transmigration of Souls, after the Doctrine
of Pythagoras. Some of them pay Divine Worship to the Sun and Moon; others to
the Camis, those Ancient Kings, of whom we have made mention, and to the
Potoques, the Gods of China. There are diverse of them who adore some kinds of
Beasts, and many who adore the Devil under dreadful Figures. Besides these,
they have a certain Mysterious Deity whom they call Amida; and say this God has
built a Paradise of such distance from the Earth, that the Souls cannot reach
it under a Voyage of three years. But the God Xaca, is he, of whom they report
the greatest Wonders; who seems to be a counter^eit of the true Messiah, set up
by the Devil himself, or by his Ministers. For if one would give credit to
them, Xaca being born of a Queen, who never had the carnal knowledge of Man,
retired into the Deserts of Siam, and there under-went severe Penances, to
expiate the Sins of Men: that coming out of his Wilderness, he assembled some
Disciples, and preached an Heavenly Doctrine in diverse Countries.

It Is incredible how many Temples have been built to the honor of Amida and
Xaca: all the Cities are full of them, The Six Jesuits who were sent to Siam
in 1685, in their relation of the Religion of the Siamois, which much resembles
this of Japan, guess, with more probability, that these Opinions were the
Corruptions of the Doctrine preached in the Indies by St. Thomas.
and their magnificence is equal to their number. Nor is it easy to imagine,
how far their superstition carries the Worshippers of these two Deities. They
throw themselves headlong down from Rocks, or bury themselves alive in Caves,
and it is ordinary to see Barques, full of Men and Women, with Stones hanging at
their necks, and singing the praises of their Gods, after which, they cast
themselves into the Sea.

For what remains, the Spirit of Lies, has established in Iapan, a kind of
Hierarchy, not unlike that of the Catholic Church. For these People have a
Chief of their Religion, and a kind of Sovereign Priest, whom they call Sa^o.
He keeps his Court in the Capital City of the Empire; and it is he who approves
the Sects, who institutes the Ceremonies, who Consecrates, if I may be allowed
to say so, the Tundi, who resemble our Bishops, and whose principal Function,
is to ordain the Priests of Idols, by conferring on them the power of offering
Sacrifice. These Priests, who are called Bonzes, part of them living in
Deserts, the rest in Towns, all affect a rigid austerity of manners, and are
amongst the Iaponneses, what the Brachmans are amongst the Indians, unless that
they are yet more impious, and greater Hypocrites.

To resume our History, Paul de saint Foy, goes to want on the King of Saxuma.
immediately after the arrival of Xavier and his Companions, Paul de Saint
Foy, whom formerly we called Anger, went to pay his duty to the King of Saxuma;
on which Congoxlma is depending, and whose Palace is about the distance of six
Leagues from it. That Prince who had heretofore shown great favor to him.
received him with much humanity, and with so much the greater joy, because he
had believed him dead. This kind reception gave Paul de Saint Foy the
confidence to petition the King for the pardon of that action, which had
occasioned his departure, and it was not difficult for him to obtain it.

The King, naturally curious, as the Iaponians generally are, inquired much of
him, concerning the Indies; as what was the nature of the Country, and the
humor of the People, and whether the Portugueses were as brave, and as
powerful, as they were represented by common Fame. When Paul had satisfied him
on these and the like Particulars, the discourse fell on the different
Religions in the Indies, and finally on Christianity, which was introduced by
the Portugueses in India.

Paul unfolded at large the Mysteries of our Faith, That which passed at the
Court of Saxuma.
and seeing with what pleasure he was heard, produced a Tablet of the Virgin,
holding the little Jesus in her arms. The Tablet was very curious, and Xavier
had given it to this Iaponnese, that he might show it, as occasion offered. The
sight alone of this excellent Painting, wrought so much upon the King, that
being touched with thoughts of Piety and Reverence, he sell on his knees, with
all his Courtiers, to honor the Persons therein represented; which seemed to
him, to have an air that was more than humane.

He commanded it should be carried to the Queen his Mother. She was also
charmed with it, and prostrated her self by the same instinct, with all the
Ladies of her Train, to salute the Mother and the Son. But, as the Ioponian
Women are yet more inquisitive than the men, she asked more inquisitive than
the men, she asked a thousand questions concerning the Blessed Virgin and our
Savior, which gave Paul the desired opportunity, of relating all the Life of
Jesus Christ; and this Relation so much pleased the Queen, that some few days
after, when he was upon his return to Cangoxima, she sent one of her Officers
to have a Copy of the Tablet: which she had seen: but a Painter was not to be
found to satisfy her curiosity. She required that at least she might have an
abridgment in writing of the chief Points of Christianity, and was satisfied
therein by Paul.

The Father overjoyed at these good inclinations of the Court, The Saint
applies himself to the study of the Japonian Tongue.
thought earnestly of making himself capable to preach in the Language of the
Country. There is but one Language spoken through all Iapan: but that so ample,
and so full of variety, that in effect, it may be said to contain many Tongues.
They make use of certain words, and Phrases, in familiar Discourse; and of
others in studied compositions. The Men of quality have a Language quite
differing from the Vulgar. Merchants and Soldiers have a Speech proper to
their several Professions, and the Women speak a Dialect distinct from any of
the rest. When they treat on a sublime Subject, for Example, of Religion, or
Affairs of State, they serve themselves of particular terms; and nothing
appears more incongruous amongst them, than to confound these different manners
of expression.

The holy Man had already some light notions of all these Languages, by the
communication he had with the three Iaponian Christians; but he knew not enough
to express him with ease and readiness, as himself acknowledges in his
Epistles, where he says, that he and his Companions, at their first arrival,
stood like Statues, mute and motionless. He therefore applied himself with all
diligence, to the study of the Tongue, which he relates in these following
words. We are returned to our Infancy, says he, and all our business at
present, is to learn the first Elements of the Japonian Grammar. God give us
the grace to imitate the simplicity and innocence of Children, as well as to
practice the exercises of Children.

We ought not to be astonished in this passage, last quoted, that a man to whom
God had many times communicated the gift of Tongues, should not speak that of
Iapan, and that he should be put to the pains of studying it. Those favors
were transient, and Xavier never expected them. Insomuch, that being to make
abode in a Country, he studied the Language of it, as if he could not have
arrived to the knowledge of it, but by his own industry. But the holy Spirit
assisted him after an extraordinary manner, on those occasions, as we have
formerly observed. And we may say, that the easiness wherewith he learnt so
many Tongues, was almost equivalent to the lasting gift of them.

While Xavier and his Companions were laboring to acquire that knowledge which
was necessary for their preaching the word of Jesus Christ, He baptizes the
whole Family of Paul de Saint Foy.
to the People of Cangoxima, Paul de Saint Foy, with whom they lodged, himself
instructed his own Family: God gave that Blessing to his Zeal, that besides his
Mother, his Wife and Daughter, many of his Relations were converted and
baptized by Xavier. Within the compass of forty days, the Saint understood
enough of the Language to undertake the translation of the Apostles Creed, and
the Exposition of it, which he had composed in India. As fast as he translated,
he got every parcel of it by Heart, and with that help, was of Opinion, that he
might begin to declare the Gospel. But seeing that in Iapan, all the Measures
of the Laws and Customs, are to be taken, and observed with great exactness,
and nothing to be attempted in public, without permission from the Government,
he would first visit the King of Saxuma, and chose the time, on the day of St.
Michael the Archangel. He had put the whole Empire under the protection of
that glorious General of the Celestial Host, who chased the Rebellious Angels
out of Heaven, and recommended in his daily Prayers to him, that he would
exterminate those Devils from Iapan, who had usurped the Dominion of it, for so
many Ages.

The Apostle of the Indies was not unknown at the Court of Saxuma. He goes to
the Court of Saxuma, and is well received.
Paul de Saint Foy, had spoken of him there, in such a manner, as infused the
desire of seeing him into all Hearts, and caused him to be looked on with
admiration, when he first appeared. The King and Queen treated him with honor,
testified great affection to him, and discoursed with him the better part of
the night. They could not but be astonished that he and his Companions, were
come from another World, and had passed through so many stormy Seas, not out of
an avaritious design, of enriching themselves with the Gold of Iapan, but only
to teach the Iaponneses the true way of Eternal Life. From the very first
meeting, the King cautioned Xavier, to keep safely all the Books and Writings,
which contained the Christian Doctrine; For, said he, if your Faith be true,
the Demons will be sure to fly furiously upon you; and all manner of mischief
is to be expected from their Malice. Afterward he granted permission to the
Saint to preach the Christian Law, within the whole extent of his Dominions;
and farther caused his Letters Patents to be expedited, by virtue of which, all
his Subjects had free liberty of being made Christians, if they so desired.

Xavier took advantage of this happy conjuncture; He begins to preach at
Cangoxima, and co^verts many.
and deferred no longer his preaching in Cangoxima. He began by explaining the
first Articles of the Creed. That of the Existence of one God, all powerful,
the Creator of Heaven and Earth was a strange surprise to his Auditors, who
knew nothing of a first Being, on whom the Universe depended, as on its Cause
and Principle. The other Articles which respect the Trinity, and Incarnation,
appeared to them yet more incredible: Insomuch, that some of them held the
Preacher for a Madman, and laughed him to scorn. Notwithstanding which, the
wiser sort, could not let it sink into their Belief, that a Stranger, who had
no Interest to deceive them, should undergo so many hardships and dangers, and
come so far, on set purpose, to cheat them with a Fable. In these
considerations, they were desirous of clearing those doubts, which possessed
them, in relation to those Mysteries which they had heard. Xavier answered them
so distinctly, and withal so reasonably* with the assistance of Paul de Saint
Foy, who served him for Interpreter, in case of need, that the greatest part
satisfied with his solutions, came over to the Faith.

The first who desired Baptism, and received it, was a man of mean condition,
destitute of the goods of Fortune; as if God willed, that the Church of Iapan
should have the same Foundations, of meanness and Poverty, with the Universal
Church: the name of Bernard was given him, and by his Virtue he became in
process of time Illustrious.

In the mean time, He visits the B^nza's, and endea^^^^s to ga^n the^.
Xavier visited the Bonza's, and endeavored to gain their good will, being
persuaded, that Christianity would make but little progress amongst the people,
if they opposed the preaching of the Gospel: And on the other side, judging
that all the World would embrace the Law of the true God, in case they should
not openly resist it. His good behavior, and frankness immediately gained him
the favor of their Chief; he was a man of fourscore years of age, and for a
Bonza, a good honest man: in that estimation of Wisdom, that the King of
Saxuma, entrusted him with his most important Affairs, and so well versed in
his Religion, that he was sirnam'd Ningit, which is to say, the Heart of Truth.
But this name was not altogether proper to him; and Xavier presently perceived,
that the Veillard, knew not what to believe, concerning the immortality of the
Soul; saying sometimes, That our Souls were nothing different from those of
Beasts; at other times, That they came from Heaven, and that they had in them
somewhat of Divine.

These uncertainties of a Mind, He (...) the S^^^s ^words^ the chief of the
Bonza's.
floating betwixt truth and falsehood, gave Xavier the occasion of proving the
immortality of the Soul, in the Conversations they had together; and he
reasoned strongly thereupon, according to natural Principles alone. Yet his
Arguments had no other effect, than the praises which were given them. Ningit
commended the Knowledge of the European Bonza, (so they called the Father) and
was satisfied, that no man had a deeper insight into Nature. But he still
remained doubtful on the business of Religion; either out of shame to change
his Opinion at that age, or perhaps, because those who have doubted all their
life, are more hard to be convinced, than those who have never believed at all.

The esteem which Ningit had for Xavier, caused him to be had in great repute
with the rest of the Bonza's. They heard him with applause, when he spoke of
the Divine Law, and confessed openly, That a man who was come from the other
end of the World, through the midst of so many dangers, to preach a new
Religion, could only be inspired by the Spirit of Truth, and could propose
nothing, but what was worthy of belief.

The Testimony of the Bonza's authorized the preaching of the Gospel; but their
scandalous way of living, hindered them from following our holy Law.
Notwithstanding, before the conclusion of the year, two of them of less corrupt
manners than the rest, or more faithful to the Grace of Jesus Christ, embraced
Christianity; and their Example wrought so far upon the Inhabitants of
Congoxima, that many of them desired to be baptized.

These first fruits of preaching promised greater; The Bonza's ^ise against him*
and the Faith flourished daily more and more in Congoxima; when a Persecution
raised on a sudden, ruined these fair expectations, and stopped the Progress of
the Gospel. The Bonza's, surpised to see the People ready to forsake the
Religion of the Country, opened their eyes to their own interest, and
manifestly saw, that if this now Religion were once received, as they only
lived on the Alms and O^^erings which were made to their Deities, they should
be wholly deprived of their subsistan^e, They judged, in consequence, that this
evil was to be remedied, before it grew uncurable; and nothing was to be
spared, for the rooting out these Portuguese Preachers. It was then mani^est,
that those Religious Idolaters, who at first had been so favorable to Xavier,
now made open War against him. They decry'd him in all places, and publicly
treated him as an Impostor. Even so far they proceeded, that one day as he was
Preaching, in one of the public places of the City, a Bonza interrupted him in
the midst of his discourse, and warned the People not to trust him; saying,
That it was a Devil, who spoke to them in the likeness of a Man.

This outrageousness of the Bonza's failed of the effect which they desired;
The Bonza's succeed not in their Undertaking.
the Iaponians, who are naturally men of wit, and Plain Dealers, came easily to
understand the motives of their Priests, to change their manner of Behavior,
and finding interest in all they said or did, grew more and more attentive to
the Doctrine of the Father.

Some of them upbraided the Bonza's, that their proper concernments had kindled
their zeal to such an height: that Religion was not to be defended by
calumnies, and a^^ronts, but by solid Arguments. That if the Doctrine of the
European was false, why did they not demonstrate clearly the falsehood of it;
that for the rest, it was of little consequence, whether this new Preacher was
a Demon or a Man; and that truth was to be received, whosoever brought it: that
after all, he lived with great austerity, and was more to be credited than any
of them.

In effect, He leads a most aus^ere Life.
Xavier for the edification of the People, who commonly judge by appearances of
things, abstained entirely both from Flesh and Fish. Some bitter Roots and
Pulse boiled in water, were all his nourishment, in the midst of his continual
labors. So that he practiced rigorously, and literally, that abstinence of
which the Bonza's make profession, or rather that which they pretend to
practice. And he accustomed himself to this immediately, upon what Paul de
Saint Foy had told him, that it would look ill if a Religious Christian,
should live with less austerity, than the Priests of Idols should in their
course of Life.

The wonders which God wrought, He w^^^s diverse Mi^acles.
by the Ministration of his Servant, gave farther confirmation to the Christian
Law. The Saint walking out one day up-the Sea shore, met certain Fishers, who
were spreading their empty Nets, and complained of their bad fortune. He had
pity on them, and after making some short Prayers, he advised them to Fish once
more. They did so, on his word, and took so many Fish, and of such several
sorts, that they could hardly draw their Nets. They continued their Fishing for
some days after, with the same success; and what appears more wonderful, the
Sea of Cangoxima, which was scarce of Fish, from that time forward had great
plenty.

A Woman, who had heard reports of the Cures which the Apostle had made in the
Indies, brought him her little Child, who was swelled over all the Body, even
to deformity. Xavier took the Infant in his arms, looked on him with eyes of
pity, and pronounced thrice over him these words, God bless thee; after which,
he gave the Child back to his Mother, so well, and beautiful, that she was
transported with joy and admiration.

This Miracle made a noise about the Town; and gave occasion to a Leper, to
hope a cure for his Disease, which he had sought in vain for many years. Not
daring to appear in public, because his uncleanness had excluded him from the
Society of men, and made him loathsome to all Companies; he sent for Xavier,
who at that time happened to be engaged in business, and could not come; but
deputed one of his Companions to visit him; giving order to ask him thrice, if
he was content to believe in Christ, in case he should be healed of his
Leprosy; and thrice to make the sign of the Cross over him, if he promised
constantly to embrace the Faith. All things passed according to the Commission
of the Father: the Leper obliged himself to become a Christian upon the
recovery of his health; and the sign of the* Cross was no sooner made over him,
but his whole body became as clean, as if he had never been infected with
Leprosy. The suddenness of the Cure, wrought in him to believe in Christ,
without farther difficulty, and his lively Faith brought him hastily to Baptism.

But the most celebrated Miracle which Xavier wrought in Cangoxima, He raises a
Maid from Death.
was the Resurrection of a young Maid of Quality. She died in the flower of her
youth, and her Father who loved her tenderly, was ready to go distracted with
his loss. Being an Idolater, he had no sourse of comfort remaining for his
affliction, and his Friends, who came to condole with him, instead of easing,
did but aggravate his grief; two new Christians, who came to see him, before
the Burial of his Daughter, advised him to seek his remedy from the holy man,
who wrought such Wonders, and beg her life of him, with strong assurance of
success.

The Heathen, persuaded by these new Believers, that nothing was impossible to
this European Bonza, and beginning to hope against all humane appearances,
aft^r the custom of the distressed, who easily believe, what they infinitely
desire, goes to find Father Xavier, throws himself at his feet, and with tears
in his eyes, beseeches him, to raise up from death his only Daughter; adding,
that the favor would be to give a Resurrection to himself. Xavier moved at the
faith, and affliction of the Father, withdraws, with Fernandez his Companion,
to recommend his desire to Almighty God; and having ended his Prayer, returns a
little time after, Go, says he to the sorrowful Father, your Daughter is alive.

The Idolater, who expected that the Saint would have accompanied him to his
house, and there called upon the name of his God, over the Body of his
Daughter, thought himself ill used, and cheated, and went away dissatisfied.
But before he had walked many steps homeward, he saw one of his Servants, who
transported with joy, cried out aloud to him, at a distance, that his Daughter
lived. Soon after this, his Daughter came her self to meet him, and related to
her Father, that her Soul was no sooner departed from her Body, but it was
seized by two ugly Fiends, who would have thrown her headlong into a Lake of
Fire; but that two unknown Persons, whose Countenances were venerably modest,
snatched her out of the gripe of her two Executioners, and restored her to
li^e, but in what manner she could not tell.

The Iaponian, suddenly apprehended, who were the two Persons concerned in her
Relation, and brought her straight to Xavier, to acknowledge the miraculous
favor ^he had received. She no sooner cast her eyes on him, and on Fernandez,
than she cried out, Behold my two Redeemers! and at the same time, both she,
and her Father desired Baptism. Nothing of this nature had ever been seen in
that Country: no History ever made mention that the Gods of Iapan had the power
of reviving the dead. So that this Resurrection, gave the People a high
conception of Christianity, and made famous the name of Father Xavier.

But nothing will make more evident how much a Favorite he was to Heaven, God
avenges the Saint.
and how prevalent with that God, whom he declared, than that exemplary
Judgment, with which Divine Justice, punished the bold impiety of a man, who
either carried on by his own* madness, or exasperated by that of the Bonza's,
one day railed at him, with soul injurious Language. The Saint suffered it with
his accustomed mildness, and only said these words to him, with somewhat a
melancholy Countenance, God preserve your Mouth. Immediately the Miscreant
felt his tongue eaten with a Cancer, and there issued out of his mouth a
purulent Matter, mixed with Worms, and a stench that was not to be endured.
This Vengeance, so visible, and so sudden, ought to have struck the Bonza's
with terror; but their great numbers assured them in some measure, and all of
them acting in a Body against the Saint, each of them had the less fear, for
his own particular. What raised their indignation to the height, was that a
Lady of great Birth and Riches, Wife to one of the most considerable Lords of
all the Court, and very liberal to the Pagods, was solemnly Baptized with all
the Family.

Seeing they prevailed nothing by the ways they had attempted, A new
Persecution raised against Xavier, by the Bonza's.
and that Persons of Quality, were not less enamored of the Christian
Doctrine, than the vulgar, and on the other side, not daring to use violence,
in respect of the King's Edicts, which permitted the profession of
Christianity, they contrived a new Artifice, which was to address a complaint
to the King, of the King himself, on the part of their Country Deities. The
most considerable of the Bonza's having been elected, in a general Assembly for
this Embassy, went to the Prince, and told him, with an air rather threatening
than submissive, that they came in the name of Xaca and Amida, and the other
Deities of Iapan, to demand of him, into what Country he would banish them?
that the Gods were looking out for new habitations, and other Temples, since he
drove them shamefully out of his Dominions, or rather out of theirs, to receive
in their stead a stranger God, who usurps to himself Divine honors, and will
neither admit of a Superior, nor an Equal. They added haughtily, that it is
true he was a King; but what a kind of King was a profane Man? was it for him
to be the Arbiter of Religion, and to judge the Gods? what probability was
there too, that all the Religions of Iapan should err, and the most prudent of
the Nation be deceived after the run of so many Ages? what would Posterity say,
when they should hear that the King of Saxuma, who held his Crown from Amida
and Xaca, overthrew their Altars, and deprived them of the honors, which they
had so long enjoyed? but what would not the Neighboring Provinces attempt, to
revenge the injury done to their Divinities? that all things seemed lawful to
be done, on such occasions; and the least he had to fear, was a civil war, and
that so much the more bloody, because it was founded on Religion.

The Conjuncture in which the Bonza's found the King, The King of Saxuma, is
turned against Xavier and the Christians.
was favorable to them. It was newly told him, that the Ships of Portugal,
which usually landed at Cangoxima, had now bent their course to Firando, and
was extremely troubled at it; not only because his Estates should receive no
more advantage by their Trade, but also because the King of Firando, his Enemy,
would be the only gainer by his loss. As the good will which he showed in the
beginning to Father Xavier, had scarce any other Principle but Interest, he
grew cold to him immediately after this ill news; and this coldness, made him ^
incline to hearken to the Bonza's. He granted all they demanded of him, and
^orbad his Subjects on pain of death, to become Christians, or to forsake the
old Religion of their Country.

Whatsoever good inclinations there were in the People to receive the Gospel,
these new Edicts hindered those of Cangoxima, from any farther Commerce with
the three Religious Christians; so easily the favor or displeasure of the
Prince, can turn the People.

They, not withstanding, whose heart the Almighty had already touched, and who
were Baptized, far from being wanting to the grace of their Vocation, were more
increased in Faith, not exceeding the number of an hundred; they found
themselves infinitely acknowledging to the Divine Mercy, which had elected them
to compose this little Flock. Persecution it self augmented their servour; and
all of them declared to Father Xavier, that they were ready to suffer
Banishment, or Death, for the honor of our Savior.

Though the Father was nothing doubtful of their Constancy, The Saint for^^ties
the Christians, before he lea^es them.
yet he would forti^ie them by good Discourses, before he left a Town and
Kingdom, where there was no farther ho^e of extending the Christian Faith. For
which reason he daily assembled them; where having read some passages of
Scripture, Translated into their own Language, and suitable to the present
condition of that Infant Church, he explained to them some one of the Mysteries
of our Savior's Life; and his Auditors were so filled with the interior
Unctions of the Holy Spirit, that they interrupted his speech at every moment,
with their sighs and tears.

He had caused diverse Copies of his Catechism to be taken, He causes his
Catechism to be Printed, before his departure.
for the use of the Faithful. Having augmented it by a more ample Exposition of
the Creed, and added sundry spiritual Instructions, with the Life of our
Savior, which he entirely. Translated, he caused it to be Printed in Iaponnese
Characters, that it might be spread through all the Nation. At this time the
two Converted Bonza's, and two other Baptized iaponians, undertook a Voyage to
the Indies, to behold with their own eyes, what the Father had told them,
concerning the splendor of Christianity at Goa; I mean the multitude of
Christians, the magnificence of the Churches, and the beauty of the
Ecclesiastic Ceremonies.

At length he departed from Cangoxima, He departs from Cangoxima.
at the beginning of September, in the year 1550, with Cozmo de Torrez, and
John Fernandez, carrying on his back, according to his Custom, all the
necessary Utensils for the Sacrifice of the Mass. Before his departure, he
recommended the Faithful to Paul de Saint Foy. It Is wonderful, that these new
Christians berest of their Pastors, should maintain themselves in the midst of
Paganism, and amongst the Persecuting Bonza's, and not one single man of them
should be perverted from the Faith. It happened, that even their exemplary
lives, so edified their Contrymen, that they gained over many of the
Idolaters: insomuch, that in the process of some few years, the number of
Christians was increased to five hundred Persons; and the King of Saxuma wrote
to the Viceroy of the Indies, to have some of the Fathers of the Society, who
should publish through all his Territories, a Law so holy and so pure. The news
which came, that the Portuguese Vessels, which came lately to Iapan, had taken
their was to Firando, caused Xavier to go thither; and the ill Intelligence
betwixt the two Princes, gave him hopes that the King of Firando, would give
him and his two Companions a good reception.

They happened upon a Fortress on their way, He ^oes to the Castle of Ek^n^^no.
belonging to a Prince called Ekandono, who was Vassal to the King of Saxuma.
It was situate on the height of a Rock, and defended by ten great Bastions. A
solid Wall, encompassed it, with a wide and deep Ditch, cut through the middle
of the Rock. Nothing but fearful Precipices on every side; and the Fortress
approachable by one only way, where a Guard was placed both day and night. The
inside of it was as pleasing, as the outside was full of horror. A stately
Palace composed the Body of the place, and in that Palace were Portico's,
Galleries, Halls, and Chambers, of an admirable Beauty, all was cut in the
living stone, and wrought so curiously, that the works seemed to be cast within
a Mould, and not cut by the Chizzel.

Some People of the Castle, who were returning from Cangoxima, and who had
there seen Xavier, invited him by the way, to come and visit their Lord; not
doubting but Ekandono, would be glad to see so famous a Person.

Xavier who sought all occasions of publishing the Gospel, He declares the
Gospel before Ekandono, and the fruits of his Preaching.
lost not that opportunity. The good reception which was made him, gave him the
means of teaching immediately the true Religion, and the ways of Eternal Life.
The Attendants of the Prince, and Soldiers of the Garrison, who were present,
were so moved, both by the Sanctity, which shone in the Apostles Countenance,
and by the truth which beamed out in all his words, that after the clearing of
their doubts, seventeen of them at once demanded Baptism: and the Father
Christened them in presence of the Tono (so the Iaponnese call the Lord or
Prince of any particular place.) The rest of them were possessed with the same
desire, and had received the same favor, if Ekandono had not opposed it by
reason of state, and contrary to his own inclinations, for fear of some ill
Consequences from the King of Saxuma: For in his heart he acknowledged Jesus
Christ, and permitted Xavier privately to Baptize his Wife, and his Eldest Son.
For the rest, he promised to receive Baptism, and to declare himself a
Christian. when his Sovereign should be favorable to the Law of God.

The Steward of Ekandono's household, What (...) of the Fa^^h in the n^w
Ch^istians of the Castle.
was one who embraced the Faith. He was a man stepped into years, and of great
prudence. Xavier committed the new Christians to his care, and put into his
hands the form of Baptism in writing; the Exposition of the Creed, the Epitome
of our Savior's Life, the Seven penitential Psalms, the Letanies of the
Saints, and a Table of Saints-days, as they are Celebrated in the Church. He
himself set apart a place in the Palace, proper for the Assemblies of the
Faith^ul, and appointed the Steward to call together as many of the Pagans as
he could, to read both to the one and the other sort, some part of the
Christian Doctrine every Sunday, to cause the Penitential Psalms to be sung on
every Friday, and the Letanies every day. The Steward punctually performed his
Orders, and those seeds of Piety grew up so fast, that some few years after,
Louis Almeyda found above an hundred Christians in the Fortress of Ekandono,
all of an orderly and innocent conversation; modest in their Behavior,
assiduous in Prayer, Charitable to each other, severe to themselves, and
Enemies to their Bodies; insomuch that the place had more resemblance to a
Religious house, than to a Garrison. The Tono, though still an Idolater, was
present at the Assemblies of the Christians, and permitted two little Children
of his to be Baptized.

One of these new Converts, Thoughts of a Christian of Ekandono.
composed elegantly in his Tongue, the History of the Redemption of Mankind,
from the fall of Adam, to the coming down of the Holy Ghost; the same man,
being once interrogated, what answer he would return the King, in case he
should command him to renounce his Faith? I would boldly answer him, said he,
in this manner. Sir, You are desirous, I am certain, that, being born your
Subject, I should be faithful to you; you would have me ready to hazard my Life
in your interests, and to dye for your Service. Yet farther, you would have me
moderate with my Equals; gentle to my Inferiors, obedient to my Superiors,
equitable toward all; and for these Reasons, command me still to be a
Christian; for a Christian is obliged to be all this. But if you forbid me the
Profession of Christianity, I shall become at the same time, Violent,
Hard-hearted, Insolent, Rebellious, Unjust, Wicked, and I cannot answer for my
self, that I shall be other.

As to what remains, He leaves a Discipline with the Steward of Ekandono, and
the use he makes of it.
Xavier when he took leave of the Old Steward, whom he constituted Superior of
the rest, left him a Discipline, which himself had used formerly. The Old man
kept it Religiously as a Relic, and would not that the Christians in the
Assemblies, where they chastis'd themselves, should make a common use of it. At
the most he suffered not any of them, to give themselves above two or three
strokes with it, so fearful he was of wearing it out; and he told them, that
they ought to make use of it the less, in chastising their flesh, that it might
remain for the preservation of their health. And indeed it was that Instrument
which God commonly employed for the Cures of sick Persons in the Castle. The
Wise of Ekandono, being in the Convulsions of death, was instantly restored to
health, after they had made the sign of the Cross over her, with the Discipline
of the Saint.

Xavier at his departure, He leaves a little Book with the Wise of Ekandono,
and for what it served.
made a Present to the same Lady, of a little Book, wherein the Litanies of the
Saints, and some Catholiqu^ Prayers were written with his own hand. This also
in following times was a Fountain of Miraculous Cures, not only to the
Christians, but also the Idolaters. And the Ton^ himself, in the height of a
mortal sickness, recovered his health, on the instant, that the Book was
applied to him by his Wife. So that the People of the Fortress, said that their
Prince was raised to life, and that it could not be performed by humane means.

The Saint and his Companions being gone from thence, He arrives at Firando;
and what reception he had there.
pursued their Voyage, sometimes by Sea, and sometimes traveled by Land. After
many labors cheerfully undergone by them, and many dangers which they passed,
they arrived at the Port of Firando, which was the end of their undertaking.
The Portuguese did all they were able, for the honorable reception of Father
Xavier. All the Artillery was discharged at his arrival, all the Ensigns and
Streamers were displayed, with sound of Trumpets; and, in fine, all the Ships
gave shouts of joy, when they beheld the man of God. He was conducted, in
spite of his repugnance, with the same p^mp to the Royal Palace; and that
magnificence was of no small importance, to make him considered in a Heathen
Court, who without it might have been despised; since nothing was to be seen in
him, but simplicity and poverty. The King of Firando, whom the Portugueses gave
to understand, how much the man whom they presented to him was valued by their
Master, and what credit he had with him, received him with so much the greater
favor, because he knew the King of Cangoxima, had forced him to go out of his
Estates: for to oblige the Crown of Portugal, and do a despite to that of
Cangoxima, he presently empowered the three Religious Christians to publish the
Law of Jesus Christ, through all the extent of his Dominions.

Immediately they fell on preaching in the Town, He preaches at Fr^nd^, with
great ^u^^ess.
and all the People ran to hear the European Bonza's. The first Sermons of
Xavier made a great impression on their Souls; and in less than twenty days, he
baptized more Insidels at Firando, than he had done in a whole year at
Cangoxima. The facility which he found of reducing those people, under the
obedience of the Faith, made him resolve to leave with them Cosmo de Torrez, to
put the finishing hand to their Conversion, and in the mean time, to go himself
to Meaco, which he had designed from the beginning. That Town being the Capital
of the Empire; from whence the knowledge of Christ Jesus, might easily be
spread through all Iapan.

Departing with Fernandez, He takes Amanguchi, in his way to Meaco.
and the two Iaponian Christians, Matthew and Bernard, for this great Voyage at
the end of October, in the year 1550, they arrived at Facata by Sea, which is
twenty Leagues distant from Firando; and from thence Embarked for Amanguchi,
which is an hundred Leagues from it. Amanguchi is the Capital of the Kingdom of
Naugato, and one of the richest Towns of all Iapan not only by the Traffic of
Strangers, who come thither from all parts; but also by reason of Silver Mines,
which are there in great abundance, and by the fertility of the Soy^l; but, as
Vices are the inseparable Companions of wealth, it was a place totally
corrupted, and full of the most monstrous debaucheries.

Xavier took that place, He stays at Amanguchi; his Actions there.
but the strange corruption of Manners, gave him so much horror, and withal so
great compassion, that he could not resolve to pass farther, without publishing
Christ Jesus, to those blind and execrable Men, nor without making known to
them, the purity of the Christian Law. The Zeal which transported him, when he
heard the abominable Crimes of the Town, suffered him not to ask permission
from the King, as it had been his Custom in other places. He appeared in
public on the sudden, burning with an inward Fire, which mounted up into his
Face, and boldly declared to the people, the eternal truths of Faith. His
Companion Fernandez did the same in another part of the Town. People heard them
out of Curiosity, and many after having inquired who they were, what dangers
they had run, and for what end, admired their Courage, and their procedure void
of Interest, according to the humor of the Iaponians, whose Inclinations are
naturally noble, and full of esteem for Actions of Generosity. From public
places, they were invited into Houses, and there desired to expound their
Doctrine more at large, and at greater leisure. For if your Law appear more
reasonable to us than our own, (said the principal of the Town) we engage our
selves to follow it.

But when once a man becomes a Slave to shameful Passions, What hindered the
fruit of his preaching at Amanguchi.
it is difficult to follow what he thinks the best, and even to judge reasonably
what is the best. Not a man amongst them kept his word. Having compared
together the two Laws, almost all of them agreed, that the Christian Doctrine
was most conformable to good sense, if things were only to be taken in the
Speculation; but when they came to consider them in the Practice, and saw how
much the Christian Law discouraged Vengeance, and forbad Polygamy, with all
Carnal Pleasures, that which had appeared just and reasonable to them, now
seemed improbable, and the perversity of their Wills, hoodwinked the light of
their Understanding; so that, far from believing in Jesus Christ, they said,
That Xavier and his Companions were plain Mountebanks, and the Religion which
they preached a mere Fable. These reports being spread abroad, exasperated the
Spirits of Men against them; so that as soon as any of them appeared, the
people ran after them, not as before to hear them preach, but to throw Stones
at them, and revile them. See, they cried, the two Bonza's, who would inveigle
us to worship one only God, and persuade us to be content with a single Wife.

Oxindono the King of Amanguchi, He appears before the King of Amanguchi, and
expounds to him the Doctrine of Christianity.
hearing what had passed, was willing to be judge himself of the Christians new
Doctrine. He sent for them before him, and asked them in the face of all his
Nobles, of what Country they were, and what business brought them to Iapan?
Xavier answered briefly, That they were Europeans, and that they came to
publish the Divine Law. For, added he, no Man can be saved, who adores not God,
and the Savior of all Nations, his Son Christ Jesus, with a pure Heart, and
pious Worship. Expound to me, replied the Prince, this Law which you have
called Divine. Then Xavier began, by reading a part of the Book which he had
composed in the Iaponian Tongue, and which treated of the Creation of the
World, of which none of the Company had ever heard any thing; of the
Immortality of the Soul, of the Ultimate End of our Being, of Adam's Fall, and
of Eternal Rewards and Punishments; in fine, of the Coming of our Savior, and
the Fruits of our Redemption. The Saint explained what was needful to be
cleared, and spoke in all above an hour.

The King heard him with attention, He preaches before the King in Amanguchi,
without success.
and without interrupting his Discourse; but he also dismissed him, without
answering a word, or making any sign, whether he allowed, or disapproved of
what he said. This silence accompanied with much Humanity, was taken for a
permission by Father Xavier, to continue his public preaching. He did so with
great warmth, but with small success. Most of them laughed at the Preacher, and
scorned the Mysteries of Christianity. Some few indeed, grew tender at the
hearing of our Savior's Sufferings, even so far as to shed Tears, and these
Motions of Compassion disposed their Hearts to a belief; but the number of the
Elect was inconsiderable: for the time pre-ordain'd for the Conversion of that
People, was not yet come, and was therefore to be attended patiently.

Xavier then having made above a months abode in Amanguchi, He pursues his
Voyage for Meaco.
and gathered but small fruit of all his Labors, besides affronts, continued
his Voyage toward Meaco, with his three Companions, Fernandez, Matthew, and
Bernard; they continually bemoaned the blindness and obduracy of those wretches
who refused to receive the Gospel; yet cheered up themselves with the
considerations of Gods Mercies, and an inward voice was still whispering in
their Hearts, That the Seed of the Divine Word, though cast into a^ barren and
ungrateful ground, yet would not finally be lost.

They departed toward the end of December, H^ su^^erings in the Voyage of Meaco.
in a season when the Rains were continually falling; during a Winter which is
dreadful in those parts, where the Winds are as dangerous by Land, as Tempests
are at Sea. The Colds are pinching, and the Snow drives in such abundance, that
neither in the Towns nor Hamlets, people dare adventure to stir abroad; nor
have any Communication with each other, but by covered Walks and Galleries.
It Is yet far worse in the Country, where nothing is to be seen but hideous
Forests, sharp pointed and ragged Mountains, raging Torrents across the
Vall^es, which sometimes over^low the Plains. Sometimes it is so covered over
with Ice, that the Travelers fall at every step; without mentioning those
prodigious Isicles, hanging over head, from the high Trees, and threatening the
Passengers at every moment with their fall.

The four Servants of God traveled in the midst of this hard season, and rough
ways, commonly on their naked Feet, passing the Rivers, and ill accommodated
with warm Clothes, to resist the inclemencies of the Air and Earth, laden with
their necessary Equipage, and without other provisions of life, than grains of
Rice roasted or dried by the Fire, which Bernard carried in his Wallet. They
might have had abundantly, for their sustenance, if Xavier would have accepted
of the Money, which the Portuguese Merchants of Firando offered him* to de^ray
the charges of his Voyage, or would have made use of what the Governor of the
Indies had supplied him with, in the name of the King of Portugal. But he
thought he should have a^^ronted Providence, if he should have furnished
himself with the Provisions needful to a comfortable subsistence; and therefore
taking out of the Treasury, a thousand Crowns, he employed it wholly for the
relief of the poor, who had received Baptism. Neither did he rest satisfied
with this Royal Alms he drew what he could also, from his Friends at Goa, and
Malacca. And it was a saying of his, That the more these new Converts were
destitute of worldly goods, the more succor they deserved: That their Zeal was
worthy the primitive Ages of the Church; and that there was not a Christian in
Japan, who would not choose rather to lose his life, than forfeit the love of
Jesus Christ.

The Journey from Amanguchi to Meaco, is not less than fiften days, when the
ways are good, and the season convenient for traveling. But the ill weather
lengthened it to our four Travelers, who made two months of it; sometimes
crossing over rapid Torrents, sometimes over Plains and Forests thick with
Snow, climbing up the Rocks, and rolling down the Precipices. These extreme
labors put Father Xavier into a Fever, from the first month, and his sickness
forced him to stop a little at Sacay. But he would take no remedies, and soon
after put himself upon his way.

That which gave them the greatest trouble, He follows a Horseman, with great
difficulty.
was, that Bernard, who was their guide, most commonly misled them. Being one
day lost in a Forest, and not knowing what Path to follow, they met a Horseman
who was going toward Meaco; Xavier followed him, and offered to carry his
Male, if he would help to disingage them from the Forest, and show them how to
avoid the dangerous passages. The Horseman accepted Xavier's offer, but trotted
on at a round rate; so that the Saint was constrained to run after him, and the
fatigue lasted almost all the day. His Companions followed him at a large
distance, and when they came up to the place, where the Horseman had left him,
they found him so spent, and over-labour'd, that he could scarcely support
himself. The Flints, and Thorns, had torn his Feet, and his Legs were swelled,
so that they broke out in many places: All these inconveniences hindered him
not from going forward. He drew his strength from the Union he had with God,
continually praying from the morning to the evening; and never interrupting his
Devotions, but only to exhort his Friends to Patience.

In passing through the Towns and Villages, He instructs the people in pas^ing
through the Towns.
where his way led him, Xavier always read some part of his Catechism, to the
People, who gathered about him: For the most part they only laughed at him; and
the little Children cried after him, Deos, Deos, Deos, because speaking of God,
he had commonly that Portuguese word in his Mouth, which he seldom Pronounced
without Repetition. For discoursing of God, he would not use the Iaponnese
Language, till they were well instructed in the Essence and Perfections of the
Divine Majesty; and he gave two reasons for it: The first. Because he ^ound not
one word in all the Language, which well expressed that Sovereign Divinity, of
which he desired to give them a distinct notion: The second, because he feared
le^t those Idolaters might confound that first Being, with their Camis, and
their Potoques, in case he should call it by those names, which were common to
their Idols. From thence he took occasion to tell them, That as they never had
any knowledge of the true God, so they never were able to express his name:
That the Portugueses, who knew him, called him Deos: and he repeated that word
with so much Action, and such a tone of Voice, that he made even the Pagans
sensible, what Veneration was due to that Sacred Name. Having publicly
condemned, in two several Towns, the false Sects of Iapan, and the enormous
Vices reigning there, he was drawn by the Inhabitants without the Walls, where
they had resolved to stone him. But when they were beginning to take up the
Stones, they were overtaken by a violent and sudden storm, which constrained
them all to betake themselves to flight: The holy man continued in the midst of
this rack of Heaven, with flashes of Lightning darting round about him, without
losing his habitual tranquillity; but adoring that Divine Providence, which
fought so visibly in his favor.

He arrived at length at Meaco, He arrives a^ Meaco, and labors there
unprofitably.
with his three Companions, in February, 1551. The name of that celebrated
Town, so widely spread, for being the Seat of Empire and Religion, where the
Cabosa^a, the Dairy, and the Saso kept their Court, seemed to promise great
matters to Father Xavier; but the effect did not answer the appearances: Meaco,
which in the Iaponian Tongue, signifies a thing worth seeing, was no more than
the shadow of what formerly it had been: so terribly Wars and Fires had laid it
waste. On every side Ruins were to be beheld, and the present condition* of
Affairs, threatened it with a total destruction. All the Neighboring Princes,
were combined together against the Cubosama, and nothing was to be heard but
the noise of Arms.

The Man of God endeavored to have gained an Audience from the Cubosama, and
the Dayri, but he could not compass it. He could not so much as get admittance
to the Saso, or High Priest of the Iaponian Religion. To procure him those
Audiences, they demanded no less than an hundred thousand Caixes, which amount
to six hundred French Crowns; and the Father had it not to give. Despairing of
doing any good, on that side, he preached in the public places, by that
Authority alone, which the Almighty gives his Missioners: As the Town was all
in confusion, and the Thoughts of every man taken up with the reports of War,
none listened to him, or those who casually heard him in passing by, made no
reflections on what he said.

Thus after a fortnights stay at Meaco, (...)
to no purpose, seeing no appearance of making Converts amidst the disturbance
of that place, he had a strong impulse of returning to Amanguchi, without
giving for lost, all the pains he had taken at Meaco; not only because of his
great sufferings, and sufferings are the gains of Gods Apostles, but also,
because at least he had preached Christ Jesus in that place; that is to say, in
the most Idolatrous Town of all the Universe, and opened the passage for his
Brethren, whom God had foreappointed in the years following, there to establish
Christianity, according to the Revelations which had been given him concerning
it.

He embarked on a River which falls from the adjoining Mountains, and washing
the foot of the Walls of Meaco disembogues it self afterward into an Arm of
the Sea, which runs up toward Sacay. Being in the Ship, he could not turn off
his Eyes from the Stately Town of Meaco; and, as Fernandez tells us, often sung
the beginning of the 113th Psalm, In exitu Israel de Aegypto, domus Jacob de
populo Barbaro, etc. whether he considered himself as an Israelite, departing
out of a Land of Insidels, by the command of God, or that he looked on that
barbarous people, as one day destined to be the people of God. As for what
remains, perceiving that Presents are of great force to introduce Foreigners to
the Princes of Iapan, he went from Sacay to Firando, where he had le^t what the
Viceroy of the Indies, and the Governor of Malacca had obliged him to carry
with him to Iapan, that is to say, a little striking Clock, an Instrument of
very harmonious Music, and some other trifles, the value of which consisted
only in the workmanship, and rarity.

Having also observed, That his ragged Habit had shocked the Iaponneses, who
judge by the outside of the man, and who hardly vouchsafe to hear a man ill
clothed, he made himself a new Garment, handsome enough, of those Alms which
the Portugueses had bestowed on him; being verily persuaded, that an Apostolic
Man, ought to make himself all to all; and that to gain over worldly men it was
sometimes necessary to conform himself a little to their weakness.

Being come to Amanguchi, Being returned to Amanguchi, ^e gains an Au^ience of
the King.
his Presents made his way for an Audience from the King, and procured him a
favorable Reception. Oxindono, who admired the workmanship of Europe, was not
satisfied with thanking the Father in a very obliging manner, but the same day
sent him a large sum of Money, by way of gratification; but Xavier absolutely
refused it, and this very denial gave the King a more advantageous Opinion of
him. How different (said Oxindono) is this European Bonza, from our covetous
Priests, who love Money with so much greediness, and who mind nothing but their
worldly Interest!

On the next morning Xavier presented to the King the Letters of the Governor,
He obtains permiss^^n to preach*
and of the Bishop of the Indies; in which the Christian Faith was much
extolled; and desired him, instead of all other favors, to grant him the
permission of preaching it, assuring him once again, that it was the only
motive of his Voyage. The King increasing his admiration at the Father's
Generosity, granted him by word of Mouth, and also by a public Edict, to
declare the word o^ God. The Edict was set up at the turnings of Streets, and
in public places of the Town. It contained a free toleration for all persons
to profess the European Faith, and forbad on grievous penalties, any hindrance,
or molestation to the new Bonza's, in the exercise of their Functions.

Besides this, He (...) visited by great multitudes.
Oxindono assigned them for their Lodgings, an old Monastry of the Bonza's,
which was dis-inhabited. They were no sooner established in it, than great
numbers of people resorted to them. Some out of Policy, and to please the King,
others to observe their carriage, and to pick faults in it, many out of
Curiosity, and to learn something that was new. All in general proposed their
doubts, and disputed with so much vehemence, that most of them were out of
breath. The House was never empty, and these perpetual visits, took up all the
time of the man of God.

He explains himself on this Subject, The Qualities which he ^^inks re (...) in
a Missioner to Japan.
and almost complains, in the Letters which he writes to Father Ignatius,
concerning his Voyage of Iapan. For after he had marked out to him the
Qualities which were requisite in a Labourer of the Society, proper to be sent
thither, That he ought in the first place to be a person of unblamable
Conversation, and that the Japonneses would easily be scandalized, where they
could find occasion for the least reproach, that moreover he ought to be of no
less Capacity than Virtue, because Japan is also furnished with an infinite
number of her own Clergymen, profound in Science, and not yielding up any
point in dispute without being first convinced by demonstrative reasons; that
yet farther it was necessary, that a Missioner should come prepared, to endure
all manner of wants and hardships, that he must be endu'd with an heroic
Fortitude to encounter continual dangers, and death it self in dreadful
torments, in case of need: Having, I say, set these things forth, and added
these express words in one of his Letters, I write to Father Simon, and in his
absence to the Rectour of Coimbra, That he shall send hither only such men as
are known and approved by your holy Charity, he continues thus;

These Laborers in the Gospel must exp^ct to be much more crossed in their
undertaking than they imagine; they will be wearied out with visits, and by
troublesome Questions every h^ur of the day, and half the night. They will be
sent for incessantly to the Houses of the Great, and will sometimes want
leisure to say their Prayers, or to make their recollections. Perhaps also they
will want time, to say their Mass or their Breviary; or not have enough, for
their repast, or even for their natural repose. For it is incredible, how
importunate these Japonians are, especially in reference to Strangers, of whom
they make no reckoning, but rather make their sport of them. What therefore
will become of them, when they rise up against their Sects, and reprehend their
Vices? yet these importunities became pleasing to Father Xavier, and afterward
produced a good effect. As the Japonnese are of docible and reasonable minds,
the more they pressed him in dispute, they understood the truth the more. So
that their doubts being satisfied, they comprehended easily, that there were no
contradictions in our Faith, nothing that would not abide the test of the most
severe discussion.

It was in the midst of these interrogations, He answers many men, with one
only word.
with which the Saint was overburthen'd, that by a prodigious manner of speech,
the like of which was scarcely ever heard, he satisfied with one only answer,
the questions of many persons, on very different Subjects, and often opposite
to each other: as suppose, the immortality of the Soul, the motions of the
Heavens, the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, the Colors of the Rainbow, Sin and
Grace, Hell and Heaven. The Wonder was, that after he had heard all their
several demands, he answered them in few words, and that these words, being
multiplied in their ears, by a virtue all Divine, gave them to understand what
they desired to know, as if he had answered each of them in particular: They
frequently took notice of this Prodigy, and were so much amazed at it, that
they looked on one another like men distracted, and regarded the Father with
admiration, as not knowing what to think or say. But as clear sighted, and able
as they were, for the most part, they could not coneive that it was above the
power of nature. They ascribed it to I know not what secret kind of Science,
which they imagined him only to possess. For which reason, Father Cozmo de
Torrez, being returned from Firando to Amanguchi, the Bonza's said, This man is
not endu'd with the great knowledge of Father Francis, nor has the art of
resolving many doubts with one only answer.

The process of the Saints Canonisation, makes mention of this Miracle; and
Father Antonio Quadros, who traveled to Iapan four years after Father Xavier,
writes it to Father Diego Moron, Provincial of Portugal: these are his words, A
Iaponnese informed me, that he had seen three Miracles, wrought by Father
Xavier in his Country. He made a Person walk, and speak, who was Dumb, and
taken with the Palsy. He gave voice to another ^ute: And hearing to one that
was deaf. This Iaponian also told me, that Father Xavier* was esteemed in
Iapan, for the most knowing man of Europe; and that the other Fathers of the
Society were nothing to him, because they could answer but one Idolater at a
time; but that Father Xavier by one only word, decided ten or twelve questions.
When I told him, that this might probably happen, because those questions were
alike, he assured me it was not so; but that on the contrary, they were very
different. He added, lastly, that his was no extraordinary thing with him, but
a common practice.

When Xavier and his Companion Fernandez were a little disengaged from these
importunities, He preaches in Amanguchi.
they set themselves on preaching twice a day, in the public places of the
Town, in despite of the Bonza's. There were seven or eight Religions in
Amanguchi, quite opposite to each other; and every one of them had many
Proselytes, who defended their own as best. Insomuch that these Bonza's, who
were heads of Parties, had many disputes amongst themselves; but when once the
Saint began to publish the Christian Law, all the Sects united against their
common ^^^my. Which notwithstanding they durst not openly declare, against a
man who was favored by the Court, and who seemed even to themselves to have
somewhat in him, that was more than humane.

At this time God restored to Father Xavier the gift of Tongues, He speaks the
Chinese Language, without learning it.
which had been given him in the Indies, on diverse occasions; for without
having ever learnt the Chinese Language, he preached every day to the Chinese
Merchants, who Traded at Amanguchi, in their Mother Tongue, there being great
numbers of them. He preached in the Afternoon to the Iaponians in their
Language, but so naturally, and with so much ease, that he could not be taken
for a Foreigner.

The force of truth, against which their Doctors could oppose nothing that was
reasonable in their disputations; the novelty of three Miracles which we have
mentioned, and of many others, which Xavier wrought at the same time, his
innocent and rigid life, the Divine Spirit which enlivened his Discourses; all
these together made so great an impression on their hearts, that in less than
two months time, more than five hundred Persons were Baptized. The greatest
part, men of quality and learning; who had examined Christianity to the bottom,
and who did not render up themselves for any other reason, than for that they
had nothing farther to oppose.

It was wonderful, according to the report of the Saint himself, The fruit of
his Preaching.
to observe that there was no other speech but of Jesus Christ, through all the
Town; and that those who had most eagerly fought against the Christian Law in
their Disputes, were now the most ardent to defend it, and to practice it with
most exactness. All of them were tenderly a^^ectionate to the Father, and were
ever loath to leave his Company. They took delight in making daily questions to
him, concerning the Mysteries of Faith, and it is unspeakable what inward
refreshments they found, in seeing that all was Mysterious even in the most
ordinary Ceremonies; as for example, in the manner wherewith the Faithful sign
themselves with the Cross.

The Father on his side had as ample a satisfaction; His joy in observing the
servour of the Faithful.
and he confesses it himself, in a Letter, which he directed some time after to
the Jesuits in Europe. -- Though my hairs are already become all h^ary, says
he to them, I am more vigorous, and r^bust than I ever was: for the pains which
are taken, to Cultivate a reasonable Nation, which loves the Truth, and which
covets to be saved, afford me matter of great joy. I have not, in the course of
all my life, received a greater satisfaction, than at Amanguchi; where
multitudes of People came to hear me, by the Kings permission. I saw the pride
of their Bonza's overthrown, and the most inflamed Enemies of the Christian
Name, subjected to the humility of the Gospel. I saw the transports of joy in
those new Christians, when after having vanquished the Bonza's in dispute, they
returned in Triumph. I was not less satisfied, to see their diligence in
laboring to convince the Gentiles, and vying with each other in that
undertaking; with the delight they took in the relation of their Conquests; and
by what arguments and means they brought them over, and how they rooted out the
^eathen Superstitions, all these particulars gave me such abundant joy, that I
lost the sense of my own afflictions. Ah, might it please Almighty God, that as
I call to my remembrance, those consolations which I have received from the
Fountain of all mercies, in the midst of my labors, I might not only make a
recital of them, but give the experience also, and cause them to be felt and
considered as they ought by our Universities of Europe, I am assured, that many
young men, who study there, would come higher to employ all the strength of
their parts, and vigor of their minds, in the Conversion of an Idolatrous
People, had they once tasted those heavenly refreshments, which accompany our
Labors.

These inward delights of God's Servant, His occasions of sorrow amongst his
Spiritual joys.
were not yet so pure, but that some bitterness was intermixed. He was not
without sorrow for Oxindono King of Amanguchi; who, though persuaded of the
excellence of Christianity, was retained in Idolatry by carnal pleasures. And
for Neatondono, first Prince of the Kingdom, who having noble and virtuous
inclinations, might have proved the Apostle of the Court, if some trivial
Reasons had not hindered him from becoming a Christian. He, and the Princess
his Wife, respected Xavier as their Father, and even honored him as a Saint.
They also loved the Faithful, and succored them in all their needs. They spoke
of our Faith in terms of great veneration: but having founded many Monasteries
of Bonza's, it troubled them as they said, to lose the fruit of charity; and
thus the fear of being frustrated, of I know not what rewards, which the
Bonza's promised them, caused them to neglect that eternal recompense, of which
the holy man assured them.

But how powerful soever the examples of Princes is usually in matters of
Religion, The Faith is embraced, notwithstanding the Princes example; and by
what means.
yet on all sides Christianity was embraced; and an action of Xavier's
Companion did not a little contribute, to the gaining over of the most
stubborn. Fernandez preached in one of the most frequented places of the Town:
and amongst his crowd of Auditors, were some Persons of great wit, strongly
Opinion'd of their Sect, who could not conceive the Maxims of the Gospel; and
who heard the Preacher with no other intention, than to make a sport of him. In
the midst of the Sermon, a man, who was of the skum of the Rabble, drew near to
Fernandez, as if it were to whisper something to him, and hawking up a mass of
nastiness, spit it full upon his face. Fernandez without a word speaking, or
making the least sign that he was concerned, took his handkerchief, wiped his
face, and continued his discourse.

Every one was surprised at the moderation of the Preacher; the more debauched,
who had set up a laughter at this affront, turned all their scorn into
admiration, and sincerely acknowledged that a man who was so much master of his
passions, as to command them on such an occasion, must needs be endu'd with
greatness of Soul, and Heroic Courage. One of the chief of the Assembly,
discovered somewhat else in this unshaken patience. He was the most learned
amongst all the Doctors of Amanguchi, and the most violent against the Gospel.
He considered that a Law, which taught such patience, and such insensibility of
affronts, could only come from Heaven; and argued thus within himself, These
Preachers, who with so much constancy, endure the vilest of all injuries,
cannot pretend to cozen us. It would cost them too dear a price; and no man
will deceive another at his own expense. He only, who made the heart of man,
can place it in so great Tranquillity. The force of Nature cannot reach so far;
and this Christian patience must proceed alone from some Divine Principle:
these People cannot but have some infallible assurance of the Doctrine they
believe, and of the recompense which they expect. For, in fine, they are ready
to suffer all things for their God; and have no humane expectations. After all,
what inconvenience, or danger can it be to embrace their Law: If what they tell
us of Eternity, be true, I shall be eternally miserable in not believing it:
and, supposing there be no other Life but this, is it not better to follow a
Religion, which elevates a man above himself, and which gives him an
unalterable peace, than to profess our Sects, which continue us in all our
weakness, and which want power to appease the disorders of our hearts. He made
his inward reflections on all these things, as he afterward declared, and
these considerations being accompanied with the motions of Grace, touched him
so to the quick, that as soon as the Sermon was ended, he confessed that the
virtue of the Preacher had convinced him, he desired Baptism, and received it
with great solemnity.

This illustrious Conversion, (...)
was followed, with answerable Success. Many who had a glimmering of the Truth,
and feared to know it yet more plainly, now opened their eyes, and admitted
the Gospel light; amongst the rest, as young man, of five and twenty years of
age, much esteemed for the subtilty of his understanding, and educated in the
most famous Universities of Japan. He was come to Amanguchi, on purpose to be
made a Bonza. But being informed that the Sect of Bonza's, of which he desired
to be a Member, did not acknowledge a first Principle, and that their Books had
made no mention of him, he changed his thoughts, and was unresolved on what
course of living, he should fix. 'Till being finally convinced, by the example
of the Doctor, and the arguments of Xavier, he became a Christian. The name of
Laurence was given him; and it was he, who being received by Xavier himself
into the Society of Jesus, exercised immediately, the Ministry of preaching,
with so much fame, and so great success, that he converted an innumerable
multitude of noble* and valiant men, who were afterward the Pillars of the
Iap^nian Church.

As to what remains, the Monasteries of the Bonza's were daily* thinn'd, and
grew insensibly to be dispeopl'd, by the de^ertion of young men, who had some
remainders of modesty and morality. Being ashamed of leading a brutal life, and
of deceiving the simple, they laid by their habits of Bonza's, together with
the Profession, that coming back into the World, they might more easily be
converted. These young Bonza's discovered to Xavier the Mysteries of their
Sects, and revealed to him their hidden abominations, which were covered with
an outside of austerity.

The Father who was at open defiance with those men, He (...) against the
Bonza's.
who were the mortal Enemies of all the Faithful, and whose only interest
it was to hinder the establishment of the Faith, published whatsoever was
told him in relation to them, and represented them in their proper colors.
These unmasked Hypocrites, became the laughter of the people; but what
mortified them more, was, that they who had heard them like Oracles before
this, now upbraided them openly with their ignorance. A Woman would sometimes
challenge them to a disputation; and urge them with such home and pressing
arguments, that the more they endeavored to get loose, the more they were
entangled. For the Father being made privy to the secrets of every Sect,
furnished the new Proselytes with Weapons to vanquish the Bonza's, by reducing
them to manifest contradictions: which amongst the Iap^nneses, is the greatest
infamy that can happen to a man of Letters. But the Bonza's got not off so
cheap, as only to be made the derision of the People; together with their
Credit and their Reputation, they lost the comfortable Alms, which was their
whole subsistence. So that the greater part of them, without finding in
themselves the lea^t inclinations to Christianity, boulted out of their
Convents, that they might not die of hunger in them; and changed their
Profession of Bonza's, to become either Soldiers or Tradesmen; which gave the
Christians occasion to say, with joy unspeakable, That, in a little time, there
would remain no more Idolaters in Amanguchi, of those Religious Cheats, than
were barely sufficient to keep possession of their Monasteries.

The elder Bonza's, in the mean time, The Bonza's opp^se the Christian Religion.
more hardened in their Sect, and more obstinate than the young, spared for
nothing to maintain their possession. They threatened the people with the wrath
of their Gods, and denounced the total destruction of the Town and Kingdom;
they said, The God whom the Europeans believed, was not Deos, or Deus, as the
Portuguese called him, but Dajus, that is to say, in the Japonian Tongue, a
Lie, or Forgery. They added, That this God imposed on men a heavy Took. What
Justice was it to punish those who transgressed a Law, which it was impossible
to keep* But where was Providence, if the Law of Jesus was necessary to
Salvation, which suffered fifteen Ages to slide away, without declaring it to
the most noble part of all the world? Surely a Religion, whose God was partial
in the dispensation of his Favors, could not posibly be true. And if the
European Doctrine had but a shadow of truth in it, China could never have been
so long without the knowledge of it. These were the principal heads of their
Accusation, and Xavier reports them in his Letters; but he gives not an account
of what answers he returned; and they are not made known to us by any other
hand: Thus, without following two or three Historians, who make him speak
according to their own Ideas, on all these Articles, I shall content my self
with what the Saint himself had left in writing. The Idolaters instead of
congratulating their own happiness, that they were enlightened by the Beams of
Faith, bemoaned the blindness of their Ancestors, and cried out in a lamentable
tone; What are our Forefathers burning in ^ell-fire, because they did not
adore a God, who was unknown to them, and observed not a Law, which never was
declared? The Bonza's added fuel to their Zeal, by telling them, The
Portuguese Priests were good for nothing, because they could not redeem a Soul
from Hell, whoreas they could do it at their pleasure, by their Fasts and
Prayers: That eternal punishments, either proved the cruelty or the weakness of
the Christian God: His cruelty, if he did not deliver them, when he had it in
his power; his weakness, if he could not execute what he desired. Lastly, That
Amida and Xaca, were far more merciful, and of greater power; but that they
were only pleased to redeem from Hell, those who, during their mortal life, had
bestowed magnificent Alms upon the Bonza's

We are ignorant of all those particular answers of the Saint, He answers (...)
Arguments of the Bonza's.
as I said above: we only know from his Relation, that concerning the sorrow of
the Iaponians, for having been bere^t for so many Ages of Christian Knowledge,
he had the good fortune to give them comfort, and put them in a way of more
reasonable thoughts: For he showed them in general, That the most anci^nt of
all Laws, is the Law of God, not that which is published by the found of words,
but that which is written in Hearts, by the hand of Nature; so that every one
who comes into the World, brings along with him certain Precepts, which his own
Instinct and Reason teach him. Before Japan received its Laws form the Wisemen
of China, said Xav^^r, it was known amongst you, that Theft and Adultery were
to be avoided; and from thence it was that Thieves and Palliards sought out
secret places, wherein to commit those Crimes. After they had committed them,
they felt the private stings of their own Consciences, which cease not to
reproach the guilty to themselves, though their wickedness be not known to
others, nor even so much as prohibited by Humane Laws. Suppose an Infant bred
up in Forests amongst the Beasts, far from the society of Mankind, and remote
from the civilis'd Inhabitants of Towns, yet he is not without an inward
knowledge of the Rules of Civil Life; for ask him, whether it be not an evil
Action to murder a man, to despoil him of his Goods, to violate his Bed, to
surprise him by Force, or circumvent him by Treachery, he will answer without
question, That nothing of this is to be done. Now if this be manifest in a
S^lvage, without the benefit of Education, how much more may it be concluded,
of men well educated* and living in mutual Conversati^n? Th^n, added the holy
man, it follows, that God has not left so many Ages destitute of Knowledge, as
your Bonza's have pretended. By this he gave them to understand, that the Law
of Nature was a step, which led them insensibly to the Christian Law: And that
a man who lived morally well, should never fail of arriving to the knowledge of
the Faith, by ways best known to Almighty God; that is to say, before his
death, God would either send some Preacher to him, or illuminate his Mind by
some immediate Revelation. These Reasons, which the Fathers of the Church have
often used on like occasions, gave such satisfaction to the Pagans, that they
found no farther difficulty in that point, which had given them so much trouble.

The Bonza's perceiving that the people, The Bonza's provoke the King against
the Christians.
preferred the Authority of Xavier above theirs, and not knowing how to refute
their Adversary, made a Cabal at Court, to lessen the Christians in the good
Opinion of the King. They gave him Jealousies of them, by decrying their
behavior, and saying, They were men of Intrigue, Plotters, Enemies of the
public safety, and dangerous to the person of the King: Insomuch, that
Oxindono, who had been so favorable to them, all on the sudden, was turned
against them. It Is true, that as the Iaponneses, value themselves above all
things, in the inviolable observation of their word, when they have once
engaged it, he durst not revoke that solemn Edict, which he had published in
favor of the Christians, but to make it of no effect, he used the Faithful
with great severity, even so far, as to seize upon their Goods, and began with
men of the first rank in his Dominions. At the same time the Bonza's, grown
insolent, and swelled with this new turn of Tide, writ Letters and Libels, full
of invectives against Xavier. They said the was a vagabond Beggar, who, not
knowing how to maintain himself in India, was come to Iapan, to live on
Charity. They endeavored above all things to make him pass for a notorious
Magician, who, through the power of his Charms, had forced the Devil to obey
him, and one who, by the assistance of his Familiars, performed all sorts of
Prodigies to seduce the People.

But neither this alteration in the King, The number of Christians is
augmented, together with the Reputati^n of the Saint.
nor these calumnies of the Bonza's, hindered the progress of the Gospel. The
number of Christians amounted in few days to three thousand in Amanguchi; and
they were all so servent, that not one of them, but was ready, not only to
forgo his Fortunes, but also to shed his Blood for the defense of his Faith,
it the King should be carried on, to persecute the growing Church with Fire and
Sword, as it was believed he would. The Reputation of the Apostle was also
increased, in spite of the false reports which were spread concerning him; and
his name became so famous in the neighboring Kingdoms, that all the people
round about were desirous to see the European Bonza.

Xavier had of late some thoughts of returning to the Indies, there to make a
choice himself, of such Laborers as were proper for Iapan; and his design was
to come back by China, the Conversion of which Country, had already inflamed
his Heart. For discoursing daily, with such Chinese Merchants as were resident
at Amanguchi, he had entertained a strong Opinion, that a Nation so polite, and
knowing, would easily be reduced* to Christianity: And on the other side, he
had great hopes, that when China should be once converted, Iapan would not be
long after it; at least the more unbelieving sort of Iaponneses, often said;
That they would not alter their Religion, till the Chinese had led the way.
Let him carry his Gospel to that flourishing and vast Empire, and when he had
subdued it to Jesus Christ, then they would also think of turning Christians.

In the mean time a Portuguese Vessel, He sends a Japonian Christian of the
Kingdom of Bungo; and for what reason.
commanded by Edward de Gama, arrived at the Kingdom of Bungo, and news came to
Amanguchi, that this Ship, which was sailed thither from the Indies, would be
on its way back again, in a month or two. Xavier, to learn what truth there was
in this Report, sent Matthew to those parts, who was one of the Iaponian
Converts, which accompanied him, and gave him a Letter, directed to the Captain
and Merchants of the Vessel. The Saint desired them to send him word, who they
were, from whence bound, and how soon they intended to return? After which he
told them, That his Intentions were to return to the Indies, and that he should
be glad to meet them, in case they were disposed to repass thither. In
conclusion, he desired them earnestly, that they would borrow so much time from
their Affairs of Merchandise as to think a little on their Souls; and declared
to them, That all the Silks of China, whatever gain they might afford them,
could not countervail the least spiritual profit which they might make, by a
daily examination of their Consciences. The Ship was at the Port of Figen,
about fifty Leagues from Amanguchi, and within a League of Fucheo, which some
call Funay, the Metropolis of B^ngo. The Portugueses were overjoyed to hear
news of Father Xavier. They sent him an account of theirs, and withal
advertised him, that in the compass of a month at farthest, they should set
Sail for China, where they had left three Vessels, laden for the Indies, which
were to return in January, and that James Pereyra, his familiar friend, was on
board of one of them. Matthew came back in five days time; and besides the
Letters which he brought the Father from the Captain, and the principal
Merchants, he gave him some from Goa; by which the Fathers of the College of
St. Paul, gave him to understand, that his presence in that place was of
absolute necessity, for the regulation of Affairs belonging to the Society.

Then Xavier, without losing time, He departs from Amanguchi, and goes for
Bungo.
after he had recommended the new Christians, to the care of Cosmo de Torrez,
and John Fernandez, whom he left at Amanguchi, put himself upon his way,
toward Mid-september, in the year 1551. He might have made this Voyage easily
by Sea; but he loved rather to go by Land, and that on Foot, according to his
Custom. He took for his Companions, Matthew and Bernard: two Christian Lords
would be also of the party. Their Goods had lately been confiscated, as a
punishment for changing their Religion; but the Grace of Jesus Christ which was
to them instead of all, rendered their Poverty so precious, that they esteemed
themselves richer, than they had been formerly. Another Christian bore them
company; that Laurence ^irnam'd the Squint-eyed, because of that imperfection
in his sight.

The Father walked cheerfully with his five Companions, He falls sick with
overtravelling himself; and after a little rest, pursues his Journey.
as far as Pinlaschau, a Village distant a League or two from Figen. Arriving
there he found himself so spent with traveling, that his Feet were swollen,
and he was seized with a violent Headache, so that the could go no farther.
Matthew, Laurence and Bernard, went on to carry news of him to the Vessel. When
Edward de Gama understood that the holy Man was so near, he called together all
the Portugueses, who resided at Fucheo; and having chosen out the Principal
amongst them, got on Horseback with them, to pay him their Respects in
Ceremony. Xavier, whom a little rest had now recruited, and who was suspicious
of the Honor which they intended him, was already on his Journey, but fell
into that Ambush of Civility, which he would willingly have shunned. The
Cavalcade came up to him, within a Leagues distance of Figen; and found him
walking betwixt the two Lords of Amanguchi, who had never left him; and himself
carrying his own Equipage. Gama was surprised to see a person so considerable
in the World in such a posture, and alighting from his Horse, with all his
Company, saluted him with all manner of respect. After the first Complements
were over, they invited the Father to mount on Horseback; but he could not be
persuaded: so that the Portugueses giving their Horses to be led after them,
bore him company on foot, even to the Port.

The Ship was equipped in all its flourish, He is received with Honor by the
Portugueses; and complemented from the King of Bungo.
with Flags hung out, and Streamers waveing, according to the Orders of the
Captain. They, who were remaining in her, appeared on the Decks, and stood
glittering in their Armor. They gave him a Volley, at his first approach; and
then discharged all their Cannon. Four rounds of the Artillery being made, the
noise of it was heard so distinctly at Fucheo, that the City was in a fright;
and the King imagined that the Portugueses were attacked by certain Pirates,
who lately had pillaged all the Coasts. To clear his Doubts, he dispatched away
a Gentleman of his Court to the Ship's Captain. Gama, showing Father Francis to
the Messenger, told him, that the noise which had alarmed the Court, was only
a small testimony of the honor which was owing to so great a Person, one so
dear to Heaven, and so much esteemed in the Court of Port^gal.

The Iapanner, who saw nothing but poverty in the person of the Father, and
remembered what had been written of him from Amanguchi, stopped a little without
speaking: then, with amazement in his face; I am in pain, said he, what answer
I shall return my Prince: for what you tell me has no correspondence either
with that which I behold, or with the account we have received from the Bonza's
of Amanguchi; who have seen your Father Bonza entertain a familiar Spirit, who
taught him to cast lots, and perform certain magical operations to delude the
ignorant. They report him to be a Wretch forsaken, and accursed by all the
World; that the Vermin which are swarming all over him, are too nice to feed on
his infectious flesh; besides which, I fear, that if I should relate what you
say concerning him* our Priests would be taken, either for Idiots, or men of
false Understanding, or for envious Persons, and Impostours. Then Gama,
replying, told the Iaponian all that was necessary to give him a good
impression of the Saint; and to hinder him from contempt of his mean
appearance. On this last Article, he declared to him, that he, who had so
despicable an outside, was of noble blood; that fortune had provided him with
wealth, but that his virtue had made him poor; and that his willful want of all
things, was the effect of a great Spirit, which despised those empty pomps that
are so eagerly desired by Mankind. This Discourse ravished the Iapanner with
admiration: he made a faithful relation of it to his King; and added of
himself, that the Portugueses were more happy in the possession of this holy
man, than if their Vessel were laden with Ingots of Gold.

The King of Bungo had already heard speak of Father Francis; He is much
esteemed by the King of Bungo.
and gave no credit to what the Bonza's of Amanguchi had written of him. He was
a Prince of five and twenty years of age, very judicious, generous, and civil:
but too much engaged in carnal pleasures, after the manner of the Iaponian
Princes. What he had heard from the relation of the Messenger, increased his
longing to behold Xavier; and the same day he writ to him, in these very terms.

FATHER Bonza of Chimahicoghin for by that name they call Portugal may your
happy arrival in my Estates, The Letter of the King of Bung^, to Father Xavier.
be as pleasing, to your God, as are the Praises wherewith he is honored by
his Saints. Quansyono^ama, my Domestic Servant, whom I sent to the Port of
Figen, tells me, that you are arrived from Amanguchi; and all my Court will
bear me witness, with what pleasure I received the news. As God has not made me
worthy to command you, I earnestly request you, to come before the rising of
the Sun to ^orrow, and to knock at my Palace Gate, where I shall impatiently
attend you. And permit me to demand this favor of you, without being thought a
troublesome Beggar. In the mean time, Prostrate on the ground, and on my knees
before your God, whom I acknowledge for the God of all the Gods, the Sovereign
of the best and greatest which inhabit in the Heavens, I desire of him, I say,
to make known to the haughty of the world, how much your poor and holy life is
pleasing to him: to the end that the Children of our flesh, may not be deceived
by the false promises of the earth. Send me news of your holiness, the joy of
which, may give me a good nights repose, 'till the Cocks awaken me with the
welcome declaration of your visit.

This Letter was carried by a young Prince of the blood Royal, attended by
thirty young Lords belonging to the Court; and accompanied by a venerable Old
Man, who was his Governor, called Poomendono, one of the vvisest and most
qualified of all the Kingdom, and natural Brother to the King of Minato. The
honor which was paid by the Portugueses to Father Xavier, so surpised the
Prince, that, turning to his Governor, he said aloud, The God of these People
must be truly great, and his counsels hidden from Mankind, since it is
pleasure, that these wealthy Ships should be obedient to so poor a man as is
this Bonza of the Portuguese: and that the roaring of their Cannon, should
declare, that Poverty has wherewithal to be pleasing to the Lord of all the
world; even that Poverty which is so despicable of it self, and so disgraceful
in the general opinion, that it seems even a crime to think of it.

Though we have a horror for Poverty, replied Poomendono, and that vv^ believe
the Poor un^apable of happiness, it may be this poor man is so much enamored
of his wants, and so esteems them, that he is Pleasing to the God whom he
adores, and that practicing it with all imaginable rigor, for his sake, he
may be richer than the greatest Monarch of the World.

The young Ambassador being returned to Court, reported to the King, with
what respect his Letter had been received; and took upon him to persuade that
Prince, that this European Bonza was to be treated with greater honor, and
far otherwise than their ordinary Bonza's; even so far as to say, that it
would be an enormous sin to level him with them. That for the rest, he was
not so poor as his Enemies had suggested; that the Captains and Portuguese
Merchants would bestow on him both their Ship, and all their Treasure, in case
he would accept of them; and that, properly speaking, he was not to be
accounted poor, who possessed as much as he desired. In the mean time, the
Portugueses being assembled, to consult how Father Xavier should appear in
Court the next morning, all of them were of opinion, that he should present
himself with all the Pomp an Magnificence they could devise. At first he
opposed it, out of the aversion he had for this Pageant show, so unsuitable to
the Condition of a Religious man: but afterward he yielded to the request, and
withal to the reasons of the Assembly. Those reasons were, That the Bonza's
of Amanguchi, having written all they could imagine, to render Xavier
contemptible, it was convenient to remove those false conceptions from the
People; and at the same time, to let them see how much the Christians honor
their Ministers of the Gospel, that thereby the Heathens might be the more
easily induced to give credit to them; so that the honor would reflect on
Jesus Christ, and the preaching would be raised in value, according to the
esteem which was given to the Preacher.

They prepared therefore, In what (...) ^e goes to the Court of Bungo.
with all diligence, for the Entry of the Saint, and set out the next morning
before daylight, in a handsome equipage. There were thirty Portugueses, of the
most considerable amongst them, richly habited; with their Chains of Gold, and
adorned with Jewels. Their Servants and Slaves, well clothed likewise, were
attending on their Masters. Father Xavier wore a Cassock of black Chamlet, and
over it a Surplice, with a Stole of green Velvet, garnished with a Gold
Brocard. The Chalop and the two Barques, wherein they made their passage from
the Ship to the Town, were covered on the sides, with the fairest China
Tapestry; and hung round, with silken Banners of all colors. Both in the
Sloop, and in the Barques, there were Trumpets, Flutes, and Hautbois, and other
Instruments of Music, which playing together, made a most harmonious consort:
the news which was spread about Fucheo, that the great European Bonza was to
enter into the Town that morning, drew many persons of Quality to the Sea side;
and such a multitude of people ran crowding together, at the sounding of the
Trumpets, that the Portugueses could hardly find footing to come on shore.

Quansyandono Captain of Canafama, and one of the principal of the Court, was
there attending them, by Order from the King. He received the Saint with great
civility; and offered him a Litter to carry him to the Palace: but Xavier
refused it, and walked on foot, with all his Train, in this order: Edward de
Gama went foremost bare-headed, with a Cane in his hand, as the Gentleman of
the Horse, or Major domo to the Father. Five other Portugueses followed him,
who were the most considerable persons of the Ship. One of them carried a Book,
in a Bag of white Satin; another a Cane of Bengale, headed with Gold; a third
his Slippers, which were of fine black Velvet, such as are worn only by Persons
of the first Quality: a fourth carried a fair Tablet of our Lady, wrapped in a
Scarf of violet Damask; and the fifth a magnificent Parasol. The Father came
next after them, in the habit which I have described; with an air composed
betwixt Majesty and Modesty. The rest of the Portugueses followed; and to
behold their countenance, their dress, and the beauty of their train, they
resembled rather Cavaliers and Lords, than a Company of Merchants. They passed
in this manner through the chief Streets of the City, with sound of Trumpets,
Flutes, and Hautbois, followed by an infinite multitude of People, without
r^^koning into the number, those who filled the Windows, the Balconies, and the
tops of houses. Being arrived at the great Place, which fronts the Royal
Palace, they found there six hundred of the King's Guards, drawn up, some armed
with Lances, others with Darts, all of them with rich S^ymiters, hanging by
their sides, and costly Vests upon their backs. These Guards, at the sign given
them by their Captain called Fingeindono, advanced in good order toward the
Saint, after which they divided into two ranks, and opened a passage for the
Father through the midst of them.

Being come to the Palace, His entry into the Palace of the King of Bungo.
the Portugueses, who walked immediately before the Father, turned toward him,
and saluted him with great respect. One presented him the Cane, and another the
Velvet Slippers; he who held the Parasol, spread it over his head; and the two
others, who carried the Book and Picture placed themselves on each side of him.
All this was so gracefully performed, and with so much honor to the Father,
that the Lords who were present, much admired the manner of it: and they were
heard to say amongst themselves, that Xavier had been falsely represented to
them by the Bonza's: that questionless he was a man descended from above, to
confound their Envy, and abate their Pride.

After they had gone through a long Gallery, they entered into a large Hall,
full of People; who by their habit, which was of Damask heightened with Gold,
and diversified with fair Figures, seemed to be Persons of the highest Quality.
There, a little Child, whom a Reverend Old Man held by the hand, coming up to
the Father, saluted him with these words. May your arrival in the Palace of my
Lord the King, be as welcome to him, as the Rain of Heaven to the Laborers, in
a long and parching drought: Enter without fear, continued he, for I assure you
of the love of all good men; though the wicked cannot behold you without
melancholy in their faces, which will make them appear like a black and stormy
night. Xavier returned an answer, suitable to his age who had made the
Complement; but the Child replied, in a manner, which was far above his age.
Certainly said he, you must be endu'd with an extraordinary courage, to come
from the end of all the world, into a strange Country, liable to contempt, in
regard of your Poverty; and the goodness of your God, must needs be infinite,
to be pleased with that Poverty, against the general opinion of mankind. The
Bonza's are far from doing any thing of this nature; they who publicly affirm,
and swear that the Poor are no more in a possibility of Salvation than the
Women.

May it please the divine goodness of our Lord, replied Xavier, to enlighten
those dark and wretched Souls, with the beams of his Celestial truth, to the
end they may confess their error, both as to that particular, and to the rest
of their Belief.

The Child discoursed on other Subjects, and spoke with so much Reason, and
with that sublimity of Thought, that the Father doubted not but he was inspired
by the holy Spirit, who when he pleases can replenish the Souls of Infants with
Wisdom, and give Eloquence to their Tongues, before Nature has ripened in them
the use of Reason.

In these Entertainments, He receives the Complements of several persons in the
Co^rt.
which were surprising to all the Assistants, they passed into another Hall,
where there were many Gentlemen richly habited, and of good Mien. At the moment
when the Father entered, all of them bowed with Reverence; which Action they
repeated thrice, and so very low, that they touched the ground with their
Foreheads; as the Iapo^neses are very dextrous at that exercise. And this
Reverence, which they call Gromenare, is only performed by the Son to the
Father, and by the Vassal to his Lord. After this, two of them separating from
the Company, to testify their general joy at the sight of him, one of them
spoke in this manner. May your arrival, holy Father Bonza, ^e as pleasing to
our King, as the smiles of a Babe are to his Mother, who holds him in her Arms;
which certainly will be, for we swear to you by the Hairs of our Heads, that
every thing, even to the very Walls. which seem to dance for joy at your
desired presence, conspires to your good reception; and excites us to rejoice
at your arrival; we doubt not but it will turn to the Glory of that God, of
whom you have spoken so greatly at Amanguchi. This Complement being ended,
these young Lords were following the Father, but the Child of whom we made
mention, and whom Xavier led by the Hand, made a sign to them, that they should
go no farther. They mounted on a Terrace bordered with Orange Trees, and from
thence entered into another Hall, more spacious than either of the former.
Facharandono, the Kings Brother was there, with a magnificent retinue. Having
done to the Saint all the Civilities, which are practiced to the greatest of
Iapan, he told him, That this day was the most solemn and auspicious of all the
year for the Court of Bungo; and that his Lord the King, esteemed himself more
rich and happy to have him in his Palace, than if he were Master of all the
Silver contained in the two and thirty Treasurie^ of China. In the mean time,
added the Prince, I wish you an increase of Glory, and an entire accomplishment
of that design, which brought you hither from the extr^mi^ies of the Earth.

Then the Child, He is introduced to an Audience of the King of Bungo; and what
passes in it.
who had hitherto been the Master of the Ceremonies to the Father, left him in
the hands of ^acharandono, and retired apart. They entered into the Kings
Antichamber, where the principal Lords of the Kingdom, were attending him.
After he had been received by them with all possible civilities, he was at last
introduced to his Audience in a Chamber which glittered with Gold on every
side. The King, who was standing, advanced five or six paces, at the first
appearance of the Father, and bowed himself even to the ground, thrice
successively; at which action all the Company were in great amazement. Xavier,
on his side, prostrated himself before that Prince, and would have touched his
Foot, according to the Custom of the Country, but the King would not permit
him; and himself raised up the Saint: then taking him by the Hand, he caused
him to sit down by him, on the same Estrade. The Prince his Brother, was seated
somewhat lower; and the Portugueses were placed over against them, accompanied
by the most qualified persons of the Court. The King immediately said all the
obliging things to the Father, which could be expected from a well-bred Man.
And laying aside all the pomp of Majejesty, which the Kings of Iapan are never
used to quit in public, treated him with the kindness and familiarity of a
Friend. The Father answered all these Civilities of the Prince with a most
profound respect, and words full of deference and submission: after which,
taking occasion to declare Jesus Christ to him, he explained in few words, the
principal Maxims of Christian Morality; but he did it after so plausible a
manner, that at the conclusion of his Discourse, the King cried out in a
transport of admiration, How can any Man learn from God these profound secrets?
Why has (...) suffered us to live in blindness, and this Bonza of Portugal to
receive these wonderful illuminations? For, in fine, we our selves are
Witnesses of what we had formerly by report; and all we hear, is maintained by
proofs so strong and evident, and withal, so conformable to the light of
Nature, that whoever would examine these Doctrines, according to the Rules of
Reason, will find, that Truth will issue out, and meet him on every side; and
that no one proposition destroys another. It Is far otherwise with our Bonza's,
they cannot make any Discourse without the clashing of their own Principles;
and from thence it happens, that the more they speak, the m^re they entangle
themselves. Confused in their knowledge, and yet more confused in the
explication of what they teac^; rejecting to day as false, what yesterday they
approved for true. Contradicting themselves, and recanting their Opinions every
moment; insomuch, that the clearest Head, and the most ready Understanding can
comprehend nothing of their Doctrine; and in relation to Eternal Happiness, we
are always left in doubt, what we should believe. A most manifest token, that
they only follow the extravagancies of their own Fancies, and have not for the
Rule and Foundation of their Faith, any per^anent and solid Truth.

In this manner spoke the King; and it was easy to judge by the vehemence of
his action, that he spoke from the abundance of his Heart. There was present a
Bonza, very considerable in his Sect, and of good knowledge, but too presuming
of his Understanding, and as much conceited of his own Abilities, as any Pedant
in the World. This Bonza, whose name was Faxiondono, either jealous of the
Honor of his Profession, or taking to himself in particular, what the King had
said of all in general, was oftentempted to have interrupted him; yet he
mastered his Passion, till the King had done; but then losing all manner of
respect, and not keeping any Measures of Decency, How dare you, said he, decid^
Matters relating to Religion, you who have never studied in the University of
Fianzima? the only place where the sacred Mysteries of the Gods are explicated?
If you know nothing of your self, consult the Learned, I am here in person t^
instruct you.

The Insolence of the Bonza, raised (...) indignation of all the Company, the
King excepted; who smiling, commanded him to proceed, if he had more to say
Faxiondono, growing more arrogant* by this* moderation of his Prince, began;
raising his note, by ex^olling the Profession of a Bonza, Tha^ nothing was more
certain, than that the Bonza's were the Favorites of Heaven; both observing
the Law themselves, and causing it to be o^serv'd by others; that they pas^d
the longest Nights, and the severest Colds, in praying for their Benefactours;
that they abstained from all sensual pleasures; that fresh* Fish never came
upon their Tables; that they administered to the Sick, instructed the Children,
comforted the Distressed, reconciled Enemies, appeased Seditions, and pacified
Kingdoms; that, which was first and chiefest, they gave Letters of Exchange for
another life, by which the d^ad became rich in Heaven; that, in fine, the
Bonza's were the familiar Friends of the Stars, and the Confidents of the
Saints; that they were priviledg'd to converse with them by night, to cause
them to descend from Heaven, to embrace them in their Arms, and enjoy them as
long as they desired. These extravagances set all the Company in a laughter; at
which the Bonza was so enraged, that he flew out into greater passion, till the
King commanded his Brother to impose silence on him. After which, he caused his
Seat to be taken from under him, and commanded him to withdraw, telling him, by
way of raillery, That his Choler was a convincing proof of a Bonza's Holiness,
and then seriously adding, That a Man of his Character had more commerce with
Hell than Heaven. At these words the Bonza cried out with excess of rage, The
time will come, when no Man of this World, shall be worthy enough to serve me;
there is not that Monarch now breathing on the face of the Earth, but shall be
judged too vile to touch the Hem of my Garment. He meant, when he was to be
transformed into one of their D^ities, and that God and he should be mixed into
one Divinity; which is the reward of a Bonza after death. Though the King could
not hear his madness without smiling, yet he had so much compassion on his
Folly* that he took upon him to confute those extravagant propositions; but
Xavier desired him to defer it to a fitter time, till he had digested his fury,
and was more capable of hearing Reason. Then the King said only to Faxiondono,
That he should go and do Penance, for the pride and insolence of his Speech,
wherein he had made himself a companion of the Gods. Faxiondono did not reply,
but he was heard to mutter, and grind his Teeth, as he withdrew. Being at the
Chamber Door, and ready to go out, May the Gods, said he aloud, dart their Fire
from Heaven to consume thee, and burn to Ashes all those Kings, who shall
presume to speak like thee.

The King and Xavier prosecuted their Discourse on several Articles of Religion
till Dinnertime; What passes (...) the King of Bungo and Xavier.
when the Meat was on the Table, the King invited the Father to eat with him.
Xavier excused himself with all possible respect, but that Prince would
absolutely have it so. I know well, said he, my Friend and Father, that you are
not in want of my Table; but if you were a Japanner, as we are, you would
understand that a King, cannot give those he favors a greater sign of his good
will, than in permitting them to eat with him; for which reason as I love you,
and am desirous of showing it, you must needs dine with me; and farther I
assure you, that I shall receive a greater Honor by it, th^n I bestow. Then
Xavier with a low reverence, kissing his Scymitar, which is a mark of most
profound respect, much practiced in Iapan, said thus to him. I petition the God
of Heaven from the bottom of my Heart, to reward your Majesty for all the
favors you have heaped on me, by bestowing on you the light of Faith, and the
Virtues of Christianity; to the end you may serve God faithfully during your
life, and enjoy him eternally after death. The King embraced him, and desired
of God, on his side, that he would graciously hear the Saints request, yet on
this condition, that they might remain together in Heaven, and never be divided
from each other, that they might have the opportunity of long Conversations,
and of discoursing to the full of Divine Matters. At length they sat to Dinner:
while they were eating, the Portugueses, and all the Lords of the Court, were
on their Knees, together with the chief Inhabitants of the Town, amongst whom
were also some Bonza's, who were enraged in their Hearts, but the late Example
of Faxiondono, hindered them from breaking into Passion.

These Honors which Xavier received from the King of Bungo, The Honor of
Xavier in the Kingdom of ^ungo; and the success of his Labors there.
made him so considerable, and gave him so great a Reputation with the People,
that being at his Lodgings with the Portugueses, they came thronging from all
quarters to hear him speak of God. His public Sermons, and his private
Conversations, had their due effect. Vast multitudes of people, from the very
first, renounced their Idols, and believed in Jesus Christ. The Saint employed
whole days together in baptising of Idolaters, or in teaching new Believers: So
that the Portugueses could not enjoy him to themselves, for their own Spiritual
Consolation, unless at some certain hours of the night, while he was giving
himself some breathing-time, after his long Labors. Loving him so tenderly as
they did, and fearing that his continual pains might endanger his health, they
desired him to manage it with more caution; and to take at least those
refreshments which Humane Nature exacted from him, before he sunk at once under
some distemper. But he answered them, That if they truly loved him, they would
trouble themselves no more concerning him: That they ought to look on him, as
one who was d^ad to all outward refreshments; that his Nourishment, his Sleep,
and his life it self, consisted in delivering from the tyranny of the Devil,
th^se precious Souls, for whose sake chiefly, God had called him from the
utmost limits of the ^^rth.

Amongst the Conversions which were made at Fucheo, (...).
one of the most considerable was that of a famous Bonza, of Ca^^fama, called
Sacay E^ran. This Bonza, who was very learned, and a great pillar of his Sect,
seeing that none of his Brethren durst attempt Xavier, on the matter of
Religion, undertook a puplick Disputation with him. The Conference was made in
a principal place of the Town, in presence of a great multude. Scarcely had
Xavier made an end of explaining the Christian Doctrine, when the Bonza grew
sensible of his Errors. The in^idel, notwithstanding* went on to oppose those
Truths, of which he had already some imperfect glimpse; but being at length
convinced by the powerful Reasons of his Adversary, and inwardly moved by Gods
good Spirit, he fell on his Knees, and lifting up his Hands toward Heaven, he
pronounced aloud these words, with ^earstrickling from his Eyes; O Je^^^
Christ, (...) true and only S^n of God, I submit to thee. I confess from my
heart, and with my mouth, that th^^ art God Eternal, and Omnipotent: and I
earnestly desire the pardon of all my Auditors, that I have so often taught
them things for truth, which I acknowledge, and at this present declare before
them, were only Forgeries and Fables.

An action, which was so surprising, moved the minds of all the assistants: and
it was in the power of Father Xavier, to have Baptized that very day five
hundred Persons, who being led by the example of the Bonza of Canafama, all of
them earnestly desired Baptism. He might perhaps have done this in the Indies,
where there were no Learned men, to oppose the Mysteries of our Faith, and to
tempt the sidelity of the new Converts by captious queries. But he judged this
not to be practicable in Iapan, where the Bonza's not being able to hinder the
conversion of Id^laters, endeavored afterward to regain them, by a thousand
lying artifices, and sophistications* and it appeared necessary to him, before
he Baptized those who were grown up to Manhood, to fortify them well against
the tricks of those Seducers.

Accordingly the Saint disposed the Souls of those Gentiles by degrees to this
first Sacrament, (...).
and began with the reformation of their Manners; choosing rather not to baptize
the King of Bungo, than to precipitate his Baptism, Or rather he thought, that
his Conversion would be always speedy enough, provided it were sincere and
constant, Thus the great care of Father Xavier, in relation to the Prince, was,
to give him an aversion to those infamous Vices which had been taught him by
the Bonza's; and in which he lived without scruple, upon the Faith of those
his Masters. Now the King, attending with great application to the man of God,
and having long conversations with him, began immediately to change his life,
and to give the demonstrations of that change. From the very first, he banished
out of his Chamber, a beautiful youth who was his Minion, and also forbad him
the entry of his Palace. He gave bountifully to the Poor, to whom he had
formerly been hard-hearted, as thinking it was a crime to pity them, and an act
of Justice to be cruel to them, according to the Doctrine of his Bonza's, who
maintained that poverty not only made men despicable, and ridiculous, but also
Criminal, and worthy of the ^everest punishments. According to the Principles
of the same Doctors, Women with Child were allowed to make themselves
miscarry by certain Potions, and even to murder those Children, whom they
brought into the World against their will. Insomuch that such unnatural
cruelties were daily committed; and nothing was more common in the Kingdom of
Bungo, then those inhumane Mothers. Some of them to save the charges of their
food and education, others to avoid the miseries attending Poverty, and many to
preserve the reputation of Chastity, however debauched and infamous they were.
The King, by the admonition of the Father, forbad those cruelties on pain of
death. He made other Edicts, against diverse Pagan Ceremonies, which were
lascivious or dishonest, and suffered not the Bonza's to set a Foot within his
Palace. As to what remains, he was wrapped in admiration at the virtue of the
holy man, and confessed often to his Courtiers, that when he saw him appear at
any time; he trembled even to the bottom of his heart, because he seemed to see
the Countenance of the man of God, as a clear mirror, representing to him the
abominations of his Life.

While Xavier had this success at the Court of Bungo, What happens to the
Companions of Xavier, at Amanguchi.
Torrez, and John Fernandez, suffered for the Faith at Amanguchi. After the
departure of the Saint, the whole Nation of the Bonza's rose against them; and
endeavored to confound them in regular disputes. Flattering themselves with
this Opinion, that the Companions of Xavier were not so learned as himself; and
judging on the other side, that the least advantage, which they should obtain
against them, would re-establish the declining affairs of Pagamism.

It happened quite contrary to their expectations: Torrez, to whom Fernandez
served instead of an Interpreter, answered their questions, with such force of
reason, that they were wholly vanquished; not being able to withstand his
arguments, they endeavored to decry him by their calumnies; spreading a
report, that the Companions of the great European Bonza, cut the throats of
little Children by night, sucked their blood, and eat their Flesh: That the
Devil had declared by the mouth of an Idol, that these two Europeans were his
Disciples, and that it was himself who had instructed them in those subtle
answers, which one of them had returned in their public disputations. Besides
this, some of the Bonza's made oath, that they had seen a Devil darting flakes
of fire like Thunder and Lightning, against the Palace of the King, as a
Judgment, so they called it, against those who had received into the Town
these Preachers of an upstart Faith. But perceiving that none of these
inventions took place according to their desires; and that the people instead
of giving credit to their projects, made their sport at them, partly in
revenge, and partly to verify their Visions; they engaged in their Interests, a
Lord of the Kingdom, who was as great Soldier, and a Malecontent: him, they
wrought to take up arms against the King. This Noble man* provoked with the
since of his ill usage at Court, and farther heightened by motives of Religion
and interest, raised an Army in less than three weeks time, by the assistance
of the Bonza's, and came pouring down like a deluge upon Amanguchi.

The King who was neither in condition to give him Battle, The death ^f the
king of Amanguchi, and the (...) of the To^n.
nor provided to sustain a Siege; and who feared all things from his Subjects,
of whom he was extremely hated* lost his Courage to that degree, that he looked
on death as his only remedy. For apprehending above all things the ignominy,
of falling alive into the power of Rebels, pushed on by a barbarous despair, he
first murdered his Son; and then ripped up his own belly with a knife; having
beforehand left Order with one of his faithful Servants to burn their Bodies
so soon as they were dead, and not to leave so much as their ashes at the
disposal of the Enemy.

All was put to Fire and Sword within the City. During this confusion, the
Soldiers animated by the Bonza's, searched for Torrez and Fernandez, to have
Massacred them. And both of them had perished without mercy, if the Wife of
Neatondono, of whom formerly we have made mention, and who, though continuing a
Pagan, Yet had so great a kindness for Xavier, that for his sake, she kept them
hidden in her Palace, 'till the public tranquillity was restored. For, as these
popular commotions, are of the nature of storms, which pass away, and that so
much the more speedily, as they had been more violent, the Town resumed her
former countenance, in the space of some few days. The Brother of the King of
Bungo, it chosen King of Amanguchi, the Saint rej^yces at it.


The Heads of the People being assembled for the Election of a new King, by
common consent pitched on the Brother of the King of Bungo, a young Prince,
valiant of his person, and born for great Achievements. Immediately they sent
a solemn Embassy to that Prince, and presented to him the Crown of Amanguchi.
The Court of Bungo celebrated the Election of the new King, with great
magnificence, while Xavier was yet residing at Fucheo. The Saint himself
rejoiced the more* at this promotion, because he looked on this wonderful
revolution, which was projected by the Bonza^ for the ruin of Christianity, as
that which most probably would confirm it. He was not deceived in his
conjectures; and, from the beginning, had a kind of assurance, that this turn
of State, would conduce to the advantage of the Faith. For having desired the
King of Bungo, that he would recommend to the Prince his Brother the estate of
Christianity in Amanguchi: the King performed so fully that request, that the
new Monarch, promised on his Royal word, to be altogether as favorable to the
Christians, as the King his Brother.

Xavier had been forty days at Fucheo, He prepares to leave Japan, and takes
leave of the King of Bungo.
when the Portuguese Merchants were in a readiness to set fail for China,
according to the measures which they had taken. All necessary preparations
being made, he accompanied them to take his leave of the King of Bungo. That
Prince told the Merchants that he envied them the Company of the Saint; that in
losing him, he seemed to have lost his Father; and that the thought of never
seeing him again, most sensibly afflicted him.

Xavier kissed his hand with a profound reverence, and told him, that he would
return to wait on his Majesty, as soon as pos^^bly he could: that he would keep
him inviolably in his heart; and that in acknowledgement of all his favors, he
should continually send up his Prayers to Heaven, that God would shower on him
his celestial blessings.

The King having taken him aside, (...)
as to say something in private to him, Xavier laid hold on that opportunity,
and gave him most important counsel for the Salvation of his Soul. He advised
him above all things to bear in mind how soon the greatness and pomp of this
present life will vanish away; that life is but short in its own nature: that
we scarcely have begun to live, before death comes on; and if he should not dye
a Christian, nothing less was to be expected, than eternal misery. That, on the
contrary, whoever being truly faithful, should persevere in the grace of
Baptism, should have right to an everlasting inheritance with the Son of God,
as one of his beloved Children. He desired him also to consider, what was
become of so many Kings and Emperors of Iapan: what advantage was it to them
to have sat upon the Throne, and wallow'd in pleasures for so many years,
being now burning in an Abyss of Fire, which was to last to all Eternity. What
madness was it, for a man to condemn his own Soul to endless punishments, that
his body might enjoy a momentary satisfaction: That there was no Kingdom, nor
Empire, though the Universal Monarchy of the World should be put into the
balance, whose loss was not to be accounted gain, if losing them, we acquired
an immortal Crown in Heaven: That These truths, which were indisputable, had
been concealed from his forefathers, and even from all the Iaponians, by the
secret judgment of Almighty God, and for the punishment of their offenses.
That, for his own particular, he ought to provide for that account, which he
was to render of himself; how much more guilty would he appear in Gods
presence, if, the Divine ^^^^vidence having conducted from the ends of the
Earth, even into his own Palace, a Minister of the Gospel, to discover to him
the paths of happiness, he should yet continue wilder'd and wandering, in the
disorders of his life. Which the Lord avert, continued Xavier, and may it
please him, to hear the Prayers which day and night I shall pour out for your
Conversion. I wish it with an unimaginable ardour, and assure you, that
wheresoever I shall be, the most pleasing news which can be told me, shall be
to hear that the King of Bungo, is become a Christian; and that he lives
according to the Maxims of Christianity.

This discourse made such impressions on the King, and so melted into his
heart, that the tears came thrice into his eyes: but those tears were the only
product of it at that time; so much that Prince, who had renounced those
impurities, which are abhorred by Nature, was still fastened to some other
sensual pleasures. And it was not 'till after some succeeding years, that
having made more serious reflections on the wholesome admonitions of the Saint,
he reformed his life for altogether, and in the end received Baptism.

Xavier having taken leave of the King, (...)
returned to the Port of Figen, accompanied by the Merchants, who were to set
sail within few days after: The departure of the Saint was joyful to the
Bonza's, but the glory of it, was a great abatement to their pleasure. It
appeared to them, that all the honors he had received, redounded to their
shame; and that after such an affront, they should remain eternally blasted in
the opinion of the People, if they did not wipe it out, with some memorable
vengeance. Being met together, to consult on a business which so nearly touched
them, they concluded that their best expedient was to raise a Rebellion in
Fucheo, as they had done at Amanguchi; and flesh the People by giving up to
them the Ship of the Portuguese Merchants, first to be plundered, then burnt,
and the Proprietors themselves to be destroyed. In consequence of this, if
fortune favored them, to attempt the Person of the King, and having dispatched
him, to conclude their work by extinguishing the Royal Line. As Xavier was held
in veneration in the Town, even amongst the most dissolute Idolaters, they were
of opinion they did nothing, if they did not ruin his reputation, and make him
odious to the people. Thereupon, they set themselves at work, to publish, not
only what the Bonza's of Amanguchi had written of him, but what they themselves
had newly invented: That he was the most wicked of Mankind, an Enemy to the
living and the dead; his practice being to dig up the Carcasses of the buried,
for the use of his Enchantments, and that he had a Devil in his Mouth, by whose
assistance he charmed his Audience. They added, That he had spelled the King;
and from thence proceeded these new vagaries in his Understanding and all his
Inclinations; but that in case he came not out of that fit of madness, it
should cost him no less than his Crown and Life: That Amida and Xaca, two
powerful and formidable Gods, had sworn to make an Example of him and of his
Subjects; that, therefore the people, if they were wise, should prevent betimes
the wrath of those offended Deiti^s, by revenging their Honor on that
Impostour of a Bonza, and these European Pirates, who made their Idol of him.
The people were too well persuaded of the Holiness of Xavier, to give credence
to such improbable stories, as were raised of him; and all the Bonza's could
say against him, served only to increase the public hatred against themselves:
Thus despairing of success amongst the multitude, they were forced to take
another course, to destroy him in the good Opinion of the King.

About twelve Leagues distant from the Town, A new Artifice of the Bonza's
against the Saint.
there was a famous Monastery of the Bonza's, the Superior of which was one
Fucarandono, esteemed the greatest Scholar and most accomplished in all the
Learning of Iapan. He had read Lectures of the Mysteries of their Divinity for
the space of thirty years in the most renowned University of the Kingdom. But
however skilled he was in all Siences, his Authority was yet greater than his
Knowledge. Men listened to him as to the Oracle of Iapan, and an implicit Faith
was given to all he said. The Bonza's of Fucheo were persuaded, that if they
could bring him to the Town, and set him up against Xavier, in presence of the
Court, they should soon recover their lost Honor; such confidence they had of
a certain Victory over the European Doctor. On this account they writ to
Fucarandono, with all the warmness of an earnest Invitation, and sent him word,
That if he would give himself the trouble of this little Journey, to revenge
the injury they had received, they would carry him back in triumph on their
Shoulders to his Monastery.

The Bonza, who was full as vain as he was learned, came speedily, attended by
six Bonza's, all Men of Science, but his inferiors and Scholars. He entered
the Palace at that point of time, when Xavier and the Portugueses had Audience
of the King, for their last farewell, being to embark the next morning. Before
the King had dismissed them, he was informed, that Fucarandono desired to kiss
his Hand, in presence of the Portuguese Bonza. At the name of Fucarandono, the
King was a little nonplus'd, and stood silent for some time, suspecting that he
came to challenge Father Xavier to a Disputation, and devising in himself some
means of breaking off this troublesome affair, as he afterward acknowledged.
For what ever good Opinion he had of the Saints Ability, Yet he could not think
him strong enough to encounter so formidable an Adversary; and therefore out of
his kindness to him, was not willing to expose him to a disgrace in public.
Xavier, who perceived the Kings perplexity, and imagined from whence it might
proceed, begged earnestly of his Majesty, to give the Bonza leave of entrance;
and also free permission of speaking. For, as to what concerns me, said the
Father, you need not give your self the least disquiet. The Law I preach is no
earthly Science, taught in any of your Universities, nor a Humane Invention;
it is a Doctrine altogether Heavenly, of which God himself is the only teacher.
Neither all the Bonza's of Japan, nor yet all the Scholars extant in the World,
can prevail against it, any more, than the shadows of the night against the
Sunbeams of the rising-Sun.

The King at the request of Xavier gave entrance to the Bonza. The beginning of
the Conference betwixt Xavier and Fucarandono.
Fucarandono, after the three usual reverences to the King, seated himself by
Xavier; and after he had fixed his Eyes earnestly upon him, I know not, said
he, with an overweening look, if thou know me; or, to speak more properly,
if thou remembrest me. I remember not, said Xavier, that I have ever seen you.
Then the Bonza breaking out into a forced laughter, and turning to his fellows,
I shall have but little difficulty in overcoming this Companion, who has
conversed with me an hundred times, and yet w^u'd make us believe, he had never
seen me: Then looking on Xavier, with a scornful smile, Have thou none of those
Goods yet remaining, continued he, which thou soldest me at the Port of
Frenajoma? In truth, replied Xavier with a sedate and modest Countenance, I
have never been a Merchant in all my life, neither have I ever been at the Port
of Frenajoma. What a beastly forgetfulness is this of thine, Pursued the Bonza,
with an affected wonder, and keeping up his bold laughter, how can thou
possibly forget it? Bring it back to my remembrance, said Xavier mildly, you
who have so much more Wit, and a Memory happier than mine. That shall be done,
rejoined the Bonza, proud of the Commendations which the Saint had given him.
It Is now just fifteen hundred years, since thou and I, who were then Merchants,
traded at Frenajoma, and where I bought of thee an hundred Bales of Silk, at an
easy pennyworth; do thou yet remember it? The Saint, who perceived whither
the discourse tended, asked him very civilly, of what age he might be? I am now
two and fifty, said Fucarandono. How can it then be, replied Xavier, that you
were a Merchant Fifteen hundred years ago, that is fifteen Ages, when yet you
have been in ^ the World, by your own confession, but half an Age? And how
comes it, that you and I then traffick'd together at Frenajoma, since the
greatest part of you Bonza's maintain, that Japan was a Desert, and uninhabited
at that time? Hear me, said the Bonza, and liste^ to me as an Oracle, I will
make the^ confess, that we have a greater (...) of things past, than thou and
thy fellows have ^f the present. Thou art then to understand, that the World
had no beginning, and that Men, Properly speaking, never die. The Soul only
breaks loose from the Body in which it was confined; and while that Body is
rotting under ground, is looking out for another fresh, and vigorous
Habitation, wherein we are born again, sometimes in the nobler, sometimes in
the more imperfect Sex, according to the various Constellations of the Heavens,
and the different Aspects of the Moon. These alterations in our Birth, produce
the like changes in our F^rtune. Now, it is the recompense of those who have
lived virtuously, to preserve a const^nt memory of all the lives which they
have passed through, in so many Ages; and to represent themselves, to
themselves, entirely, such as they have been from all Eternity, under the
figure of a Prince, of a Merchant, of a Scholar, of a Soldier, and so many
other various forms. On the contrary, they who, like thee, are so ignorant of
their own Affairs, as not to understand who, or what they have been formerly,
during th^se infinite rev^lutions of Ages, show that their Crimes have deserved
death, as often as they h^ve lost the remembrance of their lives in every
change. (...)


The Portuguese, from whose relation we have the knowledge of what is above
written, and who was present at the Dispute, as himself informs us, in his Book
of Travels, gives us no account of the Answers which were made by Xavier. I
have neither Knowledge, nor Presumption enough, says he, to relate those
subtle and solid Reasons, with which he confuted the mad imaginations of the
Bonza. We only have learnt from this Portuguese, that Fucarandono was put to
silence upon the point in question, and that a little to save his Reputation,
he changed the Subject, but to no purpose, for ever there too he was
confounded; for, forgetting those decencies, which even Nature prescribes to
Men, and common Custom has taught us in civil Conversation, he advanced
infam^us Propositions, which cann^t be related without offending Mod^sty; and
these he maintained with a strange impudence, against the Reasons of the
Father, though the King, and the Noble Auditory, thought the Christian
Arguments convincing. But the Bonza still flying out into Passion, and
continuing to rail and ^awl aloud, as if he were rather in a Bear garden, than
at a solemn Disputation, one of the Lords there present said, smiling, to him,
If your business be fighting, why did not you go to the Kingdom of Amanguchi,
when they were in Civil-Wars; there you might have found some one or other,
with whom you might have (...) to h^rd-heads. What make you ^ere, where all
things are at quiet? But, if you came hither to dispute, why do you not carry
on your Argument with mildness and good manners, according to the Copy which is
set you by the European Bonza?

This sharp raillery had no effect upon Fucarandon^. He replied to the Lord,
with so much impudence, and haughtiness, that the King, whose Patience was
tired with so much insolence, caused him to be put out of the Hall, saying,
That his Coat of a Bonza, was the only protection of his life. The affront
which Fucarand^no had received, was interpreted by the Bonza's as an injury
done to the Gods; and as such they declared it to the People, saying, That
Religion was pr^fan'd, and that the King, the Court, and the whole Nation had
incurred the wrath of Heaven. Upon which pretense they shut up the Temples, and
would neither offer Sacrifice, nor accept of Alms. The Multitude, which had
already been disposed to rise, began to get together, and had certainly taken
Arms, if the King, by good management, had not somewhat calmed their Spirits.

In the mean time the Portugueses, The fury of the Bonza's (...) the Portuguese
to retire to their Ship.
not believing themselves to be secure against the rage of a Superstitious
People; and having just grounds of apprehending, that the affront which
Fucarandono had received, might be revenged on their persons, returned with all
expedition to their Ship, designing to set Sail with the benefit of the first
fair Wind: At their departure from the Town, they in^reated Father Xavier to
follow them; but he could not resolve to run off like a Fugitive; or, to
forsake those new Christians, whose ruin had been sworn by the Heathen
Priests. How eager soever those Merchants were to get out of a Country where
their lives were in so little safety, yet their fear for Father Xavier kept
them lingering there some days longer; they deputed the Captain of the Vessel to
him, who was to desire him in their name to make haste to them. Edward de Gama,
after a long enquiry, found him at last in a poor Cabin, with eight Christians,
who, having been the most zealous in opposition of the Bonza's, were in reason
to expect the more cruel usage at their hands, and were content to offer up
their lives, provided they might die in the Arms of the Man of God.

The Captain urged him with the strongest Reasons which he could invent, The
Captain of the Ship endeavors to persuade Xavier to return; but in vain.
and set before him all the dangers which attended him: that, being at the
mercy of the Bonza's, his death was inevitable; and that the means of escaping
would be lost, when once the Tempest should begin to rise. The Father, far from
yielding to these Arguments, was offended at the Captain and the Merchants, for
desiring to hinder him from the Crown of Martyrdom, which he had taken so long
a Journey to obtain: My Brother, said he to Gama, with a servour which
expressed the holy ambition of his Soul, how happy should I be, if I could
receive what you reckon a disgrace, but what I account a Sovereign Felicity!
but I am unworthy of that favor from Almighty God; yet I will not render my
self more unworthy of it, which assuredly I should, if I embarked with you. For
what scandal should I give, by flying hence, to my new Converts? Might they not
take occasion from it, to violate their promises to God, when they should find
me wanting to the duty of my Ministry? If, in consideration of that Money,
which you have received from your passengers, you think your self obliged to
secure them from the danger which threatens them, and for that reason, have
summoned them on Board; ought not I by a stronger motive, guard my Flock, and
die with them for the sake of a God, who is infinitely good, and who has
redeemed me at the price of his own life, by suffering for me on the Cross?
Ought not I to seal it with my Blood, and to publish it by my death, that all
men are bound to sacrifice their Blood and Lives to this God of Mercies?

This generous answer, The Captain takes up a Resolution to stay with Xavier.
wrought so much upon the Captain, that, instead of doubling his solicitations
on Father Xavier, he resolved to partake his Fortune, and not to leave him.
Having taken up this Resolution, without farther care of what might happen to
his Ship, or what became of his own person, and accounting all his losses for a
trifle, while he enjoyed the Company of Xavier; he returned indeed to his
Merchants, but it was only to declare to them the determination of the Father,
and his own also; that in case they would not stay, he gave up his Vessel to
them: they were supplied with Mariners and Soldiers, and had plentiful
Provisions laid in, both of Food and Ammunition for War. They might go at their
pleasure, wheresoever they designed, but for his own particular, he was
resolved to live and die with the Man of God.

Not a Man of them but subscribed to the Opinion of the Captain; and they were
one and all for following his Example, and the Fortune of the Saint. Sudd^nly
they put into the Port again; for the Ship had lain off at a good distance, for
fear of some attempt, which might be made upon it from the Town; Soldiers were
left for its defense; and the Captain and Merchants came in Company to Fucheo.
Their return gave new vigor to the Christians, and amazed the People, who
could not but wonder that so poor a man should be had in such esteem by his
Countrymen, that they chose rather to run the hazard of their wealth, and of
their lives, than to lose the sight of him.

This prompt return broke all the measures of the Bonza's; A new Enterprise of
the Bonza's against him.
whose courage had been swelled by the ^light of Gama; which had given them the
opportunity of making their Cabals against the Christians: but when they found
that those designs might^ possibly miscarry; and that on the other side, they
were again desy'd to a new Conference on the Subject of Religion, they thought
good to accommodate themselves a little to the times, and to renew the dispute
betwixt Xavier and Fucarandono before the Court. To seem beforehand with the
Christians, they made it their own Petition to the King, who ^reely granted it,
but on some conditions, which were to be observed on other side; these Articles
were, That noise was to be banished in dispute; no flying out to be permitted,
nor any provocation by sharp language. That the Arguments and Answers were to
be couched in precise terms, and drawn up in form of a just dispute, as it
should be agreed by the Judges, who were to moderate: That the approbation of
the Audience was to decide the Victory: That if the Point were doubtful betwixt
them, the Suffrages should be taken, and that he should be judged to have
reason on his side, who had the majority of Voices. Lastly, That whoever was
willing to enter himself in Christian, might profess his Faith, without
hindrance or molestation from any man. These Conditions were too reasonable to
be accepted by the Bonza's. They appealed from the King, to the King better
informed, and told him boldly, that in matters of Religion, it was not just
that the Profane, (that is the Layety) should be Umpires: but when they found
the King resolved to maintain his point, they quitted theirs. The next morning
was agreed on for the Conference; and some of the most understanding Persons of
the Court were appointed Judges. Fucarandono made his appearance at the time,
attended by three thousand Bonza's. The King, who was either apprehensive of
his own safety, amongst that Religious rabble, or feared at least that some
disorder might ensue, permitted but four of all the squadron to enter; and sent
word to the others, for their satisfaction, that it was not honorable for so
many to appear against a single man.

Xavier, He returns to the Palace, to renew the Conference with Fucarandono.
who had notice sent him from the King, that his Adversary was on the place of
Combat, came accompanied with the chiefest of the Portugueses, all richly
habited, who appeared as his Officers, and paid him all possible respect,
attending him bare-headed, and never speaking to him but on the knee. The
Bonza's were ready to burst with envy, beholding the pompous entry of their
Antagonist: And that which doubled their despite, was, that they overheard
the Lord's, saying to one another; Observe this poor Man, of whom so many^
ridiculous Pictures have been made to us, would to God our Children might be
like him, on Condition the Bonza's might say as bad of them, as they speak of
him: Our own eyes are witnesses of the truth; and the palpable Lies which they
have invented, show what credit is to be given to them. The King took pleasure
in these discourses, and told those Lords, that the Bonza's had assured him,
that he should be sick at heart, at the first appearance of Father Francis. He
acknowledged he was almost ready to have believed them; but being now convinced
by his own experience, he found that the Character of an Ambassador from
Heaven, and Interpreter of the Gods, was not inconsistent with a Liar.
Fucarandono, who heard all these Passages from his place, took them for so many
ill Omens, and turning to his four Associates, told them, that he suspected
this day would be yet more unsuccessful to them than the last.

The King received Father Xavier with great civility, The dispute renewed.
and after he had talked with him some time in private, very obligingly,
ordered him to begin the disputation. When they had all taken their places, the
Saint demanded of the Bonza, as the King had desired him, For what reason the
Christian Religion ought not to be received in Japan? The Bonza, whose
haughtiness was much abated, replied modestly, Because it is a new Law, in all
things opposite to the ancient established Laws of the Empire: and that it
seems made on purpose to render the faithful Servants of the Gods contemptible,
An Argument ready cut and dried, for the use of any Church by Law established.
as annulling the privileges which the Cubosama's of former Ages, had
conferred on the Bonz^^^, and teaches that out of the Society of Christians
there is no Salvation. But especially, added ^e, a little kindling in the face,
because it presumes to maintain, that the holy Amida and Xaca, Gizon and Canon,
are in the bottomless pit of smoke, condemned to everlasting punishment, and
delivered up in prey, to the Dragon of the house of night. After he had thus
spoken, the Bonza held his peace: And Xavier, who had received a sign from the
King, to make reply, said at the beginning of his discourse, that seeing
Fucarandono had mingled many things together, it was reasonable, for the better
clearing of the difficulties, to tie him up to one single proposition, which
was not to be left, till it was evacuated, and plainly found to be either true
of false. All agreed this was fair, and Fucarandono himself, desired Xavier to
show cause, why he and his Companions, spoke evil of the Deities of the Country?

The Saint replied, The answer of Xavier to the first question of Fucarandono.
That he gave not to Idols the name of Gods; because they were unworthy of it:
and that so sacred a Title was only proper to the Sovereign Lord, who had
Created Heaven and Earth. Then he proceeded to discourse of the Divine Being,
and described those Properties, which are known to us by the light of Nature:
that is to say, his Independence, his Eternity, his Omnipotence, his Wisdom,
Goodness, and Justice, without circumscription. He made out, that those
infinite perfections could not be comprehended by any created understanding,
how refined soever. And thus having filled his Auditors with a vast Idea of the
Deity, he demonstrated, that the Idols of Japan, who, according to the
Japonians themselves, had been men, subject to the common Laws of Time and
Nature, were not to be accounted Gods; and at the most were only to be
reverenced as Philosophers, Lawgivers, and Princes; but not in the least as
Immortal Powers; since the date, both of their birth, and death, was registered
in the public Monuments. That, if their Works were duly considered, they were
yet less to be accounted for Omnipotent. That having not been able, after their
decease, to preserve their Stately Palaces, and Magnificent Sepulchers from
decay, there was no appearance that they had built the Fabric of the Universe,
or could maintain it, in its present state. Lastly, that this appertained alone
to the true God, who is worshipped by the Christians: and that, considering the
beauty of the Heavens, the fruitfulness of the Earth, and the order of the
Seasons, we might conclude, That he only who is a Spirit, Eternal, All
Powerful, and All Wise, could be the Creator, and absolute Commander of the
World. As soon as Xavier had concluded, the whole Assembly cried out, that he
spoke reason: and the Judges immediately pronounced* as a manifest truth, that
the Pagods were not Gods. Fucarandono would have replied, but the general cry
gave it for a cause decided. And the King imposed silence on the Bonza,
according to the Articles of Agreement.

Thus the Bonza passed on to another question in his own despite; The second
question of Fucarandono, to which the Father answers with the same success as
to the former.
and asked Father Xavier, why he allowed not of those Bills of Exchange, which
they gave in favor of the dead; since the Rich found their account in them,
and that they had their return of their money with Usury in Heaven. The Father
answered, that the right we had to a better world, was founded not on those
deceitful Letters, but on the good works, which are practiced with the Faith
and Doctrine which he preached. That he who inspired it into our Souls, was
Jesus Christ the true and only Son of God, who was Crucified for the Salvation
of Sinners; and that they who preserved that living* Faith 'till death, should
certainly obtain Eternal happiness: that for what remained this holy Law was
free from worldly interest, and that it excluded not from Heaven either the
poor, or Women; that even poverty, which is patiently endured, was a means of
gaining the Kingdom of Heaven: and that the weaker Sex, had greater advantages
than ours, by reason of that modesty and piety, which is almost inherent in
their nature. The applause which followed this discourse was general: only
Fucarandono, and his Companions, who had not wherewith to reply; and yet were
too obstinate to recant, kept a discontented silence. It was judged that
Xavier's Opinion was the more reasonable, and the dispute adjourned to the day
following.

These ill successes would have driven the Bonza to despair, (...) of the
disp^te betwixt Xavier, and Fucarandono.
if his presumption had not kept up his Spirits: he returned at the time
appointed; but as if he distructed his own strength, as presuming as he was, he
brought with him six other Bonza's, the most learned amongst them, and chosen
out of all their Sects; not to be bare Spectatours of the Combat, but to
relieve each other, and to charge every one in his turn. At the first they
propounded very subtle questions concerning the Mysteries of our Faith; Father
Xavier was surprised at the hearing of them: and as those questions which are
not reported by the Portuguese, particularly, were in all likelihood above the
knowledge of the Pagans, he was almost induced to think the Devil had suggested
them: at the least he acknowledged that to solve them he needed an
extraordinary assistance from above; and desired the Portugueses to second him
with their Prayers, during the disputation: whether he received that
supernatural assistance, or that those difficulties did not so much surpass his
knowledge, as he had thought, he answered to the satisfaction of the whole
Assembly. When Judgment was passed that those questions were fully decided, one
of the Bonza's, whose heart was wholly set on riches, and who believed that
there was nothing more charming in the World, than Gold and Silver, undertook
to prove that God was an Enemy to the Poor: For, said the Bonza, since he denis
them those blessings, which he bountiful gives the Rich, and in causing them
to be born in a mean condition exposes them to all the Miseries and ignominy of
life, is it not a sign, that he has neither kindness nor value for them?

Xavier denied the Consequence of that proposition; and argued both from the
Principles of Morality, which look on Riches as false goods, and out of the
grounds of Christianity, which in respect of Salvation, count them true evils:
he reasoned thereupon so justly, and withal so clearly, that his Adversaries
were forced to give up the cause, according to the Relation of the Portuguese,
who was witness of it. After this, they advanced such extravagant and mad
Propositions, that they cost the Father no trouble to confute; for they
destroyed themselves. But the most pleasant part of this days work was, that
the seven Bonza's not being able to agree, on some points of Doctrine, fell
^oul on each other, and wrangled with so much heat and violence, that at last
they came to downright railing; and had proceeded to blows, if the King had
not interposed his Authority, which frightened them into quiet. This was the
end of that days disputation; and nothing more confirmed the minds of the
Auditors, on the side of Xavier, than to see his Adversaries at Civil Wars
amongst themselves.

The King going out of his Palace, The (...) which the King of Bungo d^es to
Xavier.
the next morning, with a great attendance, to walk in the Town, according to
his custom, and passing by the house where the Portugueses lodged, sent a
message to the holy man, desiring him to come to his Gardens, where he would
show him sport, provided he came well armed; for he was to kill with one blow
two Kites or Puttocks, at the least, out of those seven, which yesterday
endeavored to have pulled out his eyes. Xavier, who easily understood his
meaning, came out to pay him his respects, and to acknowledge the honor which
was done him. The King took him by the hand, and led him to the Palace amidst
the acclamations of the People. The seven Bonza's represented by the seven
Kites, were already in the Hall, with a confirmed impudence, and so much the
more haughty, as they had the less reason so to be: according to the usual
character of vain and self-opinion'd men.

The first step they made in order to a new dispute, The Bonza's present a
w^^ting to the King, but without effect.
was to enter a protestation in writing, against the judgment and proceedings
of the former day; wherein they declared void the sentence of the Umpires,
appealed from them, and set forth new objections and difficulties, upon the
questions formerly debated. The King answered himself, that those Points which
had been decided, had no need of any further explanation: and that they were
already tied up, by the Conditions of the Conference, which both Parties had
accepted. He added, that Father Xavier was ready to go on Shipboard; and that
it was not reasonable to lose time by fruitless repetitions; but if they had
any n^w questions to propose, let them begin, and they should be heard: if not,
they had free license to depart.

This positive answer, Th^^ wrangle ab^ut the signification of words
constrained them to supersede their writing, and to pitch on other matters.
Fucarandono affecting an air of devotion, and modest, asked, Why the Christians
gave obsce^e names t^ the Saints in Paradise, whenever the^ invoked them in
their public Prayers: giving him to understand, that Sancte in the Japonian
Language, signified something too dishonest to be spoken. The Father declared
that the word in Latin had only a pure, and pious meaning. Nevertheless that
it might not give scandal, nor pollute the imagination of the Iap^nians, by an
equivocal sound; he ordered the new Christians from thenceforward, to use the
word Beat instead of it; and to say, Beat Petre, Beat Paul, in the room of
Sancte Petre, Sancte Paul. Concerning the name of God, the Bonza's would also
have fastened a quarrel on the Father; because Dajus in their Tongue signifies a
Lie. He laughed at this ridiculous exception, which was in effect a mere
jingle; and the Judges and Audience concluded it to be no more.

Three other points, T^^^ dispute in the nature of School-D^vin^s.
on which the Boza's more insisted, were thought to be more solid, and of
greater consequence. The first was proposed on this manner: Either God foresaw
that Lucifer and his Accomplices would revolt and be damned Eternally, or he
foresaw it not. If he had no foresight of it, his prescience did not extend so
far, as you would have us to believe; but if he foresaw it, the consequence is
worse, that he did not hinder this Revolt, which had prevented their damnation:
Your God, being as you say, the Fountain of all goodness, must now be
acknowledged by you, for the original cause of so much evil. Thus you are
forced, said the Bonza, to confess, either ignorance or malice in your God.

Xavier was so much amazed to hear a Bonza reasoning like a School-man, that
turning to Edward de Gama, who was by him: See, (says he softly in Portuguese,
that he might not be understood by the Iaponians) see how the Devil has
sharpened the Wit of these his Advocates. In the mean time, one of the Bonza's
coming up to the charge, said, according to the same Principle, That if God had
foreknown that Adam would sin, and cast down together with himself his whole
Progeny into an Abyss of miseries, why did he create him? At least when our
first Father was ready to eat of the forbidden Fruit, why did not that
Omnipotent ^and, which gave him being, annihilate him at the same moment?

A third Bonza, taking the word, urged him with another Argument. If our Evil
be as ^ncient as the World, said he subtly, why did God let so many Ages pass
away, without giving it a remedy? Why did he not descend from Heaven, and make
himself Man, to redeem humane kind, by his death and sufferings, as soon as
ever Man was guilty? To what degree did th^se first men sin, to become unworthy
of such a favor? And what has been the merit of their Descendants, that they
should be more favorably treated than their Predecessors?

These difficulties did not appear n^w to Xavier, (...)
who was very learned; and who had read whatsoever the Fathers, and School
Divines had said concerning them. He answered without doubt, according to their
Doctrine; but the Portuguese, who relates the Objections, durst not undertake
to write the Solutions of them, if we will believe himself, because they
surpassed the Understanding of a Merchant. The Bonza's made many Replies, to
all which the Father gave the proper Solutions in few words, and according to
the Rules of the Schools: whether it were that they comprehended not the
Solutions, or were it out of their hot-headedness, or that they seemed not to
understand them, to avoid the shame of being bassled, they yielded not, but
cried out louder than before. As they disputed more for Victory than Truth,
they denied all things, even to those Principles which are self-evident;
pretending thereby to encumber their Opponent. Xavier knew what use to make of
his advantages, he turned the Confusion upon them, by reducing them to manifest
contradictions, from whence they could never disingage themselves. So that,
instead of answering, they gnash'd their Teeth, foamed at Mouth and stamped,
and star'd about like Madmen. The King, whose Indignation was raised, by
seeing the obstinacy of the Bonza's, said to them in a kind of Passion, As for
my self, as far as I am capable of judging, I find that Father Xavier speaks
good Sense, and that you know not what you say. You should either understand
better, or be less violent, than you appear, to judge of these Truths without
prejudice. But if the Divine Law be wanting to you, make use of your Reason,
which of it self will let you see, that you are not to deny things which are
evident, nor to bark like Dogs. After these words he rose from his Seat, and
taking Xavier by the Hand, brought him back to his own Lodging. The people, who
followed in great multitudes, made loud acclamations, and the Streets rung with
the Praises of the holy Man. While the Bonza's, mad with rage and envy, cried
out aloud, May the fire of Heaven fall down upon a Prince, who suffers himself
to be so easily seduced, by this Foreign Magician.

Thus concluded the Disputations which he had with Fucarandono and the Bonza's:
The fruit of his Disputation with the Bonza's.
They were very glorious for him, and for the Religion which he preached; but
brought not forth the expected fruit, amongst the Idolaters who were present at
them. For neither the Portuguese Author, whom we have frequently cited, nor
other Historians of the Father's Life, make mention of any new Conversions
which were made; and it affords great occasion for our wonder, that the Lords
of the Court, who so much approved the Doctrine of Christianity, should still
continue in the practice of Idolatry, and of their Vices: If it were not always
to be remembered, that in Conversion, the light of the Understanding avails
nothing, unless the Heart be also touched; and that the Philosophers, of whom
St. Paul speaks, having known God, did not glorify him as God. Nevertheless we
may probably believe, that these Disputations in progress of time failed not of
their due effect: And it is also probable, that they were the Seed of those
wonderful Conversions, which were made in following years.

Father Xavier, H^ ^eaves Japan* and return^ ^o the Indies.
went the next morning to take his last farewell of the King, who was more kind
to him than ever; and parted from Iapan the same day, which was Nov. 20th. in
the year 1551. having continued in that Country two years and four months.

Not long before God had made known to his Servant, God reveals (...) him the
Siege of ^^lacca.
that the Town of Malacca was besieged by Sea and Land; and that the King of
Ientana, a Saracen, was personally before (...), with an Army of twelve
thousand Men. That neither the Conduct of the Governor Don Pedro de Silva, nor
the Succors of Don Fernandez Carvalio, had been able to defend it against the
attempts of the Barbarians: that the Iavans, a fierce and warlike people, had
mastered that place; that of three hundred Portugueses, who were within it,
above an hundred had been put to the Sword, and the rest of them had only
escaped by retiring into the Fortress. In short, that Malacca was now become a
place of horror; and that the Enemy wearied with the slaughter, had reserved
many thousands of the Inhabitants for the Chain. The Saint informed Gama, and
the Portugueses of the Ship, of these sad tidings, before they le^t the Port;
and declared to them, that the sins of that corrupt City had drawn down the
Curse of God upon it, as he had foretold and threatened; but he desired them at
the same time, to supplicate the Father of all Mercies, for the appeasing of
his Divine Justice, and the himself prayed earnestly in their behalf. Besides
the two Iapanners, Matthew and Bernard, who had constantly followed the Father,
and would never forsake him, an Ambassador from the King of Bungo, embarked
with him in the same Vessel. The business of this Embassy was to seek the
friendship of the Viceroy of the Indies; and to obtain a Preacher from him, who
might finish the Conversion of that Kingdom, in the room of Father Xavier.

They sai'd along the Coasts for the space of six days, What happens to him in
his return from Japan to the Indies.
and the Navigation was prosperous, till they made an Island belonging to the
King of Minaco, called Meleitor: From whence crossing a Straight, the put out
into the main Ocean. At that time the change of the Moon altered the Weather;
and there blew a furious South Wind, so that the Pilot with all his Art could
not bear up against it. The Tempest carried the Ship into a Sea, unknown to the
Portugueses; and the Face of Heaven was so black with Clouds, that during five
days and nights there was no appearance of Sun or Stars: Insomuch, that the
Mariners were not able to take the Elevation of the Pole, and consequently not
to know vvhereabouts they were. One day toward the Evening, the Wind redoubled
with so much fury, that the Vessel had not power to break the Waves, so high
the went, and came on with so much violence. In this terrible conjuncture they
thought sit to cut down the Forecastle, that the Ship might work the better,
after which they bound the Sloop which followed, with thick Cables to the
Ship; but night coming on, while they were thus employed, and being very dark,
abundance of Rain also falling at the same time, which increased the Tempest,
they could not draw out of the Sloop five Portugueses and ten Indians, as well
as Slaves and Mariners, which were in her.

Those of the Ship had neither comfort nor hope remaining, How Xavier b^hav^s
himself during the Tempest.
but in the company and assistance of Father Xavier. He exhorted them to lament
their Sins, thereby to appease the wrath of God, and he himself poured forth
whole showers of Tears before the Face of the Almighty. When night was now at
the darkest, a lamentable cry was heard, as of people just upon the brink of
perishing, and calling out for succor. The noise came from the Sloop, which
the violence of Winds had torn off from the Vessel, and which the Waves were
hurrying away. As soon as the Captain had notice of it, he ordered the Pilot to
turn toward those poor Creatures, without considering, that by his endeavor
of saving his Nephew Alphonso Calvo, who was one of the five Portugueses in
the Sloop, the Ship must certainly be lost, and himself with her. In effect, as
it was difficult to steer the Ship, when they would have turned her toward
the Sloop, she came across betwixt two Mountains of Water, which locked her up
betwixt them; one of those Waves fell upon the Poop, and washed over the Deck;
and then it was, that the whole Company thought their business was done, and
nothing but cries and lamentations were heard on every side. Xavier, who was at
his Prayers in the Captain's Cabin, ran out toward the noise, and saw a
miserable object, the Vessel ready to bulge, the Seamen, the Soldiers, and the
Passengers, all tumbling in confusion on each other, deploring their unhappy
destiny, and expecting nothing but present death. Then the holy Man lifting up
his Eyes and Hands to Heaven, said thus aloud, in the transport of his ^ervour,
O Jesus, Thou love of my Soul, succor us! I beseech thee, by those five
wounds, which for our sakes thou have suffered on the Cross. At that instant
the Ship which already was sinking under Water, raised her self aloft, without
any visible assistance, and gained the surface of the Waves. The Mariners
encouraged by so manifest a Miracle, so ordered the Sails, that they had the
Wind in Poop, and pursued their course.

In the mean time the Sloop was vanished out of sight: What happen^ to the
Chal^op bel^nging to the Ship.
and no man doubted but she was swallowed by the Waves. The Captain lamented
for his Nephew, the rest shed tears for their lost Companions. As for the
Father, his greatest affliction was for two Mohammedan Slaves, whom he could not
convert to Christianity. He sighed, in thinking of their deplorable condition,
but in the midst of these anxious thoughts, entering into himself, or rather
wholly recollecting himself in God, it came into his mind to intercede with
Heaven for the protection of the Sloop, in case it were not already lost. In
this he followed the inspiration of the holy Spirit, and his Prayer was not yet
ended, when he perceived that it was heard: Insomuch, that turning toward
Edward de Gama, who was oppressed with sadness; Afflict not your self, my
Brother, said he, with a cheerful Countenance, before three days are ended, the
Daughter will come back, and find the Mother. The Captain was so buried in his
grief, that he savv too little probability in what the Father said, to ^ound
any strong belief upon it. Which notwithstanding, at break of day, he sent one
up to the Scuttle, to see if any thing were within ken: but nothing was
discovered, saving the Sea, which was still troubled, and white with foam. The
Father, who had been in private at his d^votions, came out two hours after,
with the same cheerfulness upon his Countenance; and having given the good day
to the Captain and Pilot, and six or seven Portugueses who were in Company, he
inquired, If they had not yet seen the Chalop? they answered they had not: and
because he desired that some one might again get up to the Scuttle, one of the
Portugueses called Pedro Veglio, replied thus bluntly, Yes Father, the Chalop
will return, but not 'till another be lost: he meant that it was impossible the
same Chalop should come again.

Xavier mildly reprehended Veglio for his little Faith; He expects the return
of the Chalop (or Cockb^at) notwithstanding^ all appearances to the contrary.
and told him, nothing was impossible to God. The confidence which I have in
the Divine mercy* said he, gives me hope, that they, whom I have put under the
protection of the Holy Virgin, and for whose sake I have vowed to say three
Masses to our Lady of the Mountain, shall not perish. After this, he urged Gama
to send up to the Scuttle for discovery: Gama, to satisfy the man of God, went
up himself with a Seaman; and after having looked round him for the space of
half an hour, neither he nor the other could see any thing. In the mean time,
Xavier, whose stomach was turned with the tossing of the Ship, and who had been
two days and three nights, without eating, was taken with a violent headache,
and such a giddiness, that he could scarcely stand. One of the Portuguese
Merchants, called Ferdinand Mendez Pinto, desired him to repose a little while,
and offered him his Cabin; Xavier, who by the Spirit of mortification, usually
lay upon the Deck, accepted his courtesy, and desired this further ^avour,
that the Servant of this Merchant, who was a Chinese, might watch before the
door, that none might interrupt his rest.

The intention of the Father, He renews his Prayers for the return of the
Chalop.
was not to give the least refreshment to his Body: he set himself again to
Prayers, and it was affirmed by the Chinese Servant, that from seven in the
morning, when he retired, he had been constantly on his knees, 'till the
evening, groaning in the agony of his Spirit, and shedding tears. He came out
from his retirement after Sun set, and once more inquired of the Pilot, if they
had not seen the Chalop, which could not possibly be far distant. The Pilot
replied, that it was in vain to think of her, and that it was impossible for
her to resist so furious a Tempest. But in case that by some wonderful
accident, or rather by some miracle, she had been preserved, she must of
necessity be at fi^ty leagues distance from the Ship. It Is the propriety of
Christian confidence to remain unshaken, and secure, when humane reason leaves
us destitute of hope. The Saint acknowledged, the Pilot to have spoken
judiciously, and yet doubted not but the Chalop would return. He constantly
maintained, that she could not be far off; and pressed him to send up to the
Scuttle before the dusk. The Pilot, less out of complaisance to the Father,
than out of his desire to undeceive him, went up himself, and could discover
nothing. Xavier, without any regard to the affirmation of the Pilot, instantly
desired the Captain to lower the Sails; that the Chalop might more easily come
up with the Ship. The authority of the holy man, carried it, above the reasons
of the Pilot: The Sail-yard was lowered; and a stop was made for almost three
hours. But at length, the Passengers grew weary, as not being able any longer
to bear the rolling of the Ship, and one and all cried ou^ to Sail. The Father
upbraided them with their impatience: and himself laid hold on the Sail-yard,
to hinder the Seamen, from spreading the Sails: and leaning his head over it,
broke out into sighs and sobbings, and poured out a deluge of tears.

He raised himself a little after, He prays once more for the return of the
Chalop.
and keeping his eyes fixed on Heaven, yet wet with tears; O Jesus, my Lord and
my God, said he, I beseech thee by thy holy Passion, to have pity on those poor
People, who are coming to us, through the midst of so many dangers. He composed
himself, after he had uttered this, and continued leaning on the Sail-yard,
wholly silent, for some time, as if he had been sleeping.

Then a little Child, The Chalop appears, and comes up with the Ship.
who was sitting at the foot of the Mast, cried out on the sudden, a Miracle a
Miracle, behold the Chalop. All the Company gathered together at the cry, and
plainly perceived the Chalop within musket shot. Nothing but shouts and
exclamations of joy were heard, while she drew still nearer and nearer to the
Vessel. In the mean time, the greatest part fell down at the Feet of Father
Xavier, and, confessing they were Sinners, unworthy the Company of a man so
holy, asked him pardon for their Unbelief. But the Father, in great confusion,
for being treated in this manner, escaped out of their hands as soon as
possibly he could; and shut himself up within the Cabin. In conclusion, the
Chalop came up with the Ship; and it was observed, that though the Waves were
in great agitation, she came right forward, without the least tossing, and
stopped of her self. It was also taken notice of, that she continued without any
motion, 'till the fifteen men which she carried, were entered the Ship, and
that the Seamen had fastened her behind the Poop. When they had embraced those
men, whom so lately that had given for lost, every one was desirous of knowing
their Adventures^; and were much surprised to understand, that they were come
through the midst of the most horrible tempest, which was ever seen, without
any apprehension, either of drowning, or losing of their way: because, said
they, Father Francis was our Pilot, and his presence freed us even from the
shadow of any fear. When the Ships Company assured them, that the Father had
been always with themselves, those of the Chalop, who had beheld him constantly
steering it, could not believe what had been told them. After some little
dispute, on the matter of ^act, both sides concluded, that the Saint had been
at the same time in two places: And this evident Miracle, made such an
impression on the minds of the two Saracen Slaves, who had been in the Chalop,
that they abjured their Mahometism. The impatience of these fifteen men, to
behold their miraculous Steersman, who had so happily brought them to the Ship,
and who vanished from their eyes, at the same moment, when they joined her,
obliged Xavier to come out* and show himself. They would have saluted him as
their Protector, by prostrating themselves before him, but he would not suffer
it: declaring to them, that it was the hand of the Lord, and not his, which had
delivered them from Shipwreck. At the same time he rendered public thanks to
God, for so eminent a favor, and ordered the Pilot to pursue his Voyage,
assuring him, that he should have a good wind immediately. The Pilots
Experience of the Sea, did not promise him this sudden change; but this late
deliverance of the Chalop, quickened his belief in the Fathers words; and it
was not long, before he understood, that he who commands the winds and Seas,
had authorized the holy man to make that Prediction.

The Sails were scarcely spread, He arrives at the Isle of Sancian; an^ goes
off after a little time.
when a north wind arising, the air cleared up, and the Sea was immediately
calmed. So that in thirteen days sailing, they arrived at the Port of Sancian,
where the Portuguese Merchants of the Ship had traffic. As the season of
sailing in those Seas, was already almost past, there were remaining but two
Ships of the Indies in Port; one of which belonged to James de Pereyra. The
Ship of Edward de Gama not being in condition, to go on directly for Malacca,
without stopping by the way, and having need of refreshment at Sian, the Saint
went into the Ship of his friend Pereyra. It was wonderful, that at the same
moment when he passed into that Vessel, the wind which for the space of fifteen
days had blown at North, which was full in their faces, who were going for the
Indies, came about on the sudden, so that the day following, which was the last
of the year, 1551, they set Sail again. Another Ship, which was waiting also
for a wind, set out in their Company; but that Vessel found afterward to her
cost, that she carried not the Apostle of the Indies.

Before they put to Sea, His Prediction to the Pi^^^.
Xavier discoursing with the Pilot concerning the dangers of the Ocean; it was
the same Pilot, who had brought him from Iapan, whose name was Francis d'
Aghiar, foretold him that he should not end his days upon the water. And, that
no Vessel, wherein he should be, should suffer Shipwreck, were the Tempest
never so outrageous. d'Agh^ar was possessed with so firm a belief of what the
Father told him, and afterward found the effect of it so manifest, on various
occasions, that without observing either Winds or Seasons, he often put to Sea,
in an old crazy Vessel, ill provided; insomuch, that they who were ignorant of
the secret cause of this his confidence, took him for a rash pre^uming man, and
of little understanding in Sea affairs.

Once, A m^rvell^us effect of the Saints Pr^phecy
amongst many other times, he gave a demonstration, how much he relied on the
promise of the Saint, and that was, in going from Tenasserim to the Kingdom of
Pegu, in a light Barque, which was quite decayed, and out of order. A Tempest
ri^^ng in the midst of his Voyage, dashed against the Rocks, and split in
pieces some great Vessels, which were following the Barque of d'Aghiar. She
alone seemed to defy the Rocks; and while the Sea was in this horrible
confusion, the Pilot sat singing at his ease, as if the Waters had been hushed
beneath him. A Passenger, who shook with fear, demanded of him, With what
courage he could sing, when he was just upon the brink of death. It Is because I
fear nothing^ replied Aghiar; and I should fear nothing, added he, though the
wa^es should mount as high again, as now we see them, and my Barque were also
made of glass: For the Father Master Francis has assured me, that I should not
dye upon the Seas, in whatsoever Vessel I should go. Some Saracens, who were in
the Barque, and who heard these sayings of the Pilot, were so moved with this
continued Miracle, that they vowed to become Christians, so soon as ever they
should come on shore: and they complied religiously with their promise. The
Barque casting Anchor at Tanar, they received Baptism at that place; so much
the more persuaded both of the truth of the Miracle, and of the Christian
Faith, because they saw before their eyes upon the Coast, the wrecks of other
Vessels, which were floating round about it.

The Conversations which Xavier had with Pereyra, He ^orm^ the de^^gn of (...)
the (...).
during all the Navigation, were almost wholly relating to Iapan, and China.
The Father told his friend, what progress the Faith had made in little time, in
the Kingdoms of Saxuma, of Amanguchi, and of Bungo; and what hopes he had
conceived, to convert all those Islands with great ease, when once the Chinese
should be brought to acknowledge Jesus Christ. And on that motive, he had fixed
his resolution to go to China; that his return to the Indies, was only in order
to this intended Voyage, after he had regulated the affairs of the Society at
Goa. That on this account, he had brought with him from Iapan, the Translation
of his Catechism, into the Chinese Language: by the benefit of which he hoped
to overcome the first difficulties, which in matters of Conversion are still
the greatest. Some Portugueses who were in the same Vessel, and were well
acquainted with the Government of China, thought this proposition of the Father
not a little extravagant. They told him, that besides the ill understanding
which was betwixt China and Portugal, it was forbidden to strangers on pain of
death, or of perpetual imprisonment, to set a foot upon that Kingdom. And that
the Merchants of their Nation, who had stolen thither, for the benefit of trade,
having been discovered, some of them had lost their heads, others had been put
in Irons, and cast into Dungeons, there to lie and rott for the remainder of
their lives. They added, notwithstanding, that there was a safe and certain way
of entering into China, provided there was a solemn Embassy sent to the Emperor
of that Country, from the King of Portugal. But since that could not be
compassed without a prodigious expense, if nothing else were to be considered
but only the Presents for the Emperor, and his Ministers of State, in all
probability the Viceroy of the Indies would not burden himself with the cost of
such an Enterprise, at a time, when he had enough to do, to de^ray more
necessary expenses.

These difficulties began to startle Father Xavier, ^e takes his measures with
Pereyra, for the Voyage of China.
when James Pereyra, who under the habit of a Merchant, had the heart of an
Emperor, and the zeal of an Apostle, made offer of his Ship, and all his
goods, for the promoting of the expedient which had been mentioned. The Father
accepted of his generous pro^^er, with transports of joy, and engaged on his
side, to procure the Embassy of China for his friend. Pereyra, who had received
intelligence of the Siege of Malacca, told the Saint, He apprehended lest a^
Embargo might be put upon his Ship, for the immediate service of the Town:
X^vier, to whom God had revealed the deliverance of Malacca, and to whose
Pray^rs that deliverance had perhaps been granted, cheered up his Friend, with
this assurance, That when the Fortress was just upon the point of yielding, the
Infidels had been struck with a panick fear, and fled away; so that the Town
was wholly free.

Pereyra had yet another thing which troubled him, concerning the Voyage which
Father Xavier had to make, before that of China. The season being already far
spent, he feared there were no Vessels at Malacca, which were bound for Goa.
He could not carry the Father to Cochin himself, because he was obliged to go
on to Sunda, there to unlade his Merchandise. But that apprehension was soon at
an end: For Xavier illuminated from Heaven, told him positively, That the Ship
of Antonio Pereyra, was in the Port of Malacca, and that they should find it
just ready to weigh Anchor, and set ^ail for Cochin.

Xavier discovered these things to his Friend, He dissipac^^ a Tempest: his
(...) concerning the Ship of James Pereyra.
during a great calm, which made the Navigation pleasing; when suddenly they
perceived one of those terrible Hurricanes arising, which in a moment sink a
Vessel. All the Company gave themselves for lost; or if they had any hope
remaining, it was only in consideration of the Saint; and therefore they
earnestly desired him, to intercede with God in their behalf. The holy Man,
without replying, retired to his Devotions: he returned to them not long after
with his Countenance all on Fire, and gave his blessing to the Ship,
pronouncing these follovving words aloud; This Vessel of the The holy Cross.
Santa Cruz, (for so she was named) shall never perish on the Seas; the place
where she was built, shall behold her fall in pieces of her self. Might it
please Almighty God, continued he, that the same could be said, concerning that
Vessel which put to Sea with us! But we shall be witnesses too soon of her
unhappy destiny! At that very instant appeared the signs, which were to begin
the verification of the Prophecy; the Whirlwind was dissipated, and the Sea
grew calm. Not long afterward, they beheld the Merchandise, and dead Bodies,
floating on the Waters, and from thence concluded, that the Hurricane had
destroyed the Ship which followed them. Immediately their Opinion was
confirmed by two Mariners, who had gotten on a Plank, when the Ship was
foundering; and who having afterward struggled with the Waves, were driven
by them to the Board of Pereyra's Vessel. The rest of the Navigation was
prosperous; a calmer season was never known. The Ship being landed at the Port
of Sincapour, Xavier, who knevv certainly that Antonio Pereyra was at
Malacca, ready to hoist Sail toward Cochin, as we have said, vvrote to him by
a Frigate which went off, to desire, that he would wait for him three days
longer. He vvrote also by the same conveyance, to Father Francis Perez,
Superior of the Jesuits at Malacca, and commanded all of them to provide
refreshments for the Iaponneses, who came along with him.

When it was known in the City that Xavier was coming; they joy was so
general, His reception at Malacca.
that it almost blotted out the remembrance of all they had suffered in the
War. The Inhabitants ran crouding to the Shore, and at the first appearance of
the Saint, nothing was to be heard, but acclamations and shouts of rejoicing on
every side. They received him at his landing, with all the tenderness of
affection, and all the Reverence imaginable. In conducting him to the House of
the Society, they showed him, as he passed along, the Ruins of their Houses,
and told him sighing, That if he had not left them, they had been preserved
from the fury of the Javans, as they had formerly been protected from the
Barbarians of Achen. But the Father answered them, That their crying Sins had
called down the wrath of Heaven upon them. That nothing could divert it, but a
speedy change of life; and that the only means of reconciling themselves to
God, was to receive those chastisements at his Hands, with the Spirit of
Humiliation and of Penitence. He visited the old Governor Don Pedro de Silva,
and the new one, who succeeded him, Don Alvarez de Atayda, and communicated to
them his design, concerning an Embassy to China. Both of them concurred in the
Opinion, that it would be advantageous to the Crown of Portugal, and to the
Interests of Christianity. James Pereyra not being capable of accompanying the
Father to Goa, for the reason above mentioned, furnished him at present with
thirty thousand Crowns, for the preparatives of that intended Voyage; and sent
a Servant with the Father, with Commission to dispose of all things. Xavier
having often embraced this faithful Friend, entered with his Iaponians, into
the Vessel of Antonio Pereyra, who attended but their company to set sail.

The Prediction which the Man of God had made in favor of the Ship called
Santa Cruz, The History of the Ship called Santa Cruz.
gave it the new name of the Saints Vessel. And from Malacca, from whence she
departed at the same time, when Xavier went on board of Antonio, her Reputation
was extended over all the East. Wheresoever she arrived, she was received with
Ceremony, and saluted by all other Ships with the honor of their Canon. All
Merchants were desirous of stowing their Goods in her, and willingly paid the
Carriage of their Wares, and the dues of Custom, beyond the common price of
other Vessels. The weight of Lading was never considered, but her Freight was
always as much as they could crowd into her. As she lasted very long, and that
thirty years after the decease of the Father she was in being, and was used
for the traffic of the Indies, they never failed of lading her with an
extraordinary Cargo, all worn and Worm-eaten as she was. The Owners into whose
hands she came, during the space of those thirty years took only this one
precaution, which was to keep her off from Shore; so that when she was to be
resitted, that work was constantly done upon the Sea. As to what remains,
it is true she met with many ill accidents and hardships; she was often engaged
with Pirates, and combated by Tempests: but she escaped clear of all those
dangers, and never any one repented of embarking in her. One time it is
acknowledged, sailing from Malacca, to Cochin, with an extraordinary lading,
she sprung a leak, and took in so much Water, at the beginning of the Voyage,
that the Passengers, who were very numerous, were of Opinion to unlade her of
half her burden, and half her Men, and to put them upon other Ships, which
were in their company. But those Vessels, which had already their whole
lading, would not consent to ease the Santa Cruz; so that fear overpowring the
Ships Company, they returned speedily into the Port. The whole Town was
surprised to see the Ship so suddenly come back; and they were laughed to shame
for apprehending Shipwreck in the ^essel of the Saint. Being thus pulickly
upbraided with their want of Faith, to mend their Error, they took out
nothing of the Lading, but put again to Sea. And what (...) one said to them,
concerning ^^e good fortune which perpetually attended that Ship, for two and
twenty years together, so much renewed their Con^idence, that they performed
their Voyage without farther fear. The Santa Cruz continued in this manner,
sailing over all the Seas, and to every Port of Asia, till she came into the
possession of the Captain, who commanded the Port of Di^; who perceiving her to
be half rotten, and opened in diverse parts, concluded she could serve no
longer, unless she were brought into harbor, and set upon the Stocks. For
which purpose she was sent to Cochin, and haled ashore on the same Dock where
she had been built; but she was no sooner there, than she fell in pieces of her
self; nothing remaining of that great bulk, besides Planks and Beams of Timber,
unprofitable for any thing, but for the Fire. The Inhabitants of Cochin, who
knew the Prediction of ^he Saint, to every Circumstance, came out to behold its
accomplishment. An inconsiderable Merchant, called George Nugnez, who happened
to be there present, began to think within himself, that there might be yet
remaining in those Planks, somewhat of the Virtue, which the blessing of the
Saint had imprinted in them; and thereupon took one of them, which he caused to
be nailed to his own Frigate, out of the persuasion he had, that with this
assistance he should be secure from Shipwreck. Thus being filled with a lively
Faith, he boldly undertook, such long, and hazardous Voyages, that Ships of the
greatest burden were afraid to make: and without consideration of the
weather, adventured many times to cross the most tempestuous Gulphs. When he
was told, that it was not the part of a prudent Man, to endanger himself in
that manner, he answered, That the Winds and Seas were well acquainted with his
Fright, and had a Reverence for the Plank of the Santa Cruz: In effect, his
little Vessel, was ever fortunate enough, to escape the greatest perils: and
what was most remarkable, was, That having had the same destiny with the Ship
in her Adventures, and Deliverances, she ended like her, breaking in pieces of
her self, on the Shore of Coulan, where she was brought to be resitted.

To return to the Navigation of Father Xavier, He arrives at Cochin; and
finishes the Conversion of the King of the Maldivia's
he arrived at Cochin Ian. 24th. in the year 1552. The King of the Maldivia's
had been there, for some months: He was a Prince of about twenty years of age,
born in the Mohammedan Religion, and bred up in the hatred of Christians: The
revolt of his Subjects, who loved him not, or hated the Government, forced him
for the safeguard of his life, to abandon his Kingdom, and to seek Sanctuary
amongst the Portugueses, by whom he hoped to be restored. The Fathers of the
Society received him into their House, and went about to convert him, by
letting him see the falsehood of his Sect. The ill posture of his Affairs, made
him apt to receive the instructions which were given him by Father Antonio
Heredia, who endeavored his Conversion with great Zeal. But his fear of
farther exasperating his Rebellious Subjects, in case he changed his Religion,
caused him to defer that change from time to time; and perhaps he had never
forsaken the Law of Mahomet, if Father Francis had not arrived to complete that
work, which Heredia had begun. The holy Apostle preached the word with so much
e^^icacy to the King of the Maldivia's, that at length he reduced him to the
obedience of Christ, notwithstanding all the motives of worldly interest to the
contrary. Having instructed him anew in the Mysteries of Christianity, he
solemnly baptized him. In sequel of which, he excited the Portugueses to
replace him on the Throne, and nominated some of the Fathers to accompany the
Naval Army, which should be sent to the Maldivia's. His intention was, that
they should labor in the Conversion of the whole Kingdom, when once the King
should be established. But because it was of small importance to the Crown of
Portugal, that those Islands, which produce neither Gold, nor Spices, nor
Perfumes, should be made tributary to it, the Governors did nothing for that
exiled Prince; who despairing to recover his Dominions, married a Portuguese,
and lived a private life, till the day of his death: Happy only in this, that
the loss of his Crown, was made up to him, by the gift of Faith, and the Grace
of Baptism.

When the holy Man was ready to depart, He writes into Europe and comes to Goa.
an opportunity was offered him of writing into Europe; which he laid hold on,
thereby to render an account of his Voyage to Iapan, both to the King of
Portugal, and to the General of his Order. Then imbarking for Goa, he had a
speedy Voyage, and arrived there in the beginning of February.

So soon as he was come on shore, He cure^ a ^^ing m^n immediatel^ upon his
arrival.
he visited the sick in the Town-Hospitals; and then went to the College of
St. Paul, which was the House of the Society. After the ordinary embracements,
which were more tender than ever, he inquired if none were sick within the
College? He was answered, there was only one, who was lying at the point of
death. Immediately Xavier went, and read the Gospel over him. At the sight of
the Father the dying man recovered his Spirits, and was restored to health. The
Physicians had given him over, and all things had been ordered for his burial:
But he himself had never despaired of his recovery; and the day when Xavier
arrived, he said with a dying voice, That if God would grant him the favor of
beholding their good Father, he should infallibly recover.

The Relation which Xavier made to the Fathers of Goa, He hears joyful news of
the progress of Christianity in the Indies.
concerning the Church of Iapan, was infinitely pleasing to them: And he
himself was filled with equal consolation, in learning from them the present
condition of Christianity in the Indies. The Missioners whom he had dispersed
before his departure, were almost all of them united at his return. Some of
them were come by his command, and others of their own motion, concerning
urgent business; as if the holy Spirit had re-assembl'd them expressly, that the
presence of the Man of God, might redouble in them their Apostolic Zeal, and
Religious Fervor. God had every where blessed their labors. The Town of Ormus,
which fell to the lot of Father Gaspar Barzaeus, had wholly changed its
Countenance: Idolaters, Saracens, and Jews ran in multitudes to Baptism: The
Temples of Idols were consecrated to Christ; the Mosques and Synagogues were
dispeopled, ill Manners were reformed, and ill Customs totally abolished.
Christianity flourished more than ever in the Coast of Fishery, since the death
of Father Antonio Criminal, who had cultivated it with care, and in that
cultivation was massacred by the Badages. The blood of the Martyr seemed to
have multiplied the Christians; they were reckoned to be more than ^ive hundred
thousand, all Zealous, and ready to lay down their lives for their Religion.
The Gospel had not made less progress at Cochin, and at Coulan; at Bazain and
at Meliapore, at the Molucca's, and in the Isles del Moro. Put it is almost
incredible, with what profit, the Gospel Laborers preached at Goa. All the
Priests of Idols had been driven out of the Isle of Goa, by Order from the
Governor, and at the solicitation of one of the Fathers, belonging to the
College of St. Paul. It was also prohibited, under severe Penalties, to
perform any public action of Idolatry within the District of Goa: and those
Ordinances by little and little, reduced a multitude of Gentiles. As for the
Portugueses, their lives were very regular; amidst the liberty of doing
whatsoever pleased them, they refrained from all dishonest actions; and
Concubines were now as scarce* as they had been common. The Soldiers lived
almost in the nature of men in Orders: and even their Piety edified the People.

But nothing was more pleasing to Xavier than the Conversion of two Princes,
The C^n^ersi^n of the King of Tanor.
who during his absence had been at Goa. The first was King of Tanor, a Kingdom
situate along the Coasts of Malabar, betwixt Cranganor and Calecu^. This
Prince who was party-per-pale, Mohammedan and Idolater, but prudent, a great
Warrior, of a comely shape, and more polite, than was usual for a Barbarian,
had ^^om his youth a tendency to Christianity, without being well instructed in
it. He was enamored of it, after he had been informed to the full, concerning
the Mysteries of our Faith, by a Religious of the Order of St. Francis, who
frequented his Palace. In the mean time, the wars which he had with other
Princes, for ten years together, hindered him from receiving Baptism. At length
he was Christened, but very secretly, so that in appearance he remained an
Infidel, to keep the better corresponde^ce with his People. Yet he was not
without some scruple concerning the manner of his Life; and in order to
satisfy his Conscience, on so nice a Point, he desired the Bishop of Goa to
s^nd him an Apostle: for by that name the Fathers of the Society were called by
the Indi^ns, as well as by the Port^gueses. Father Gomez, who was sent to the
King of Tanor, told him positively, that God would be served in spirit and in
truth; that dissembling in Religion, was worse than irreligion; and that Jesus
would disown before his Angels, those who disowned him before men. The King,
who preferred his Salvation before his Crown, believed Gomez, and resolved to
declare himself solemnly a Christian, as soon as he had made a Treaty with his
Enemies. Having concluded a Peace through the mediation of the Father, who had
advised him to it; he came to Goa, in despite of all his Subjects, who not
being able to gain upon him, either by their reasons, or their desires, had
seized upon his Person, and shut him up, in one of the strongest Citadels of
the Kingdom: He escaped out of his Prison, swam a River, and having found eight
Foysts or half Galleys belonging to Goa, which were purposely sent to favor
his passage, he had the good fortune to arrive safely at the Town. The Bishop
and the Viceroy conducted him to the Cathedral, amidst the acclamations of the
People; and at the ^oot of the Altar, he made a public profession of his
Faith; with such expressions of true devotion, as melted the Assistants into
tears.

The other Prince, The Conversion of the King of Trichenamalo
whose Conversion gave so much joy to Father Xavier, was the King of
Trichenamalo; who is one of the Sovereigns of Ceylan. This King, while he was
yet an Infant, was set upon the Throne, and afterward dispossessed by an
Usurper, when he was but eight years old. The Tyrant not content to have taken
the Crown from him, would also have murdered him, but was prevented by a
Prince of the Blood Royal, who carried him out of his reach, being accompanied
by forty Lords of the loyal Party: and sought sanctuary for him, on the Coasts
of Fishery. The Paravas received him with all the charitable compassion, which
was due to his illustrious Birth, to the tenderness of his years, and to his
misfortunes: They also promised his attendants to serve him, what was in their
power. But at the same time advised them, to procure him a more durable and
more glorious Crown: and withal informed them of what they had been taught,
concerning the adoption of the Sons of God, the Kingdom of Heaven, and
inheritance of the Saints. Whether those considerations prevailed upon the
Prince of the blood Royal, or that the Spir^^ of God wrought powerfully on his
heart, (...) to what the Paravas desired, (...) put himself into the hands of
Father Henriquez to be instructed. The rest of the Lords followed his example,
and were all Baptized, together with the King, who seemed at his Baptism to
have an understanding much above his years. The Rulers of the Christians on the
Fishing Coast, having afterward made up an Army, supplied with what
Ammunitions of War, and other Provisions which the Country could furnish,
passed over into the Isle of Ceylan, under the conduct of the Prince, and the
forty Lords: but the Usurper was so well established in his possession, that
the Paravas were forced to retire with speed into their own Country. As for the
young King, he was brought to Goa, and the Portugueses, who took the conduct of
him into their hands, put him into the College of St. Paul, where he was
virtuously educated by the Fathers of the Society. Xavier praised Almighty God,
to see the great Men of the Earth, subjected to the Empire of Jesus Christ, by
the Ministry of the Children of Ignatius: and rejoiced with his Brethren so
much the more, because the Bishop of Goa, Don Iuan de Albuquerque, was so well
satisfied of their conduct.

This wise and holy Prelate, The Letter from the Bishop of the Indies, to
Father Ignatius.
communicated to the Father, a Letter which he had written on that Subject,
during his absence, to the General of the Society. The Letter was in
Portuguese, dated from Cochin, Nov. 28. in the year 1550. And is thus
translated into our Language: The great performances of your Children, and
Subjects, in all the Dominions of the East, the holiness of their lives, the
purity of their Doctrine, their Zeal, in laboring the reformation of the
Portugueses, by the Ministry of Gods word, and the Sacrament of Penance, their
un^eary'd Travels through all the Kingdoms of India, for the conversion of
Idolaters and Moors, their continual application to study the Tongues of this
new World, and to teach the Mysteries of Faith, and principally at the Cape of
Comorin, all this obliges me to write to your Reverence, and to give testimony
of what I have beheld with my own Eyes. Indeed, the Fathers of your Society are
admirable laborers in our Lords Vineyard; and are so faithfully subservient to
the Bishops, that their endeavors for the good of those Souls, with which I am
entrusted, give me hope of remaining the fewer years in Purgatory. I dare not
undertake the relation of all their particular Actions, and if I durst
adventure it, want time for the performance of it; I will only tell you, that
they are here like Torches lighted up, to dissipate the thick darkness, wherein
these barbarous people were benighted; and that already by their means, many
Nations of Infidels believe one God in three persons: For what remains, I
freely grant them all they require of me for the good of Souls. Every one of
them partakes with me in my Power and Authority, without appropriating any of
it to my self: and I look upon my self, as one of the Members of that holy
Body, though my life arises not to their perfection. In one word, I love them
all in Jesus Christ, with a fervent and sincere Charity.

The rest of the Letter is nothing appertaining to our purpose, and therefore
is omitted.

The man of God received intelligence at the same time, He ^ears other
comfortable news.
that the Ministers of Portugal at Goa, had sent word to Lisbonne, of the great
progress which the Society had made; and that in particular, the new Viceroy
Don Antonio de Norogna, had written, That the Indies were infinitely satisfied
with the Jesuits, that none could look on the good effects of their labors,
without blessing the name of God for them; and that their Lives were
correspondent to their Calling. The Saint also was informed, that the King of
Portugal had sent word of all these proceedings to the Pope; especially the
conversion of the King of Tanor, and the Martyrdom of Father Antonio Criminal,
That he had communicated to his Holiness, his intentions of founding many
Colleges for the Society, to the end, the East might be filled with
Apostolical Laborers; and that, in the mean time, he had ordained, that all
the Seminaries established in the Indies, for the education of youth, should be
put into the hands of the Society, in case it was not already done. Lastly, it
was told to Father Xavier, that the Viceroy of the Indies, and the Captains of
the Fortresses, had Orders from King John the Third, to defray the charges of
the Missioners in all their Voyages; and that this most religious Prince had
discharged his Conscience of the care of Souls, by imposing it on the Society;
obliging the Fathers in his stead, to provide for the instruction of the
In^idels, according to the ancient agreement, which had been made with the holy
See, when the Conquests of the East, were granted to the Crown of Portugal.

Amidst so many occasions of joy and satisfaction, He is afflicted with the
misdemeanors of Father Antonio Gomez.
the ill conduct of Antonio Gomez, gave Xavier an exceeding cause of grief.
Before his Voyage to Iapan, he had constituted him Rectour of the Colled of St.
Paul, according to the intention, or rather by the order of Father Simon
Rodriguez, who had sent him to the Indies, three years after his Noviciat; and
who in relation to these Missions, had an absolute authority, as being
Provincial of Portugal, on which the Indies have their dependence. Gomez was
Master of many eminent qualities which rarely meet in the same person: He was
not only a great Philosopher, Divine and Canonist, but also an admirable
Preacher, and as well conversant as any man in the management of Affairs: and
besides all this, was kindled with a most fervent zeal, for the Conversion of
Souls; always ways prompt to labor in the most painful employments, and always
inde^atigable in labor. But wonderfully self-op^nion'd, never guided by any
judgment but his own; and acting rather by the vivacity of his own impetuous
fancy than by the directions of the holy Spirit, or the rules of right reason.
As he was of a confirmed age, at his entrance into the Society, so he had not
soon enough endeavored to get the mastry of those headstrong Passions which
ran away with his Understanding. And when he had once taken upon him the charge
of Rectour, he began to govern by the dictates of his own capricious humor,
even before the face of Xavier, e're he departed from the Indies for Iapan; and
the Father, who easily perceived, that the Government of Gomez, was not in the
least conformable to the Spirit of their Institute, would at that time have
withdrawn him from Goa, and sent him to Orm^z: But the Viceroy, to whom Gomez
had been powerfully recommended by one of the chief Ministers of Portugal,
would not suffer him to be transplanted; or that his Authority should be taken
from him; so that all Xavier could do, was to temper, and draw off from his
jurisdiction, by establishing Father Paul de Camerin^, Superior General of all
the Missions of the Indies.

But when once the Saint was departed from Goa* How Gomez attacks the Authority
of Paul de Camerino*
Go^ez usurped the whole Government; alleging for his own justi^ication, that
Father Rodriguez had given him an absol^te power; and that Camerine was a poor
honest Creature, more sit to visit the Prisons and Hospitals of Goa, than to
manage the Missions, and govern the Colleges of the Society. He began with
prescribing new Rules to his Inferiors; and declared to them in exp^ess terms,
That they must return into their Mothers Womb, that they might be born again
into a spiritual life, and transformed into other men. Not that they had any
need of Reformation they who were themselves the models of a perfect life; but
the business was, that he had brought with him out of Europe, I know not what
contrivance of new living, framed according to his own fanciful Speculations.
He undertook then to change their domestic Discipline, and to regulate the
Studies of the Jesuits, by the model of the University of Paris, where he had
been a Student in his youth. There was nothing but change and innovation every
day, and he exercised his power, with such haughtiness, and magisterial
hardness* that it appeared more like the dictates of an absolute Monarchy, than
the injunction of a Religious Superior. For, to make himself obeyed and
feared, he went so far, as to tell them, he had re^eiv'd an unlimited power
from Father Simon Rodriguez, in virtue of which he could imprison, or remand
into Portugal any person, who should presume to oppose his Government.

His Conduct was: The extravag^^ces of Gome^. in matters of Religion.
not less irregular, in respect of the young men who were educated in the
Seminary; of whom the greatest part were Indians. Though they were yet but
Novices in the Faith, and scarcely to be accounted Christians, he enjoined them
the practices of the most perfect interior life, which they could not possibly
under stand; and as they could not acquit themselves of those Exercises, which
were too sublime for them, he failed not to punish them severely. From thence
arose Murmurs and Combinations, and even despair began to seize on those young
ill-treated Indians: and from thence: also it came to pass, that many of them,
not able to endure so violent a Government, leapt over the Walls by night, and
^led from out the College. Gomez, who could not bear the least contradiction,
upon this became more assuming, and fantastical. So that one day, he turned
out, all the remaining Scholars of the Seminary; as if they had been incapable
of Discipline: and receiving into their places, seven and, twenty Portugueses,
who desired to be of the Society, without having any tincture of humane
Learning, he changed the Seminary into a Noviciat. As he had gained an absolute
ascendant, over the mind of George Cabral, at that time Viceroy of the Indies,
no man durst oppose his mad enterprises, not so much as the Bishop Don Iuan d'
Albuquerque, who was unwilling to displease the Viceroy, and feared to increase
the distemper, by endeavoring to cure it. Neither was the Rectour so confined
to Goa, that he made not frequent sallies into the Country; whether his natural
activity would not suffer him to take repose, or that his Zeal required a
larger sphere; or that, in ^ine, he looked upon himself as Superior General of
the Missions, and therefore thought it incumbent on him, to have an inspection
into all Affairs, and to do every thing himself.

The Town of Cochin, The violence and injustice of Gomez.
being willing to found a College for the Society, he went thither to receive
the o^^er; but he spoiled a good business by ill management. The Captain of the
Fortress, immediately gave him a Church, called, the M^ther of God, against the
Will of the Vicar of Cochin, and in despite of a certain Brotherhood, to which
that Church belonged. The donation being disputed in Law, Gomez, who had it
still about him, to make a false step, that is, having much opiniatrete, great
credit, and good intentions, took upon him to stand the suit, and to get the
Church upon any terms. This violent procedure exasperated the people, who had
been hitherto much edified, by the Charity of the Fathers, and the public
indignation went so high, that they wrote Letters of Complaint concerning it,
to the King of Portugal and Father Ignatius.

This was the present face of things when Xavier returned from Iapan; Xavier
repairs the faults committed by Gomez.
and it was partly upon this occasion, that the Letters, which he received at
Amanguchi, so earnestly pressed his coming back. his first endeavors were to
repair the faults committed by the Rectour; and he began with the business of
Cochin; for in his passage by it, at his return, knowing the violence of Gomez,
he assembled in the Choir of the Cathedral, the Magistrate of the Town, with
all the Fraternity of the Mother of God, and in the presence of the Vicar,
falling on his knees before them, he desired their pardon for what had passed;
presented to them the keys of the Church, which was the cause of the dispute,
and yielded it entirely to them. But submission sometimes gains, that which
haughty carriage goes without. The Fraternity restored the keys into the hands
of Xavier, and of their own free motion, made an authentic deed of gift, of
their Church, to the College of the Society. As for what relates to Goa, the
Saint dismissed those Portugueses, whom Gomez had received into the Society;
and, having gathered up as many as he could ^ind of those young Indians, who
had either been expelled, or were gone out of the College of their own accord,
he reestablished the Seminary, whose dissolution was so prejudicial to the
Christianity of the Indies.

It was only remaining to chastise the Criminal, He expel^ Gomez from the
Society.
who had made such evil use of his authority; Xavier would make an example of
him; and so much the rather, because having told him what punishment his faults
had merited, he found him standing on his terms, insolent, and with no
disposition to submit. He judged upon the whole, that a man who was neither
humble nor obedient, after such scandalous misdemeanors, was unworthy of the
Society of Jesus; which notwithstanding, he was not willing to pull off his
Habit at Goa, for fear his departure might make too great a noise. But having
made the Viceroy sensible of the justice of his proceeding, he sent him to the
Fortress of Diu, toward Cambaya; with Orders, to the Fathers residing there,
to give him his dismission; and to use all manner of persuasions with him, that
he would return into Portugal, by the opportunity of the first Ship which went
away. All was performed according to the intentions of the Holy man. But Gomez
embarking on a Vessel, which was wrecked in the midst of the Voyage, was
unfortunately drowned. Giving us to understand by so tragical an end, that the
talents of Nature, and even the gifts of Grace it self, serve only to the
destruction of a man in Religious Orders, who is not endu'd with the Spirit of
Humility and Obedience.

THE LIFE OF St. FRANCIS XAVIER.
BOOK VI.
THE Affairs of the Society being accommodated in this manner, He sends out
Missioners to diverse places.
Xavier thought on nothing more than how to supply the Missions of the Indies
with good Laborers; or rather to increase the number of the Missioners, who
were not sufficient for the common needs. He therefore sent Melchior Nug^ez to
Bazain; Gonsalvo Rodriguez to Cochin, John Lopez to Meliapore, and Luys Mendez
to the Fishery, where he confirmed Henry Henriquez for Superior, whom the
Missioners of that Coast had already chosen instead of Antonio Criminal.

After this, He endavours an Embassy to China.
he bent his whole endeavors to Procure an Embassy to China. The Viceroy, Don
Alphonso de Norogna, with great willingness granted to James Pereyra, that
employment, which Xavier had desired for him. He promised even to favor it, in
all things depending on him; and gave wherewithal to furnish out Presents for
the Emperor of China. Notwithstanding, the most magnificent were made at the
charges of the Ambassador. He had prepared Cloth of Gold, Ornaments for an
Altar of Brocard, Pictures of Devotion in rich Frames, made by the best hands
of Europe, with Copes and other magnificent Church-stuff, all proper to
represent to the Chinese, the Majesty of the Christian Religion. The Bishop,
Don Iuan d' Albuquerque, was not less favorable to the designs of the Father,
than the Viceroy. And being willing to write to the Emperor of China, thereby
to give an honorable testimony to the holy Law of God, he ordered his Letter
to be written in Characters of Gold, and bordered about with curious Painting.
Nothing more was wanting, than only to make choice of such Missioners, as were
to accompany Xavier to China, and to provide others for Iapan: For, besides
that the Saint himself, had his dear Iaponians always in his memory, the
Ambassador of the King of Bungo, who was come with him to Goa, requested some
Evangelical Preachers, in his Masters name. The man of God* had enough to do,
to content all those, who were desirous of that Employment. There were at that
time thirty of the Society in the College of G^a. Some of them had been in the
Indies, from the first years of Xaviers arrival in those Ports: Others were
either new comers* or had been lately admitted; all of them were of approved
virtue, and well worthy of that vocation, which they so earnestly desired; but
there was none amongst them, who sought it with more eagerness, nor who more
signally deserved it than Gasper Barzaeus.

Xavier, He appoints Barzaeus Rector of the College of Goa.
before his Voyage to Iapan, had recalled him from Ormuz, with design of
sending him to that Country, or else of taking him with himself to China. Yet
he altered both those intentions; for after many serious debates within
himself, he thought it most convenient, to leave Barzaeus at Goa, where since
his return from Ormuz, he had labored in the Ministry with great success: but
his principal reason was, the necessity of the College of St. Paul, which had
not yet shaken off all the ill symptoms of the government of Gomez, and which
stood in need of a Superior, whose conduct should be regular. On these
considerations he made him Rector of the College of Goa, and also
Vice-Provincial of the Indies, by the authority which he had received from the
General of the Order. For the Saint at his return from Iapan, found two Patents
waiting for him, which had been expedited from Rome, in the year 1549, one
bearing date the 10th. of October, the other the 23d. of December, as the
minutes, which are kept in the Archives of the Society, declare; by the first
Ignatius constitutes Father Xavier Provincial of the Indies, and of all the
Kingdoms of the East, of which he made a particular Province, distinct from
that of Portugal; by the second he endows him with all the privileges which
the Popes have granted to the head of the Order; and to those Members of it, to
whom the General shall please to impart them. For what remains, see here the
form of Barzaeus his establishment, which is preserved in the Archives of Goa;
and written by the hand of Father Xavier.

Master Gaspar, The form by which Barz^us was made Rector of the College, etc.
I command you in virtue of holy obedience, as Superior of the Company of
Jesus in these Countries of the Indies, to take the Government of this College
of Santa Fe; in quality of Rector; persuaded as I am of your virtue, your
humility, your prudence, and of all those qualities which make you proper for
the governing of others.

I will, that all the Fathers, and Portuguese Brothers of the Society of Jesus,
who are spread over this new world, from the Cape of Good Hope, as far as
Malacca, the Molucca's, and Japan, be subject to you. I will, in like manner,
that all those who shall come from Portugal, or from any other Country of
Europe, into the Houses of the Society, under my obedience, should acknowledge
your for their Superior; if it happen not, that our Father Ignatius name some
other Rector of this College of Goa, as I have already requested him by my
Letters, informing him at large of the necessity of sending hither some
experienced person, in whom he much confides, to Govern this College, and all
the Missions of our Society depending on it. If then, any of the Society, sent
by Father Ignatius, or by any other General of the Society of Jesus* with
Patents signed in due form, shall arrive at Goa, to take the Government of this
House, and of those which are subjected to it, I command you, in the same
virtue of holy obedience, to resign the Government into his hands, forthwith,
and to be obedient to him in all things.

Xavier having thus declared Barzae^^ Superior, (...)
in a full Assembly of the College, kneeled down, and acknowledged him for
such; thereby giving a public example of submission. After which, he commanded
all of them in virtue of holy obedience, to be subject to him: and ordered him
to expel from the Society, all such, as should enterprise ought against his
authority, or refuse obedience to his Orders. He ordered him, I say, positively
to expel them, without consideration of their capacity, their ^loquence, or any
other gifts of Nature; adding, that what ever excellent qualities they had,
they wanted those which were essential, namely humility and obedience.

Barzaeus replied not one word, (...)
when it was intimated to him, that he should not go to China, how desirous
soever he were of that Voyage: and it may be said, that on this occasion, he
made a noble sacrifice of all his fervent zeal to his Obedience. But when he
was nominated both Rector and Vice Provincial, confounded at the mention of
those dignities, he said aloud, That he was not endu'd with the Spirit of
Government: he was ready to dye of shame, when he saw the Saint upon his knees
before him; and with great precipitation, fell also on his knees, and humbly
begged of him with tears in his eyes, that he would consider his infirmities.
The Saint, who had a perfect insight into his integrity, would not hearken to
him, and judged him to be so much the more worthy of those two Employments, as
he judged himself to be incapable. As Barzaeus was the desire of all, in all
places, and yet his presence was necessary at Goa, not only for the due
regulation of the College, but also for the good of Missions; Xavier forbad
him in virtue of holy obedience, to depart out of the Isle of Goa, during the
space of three years ensuing; and for this reason, that Barzaeus having this
tie of prohibition upon him, might be priviledg'd to refuse any Towns which
might desire him amongst them: and that if his refusal should displease them,
yet at least the unkindness might not rest on him.

After all these punctual Orders, The new Instru^^ns which he (...) t^ Barzaeus.
Xavier gave in writing, to the new Rector, such instructions, as he was to use
in the government of his inferiors, and in reference to the conduct of
himself; according to what all of them had proposed to themselves, to have no
design, save only ad m^j^rem Dei gloriam; to God's greater honor. Those
Instructions are very ample; and I shall give you only the most material.

Have before your eyes continually your own nothingness, and endeavor above
all things to have your mind so possessed with it, that the contempt of your
self may never leave you. Always treat the Fathers of the Society with great
mildness and respect; as well those who inhabit with you, as those who live in
other places, at a distance: let not the least rough^ess, or haughty carriage
appear in you, if it be not when your moderation and humility are turned into
contempt; for on such occasions, having nothing in your intentions but the good
of your Inferiors, and not making the contempt of your authority the object of
your vengeance, you are to make the guilty somewhat sensible of your power. But
you shall only punish them so far as need requires, and for their amendment*
and the edifica^ion of our Brethren, who were witnesses of their fault. All the
offenses which shall be committed either by the F^thers or the Brothers against
the rule of obedience, ought to be punished by some correction: and in so
doing, the Character of Priesthood, must be no privilege to the Offendour. If
any of your Inferiors, act presumptuously against you, and full of
self-opinion, resist you with stubbornness, raise your self in opposition to
their pride; and speak magisterially to them: let your behavior toward them,
have more of severity than of mildness. Impose some public penance on them:
and beware of all things, that they may not observe in you the least remisness,
which they will be sure to interpret fear; for nothing more encourages the
^^tractable and haughty to Rebellion, than the softness and fearful spirit of a
Governor. And it is not credible, how assuming, proud, and peremptory they
will grow, when once they find the reins are slackened, and that their
p^silanimous Superior is afraid of punishing their want of due respect.
Impunity hardens that sort of People in their insolence; or rather, it makes
them more and more audacious; which disturbs the peace of Religious Houses.
Execute then my Orders, without fearing the opinion or speech of People: and
let no consideration, no regard of persons, hinder you from the performance of
your duty. Amongst your Inferiors, you will find some, who are neither
obstinate nor disobedient, but who are weak; who are forgetful of what is
enjoined them, who indeed despise not the Orders of their Superiors, but
sometimes neglect them, either out of faintheartedness, or want of sense.
Reprehend such men, with more gentleness and moderation, and temper your
reproof with the mildness of your countenance; and if you find it necessary so
punish them, impose but an easy penance on them. Never admit into the Society,
such as are not endu'd with judgment, and good natural parts: nor those who
are of a weak constitution, and proper for no employment, or of whom you may
reasonably suspect, that they would enter into Religion for secular respects,
rather than out of a sincere devotion of serving God. When they shall have
ended their exercises, you are to employ them in the service of the Sick, in
the public Hospitals, and in the meanest Offices of the House. You shall cause
them t^ give you an account of the endeavors they have made, to acquit
themselves well of their ordinary meditations, according to the form
prescribed. If you are assured, that they are lukewarm and faint, at their
devotions, you will do well to d^smiss them, and turn them out of the Society
betimes: or, if there be any hope of their amendment, you shall withdraw them
for some days from those interior exercises; depriving them by way of penance,
of an honor which their negligence has made them unworthy to enjoy; (and such
indeed is that of communicating with God in Prayer) to the end that being
ashamed, to stand excluded from that celestial commerce, they may desire more
ardently to be readmitted to it. I recommend extremely to you, that you pay an
extraordinary respect to my Lord the Bishop; and that you be obedient to him.
Beware of doing any thing which may displease him: Endeavor, on the contrary,
to serve him in all things, according to your power: and acknowledge by all
manner of good Offices, those infinite obligations which we have to so
charitable a Father and Benefactour. Command those Fathers who are out of Goa,
to write to him from time to time, but not too prolixly: and to give him an
account of the fruit of their labors. That they mention in their Letters, as
far as truth will give them leave, the commendation of his Vicars; and omit not
the other good (...) of the Religious: and if they can say no good of them, let
them be silent of them; for we are not to imagine that our duty o^liges us, to
complain to the Bishop, of the ill conduct of his Vicars, or of other
Gospel-Labourers: There will never be wanting those who will ease us of that
trouble. Beware, not to trouble your self with the management of worldly
business; nor even to encumber your Inferiors with it, on any occasion
whatsoever. When Secular men shall desire to engage you in the employments of
civil life, return this answer, That the time which remains free to you from
preaching, and the administration of the Sacraments, is scarce sufficient for
your studies and devotions, which are yet necessary to you before you go into
the Pulpit, or appear in the Tribune of Penance: that you cannot prefer the
care of Worldly things, before the cure of Souls, without perverting the Order
and Rule of Charity. By this means you shall disengage your self from all those
sorts of encumbrances; and without this circumspection, you will do great
prejudice to the Society: for you ought to understand, that the World often
enters by this door into Religious Houses, to the extreme damage both of the
Religious, and of Religion.

In the visits which are made to you, endeavor to find out the bottom and end
of their design, who come to see you. For some there are, the least part of
whose business is to be instructed in S^irituals; it is only Temporal inte^est
which brings them to you: There will even be some, who will come to Confession,
on no other m^tiv^, than to (...) yo^ with the necessities of their Family: The
bent counsel I c^n give you, is to stand upon your guard with such; and to he
rid of them, let them k^^w from the very first, that you can neither furnish
them with money, nor procure them any favor from other men. Be warned to have
as little disco^rse with this so^t of People, as possibly y^u can; for most
commonly they are great talkers, and if you trouble your self with giving them
the hearing, you are almost certain to lose your time. For what remains,
disquiet not your self, with what they think or say of you; let them murmur on,
and do you take up a res^lu^i^n of standing out so firmly, that they may not
find the least concernment in you: f^r the show of any natural sensibility
w^u'd discover that you are not enough disengaged from the World; as if you
were wavering what part to take, betwixt the World and Christ. Remember, that
you cannot covet popular approbation, without betraying your Ministry, or
becoming a des^rtou^ of your Sacred Colors, in going back from that
Evangelical Perfe^tion, which you are obliged to follow, with an unrelenting
ard ^ur.

After this, Xavier gave Barzaeus sundry particular Orders, relating to the
Persons, and Houses of the Society.

And now he chose for his Companions, (...)
Baltha^ar Gago, Edward Silva, and Peter Alcaceva, with Francis Gon^alez, and
Alvarez Ferreyra de Monte Major; without reckoning into the number a young
secular Chinese named Antonio, who had been brought up in the Seminary of
Saint Foy. Some of these were intended for China, and others for Iapan. Father
Ignatius had written to Father Xavier, that it was of great importance, to send
from the Indies into Europe, one of the Society, well versed in the Eastern
affairs, who might render an exact account of all things, to the King of
Pertugal, and the Pope; as a means of procuring Temporal supplies from the one,
and Spiritual favors from the other: both which were necessary for the ^urther
increase of Christianity in Asia. Father Francis did not receive those Letters,
'till after his Voyage of Iapan. He had thought of these very things formerly,
but now seeing that the judgment of Ignatius concurred with his, he deputed
into Italy and P^rtugal, Andrew Fernandez, a man of parts and probity, who was
not yet in Priests Orders. He not only gave him ample informations concerning
the present condition of the Indies, but also wrote large Let^ers on the same
Subject, to the King of Portugal, to Father Ignatius, and to Simon Rodriguez.
Being now ready to go for the Voyage of China, he gave notice of his intentions
to King John, in this ensuing Letter.

I Shall depart from Goa, (...)
within the compass of five days, intending first for Malacca; from whence I
shall take the way of China, in the company of James Pereyra, who is named
Ambassador. We carry with us the rich Presents which are bought, partly at the
cost of your Majesty, and partly at the proper charges of Pereyra. But we carry
also a far more precious present, and such an one, as no King, at least to my
knowledge, has made the like to another Prince; namely, the Gospel of Jesus
Christ; and if the Emperor of China, once knew its value, I am confident he
would prefer that treasure, before all his own, how immense soever they may be.
I hope, that at length Almighty God, will look with Eyes of pity, on that vast
Empire, and that he will make known, to those great multitudes, who are all
made after his own Image, their Creator, and (...) men. But my hopes are
incomparably greater, when I consider, that God has made ch^ice of such w^ak
instruments, and such sinners as we are, for so high an employment, as to carry
the light of the Gospel, almost, I may say, into another World, to a Nation
blinded with Idolatry, and given up to Vice.

While they were sitting out the Ship, (...)
which was to carry the Missioners of China and Iapan, Xavier assembled the
Fathers of the College by night, not being able to do it by day, because they
were in continual employment, till the Evening. He discoursed with them,
concerning the virtues requisite to the Apostolic Vocation; and spoke with so
much ardency and unction, that the Congregation was full of sighs and tears,
according to the Relation of some who were present, and have left it us in
writing. But the instructions which he gave, in taking his last farewell of
them, are very remarkable. And I cannot, in my Opinion report them better, than
in the very words of the Author, who took them from the mouth of the Apostle.
The Father, Master Francis, says he, embracing his Brethren before his
departure for China, and weeping over them, recommended Constancy, in their
Vocation to them: together with un^eign'd ^umility, which was to have for its
Foundation, a true knowledge of themselves, and particularly a most prompt
Obedience. He extended his Exhortation on this last point, and enjoined them
Obedience, as a virtue most pleasing to Almighty God, much commended by the
holy Spirit, and absolutely necessary to the Sons of the Society.

The Apostle went from Goa, (...)
on Holy Thursday, which fell that year 1552, on the fourteenth day of April.
The Sea was calm enough, till they came to the height of the Islands of
Nicubar, which are somewhat above Sumatra, toward the Nort^. Thereabouts the
Waves began to swell; and presently after, there arose so furious a Tempest,
that there scarcely remained any hopes of sa^ety. That which doubled their
Apprehension, was, that two Foysts, which bore them company, unable to sustain
the fury of the Waves, sunk both by one another* The ^hip which carried Xavier
and his Companians, was a Royal Vessel, very large and deep laden, so that her
unw^ldy bulk, and heavy freight, hindered her ^ailing, and her steering. It was
t^ought necessary to ease her, and the Merchandises were ready to be cast
overboard, when Father Francis desired the Captain not to be too hasty. But the
Sailours saying, that the Tempest increasing, as usually it does toward
evening, the Vessel could not so conveniently be disburden'd in the dark, he
bid them not disturb themselves about it, for the storm should cease, and they
should make Land before Sunset. The Captain, who knew how certain the
Predictions of Xavier were, made not the least scruple of believing him; and
the event verified the Prophecy. The Sea grew calm, and Land appeared before
the setting of the Sun.

But while every one was rejoicing at the nearness of the Port, Before his
arrival at Malacca, he knows the Plague is in the Town.
the holy Man had sadness in his Countenance, and often sighed. Some of them
inquired the cause, and he bade them pray to God for the City of Malacca, which
was visited with an Epidemical disease. Xavier said true, for the sickness was
so general, and so contagious, that it seemed the beginning of a Pestilence.
Malignant Fevers raged about the Town, which carried off the strongest
Constitutions in a little space, and the infection was caught almost at sight.
In this condition the Ship sound Malacca; and never was the sight of the holy
Man, more pleasing to the Inhabitants. Every one promised himself ease of Body,
and consolation of Mind from him; and they were not deceived in their
expectation.

So soon as he was set on shore, (...)
he went in search of the Sick, and found employment enough amongst them for
the exercise of his Charity. Not a man of them, but desired to confess to
Father Francis; and to expire in his Arms; according to the popular opinion,
that whoever died in that manner, could not fail of being saved. He ran from
Street to Street with his Companions, to gather up the poor, who lay
languishing on the ground, for want of succor. He carried them to the
Hospitals, and to the College of the Society, which on this occasion he
changed into an Hospital. And when both the College and the Hospitals were
full, he ordered Cabins to be built along the Shore, out of the remainders of
rotten Vessels, for Lodgings, and necessary uses of those distressed Creatures.
After which he procured them Food and Medicines, which he begged from the
devouter sort, and himself attended them both day and night. That which
appeared most wonderful, was, that though the sick could not be served, nor the
dying assisted, nor the dead buried without taking the infection, and it was
death to take it, yet Xavier and his Companions enjoyed their perfect health in
the midst of such dangerous employments. This indeed was wonderful, but there
was also an undoubted miracle, which it pleased Almighty God to work by the
Ministry of his Servant, on a young man, whom at that time he restored to li^e.

This young m^n, He raises a y^ung man t^ life.
named Francis Ciavus, the only Son of a devout Woman, who had long been under
the conduct of Xavier, having put into his mouth, without thinking of it, a
poisoned Arrow, such as are used in those Eastern parts, died suddenly, so
subtle, and so mortal was the venom. They were already burying him, when
Xavier came by chance that way. He was so moved with the cries and lamentations
of the Mother, that taking the dead by the h^nd, he revived him with these
words; Francis, in (...) name of Jesus Christ, arise. The youth thus raised,
believed from that moment, that he was no more his own, and that he was obliged
to consecrate that li^e to God, which was so miracul^usly restored: In effect,
he did it, and out of acknowledgment to Xavier, took the Habit of the Society.
When the Mortality was almost ceased, the Saint pursued his design of the
Embassy to China, and treated with Don Alvarez'd Atayda, the Governor of
Malacca, on whom the Viceroy had reposed the trust of so important an Affair.
Don Alvarez had much approved this enterprise, when Xavier had first opened it,
at his return from Iapan, and had even promised to favor it with all his
power. But Envy and Interest are two passions, which stiflxse the most
reasonable thoughts, and make men forget their most solemn Protestations.

The Governor had a grudging to Pereyra, (...) of China is cr^ss'd by the
(...) of Malacca.
who, the year before, had refused to lend him ten thousand Crowns; and could
not endure, that a Merchant should be sent Ambassador to the greatest Monarch
in the World. He said, That certainly that Pereyra, whom the Viceroy had
empowered by his Letters, was some Lord of the Court of Portugal, and not James
Pereyra, who had been Domestic Servant to Don Gonsalvo de Cotigno. But that
which most disturbed him, was, that besides the honor of such an Embassy, the
Merchant should make so vast a pro^it of his Wares, which he would sell off at
an excessive rate in China. The Governor said, That in his own person, were to
be considered the services of the Count his Father, and that those hundred
thousand Crowns which would be gained at least by Pereyra, were a more suitable
reward for the Son of Atayda, than for the Valet de Chamber of Cotigno. With
such grating thoughts as these he sought occasions to break off the Voyage; yet
he would not declare himself at first; and the better to cover his design, or
not to seem unthankful to Father Xavier, he fed him with fair promises. For the
holy Man had procured him the command of Captain Major of of the Sea; and
himself had brought him the provisions for that place: because when first the
Father had opened his purpose of going into China, Atayda seemed to have
espoused the project with great affection, and engaged himself to make it
succeed, in case the Ports and Navigations of the Portugu^ses, were once
depending on him. To oblige him yet farther, the Saint had procured from the
Viceroy, and brought along with him, certain extraordinary privileges, which
had not been comprised in the provisions of the Command. And lastly, That he
might wholly gain him, at his arrival, finding the Governor very sick, he
attended him with great diligence, and made himself at once, both his Nurse and
his Chaplain; watching by him all the night, and saying Mass for him in the
morning. But all these Offices of friendship, wrought nothing on a heart, where
Jealousy and Avarice were predominant.

What care soever Don Alvarez took, Xavier endeav^urs all he can t^ gain the
(...) of the (...), for the Embass^.
to conceal his ill intentions, Xavier quickly discovered them, and at the same
time wrote to Pereyra, who was yet at Sunda, advising him to come without any
Equipage, and to affect nothing of magnificence, that he might not farther
exasperate an interessed and jealous Soul. But all the modesty of the
Ambassador could not hinder the Governor from breaking out. At the first
noise of his arrival, he sent Officers of Justice, and Soldiers to the Port,
with Orders to make seizure on the Ship called Santa Cruz, to take away the
Rudder, and give it into his hands. This was the first act of Jurisdiction,
which was exercised by Do^ Alvarez, as Captain of the Sea; employing against
Xavier himself, that Authority which had been procured him by Xavier, and
pushing his ingratitude as far as it could go. In the mean time, to cover his
Passion with the pretext of public good, according to the common practice of
men in power, he protested ^oudly, That the interests of the Crown had
constrained him to act in this manner: That he had received information from
his Spies, that the Iavans were making preparations of War, to come upon
Malacca, once again: That he could not have too many Ships in readiness,
against such formidable Enemies; and that the Santa Cruz, was of absolute
necessity to the Kings service. This Fable, which was the product of his own
Brains, was soon exploded by the arrival of some other Portuguese Vessels, who
coming from the Isles of Iava, made Oath, that these Barbarians being engaged
amongst themselves in Civil Wars, had no thoughts of any Foreign Conquest. Don
Alvarez not being able any longer to support the credit of his Tale, pulled off
the Mask, and stood upon no farther Ceremonies. Xavier perceiving that the love
of Iucre, was his governing Passion, made o^^ers to him by Pereyra, of thirty
thousand Crowns in pure gift, but the desire of engrossing all the gain, was
the reason which prevailed with Atayda, to refu^e it.

The Treasurer, with the rest of the Crown-Officers, being come to remonstrate
to him, that the Kings Orders were positive, not to stop the Navigation of
those Merchants, who had paid the duties of the Port; he threatened them with
his Cane, which he held up against them, and drove them out of his Chamber with
great fury, saying, That he was too old to be counseled, that as long as he
continued Governor of Malacca, and Captain ^f the Seas, James Pereyra should
not go to China, either as Ambassado^r or Merchant; and if Father Xavier was
intoxicated with the zeal of converting Heathens, he might go to Brazile, or to
the Kingdom of Monomotapa.

Francis Pereyra, who was Auditou^ Royal, and who had great Credit in the Town,
not being able either by his Entreaties, or his Arguments, to oblig^ Don
Alvarez to restore the Rudder of the Santa Cruz, would have forced it from him;
but this was opposed by Xavier^ who foresaw, that the Soldiers who kept the
Rudder, would defend it wit^ the hazard of their lives; and that this Affair
would have ill Consequences.

The way which was taken by the holy Man, (...)
was to send to the Governour^ the Grand Vicar John Suarez, attende^ by the
most considerable persons of the Town, to show him the Letters of King John the
Third, which expressly made out his intentions, That Father Xavier should extend
the Faith, as far as he was able, through all the Kingdoms of the East, and
that the Governors should favor him on all occasions. Suarez read also to the
Governor, the Letter of the Vice King Don Alphonso de Norogna, in which he
declared Criminal of State, whosoever should hinder, or oppose this particular
Voyage of the Saint. That which ought to have reduced Don Alvarez to Reason, or
at least to have terrified him, served only to make him more unreasonable, and
more audacious. He rose from his Seat, with the action of a Madman, and
stamping with his foot, sent back the Grand Vicar, with this dutiful
expression: The Kings Interest, you say, requires this to be performed; and I
will not suffer it to be performed: Here I am, and will be Master.

These outrageous dealings of the Governor, The G^^e^n^ur flies ^ut into fury
against the Father.
were not consin^d to those, who made these Remonstrances to him from the
Father; they extended even to the Saint himself; whom he looked on, as the
Author, and head of the Enterprise. It Is incredible, what injurious words he
gave him, an^ how rudely he treated him, on several occasions: Insomuch, that
it was the common talk of Malacca, that this Persecution might pass for the
Martyrdom of Father Xavier. The Servant of God resented nothing which was done
to his own person. He blessed God continually, for giving him occasions of
suffering; but he was extremely sensible of what Religion, and the progress of
the Gospel suffered, and was often seen to weep abundantly.

He ceased not for a month together to solicit the Governor: sometimes
beseeching him by the wounds of a Crucified Savior, sometimes urging him with
the fatal consequences of a miserable Eternity, and endeavoring to let him
understand, what a crime it was to hinder the publication of the Gospel; but
these Divine Reasons prevailed as little with Don Alvarez, as the Humane had
done formerly. This strange obduracy, quite overwhelmed the Father, when he saw
that all these ways of mildness were unsuccessful, and the season of Navigation
passed away; after he had well consulted God upon it, he concluded, that it was
time to try the last remedies. Ten years were now expired since his coming to
the Indies, and hitherto no one person, excepting only the Bishop of Goa, was
made privy to his being the Apostolic Nuncio. He had kept this secret in
profound silence, and had not once exercised his power. But now he thought
himself obliged to own it, in a business of so great consequence, and to strike
with the Thunders of the Church, if occasion were, the Man who made open War
against the Church.

Which notwithstanding he would not dart the Thunderbolt himself; The Father
resolves to excommunicate the Governor; and what he does in order to it.
but used the hand of the Grand Vicer; having sent for him, he began with
showing him one of the Briefs of Paul the Third, which constituted him his
Nuncio, in all the Kingdoms of the East. After this, he requested Suarez to
show this Brief to Don Alvarez, and to explain to him the Censures which were
incurred by those, who should oppose the Popes Legates in matters of Religion,
and to exhort him, by what was most holy in the World, to suffer the Embassy to
proceed. In case of refusal, to threaten him with Ecclesiastical punishments
from the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and to adjure him at the same time, by the
death of the Savior of Mankind, to take compassion on himself,

Xavier had always hoped, that the Governor would open his Eyes; and in that
writing which he gave the Vicar to engage him in that nice Commission, there
were these following words. I cannot believe that Don Alvarez can be so
hard^n'd, but that he will be mollify'd, when he shall know the Intentions and
Orders of the Holy See. He desired the Grand Vicar in the same Writing, to send
that very Paper back to him, together with the answer of Don Alvarez, that both
the one and the other might be an authentic evidence to the Bishop of Goa,
that he had omitted nothing, for advancing the Embassy; and that if it
succeeded not, the fault lay not at his door. Suarez^ proceeded with the
Governor, according to all the directions which had been traced out to him by
the Father. But nothing could work upon Alvarez. He laughed at the threatenings,
and broke out into railing Language against the person of Xavier, saying
loudly, that he was an ambitious Hypocrite, and a friend of Publicans and
Sinners.

The Grand Vicar not being able any longer to endure so outrageous and
scandalous an impiety, (...)
at the length excommunicated the Governor, according to the agreement betwixt
himself and Father Xavier. He also excommunicated all his People, who basely
^latter'd the passion of their Master, and spoke insolently of the Holy See.
This excommunication signified little to a man, who had no Principles, either
of Honor or of Religion. Without giving himself the least disquiet for the
wrath of H^aven, or talk of men, he made himself Master of the Ship Santa Cruz,
and placed in her a Captain, with 25 Marin^rs, all of them in his Interests, to
go and trade at Sancian, where the Portu^ues^s had established a wealthy
tra^^ick. The ill success of the negotiation, ^^^wixt the Grand Vicar and the
Governor, was very afflicting to Father Xavier, his heart was pi^rc'd with
sorrow, and he acknowledged to ^ather Francis Perez, that he never re^^^ted any
thing with greater grief. The deplorable condition of Don Alvarez in the sight
of God, the ruin of his friend Pereyra, the Embassy of China utterly
destroyed; all these made him sigh from the bottom of his Soul; and so much the
more, because he imputed these so great misfortunes to himself: as he gave
Pereyra to understand, who lay hidden at M^lacca, and to whom he expressed
himself in writing, because he knew not with what face to see him.

Since the greatness of my sins, The Saint imputes the overthrow ^f the Embassy
to his own sins.
says he, have been the reason, why God Almighty would not make use of us two,
for the enterprise of China, it is upon my self that I ought in conscience to
lay the fault. They are my offenses, which have ruined your fortunes, and have
caused you to lose all your expenses, for the Embassy of China. Yet God is my
witness that I love him, and that I love you also. And I confess to you, that
if my intentions had not been right, I should be yet more afflicted than I am.
The favor which I desire of you, is that you would not come to see me; for
fear lest the condition to which you are reduced, should give me too much
trouble; and that your sorrow might be the occasion of increasing mine. In the
mean time, I hope this disgrace of yours may be of advantage to you; for I
doubt not but the King will reward your zeal, as I have requested of him by my
Letters. As for the Governor who has broken our Voyage, I have no farther
communication with him; God forgive him, I pity him, and lament his condition;
for he will soon be punished, In writing t^ the King of Portugal, he makes no
complaint of the G^vernour of Malacca.
and more sever^ly than he thinks.

But though Father Xavier wrote very pressing Letters to the King of Portugal,
in favor of Pereyra, he wrote nothing against Don Alvarez; and Alvarez himself
was witness of it, having intercepted the Letters of the Father. In effect, he
found not the least expression of complaint against him; at which he was
wonderfully surprised. The man of God daily offered the Sacrifice of the Mass
for him, and shed many tears at the foot of the Altar, to the end he might
obtain for him, the favor of a sincere Repentance. He said one day, he should
lose at once, his Estate, his Honor, and his Life; and added, I beseech God
that he lose not his Soul also.

For what remains, Though the door of China seemed to be shut upon him, since
all hopes of the Embassy were vanished, which had facilitated his entrance into
that Kingdom, yet the Saint despaired not of preaching the Gospel to the
Chinese; and a thought came into his head, that if he could get to an Isle,
which was neighboring to Canton, he might from thence go privately over into
the Continent. That if he were stopped, and put in Prison, he should at least
preach to the Prisoners; that from the Prisons, the Christian Doctrine might
spread into the Towns, and possibly might reach the Court. That perhaps also
the great men of the Empire, and even the Emperor himself, might have the
curiosity to see a man, who ^u^lish'd so new a Faith; and then he might gain an
opportunity of declaring the whole Law of Jesus Christ.

With these considerations, (...)
he took up the design, of embarquing on the S^nta Cruz, which the Governor of
(...) was ^ending out ^or Sancian. But seeing that the entry of China could not
be attempted, by that way which he had proposed, without great ^^zard, he would
be the only Priest, who should expose himself to those dangers; and retaining
with him, only one Brother of the Society, the Chinese, Antonio de S^inte
(...), and another young Indian, he sent Balt^a^ar Iago, Edward Silvia, and
^eter Al^^ceva to several employments; the first to the Kingdom of Bungo, and
the two others to Amanguchi.

During these passages, it happening that John B^yro came from the M^l^cca's, to
desire some more assistance, for the farther propagation of the Faith in (...)
Islands, Xavier received from him (...) comfortable news of the great (...) of
Christianity: and sent him to Barzaeus, with Orders that more Companions should
be joined to him: and that he should be remanded thither with all expedition.

(...) ^^nta Cr^z, being now upon the (...) he retired into the (...) of the
Mount, to (...) Voyage to the protection of (...) Virgin. He continued his
(...) 'till the evening; and had also (...) the night in prayer, if they had
not come to give him notice that the Ship had already weighed Anchor.

The Grand Vicar, John Suarez who bore him company to the Ship, He departs from
Malacca without seeing the Governor: and what he does in going out of the Town.
asked him by the way, if he had taken leave of the Governor? adding, that if
he ^ail'd in that point of Ceremony, the weaker Christians might be seandalis'd
that it would be a proof of his resentment, and an occasion of public murmur;
the Saint, who was willing to show by his example, how Excommunicated persons
ought to be treated, replied immediately, Don Alvarez shall never see me in
this life: I expect him at the Judgment Seat of God; where he will have a great
account to answer. Having walked on a little farther, he stop^d at a Church
door, which was near the Sea; and in a transport of Spirit, lifting up his e^es
to Heaven, he prayed aloud for the Salvation of the unhappy Don Alvarez. Then
he prostrated himself* and was silent for some time, praying form the bottom of
his heart to God, with his face to the ground; soon after he rose up, with a
vehement action; which had somewhat of a holy disdain in it; he took off his
shoes, beat them one against another, and afterward against a stone* saying,
that he would not bear away the dust of an accursed place. He then foretold
with circumstances at large, and more than formerly, the punishments which
Heaven had prepared for the Governor of Malacca; and going on board, left the
people who had followed him thus far, astonished at his Prophecies, and
afflicted at his departure.

Immediately they set sail; He embarques, and what happens afterward
and there were in the Vessel above five hundred persons, counting in the
Passengers and Servants. They were already forward on their Voyage, when the
wind fell on the sudden; and in a moment the waves were laid, and the face of
the Ocean grew so smooth, that the Santa Cruz stood still, and moved no more,
than if she had been at Anchor. During this becalming, which lasted fourteen
days together, their water failed them; and some died from the first want of
it; they rowed on every side with their Chalop, to make discovery of some
Coast, where they might find fresh water. Being far at Sea they could discern
nothing, but the Island of Formosa, at least they believed it so to be; they
endeavored to gain the shore, but in seven days time, notwithstanding all
their attempts, they could not reach it.

In the mean time, the Ship was full of sick people, who were burnt up with a
deadly thirst, and they had all perished without hope of succor, if one of
them, reflecting, within himself, that Father Xavier had been always prevalent
with God, had not hinted this notion to the rest: whereupon all of them coming
on their knees before him, besought him, with more tears than words, to obtain
from Heaven, either Wind or Water for them.

Xavier bad them address themselves to God in their own behalf: He changes the
salt water into fresh.
caused them to recite the Litany on their knees, at the foot of a large
Crucisix, and then ordered them to retire, but to have con^idence in Jesus
Christ. He himself withdrew also into a Chamber; from whence coming out some
time after; he went down into the Chalop with a little Child, and having caused
him to taste of the Sea water, asked him whether it were fresh, or salt? The
Child answering that it was salt, he commanded him to taste again, and the
Child told him that it was fresh. Then the Father returning into the Ship,
ordered them to fill all their Vessels, but some amongst them being eager to
drink, found the water salt. The Saint made the sign of the Cross over the
Vessels, and at the same moment the water losing its natural faltness, became
so good, that they all protested, it was better than that of Bangar, of which
the Seamen make their ordinary provision, and which is esteemed the best Water
in all the Indies.

This Miracle so struck some Sarac^^ Ar^bs, who were transporting their whole
Families into China, that throwing themselves at the ^eet of the Holy man, they
ack^^w^^dg'd the God of the Christ^ns, and desired Baptism. The faithful on
the^^ side, admired Father Francis, and all of them in a body, owned the
preservation of their lives to him. But the Father told them, that it was to
God, and not to such a sinner as he was, that they were obliged to pay their
thanks. The greatest part of the Mariners and Passengers, kept, out of
devotion, some of this water, at the first as a testimony of the Miracle,
afterward as a Celestial Remedy; for the water being carried to the Indies,
cured great numbers of sick people; and infusing some small quantity of it into
any sort of drink, was sufficient to restore their health.

During the Navigation, He (...) Man om^tan his S^n, who was fallen into the.
Sea.
a Child of five years old happened to fall into the Sea; the Vessel, which had
a fore-wind, pursuing its course. The Father of this Child was not to be
comforted, and his grief so overwhelmed him, that he kept in private for three
days. He was a Mohammedan, and the Miracle of the Water had not converted him.
At length he appeared in public, but all in tears, and never ceasing to lament
the loss of his only Son. Xavier, who knew nothing of this misfortune, asked
him the reason of his sorrow? Having learnt it, he stood recollected in himself
a little time, and then said, Supposing that God s^^u'd restore your Son to
you, would you pr^mise me to believe in Jesus Christ; and to become a sincere
Christian? The Infidel promised him; and three days after this, before Sun
rising, they saw the Child upon the hatches* The Child knew not what had become
of him for those six days, and only remembered his falling into the Sea, not
being able to give any account how he returned into the Ship. His Father was
ready to dye with joy, when he received him; and Xavier ha^ no need of putting
him in mind of his engagement: he came of his own accord, accompanied by his
Wife, his Son, and his Servant; all of them were Baptized, and the Child was
named Francis.

Those of the Vessel, having been witnesses of these two Miracles, spoke of
them to the Inhabitants of an Isle called Cincheo, by which they passed; and
which was a place of great traffic, full of Merchants from several parts. The
desire of seeing so admirable a man, caused about sixty persons, some
Ethiopians, others Indians, all Idolaters or Mahometans, to come into the Ship:
Xavier took the occasion, and preached the Gospel to them: withal, instructing
them in the holy practices of Christianity. He had no sooner ended his
exhortation, than they acknowledged Jesus Christ, and received Baptism.

While he was Christning them, He appears of an extraordinary height, and much
above his own stat^^e.
he appeared of a Stature much higher than his own; insomuch that those who
were upon the shore near the Vessel, believed he had been standing on some
bench; but seeing him coming and going, and always appearing of the same
height, they thought there might possibly be some Miracle in the matter, and
were desirous to be satisfied concerning it: Stephen Ventura went into the Ship
on purpose, and approaching Father Xavier, saw, that with his feet he touched
the hatches, and yet his head was higher than the tallest there, on whom he
sprinkled the Sacred Waters of Baptism. Ventura likewise observed that after he
had Baptized the Company, he (...) to his natural proportion.

From Cincheo the Ship pursued (...) Voyage toward Sancian, He reassures the
Captain of the Santa Cruz, and the Mariners.
which (...) six Leagues distant from the (...) over against Canton, a Town of
^hina. They had sailed far beyond Can^on, and the Mariners believed they were
still on this side of it. Xavier endeavored to undeceive them, but they
adhered to their first opinion; and they had gone much further out of their
way, if the Captain, upon the word of the Saint, had not struck sail, and cast
anchor, 'till the return of the Chalop, which he had sent out to discover the
neighboring Coast. She was three days before she came back, and all the Ships
Company imagined that she had been overtaken by some Hurrican; but Xavier
assured them that she should suddenly return, with refreshments sent them by
the Portugueses of Sancian: and that also she should be followed by some
Vessels, which should come to meet them on their way, and conduct them into the
Port. All happened, as the Father had foretold, and the Santa Cruz. guided by
the Vessels of Sancian, arrived at that Island, twenty three days after her
departure from Malacca.

There are three Islands, ^e arri^es at the Isle of Sancian.
so little distant from each other, that they appear but one; for which reason
the Chinese in their language call them Samceu: a word composed of Sam, which
signifies three, and Ceu, which is to say, an Island. The chief of these
Islands, which the Portugueses have named Sancian, has a convenient and safe
Port, all Crowned with Mountains, and forming a semicircle on that side, which
looks toward Mac^^, It has few Inhabitants, who are Natives, almost no
Provisions, and is so barren of it self. so uncultivated and so wild, that it
seems rather a place of Banshment than of Commerce. The Chinese had permitted
the Portugueses to trade thither, to buy their Commodities, and sell their own
to them, without breaking their fundamental Law, of suffering no stranger to
set foot within their Country. So that the Portugueses durst come no nearer the
main Land, for fear of hazarding their lives, or at least their liberty.
Neither was it permitted them to build solid Houses in the Isle; they were only
allowed to set up slight Cabins, covered with Matts, and dressed about with
boughs of Trees, that they might not always be shut up within their Vessels.

Amongst these Merchants, What passes betwixt Xavier and Veglio.
there was one, who was very rich, and infinitely charitable; but of a gay
humor, and pleasant in Conversation, addicted to all pleasure which decency
permits, and loving not to deny himself any thing which will make life
comfortable. For the rest, most affectionate to Father Xavier; his name was
Peter Veglio, the same Veglio who was with the Saint at Iapan, and who returned
in his Company. Xavier being very desirous of his Friends Salvation, exhorted
him from time to time, to mortify his natural Inclinations; even sometimes to
chastise his Body, for the expiation of his Sins. Veglio understood not that
Latin; whether he was too tender of his own person, or thought his Sins were
not of a nature to deserve such severities, he could never find in his Heart to
take up the Discipline; but instead of Macerations and Penances, he gave great
Alms, and Father Francis received from him* very large supplies, for the relief
of such as were in want. One day, the Father having need of a certain sum of
Money, to marry a young Orphan Virgin, who was poor and handsome, and
consequently in danger of being ruined, had recourse to Veglio* according to
his Custom. He found him engaged in play with another Merchant; but the
business being urgent, he forbore not to request his Charity. Veglio, who loved
to be merry, made as if he were angry with him, and answered thus: Father
Francis, when a man is losing, he is in no condition of giving Alms; and for a
wise man as you are, you have made a very gross mi^^ake, in this unseasonable
demand. It Is always in season to do good, replied Xavier, and the best time for
giving Money, is, when a man has it in his hand. The Merchant, continuing in
the same tone, and seeming to be displeased with the Fathers company, added, as
it were to be rid of him, Here, take the Key of my Chest, take all my Money if
you will, and leave me, to play my Game in quiet. In the Merchants Chest were
thirty thousand Taes, which amount to forty five thousand Crowns of Gold. The
Father took out three hundred Crowns, which were sufficient to marry the Orphan
Maiden. Some time afterward, Veglio counting over his Money, and finding the
sum was still entire, believed the Father had not touched it, and reproached
him with want of friendship for not making use of him; whereupon Xavier
prote^ted to him, that he had taken out three hundred Crowns. I swear to you,
said Veglio, that not one of them, is wanting: But God forgive you, added he*
my meaning was to have parted the whole sum betwixt us; and I expected, that of
my forty five thousand Crowns, you should at least have taken the one moity.

Xavier finding that Veglio had spoken very sincerely to him, He f^retels to
Veglio, that he shall be advertised of the day of his death.
and out of a pure principle of Charity, said as a Man transported out of
himself, by the Spirit of God; Peter, the design you had, is a good work,
before the Eyes of him, who weighs the motions and intentions of the Heart; he
himself will recompense you for it, and that which you have not given, shall be
one day restored to you an hundredfold. In the man time, I answer for him,
that temporal g^ods shall be never wanting to you; and when you shall have
misfortunes to put you backwards in the World, your Friends shall assist you
with their Purses. I farther declare to you, that you shall not die without
being first advertised of the day of your death. After these predictions,
Veglio was quite changed into another man, applying himself wholly to exercises
of Piety; and in the condition of a Merchant, lived almost the life of a
Religious. What had been foretold him, that he should have warning of his
death, came frequently into his remembrance; and he could not hinder himself
one day, from asking the Saint, at what time, and in what manner it should be?
The Saint told him, without pausing, When you shall find the taste of your Wine
bitter, then prepare your self for death, and know that you have but one day
more to live.

The Merchant lived in Opulence and Splendor, The Prediction ^f the Saint is
^ccomplish'd in all its circum^^ances.
even to an extreme old age. He had several losses in his Trade, according to
the chance of things which are depending on the Sea. But his Friends
continually relieved him, in his necessities, and gave him wherewithal to set
up again. At length being one day at a great Entertainment, and more gay than
ever, having asked for Wine, he found the taste of it was bitter. Immediately
remembering the Prophecy of Father Xavier, he was seized with an inward horror;
which beginning from the Soul, spread over his Body, as if death had been
pronounced against him, or the Image of death presented to his Eyes.
Nevertheless, somewhat recovering his Spirits, for his farther satisfaction in
the point, he desired his fellow Guests at the Table, to taste the Wine out of
his Glass. All judged it to be excellent, besides himself, who made diverse
trials of it on his Palate. He called for other Wines, and another Glass; but
always found the same bitterness. Then no longer doubting, but that his last
hour was coming, after he had made an interior Sacrifice of his life to God,
he related to the Company that Prediction, which was now accomplished; and
arose from the Table, with the thoughts of a Christian, who is disposing
himself for death. Having distributed his Goods betwixt his Children and the
Poor, he went to see his Friends, and to give and take the last farewell:
Notwithstanding his great age he was in perfect health. It was thought he
doted, and they endeavored to persuade him out of his melancholy
apprehensions. But their Arguments prevailed so little on his mind, that he
gave orders for his own Funeral, and invited his Friends to do him the last
kind Office, of accompanying his Corpse to burial. To content him, and to make
themselves merry at his folly, they attended him into the Church: In their
presence he received the Viaticum, and the Extreme Unction, without being sick;
afterward he laid himself upon the Beer, and caused them to sing the Mass for
the Dead. The people gathered in a crowd at the strangeness of the report; some
drawn by the novelty of the sight, the rest to be Ey^witnesses how the
Prediction of Father Xavier would succeed. Mass being ended, the Priest
attended by his Inferiors, performed all the Ceremonies of the Church about
the Grave, and at length, sung the last words belonging to a Christian burial,
over the old man, who was alive, and bore his part in the Responses. There now
remaining no more to do; the Servant of Veglio coming to help his Master off
the Beer, he found him dead. All the Assistants were witnesses of the matter of
fact, and ev^ry one went home full of admiration of Gods Mercy toward this
Merchant, who had been so charitable; and blessing the Memory of the holy
Apostle of the Indies.

This was not the only Prophetical Light, which Xavier had in the ^sle of
S^ncian. A Ship which went from Macao to Iapan, appeared in sight of Sancian,
to be overtaken by a dreadful Hurricane. The Portugueses who had great
concernments in that Vessel, being alarmed at so inevitable a danger, came
running for comfort to Father Xavier. But the Father assured them, they had no
cause of fear; and that the Ship was safely arrived at her Port. They kept
themselves quiet, upon the assurance of his word; till finding that the Ship
made no return, which was to stay at Iapan but some few days, they gave her for
lost. Xavier reproved their want of Faith, and positively told them, that she
should come back before the week were ended. In effect, she returned two days
afterward, laden with rich Merchandises, and proud of her escape from the fury
of the Hurricane.

At the same time Xavier was inspired with the knowledge of the quarrel betwixt
Don Alvarez de At^yda, Other w^nder^ul I^u^inations.
Governor of Malacca, and Don Bernard de Sosa, who was newly arrived from the
Molucca's; and told the Circumstances of it to the Portugueses, who having
afterward the particulars of it from some of Malacca. were astonished to find
them the very same, which the Father had related.

This miraculous foreknowledge, He raises up a dead man, and drives the Iygers
out of the Island.
was accompanied by actions as surprising; and without speaking of a dead
Infant, which Xavier restored to life, but whose Resurrection is without
Circumstances in the Acts of the Saints Canonization, he cleared the Country of
the Tigers, which laid it waste. These furious Beasts came in Herds together
out of the Forests, and devoured not only the Children, but the Men also, whom
they found scattered in the Fields, and out of distance from the Retrenchments
which were made for their defense. One night the Servant of God went out to
meet the Tigers, and when they came near him, threw holy Water upon them,
commanding them to go back, and never after to return. The Commandment had its
full effect, the whole Herd betook themselves to flight, and from that time
forward no Tigers were ever seen upon the Island.

The joy which the Portugueses had conceived, (...)
at the arrival of Father Xavier, was immediately changd to sadness, when they
understood that he had only taken Sancian in his way to China. They all
endeavored to dissuade him from it: and set before his Eyes, the rigorous Laws
of that Government: That the Ports were narrowly observed, by vigilant and
faithful Officers, who were neither to be circumvented, nor bribed with
Presents. That the Mandarins were cruel to all strangers; that the year before
some Portuguese Seamen, being cast by Tempest on the Coast of Canton, had been
severely whipped, and afterward enclosed in dark Dungeons, where if they were
not already dead, they were still exercised with new punishments; that for
himself, the least he could expect was perpetual imprisonment, which was not
the business of an Apostle, who designed to run from place to place, and
propagate the Faith through all the East. These Arguments made no impression on
the Saint: He had fortified his Resolution with more potent Reasons, and
answered the Merchants in the same tenor in which he had written to Father
Francis Perez, That he could not distrust the Divine Goodness, and that his
distrust would be so much the more Criminal, because the powerful inspiration
of the holy Spirit, pushed him forward to teach the Chinese the Gospel of the
living God. I am elected, said he, for this great enterprise, by the special
Grace of Heaven. If I should demur on the execution, or be terrified with the
hardships, and want courage to attempt those difficulties, would it not be
incomparably worse, than all the Evils with which you threaten me? But, what
can the Demons, and their Ministers do against me? surely no more than what is
permitted them by the Sovereign Lord of all the World. Add, that in giving up
my self in this manner, I shall obey my Lord Jesus, who declares in his Gospel,
That whosoever will save his life shall lose it, and whoever will lose it for
my sake, shall find it. Our Sa^iour also says, That he who having put his hand
to the Plough, shall look behind him, is not sit for the Kingdom of Heaven. The
loss of the Body, being then without comparison less to be feared, than that of
the Soul, according to the Principles of eternal Wisdom, I am resolved to
sacrifice a frail and miserable life, for everlasting happiness. In fine, I
have set up my rest, I will undertake this Voyage, and nothing is capable of
altering my resolution. Let all the Powers of Hell break loose upon me, I
despise them, provided God be on my side; for if he be for us, who shall be
against us? The Portugueses being of Opinion, that this fixed intention of the
Man of God, was partly grounded on his ignorance of the dangers, which he
believed they magnified to him, beyond their natural proportion, sent some
Chinese Merchants, with whom they traded, to discourse the business calmly with
him; but the matter went otherwise than they had imagined. Those Chinese, to
whom Xavier failed not to speak of Christianity, and who were men of
understanding, advised him to the Voyage, instead of dissuading him: they
counseled him only to carry Books which contained the Christian Doctrine; and
added, that not long since, the Emperor had s^nt some learned men into the
neighboring Kingdoms, to inform themselves of such Religions, as were
different from the received opinions of the Chinese. That they believed the
Christian Doctrine would be well received at Court; and that it seemed probable
to them, that the novelty of so reasonable a belief, would make his way, who
was the first bearer of it.

Xavier was overjoyed to find a passage opened for the Gospel, He takes his
measures for the Voyage of China.
to the most polite Nation of the World: and doubted not but that the Christian
Religion, coming to be compared by judicious men, with the other Opinions of
the East, would have the advantage. Being thus encouraged to pursue his
purpose, his first business was to provide himself of a good Interpreter. For
Antonio the Chinese, whom he had brought from Goa, was wholly ignorant of the
Language which is spoken at the Court, and had almost forgotten the common
Idiome of the vulgar. He found out another Chinese, who had a perfect knowledge
of the Language of the Mandarins, and who could also write excellently well, in
which consists the principal knowledge of China. For the rest, he was a man
well shaped, of a good presence, of great natural parts, of a pleasing
conversation, and which was above all, he seemed entirely devoted to the
Christians; he promised all possible good Offices, whether he hoped to make his
fortune, by presenting to the Emperor, one who published a new Law, or that
God had inspired him with those pious thoughts.

There was more difficulty in finding Seamen, to transport the Father, for
there was no less venture than that of life, for any one who undertook that
business. But interest gives him courage to hazard all, who values money more
than life it self. A Chinese Merchant, called Capoceca, offered himself to
carry Xavier into the Province of Canton, provided he might be well paid: and
asked the value of two hundred A Pardo (says Tavernier,) is of the value of 27
So^s French Money; ten of which make about a shilling English.
Pardo's in Pepper. The Chinese promised to take Xavier into his Barque by
night, and to land him before day, on some part of the Coast, where no houses
vere in view; and if this way was thought uncertain, he engaged to hide the
Father in his own house; and four days after, to conduct him early in the
morning to the Gates of Canton. But he would have Xavier oblige himself also,
on his side, to go immediately to the Mandarin, with the Letters which the
Viceroy of the Indies, and the Bishop of Goa had written to the Emperor, for
the Father had still reserved by him those Letters which related to the
Embassy, though the design had been ruined by the Governor of Malacca. The
Chinese also exacted an Oath of secrecy from the Saint, that no torments, how
ever cruel, should bring him to confess, either the name or the house of him
who had set him on shore.

Xavier made as solemn an engagement as he could desire; not without knowledge
of the hazard which he ran, as himself related to one of his dearest friends. I
perceive, said he, two dangers which are almost inevitable in this affair; on
the one side, there is great cause of apprehension, lest the Idolatrous
Merchant having received the price of my passa^^, should throw me overboard,
or leave me on some desert Isle; on the other side, lest the Governor of
Canton should discharge his fury upon me, and make me an example to all
Strangers, by putting me to a c^uel death, or condemning me to perpetual
Imprisonment. But in case I follow the voice which calls me, and obey my Lord,
I count my life and liberty at nothing.

When the Voyage of China was on these terms, The Portugueses of Sancian
tra^erse the design of Xavier.
and that all things seemed to favor it, the Portugueses of Sancian put an
obstacle in the way, of which Xavier had never thought. The appetite of gain,
made them apprehend, lest his Zeal should bring them into trouble; and they
said to one another, that the Mandarin Governor of Canton would certainly
revenge on them the boldness of their Countreyman. That he would Commission his
Officers to pillage their Ships, and con^iscate their effects, and that their
lives were not in safety. In this general a^^rightment, which was not ill
grounded, and which increased daily, the wealthie^ sort addressed themselves to
Father Xavier, and desired him to take compassion on them, and on their Wives
and Children, if he would have no compassion on himself.

Xavier who was no less careful for the interests of others, He deferrs his
Voyage, in consideration of the Portuguese Merchants.
than he was n^gligent of his own, found an expedient to satisfy them. He
engaged his word, that he would not pass over into China, 'till they had ended
all their business, and were gone from Sancian. This gave opportunity to the
Chinese Merchant, with whom he had treated, to make a short Voyage, under
promise, notwithstanding, to return at a time which was prefixed. While these
things were thus managed, the Father fell sick of a violent Fever, which
continued on him fifteen days. The Portugueses took occasion from thence to
tell him, that Heaven had declared against the Voyage of China, but being
recovered, he followed his design with more warmth than ever; while the
Merchants were lading their Ships, he entertained himself day and night, with
the prospect of Converting China; and all his pleasure was to think how happy
he should be, in dispossessing the Devil of the largest Empire in the world. If
yet, said he, it shall please Almighty God to employ so vile an Instrument as I
am, in so glorious an undertaking. Taken up with these and such like
meditations, he often took his walk along the shore, and turning his eyes
toward that desired Country, sent out ardent sighs. He said sometimes amongst
his friends, that his only wish, was to be set down at the Gates of Canton, and
troubled not himself with what might happen afterward: happy he, if he could
once declare the Son of God to the Chinese, and more happy, if, for his sake,
he might suffer Martyrdom.

In the mean time, He writes diverse Letters to Malacca, and to Goa.
all the Portuguese Vessels, excepting only the Santa Cruz, which had not yet
her whole lading, set sail from Sancian, for the Indies. Xavier gave many
Letters to the Merchants, to be delivered both at Malacca, and at Goa. He writ
to his friend James Pereyra in terms which were full of acknowledgement and
charity. Almighty God, said he in his Letter, abundantly reward you, since I am
not able of my self to do it: at least, while I continue in this world, I shall
not fail to implore the Divine Goodness, to conferr on you, during your life,
his holy grace, accompanied with perfect health, and after your death Eternal
Happiness. But as I am persuaded, that I cannot acquit my self by these my
Prayers, of the great obligements which I have to you, I beg all those of our
Society in the Indies, to desire of God the same blessings in your behalf. For
what remains, if I compass my entrance into China, and if the Gospel enter with
me, it is to you, next to Almighty God, to whom both the Chinese and my self
shall be owing for it. You shall have the merit of it, in the sight of God, and
the glory in the sight of men. Thus, both the Chinese, who shall embrace the
Faith, and those of our Society who shall go to China, shall be obliged, to
offer without ceasing, their Vows to Heaven, in favor of you. God grant us
both the happiness, once to meet in the Court of China: As for my self, I am of
opinion if I get into that Kingdom, and that you come thither, you will either
find me a Prisoner at Canton, or at Pequin, which is the Capital City of that
Empire: and I beseech the Lord out of his infinite mercy, that we may be joined
together, either in the Kingdom of China, or at least in the Kingdom of
Immortal Glory.

He wrote, He gives Orders to Father Francis Perez, and to Father Gaspar
Earza^us.
by the same conveyance, to Father Francis Perez, Superior of Malacca. He
commanded him, in virtue of holy obedience, to depart, with the soonest, out of
that unhappy Town, and to conduct his inferiors to Cochin, where he
established him Rectour of the College, in the place of Antonio Heredia, whom
he sent to Goa. Though Father Xavier deplored anew, the wr^t^hed condition of
Don Alvarez, it hindered him not from enjoining Father Barzaeus, in his Letter
to him, that he should work the Bishop, to send his Orders to the Grand Vicar
of Malacca, therein declaring the Governor to be Excommunicated. And he took
this way, not only because hardened and scandalous Offenders, such as Don
Alvarez, ought to incurr a public dishonor, by that means to induce them to a
serious consideration of their own estate, and that others might take warning
by them; but also, that succeeding Governors might fear, by the example of his
punishment, to set themselves in opposition to any intended Voyage of the
Missioners, who should be sent hereafter to the Molucca's, Iapan, or any other
places.

He desired Father Barzaeus in the same Letter, to receive few persons into the
Society; and to make an exact trial of those whom he should receive. For I
fear, said he, that many of them who have been admitted, and daily are
admitted, were better out of our walls than within them.

You ought to deal with such people, as you have seen me deal with many at Goa;
and as I have lately treated my Companion, whom I have dismissed from the
Society; not having found him proper for our business. He meant Alvarez
Pereyra, whom he had brought with him from the Indies, and whom he sent back
from Sancian, with the Portuguese Vessels.

Amongst those Merchants, He foretells the unhappy death of a Merchant.
who went off from Sancian, there was one who made more haste than any of the
rest; without giving notice of his departure to the Father, whom he had lodged
in his Cabin, or without waiting for a Chinese Vessel, which he had bought at
the Port of Canton. One morning while the Father was saying Mass very early,
this Merchant had put off from shore, and fled, with as much precipitation, as
if the Island was ready to be swallowed by the Sea. After Mass was ended, he
looked round him, and not seeing him for whom he searched, What is become of my
Host? said he, with the looks and gesture of a man inspired. Being answered,
that he was already in open Sea; what could urge him, continued he, to so
prompt a resolution? why did he not expect the Ship which comes from Canton?
and whither is he dragged by his unhappy destiny? That very evening the Chinese
Vessel was seen to arrive: as for the ^ugitive Merchant, he was no sooner
landed at Malacca, when going into a wood, to seek materials for the refitting
of his Ship, he was ponyarded by Robbers.

All the Portuguese Vessels being gone, He is reduced to an (...)
saving only that which belonged to the Governor of Malacca, or rather of
which the Governor had possessed himself by violence, Xavier was reduced to so
great a want of all necessaries, that he had scarcely wherewithal to sustain
Nature. It Is certainly a matter of amazement, that they whose lives he had
preserved, by changing the salt Seawater into fresh, should be so
hard-hearted, as to abandon him to dye of hunger. Some have thought that Don
Alvarez had given Orders, that all things should be refused him; but I rather
think, that Providence, would try him, in the same manner, as sometimes God is
pleased to prove those, whom he loves the best, and permitted that dereliction
of him, for the entire perfection of the Saint.

That which most afflicted him, The means sail him, for his passage into China.
was, that the Chinese Interpreter, who had made him such advantageous offers,
recalled his word, either of himself, for fear of danger, or at the
solicitation of those, who were devoted to the Governor of Malacca. Yet the
Father did not lose his courage; he still hoped that God would assist him some
other way; and that at the worst, Antonio de Saint Foy might serve his turn
for an Interpreter. But for the last load of his misfortunes, the Merchant who
had engaged to land him on the Coast of China, returned not at the time
appointed, and he in vain expected him for many days.

Despairing of any thing on that side, He is still in hope, and the expedient
which he finds.
he still maintained his resolution; and another expedient seemed to promise
him success. News was brought him, that the King of Siam, whose Dominions are
almost bordering on Malacca; and who also was in league with Portugal, was
preparing a magnificent Embassy to the Emperor of China, for the year
following. Whereupon Xavier resolved on returning to Malacca by the first
opportunity, and to use his best endeavors, that he might accompany the
Ambassador of Stam to China.

But the Eternal Wisdom, He falls sick again, and (...) the day of his death.
which sometimes inspires his Servants with great designs, does not always will
the performance of them; though he wills that on their side nothing be omitted
for the execution. God was pleased to deal with Xavier, as formerly he had
dealt with Moses, who dyed in view of that very Land, whither he was commanded
to conduct the Israelites. A Fever seized on Father Francis, on the 20 th. of
November; and at the same time he was endu'd with a clear knowledge of the day
and hour of his death: as he openly declared to the Pilot of the Vessel,
Francis d' Aghiar, who afterward made an authentic deposition of it, by
solemn Oath.

From that moment, he perceived in himself a strange disgust of all earthly
things, and thought on nothing but that Celestial Country, whither God was
calling him. Being much weakened by his Fever, he retired into the Vessel,
which was the common Hospital of the sick, that there he might die in Poverty;
and the Captain Lewis Almeyda received him, notwithstanding all the Orders of
his Master Don Alvarez. But the tossing of the Ship, giving him an
extraordinary headache, and hindering him from applying himself to God, as he
desired; the day ensuing he requested that he might be set on shore again. He
was landed. and le^t upon the Sands, exposed to the injury of the air, and the
inclemency of the season, especially to the blasts of a piercing North Wind,
which then arose. He had there died without relief, had not a Portuguese, more
charitable than the rest, whose name was George Alvarez, caused him to be
carried into his Cabin; which yet was little different from the naked shore, as
being open on every side.

The Indications of his disease, The nature of his sickness, and how he was
inwardly disp^s'd.
being an accute pain in his side, and a great oppression, Alvarez was of
opinion, that they ought to breathe a Vein; and the Father was consenting to
it, by a blind submission to the Judgment of his Host, though he knew before
hand, that all manner of Remedies were in vain. A Surgeon of the Ship, who
was awkward at his work, and of small experience in his Art, bled him so
unluckily, that he hurt the Nerves, and the Patient fell immediately into
swooning Convulsions. Yet they drew Blood from him a second time; and that
operation had all the ill accidents of the former. Besides which, it was
attended with a horrible nauseousness, insomuch that he could take no
nourishment: at least, the little which he took, consisted only of some few
Almonds, which the Captain of the Vessel sent him out of Charity. The disease
increased hourly, and he grew weaker every day. But his Countenance was still
serene, and his Soul enjoyed a perpetual calmness. Sometimes he lifted up his
Eyes to Heaven, and at other times six'd them on his Crucifix, entertaining
Divine Conversations with his God, and not without shedding abundant tears. He
remained in this condition, till the twenty eighth of November, when the Fever
mounted into his Head. During this delirium, he talked of nothing but of God,
and of his passage into China, but in terms more tender and ardent than ever
formerly.

At length he lost his Speech, He entertains himself with God in the extremity
of his sickness.
and recovered not the use of it, till three days afterward: His strength then
left him all at once; so that it ^as expected every moment that he would pass
away: Which notwithstanding he once more recovered, and having the free
exercise both of his Reason and his Speech, he renewed his Entertainments with
his Savior in an audible manner. Nothing was to be heard from him but devout
Aspirations, and short Ejaculations of Prayer, but those full of life and of
affect on. The Assistants understood not all he said, because he continually
spoke in Latin: And Antonio de Saint Foy, who never (...) him, has only
reported, That the man of God made frequent Repetition of these words, Jesus,
fili David, miserere mei? and these also, which were so familiar to him, O
sanctissima Trinitas! Besides which, invoking the blessed Virgin, he would say,
Monstra teesse Matrem! He passed two days without taking any food; and having
ordered his Priestly (...) and the other Churchstuff, which (...) in saying
Mass, to be carried aboard ^he Ship, together with those Books (...) he had
composed for the instruction of the Eastern people, he disposed himself for his
last hour, which was near approaching.

Besides Ant^ nio de Saint Foy, He denounces to a young Indian, the unhappy
death which was attending him.
he had near his person a young Indian, whom he had brought with him from Goa.
The Saint, dying as he was, cast his Eyes on the young man, and appeared
discomposed in looking on him; afterward with a compassionate regard, he twice
pronounced these words, Ah miserable man! and afterward shed tears. God, at
that moment, was pleased to reveal to Xavier, the unhappy death of this young
Indian, who five or six months afterward, falling into most horrible
debauches, was killed on the place, by the shot of an Arquebuse. So that the
Spirit of Prophecy accompanied the holy Man, even to his last breath.

At last, The death of the Saint.
on the second of December, which fell on Friday, having his Eyes all bathed in
tears, and fixed with great tenderness of Soul, upon his Crucifix, he
pronounced those words, In te Domine speravi, non confundar in aeternum; and at
the same instant, transported with Coel^stial joy, which appeared upon his
Countenance, he sweetly gave up the Ghost, toward two of the Clock in the
afternoon: and in the year of God 1552.

He was six and forty years of age, His age, and person.
and had passed ten and a half of them in the Indies: His stature was somewhat
above the middle size; his Constitution strong, his Air had a mixture of
pleasingness and Majesty: He was fresh colored, had a large Forehead, a well
proportioned Nose; his Eyes were blew, but piercing and lively; his Hair and
Beard of a dark Chestnut; his continual labors had made him gray betimes; and
in the last year of his life, he was grizzled almost to whiteness. This without
question gave occasion to his first Historians, to make him five and fifty
years old, before the certain proofs of his age came at length to be discovered.

When it was known that Father Francis Of the (...) which were paid him
immediately afte^ his decease.
was expired, many of the Ship, and even the most devoted to the Governor, ran
to the Cabin. They found the same fresh color on his Face. as he had when
living, and at the first sight, could hardly persuade themselves that he was
dead. When they had looked on him at a nearer distance, Piety began to be
predominant over all their other thoughts: they kneeled down by him, and kissed
his Hands with reverence, recommending themselves to him, with tears in their
Eyes, as nothing doubting but that his happy Soul, was perfectly enjoying God
in Heaven.

His Corpse was not laid into the ground, They inter him without any Ceremony.
till Sunday toward noon. His Funerals were made without any Ceremony: and
besides Antonio de Saint Foy, Francis d'Aghiar, and two others, there were not
any more Assistants. An Historian of the Indies has written, That the
insupportable coldness of that day, was the occasion of it. But in all
probability, the apprehension which the Ships Company had of drawing on
themselves the displeasure of the Governor, Don Alvarez, had at least as great
a share in it, as the sharpness of the season. They took off his Cassock, which
was all in tatters; and the four, who had paid him those last duties, divided
it amongst them, out of devotion; after which they arrayed him, in his
Sacerdotal Habits.

George Alvarez took upon himself the care of bestowing the Body in a large
Chest, made after the Chinese fashion; he caused this Chest to be filled up
with unslak'd Lime; to the end that the Flesh being soon consumed, they might
carry the Bones in the Vessel, which within some few months was to return to
India.

At the point of the Haven, there was a little spot of rising ground, and at
the foot of this Hillock, a small piece of Meadow, where the Portugueses had
set up a Cross. Near that Cross they interred the Saint; they cast up two heaps
of Stones, the one at his Head, the other at his Feet; as a mark of the place
where he was buried.

In the mean season, The miraculous Crucifix in the Chapel of the Castle of
Xavier.
God made manifest the holiness of his Servant in the Kingdom of Navarre, by a
miraculous accident; or rather by the ceasing of a Miracle. In a little
Chapel, at the Castle of Xavier, there was an ancient Crucifix made of
Plaster, of about the stature of a Man. In the last year of the Fathers life,
this Crucifix was seen to sweat Blood in great abundance every Friday, but
after Xavier was dead, the sweating ceased. The Crucifix is to be seen even at
this day, at the same place, with the Blood congealed along the Arms and Thighs
to the Hands and Sides. They who have beheld it, have been informed by the
Inhabitants of the Neighborhood, that some persons of that Country having
taken away some of the flakes of that clotted Blood, the Bishop of Pampeluna,
had forbidden any one from henceforward, to diminish any part of it, under pain
of Excommunication. They also learnt, that it had been observed, according to
the news which came from the ^^dies, that at the same time, when Xa^ier
labored extraordinarily, or that he was in some great danger, this Crucifix
distilled Blood on every side; as if then, when the Apostle was actually
suffering for Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ was suffering for him, notwithstanding
that he is wholly impassible. The Ship, which was at the Port of Sancian. being
at the point of ^etting Sail ^or the Indies, Anthony de Saint Foy, and Geor^e
Alvarez desir^d the Captain Luys Almeyd^, not to l^ave upon the Isle the
Remainders of Father Francis.

One of the Servants of Almeyda He is (...), and his Body is found without the
least (...).
opened the Coffin, by the order of his Master, on the seventeenth of February,
1553. to ^ee if the Flesh were totally consumed, so that the Bones might be
gathered together; but having taken the Lime from off the Face, they found it
ruddy and fresh colored, like that of a man, who is in a sweet repose. His
Curiosity led him farther to view the Body, he found it in like manner whole,
and the natural moisture uncorrupted. But that he might entirely satisfy all
doubts and scruples, he cut a little of the Flesh on the right Thigh, near the
Knee, and beheld the Blood running from it. Whereupon he made haste to
advertise the Captain of what he was an Eyewitness; and carried with him a
little piece of Flesh, which he had cut off, and which was about a Fingers
length. All the company ran immediately to the place of burial, and having made
an exact observation of the Body, found it to be all entire, and without any
putrefaction. The Sacerdotal Habits, with which he had been vested after his
decease, were no ways endammag'd by the Lime. And what was most amazing to them
all, was that the holy Corpse, exhaled an Odor so delightful, and so fragrant,
that by the relation of many there present, the most exquisite Perfumes came
nothing near it, and the scent was judged to be Celestial.

Then those very people, The body of the Saint is put on Shipboard, to be
transported into India.
who basely to comply with the brutality of Alvarez, had misused Father Xavier
in his life, after his decease did honors to him, and many of them asked his
pardon with weeping Eyes, that they had forsaken him so unworthily in his
sickness. Some amongst them exclaimed openly against Alvarez, without fearing
the Consequence; and there was one who said aloud, what was said afterward by
the Viceroy of the Indies, Don Alphonso de Norogna, That Alvarez de Atayda, had
been the death of Father Francis, both by his persecutions at Malacca, and by
the cruelties of his Servants at Sancian. With these pious Meditations, having
laid the un^^ak'd Lime once more upon the Face and Body, the sacred Remains
were carried into the Ship, and not long after they set sail, esteeming
themselves happy, to bear along with them, so rich a trea^^re to the Indies.

They arrived at Malacca, How the Body is received at Malacca.
March the twenty second, without meeting in their ^assage any of those
dreadful Whirl-winds, which infest those Seas; as if the presence of those holy
Corpse, was endu'd with Virtue to dispel them. Before they had ^ain'd the Port,
they sent in their Cha^op to give them notice in the Town of the Present which
they were about to make them; though none of the Society were in Malacca, and
that the Flague was there violently raging, yet the whole Nobility, and all the
Body of the Clergy, came with James Pereyra to the Shore, to receive the
blessed Body, each with a waxen Taper in his hand, and carried it in Ceremony
to the Church of our Lady of the Mount, followed by a crow'd of Christians,
Mahometans, and Idolaters, who on this occasion, seem'^ all to be joined in the
same Religion.

Don Alvarez was the only person who was wanting in his Reverence to the Saint:
The punishment of the Governor of Malacca.
He was then actually at play i^ his Palace, while the Procession was pa^sing
by; and, at the noise of the people putting his head out at the Window,
h^miscall'd the public Devotion, by the names of Silliness and Foppery: afte^
which he set him again to gaming. Bu^ his impiety did not long remain
unpunished, and the Predictions of the man (...) God, made haste to justify
their truth.

The Viceroy of the Indies, upon the Complaints which were brought again Don
Alvarez for his tyrannical procee^ings, deprived him of the Government (...)
Malacca, and causing him to be broug^^ to Goa, as a Prisoner of State, sent h^^
to Portugal, under a sufficient guard. There all his Goods were confiscated to
the Kings Exchequer; and for himself, he was condemned to perpetual
Imprisonment. Before his departure from the Indies, he had gotten an obscene
disease, which increased to that degree in Europe, that he died of it at last
in a shameful manner; no Remedy availing to his cure: The stench of his
polluted Body, having first made him insupportable to all the World. As for
Pereyra, who had sacrificed his whole Estate, for the benefit of Souls, and
propagation of the Faith, though the Governor had so unjustly made a seizure
of his Fortunes, yet King John the Third, restored him all with Interest, and
heaped his Royal Favors on him, in succeeding years, according to the
Prediction of the Father.

But the Devotion of the people sailed not of an immediate reward. The Town of
Malacca is freed f^^m the Pestilence at the (...) of the holy Body.
The Pestilence, which for some weeks had laid waste the Town, as the Saint had
foretold, not long before his death, in his Letter to Father Francis Perez, on
the sudden ceased; insomuch, that no infection was from thence forward caught;
and they who had been infected, were cured, without taking any remedy. Besides
this contagious disease, the Famine raged to that degree, that multitudes of
people daily died of hunger. This second Judgment was likewise diverted at the
same time: for together with the Vessel, which bore the sacred Body, there came
in a Fleet of Ships, which were laden with all manner of provisions, to supply
the necessities of the Town.

These so considerable favors, In what manner the B^dy of the Saint is treated
in Malacca.
ought to have obliged the Inhabitants, to have honored the Body of their
Benefactour, with a Sepulcher which was worthy of him. In the mean time,
whether the fear of their Governor withheld them, or that God permitted it
for the greater glory of his Servant, having taken the Body out of the Chest,
they buried it without the Church, where the common sort of people were
interred; and which was yet more shameful, they made the Grave too scanty; so
that crushing the Body to give it entrance, they broke it somewhere about the
Shoulders; and there gushed out Blood, which diffused a most fragrant Odor.
And farther, to carry their civility, and discretion to the highest point, they
trampled so hard upon the Earth, which covered the blessed Corpse, that they
bruised it in many parts; as if it had been the destiny of that holy Man, to be
tormented by the people of Malacca, both during his life, and after his
decease. The sacred Corpse remained thus without honor, till the month of
August, when Father John Beyra came from Goa, in his return to the Molucca's,
with two Companions whom Gaspar Barzaeus, the Vice Provincial had given him,
pursuant to the Orders of Father Xavier. This man having always had a tender
affection for the Saint, was most sensibly afflicted for his death; and could
not think of continuing his Voyage to the Molucca's, till he had looked upon
the Body, of which so many wonders were related. Opening himself on that
Subject to James Pereyra, and two or three other Friends of the dead Apostle,
they took up his Body privately one night. The Corpse was found entire, fresh,
and still exhaling a sweet Odor: neither had the dampness of the ground after
five months burial, made the least alteration in him: They found even the
Linen which was over his Face, tinctured with Vermillion Blood.

This surprising sight, They consider of transporting the holy Corpse to Goa.
so wrought upon their minds, that they thought it their duty, not to lay it
again into the ground; but rather to contrive the means of transporting it to
Goa. Pereyra ordered a Coffin to be made, of a precious wood, and after they
had garnished it with rich China Damask, they put the Corpse into it, wrapping
it in Cloth of Gold, with a Pillow of Brocard underneath the head. The Coffin
was afterward bestowed in a proper place, known only to the devoted friends of
Father Xavier: and it pleased the Almighty to declare by a visible Miracle,
that their Zeal was acceptable to him. For a Waxen Taper, which they had
lighted up before the Coffin, and which naturally must have burnt out, within
ten hours, lasted eighteen days entire, burning day and night: and it was
observed that the droppings of the Wax, weighed more than the Taper it self at
the beginning.

In the mean time an occasion offered, for the Voyage of the Molucca's; while
they were waiting ^or an opportunity of passing to G^a. Beyra, therefore put to
Sea, more inflamed than ever with the Zeal of Souls; and filled with a double
portion of an Apostolic Spirit, which the sight of the Saint had inspired into
him. But, of the two Companions, which had been assigned for the Mission of the
Molucca's, he left one behind him at Malacca, to be a Guardian of that holy
treasure, and this was Emanuel Pavora. Peter de Alcaceva, at the same time
returned from Iapan, whither he had been sent from Goa, for the affairs of that
new Christianity. And both of them, not long after, carried the holy Corpse
along with them, in the Vessel of Lopez de Norogna.

The Ship was so old and worn, The Body is put into a crazed old Ship, and what
happens to it in the passage.
and out of all repair, that none durst venture to embark upon her. But when
once it was divulged, that it was to carry the Corpse of Father Francis, every
one made haste to get a corner in her: not doubting but there they might be
safe. And the Passengers had no cause to repent them of their confidence: for,
in effect, God delivered them, more than once, miraculously from Shipwreck.

A furious tempest, almost at their first setting out, cast them upon banks of
Sand, and the Keel struck so far into it, that they could not get her off, when
against all humane appearances, the wind coming about, and blowing full in
their faces, disengaged the Vessel; and that it might manifestly appear to be
the hand of God, the blast ceased that very moment, when the Keel was losen'd
from the Sands.

Not long after, at the entry into the Gulf of Ceylan, they struck impetuously
against some hidden Shelves, the Rudder flying off, with the fury of the
stroke, the Keel stuck fast within the Rock; and it was a Miracle that the
Vessel, being so crazy, did not split asunder. The Mariners did that on this
occasion, which is commonly put in practice, in extremity of danger. They cut
the Masts with their hatchets, but that being of no effect, they were going to
throw all their lading overboard, to ease the Ship; but the fury of the waves,
which beat upon her on every side, and outrageously tossed her, suffered them
not to perform what they desired. Then they had their last recourse to the
intercession of that Saint, whose Corpse they carried. Having drawn it out of
the Pilots Cabin, they fell on their knees about it with lighted Flambeaux;
and, as if Father Xavier had been yet living, and that he had beheld, and heard
them, they begged succor of him, from that imminent destruction.

Their Prayer was scarcely ended, when they heard a rumbling noise from
underneath the Vessel; and at the same time, perceived her following her course
in open Sea: from whence they concluded, that the Rock was cleft in pieces, and
had left a free passage for the Ship.

They pursued their Voyage cheerfully, (...)
and turning toward the Cape of Comorine, landed at Cochin. The whole City
came to pay their last duty to their Instructour, and beloved Father. And it is
incredible what demonstrations of piety the people gave. From Cochin they set
sail for Baticula. The Wife of Antonio Rodriguez, one of the Kings Of^icers,
who had long been sick* was in hope to recover, if she could see Father
Francis. She caused her self to be carried to the Ship, and at the sight of the
dead Saint, was restored to her health at the same moment. Not satisfied with
this, she was desirous to have a little piece of the Cope, with which the
Father was habited: and^ it is wonderful what Cures she effected by that precious
Relic.

The Ship being now within twenty Leagues of Goa, and being unable to make any
farther way, because of the contrary winds, the Captain went into the Chalop,
with some of his people, and got to the Town, by the help of Oars, that himself
might have the honor of bearing the first news to the Viceroy, and the Fathers
of the Society, that the blessed Corpse was coming to them. Father Gaspar
Barzaeus was already dead, and Father Melchior Nugnez declared his Successor
in his two Offices, of Rectour of the College, and Vice Provincial of the
Indies, in virtue of the Letter which Father Xavier had left sealed behind him,
when he went for China, and which was opened after the death of Gaspar,
according to the Orders of Xavier himself.

The Viceroy immediately ordered a light Galley for Nugnez, They come from Goa
to meet the Corpse.
upon which, he and three others of the Society imbarking, together with four
young men of the Seminary, they set sail toward the Vessel, to bear off the
Body of the Saint. They received it with the honorable discharge of all the
Cannon, not only from the Ship of Lopez, but from six other Vessels which were
in Company, and which had been wind-bound toward Baticula. On the fifteenth of
March, in the year 1554, the Galley landed at Rebendar, which is within half a
league of Goa: she remained there the rest of that day, and all the night;
while they were making preparations in the Town, for the solemn reception of
the holy Apostle of the Indies. The next morning, which was Friday in passion
week, six Barks were seen to come, which were all illuminated with lighted
Torches, and pompously adorned; wherein was the flower of the Portuguese
Nobility. Twelve other Barks attended them, with three hundred of the principal
Inhabitants, each of them holding a Taper in his hand: and in every of these
Barks, there was Instrumental music of all sorts, and choirs of Voices, which
made an admirable harmony. The whole squadron was drawn up into two wings, to
accompany the Galley, which rowed betwixt them. The Body of the Saint was
covered with Cloth of Gold, which was the present of Pereyra, and was placed
upon the Stern, under a noble Canopy, with lighted Flambeaux, and rich
Streamers waving on both sides of it.

In this equipage, they rowed toward Goa, but very softly, and in admirable
order. All the Town was gathered on the shore, in impatient expectation of
their loving and good Father. When they perceived the Vessel from afar, there
was nothing to be heard but cries of joy, nothing to be seen but tears of
devotion. Some more impatient than the rest, threw themselves into the Sea, and
swimming up to the Gally, accompanied it to the shore, in the same posture.

The Viceroy was there waiting for it, H^w the C^rps ^f the Saint is received
at Go^
attended by his Guards, the remaining part of the Nobility, the Council Royal,
and the Magistrates, all in mourning. At the time when the holy Corpse was
landing, a Company of young men, consecrated to the service of the Altars, sung
the Benedictus Dominus D^us Israel. In the mean while, they ordered the
Ceremony of the Proc^ssio^ after this ensuing manner.

Ninety Children went foremost, in long white Robes, with Chaplets of Flowers
on their heads, and each of them holding in his hand an Olive Branch. The
Brotherhood of Mercy followed them, with a magnificent Standard. The Clergy
succeeded to the Brotherhood, and walked immediately before the Corpse, which
was carried by the Fathers of the Society. The Viceroy with his Court, closed
up the Ceremony, which was followed by an innumerable multitude of people. All
the Streets were hung with Tapistry; and when the blessed Corpse appeared,
Flowers were thrown upon it from all the windows, and from the tops of Houses.

But nothing rendered the pomp more famous, The Miracles which are wrought,
during the P^ocession.
than the Miracles which at that time were wrought: For there seemed to breath
out from this holy body, a saving v^rtue, together with a Celestial Odor.
Many sick persons, who had caused themselves to be carried out into the
Streets, were cured with only seeing it: and even some, who were not able to
leave their Beds, recovered their health with the bare invocation of his name.
Jane Pereyra was of this number; after a sickness of three Months, being almost
reduced to a despair of life, she had no sooner implored the assistance of the
Saint, but she found her self in a perfect State of health.

Another young Maiden, who was just at the point of death, and held the
Consecrated Taper in her hand, having been recommended by her Mother to the
patronage of the Saint, came suddenly to her self, and rose up well recovered,
while the Procession was passing by the house.

After many turns and windings, (...)
at last they proce^ded to the College of St. Paul; and there let down the
Co^^in, in the great Chapel of the Church. A retrenchment had been made before
the Chapel, to keep o^^ the ^rowd; but it was immediately broken down, not^
withstanding the opposition of the Guards, which were placed on purpose to
defent it. To appease the tumult, they were forced to show the Saint, three
times successively, and to hold him upright, that he might more easily be seen
by the longing multitude. It was also thought convenient to leave the Body
exposed to view, for three days together, for the comfort of the Inhabitants,
who were never weary with gazing on it; and who in gazing were pierced with a
sensible devotion.

New Miracles were wrought in presence of the holy Body. New Mir^^les ar^
wr^ught in presence of the B^dy.
The Blind received their sight, those who were taken with the Palsy,
recovered the use of their Limbs, and the Lepers became clean as Babes. At the
sight of these miraculous Cures, the people published aloud, all those
wonderful operations which they knew to have been performed by Father Xavier.
And his old Companion John Deyro, at that time a Religious of the Order of St.
Francis, related, with tears of tenderness and devotion, what the Saint had
Prophesied of him, which was now accomplished. In the mean time, on that very
day which was Friday, the Canons of the Cathedral, solemnly sung the high Mass
of the Cross. The day following, the Religious of St. Francis, whom the man of
God had always honored, and tenderly affected, came to sing the M^ss of the
Blessed Virgin, in the Church of the Society.

When in this manner, the public devotion had been accomplished, on Sunday
night, the Co^^in was placed on an eminence near the high Altar, on the Gospel
side.

In this place I ought not to omit, that the Vessel which had born this Sacred
Pledge to Goa, split asunder of it self, and sunk to the bottom, so soon as the
Merchandises were unladed, and all the Passengers were come safe on shore:
which was nothing less than a public declaration of Almighty God, that he had
miraculously preserved her in favor of that holy treasure; and that a Ship
which had been employed on so pious an occasion, was never to be used on any
secular account.

As soon as it was known in Europe, The informations of the Saints li^e are
gathered in the Indies.
that Father Xavier was dead, they began to speak of his Canonization. And on
this account, Don John the Third, King of Portugal, gave Orders to the Viceroy
of the Indies, Don Francis Barreto, to make a verbal process of the Life, and
Miracles of the Man of God. This was executed at Goa, at Cochin, at the Coast
of Fishery, at Malacca, at the Molucca's, and other parts: And men of probity,
who were also discerning and able persons, were sent upon the places, heard the
Witnesses, and examined the matters of fact, with all possible exactness.

It Is to be acknowledged, (...)
that the people took it in evil part, that these informations were made; being
fully satisfied of the holiness of the Saint, and not being able to endure,
that it should be doubted in the least: In like manner, neither wou^d they
stay, till all the Ecclesiastical proceedings were wholly ended, nor till the
holy See had first spoken of rendering him the worship due to Saints; they
invoked him already in their necessities, and particularly in all sorts of
dangers. Some of them placed his Picture in their Oratories; and even the
Archbishop of Goa, Don Christopher de Lisbo^ne, (for the Episcopal See had been
erected into an Archbishopric) the Archbishop, I say, wore on his Breast, an
Image of Xavier in little, which he often kissed with a reverent A^^ection, and
his Devotion was not without Reward; for having been cruelly tormented with the
Stone, for a Month together, he was freed immediately from it, and felt not any
farther pains.

It also happened, They build Churches in hon^^r to him, in diverse parts of the
East.
that in many places of the Indies, the new Converts built Churches in honor
of Father Francis, through a precipitate and indiscreet Devotion, which their
good meaning and their zeal are only capable of excusing. Amongst those
Churches, there was one much celebrated, on the Coast of Tra^^^cor. The
Saracens having demolished it, together with eleven other ancient Structures of
Piety, the Christians, who by reason of their poverty, were not able to rebuild
them all, restored only this one Church, which was dearer to them than any of
the rest.

For what remains, in what place soever any Churches were dedicated to the
Father, there never ^ail'd a wonderful concourse of people, to honor the
Memory of the holy Man; and according to the relation of Francis Nugnez, Vicar
of Coulan, they were obliged to sink a Well ^or the relie^ of poor Pilgrims
near the Church, which was built in honor of him at that Town. Nugnez also
reports, That those which had been consecrated to the Apostles, and other
Saints, in a manner lost their Titles, when once the Image of St. Xavier was
there exposed: and that the people turning all their Devotion toward him, were
wont to call them the Churches of Father Francis.

But what was most to be admired, The praises which are gi^en him by Infidels,
an^ the honor they perform to him.
even the professed Enemies of Jesus Christ, paid him reverence after his
decease, as well as during his life; calling him, the Man of Prodigies, the
Friend of Heaven, the Master of Nature, and the God of the World. Some of them
undertook long Voyages, and came to Goa expressly to behold his Body exempted
from Corruption, and which, only excepting motion, had all the appearances of
life. There were amongst the Gentiles, who spoke of raising Altars to him; and
some people of the Sect of Mahomet, did, in effect, dedicate a Mosque to him,
on the Western Coast of Comorine. The King of Trav^^cor, though a M^hometan,
built a magnificent Temple to him; and the Infidel^ had so great a veneration
for that place* where the Great Father was adored, that they durst not spet
upon the ground, i^ we may believe the Testimony of those* who were Natives of
the Country.

The Pagans had a Custom, that in confirmation of a Truth, they would hold a
red hot Iron in their Hands, with other Superstitions of the like nature: but
after that Father Francis, came to be held in so great veneration through the
Indies, they swore solemnly by his name; and such an Oath, was generally
received for the highest attestation of a truth. Neither did any of them
forswear themselves unpunished after such an Oath. And God authorized by many
proofs, this religious practice, even by manifest prodigies. Behold a terrible
example of it: An Idolater owed a Christian a considerable sum of Money. But as
he denied his debt, and no legal proof could be made of it, the Christian
obliged him to swear in the Church, upon the Image of St. Francis: The Idolater
made a false Oath, without the least scruple; but was scarcely got into his own
House, when he began to void Blood in abundance at his Mouth; and died in a
raging fit of madness which had the resemblance of a Man possessed, rather than
of one who was distracted.

Neither was his Memory less honored in Iapan, How much he is honored at
Japan.
than in the Indies. The Christians of the Kingdom of Saxuma, kept religiously
a Stone, on which he had often preached; and showed it as a precious rarity.
The House wherein he had lodged at Amanguchi, was respected as a sacred place;
and was always preserved from ruin, amidst those bloody Wars, which more than
once had destroyed the Town. For what remains, the Indians and Iaponians were
not the only people which honored Father Xavier after his decease; the Odor
of his holy life expanded it ^elf beyond the Seas into other Heathen Countries
where he had never been. And Alphonso Leon Barb^da, who has traveled over all
the Coasts of Africa, reports, that in the Kingdoms of Sofala, beyond the great
River of Cuama, and in the Isles about it, the name of Father Francis was in
high repute, and that those Moors never mentioned him, but with the addition of
a wonderful Man. So many illustrious testimonies, and so far above suspicion,
engaged the King of Portugal anew, to solicit the Canonization of the Saint;
and in that prospect, there was made an ample collection of his Virtues, of
which I present you with this following Extract.

No exterior employments, (...)
how many or how great soever, could divert the Father, from the contemplation
of celestial things. Being at Goa, his ordinary retirement after Dinner, was
into the Clock-house of the Church, to avoid the int^rruption of any person,
and there, during the space of two hours, he had a close communication with his
God. But because he was not always Master of himself on those occasions, so as
to regulate his time; and that he was sometimes obliged to leave his privacy,
he commanded a young man of the Seminary of Saint Foy, whose name was Andrew,
to come and give him notice, when the two hours, to which he was limited, were
expired. One day, when the Father was to speak with the Viceroy, Andrew, being
come to advertise him, found him seated on a little Chair, his Hands across his
Breast, and his Eyes fixed on Heaven. When he had looked on him a while
attentively, he at length called him, but finding that the Father answered not,
he spoke yet louder, and made a noise. All this was to no purpose, Xavier
continued immovable, and Andrew went his way, having some scruple to disturb
the quiet of a Man, who had the appearance of an Angle, and seemed to enjoy the
pleasures of the Souls in Paradise. He returned, nevertheless, about two hours
after, and found him still in the same posture: The young man ^earing that he
should not comply with du^y, if coming the second time, he sho^^d not make
himself be heard, b^gan to pull the Father, and to jogg him. Xavier at length
returning to himself, was in a wonder at the first, that two hours should so
soon be slipped away; but coming to know, that he had remained in that place
beyond four hours, he went out with Andrew, to go to the Palace of the Viceroy.
He had scarcely set his Foot over the Threshold, when he seemed to be ravished
in Spirit once again. After he had made some turns, without well knowing
whither he went, he returned as night was beginning to come on, and said to his
Attendant, My Son, we will take another time to see the Governor, it is the
Will of God, that this present day should be wholly his.

Another time* walking through the Streets of the same City, his thoughts were
so wholly taken up with God, that he perceived not a furious Elephant, who
^eing broken loose, caused a general terror, and every man made haste out of
his way. It was in vain to cry out to the Father, that he might avoid him, he
heard nothing, and the enraged beast passed very near him, without his
knowledge.

I^ his Voyages at ^ea, he continued earnestly in Prayer, from midnight even to
Sunrising, and that regularly. From thence it came almost to a Proverb amongst
the Seamen, That nothing was to be feared in the night, because Father Francis
watched the Vessel, and the Tempests durst not trouble them, while he held
conversation with God.

A man of Manapar, at whose House he lodged, and who observed him at diverse
hours of the night, found him always on his Knees before a Crucifix, and
frequently beheld the Chamber enlightened by the Rays which darted from his
Countenance.

While he was sojourning among Christians, the small repose he gave to Nature,
was commonly in the Church; to the end he might be near the blessed Sacrament,
before which he prayed all the remainder of the night. But in Countries, where
yet there were no Churches built, he passed the night in the open Air, and
nothing so much elevated his Soul to God, as the view of Heaven, spangled over,
and sowed as it were with Stars; and this we have from his own Relation.

The Pope, had permitted him, in consideration of his Employments, and
Apostolical Labors, to say a Breviary which was shorter then the Roman, and
had but three Lessons: It was called the O^^ice of the Cross; and was easily
granted in those times, to such, who were overburden'd with much business. But
Xavier never made use of this permission, what A^^airs soever he was pressed
withal, for the service of Almighty God: On the contrary, before the beginning
of every Canonical hour, he always said the Hymn of Veni Cre^tor Spiritus; and
it was observed, that while he said it, his Countenance was enlightened, as if
the Holy Ghost, whom he invoked, was visibly descended on him.

He daily celebrated the Sacrifice of the Mass with the same Reverence, and the
same Devotion, with which he had said it, the first time, and most ordinarily
performed it at break of day. Those heavenly Sweets, which overflowed his Soul
at the Altar, spread their mild inundations even over the Assistants: And
Antonio Andrada reported of himself, that being then a young Soldier, he found
such an inward satisfaction when he served the Father, in serving at Mass, that
in that consideration, he sought the occasions of ^erforming the Clerks Office.

In the midst of his Conversations with Secular Men, the Saint was often called
aside of God, by certain sudden illuminations, which obliged him to retire: And
when afterward they sought him, he was found before the Holy Sacrament, in
some lonely place, ingulph'd in deep Meditations, and frequently suspended in
the Air, with Beams of Glory round his Countenance. Many Ocular Witnesses have
deposed this matter of Fact; but some have a^^irm'd, That at first they have
found him on his Knees immo^veable; that they have afterward observed, how by
degrees he was moun^ed from the Earth; and that then, being seized with a
sacred horror, they could not steadfastly behold him, so bright and radiant was
his Countenance. Others have protested, That while he was speaking to them of
the things of God, they could perceive him shooting upward, and distancing
himself from them, on the sudden, and his Body raising it self on high of its
own motion.

These ext^aordinary Ravishments, which bore some manner o^ proportion to the
Glory of the Blessed above, happened to him from time to time, during the
Sacrifice of the Mass, when he came to pronounce the words of Consecration; and
he was beheld elevated in that manner, particularly at Meliapore, and at
Malacca. The same was frequently observed at Goa, while he was communicating
the people; and what was remarkable, as it was then the Custom, to give the
Sacrament in kn^el^ng, he app^ar'd to be lifted from the Earth, in that humble
posture.

For common Ecstasies, he had them almost every day; especially at the Altar,
and after the Sacrifice of the Mass; insomuch, that many times they could not
^ring him to himself, with pul^^^g him by the Robe, and violentl^ ^haking him.

The delight^ which he enjoyed at such a time, are only to be comprehended by
such Souls, which have received from Heaven the like savours. Never^heless,
it is evident, that if it be possible for M^n to enjoy on ^a^th, the Felicities
of Heaven, it is then, when the Soul, transported out of it self, is plunged,
and as it were lost in the Abyss of God.

But it was not only in these Extatick Transports, that Xavier was intimately
united to our Lord: In the midst of his Labors, he had his ^oul recollected in
God, without any dissipation, caused by the multitude or in^ricacy of Affairs;
insomuch, that he remained entire in all he did, and at the same time whole in
him, for whose Honor he was then employed.

This so close, (...)
and so con^inual an Union, could only proceed from a tender charity: the
divine love burning him up in such a manner, that his face was commonly on
fire; and both for his interior and outward ardour, they were often forced to
throw cold water into his bosom.

Frequently in Preaching, and in walking, he felt in himself such inward
scorching, that not being able to endure it, he was constrained to give himself
air, by opening his Cassock before his breast; and this he has been seen to do,
on many occasions, in the public places, at Malacca and at Goa, in the Garden
of St. Paul's College, and in the sandy walks of the Sea shore.

Almost every hour, words of life and fire burst and sallied as it were from
out his mouth, which were indeed the holy sparkles of a burning heart. As for
Example, O most ^oly Trinity, O my Creator, O my Jesus O Jesus the desire of
my S^ul! He spoke these words in Latin, that he might not ^e understood by the
^ommon People: and being on the Coast of ^ishery, a^ the Kingdom of Travanc^r,
and at the Molu^c^'s, he was heard to speak so many (...) every day these
words. O Sanctissi^a Trinitas! that the most Idolatrous B^rb^rians, when they
found themselves in extreme dangers, or that they would express their amazement
at any thing, pronounced those very words, without understanding any thing more
of them, than that they were holy and Misterious.

Even sleep it self had not the power to interrupt those tender aspirations;
and all the night long he was heard to say, O my Jesus, my Souls delight! or
other expressions, as full of tenderness, which showed the inclination of his
heart. Being out of his senses, by the violence of a burning Fever, both at
Mozambique and at Sancian, he spoke of God, and to God, with more ^ervency than
ever, insomuch that his Delirium, seemed only to be a redoubling of his love.
He was so sensible of the interests of the Divine Majesty, that being touched
to the quick with the enormity of those crimes, that were committed in the new
World, he writ to a Friend of his, in these very terms. I have sometimes an
abhorrence of my life, and w^u'd rather choose to d^e than to beh^ld so many
outrages done to Jesus Christ, without being* able either to hinder, or to
repair them.

For the rest, that he might always keep alive the fire of Divine Love, he had
incessantly before his eyes, the sufferings of our Lord. At the sight of the
wounds and of the blood of a Crucified God, he fell into sighs and tears, and
languishments, and ecstasies of love. He was consumed with the zeal of returning
his Savior life for life; for Martyrdom was his predominant passion, and his
sentiments are a contin^al proof of it. It sometimes happens, through a
singular favor of the Divine Goodness (says he ^n one of his Letters) that for
the service of God we run our selves into the ^^z^rd of death. But we ought to
bear in mind, that we are born mortal; and that a Christian is bound to desire
nothing more than to lay down his Life for Jesus Christ.

From thence proceeded that abundant joy which he conceived, when the faithful
poured out their blood for Faith: and he wrote to the Fathers at Rome, on
occasion of the Massacre of the Baptized M^narois. We are obliged to rejoice in
Jesus Christ, that Martyrs a^e not wanting, not even in our deca^ing times; and
to give him thanks, that, seeing so few p^rs^ns make the right use ^f his grace
for their Salvation, he permits that the number of the happy shall be
completed, through the cruelty of men. Admirable n^ws (says he el^ewhere) is
lately come from the Molucca's; they who labor there in the Lords Vineyard,
suffer exceedingly, and are in continual hazard of their lives. I imagine that
the Isles del Moro, will give many Martyrs to our Society, and they will soon
be called the Isles of Martyrdom. Let our Brethren then, who desire to shed
their blood for Jesus Christ be of good courage, and anticipate their future
joy. For, behold at length a Seminary of Martyrdom is ready for them; and they
will have wherewithal to satisfy their longings.

The same love which inspired him with the desire of dying for our Savior,
made him breath after the sight and the possession of God. He spoke not but of
Paradise, and concluded almost all his Letters, with wishing there to meet his
Brethren.

But his Charity was not confined to words and thoughts, His Cha^ity t^wards
h^s Nei^hb^ur.
it shone out in his works and actions; and extended it self to the service of
his Neighbor. Xavier seemed to be only born for the relief of the distressed.
He loved the sick with tenderness; and to attend them, was what he called his
pleasure. He sought out, not only wherewithal to feed them, but to feast them.
And for that purpose begged from the Portugueses, the most exquisite Regalio's,
which were sent them out of Europe. He was not ashamed of going round the Town
with a Wallet on his back, begging linen for the wounded Soldiers: he dressed
their hurts, and did it with so much the more affection, when they were the
most putrifi'd and loathsome to the smell. If he happened to meet with any
Beggar, who was sinking under sickness, he took him in his arms, bore him to
the Hospital, prepared his Remedies, and dressed his meat with his own hands.

Though all the miserable were dear to him; yet he assisted the Prisoners after
a more particular manner, with the Charities which he gathered for them. And,
in Goa, which was the common Tribunal of the Indies, he employed one day in the
week, in doing good to such who were overwhelmed with Debts. If he had not
wherewithal, to pay off their Creditors entirely, he mollify'd them at least
with his civilities, and obliged them sometimes to release one moiety of what
was owing to them.

The poor with one common voice called him their Father, and he also regarded
them as his Children. Nothing was given him, but what passed through his hands
into theirs, who were members of Jesus Christ; even so far as to deprive
himself of nec^ssaries. He heaped up, as I may call it, a Treasury of Alms, not
only for the subsistence of the meaner sort, who are content with little, but
for the maintenance of honorable Families, which one or two Shipwracks had
ruined all at once: and for the entertainment of many Virgins of good
parentage, whom poverty might necessitate to an infamous course of living.

The greatest part of the miracles, which on so many occasions were wrought by
him, was only for the remedy of public calamities, or for the cure of
particular persons: and it was in the same Spirit, that being one day greatly
busied in hearing the Confessions of the faithful at Goa, he departed abruptly
in appearance out of the Con^essional, and from thence out of the Church also,
transported with some inward motion, which he could not possibly resist: after
he had made many turns about the Town, without knowing whither he went, he
happened upon a Stranger, and having tenderly embraced him, conducted him to
the College of the Society. There, that miserable creature, whom his despair
was driving to lay violent hands upon himself, having more seriously reflected
on his wicked resolution, pulled out the Halter, which he had secretly about
him, and with which he was going to have hanged himself; and gave it into the
Father's hands. The Saint, to whom it was revealed, that extreme misery had
reduced the unhappy wretch, to this dismal melancholy, gave him comfort,
retained him in the College for some time; and at length dismissed him with a
round sum of money, sufficient for the entertainment of his Family. He
recommended without ceasing, his Friends and Benefactours to our Lord; he
prayed both day and night for the prosperity of King John the third of
Portugal; whom he called the true Protector of all the Society: But the
Persecutors of the Saint had a greater share in his devotions than any others:
and at the same time when he was treated so unworthily by the Governor of
Malacca, he daily offered for him the Sacrifice of the Mass. He was used to
say, that to render good for evil, was in some sort a Divine Revenge: and he
revenged himself in that very sort on the Governor of Comori^e; which in one
of his Letters is thus attested. My dear Brother in Jesus Christ (thus he wrote
to Father Mansilla) I hear uncomfortable news, that the Governor's Ship is
destroyed by fire, that his Houses also are burnt down: that he is retired into
an Island, and has nothing left him, even for the necessary provisions of life.
I desire you, out of Christian charity, to go with the soonest to his relief,
with your Christians of Punical: get what Barks you can together, and lade them
with all manner of Provisions; I have written earnestly, to the chief of the
people, that they furnish you with all things necessary, and especially with
fresh water, which as you know, is very scarce in those desert Islands. I would
go in person to the assistance of the Governor, if I thought my presence might
be acceptable to him: but of late he hates me, and has written that he could
not say, without giving scandal, all the evils I have done him. God and man can
bear me witness, if ever I have done him the least prejudice.

His Charity toward his Neighbor, His Zeal of Souls
has principally appeared, in what he did for the Conversion of Souls. It Is
difficult to enumerate all his Travels by Land, and his Voyages by Sea. And if
any one would take that pains, it might be thought he had scarce the leisure to
do any thing but travel. Without mentioning his Journe^s from Fran^e to Italy,
and from Italy to Portug^l; he went from Lisb^nn to M^^^m^ique, and from
Moz^mbique to Melind^ to S^c^tora, and in fine to G^a. From Goa he p^ss'd to
C^pe Comorine, and to the F^shing-Coast, from thence to Cochin* and returning
to Goa, came back to the Coast of Fishery, entered far into the Islands, and
returned to the Fishery, from whence he traveled to the Kingdom of Tr^vancor,
which is seated to the West.

After he had run over all these Coasts, he was a second time at Cochin and at
Goa: from G^a, he took the way of Cambaya, and having crossed that whole
Region, which lies extended from the mouth of the River Indus, as far as
Cochin, he made the tour of Cap^ Cori, and went to the Islands of Ceylan, of
Manar, and that of Las Vaccas. There he took Shipping for Negapatan, and from
thence undertook the Vo^age of Meliapore, along the Coasts of C^r^mandel. From
Meliapore he set sail for Malacca, from Malacca he descended toward the
Equin^ctial, which having passed, he entered into the Southern Hemisphere, as
far as the Isle of Banda, and those of Amboyna, N^liager, Vlate, Baranura,
Rosalao, and others without name, unknown even to Seamen, and Geographers.

In sequel of these Voyages, he turned toward the M^lucca's, was at Ternata,
and passed from thence to the Isles del Moro. Went again to Ternata, and
Amboyna, repassed the Equator, and returned to Malacca: from thence by Sea, he
regained the Port of Cochin; but immediately after his arrival departed for the
Coast of Fishery, and Ceylan. After this he returned to Goa, and drew downward
on the same Coast for Bazain; from Bazain he returned once more to Goa, and
Cochin. He passed anew from Goa to Cochin, and from Cochin to Goa, from thence
following the Coast as far as Cape Comorine, he set sail toward Malacca.
Having there made some little stay, he continued his course Northward, and
coasting certain Isles in sight of China, came at length to Iapan. After he had
made some courses there, during the space of two years, from Cangoxima to
Firando, from Firando to Amanguchi, from Amanguchi to Meaco, from Meaco back to
Amanguchi, and from thence to Bungo; he put once more to Sea, touched at the
Isle of Sancian, and was driven by Tempest on the Isle of Mindanao, one of the
Philippina's. Once again he went to Malacca, and to Goa; from Goa, he repassed
the fifth time to Malacca, and from thence arrived at Sancian, where death
concluded all his Travels.

Behold the sequel of the Voyages, of the Indian Apostle Francis Xavier. I have
omitted a vast number of Islands and Regions, where we are satisfied he carried
the light of the Gospel; I say I have not mentioned them, because the time is
not precisely known, when he made these Voyages. For what remains, I undertake
not to reckon up the leagues which he has traveled, the supputation would be
difficult to make, and content my self to say in general, that according to the
Rules of our Geographers, who have exactly measured the Terrestrial Globe, if
all his courses were to be computed, they would be found, to be many times
exceeding the circumference of this World.

In the mean time, the least of his business in all his Travels, was to Travel.
And they who were best acquainted with him, report of him, what St. Chrysostom
said of the Apostle St. Paul, that he ran through the World with an incredible
swiftness, and as it were on the wing, yet not without labor, nor that labor
without fruit, but Preaching, Baptizing. Confessing, Disputing with the
Gentiles, rooting out Idolaters, reforming manners, and throughout establishing
the Christian Piety. His Apostolical labors, were attended with all the
incommodities of life, and if those people were to be credited, who the most
narrowly observed him, it was a continual Miracle that he lived. Or rather, the
greatest miracle of Xavier was not to have revived so many dead, but not to dye
himself of labor, during the incessant sweat of ten years toiling.

His zeal alone sustained him; but how painful soever were the functions of his
Ministry, he acquitted himself of them, with so much promptitude and joy, that
by the Relation of Father Melchior Nugn^z he seemed to do naturally all he did.
These are the very words of Nugnez: The Father, Master Francis, in laboring
for the Salvation of the Saracens and Idolaters, seemed to act not by any
infused or acquired virtue, but by a natural motion: for he could neither live,
nor take the least pleasure but in Evangelical Employments; in them he ^ound
even his repose: and to him, it was no labor, to conduct others, to the love
and knowledge of his God.

Thus also, whenever there was the least probabilty, that the Faith might be
planted in any new Country of the Gentiles, he flew thither in despite of all
threatening difficulties. The certain number is not known of those whom he
converted, but the received opinion mounts it to seven hundred thousand Souls.
Which notwithstanding it ought not to be believed, that he instructed them but
lightly: for before he christened them, he gave them a through insight into all
the Principles of Faith. According to their different conditions, his
Instructions were also different. He had some which were proper to Youth,
others for Wives, for Widows, for Servants, and for Masters. He never changed
places till he had left behind him a solid establishment of Faith, and capable
of preserving it self, on its own basis. And in effect, of all the Countries
which he made Christian, there is none to be ^ound which relapsed into
Idolatry, excepting only the Town of Tolo; and not that neither, for any long
continuance. But it is well known, that the people, who during the space of
fifteen or sixteen years, had not seen the Face of any Priest, or even of (...)
Christian Stranger, have been found instructed in Religion, and as fervent in
the practice of Good-works, as if they had but newly received Baptism. It Is
known that many of those Converts were not less firm in their belief, than the
Prince of the Isle of Rosalao, whom Pedro Martinez protests to have heard say,
That though all the World should arm against him, they should never be able to
tear out of his Heart, that persuasion, which Father Francis had inspired into
him.

We know farther, that some of them having been made Captives by the Pagans,
have preserved their Faith entire in the midst of Heathenism; and have chosen
rather to lose their lives in torments, than renounce their Savior Jesus
Christ. The Saint was accustomed to desire earnestly of God, the Conversion of
the Gentiles, in the Sacrifice of the Altar: and for that very end, said a most
devout Prayer, which he composed in Latin; ^and is thus rendered in our Language.

OEternal God, Creator of all things, mercifully remember, that the Souls of
Infidels are the work of thy Hands, and that they are created to thy
resemblance. Behold, O Lord, how Hell is filled with them, to the dishonor of
thy name. Remember that Jesus Christ thy Son, for their Salvation suffered a
most cruel death: permit not, I beseech thee, that he should be despised by
those Idolaters. Vouchsafe to be propitiated by the Prayers of the Church, thy
most holy Spouse, and call to mind thy own Compassion. Forget, O Lord, their
infidelity, and work in such manner, that at length they may acknowledge for
their God, our Savior Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent into the World, and
who is our Salvation, our Life, our Resurrection, by whom we have been redeemed
from Hell, and to whom be all Glory now and evermore. Amen.

The Industry which the Saint employed in converting the Nations of the East,
The v^ri^us I^dust^y of his Zeal.
or in strengthening their Conversion, was of various sorts. In those places
where he preached the Gospel, he erected Crosses on the Seashore, on Hills,
and in public passages, to the end, that the view of that s^gn of our
Salvation* might give the Gentiles the Curiosity to know the meaning of it, or
inspire them with religious thoughts, if they had already heard speak of Jesus
Christ.

As it was impossible for him to preach always, or in all places, he writ many
Instructions, relating to Faith, and to Good Manners, some more ample, and
others more brief, but all in the Langu^ges of the ^onv^^ted Nations: And it
was by these I^structions in (...), that the Childr^^ l^arn'd to read The (...)
were so pl^asing, to Men, Women, and Children, that they sung them day and
n^ght, both in their Houses, and in the open ^i^lds.

But amongst all the means which the Father used for the Conversion of
Infidels, the most e^^icacious, was this; So soon as he entered into a Country
of Idolaters, he endeavored to gain to God, those persons who were the most
considerable, either for their Dignity, or by their Birth, and especia^ly the
Sovereign. Not only because the Honor of Jesus Christ requires that
Crown'd-heads sho^d be subject to him, but also, that by the Conversion of
Princes, the people are converted So much Authority there resides in the
Example of a Monarch, over his Subjects in every Nation of the World.

He was of easy Conversation to all sorts of persons, but more ^amiliar with
the greatest Sinners; not seeming to understand, that they were keepers of
Mistresses, Blasphemers, or Sacrilegious Persons. He was part^cularly free in
his Converse with Soldiers, who are greater Libertines, and more debauched in
the Indies than elsewhere. For, that they might the less suspect him, he kept
them company; and because sometimes when they saw him coming, they hid their
Cards and Dice, he told them, They were not of the Clergy, neither could they
continue praying all the day; that Cheating, Quarr^ling and Swearing, were
forbid to Gamesters, but that Play was not ^orbidden to a Soldier. Sometimes
he played at Chess himself, out of compliance, when they whom he studied to
withdraw from Vice, were lovers of that Game: And a Portugu^se Gentleman, whose
name was Don Diego Norogno, had once a very ill Opinion of him for it. This
Cavalier, who had heard a Report of Xavier, that he was a Saint-like man, and
desired much to have a sight of him, happened (...) be aboard of the same
Galley. Not know^ng his person, he inquired which was he; but was much
surprised to sind him playing at Chess with a private Soldier. For he had
formed in his imagination, the Idea of a man who was recollected and austere,
one who never appeared in public, but to discourse of Eternity, or to work
Miracles: What, in the name of God, said Norogna, is this your Saint! For my
part, I believe not one syllable of his Sanctity, and am much deceived if he be
not as errant a Priest as any of his fellows. Do^ Pedro de Castro, his
Camerade, and Cousin, took pains to little purpose, to persuade Norogna, of the
wonderful things which had been wrought by Xavier: Norogna still adhered to his
Opinion, because he always ^ound the Father cheerful, and in good humor. The
whole Company going ashore on the Coast of Malabar, he perceived Xavier taking
a walk by himself, into a Wood, and sent after him one of his Servants, to
observe his Actions: The Servant found the Man of God raised from the ground
into the Air; his Eyes fixed on Heaven, and Rays about his Countenance. He ran
to give notice of his discovery to his Master; who upon the report came
thither, and was himself a Witness of it. Then Norogn^^ was satisfied that
Xavier was truly a Saint, and that his Holiness was not incompatible with the
gaiety of his Conversation. By these methods the Apostle of the Indies,
attracted the Hearts of the Soldiery to himself, before he gained them to our
Lord.

He took almost the same measures with the Merchants: For he seemed to be
concerned for nothing more than for their Interests: He gave his Benediction to
the Vessels which they were sending out for traffic, and made many enquiries
concerning the success of their Affairs; as if he had been Copartner with them.
But while he was discoursing with them of Ports, of Winds, and of Merchandises,
he dexterously turned the Conversation on the eternal gains of Heaven: How bent
are our desires, said he, on heaping up the frail, and perishable Treasures of
this World; as if there were no other life besides this earthly Being; nor
other riches besides the Gold of Japan, the Silks of China, and the Spices of
the Molucca's! Ah what profits it a Man to gain the Universe, and lose his
Soul? These very words, which Father Ignatius had formerly used to Xavier, in
order to loosen him from the World, were gotten familiar to him, and he had
them frequently in his mouth. In respect of the new Christians, his conduct was
altogether fatherly. He suffered their rough, and barbarons behavior. And
required no more from them in the beginning, than what might be expected then
from people of base extraction, and grown inveterate in Vice. As they were
generally poor, he took a particular care of their Families, and obtained from
the King of Portugal, that the Paravas should be discharged from certain
excessive yearly Tributes. He protected them more than once from the fury of
their neighboring Nations, who made War against them out of hatred to the
Faith, and induced the Governor of the Indies, to send a Royal Army to their
relief; he saved them even from the violence of the O^^icers, who despoiled
them of their Goods through Avarice, and set bounds to the unjust Exactions, of
those griping Ministers, by threatening to complain of them both to King John
the Third, and to the Cardinal Infant, who was Grand Inquisitour.

As the sin of Impurity was the reigning vice in India, (...).
amongst the Portugueses, he applied himself in a particular manner, to
withdraw them from their voluptuous living. The first rule of his proceeding,
was to insinuate himself into the favor, not only of the Concubinarians, b^t
of th^^r Mistresses, and he compassed this, by the mildness of his Aspect, by
the obligingness of his Words, and sometimes by good Offices. Yet we cannot
think, that the Conversions of Sinners cost him only these Addresses. Before he
treated with them concerning the important business of their Souls, he treated
with God at the holy Altars; but to render his Prayers more efficacious, he
joined them with all manner of Austerities. Having notice, that three
Portuguese Soldiers, belonging to the Garrison of Amboyna, had lived for five
years past, in great debauchery, he got their good Wills, by his engaging
carriage, and wrought so well, that these Libertines, as wicked as they were,
lodged him in their Quarters, during a whole Lent, so much they were charmed
with his good humor. But while he appeared thus gay amongst them, in his
outward behavior, for fear of giving them any disgust of his Society, he
underwent most rigorous Penances to obtain the Grace of their Conversion; and
used his Body so unmercifully, that he was languishing for a month of those
severities. When Xavier had reduced his Penitents, to that point, at which he
aimed; that is, when he had brought them to Confession, they cost him not less
pains than formerly. He always begged of God their perseverance, with his
tears; and frequently, when he had enjoined them some light Penance, paid for
them the remainder of their debts, with bloody disciplining of his own Body.
But when he lighted on intractable and stubborn Souls, he left them not off,
for their contumacy; but rather sought their good opinion; and on occasion
showed them a better Countenance than usual, that thence they might be given to
understand, how ready he was for their reception.

When he went from Ternata to Amboyna, he left but two persons, who were
visibly engaged in Vice: The first opportunity which the Vessels had of
repassing to Ternata, he writ expressly to one of his Friends, that he should
salute those two scandalous sinners with all tenderness from him; and let them
know, that upon the least sign which they should make him, he would return to
hear their Confessions.

But these Condescentions, and this Goodness of the Apostle had nothing in them
of meanness, or of weakness; and he knew well enough, to make use of severity,
when there was occasion for it. Thus, a Lady, who had accused her self in
Confession, to have looked upon a Man, with too alluring an Eye, was thus
answered by him, You are unworthy that God should look on you; since by those
encouraging regards which you have given to a Man, you have run the hazard of
losing God. The Lady was so pierced with these few words, that during the rest
of her life, she durst never look any Man in the Face.

By all these Methods, Xavier made so many Converts. But whatever he performed,
The extent of his Zeal.
he looked on it, as no more than an Essay. And he wrote in the year 1549, that
if God would be pleased to bestow on him, yet ten years more of life, he
despaired not but these small beginnings would be attended with more happy
Consequences. This ardent desire of extending farther, the Dominion of Jesus
Christ, caused him to write those pressing Letters to the King of Portugal, and
Father Ignatius, that he might be furnished with a larger supply of Missioners:
he promised in his Letters, to sweeten the Labor of the Mission, by serving
all his fellows, and loving them better than himself. The year he died, he
writ, that when once he had subdued the Empire of China, and that of Tartary,
to the Scepter of Jesus Christ, he purposed to return into Europe, by the
North; that he might labor in the reduction of Heretics, and restoration of
Discipline in Manners; that after this, he designed to go over into Africa, or
to return into Asia, in quest of new Kingdoms, where he might preach the Gospel.

For what remains, though he was ever forming new designs, as if he were to
live beyond an Age, yet he labored as if he had not a day to live; and so
tugged at the work which he had in hand, that two or three days and nights
passed over his head, without once thinking to take the least manner of
nourishment. In saying his Office, it often happened to him, to leave for five
or six times successively, the same Canonical-hour, for the good of Souls; and
he quitted it with the same promptitude, that afterward he resumed it: He
broke off his very Prayers, when the most inconsiderable person, had the least
occasion for him; and ordered, when he was in the deepest of his retirements,
that if any poor Man, or even but a Child should desire to be instructed, he
might be called from his Devotions.

No Man, His Intrepidity in dangers, and his C^ns^dence in God.
perhaps, was ever known to have run more dangers, both by Land and Sea;
without reckoning into the account, the Tempests which he suffered in ten
years, of almost continual Navigation; it is known, that being at the Molucca's,
and passing from Isle to Isle, he was thrice Shipwrack'd; though we are not
certain of the time or places: and once he was for three days and nights
together, on a Plank, at the mercy of the Winds and Waves. The Barbarians have
often shot their Arrows at him; and more than once, he fell into the hands of
an enraged multitude. One day the Saracens pursued him, and endeavored to have
stoned him: and the Brachmans frequently sought after him, to have murdered
him; even to that point of merciless barbarity, as to set Fire on all the
Houses, where they imagined he might lie concealed. But none of all these
dangers, were able to affright him; and the apprehension of dying, could never
hinder him from performing his ordinary Functions: It seemed, that even dangers
served to the redoubling of his Courage: and that by being too intrepid, he
sometimes entered into the extreme of rashness. Being at Iapan, he reprehended
the King of Amanguchi, so severely, for the infamy, and scandal of his Vices,
that Father John Fernandez, (who served him for Interpreter, as being more
conversant than the Saint, in the Language of the Court) was amazed, and
trembled in pronouncing what the Father put into his mouth; as we are given to
understand, in a Letter written by the same Fernandez. Xavier, one day
perceiving the fear of his Companion; forbade him absolutely, either to change,
or soften any of his words: I obeyed him, says Fernandez; but expected every
moment, when the Barbarian should strike me with his Cymetar: and confess my
apprehensions of death were as much too great, as the concernment of Father
Francis was too little.

In effect, he was so far from fearing death, that he looked on it, as a most
pleasing Object. If we dye for so good a Cause, ( said Xavier on another
occasion) we ought to place it amongst the greatest benefits we receive from
God, and shall be very much obliged to those, who freeing us from a continual
death, such as is this mortal life, shall put us in possession of an eternal
happiness. So, that we are resolved to Preach the truth amongst them, in
despite of all their threatenings, and encouraged by the hopes of Divine
assistance, obe^ the precept of our Savior, who commands us to preserr the
Salvation of others, above our lives.

In the most hazardous undertakings, he hoped all things from God; and from
thence drew his assurance of daring all things. Behold, what he says himself,
concerning his Voyage of Iapan. We set out full of confidence in God: and hope,
that having him for our Conductor, we shall Triumph over all his Enemies.

As to what remains, we fear not to enter into the lists, with the Doctors of
Iapan; for what available knowledge can they have, who are ignorant of the only
true God, and of his only Son our Lord Jesus? and besides, what can we justly
apprehend, who have no other aim than the Glory of God, and Jesus Christ? the
Preaching of the Gospel, and the Salvation of Souls? supposing that we were,
not only in a Kingdom of Barbarians, but in the very Dominion of Devils, and
that naked and disarmed, neither the most cruel barbarity, nor the rage of Hell
could hurt us without God's permission. We are afraid of nothing but ossending
God Almighty; and provided that we ossend not him, we promise our selves,
through his assistance, an assured Victory over all our Enemies. Since he
a^^ords sufficient strength to every man, for his service, and for avoiding
sin, we hope his mercy will not be wanting to us. But as the sum of all
consists, in the good or evil use of his benefits, we also hope he will give us
grace to employ our selves for his glory, by the prayers of his Spouse, and our
holy Mother the Church; and particularly by the intercession of our Society,
and those who are well affected to it. Our greatest comfort proceeds from this,
that God beholds the scope of this our Voyage, that our only aim is to make
known the Creator of the Universe to Souls which are made after his own Image:
to bring those Souls to give him the Worship due to him, and to spread the
Christian Religion through all Regions.

With these encouragements, we doubt not but the issue of our Voyage will be
prosperous; and two things especially seem to assure us, that we shall vanquish
all the opposition of Hell; the one is the greatness of our holy enterprise,
the other is the care of Divine Providence; whose Dominion is of no less extent
over Devils, than over men. I acknowledge, that in this Voyage, I foresee, not
only great labors, but also dangers of almost inevitable death; and this
imagination, is frequently presented to my thoughts, that if those of our
Society, who are endu'd with the greatest stock of knowledge, should come into
the Indies, they would certainly accuse us of too much rashness, and would be
apt to think, that, in exposing our selves, to these manifest dangers, we
tempted God. Nevertheless upon a more serious reflection, I cease to fear: and
hope that the Spirit of our Lord, which animates our Society, will regulate
their judgments concerning it. For my own particular, I think continually on
what I have heard our good Father Ignati^s often say, that those of our
Society, ought to exert their utmost force in vanquishing themselves; and
banish from them all those fears, which usually hinder us from placing our
whole confidence in God.

For though Divine hope, is purely and simply the grace of God, and that he
dispenses it, according to his pleasure, nevertheless, they who endeavor to
overcome themselves, receive it more frequently than others. As there is a
manifest difference, betwixt those, who abounding with all things, trust in
God; and those, who being sufficiently provided with all necessaries, yet
bereave themselves of them, in imitation of Jesus Christ; so is there also, in
those who trust in Gods providence, when they are out of danger, and those, who
with the assistance of his grace, dare voluntarily expose themselves to the
greatest hazards which are in their proper choice and power to shun.

It was in the Spirit of this holy confidence, that the Saint, writing to Simon
Rodriguez, speaks in this manner to him.

Our God, holds in his hand the Tempests which infest the Seas of China and
Japan; the Rocks, the Gulphs, and Banks of Sands, which are formidably known,
by so many Shipwracks, are all of them under his Dominion. He is Sovereign over
all those Pirates, which cruise the Seas, and exercise their cruelties on the
Portugueses. And for this reason I cannot fear them. I only fear, lest God
should punish me for being too pusillanimous in his service; and so little
capable, through my own frailty, of extending the Kingdom of his Son, amongst
those Nations, who know him not.

He speaks in the same Spirit, to the Fathers of Goa; in giving them an account
of his arrival at Iapan -- We are infinitely obliged to God, for permitting us
to enter into these Barbarous Countries, where we are to be regardless, and in
a manner forgetful of our selves: for the Enemies of the true Religion, being
Masters every where, on whom can we rely, but on God alone? and to whom can we
have recourse besides him? In our Countries, where the Christian Faith is
flourishing, it happens, I know not how, that every thing hinders us from
reposing our selves on God: The love of our Relations, the Bonds of Friendship,
the Conveniences of life, and the Remedies which we use in sickness: but here,
being distant from the place of our Nativity, and living amongst Barbarians,
where all humane succou^s are wanting to us, it is of absolute necessity that
our confidence in God alone, should be our aid.

But the Saint perhaps, never discoursed better on this Subject, than in a
Letter written at his return from the Molucca's, after a dangerous Navigation.
His words are these: It has pleased God, that we should not perish: it has also
pleased him, to instruct us even by our dangers, and to make us know by our own
experience, how weak we are, when we rely only on our selves; or on humane
succors. For when we come to understand the deceitfulness of our hopes, and
are entirely diffident of humane helps, we rely on God, who alone can deliver
us out of those dangers, into which we have engaged our selves on his account:
we shall soon experiment, that he governs all things; and that the heavenly
pleasure^, which he confers on his Servants, on such occasions, ought to make
us despise the greatest hazards; even death it se^f has nothing in it, which is
dreadful to them, who have a ^ast of those divine delights; and though when we
have escaped those perils of which we speak, we want words to express the
horror of them; there remains in our heart a pleasing memory of the favors
which God has done us; and that remembrance excites us day and night, to labor
in the service of so good a Master; we are also enlivened by it to honor him,
during the rest of our lives, hoping, that out of his abundant mercy, he will
bestow on us a new strength, and fresh vigor, to serve him faithfully, and
generously even to our death.

May it please the Divine goodness, (he says elsewhere) that good men, whom the
Devil endeavors to affright in the service of God, might fear no other thing
besides displeasing him, in leaving off what they have undertaken for his sake.
If they would do this, how happy a life would they then lead! how much would
they advance in virtue, knowing by their own experience, that they can do
nothing of themselves, but that they can do all things by the assistance of his
grace!

He said, that our most steadfast hold in dangers and temptations, was to have a
noble courage against the foe of our Salvation, in a distrust of our own
strength, but a firm reliance on our Lord: so that we should not only fear
nothing, under the conduct of such a general, but also should not doubt of
Victory. He said also further, that in those dangerous occasions, the want of
confidence in God, was more to be feared, than any assault of the Enemy: and
that we should run much greater hazard, in the least distrust of the divine
assistance, in the greatest dangers, than in exposing our selves to those very
dangers. He added, lastly, that this danger was so much the more formidable,
the more it was hidden, and the less that we perceived it.

These thoughts produced in the Soul of this holy man, His Humility.
an entire diffidence of himself, together with a perfect humility. He was the
only discourse of the new World: Infidels, and Christians gave him almost
equal honor; and his power over Nature was so great, that it was said to be a
kind of Miracle, when he performed no Miracle. But all this served only to
raise confusion in him; because he found nothing in himself, but his own
nothingness: and being nothing in his own conceit, he could not comprehend, how
it was possible for him to be esteemed. Writing to the Doctor of Navarre,
before his Voyage to the I^dies, he told him, that it was a singular grace of
Heaven, to know our selves; and that through the mercy of God, he knew himself
to be good for nothing.

Humbly beseech our Lord, ( he wrote from the Indies, to Father Simon
Rodriguez,) that I may have power to open the door of China to others; where I
am, I have done but little. In many other passages of his Letters, he calls
himself an exceeding evil man; a great Sinner; and conjures his Brethren to
employ their intercessions to God in his behalf. Bring to pass by your Prayers
(says he to one of them) that though my sins have rendered me unworthy of the
Ministerial Vocation, yet God may vouchsafe out of his in^inite goodness to
make use of me.

I beseech you, (says he to another) to implore the heavenly assistance for us;
and to the end you may do it, with the greater fervency, I beseech our Lord,
that he would give you to understand, how much I stand in need of your
intercession.

It is of extreme importance to my consolation ( he writes to the Fathers of
Goa) that you understand, the wonderful perplexity in which I am. As God knows
the multitude and heynousness of my Sins, I have a thought which much torments
me; it is that God perhaps may not prosper our Undertakings, if we do not amend
our lives, and change our manners: It Is necessary on this account, to employ
the Prayers of all the Religious of our Society; and of all our Friends: in
hope, that by their means, the Catholic Church, which is the Spouse of our
Lord Jesus, will communicate her innumerable merits to us; and that the Auth^ur
of all good, will accumulate his graces on us, notwithstanding our offenses.

He attributed all the fruits of his labors, to an evident Miracle of the
Divine Power, which made use of so vile and weak an instrument as himself, to
the end it might appear to be the work of God. He said, that they who had great
Talents, ought to labor with great courage for the safety of Souls; since he
who was wanting in all the qualities, which are requisite to so high a Calling,
was not altogether unprofitable in his Ministry.

As he had a mean opinion of himself, and that his own understanding was
suspected by him, he frequently, by his Letters, requested his Brethren of
Italy, and Portugal, to instruct him in the best method of Preaching the
Gospel, pro^itably. I am going, said he, to publish Jesus Christ, to people who
are part Idolaters, and part Saracens; I conjure you, by Jesus Christ himself,
to send me word, after what manner, and by what means I may instruct them. For
I am verily persuaded, that God will suggest those ways to you, which are most
proper for the easy reduction of those People into his Fold: And if I wander
from the right path, while I am in expectation of your Letters, I hope I shall
return into it, when I shall have received them.

All that succeeded well to his endeavors, in the service of our Lord, he
attributed to the intercession of his Brethren. Tour Prayers, ( he writ to the
Fathers at Rome) have assuredly obtained for me the knowledge of my infinite
offenses: and withal the grace of u^vearied laboring, in the Conversion of
Idolaters, not withstanding the multitude of my sins.

But if the designs which he was always forming, for the advancement of
Religion, happened to be thwarted, he acknowledged no other reason of those
crosses than his own sins, and complained only of himself.

As for those Miracles, which he continually wrought, they passed in his
opinion, as the effects of innocence in Children, or for the fruits of faith in
sick Persons. And when at the sight of a miraculous performance, the people
were at any time about to give him particular honors, he ran to hide himself
in the thickest of a Forest; or when he could not steal away, he entered so far
into the knowledge of himself, that he stood secure from the least temptation
of vain glory. It even seemed, that the low opinion which he had of his own
worth, in some sort blinded him, in relation to the wonders which he wrought,
so that he perceived not they were Miracles.

It was the common talk at Goa, that he had raised the dead on the Coast of
Fishery: After his return to Goa, James Borba, and Cozmo Annez, his two
intimate friends, requested him to inform them, for God's further glory, how
those matters went; and particularly they inquired, concerning the Child, who
was drowned in the Well. The holy Man at this request, hung down his head, and
blushed exceedingly; when he was somewhat recovered of his bashfulness, Jesus,
said he, what I to raise the Dead! can you believe these things of such a
wretch as I am! After which, modestly smiling, he went on: Alas poor Sinner
that I am! they set before me a Child, whom they reported to be dead, and who
perhaps was not: I commanded him in the name of God to arise; he arose indeed,
and where was the Miracle?

Ordognez Cevalio, who traveled almost round the World, tells us, in the
relat^ons of his Voyages, that in India, he happened to meet a Iaponnese, who
informed him, in a discourse which they had together, of these particulars.
Know, said he, that being in Japan, a Bonza by profession, I was once at an
Assembly of our Bonza's; who upon the report of so many Miracles, as were
wrought by Father Francis Xavier, resolved to place him in the number of their
Gods: In order to which, they sent to him a kind of Embassy: But the Father was
seized with horror at the proposition of their Deputies. Having spoken of God
to them, after a most magnificent and elevated manner, he spoke of himself, in
terms so humble, and with so much self contempt, that all of us, were much
edified by his procedure. And the greatest part of us seriously reflecting,
rather on his carriage than his words, from Priests of Idols which we were,
became the Worshippers of Jesus Christ.

He shunned the Offices of the Society, and believed himself unworthy of them: I
cannot tell you ( wrote he from Cochin, to Father Ignatius) how much I stand
obliged to the Japonneses; in favor of whom, God has given me clearly to
understand the infinite number of my sins: for 'till that time, I was so little
recollected, and so far wandered out of my self, that I had not discovered in
the bottom of my heart, an Abyss of imperfections and failings. It was not
'till my labors and sufferings in Japan, that I began at length to open my
eyes, and to understand, with God's assistance, and by my own experience, that
it is necessary for me to have one, who may watch over me, and govern me. May
your holy Charity be pleased for this reason to consider what it is you do, in
ranging under my command, so many Saint-like Souls, of the Fathers and Brethren
of our Society. I am so little endued with the qualities which are requisite
for such a charge, and am so sensible that this is true, through God's mercy,
that I may reasonably hope, that instead of reposing on me the care of others,
you will repose on others the care of me. He infini^ely esteemed those
Missioners who were his Seconds; and accounted his own pains for nothing, in
comparison of theirs: After having related, what had been performed by Father
Francis Perez in Malacca: I confess ( my Brethren said he, to Paul de Camerino,
and Antonio Gomez) that seeing these things, I am ashamed of my self, and my
own lazy Cowardice makes me blush, in l^oking on a Missioner, who infirm and
languishing as he is, yet labors without intermission in the Salvation of
Souls. Xavier, more than once repeats the same thing, in his Letter with
profound sentiments of esteem for Perez, and strange contempt of his own
performances.

He recommends not any thing so much to the Gospel Laborers, as the knowledge
of themselves, and shunning of Pride. And we need only to open any of his
Letters, to behold his Opinions on that Subject.

Cultivate Humility with care, His Maxims on Humility.
in all those things which depraved Nature has in horror; and make sure, by
the assistance of Divine Grace, to gain a thorough knowledge of your selves:
for that understanding of our selves, is the Mother of Christian Humility:
Beware especially, lest the good Opinion, which Men have conceived of you, do
not give you too much pleasure; for those vain delights are apt to make us
negligent: and that negligence* as it were by a kind of Enchantment, destroys
the Humility of our Hearts, and introduces Pride instead of it.

Be distrustful of your proper strength, and build nothing upon humane wisdom,
nor on the esteem of men. By this means you will be in condition to bear
whatsoever troubles shall happen to you; for God strengthens the humble, and
gives him courage, he is proof against the greatest labors, and nothing can
ever separate him, from the Charity of Jesus Christ: not the Devil with his
evil Angels, nor the Ocean with its Tempests, nor the most brutal Nations, with
all their barbarity. And if God sometimes permits, that the Devil put
impediments in his way, or that the Elements make war against him, he is
persuaded, that it is only for the expiation of his sins, for the augmentation
of his merits, and for the rendering him more humble.

They who fervently desire to advance Gods glory, ought to humble themselves,
and be nothing in their own opinion; being diffident even in the smallest
matters of their own abilities; to the end, that in great occasions, becoming
much more diffident of themselves, through a principle of Christian humility,
they may entirely confide in God; and this confidence may give them resolution:
for he who knows that he is assisted from above, can never degenerate into
weakness.

Whatever you undertake will be acceptable in the sight of God, if there appear
in ^our conduct a profound ^umility; and that you commit the care of your
Reputation into his Hands: For he himself will not be wanting to give you both
Authority and Reputation with Men, when they are needful for you; and when he
does it not, it is from his knowledge that you will not ascribe to him, that
which only can proceed from him. I comfort my self with thinking, that the sins
of which you find your selves guilty, and with which you daily upbraid your own
Consci^nces, produce in you an extreme horror of windy Arrogance, and a great
love of perfection; so that humane praises will become your Crosses, and be
useful to admonish you of your failings.

Take heed of your selves, my dearest Brethren; many Ministers of the Gospel,
who have opened the way of Heaven to other men, are tormented in Hell, for want
of true Humility, and for being carried away with a vain opinion of themselves:
On the contrary, there is not to be found in ^ell, one single Soul, which was
sincerely ^umble.

These are the Instructions, which the Saint gave in general to his Brethren,
on the Subject of Humility; and next be hold some particular Admonitions which
were addressed to some amongst them.

I conjure you to be humble and patient toward all the World, says he to
Father Cyprian, who preached the Gospel at Meliapore. For, believe me, nothing
is to be done by Haughtiness and Choler, when it cannot be accomplished by
Modesty and Mildness. He continues, We deceive our selves, in exacting
submission and respect from men, without any other title to it, than being
Members of our Society; and without cul^ivating that Virtue which has acquir d
us so great an Authority in the World. As if we rather chose, to recommend our
selves, by that Credit and Reputation, than by the practice of Humility and
Patience, and those other Virtues by which our Society has maintained its
Dignity and Honor with Mankind.

Be mindful, writes he to Father Barzaeus, who was Rectour of the ^olledge of
Goa, to read frequently the Instructions which I have left with you;
particularly, those which concern Humility; and take an especial care, in
considering what God has done by you, and by all the Laborers of the Society,
that you do not forget your self: For my own particular, I should he glad, that
all of you would seriously think, how many things God leaves undone, because
you are wanting to him in your Fidelity, and I would rather that consideration
should employ your thoughts, than those great works, which it has pleased our
Lord to accomplish by your Ministry; for the first reflection will cover you
with Confusion, and make you mindful of your weakness; but instead of that, the
second will puff you up with Vanity, and expose you to the danger of having
thoughts of Arrogance.

This well grounded humility in Xavier, His submi^si^n to (...) pleasure.
was the Principle of a perfect submission to the Will of God. He never
undertook any thing, without consulting him beforehand; and the Divine Decrees
were his only Rule. I have made continual Prayers, says he, speaking of his
Voyage to Macassar, to know what Heaven requires of me; for I was firmly
resolved, not to be wanting on my part to fulfill the Will of God, whenever it
should be made known to me. May it please our Lord, said he on the same
subject, that out of his goodness we might understand what he designs by us, to
the end we might entirely conform our selves to his holy Will, so soon as it
shall be discovered to us: For he commands us to be always in a readiness to
obey him at the first signal, and it becomes us to be as strangers in this
World, always prepared to follow the voice of our Conductor.

I wish, said he in another place, that God would declare to us his most holy
Will, concerning the Ministries, and Countries, where I may best employ my
labors for his glory. I am ready by his Grace to execute those things which he
makes me understand to be most pleasing to him, of whatsoever nature they may
be, and undoubtedly, he has admirable means of signifying his good pleasure to
us; such as are our inward Sentiments, and heavenly Illuminations, which leave
no remaining scruple concerning the place to which he has designed us, nor what
we are to undertake for his Service. For we are like Travelers, not fixed to
any Country through which we pass: It Is our duty to be prepared to fly from one
Region to another, or rather into opposite Regions, where the Voice of Heaven
shall please to call us. East and West, North and South, are all indifferent to
me, provided I may have an opportunity of advancing the Glory of our Lord.

He says elsewhere, I could wish, that you had ever in your mind this
Meditation, that a ready and obedient Will, which is entirely devoted to Gods
service, is a more pleasing sacrifice to the Divine Majesty, than all the pomp
and glitter of our noisy actions, without that interior disposition.

Being thoroughly convinced, that the perfection of the Creature consists in
willing nothing but the Will of the Creator; he spoke incessantly of God's good
pleasure; and concluded almost all his Letters, with his desires of knowing and
fulfilling it. He sacrifi^'d all to that Principle; even his ardent wishes to
die for Jesus by the hands of the Barbrians: for though he breathed after
M^^tyrdom, he well understood, tha^ (...) tender of our life, is not (...) to
God, when he requires it not; and he was more fearful of displeasing him, than
desirous of being a Martyr for him. So that he died satisfied, when he expired
in a poor Cabin, of a natural death, though he was at that very time, on the
point of carrying the Faith into the Kingdom of China: An^ it may be therefore
said, That he sacrifis'd not only his own Glory, but even that of Jesus Christ
to the good pleasure of God Almighty.

A man so submissive to the Orders of Heaven, (...)
could not possibly want submission in regard of his Superior, who was to him
in the place of God. He had for Father Ignatius, General of the Society of
Jesus, a Veneration and Reverence mixed with Tenderness, which surpass
Imagination. He himself has expressed some part of his thoughts on that
Subject; and we cannot read them without being edified. In one of his Letters,
which begins in this manner, My only dear Father, in the Bowels of Jesus
Christ, he says at the Conclusion, Father of my Soul, for whom I have a most
profound respect, I write this to you upon my Knees, as if you were present,
and that I beheld you with my Eyes: It was his Custom to write to him in that
posture; so high was the place which Ignatius held within his heart.

God is my witness, my dearest Father, says he in another Letter, how much I
wish to behold you in this life, that I might communicate to you many matters,
which cannot be remedied without your aid: for there is no distance of places,
which can hinder me from obeying you. I conjure you, my best Father, to have
some little consideration of us who are in the Indies, and who are your
Children. I conjure you, I say, to send hither some holy Man, whose fervor may
excite our lazy faintness. I hope, for the rest, that as you know the bottom of
our Souls, by an illumination from Heaven, you will not be wanting to supply us
with the means, of awakening our languishing and drowzy Virtue, and of
inspiring us with the love of true perfection. In another of his Letters which
is thus superscrib'd, To Ignatius, my holy Father in Jesus Christ; he sends him
word, That the Letter which he received from his holy Charity, at his return
from Iapan, had replenished him with joy; and that particularly he was most
tenderly affected, with the last words of it. I am all yours, yours even to
that degree, that it is impossible for me to forget you, Ignatius. When I had
read those words, said he, the tears came flowing into my Eyes, and gushing out
of them; which makes me, that I cannot forbear writing them, and recalling to
my Memory, that sincere and holy Friendship, which you always had, and still
have for me; nothing doubting, but that if God has delivered me from so many
dangers, it has principally proceeded from your fatherly intercessions for me.
He calls himself his Son in all his Letters, and thus subscribes himself in
one: The least of your Children, and most distant from you, Francis Xavier. But
the high Idea's which Francis had of Ignatius, caused him frequently to ask his
advice in relation to his own conduct. You will do a charitable work, said he,
in writing to me a Letter, full of spiritual Instructions, as a Legacy
bequeathed to one, who is the least of all your Children, at the farthest
distance from you, and who is as it were banished from your presence, by which
I may partake some part of those abundant treasures which Heaven has heaped
upon you. I beseech you not to be too niggardly in the accomplishment of my
desires. I conjure you, says he elsewhere, by the tender love of Jesus Christ,
to give me the method, which I ought to keep, in admitting those who are to be
Members of our Society; and write to me at large, considering the smallness of
my Talent, which is well known to you; for if you give me not your assistance,
the poor ability which I have in these matters, will be the occasion of my
losing many opportunities, for the augmentation of God's Glory.

In prescribing any thing that was difficult to his Inferiors, he frequently
intermixed the name of Ignatius. I pray you by our Lord, and by Ignatius the
Father of our Society. I conjure you by the Obedience, and by the Love which
you owe to our Father Ignatius. I require this of you, in the name of the
beatify'd Father Ignatius. Remember, said he farther, to what degree, both
great and small, respect our Father Ignatius.

With these Sentiments, both of affecton and esteem, he depended absolutely on
his Superior. If I believed, says he, writing from the Indies, to Father Simon
Rodriguez, that the strength of your Body, were equal to the vigor of your
Mind, I should invite you to pass the Seas, and desire your company in this new
World: I mean, if our Father Ignatius should approve and counsel such a Voyage.
For he is our Parent, it behooves us to obey him; and it is not permitted us to
make one step without his Order.

In this manner, Xavier had recourse to Ignatius, on all occasions, as much as
the distance of places would permit; and the Orders which he received, were to
him inviolable Laws. You shall not suffer any one,(so he writ to Gasper
Barzaeus, Rectour of the College of Goa) to receive the Orders of Priesthood,
who is not sufficiently learned; and who has not given, for the space of many
years, sufficient examples of his good life in our Society; because our Father
Ignatius, has expressly forbidden it. For the same reason he exactly observed
the Constitutions of the Society. Make not haste, writes (...) in the same
Letter to Barzaeus, to receive Children which are too young: And totally reject
such sorts of people, whom Father Ignatius would have for ever excluded from
our Order. But nothing, perhaps, can more clea^ly discover how perfect the
submission ofXavier was, than (...) his Superior himself thought of it. At the
time when Xavier died, Ignatius had thoughts of recalling him from the Indies,
not doubting, but at the first notice of his Orders, this zealous Missioner,
would leave all things, out of his Obedience. And on this occasion he wrote to
him, a Letter bearing date the 28th of June, in the year 1553. Behold the
passage which conce^ns the business of which we are speaking. I add, says
Ignatius in his Letter, that having in prospect the Salvation of Souls, and the
greater service of our Lord, I have resolved to command you in virtue of holy
Obedience, to return into Portugal, with the first opportunity; and I command
you this in the name of Christ. But that you may more easily satisfy those, who
are desirous of retaining you in the Indies, for the good of those Countries, I
will present you with my reasons: You know in the first place, of what weight
are the Orders of the King of Portugal, for the confirmation of Religion in the
East, for the propagation of it in Guinea, and Brasile: and you can rightly
judge, that a Prince so Religious as he, will do all things necessary, for the
advancement of Gods Honor, and the conversion of People, if one of your
Ability and Experience, shall personally instruct him. And besides, it is of
great importance, that the holy Apostolical See, should be informed of the
present state of India, by some authentic Witness; to the end, that Popes may
issue out spiritual supplies, as well to the new, as to the ancient
Christianity of Asia; without which, neither the one nor the other can subsist;
or cannot subsist without much trouble; and no body is more proper than your
self for this; both in respect of your knowledge in the Affairs of the new
World, and of your Reputation in these parts.

You know moreover, of what consequence it is, that the Missioners who are sent
to the Indies, should be proper for the end proposed: and it is convenient, on
that account, that you come to Portugal and Rome. For not only many more will
be desirous of going on those Missions, but you will make a better choice of
Missioners; and will see more clearly to what parts such and such are proper to
be sent. You judge your self, of what consideration it is, not to be mistaken
in these Affairs. And whatsoever relation you can send us, your Letters are not
sufficient to give us a true notion, of what ^ abourers are fitting for the
Indies. It Is necessary that you, or some one, as intelligent as you, should
know and practice those who are designed for those Countries. Besides what it
will be in your power to do for the common benefit of the East, you will warm
the Zeal of the King of Portugal, in relation to Ethiopia, which has been under
consideration for so many years, but nothing yet performed. You will also be of
no little use to the Affairs of Congo and Brasile, on which you can have no
influence in India, for want of Commerce betwixt them and you. But if you think
your presence may be necessary, for the Government of those of the Society who
are in the Indies, you may govern them more easily from Portugal, than you can
from China or Japan. For what remains, I remit you to the Father, Master
Polanque, and recommend my self most cordially to your good Prayers,
beseeching, the Divine Goodness to multiply his favors on you; to the end,
that we may understand his most holy Will, and that we may perfectly perform it.

Father Polanque, who was Secretary to Father Ignatius, and Confident to all
his purposes, has given testimony, That the intention of the holy Founder was
to make Xavier General of the Society. The Letter of Ignatius found Xavier
dead. But we may judge of what he would have done, by what he writ before his
death to Ignatius himself, who had testified so earnest a desire to see him.
Your holy Charity, says he in his Letter, tells me, that you have an earnest
desire to see me once again, in this present life: God who looks into the
bottom of my Heart, can tell how sensibly that mark of your tende^ness has
touched me. Truly, whenever that expression of yours returns to my remembrance,
and it frequently returns, the tears come dropping from my Eyes, and I cannot
restrain them; while I revolve that happy thought; that once, yet once again it
may be given me to embrace you. I confess, it appears difficult to compass my
desires, but all things are possible to holy Obedience.

Undoubtedly, if the Letter of Ignatius had found Xavier alive, he had soon
been seen in Europe; for having offered of his own free motion, to leave the
Indies, Iapan, and China, and all the business which he had upon his hands, and
having said, that the least beckoning of his Superior should be sufficient for
it, what would he not have done, when he had received a positive command to
abandon all, and repass the Seas.

His Maxims of obedience show clearly what his own submission was.

There is nothing more certain, His Maxims on obedience, and his love for the
Society.
nor less subject to mistake, than always to be willing to obey. On the
contrary, it is dangerous to live in complaisance to our own wills; and without
following the motion of our Superiors: for though we chance to perform any
good action, yet if we never so little deviate from that which is commanded us,
we may rest assured, that our action is rather vicious than good.

The Devil by his malicious suggestions, tempts the greatest part of those who
have devoted themselves to God's service. What make you there, he secretly
whispers, see you not that you do but lose your labor? resist that thought
with all your strength; for it is capable not only of hindering you in the way
to perfection, but also of seducing you from it: and let every one of you,
persuade himself, that he cannot better serve our Lord, than in that place,
where he is set by his Superior. Be also satisfied, that when the time of God
is come, he will inspire your Superiors with thoughts of sending you to such
places, where your labors shall abundantly succeed. In the mean time, you
shall possess your Souls in peace. By this means, you will well employ your
precious time, though too many do not understand its value: and make great
proficiencies in virtue. It Is far otherwise with those restless Souls, who do
no good in those places where they wish to be, because they are not there; and
are unprofitable both to themselves and others where they are, because they
desire to be other-where.

Perform with great affection, what your Superiors order you, in relation to
domestic discipline, and suffer not your self to be surprised with the
suggestions of the evil Spirit, who endeavors to persuade you, that some other
Employment would be fitter for you: his design is, that you should execute that
Office ill, in which you are employed: I entreat you therefore, by our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, to consider seriously, how you may overcome those
temptations, which give you a distaste of your employment; and to meditate more
on that, than how to engage your self in such laborious Affairs, as are not
commanded you. Let no man flatter himself; it is impossible to excel in great
matters, before we arrive to excel in less: and it is a gross error, under the
pretense of saving Souls, to shake off the Yoke of Obedience, which is light
and easy, and to take up a Cross, which without comparison, is more hard and
heavy.

It becomes you to submit your will and judgment to your Governors; and to
believe that God will inspire them, in reference to you, with that which will
be most profitable to you. For the rest, beware of asking any thing with
importunity, as some have done, who press their Superiors with such
earnestness, that they even tear from them that which they desire, though the
thing which they demand be in it self pernicious; or if it be refused them,
complain in public, that their life is odious to them: They perceive not, that
their unhappiness proceeds from their neglect of their vow, and their endeavor
to appropriate that will to themselves, which they have already consecrated to
our Lord. In effect, the more such people live according to their own
capricious fancy, the more uneasy and melancholic is their life.

The holy man, was so thoroughly persuaded, that the perfection of the Society
of Jesus consisted in obedience, that he frequently commanded his Brethren in
virtue of their holy obedience, thereby to increase their merit.

I pray you, said he to two Missioners of Comorine, to go to the Isles del
Moro, and to the end you may the better have occasion of meriting by your
obedience, I positively command you.

But it is impossible to relate, with what tenderness he loved the Society, nor
how much he concerned himself in all their interests, though of the smallest
moment. Being in Portugal, before his Voyage to the Indies, he wrote not any
Letters to Rome, wherein he did not testi^y his great desire to know what
progress it made in Italy. Writing to the Fathers, Le Gay, and Laynez, he says
thus: Since our rule is confirmed, I earnestly desire to learn the names of
those, who are already received into our Order, and of such as are upon the
point of being admitted. He exhorts them, to thank the King of Portugal, for
the design which his Majesty had to build a College, or a House for the
Society: and we ought to make this acknowledgement to the King, said he, to
engage him th^reby, to begin the Building.

The news which he received from Father I^natius, and the other Fathers who
were at Rome, gave him infinite consolation. I have received your Letters,
which I expected with much impatience, and have received them with that joy,
which Children ought to have, in receiving some pleasing news from their
Mother. In effect, I learn from them, the prosperous condition of all the
Society; and the holy Employments wherein you engage your selves, without
intermission.

He could scarcely moderate his joy, whenever he thought on the establishment
of the Society: Thus he wrote from the Indies to Rome: Amongst all the favors
which I have received from God in this present life, and which I receive daily,
the most signal, and most sensible, is to have heard that the Institute of our
Society has been approved and confirmed by the Authority of the Holy See. I
give immortal thanks to Jesus Christ, that he has been pleased his Vicar should
publicly establish the form of life, which he himself has prescribed in
private to his Servant, our Father Ignatius.

But Xavier also wished nothing more, than to see the Society increased; and he
felt a redoubling of his joy, by the same proportion, when he had notice of
their gaining new Houses in the East, or when he heard from Europe, of the
foundation of new Colleges.

To conclude, he had not less affection for the particular persons, who were
Members of the Society, than for the body of it. His Brethren were ever present
in his thoughts,; and he thought it not enough to love them barely without a
continual remembrance of them. I carry ab^ut with me, (thus he writes to the
Fathers at Rome) all your Names, of your own handwriting, in your Letters; and
I carry them together, with the solemn form of my profession. By which he
signifies not only how dear the Sons of the Society were to him, but also how
much he esteemed the honor of being one of their number.

The love which he bore to Gospel-poverty, (...)
caused him to subsist on Alms, and to beg his Bread from door to door, when he
might have had a better provision made for him. Being even in the College of
Goa, which was well endowed, he sought his livelihood without the Walls, the
more to conform himself to the poverty of his blessed Savior. He was always
very meanly clothed, and most commonly had so many patches on his Cassock,
that the Children of the Idolaters derided him. He piec'd up his tatters with
his own hand, and never changed his habit, till it was worn to ^ags; at least,
if the honor of God, and the interest of Religion, did not (...) oblige him.
At his return from Iapan to Malacca, where he was received with so much honor,
he wore on his back a torn Cassock, and a rusty old Hat on his head.

The Portugueses, beholding him always so ill apparelled, often desired him to
give them leave to present him with a new habit: but seeing he would not be
persuaded, they once devised a way, of stealing his Cassock, while he was
asleep. The trick succeeded, and Xavier, whose Soul was wholly intent on God,
put on a new habit, which they had laid in the place of his old garment,
without discovering how they had served him. He passed the whole day in the
same ignorance of the cheat, and it was not till the evening that he perceived
it. For supping with Francis Payva, and other Portugueses, who were privy to
the matter; it is perhaps to do honor to our Table, said one amongst them, that
you are so spruce to day* in your new habit. Then, casting his eyes upon his
Clothes, he was much surprised, to find himself in so strange an Equipage. At
length being made sensible of the prank which they had played him, he told them
smiling, that it was no great wonder that this rich Cassock, looking for a
Master in the dark, could not see its way to some body who deserved it better.

As he lived most commonly amongst the poorer sort of Indians, who had nothing
to bestow, and who for the most part went naked, he enjoyed his Poverty without
molestation. All his movables were a Matt, on which he lay sometimes, and a
little Table, whereon were his Writings, and some little Books, with a wooden
Crucifix, made of that, which the Indians call the wood of St. Thomas.

He cheerfully underwent the greatest hardships of Poverty: and writing from
Iapan to the Fathers of Goa, his words were these: Assist me, I beseech you, my
dear Brethren, in acknowledging to Almighty God, the signal favor he has done
me: I am at length arrived at Japan, where there is an extreme scarcity of all
things: which I place amongst the greatest Benefits of Providence.

Mortification is always the Companion of poverty in Apostolical persons.
Xavier bore constantly along with him, the instruments of Penance; Hair cloth,
Chains of Iron, and Disciplines, pointed at the ends, and exceeding sharp. He
treated his flesh with great severity, by the same motive, which obliged St.
Paul the Apostle to chastise his Body, and to reduce it into servitude; least
having preached to other men, he might himself become a Reprobate.

At Sea, the Ship tackling served him for a Bed; on Land a Matt, or the Earth
it self. He eat so little, that one of his Companions assures us, that without
a Miracle he could not have lived. Another tells us, that he seldom, or never
drank Wine, unless at the Tables of the Portugueses; for there, he avoided
singularity, and took what was given him. But afterward he revenged himself on
one of those repasts, by an abstinence of many days.

When he was at Cape Comorine, the Viceroy Don Alphonso de Sosa, sent him two
Barrels of excellent Wine: He did not once taste of it, though he was then
brought very low, through the labors of his Ministry, but distributed the
whole amongst the poor.

His ordinary nourishment in the Indies, was Rice, boiled in water, or some
little piece of Salt-Fish: but during the two years and a half, of his
residence in Iapan, he totally abstained from Fish, for the better edification
of that People. And writ to the Fathers at Rome, that he would rather choose to
dye of hunger, than to give any man the least occasi^n of scandal. He also
says, I count it for a signal favor, that God has brought me into a Country,
destitute of all the comforts of life, and where, if I were so ill disposed, it
would be impossible for me, to pamper up my Body with delicious fare. He
perpetually traveled by Land, on foot; even in Iapan, where the ways are
asperous, and almost impassable: and often walked with naked feet, in the
greatest severity of Winter.

The hardships of so long a Navigation, says he, so long a sojourning amongst
the Gentiles, in a Country parched up with excessive heats, all these
incommodities being suffered, as they ought to be, for the sake of Christ, are
truly an abundant source of consolations. For my self, I am verily persuaded,
that they who love the Cross of Jesus Christ, live happy in the midst of
sufferings; and that it is a death when they have no opportunities to suffer.
For can there be a more cruel death, than to live without Jesus Christ, after
once we have tasted of him? Is any thing more hard, than to abandon him, that
we may satisfy our own inclinations? believe me, there is no other Cross, which
is to be compared to that. How happy is it, on the other side, to live, in
dying daily, and in con^uering our passions, to search after, not our proper
interests, but the interests of Jesus Christ.

His interior mortification was the principle of these thoughts in this holy
man; from the first years of his Conversion, his study was to gain an absolute
conquest on himself; and he continued always to exhort others, not to suffer
themselves to be hurried away, by the fury of their natural desires. He writes
thus to the Fathers and Brethren of Coimbra, from Malacca; I have always
present in my thoughts, what I have heard from our Holy Father Ignatius, that
the true Children of the Society of Jesus, ought to labor exceedingly in
overcoming of themselves.

If you search our Lord in the Spirit of truth, says he to the Jesuits of Goa,
and generously walk in those ways, which conduct you to him, the Spiritual
delights which you taste in his service, will sweeten all those bitter agonies,
which the conquest of your selves will cost you. O my God, how grossly stupid is
mankind, not to comprehend that by a faint and cowardly resistance of the
assaults of the Devil, they deprive themselves of the most pure and sincere
delights which life can give them*

By the daily practice of these Maxims, Xavier came to be so absolute a Master
of his passions, that he knew not what it was to have the least motion of
choler, and impatience: and from thence proceeded partly, that tranquillity of
Soul, that equality of Countenance, that perpetual Cheerfulness, which rendered
him so easy and so acceptable in all Companies.

It Is natural, His purity of S^ul and Body.
for a man who is extremely mortified, to be chaste. And so was Xavier, to such
a degree of perfection, that we have it certify'd from his Ghostly Fathers, and
amongst others, from the Vicar of Meliapore, that he lived and died a Virgin.
From his youth upward he had an extreme horror for impurity; notwithstanding,
that he was of a sanguine complexion, and naturally loved pleasure. While he
was a Student at Paris, and dwelt in the College of Saint Barbe, his Tutor in
Philosophy; who was a man lost in debauches, and who dyed, of a dishonest
disease, carried his Scholars by night to Brothel-houses. The abominable man
did all he could, toward the debauching of Francis Xavier, who was handsome,
and well shaped, but he could never accomplish his wicked purpose: so much was
the youth estranged from the uncleanness of all fleshly pleasures.

For what remains, nothing can more clearly make out his love to purity, than
what happened to him once at Rome. Simon Rodriguez being ^allen sick, Father
Ignatius commanded Xavier to take care of him, during his distemper. One night,
the sick man awaking, saw Xavier, who was asleep at his beds-^eet, thrusting
out his arms in a dream, with the action of one who violently repells an Enemy:
he observed him, even casting out blood in great abundane, through his nostrils
and at his mouth. Xavier himself awaking, with the labor of that struggling,
Rodriguez inquired of him the cause of that extreme agitation, and the gushing
of his blood. Xavier would not satisfy him at that time, and gave him no
account of it, 'till he was just upon his departure to the Indies; for then
being urged anew by Rodrigu^z, after he had obliged him to secrecy, Know said
he, my Brother, Master Sim^n, that God, out of his wonderful mercy, has done me
the ^avour to preserve me even 'till this hour, in entire purity: and that very
night I dreamt, that lod^ing at an Inn, an impudent Woman would needs approach
me. The motion of my arms was to thrust her from me; and to get rid of her: and
the blood which I threw out, proceeded from my ag^ny.

But whatsoever detestation Xavier had, even for the shadow of a sin, he was
always di^^ident of himself; and withdrew from all conversation of Women, if
charity obliged him not, to take care of their conversion. And even on such
occasions, he kept all imaginable measures, never entertaining them with
discourse, unless in public places, and in sight of all the world: nor
speaking with them of ought, but what was necessary, and then also sparing of
his words, and with a grave, modest, and serious countenance. He would say,
That in general conversation, we could not be too circumspect in our behavior
toward them; and that however (...) the intentions of their Confessors were,
there still remained more cause of fear, to (...) directours in those
entertainments, than of ^ope, tha^ any good should result from them, to the
Women Penitents.

Besides all this, he kept his senses curbed* and recollected, examined his
conscience often every day; and daily confessed himself when he had the
convenience of a Priest. By these means, (...) acquired such a purity of Soul
and Body, that they who were of his intimate acquaintance, have declared, that
they could never observe in him, ought that was not within the rules of the
exactest decency.

In like manner, he never forgave himself the least miscarriage; and it is
incredible how far the tenderness of his Conscience went on all occasions. In
that Vessel which carried him from Lisbonne to the Indies, a Child who was of
years which are capable of instruction, one day happened to dye suddenly:
Xavier immediately inquired, if the Child had been usually present at
Catechism, together with the Ship's Company? It was answered in the negative;
and at the same moment, the man of God, whose countenance commonly was
cheerful, appeared extremely sad. The Viceroy Alphonso de Sosa, soon observed
it, and knowing the cause of his affliction, asked the Father, if he had any
former knowledge, that the Child came not to Catechism; If I had known it,
replied Xavier, I had not failed to have brought him thither: But, why then,
said the Vicerory are you thus disquieted for a thing you know not, and of
which you are no ways guilty? It Is, replied the Saint, because I ought to
upbraid my self with it as a fault, that I was ignorant that any person, who
was embarked with me, wanted to be taught the Christian Faith.

A body so chaste, His devotion to the Blessed Virgin.
and a mind so pure, could not have been, but of one who was faithfully devoted
to the holy Virgin. The Saint honored, and loved her all his life, with
thoughts full of respect and tenderness. It was in the Church of Mont Martre,
dedicated to the Mother of God, and on the day of her Assumption, that he made
his first vows. It was in that of Loretto, that he had his first inspiration,
and conceived his first desires of going to the Indies. He petitioned for
nothing of our Lord, but by the intercession of his Mother: and in the
exposition which he made of the Christian Doctrine; after addressing himself to
Jesus to obtain the grace of a lively and constant Faith, he failed not of
addressing himself to Mary. He concluded all his instructions with the Salve
Regina, he never undertook any thing, but under her protection; and in all
dangers, he had always recourse to the blessed Virgin, as his Patroness. For
the rest, to show that he depended on her, and made his glory of that
dependence. He commonly wore a Chaplet about his neck, to the end that
Christians might take delight in saying the Chaplet; and made f^equ^nt use of
it in the operation of his Miracles.

When he passed whole nights at his devotions in Churches, it was almost always
before the Image of the Virgin, and especially, he offered his vows to her, for
the Conversion of notorious Sinners, and also for the remission of his own
offenses, as himself testifies in a Letter of his, which shows not less his
humility, than his confidence in the intercession of the Blessed Virgin. I have
taken the Queen of Heaven for my Patroness, that, by her Prayers I may obtain
the pardon of my innumerable sins. He was particularly devoted to her
immaculate Conception, and made a vow to defend it, to the utmost of his power.

In conversation, he frequently spoke of the greatness of the divine Mary; and
attracted all men to her service. In fine, being just upon the point of drawing
his last breath, he invoked her name with tender words, and besought her, to
show her self his Mother.

These are the principal virtues, which were collected, to be presented to the
Holy S^^. The Archbishop of Goa, and all the Bishops of India, seconded the
designs of the King of Portugal, by acting on their side with the Pope, for the
canonization of Xavier. But no one, in process of time, solicited with more
splendor, than the King of Bung^.

This Prince, His Canonization (...) solicited, and what is done in order to
it, by the King of Bungo
who was upon the point of being converted, when Xavier left Iapan, had no
sooner lost the holy man, but he was regained by the Bonza's, and fell into all
the disorders of which a Pagan can be capable. He confessed the Christian Law
to be the better; but said it was too rigorous, and that a young Prince, as he
was, born in the midst of pleasures, could not brook it. His Luxury hindered
him not from the love of Arms, nor from being very brave, and he was so
fortunate in War, that he reduced four or five Kingdoms under his Obedience. In
the course of all his Victories, the last words which Father Francis had said
to him, concerning the vanity of the World, and the necessity of Baptism, came
into his remembrance: he made serious reflections on them, and was so deeply
moved by them, that one day he appeared in public, with a Chaplet about his
neck, as it were to make an open profession of Christianity.

The effects were correspondent to the appearances: he had tow Idols in his
Palace of great value, which he worshipped every day, prostrating himself
before them, with his forehead touching the ground: these Images he commanded
to be thrown into the Sea. After this, applying himself to the exercises of
Piety and Penitence, he totally renounced his sensual pleasures, and was
finally Baptized by Father Cabira, of the Society of Jesus. At his Baptism he
took the name of Francis, in memory of the holy Apostle Francis Xavier, whom he
acknowledged for the Father of his Soul, and whom he called by that title,
during the remainder of his life.

The King of Bungo had hitherto been so fortunate, that his Prosperity passed
into a Proverb. But God was pleased to try him. Two Months after his Baptism,
the most considerable of his Subjects, entering into a. Solemn League and
Covenant against him, out of hatred to Christianity, and joining with his
neighboring Princes, defeated him in a pitched Battle, and despoyl'd him of
all his Estates. He endured his ill fortune, with great constancy, and when he
was upbraided by the Gentiles, that the change of his Religion had been the
cause of his ruin, he made a Vow at the foot of the Altar, to live and dye a
Christian; adding, by a holy transport of Zeal, that if all Iapan, and all
Europe, if the Fathers of the Society, and the Pope himself should renounce our
Savior Jesus Christ, yet, for his own particular he would confess him to the
last gasp; and be always ready, with God's assistance, to shed his Blood, in
testimony of his Faith.

As the Piety of this Prince diminished nothing of his Valor, nor of his
Conduct, having gathered up the remainder of his Troops, he restored himself by
degrees, partly by force of Arms, and partly by amicable ways of Treaty. His
principal care after his re-establishment, was to banish Idolatry out of his
Estates, and to restore the Catholic Religion. His Devotion led him to send a
solemn Embassy to Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, who at that time governed the
Church. Don Manci^ his Ambassador, being arrived at Rome, with those of the
King of Arima, and the Prince of Omura, was not satisfied with bringing the
Obedience of the King his Master, to the Vicar of Jesus Christ, by presenting
him the Letters of Don Francis, full of submission and respect to the holy See;
but he also petitioned him, in the name of his Sovereign, to place the Apostle
of Iapan amongst those Saints, whom the Faithful honor, and declared to his
Holiness, That he could not do a greater favor to the King of Bungo.

In the mean time the Memory of Xavier, (...)
was venerated more than ever, through all Asia. An Ambassador from the great
Mogul being come to Goa, to desire some Fathers of the Society might be sent to
explain the Mysteries of Christianity to that Emperor, asked permission to see
the Body of Father Francis; but he durst not approach it, till first himself
and all his train had taken off their Shoes; after which Ceremony, all of them,
having many times bowed themselves to the very ground, paid their respects to
the Saint, with as much devotion as if they had not been Mahometans. The Ships
which passed in sight of Sancian saluted the place of his death with all their
Cannon: sometimes they landed on the Island, only to view the spot of Earth,
where he had been buried for two months and a half, and to bear away a turff of
that holy ground. Insomuch, that the Chinese, entering into a belief, that
there was some hidden treasure in the place, set guards of Soldiers round
about it, to hinder it from being taken thence. One of the new Indian Converts,
and of the most devoted to the Man of God, not content with seeing the place of
his death, had also the curiosity, to view that of his Nativity: Insomuch, that
traveling through a vast extent of Land, and passing through immense Oceans,
he arrived at the Castle of Xavier: Entering into the Chamber where the Saint
was born, he fell upon his Knees, and with great devotion kissed the Floor;
which he watered also with his tears. After this, without farther thought, or
desire of seeing any thing besides in Europe, he took his way backwards to the
Indies; and counted for a mighty treasure, a little piece of Stone, which he
had loosened from the Walls of the Chamber, and carried away with him, in the
nature of a Relick.

For what remains, (...)
a series of Miracles was blazed abroad in all places. Five or six passengers,
who had set sail from Malacca toward China, in the Ship of Benedict Coeglio,
fell sick, even to the point of death. So soon as they were set on shore at
Sancian, they caused themselves to be carried to the Meadow, where Xavier had
been first interred; and there having covered their heads with that Earth which
once had touched his holy Body, they were perfectly cured upon the spot.

Xavier appeared to diverse people, on the Coast of Travancor, and that of
Fishery, sometimes to heal them, or to comfort them in the agonies of death: at
other times to deliver the Prisoners, and to reduce Sinners into the ways of
Heaven.

His name was propitious on the Seas, in the most evident dangers. The Ship of
Emanuel de Sylva, going from Cochin, and having taken the way of Bengala, in
the midst of the Gulf, there arose so furious a Tempest, that they were
constrained to cut the Mast, and throw all the Merchandises overboard: when
nothing less than Shipwreck was expected, they all implored the aid of the
Apostle of the Indies, Francis Xavier. At the same instant, a Wave, which was
rolling on, and ready to break over the Ship, like some vast Mountain, went
backward on the sudden, and dissipated into Foam. The Seamen and Passengers, at
the sight of so manifest a Miracle, invoked the Saint with loud voices, still
as the Tempest grew upon them; and the Billows failed not of retiring always at
the name of Xavier: But whenever they ceased from calling on him, the Waves
outrageously swelled, and beat the Ship on every side.

It may almost be said, That the Saint in person wrought these Miracles; but it
is unconceivable, how many were performed by the Subscriptions of his Letters,
by the Beads of his Chaplet, by the pieces of his Garments; and finally, by
every thing which had once been any wa^ appertaining to him.

The Crosses, which he had erected with his own hand on sundry Coasts to be
seen from far by Mariners and Travelers, were loaded with the Vows and Gifts,
which Christians, Saraceus, and Idolaters had fastened to them daily, in
acknowledgment of favors which they had received, through the intercession of
the holy Man. But the most celebrated of those Crosses, was that at Cotata,
whereon an Image of Xavier was placed. A blind man received sight by embracing
of that Cross: two sick men were cured on the instant; one of which, who was
aged, had a settled Palsy, and the other was dying of a bloody Flux. Copies
were made of that miraculous Image at Cotata; and Gasper Gon^alez brought one
of them to Cochin. It was eleven of the Clock at night, when he entered into
the Port: An hour afterward, the house of Christopher Miranda, adjoining to
that of Gon^alez, happened to be on Fire. The North Wind then blowing, and the
Building being almost all of Wood, the burning began with mighty rage, and
immediately a Maid belonging to the house was burned. The Neighbors awakened
with the cries of Fire, cast their Goods out at the Windows, in confusion;
there being no probability of preserving the houses, because that of Miranda
was the highest, and the burning Coals, which flew out on every side, together
with the Flames, which were driven by the Wind, fell on the tops of the Houses,
that were only covered with bows of Palm Trees, dry, and easy to take Fire. In
this extremity of danger, Gon^alez bethought himself of the holy Image which he
had brought, falling on his Knees, accompanied by all his domestic Servants,
he held it upwards to the Flames, and invoked Father Francis to his assistance.
At the same instant the Fire was extinguished of it self; and the Town in this
manner preserved from desolation, when it was ready to be burned to Ashes.

A Medal which had on one side the Image of the Saint, and on the other, that
of the holy Virgin, holding the little Jesus, wrought yet more admirable
effects. It was in the possession of a Virtuous Widow of Cochin, born at
Tamuzay in China, and named Lucy de Vellanzan, who had formerly been instructed
at Malacca in the Mysteries of Faith, by Xavier himself; and who was aged an
hundred and twenty years, when she was juridically interrogated, concerning the
Miracles which had been wrought by her Medal. All in^irm persons who came to
Lucy, received their cure so soon as she had made the sign of the Cross with
her Medal over them; or when she had sprinkled them with Water, wherein the
Medal had been dipped; in saying only the^e words: In the name of Jesus, and of
Father Francis, be your health restored.

I have seen many, says an Eye witness, who have been cured on the instant, by
being only touched with that Medal: Some, who being only putrified, ejected
through the Nose corrupted Flesh, and matter of a most offensive scent; others
who were reduced to the meagerness of Skeletons, by Consumptions of many years;
but the most celebrated Cures, were those of Gonsalvo Rodriguez, Mary Dias, and
Emanuel Fernandez Figheredo.

Rodriguez had a great Imposthume on the le^t (...), (...) remarkable Cures.
very near the Heart, which had been breeding many Months. The Surgeons for
fear of exasperating the malady, by making an Incision in so dangerous a part,
endeavored to dry up the humor, by applying other Remedies. But the
Imposthume degenerated into a Cancer, which gave the Patient intolerable pains,
and made him Heart and Stomach sick. Rodriguez having notice given him, what
wonders were wrought by the Chinese Chris^ian, by means of the Medal of Father
Xavier, went immediately to her, and kneeled before her. The Chinese only
touched him thrice, and made the sign of the Cross over him, according to her
Custom; and at the same moment, the Cancer vanished; the Flesh returned to its
natural color, on the part where the Ulcer had been formerly, and Rodriguez
found himself as well, as if nothing had ever ailed him.

Mary Dias was not only blind, but taken with the Palsy over half her Body, on
the right-side of it; so that her Arm hung dead from her Shoulder, and she had
only the use one Leg: despairing of all natural Remedies, she caused her self
to be conveyed to Lucy's Lodgings. The Hospitable Widow, kept her in her House
for the space of seven days; and washed her every of those days with the Water
wherein the Medal had been dipped. On the seventh day, she made the sign of the
Cross over the Eyes of the Patient with the Medal it self; and then Dias
recovered her sight: Her Palsy, in like manner, left her; so that she was able
to walk alone, to the Church of the Society, where she left her Crutches.

As for Emanuel Gon^alez Figheredo, both his Legs for a long time, had been
covered with Ulcers, and were become so rotten, that Worms were continually
crawling out of them. The Physicians, to divert the humors, put in practice
all the secrets of their Art, but without effect: On the contrary, the Sinews
were so shrunk up on one side, that one Leg was shorter than the other. And for
the last addition of misfortunes, Figheredo was seized with so terrible a Lask,
that in a man of threescore years old, as he was, it was judged mortal. In
effect, it had been so, but that he had immediate recourse to the Medal of
Xavier: he drank of the Water, wherein it had been dipped; after which he was
entirely cured, both of his Ulcers and his Dysentery.

But that which was daily seen at Goa, The perpetual Miracle of the Saint^ Body.
blotted out the memory of the greatest Prodigies, which were done elsewhere.
The Body of the Saint perpetually entire, the Flesh tender, and of a lively
color, was a continued Miracle. They who beheld the Sacred Corpse, could
scarcely believe that the Soul was separated from it: And Dias Carvaglio, who
had known Xavier particularly in his life, seeing his Body many years after he
had been dead, found the Features of his Face so lively, and every part of him
so fresh, that he could not forbear to cry out, and repeat it often, Ah, he is
alive.

The Vicar General of Goa, Ambrosio Ribera, would himself examine, if the
Inwards were corresponding to the outward appearances. Having thrust his Finger
into the hurt which they gave the Saint, when they interred him at Malacca, he
saw Blood and Water issue out of it. The same experiment happened at another
time to a Brother of the Society.

The Saint was one day publicly exposed, with his Feet bare, at the
importunity of the people, who through Devotion petitioned to kiss them. A
Woman, who passionately desired, to have a Relick of Xavier, drawing near, as
if it were to have kissed his Foot. fastened her Teeth in it, and bit off a
little piece of Flesh. The Blood immediately ran in great abundance out of it;
and of so pure a Crimson, that the most healthful Bodies could not send out a
more living color. The Physicians, who visited the Corpse from time to time,
and who always deposed, that there could be nothing of natural in what they
saw, judged, that the Blood which came from a Body deprived of heat, and issued
from a part so distant from the heart, as is the Foot, could be no other than
the effect of a Celestial Virtue; which not only preserved all parts of it from
putrefaction, but also caused the humors to flow, and maintained them in the
motion, which only life infuses in them.

So many wonders, which spread through all the East, He is beatify'd, and in
sequel Canonized.
and were transmitted into every part of Europe, so moved the Heart of Paul the
Fifth, that he finally performed, what his Predecessor, had designed. After a
Juridical Examen of the Virtues and Miracles, above mentioned, he declared
Beatify'd Francis Xavier, Priest of the Society of Jesus by an express Bull,
dated the 25th of October, in the year 1619.

Gregory the Fifteenth, who immediately succeeded Pope Paul the Fifth,
Canonized him afterward in all the forms, and with all the procedures, which
the Church observes on the like occasions. The Ceremony was performed at Rome,
on the 12th of March, in the year 1622. But as death prevented him from making
the Bull of the Canonization, it was his Successor Urban the Eighth, who
finally accomplished it.

This Bull, The Contents of the Bull of his Canonization.
bearing date the sixth of August, in the year 1623, is an Epitome and
Panegyric of the miraculous life of the Saint. It is there said, That the new
Apostle of the Indies has spiritually received the Blessing which God
vouchsafed to the Patriarch Abraham, that he was the Father of many Nations;
and that he saw his Children in Jesus Christ multiplied beyond the Stars of
Heaven, and the Sands of the Sea. That, for the rest, his Apostleship has had
the signs of a Divine Vocation, such as are the gift of Tongues, the gift of
Prophecy, the gift of Miracles, with the Evangelical virtues in all perfection.

The Bull reports almost all the Miracles, which we have seen in his Life;
particularly, the Resurrections of the Dead; and amongst other miraculous
Cures, which were wrought after his decease, it observes those of Gonsalvo
Fernand^z, Mary Diaz, and Emanuel Rodriguez Figheredo. It also mentions two
famous Cures, of which we have said nothing. One is of a blind man, who having
prayed to God nine days successively, by the order of Xavier, who appeared to
him, instantly recovered his sight. The other was of a Leper, who being
anointed, and rubbed over, with the Oil of a Lamp, which burned before the Image
of Xavier, was entirely cured. The Pope has added in his Bull, That the Lamps
which hung before the Image, which was venerated at Cotata, often burned with
Holy Water, as if they had been full of Oil, to the great astonishment of the
Heathens. The other Miracles which we have related, and which are omitted in
the Bull, are contained in the Acts of the process of the Canonization.

Since the time that the holy See, The Veneration of the Saint is much
increased since his Canonization.
has placed the Apostle of the Indies, in the number of the Saints; it is
incredible how much the public Devotion, has every where been augmented
toward him. Cities have taken him for their Patron and Protector. Altars have
been erected, and incessant Vowa have been made to him. Men have visited his
Tomb, with more devotion than ever; and the Chamber wherein he was born, has
been converted into a Chapel, to which Pilgrims have resorted in great crowds,
from all the quarters of the World.

For the rest, New Miracles are wrought, and chiefly in Italy.
it was not in vain, that they invoked him; and if I should take upon me to
relate the Miracles which have been lately done through his Intercession, they
would take up another Volume as large as this. Neither shall I go about to make
a recital of what things were wrought in succeeding years at Po^amo, and
Naples: but shall content my self to say, that in those places God was pleased
to honor his Servant by the performance of such wonders as might seem
incredible, if those which preceded, had not accustomed us to believe all
things of St. Xavier.

I shall even forbear to speak, of the famous Father Mastrilli, who being in
the agony of death, was cured on the instant by the Saint; and who going to
Iapan by the Ord^r of the Saint himself, to be there Martyred, built him a
magnificent Sepulcher at Goa. It Is enough for us to know, that never Saint has
been, perhaps, more honored, nor more loved in the Church, than St. Francis
Xavier: and that even the Enemies of the Society of Jesus, have had a
veneration, and tenderness for him.

But these Opinions are not con^in'd to Catholics alone: the very Heretics
revere Xavier, and Baldeus speaks of him in these terms, in his History of the
Indies. If the Religion of Xavier agreed with ours, we ought to esteem and
reverence him as another St. Paul: yet notwithstanding the difference of
Religion, his zeal, his vigilance, and the sanctity of his manners, ought to
stir up all good men, not to do the work of God negligently; for the gifts
which Xavier had received, to execute the Office of a Minister, and Ambassador
of Jesus Christ, were so eminent, that my Soul is not able to express them. If
I consider the patience and sweetness, wherewith he presented both to great and
small, the holy and living waters of the Gospel; if I regard the courage
wherewith the suffered injuries and affronts; I am forced to cry out, with the
Apostle, Who is capable like him of these wonderful things! Baldeus concludes
the Panegyric of the Saint, with an Apostrophe to the Saint himself: Might it
please Almighty God, says he, that being what you have been, you had been, or
would have been one of ours.

Richard Hackluyt also, a Protestant, and which is more, a Minister of England,
commends Xavier without restriction. The principal Navigations, Voyages,
Discoveries, etc. of the English, etc 2d. part of the 2d. Volume.
Sancian, says he, is an Island in the confines of China, and near the Port of
Canton, famous for the death of Francis Xavier, that worthy Preacher of the
Gospel, and that divine Teacher of the Indians, in what concerns Religion; who
after great labors, after many injuries, and infinite crosses, undergone with
great patience and joy, died in a Cabin, on a desert Mountain, on the 2d. of
September, in the year 1552, destitute of all worldly conveniences, but
accumulated with all sorts of spiritual blossings; having first made known
Jesus Christ to many thousands of those Eastern People. The Reader is referred
to the Original English, for the words themselves; the Translatour not having
the work by him.
The modern Histories of the Indies, are filled with the excellent virtues, and
miraculous operations of that holy Man.

Monsieur Tavernier, who is endu'd with all the probity which a man can have,
without the true Religion, makes a step farther, than these two Historians, and
speaks like a Catholic. St. Francis Xavier, says he, ended in this place his
Mission, together with his life, after he had established the Christian Faith,
with an admirable progress in all places through which he passed; not only by
his zeal, but also by his example, and by the holiness of his manners. He had
never been in China, but there is great probability, that the Religion which he
had established in the Isle of Niphon, extended it self into the neighboring
Countries; and multiplied by the cares of that holy Man, who by a just Title
may be called the St. Paul, and true Apostle of the Indies.

As to what remains, What (...) be concluded from these testimonies, and from
all the B^ok.
if Xavier was endu'd with all Apostolical virtues, does it not follow, that
the Religion which he preached, was that of the Apostles? Is there the least
appearance that a man, who was chosen by God to destroy Idolatry and Impiety in
the new World, should be himself an Idolater and a wicked man, in adoring Jesus
Christ upon the Altars, in invoking of the Holy Virgin, in engaging himself to
God by Vows, in desiring Indulgences from the Pope, in using the sign of the
Cross and Holy Water for the cure of the sick, in Praying, and saying Masses
for the dead? In fine, is it possible to believe, that this holy Man, this new
Apostle, this second St. Paul, continued all his life in the way of perdition,
and instead of enjoying at this present time the happiness of the Saints,
endures the torments of the Damned? Let us then pronounce, concluding this Work
as we began it, that the Life of St. Francis Xavier, is an Authentic Testimony
of the truth of the Gospel; and that we cannot strictly observe, what God has
wrought by the ministry of his Servant, without a full satisfaction in this
point, that the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, is the Church of our
Savior Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

