THE Bounds set to FRANCE BY THE Pyrenean Treaty; And the Interest of the
CONFEDERATES Not to accept of the Offers of Peace Made at this Time by the
FRENCH KING.

To which are added Some short Reflections; showing, How far England is
concerned in the Restitution of that Treaty.

Together with a List of the Towns and Countries that the French have taken
since that Time.

LONDON: Printed for R. Baldwin, at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane, 1694.

THE BOUNDS OF France, etc.
FOUR Things have contributed to render France so Potent and Formidable as we
behold her at this day. In the first Place, the ill observance of her Word, in
reference to Treaties of Peace or Truces concluded with other Sovereign States,
and which she has violated in a little time after the Exchange of the
Ratifications; which has been the Original of all the terrible Misfortunes that
have turmoil'd Europe for above these Thirty Years, and which, perhaps, will
hardly end but with the Princes Reign that first began the fatal Disturbance.

The second Cause of the Grandeur of France, was the easiness she met with to
give her Ambition its full Swinge, by pushing forward to the utmost of their
Extent her Exorbitant Pretensions to the Territories and Dominions of her
Neighbors, with a Resolution to confine 'em within no other Bounds then those
of all Europe, unless a greater Force opposed her.

The third Cause of her Grandeur, is the Arbitrary Power, and the Sovereign
Authority which the Reigning Price has made himself Master of by degrees, by
encroaching upon the Liberties of the People, and the Authority of Parlaments.
And the fourth, is the extraordinary Means she makes use of to increase her
Teasury, and the good use she makes of it, through the good Conduct of those
who are entrusted with the management of it.

As to the first of these Causes which is, The Violation of Treaties, and which
we have made choice of for the Subject of this Discourse; All the World knows
the Condition to which France was reduced, before the Conclusion of the
Pyrenean Peace; or to descend a little lower, during the King's Minority. She
could hardly then bring an Army of above thirty thousand Men into the Field,
and ^ind Money proportionable to pay 'em. For proof of which, the Queen Mother
has been often heard to say, talking Face to Face with her prime Minister
Mazarin; Good God! where shall we find Men to continue the War, and Money to
supply so many pressing Necessities! And a little while after, did we not see
M. de Turenne reduced to melt down his Plate, and as it were strip himself to
the last Farthing, to keep his Army from Perishing? So hard a thing it was to
get Money from the Court, for that many times the Chequer was quire drained, and
utterly unable to pay the Soldiers.

It may be said, that the French Monarchy was supported then by the Cunning and
Policy of her Ministers, rather then by her own Forces. Witness what Mazarin
said one day to the King. Sir, said he, in respect of the Treasure, Your
Majesty's Conquests in your Cabinet, are without all Contradiction, far the
greater Number, then those of your Armies. In a word, the Negotiations and
Alliances which were made during Mazarin's Ministry, and afterward under the
Marquess of Louvais, contributed more to the Aggrandizing France, and extending
her Limits, then the Force of her Arms.

France then having extremely suffered, during the space of several Years that
the War with Spain lasted, she was reduced to a lamentable condition by reason
of her Teasure's being exhausted, and the oppression of her Subjects; and it
may be said, that notwithstanding all the Polities of Mazarin, the King was
fain to put a good Face upon a bad Matter, which is a thing frequently
practiced among the French. Though at the same time she made a bouncing show of
nothing less then of being inclined to Peace, a Conduct quite opposite to what
she observes at this day: And yet the Proceedings of Mazarin made it plainly
appear, that France had a greater Inclination to it then Spain. In a word, that
Minister had hardly time to bid the Queen adieu; so earnest he was to be upon
the Frontiers of the Kingdom.

But some will object against this, the Pains that Don Antonio Piemontel took
at Paris, to persuade Mazarin to hearken to the Propositions of Peace: The
great number of Conferences which the Cardinal had with Don Lewis de Haro; the
Delays and Difficulties that occurred before the Points of that Peace could be
agreed to; all which things manifestly prove the contrary, and that France was
not so low as I represent her to be. But I answer, that this was only a
Masterpiece of Mazarin's fine-spun Politics, who made use of all the Shifts
and cunning Artifices imaginable, to incline Don Lewis, and Don Piemontel, the
Spanish Plenipotentiaries, to grant him all those Advantages which he looked
for.

In a word, Experience shows us, that he was not deceived, since the Project
which he had drawn up at Court was followed point by point, and every way to
the Advantage of France. The greatest Fault that Spain at that time committed
was, that she did not make choice of a Plenipotentiary more sharp-sighted, and
more nimble-witted then Lewis de Haro, who was mifinform'd of the Rights which
the Princes had, who were most remarkably concerned in that Peace. Don Lewis
made a World of Oversights in that Negotiation, and had committed many more but
for the Assistance of M. d' Aigremont, whom the Prince of Conde sent away Post
out of Flanders to instruct him in many things of which he was ignorant.

It was to have bin wished, that for the good and repose of all Europe, and for
the particular Interests of the House of Austria, that Spain had been more
circumspect in an Affair of that great Importance, wherein the high Dispute
was, not only about concluding a solid and lasting Peace, but the Marriage of
the Infanta. And I am persuaded that if the King of Spain had had any Idea of
good Policy, he would have taken juster Measures then he did, since it was
impossible but he must have foreseen, that by that Alliance he went about to
lay the foundation of the utter Ruin of the House of Austria. Nor did he want
any other Example then that of Lewis XIII. to teach him that the Matches of the
Infanta's of Spain, with the Kings of France had bin always fatal to the
Spaniards.

It must be acknowldg'd that the Spanish Court at that time labored under a
most terrible Blindness, that while they were moyling at the Negotiation of
Peace, and the Marriage of the Infanta, one of the two young Infant Princes
happening to die, there remained no more then the Reigning Price to suceed to
the Crown, and he so young and so sickly, that 'twas much questioned whether he
would outlive the third Year of his Age. Nevertheless, the Tidings of that
young Prince's death, which ought to have made the Court of Spain tremble,
considering the Misfortunes that threatened the Kingdom, being carried to Don
Lewis de Haro, never put so much as a Minutes stop to the Negotiation. True it
is, that de Haro had a deep sense of it; but Mazarin, who had his Prospects,
redoubled his Importunities, and hastened more then ever the Conclusion of the
Treaty.

When the Kings of France had the Misfortune to make Alliances that were likely
to prove fatal to 'em, and which infallibly would have proved the Ruin of their
Dominions, what did they do to break 'em? Witness the Conduct that Lewis XII.
observed upon the like Occasion. He had concluded a Treaty of Confederacy with
the Emperor Maximilian. The second and third Article of which Treaty imported,
that the two Princes should engage themselves to ratify and confirm the
Contract of Marriage concluded between Charles Duke of Luxemburgh Son of
Archduke Philip, and Madam Claudia of France, the most Christian King's
Daughter.

Lewis promised, that in case he died without Issue Male, that the Dutchies of
Milan, Genoa, as also the Countries of Ast and Blois, and all the other Lands
and Signiories of his Demesnes should be delivered up, after his Death, and
immediately after the Consummation of the Marriage of the Duke of Luxemburgh
with Madam Claudia of France, into the Hands of that Princess his Heiress, to
enjoy to Perpetuity, upon condition that if she happened to have any Sisters,
she should allow 'em a Dowry in Money proportionable to their Birth.

The Ministers of Lewis XII. after they had seriously considered how
disadvantagious this Marriage was to France, and how powerful the House of
Austria was like to grow, set all their Engines at work to break it. To which
purpose, by the King's consent, there was an Assembly ordered to be summoned,
which was held in the year 1506. at Plesses-Les-Tours, where the King was
present, and by a knack of Policy, as daring as well found out, they ordered
underhand, a famous Doctor of the University of Paris to appear upon the Stage,
who came and made a Speech to the King, beseeching him in the Name of all the
States of France to match the Princess, his Daughter, with the Duke of Valois,
presumptive Heir of the Crown.

This Doctor, with so much Eloquence, set before the King, the Misfortunes that
suddenly threatened France, if he suffered Madam Claudia to marry Charles of
Austria, or any other Foreign Prince, that from that very moment the Match was
brok'n off; and by that manner of Proceeding Lewis XII. disengaged himself from
his Word and Oath; and the Treaty which was made in 1501. and confirmed by
another three Years after at Blois, was declared null and void.

There Is no Question to be made but that Lewis the XII. himself was the Person
who ordered the Duke of Valois to be nominated to him by all the States of the
Kingdom, to the end that by that means he might bring himself off fairly from
his Agreements with Maximilian and Philip his Son, who had reckned upon the
word of that Prince, as upon a thing that was irrevocable.

This is an Example past all Contradiction, besides a great number of others
that might be found in History, sufficient to justify the Reasons which the
Court of Spain had then, has she minded her own Interests, to have refused the
Marriage of the Iufanta to Lewis XIV. who was a Foreign Prince, that they might
have bestowed her upon the Emperor's Son, who was of the House of Austria, and
had demanded her at the same time.

However it were, Mazarin in this particular acted the part of a great
Politician, and not to mention other Important Services which he did the French
Monarch, it may be said, that though he had done nothing else during the whole
course of his Ministry, this alone was a thing that never ought to be forgot by
France. So that he made no scruple, to write to Monsieur le Tellier,
immediately after the signing of the Treaty, That there was great Reason to
hope a long continuation of the Treaty, in regard that both Parties were
equally satisfied. But that in his Opinion, the King had reason to be more
contented, because that all the advantage was on his side: And, besides, that
there was also this farther Benefit, that Don Lewis, believing he had don his
Business admirably well, would never dream of laying hold upon Opportunities
for the furture, should they present themselves, to repair the great Prejudices
that Spain had received by the Conclusion of that Peace.

However, had France stook to this Treaty, how disadvantagious soever it was
for Spain, and had not transgressed the Limits that were prescribed him, we
should not have now beheld all Eurpoe in Arms, and the Princes of the August
League unanimously resolved not to surcease the War, till France has restored
to every one what she has wrested from 'em since the Conclusion of that Treaty.
Her want of Faith and Sincerity not only transported her to declare her self
the Irreconcilable Enemy of the House of Austria, by virtue of those Rights
which she pretends to claim as yielded up to her by virtue of that Peace, but
has openly invaded the Dominions of other Sovereigns of Europe; and without any
other Right and Title, then the Challenges of her Ambition and Power, she has
run her self into those Excesses, that now make her looked upon with Detestation
and Abhorrency.

We have showed ye the Fault, never to be repaired, that the Court of Spain
committed in consenting to the Marriage of the Infanta with Lewis XIV. and to a
Treaty of Peace so disadvantagious to her Interests. Now let us see the fatal
Event that attended 'em, and begin with the Bounds that were prescribed to
France by the Treaty; which done we will examine the Conduct which she observed,
to extend those Limits as far as we see 'em now extended: And, lastly, we shall
conclude with representing to the Princes of the League, the necessity of being
inexorable to the Importunities of France for Peace, unless extremely to their
Advantage: Their Interest to keep inviolably united together, and never to
listen to the Proposals of France, unless she makes Restitution of all that she
has usurped since the Pyrenean Peace.

All the World knows, that the main thing that obstructed the Pyrenean Treaty,
was the Accommodation of the Prince of Conde. We shall not, therefore, trouble
our selves to recite all the Particulars that passed in the great number of
Conferences between the Ministers of the two Crowns upon this Subject, as being
otherwhere to be met with. It Is sufficient to say, that Mazarin had the Honor
of the Triumph, and that he obtained of Don Lewis all that he could expect. So
true it is, that the Right and Justice of a good Cause are not battry proof
against the Artifices of a Crafty Minister, and that Honesty and Sincerity
frequently become the Cullies of wily Cunning.

Don Lewis demanded, that the Prince in consideration of the Services which he
had done Spain, should be restored to the Governments and Employments which he
possessed before his disgrace, and that the King should secure the Enjoyment of
'em to him and his Son the Duke of Enguien.

Mazarin, who was the Prince's Irreconcilable Enemy, neatly eluded all that
Don Lewis could advance to support his Pret ensions, and told him in a word,
that it would be a fruitless loss of Time to make many Disputes about a thing,
which the King, his Master, would never consent to. That the Restoration of the
Prince to his Governments and Employments, was enough to open a wide Gate for
Rebellion, and to encourage the great Lords of France to take up Arms against
their Sovereign, and take part with her Enemies upon the least discontent.

Mazarin's unshaken Constancy in this Particular, quite disarmed Don Lewis, and
was the reason, that at length he granted France the two Important Places of
Avennes and Juliers, to obtain the Prince's Restoration. So that had not
Mazarin bin afriad of some unlucky Disappointment, as well on the King of
Spain's part, who might alter his Resolution, and refuse his consent to the
Infanta's Marriage; as on the Christian Kings side, who was become passionately
in love with his Niece, to whom he had made Promises of Marriage: These
Considerations, I say, made him press on the Negotiation, or otherwise it is
most certain that Mazarin had also obtained the City of Cambray.

It Is true, that in the first Conferences Don Lewis had proposed to the
Cardinal to make an Exchange of Bethune and St. Venant, for some other Places
which he offered to give him, upon condition he would consent to let 'em go.
Mazarin enlarged himself at first very cunningly upon the Difficulties of
accepting an exchange of two such Posts, so important and useful to France;
however, if Don Lewis would part with the City of Cambray, together with
Cambresis, he hoped he might be able to persuade the King not only to deliver
up Bethune and St. Venant, but also bergues and Bassee.

Don Lewis, having considered with himself, that the loss of Cambray would be a
great disadvantage to Spain, and that thereby the whole Low Countries would be
exposed to the Invasions of France upon the first Rupture, returned for Answer
to the Cardinal, that he would never consent to the exchange of a Fortress so
considerable.

In the mean time Cardinal Mazarin, being very well satisfied with Avennes and
Juliers, thought he had gained sufficient, to make amends for his missing
Cambray. Which made him say one day, as he was talking to M. de Lionne, that if
he could but persuade Spain to deliver up Juliers to the Duke of Newburgh,
it would be a great satisfaction to him, as being convinced that it would be
more for the Honor of France, then the winning of four good Towns.

So that he made no scruple of writing to the Duke of Orleans, That he had not
only got Avennes, which his Royal Highness deemed so important, but also the
Restitution of Juliers to the Duke of Newburgh, with other Advantages, which
had cost the King no more then the Government of Burgundy for the Prince, and
the Employment of Grand Maistre for the Duke of Anguien his Son.

Avennes, as all the World knows, is a Place of Importance in the Low Countries
within the Province of Hainault, between the Sambre and the Meuse. It bears the
Title of an Earldom, and lies not above four Leagues from Landrecy, and as many
from Maubeuge: And this Town was in part the Boundary that was allotted to
France on that side: And by the yielding up of that City, the particular
Interests of the Prince of Chimai, were sacrificed to the Public. Now let us
view the rest of the Boundaries.

By the XXXV. Article of the Treaty it was concluded, That the King of France
should remain seized of, and effectually enjoy the following Places, viz. Arras
in the County of Artois, Hesden, Bapaume, Bethune, Lillier, Lens in the County
of St. Pol, Terroane, Renti, as also all the other Bailliages and
Castellan-ships of the said Artois; except only Air and St. Omer, with their
Appurtenances and Annexes.

By the XXXVI. Article it was agreed, That in the Province of Flanders, the
King of France should be possessed of Graveline, the Forts Philip, Ecluse,
Hannuin, Bourbourg and St. Venant.

By the XXXVII. is was concluded, That in the Province and County of Hainault,
the most Christian King should enjoy Landreci and Quesnoi.

By the XXXVIII. Article it was likewise greed, That the most Christian King
should enjoy in the Duchy of Luxemburgh, the strong Holds of Thionville,
Montmedi and Damvilliers; the Provostship of Ivoy, Chavanci, Chateau and the
Provostship belonging to it, the Town and Post of Marville, seared upon a
little River called Vexin, which belonged formerly in part to the Dukes of
Luxemburgh, and partly to those of Bar.

By the XXXIX. it was agreed, That Marienburgh and Philippeville, seated
between the Sambre and the Meuse, with their Appurtenances and Annexes should
be allowed the most Christian King, in exchange for la Bassee and Berg St.
Winox, and the Fort Royal, of which the Catholic King was to remain in
Possession.

by the XLIV. Article it was covenanted, That the Catholic King should
re-enter into, and enjoy the County of Charleroy.

By the XLV. the King of Spain engaged to restore to the most Christian King,
Rocroy, Chatelet and Linchamp, with their Dependences and Annexes.

By the XLVI. Article it was agreed, That the most Christian King should
restore to the Catholic King, the Cities and Places of Ypre, Dixmude,
Oudenard, Furnes, with their Dependances, etc.

These were the Boundaries prescribed to France in the Low Countries: We shall
now set down the Bounds that were assigned her in Spain.

By the Negotiation began at Madrid, in the Year 1656. upon which the present
Treaty was grounded, it was concluded, That the Pyrenean Mountains, which had
anciently divided Spain from Gaul, should also part the two Kingdoms at this
day.

In pursuance of which, the most Christian King was to remain in Possession of
all the County of Viguery of Jurisdiction of Roussillon, of the County and
Jurisdiction of Conflans, and of the Countries, Cities, Places, Castles,
Buroughs, Villages and other Places of which it consists. It was also agreed
That the County of Cerdaigne, in the Principality of Catalonia, should remain
in the Hands of the most Catholic King.

By the XLIX. the most Christian King engages to restore to the Catholic King,
the strong Holds and Ports of Roses, Trinity Fort, Capa de Quers, la Seau d'
Vrgel, Toxen, the Castle of Bastide; the Towns and strong Holds of Baga, Ripol,
and the County of Cerdaigne, wherein are Belver, Puicerda, Carol, and the
Castle of Cerdaigne, in the same condition as then it was. 'Twas also said,
That Part of Cerdaigne, that lay in the Pyrenean Mountains on that side next
France, should remain to his most Christian Majesty, as should be regulated, by
Umpires on both sides.

The Boundaries allotted to France on Gernany side were Juliers, the chief City
of the Duchy of the same Name, which belonged to the Duke of Newburg, from
whom it had bin taken by the Spaniards, but restored to him again by the
Treaty: And so the Duke of Newburg being a Confederate with France, that Place
was at her Disposal; and as such, we shall look upon it as one of the Barriers
that were assigned her on that side. As for Lorrain, the most Catholic King
consented by the LXII. Article, that it should be restored to her Lawful
Sovereign, upon condition that the Duke should demolish the Fortifications of
Nanci; never to be repaired any more. He consented also, that the
forementioned Duke should be resettl'd in the Cities, Places and Countries
which he formerly possessed, depending upon the three Bishoprics of Metz, Toul
and Verdun, except Moyenvic, surrendered to France by the Treaty of Munster, in
1648. excepting also the County of Clermont, and the Demesnes belonging to it,
and the Fortresses, Provostships and Territories of Stenai, Dun and Jamets,
with their Revenues; which Places, together with the Duchy of Bar, were to
remain united to the Crown of France.

On Alsatia side it was agreed by the LXVII. Article, That his Catholic
Majesty should, by the Treaty, renounce all Rights and Pretensions which he had
or might have hereafter to the upper and lower Alsatia, the Zuntga^ the County
of Ferrette, Brisac and its Depe^^ dencies; as also to all the Countries,
Placer Rights and Claims that were surrenderd (...) his most Christian Majesty
by the Treaty (...) Munster, October. 4. 1648. to be united and in corporated
into the Crown of France: H^^ Catholic Majesty approving, by virtue (...) the
said Renunciation, the Contents of the said Treaty: In lieu of which
Renunciation his most Christian Majesty engages to make just payment of the
three Millions of Livers which he was obliged by the said Treaty to pay the
Archdukes of Inspruch.

In the County of Burgundy, it was concluded by the XLVIII. Article, That the
most Christian King should restore to the Catholic King, the Fortresses of St.
Amor, Bleterans Toux and their Dependences, together with all the Fortified
Posts possessed by the Arms o^ his most Christian Majesty within the said
County, without reserving or detaining any thing to himself.

As to Italy, it was covenanted by the XLVIII. Article, That the most Christian
King should restore to the Catholic King the Fortresses of Valence upon the
Po, and Mortara with their Dependences. On the part of Spain, Vercueil was to
be restored to the Duke of Savoy, the King of France's Confederate.

For Brevity's sake, we shall content out selves, with allowing on Italy-side
for the French Limits, the Important Place of Pignerol, which we may number
among the Fortunate Acquisitions of the King of France during his Reign; and
wherein Negotiation and Artifice had a greater share then the pretended Claims
which he has always boasted. Such are the Cities of Dunkirk, Casal and
Strasburgh, of which more at large in the sequel of our Discourse. It will be
sufficient at present to say, That the most Christian King made himself Master
of Pignerol by virtue of a particular Treaty made with the Duke of Savoy, by
which that Prince delivered to him that Fortress, and had in recompense some
certain Territories in Montferrat, for which his Majesty promised to pay the
Duke of Mantua the Sum of Fourteen Millions in Gold. Thus France has kept in
ever since. And by means of that Fortress, has secured her Frontiers on that
side, and has preserved a Passage open to fall into Piedmont and Savoy, when
she pleases, and carry her Arms into the Heart of the Territories of the
Italian Princes. By the Surrender of that Place, the Dukes of Savoy despoyl'd
themselves of the ancient Liberty which they formerly enjoyed and are become
Salves and Victims to the most Christian King.

Thus in a few Words, we have set down the Limits that were assigned to France
by the Pyrenean Treaty, and, as I may so say, the most essential part of that
famous Negotiation. I might add to all these Advantages which t^^ most
Christian King received the particular Interests of the Princes allied to
Spain, which Don Lewis sacrificed with so much Imprudence and Cruelty, only to
improve and advance the Interests of the Prince of Con^^ which vexed the Duke
of Lorrain to the So^^ to see himself despoyl'd of half his Territories by a
Treaty. Who, thereupon, arrivin^^ Post at the Place where the Conferences were
held, his Resentment transported him to that degree, that he told Don Lewis to
his Fact 'Twas a shame to see with what Ingratitude the House of Austria repaid
the great Services which he had done it for about eight an^ twenty Years
together. That, in short, if (...) must be so stripped of his Territories;
there re^^ main'd nothing more for him to do, but to commit himself to Sea, and
wander on the Wave till Fortune found him out a Resting Place.

Mazarin, whose aim it was to draw that Prince into a closure with France, was
over joy'd to see him under those Disturbances, as well to mortify him, as to
renew his vexation for not having laid hold of those Advantages which the most
Christian King had formerly proposed to him, would he have embraced her
Interests, and abandoned the House of Austria.

And indeed France offered to restore the best part of Lorrain, and all his
Territories; as also to lend him Forces, in order to Besiege Clermont and
Stenay, in the peaceable Possession of which he should have remained: To ^^ve
given him Mogenvic, which was at his Majesty's Disposal: And besides all those
great advantages, the King promised to look upon ^^m as a Prince, to whom he
should have been beholding, for having assisted him at a time then the Civil
Wars afflicted France. But ^^e Duke of Lorrain too much addicted t ^^e House of
Austria, slighted all these Offers, ^erswading himself that the King of France
would make him pay dearly for 'em, if he would accept 'em.

The Unfortunate Prince then finding that ^^e had no time to lose, because the
Plenipotentiaries were just ready to Sign, offered Mazarin as his last Remedy,
to persuade Don Lewis to allow France a considerable Thorow^are into Alsatia
through Franche Conte, with all the Towns and Cities that lay upon that
Passage, provided the King would release to him the Duchy of Bar; which was
so inconsiderable a thing said he, that he would give the Cardinal his Oath,
that it never yielded him 4000 Livers a Year. But the two Plenipotentiaries met
with so many difficulties to agree upon Expedients to the Duke's Content, that
Mazarin carried it in this, as he had done in all other things. Besides that,
he was desirous to reserve for the King his Master the Honor of doing the Duke
of Lorrain a Kindness, as he had done in reference to the Prince of Conde, to
the end he might bind both the one and the other so much the faster to his
Interests; and because it should never be said, that Spain should one day boast
to have enforced France to make Restitution of what belonged to those Princes,
at the Peril of his Majesty's Clemency, who reserved the Honor of it wholly to
himself.

But if Spain took little care of the Interests of her Confederates, France
took a quite contrary Course in respect of Portugal, the Dukes of Newburg,
Savoy and Modena, her Allies; for whom the Cardinal procured all the Advantages
they could expect. What an Honor was it for France, what a Happiness at the
same time for the Duke of Newburg! He did but enter into an Alliance with
France, and presently had his Territories restored him France quits all,
abandons a part of her own Interests, and causes Restitution to be made of the
City of Juliers, to the prejudice of the Emperor's and the Duke of
Brandenburgh's Claims: While on the Part of Spain, such Sovereign Princes as
the Duke of Lorrain, who had served her above Eight and twenty Years, are
deprived of all.

In truth, most Serene Princes, who are at this day united in Confederacy
against France, as I cannot but reflect upon a Conduct so little becoming the
Justice of a potent Monarchy, so I cannot but humbly lay befnre you this Noble
Memento. That being upon the point of concluding a Peace with the Most
Christian King, (...) stands with your Honor to take a care, ^^at it be not a
Peace like the rest, and that one of the Princes comprehended in this August
Confederacy, wherein you have so justly ^rm'd your selves, may have the like
occasion to charge you with the same Reproach.

Methinks I hear France already loudly giving out, as she did in the time of
Charles the (...) and Francis I That the Protecting of the House of Austria was
never capable of secu^^^ng the Princes that sided with her from Oppression.
Witness, say they, what at that me befell the Dukes of Savoy, and what has
befallen Duke Victor Amedeas II. Which manner of Arguing makes me judge that
France as a strong Confidence in the Engine she is ^tting at work to bring him
off from the confederacy, she fails not to Peal in his ^ars, that he is upon
the brink of being Forken by the rest of the Princes, as his Anceers the Duke
of Lorrain, and the Prince of himai were formerly; and as an accumution to his
Misfortune, of seeing his unhappy Dominions become the Innocent Victim of he
Common-Cause, which freequently Sacrifices the Weakest.

But let ut return to our Subject: And now behold all Europe wistfully
expecting to enjoy he Sweets of a solid and durable Peace, after which she has
panted so many Years. Spain is the first that has reason to conceive great
Hopes from so August a Treaty, and an Alliance that one would think should
revive the Amity that flourished between the two House in the Reigns of
Ferdinand and Lewis XII Those two Princes in testimony of their intended
constant Union, and inviolable Friend ship, would needs that the first Article
of the Treaty of Blois, should be expressed in the^ Words, The Most Christian
King, and the Catholic King shall be as two Souls in one an the same Body.

Would to God we had as much reason o^ our side to continue the same Language,
and that we had not rather cause to say of Lewis XIV. what the Historian said
of the Dauphin who fled for Succor to the Court (...) Burgundy; that upon the
Marriage of the Monarch with the Infanta of Spain, Hatred, Altecration,
Discord, Brandling, etc. A^^ the Devils entered with him into the House (...)
Austria. It Is also observable, that the da^ when that unhappy Alliance was
conclude was so Tempestuous and so outrageously Sto^ my, that the
Plenipotentiaries were at a lo^ whether they should stay or run out of the
Room, so great the Danger was that threatn^ 'em. It seemed as if Heaven had had
a de^ sign to have hindered the conclusion of a Contract that was made on
purpose to sow the Seeds of those Dismal Confusions and Calamities that
afterward overwhelmed all Europe.

And thus we have seen the Bounds that were prescribed to France by the
Pyrenaean Treaty. Now let us see how far either her Ambition or her breach of
Faith extended 'em and the Springs that she set at work to In^ade the
Possessions of her Neighbors, and to Cloth her self with the Spoils of so
many Oppressed Princes whom she Sacrificed to her Avarice to form the Powerful
Monarchy that so long has been the Terror of Europe. Modern Historians have
great reason to say, That France is now no longer to be found in France, she is
become so much altered and out of Knowledge. How many States, Signiories,
Demesnes and Principalities has she Invaded! What Potentate could vaunt himself
secure from her impious Tyranny! I find not any in all the four Parts of the
World: The whole Earth upbraids her with her Infidelity.

Let 'em not tell me, that France has obtained to that high degree of
Exaltation and Power, by the Rights or Claims that have been yielded to her by
virtue of Alliances, or Treaties, which have succeeded that of the Pyrenans.
For to that I answer, That the Princes of the League are not to take notice of
any other then the Pyrenean Treaty, and that it is a favor done her if they
should not dispute the Places with her that were allowed her by that Treaty,
which was brought to Perfection to the Advantage of France, by the Treachery
and Cunning of Mazarin prevailing over the Weakness and witless Insufficiency
of Don Lewis.

It Is a Truth so generally received that all the World knows it, That France
constrained the Confederates, by force of Arms, to conclude the two Treaties of
Aix la Chapelle and Nimeguen. So that if the Duke of Venice, Andrea Gritti,
called the City of Cambray the Venetian's Purgatory, because all the Treaties
there concluded between the two Emperors and the two Kings of France, had bin
fatal to the most Serene Republic: We may with as much reason call the Cities
of Aix la Chappelle and Nimeguen, the Purgatories of the Spaniards and the
Confederates in regard of the Injustice of France appropriating to her self,
while she had such numerous Armies on foot, the greatest part of their
Territories under pompous and chimerical Titles, claims of the Queen, Right of
Devolution, Dependency and Covenience, etc.

And, indeed, if I may presume to say so France may be said to have soundly
purged both Spain and the Confederates by the Treaties of Aix la Chapelle and
Nimeguen, if we consider the Losses which they have sustained through the
surrender of a great many Towns and Fortresses, to which the King of France's
Power constrained 'em, and to which he had no Right. God grant we may not fall
into the like Misfortunes if it should come to another Treaty, in the
management of which it will behove the Confederate Princes to make choice of
able and faithful Plenipotentiaries. Let 'em remember, that if Mazarin had the
Honor to carry away all the Advantages that France could expect from the
Pyrenaean Negotiation; Colbert Croissi was no less successful in that of
Nimeguen: And that both the one and the other of those Ministers, were as
cunning to improve their Interests, as the the other side were unwary and
negligent in suffering themselves to be surpised.

After the Pyrenaean Peace, the first step that France made to the extending of
her Limits into Germany, was to take a fair occasion to despoil the Duke of
Lorrain of his Territories: And this that follows, was the suggestion of her
Crafty Ambition. The King of France always made a cunning use of Marriages, and
we see but very few Negotiations wherein he has not affected to employ Women;
because they are really insinuating, for that the Man must be very obdurate,
who can resist the effects of their Charms.

The King then proposed to the Duke (believing that he would refuse him) a
Match between Prince Charles his Nephew, and a Princess of France. The Duke
appeared as could as Ice, as having no mind to listen to the Proposal, and, in
short, refused to consent to it; persuading himself that the Alliance would
prove fatal to him, and be the infallible Ruin of his Territories, and his
Nephew that was to succeed him. France finding the first Hook would not take,
bethought her self of another Artifice. She set a foot Suspicions, Distrusts
and Menaces. Suspicions, by representing to the Duke, that Prince Nicholas
Francis (...) Brother, and Prince Charles his Nephew betrayed him, and held
Intelligence with the Court of France, though there were nothing so false. Which
done, perceiving the Duke would not declare himself, she raised her Tone a
little higher, and gave him to understand, that if he continued obstinate in
giving his consent to the Marriage, she would seize upon his Territories, and
deliver 'em into' the Hands of his Nephew.

The Duke, who had had sufficient Experience all his Life time, what France
would do if she were not obeyed, thought there was no way to recoil, but that
her unfortunate Destiny had plunged him into an Abyss from Whence he should
never be able to deliver himself, but by the loss of what he had most dear and
valuable in this World, that is to say, his Liberty and his Territories. So
that he resolved to strip himself of his Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar, with
their Dependences and Annexes in favor of France, to the end that she should
enjoy 'em after his Death, with all the Rights and Privileges of Sovereignty
and that they should for ever be united and incorporated into the Demeans of
the Crown only that he should enjoy 'em during his Life.

But the Duke of Lorrain, who had showed so much Constancy at other times, when
France sought his Destruction, now imprudently fell into the Springes which she
set for him. Which made the Politicians say, That he had more Folly then
Judgment in his Conduct. If we consider one Circumstance, that happened the
very day that he surrendered his Territories to France, and which is very
remarkable, it must be agreed, that the Duke had in a manner lost his Senses.
For you must know, That this same Prince being locked up in a Chamber, where he
was left all alone for a while, and afterward told, That he must never think
to be let out again till he had renounced his Territories: The Duke, who found
himself to be a Prisoner, resolved at length to purchase his Liberty at the
expense of all his Signiories. To which purpose, he took the Pen, Ink and
Paper, that was left him upon the Table, and drew up in Writing, a Draught of
the Resignation of his Dutchies to France. After he had finished the Draught,
he filled the Margin of Resignation with a great number of little Birds, which
he drew with his Pen, and sent the whole to be delivered to his Majesty, who
could not forbear Laughing, to see such an Aviary in Paper: An undeniable Proof
that the Duke knew not what he did.

These were the first Fruits which France reaped from the Pyrenean Peace, and
the effect of the LXVII. and LXIX. Articles; Mazarin took care to insert into
the Articles of the Treaty, and which he needs would undertake to dictate
himself. By the first it was agreed, That neither Duke Charles, nor any Prince
of his House, should continue in Arms, but should be obliged to disband his
Forces upon the Publication of the Peace. The second Article confirmed, That
the Duke should allow a free Thorough-fare for his Majesty's Armies to march
into Alsatia, to Brisac or Philipsburgh, when ever the King should demand it.
Observe the depth of the Artifice. France consents the Lorrain should be
restored to her Lawful Sovereign, but she reserves Passages and Thorough-fares
to return thither when she pleases. She consents, That a Sovereign Prince shall
enjoy his Liberty for the future; but, first, he must lay down his Arms;
secondly, he must demolish the Fortifications of his strong Holds, and France
must have the keeping of the Keys of his Dominions; to the end, that when she
has a mind to make her self Mistress of 'em, she may do it without meeting any
Resistance.

Thus you see the Bounds of the French Monarchy enlarged of a sudden, and
extended into Germany, by the addition of all the Territories of a Sovereign
Prince, without having any Right or Pretense to Invade 'em, but because they
lay convenient for her: Though Advocate Talon spent all the Reason and Argument
he had to the last drop, to prove the contrary in a full Parliament; asserting,
That Lorrain had always depended upon the Crown of France, and, consequently,
that 'twas but just it should be reunited to the Crown.

The King of France, considering the good luck that had attended him on Germany
side, turned all his Designs toward the Low Countries, to see whether Fortune
would present him with any favorable occasion to aggrandize himself, and
enlarge his Frontiers that way. To that purpose, he cast his Eyes upon Dunkirk,
with a Resolution to sacrifice Hecatombs, so he might but get that Important
Place out of the Hands of the English. And, indeed, the strict Ties of Amity
contracted with King Charles, during his Exile, had decoyed that Unfortunate
Prince into an Engagement not to refuse him any thing; and, knowing his weak
side, he made him an Offer, underhand, of four Millions, and a fair Mistress
over and above the Market-price: Charms sufficiently powerful to engage him to
make such a false Step, as rendered, and will for ever render, both him and his
Memory odious to Posterity.

But the Ambition of France stopped not here; there was a necessity of giving it
its full swinge; the Revenues and Right of the Church must not be spared, when
the Aggrandisement of France was the main thing in dispute. Her Bounds were
still to narrow for her to be confined within 'em. Therefore she fell upon Pope
Alexander VII. and seized upon Avignon, after she had enraged the People of
that City to mutiny against the Governor. If you ask what Ground she had for
her Pretensions? She will answer, That the Pope did not do what he would have
had done for him. Hence it came to pass, that the order of all things was
ranvers'd. The eldest Son of the Church takes up the Rod to chastise the common
Father of the Christians, because he proves disobedient; whereas, it is
generally seen, that Fathers correct their Children when they fail of their
Duty.

Pepin, the Son of Charles Martell, the Twenty Third King of France, of the
second Race, was the Glory of his Age, and the greatest Example of Piety and
Veneration toward the Popes, of any among all our Kings. His Zeal so eminent,
when he marched into Italy to succor Pope Zachary, most cruelly persecuted by
the Lombards; the Marks of his Friendship and Tenderness bestowed upon Pope
Stephen III. who fled for Refuge into France; and his raising the Siege of
Rome, which Astolphus, King of the Lombards was constrained to quit, as being
enforced to sue for Peace to Pepin, who kept him close blocked up; all these
signal Services which he did the holy See, acquired him the glorious Surname
of Most Christian.

Now if we compare King Pepin's Conduct, with the Behavior of Lewis XIV.
toward the Popes, 'twill be no difficult thing to conclude, that the Court of
Rome never had a greater Enemy then this Prince; and, consequently, that there
is nothing which he less deserves then the Surname of Most Christian. If you
demand a Reason for all these Extravagancies, you need no more then consult his
Ambition; that Passion will make answer, That when once it got Possession of
his Heart, there was nothing in the World which it did not prompt him to
undertake for the satisfaction of it. So that it is no wonder if the Rights of
the Church, and whatever is more Sacred and Augnst, are become Victims to his
Exorbitant Desires.

But what does France do further still? She was obliged by one of the Articles
to abandon the Protection of Portugal; promising, withal, to employ her utmost
Industry to persuade that Prince, in Friendly Terms, to compose the Differences
which he had with Spain. But hardly were the Ratifications exchanged, before
she made a Laughing Stock of her Promises: She gave out Commissions underhand,
and caused the Drums to beat up publicly at Paris, in order to the Raising of
Soldiers for the service of that Crown.

But all this is nothing: Here comes another Tragical Event, that makes her
Mistress, all of a sudden, of a vast extent of Country, of several Signiores,
Dukedoms, Marquisats and Earldoms; and because that was not enough to satisfy
her unsatiable Avarice, whole Kingdoms must become her Victim and her Prey. I
mean the Death of Philip IV. The loss of that Prince drew Tears from the Eyes
of Spain, and all Europe; but France leapt for Joy. That Ambitious Potentate
finding the time was come to spread abroad his vast Designs, and extend his
Limits, at the Expenses of the House of Austria, sacrifices whatever is most
sacred in Religion, and in the venerable Alliance which he had contracted:
Neither Honor, Oaths, Faith solemnly sworn, nothing is capable to stop him.

However, that he might still preserve some shadow of Justice, and authorize
his Conduce by some show of Reason, his Majesty public shed a Manifesto,
wherein he set up the Queens claim to Brabant, and some other Provinces of the
Low Countries. This Right was otherwise called a devolved Right, by virtue of
which a Brother born in the second Wedlock, is excluded from the Succession, b^
a Sister of the first Venture. And this is the Dispute between France and Spain;
Charles II. being the Issue by the second Marriage.

The King of France, therefore, having demanded of the Queen Regent of Spain
the Dominions devolved to him in right of Mari Teresa his Wife, he would not
stay till the Council of Sapin returned him an Answer His Impatience to
aggrandize himself and extend his Limits, spurred him on to be beforehand with
all the World: So that without any Declaration of War he seizes upon Bergue,
Furnes, Tournai, Douay, Courtray, L'Isle, Oudenard, Alost, and all the Places
that lay convenient for him: And to these Conquests, he joins the Important
Cities of Salins, Besanson and Dole; after which followed the total Reduction
of Franche Conpte.

Nothing could stop the Rapidness of his Arms; there was a necessity of
altering his Bounds, and he must enlarge 'em to the utmost extent of his
boundless Ambition. Nothing could stand in his way but the Triple Alliance;
nothing else could make him consent to a Treaty of Peace: By which he restores
back to Spain nothing but what he pleases himself, while he keeps those Places
which he deems of greatest Importance, and most proper to savor his
Enterprises. He therefore consents to a Treaty at Aix la Chapelle, but with a
mental Reservation, as Mahonia called it; that is to say, That he promised
Spain to lay down his Arms, provided she quits to him all the Places and Towns,
that he had seized in 1667. reserving to him self a Power to begin the War
again, so soon as the Peace should be concluded.

Spain is there enforced to quit Chatle^^^, Binch, Ath, Douay, Tournay,
Oudenard, L'Isle, Armentier, Courtray, Bergh and Furnes, with all their
Dependencies, Appurtenances and Jurisdictions. One would have thought, that
after so many Advantages France would have been satisfied, and would have let
the Confederates and Spain have been at quiet, at least, for some Years. But
that was the least of her Intention. For in 1671. her old insatiable Passion
roused her again, and she that had violated the Pyrenean Peace, the most
solemn, the most sacred, that France ever made, signed by all the Nobility and
Grandees of both Crowns, might with much more reason infringe the Treaty of Aix
la Chapelle.

Well, then, without consulting any other then her old Mistress Ambition (and,
always when that Passion gives the word, his Armies are ready to march, and his
Generals are in a condition to put his Designs in Execution) the first Step,
then, that France made after the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, was her declaring
War against Holland, after she had made use of all the Artifices imaginable to
break off the Engagement, that united 'em with England and Sweden. If you
demand a Reason for this Rupture; she will answer, That the King had
Inducements to look upon those People no otherwise then as the Enemies of his
Realm, and upon no other Grounds marches his Armies, and in less then six Weeks
takes from the Hollanders three whole Provinces of seven that compose their
Commonwealth, together with all the strong Fortresses upon the Banks of the
Vahal and the ^ld Rhine.

She seizes upon Franche Conte the second ^ime, and pushes on her Conquests as
far as ^t was possible for her to do, with Orders to ^her Forces to commit all
the Ravages imaginable; allowing no Bounds to her vast Designs, then such as
the opposition of a greater Force was able to prescribe her.

So soon as she had obtained her Ends, and saw her Affairs in a thriving
condition, by the great Advantages which her victorious Arms had acquired, she
observed the same Conduct as she observes at this day; that is to say, she
offered Propositions of Peace to the Confederates, rather to disunite 'em, then
out of any Compassion to the Calamities of Europe, as she gave out, occasioned
by the most bloody and cruel War that ever was known.

Never was France more eager after Peace then at that time; there was never a
petty Prince or State that was comprehended in the League, to whom she did not
make advantageous Offers; with a Design, that if she could bring off any one,
they who last laid down their Arms should become Victims to her Resentment, and
their Territories, and their Countries be abandoned to the Plunder and Fury of
his Soldiers. I cannot here forbear to recite what the Marquess of Louvois
said one day to the King upon this occasion. Sir, said he, if your Majesty can
but once disunite the Princes of the League, France will have reason to admire
her Happiness^ and to boast of never having concluded so advantageous a Peace.
To which purpose it is requisite, that she stoop to considerable Condescentions,
and that she offer to make Restitution of Places that may form a good Barrier
in Flanders, for which she may make her self amends, by retaking 'em after the
Conclusion of the Peace.

Charles V. having a design to enthral all Germany, finding himself so far from
succeeding in his Enterprises, that he perceived the liberty of the Princes,
which he endeavored to oppress, gather Strength every day more then other, and
that their Union became more Potent, resolved to make 'em very advantageous
Proposals of Peace: as, likewise, to Francis I. the most formidable of all his
Enemies, believing, that if he consented once to an Accommodation, he should
easily compass the rest. And this is the Course that Lewis the Great takes at
this day.

However it were. France having luckily attained her end, after she found the
knack of separating the Hollanders from their Confederates, surceases her
offering Peace to the rest, but imposes the Law upon 'em, and forces 'em to an
Acceptance, mangre their unwillingness. So that Spain was constrained to resign
Irrevocably and for ever Franche Conpte, together with the Cities of
Valencionnes, Bouchain, Conde, Cambray, Aires, Sc. Omer, Ipres, War^ic and
Warnton upon the Lis, Cassel, Bovay, Maubege, with all their Signiores,
Appurtenances and Dependences.

France on the other side engages, but with Mazarin's Mental Reservation, to
restore Charleroy, Binch, Ath, Oudenard and Countray, which had been resigned
to her before the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle. In like manner, she restored the
Duchy of Limberg, and the Country of Oultremouse, together with the City and
Citadel of Gaunt, the City of Leuve in Brabant, St. Ghilain in Hainault, and
the City of Puicerda in Catalonia.

Now look how much France advances in the Negotiation of the Peace at Nimeguen,
especially after she had found a way to satisfy the Hollanders and Spaniards,
whether to their content or no it mattered not, but more especially the
foremost who were the principal Sinews of the League, she raises her Tone a
litter higher, and never concerns her self with what the rest of the
Confederates will do: She knows what she had to do, to bring 'em to her Bow. So
that the Emperor, the Princes of the Empire, and the Duke of Lorrain, who are
the last to be agreed with, having nothing to do but to prepare for a new War,
if they obstinately stand out, and refuse the Propositions that are made 'em,
Blows immediately follow Threats; she marches her Forces into the Territories
of those Princes, and constrains 'em, by the unheard of Ravages and Cruelties
there committed, to accept the severe Conditions which she offers 'em, and so
sells 'em their Peace at a dear rate.

After this manner the Treaty between France and Spain was concluded in 1678.
and the Emperor was fain to comply the next Year: Between whom and France it
was agreed, That his Imperial Majesty and the most Christian King, should renew
and confirm the Contents of the Treaty of Munster in 1648. except in some
Points.

By this Treaty, the most Christian King engages to resign and transfer to the
Emperor, and his Heirs and Successors, the perpetual Right of Protection and
Possession of the City of Philipsburgh, which he possessed by virtue of the
Peace of Munster. On the other side, his Imperial Majesty, in the name of the
whole House of Austria and of the Empire, promises to resign and transfer to
his most Christian Majesty and his Successors, the City and Citadel of
Friburgh, with the three Villages depending upon it, excepting the Diocesan
Rights, which were reserved to the Bishop and Church of Constance, to which it
belonged.

Next to the Emperor, the Elector of Brandenburgh was forced, in his turn, to
obey France, and to restore to Sweden all that he had won from that Crown; so
that the Elector, finding himself the only innocent Victim of the Party, whose
Interests he had so ^enerously espoused, laid it so heinously to Heart, as to
vow, That if he had bin so easy, ^s to the time past, to intermeddle with
other Peoples Quarrels, he would be so prudent for ^e future, as to consider
twice before he de^ar'd once. What a Consolation it was to ^e most Christian
King, to see that all ^^ings went to wrack on the Confederates ^de, after the
Hollanders had quitted that Union. Therefore, most Serene Princes, may nothing
ever be so prevalent as to disunite ^our Confederacy; for it is by your united
^orce that you will obtain a lasting and ^urable Peace; nor is there any other
pro^able Means to bring down the Pride of France.

As for Prince Charles of Lorrain, it was ^greed by the XII. Article, That he
should ^e restored to the Territories which Duke Charles his Uncle enjoyed in
1670. at what ^ime France made her self Mistress of 'em, upon condition that
the City of Nanci and the Dependencies, should belong to the King in
Sovereignty. And it was also agreed, That besides the Thorough-fare, which the
deceased Duke had granted to his Majesty in 1667. Prince Charles should engage
to allow him two more, from Nanci to Metz; and so unto Franche Conte. In this
manner France consents to the Restitution of Lorrain, as she had done by the
Pyrenean Peace; but Colbert Croissi, in imitation of Mazarin, labors (...)
preserve a Thorough-fare and High Roa^^ for his Majesty's Forces, to the end
that if (...) Fancy should take him to seize upon th^^ Dukedom a third time, he
may always find (...) open and ready to receive him. Moreover the King engaged
by the XVII Article to (...) sign and transfer to him the Propriety an^
Sovereignty of the City of Toul, with (...) Banlieu or Precinct of a League in
compass belonging to it, to make him amends for (...) loss of Nanci. France had
also promis^^ to give him in exchange for the City an^ Provostship of Longwic,
and Equivalent in o^^ of the three Bishoprics: But she made a (...) of that
Article as well as of all the rest. Wh^^ the day of signing Treaties is once
over, sh^^ never thinks her self bound to perform an^ more.

The Landgraviate of Alsatia, and the Government of that Province, the three
Bishop ricks of Metz, Toul and Verdun, and Sangovi^^ with Brisac, were also to
be resigned to France by the Treaties of Munster and Nimeguen.

After so many Resignations and Surrenders one would have thought that this
Ambitious Potentate should have bin satisfied; but fa^ from that, he gave the
Emperor to understand, in a short time after, that since he had surrendered one
part of that Province to him the whole belonged to him by Rights of Dependency,
Convenience, Equivocation, Compensation, and a thousand other Chimerical
Plaims, which he readily invented, and which ^ought Re-unions into Fashion. So
that the are Langraviate, with Brisac and Sandgaw, which lie in the upper
Alsatia, being resigned (...) him, they must be taken for the whole Alsatia,
though they make but one part of it.

As to the Government of the Province which only referred to the lower Alsatia,
'twas ^^presly agreed by the Treaty, That France ^ould only enjoy the Right of
the Admini^^ation of Justice, without appropriating to ^er self any Right of
Sovereignty; but she ^ugh'd at that Exception. So that 'twas a ^anifest
Usurpation, and a mere pretense to ^ppress the Liberty of all Alsatia, as being
^^vested with a single Prerogative: That ^iberty, which had been always so dear
to that Province, and which it had enjoyed for ^o many Years, as a Member of
the Em^ire.

I would fain know to what purpose served ^ll the Care and Pains which the
Emperors Plenipotentiaries took, to insert expressly the Names of the Countries
and Places which were to be resigned to the Emperor, and which were not to be
surrendered. 'Twas said, That the Landgraviat, and all the rest of Alsatia,
should enjoy the same Franchises and Privileges which they had enjoyed under
the House of Austria. But France passing by all these Reservations made a Jest
of 'em, a^^ using the Lands that were not surrendered (...) the same Pride and
Cruelty, as those (...) were, has so ordered the Matter, that the Subjects of
that Province have sufficiently experenc'd the rigorous Effecrs of his Tyranny.

It would require a large Volume to enumerate all the Articles that France has
violated; and, therefore, we shall refer those th^^ desire a more particular
Account, to th^^ Authors who have discoursed at large upon the Negotiation of
the Peace of Nimeguen.

All Europe wearied with so many Breach^ and wicked Encroachments, panted after
(...) thing but Peace, and prepared to enjoy it (...) some Years; and there was
some reason (...) hope, that France having reaped such a plen^^ful Harvest of
Advantages from the Alli^^ would have set bounds to her Designs, a^^ lived in
perfect Unionw ith the House of A^stria, and the rest of the Princes of Europ^^
But neither is all this any thing: Her Limi^^ are not yet enough extended; nor
will an^^ thing less content here, then the Limits of th^^ whole Earth.

The Reason why I cannot here forbear t^^ recite the words of St. Austin, To
make Wa^^ upon our Neighbors, and thence to carry it sti^^ farther into other
Countries, oppressing People that never did us harm, and this merely out o^^ an
Ambitious Desire of Empire; what is it els^ but a glorious sort of Robbing upon
the High^ way? Thus, in a few Words, you have the (...) of all the Heroic
Virtues of Lewis the ^^eat, his Panegyric in Miniature. To ^^ich we may add,
those Verses of Juvenal, ^^eaking of the Insatiable desire of Alexander, (...)
aggrandize his Fame.

Vnus Pellaeo Juveni non sufficit Orbis:
Aestuat Infoelix Angusto Limite mundi,
Vt Gyarae clausus scopulis, Parvoque seripho.
Cum tamen a figulis munitam intraverit Vrbem,
Sarcophago contentus erit --
That Prince who was too little for the Universe, and the Universe too little
for him, ^^d whose Ambition could never be asswag'd, ^eing entered into
Babylon, was forced to be ^^ntented with a single Coffin.

My Opinion is, that as much may be said (...) Lewis the Great, and that this
swelling Monarch, having bin the Scourge of his Age, ^he Terror of his Enemies,
and the most Ambitious Prince that ever swayed the Scepter of France, will be
at length constrained to confine the vast extent of his Designs, and his
Insatiable desire of Aggrandizing himself, to a ^canty Tomb prepared for him at
St. Denis's, ^here to be laid up among the Illustrious and Highborn Lumber of
the World. But this is not the Business in hand; we must stay till he is dead.
In the mean time, let us see what he has done further. He has violat^ the
Pyrenean Treaty, and that of Aix la Ch^pelle; now let us consider, whether he
held (...) Peace of Nimeguen more sacred or more (...) violable.

In the Year, 1688. France makes her (...) Mistress of two the most Important
Places (...) Europe: To which purpose, observe the Artifices that Luovis makes
use of. He co^ceals his Order of Knighthood under his u^per Coat, puts himself
into a Disguize, tak^ Posthorses, and flies from Versailles, attented only by
one single Lacquey, and comes (...) cognito to Strasburgh. Being arrived at
(...) Entrance into the Plain, within Canon-sh^^ of the City, there he found
the Coach of (...) Chief Burgo-master of the Town, that (...) for his coming;
into which he whipped, (...) fear of being known, and ordered his Lacque^^ who
was also in the Disguise of a Hor^^ courser, to go before with the two Horse^
and lodge at the White Horse, where he (...) to stay, and make a show of
trucking for Ho^^ses, till he had notice of the Day and He^^ of his return.

Louvois was conducted to the Chief Burge^^ master's House, who had found a way
to rid^^ himself of his Wife and Children, by sending 'em to his House in the
Country, about thr^^ Leagues from the City, keeping no Body (...) attend him at
home, but a very faithful Val^^ de Chamber. The rest of the Magistrates that
were of the Cabal, were to randezouze in (...) Nightime; and as soon as they
were (...) together, they fell to the Business. Louvois began the Treaty with a
Proposal of great ^^dvantages and Rewards which his Majesty ^^serv'd
particularly for them, after the Con^^usion of an Affair, which he looked upon
as (...) Concern of great Importance to his other ^^esigns. And to render his
Chapmen the ^^ore favorable, he added to his other Marks (...) Friendship and
Acknowledgment, some ^^urses of 500 Luidores apiece, of which he ^resented one
to every particular Person, tel^^ng 'em with a Smile, at the time that he ^ade
the Presents, That his Majesty was not (...) rich as fully to remunerate the
great Obliga^^ons which they were about to confer upon him; however, that they
had to do with a Prince, who ^^anted neither Good Will nor Power to make 'em
Great Lords in France.

At the Fourth Conference 'twas agreed, That Louvois should engage for the
payment of 400000. Livers in ready Money to the Chief Burgo-master, and that
every one of the Pro^osts, Consuls and Magistrates the were of ^he Cabal,
should have for their share 300000 Livers; in consideration of which, the Keys
of the City should be put into his Hands; and the said City was to be put into
his Majesty's Hands, to reck'n from the 23d of October, 1661. which was the Day
made choice of for his Majesty's taking Livery and Seizsin. Besides that,
Louvois engaged to allo^^ the said Magistrates their House-Rent fre^^ at his
Majesty's Charge, from the time (...) their Arrival at Paris, assuring 'em of
(...) Majesty's Friendship and Protection, against all that should make any
Attempt upon the^ Liberty.

France having thus made her self Mistre^^ of the Capital City of Alsatia,
Louvois se^^ word to the Duke of Mantua, that if he (...) a mind to quit Casal
for Money, he would (...) him down two Millions upon the Nail. (...) Importance
of that Negotiation, and the fe^^ the Court was in lest the Secret should be
(...) vulg'd, caused his Majesty to make choice^ Colbert Croissi, in the
absence of Louvois, (...) had proffered to undertake a Journey (...) Italy, as
he had done into Alsatia, but th^^ the Fatigues of his first Journey would
(...) permit him. At length Colbert Croissi depa^^ed in all haste, after he had
received full (...) structions, and came to Casal Incognit^^ where he had a
Conference Face to Face (...) the Duke. As they were about to take the leaves,
after the first Treaty which they (...) together, Colbert pulling out some
Papers out (...) his Pocket, unluckily let fall his Memoirs under the Table,
which the Duke took up, so so^^ as the Minister was gone out of the Room^ and
having read 'em, he found the Purport (...) 'em to be, That in case the Duke
made a^^ scruple to part with Casal for two Millio^ Colbert should come up to
his Price whatever (...) were, and that if he only stook for Money, ^^at he
should mount up to four Millions, ^aving the rest to his Prudence. But above
(...) things, he had order not to return, till (...) Affair was fully concluded.

The next day in the Morning, coming to ^tend the Duke, as he was dressing
himself, (...) of the Prince's Pages neatly slipped the ^emoire into the
Ministers Pocket, without ^^ing perceived; and then the Duke making (...) if he
knew nothing of his Orders, told (...), 'Twas impossible to deliver up such an
^^portant Place as Casal, under less then four ^^illions in Silver, and that he
expected 'em (...) be paid upon the Day that the Town was (...) be delivered,
or immediately after signing (...) Treaty. Colbert was extremely surpised
(...) hear that the Duke's Mind was so strangely ^^er'd from what it was the
Day before, and ^^gning that he would return home without ^^ing any thing, told
the Duke, that he would (...) as much as lay in his Power, and that he should
presume to exceed his Master's Orders (...) far as some few hundred thousand
Livres should reach, above the two Millions that he (...) offered the Day
before. 'Twas agreed (...), That his Master should give 500000 ^^vres more,
above the Two Millions that he (...) offered the Day before, together with an
^^nnual Pension of 200000, which should be ^^gularly paid during his Life. Upon
this, the poor Prince fell into the Snare, and (...) glitter of the French
Lewidores daz'ld him (...) that degree, that he signed the Contract of Sal^^
and Colbert returned to Court in less then Si^^ Weeks.

Thus France became the Mistress of Tw^^ strong Barriers, without so much as
drawin^ a Sword, which secured her both on Germany and Italy side. Besides
these notorious Attempts upon the Peace, the most Christian King besieged
Courtray, and won it. Whi^^ done, he spent no less then 3000 Bombs upon
Luxemburgh, and laid it in Ashes. If the Sp^niards complain of these Cruelties,
he (...) swers 'em, That the Marquis of Grana (...) committed Acts of
Hostility, which he nev^^ so much as dreamt of, and then, like a (...) Man,
lets loose all his Fury, and sends Bot^flers and Montal to commit all the
Ravag^^ imaginable; orders 'em to waste all before 'em with Fire and Sword, to
the very Ga^^ of Mons, and to act those Villainies and Cr^elties in the midst of
Peace, that scarce cou^^ have bin committed in the height of a (...) bloody War.

If Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgun^^ had the Surname of Terrible given him
2^ Years after his Death, because he renew^^ the Rigor of War in former Times,
(...) which had been discontinued for some Ag^^ among the Christians; it may be
said (...) Lewis the Great has outdone him, and (...) never any Prince has
rendered himself more Terrible in History, or more odious to the World, then
this Monarch has made himself, by his Cruelties and Barbarities, during the
whole Course of his Reign. But let us proceed to the other Breaches of the
Peace.

The most Christian King, perceiving that ^ll the Princes of Europe lay secure
and care^ess, and that not so much as one of 'em stirred ^o oppose his Designs,
while every one minded noting but his own particular Interests, thought himself
at Liberty to do whatever he pleased. Thereupon, he bethought himself of
building Fortresses along the Rhine, upon the Territories of his Enemies, and
Barriers and Securities of his Conquests, but which exposed their Dominions to
the first Fury and Havocks of a War, in case of a Rupture, and enabled him to
carry his Arms into the Heart of Germany, before the Forces of the Empire could
be in a Condition to march. With this Design he erected that important Fortress
of Mount-Royal upon the Moselle, within the Peninsula of Trebon, upon a steep
Rock, almost encompassed with the River: he fortiy'd Sar-Lewis upon the Sar;
and raised the Fort of Huninghen, consisting of Five Bastions, seated upon the
Rhine, with a wooden Bridge a little below Bale in Sungouw. To which we may add
the Forts which he raised upon the Rhine near Strasburgh, etc.

When these Enormous Actions were complained of in France, the Answer was ready
(...) For the Imperial Ministers were told, That their Master had no reason to
be jealous (...) what she did; for that she was very well satisfied, there was
nothing done contrary to the Peace.

In the Year 1684. France gives the Catholic King to understand, that he was
to deliver into her Hands the Equivalent that had bin offered her, in lieu of
the Country o^ Alost, and upon the King of Spain's refusing immediately to
satisfy her new Pretensions, Lewis XIV. lays Siege to Luxemburgh, and in less
then a Month makes him Master of that important Fortress, the Key of all
Germany.

After she had thus worried all Europe, she bethought her self of citeing the
Princes o^ the Empire before Sovereign Courts and Tribunals, erected at Mets
and Brisac, where French Commissioners, being both Judges and Parties,
pronounced Sentences of Condemnation, by virtue of certain Parchments gnawed by
the Rats and soyl'd with Dust and Smoke, to the end they might look old, and
consequently the more Authentic. Which Writings being drawn by a Famous
Advocate of Paris, contained Claims and Pretensions of France, to several
States, Signiories and Counties, by virtue of Reunions and Dependencies of
Lands, which had been granted by the Treaties of Munster and Nimeguen. But it is
to be observed, that these Claims were so much the more Imaginary and
Chimerical, because it had been agreed by the Articles of the Treaties, That
France should renounce 'em: Yet all those Renunciations were not able to put a
stop to her. She had always one Code or Digest, at hand, apart by themselves;
and when she had a fancy to despoil any Prince of his Territories, or to seize
upon any Lands that lay convenient for her, she never failed of a Pretense. Her
Laws were like a Saddle, for all Horses, and she gave 'em what Interpretation
she pleased: So that it is no wonder to see her Commenting upon all the Articles
of the Treaties, and wresting the Sense to her own Advantage.

Two Months after the taking of Luxemburgh, France perceiving that that New
Conquest had manifestly discovered her Ambition, and set the Low Countries and
all Germany a Murmuring, and very near incensed 'em to a new War, and
disappoint her Designs, which were, still to be gaining at a cheap rate, under
the shadow of Peace, bethought her self of one of the neatest knacks of Policy
that ever she was guilty of. She proposed to the Emperor, to Spain, and the
States General of the United Provinces, a Truce of twenty Years; and in regard
her Armies were still marching at the same time that she makes her Demands,
that she may be able to make 'em good, she ordered her Ambassadors to let those
Potentates understand, That if they refused to consent to the advantageous
Offers of a Truce to secure the Repose and Tranquillity of Christendom, she was
resolved to declare open War against 'em. Who would have thought, but that
France had then bin full of Sincerity and good Will? To hear the Language of
her Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, a Man would have sworn, That the Truce
would infallibly have proved more sacred and inviolable then the three
preceding Treaties.

The Hollanders were the first that fell into the Snare, in hopes to have
enjoyed a solid and durable Peace; a Lure which France has all along dexterously
made use of when ever she had a design to amuse the King of Spain, who seeing
himself the continual mark of that Ambitious Crown, was willing to have secured
his poor Countries from the Ravages to which they were exposed, and to deliver
'em from the Mischiefs they had suffered for almost thirty Years together: And,
therefore, for these Reasons they consented to a Truce for 20 Years. The
Emperor, who was already engaged in a War with the Ottoman Port, whose
prodigious Numbers made all Germany tremble, found himself in a kind of
Necessity to temporize with France, for fear of drawing that powerful and
dangerous Enemy upon his Shoulders, and so submitted to the Truce after the
Example of Holland and Spain.

And thus you see how the most Christian King obtained his Ends. For by this
Treaty he secured his Conquests, lulled the Hollanders asleep, and amused the
Emperor and Princes of the Empire: All these Potentates being so credulous as
to fall into the Snare, maugre the Experience they had so many times already
had of his Infidelity. What does Lewis the Great do after this? He prepares to
bring to an absolute Conclusion, the Grand Work which his Ambition had set on
foot; and which he had bin laboring to bring about for above forty Years
together, I mean, the Universal Monarchy. To which purpose, there was no
Precaution which that Prince did not take. He allied himself to the Ottoman
Port; he dispatched away Marshal d' Humiers to the Court of England, and
engages King James to side with him: He purchases the Friendship of Poland and
the Czars of Muscovy; he proposes Offers to the Northern Crowns and the Princes
of Italy; he endeavors to gain the three Ecclesiastical Electors, and to
appoint Coadjutors that were devoted to his Interests: He does all he can to
carry Fustenburgh's Election; he quarrels with the Court of Rome; he revokes
the Edict of Nants, drives the Reformed out of his Kingdom; makes strict
Alliances with the King of Siam to ruin the Hollanders's Trade; and bargains
with the Switzers what he shall give 'em to sit still and look on.

We might here give a particular Accoun^ of the great Preparations of France to
sprin^ the Mines that were to make her Mistress o^ all the strong Holds of
Europe. She reckoned upon the Conquest of the Remainder of the Low Countries
and Holland, as a certain and infallible thing. King James had given him a
Promise of it, and that Prince's word was Irrevocable. Germany being at the
same time attacked by all the Forces of France and Turkey, must have sunk under
the Burden, and have become the Prey of potent Enemies: And at the same time
likewise all the Dominions of the King of Spain were just ready to change their
Master, and to see themselves subdued under the French Monarchy, which was to
have no other Limits then those of all Europe.

The most Christian King had so surely built upon these Foundations, and had
taken such true Measures, that a Man might have justly said, That nothing could
have stopped him. But then of a sudden happens the Blow which could only do the
Business, a Blow the most fatal and deadly that ever happened to France, and
which rendered abortive all her Designs in an instant; ranverses that Colossus
of Pride and Ambition that had bin Erected upon the Ruins of so many poor
States and Soveraignties, at the expense of Treaties broken, and which
consisted only in the hopes of Invading the rest that lay fit for Convenience.
I mean, the Revolution of England; the Prince of Orange, his vowed Enemy, is
made King of Great Britain, and made it appear, That only England was able to
deliver Europe from the oppression of the French Crown.

And, now most Serene Princes, you are within (...) very little of reducing
France within the Bounds of the Pyrenean Peace, if your Union subsists but two
Campaigns longer. Therefore, whatever Advantages France proposes, ^ow soft and
obliging so ever her Caresses may be, reject 'em all. Let the Experience of
what is past, instruct ye to avoid at present what has been the Ruin of all the
Leagues that have been formerly contracted against her. You have to do with a
crafty and potent Enemy; and as she has found the Benefit of her Maxims
practiced in the late Wars, she makes use, at present, of the same to break
your Union.

How earnest is she at the Court of Rome? How importunate with the Northern
Crowns and the laudable Cantons to persuade 'em to take the Meditation upon
'em? To this purpose she spares neither Gold nor Silver, nor Embassies, and it
is in good part discovered, that she offered six Millions to any one that could
procure a Peace. And which is worse, we find to our Sorrow, that her Pains have
not proved altogether fruitless, by the Steps that some People tread, who
interest themselves too much in her Concerns.

But some zealous Adherents to that Crow^ will object and say, That it is high
time to pu^ a stop to the Miseries that afflict Europe, an^ you ought not any
longer to refuse that Peac^ to France which she demands, since she make^ such
advantageous Offers, seeing the Denia^ will render you responsible before God
for all the Blood that is shed and for all the dismal Calamities that attend
War. The mo^^ Christian King, say they, offers the Confederates Conditions
altogether reasonable; h^ offers 'em Barriers sufficient to secure their
Liberty, and to secure 'em for the future from the prodigious Forces of that
Crown. Those Offers are these that follow:

France proposes, by the Danish Envoy, That first in respect of the Emperor,
the Princes and States of the Empire, the Duchess of Lorrain and Savoy, the
Advantages which his Armies have gained upon his Enemies, shall make no
alteration in the Conditions that have bin communicated to his Danish Majesty.

That in respect of the King of Spain, his most Christian Majesty might justly
keep all his Conquests after the Example of the Catholic Kings; but that to
facilitate a Peace, he is willing to restore Roses and Belevers, and, in a
word, all that he has conquered in Catalonia, during this last War. He adds,
That he had still more reason to keep, for the safery of his Frontiers, all the
Conquests that he had won in Flanders, yet for the forming of (...) Barrier
that might remove all occasion of ^isquiet from the United Provinces, he would
^estore to the King of Spain, Mons and Na^^ur, and offered to demonish
Charleroy.

As to the Country of Liege, he would re^ore the City and Castle of Huy to the
Bi^hoprick, and make amends for Dinant and Bouilion, by reuniting such a
Portion of the Country of Luxemburgh, as should lie most for the convenience of
the Bishopric, and as should be deemed reasonable by chosen Arbitrators.

He consents to the re-settling of Trade with the States General, according to
the Agreements in the Treaty of Nimeguen without any Alteration.

In case of the King of Spain's Death, he consents that the Elector of Bavaria
shall enjoy those Countries, provided the Emperor will declare the same to be
his Will and Pleasure: And, that though the Deceased Queen's Renunciation to
Spain during her Minority be Void, for the Reasons already made public to the
World, his Majesty is willing, as well for himself as for the Dauphin, to
confirm he said Renunciation in favor of the Duke of Bavaria, with all the
requisite Formalities; adding withal, that he makes no question but that this
Engagement will convince the Confederates beyond all other things of the
reality of the Peace which he proposes to 'em.

As to the Affairs of England, the Royal Majesty^ being wounded in the Person
of the K. of Great Britain, his Most Christian Majesty makes no question but
that the King of Sweeden and the Emperor himself will propose some Expedient to
put an end to that Difference: And moreover his Most Christian Majesty has no
pretention directly nor indirectly to England; excepting what he claimed during
this War to the Islands and Continents of America, of which he demands
Restitution, being ready to renew with that Crown the last Treaty of Commerce,
which was in force when the War began.

As for what concerns Germany, his Most Christian Majesty-consents, that the
Treaty of Munster and Nimeguen, shall remain in full Force and Vigor.

That the Truce in 1684. might be changed into a Definitive Treaty of Peace;
nevertheless with these Exceptions.

That in compensation for Strasburg, France shall Surrender up Mont Royal and
Trarbag, after the Fortifications are Demolished, granting that it be for the
security of the Empire. Besides that, his most Christian Majesty will restore
Philipsbourg and Fribourg to the Emperor and the Empire, together with the
Fortifications, in the same condition as now they are. That Fort Lewis and
Huninghen shall be Demolished: That Heydelburg and the Palatinat shall be
restored to the Palatinate; France taking upon her to make Madam amends for the
Succession of the Electors her Father and Brother; an Article which his Most
Christian Majesty stands very much upon.

In regard of the Duke of Lorrain, the Most Christian King consents that the
Treaty of Nimeguen shall be observed, Sar Louis, Briche and Hombourg excepted,
for which there shall be an Equivalent given of an equal Revenue.

That the most Serene Republic of Venice shall be Arbitratrix if there be any
Reunions to make; and for the putting a conclusion to all Differences between
France and the rest of the Princes, she will agree to any just and reasonable
Proposals that shall be made on their Part and in their Name.

In truth, we must acknowledge, that France is become all on a sudden very
Tractable and very Conscientious; she who was wont to gripe all, and restore
nothing, now offers the Confederates the Restitution of all the Places during
the last War.

Most Serene Princes, here is a particular Favor, which the Most Christian
King vouchsafes ye: He is willing notwithstanding your Obstinacy to continue
the War, to heap his Graces upon ye, to the end you may have reason to forget
the Mischiefs he has done ye. He offers to be Reconciled with ye, and lay down
his Arms, provided you will accept of his Propositions of Peace, and rely upon
his Promises.

After this, it is to be thought, that you will have no cause to Complain: And
the Adherents of France will be apt to tell ye, that Lewis XIV. is at this day
Triumphant and Victorious, and consequently that it is for him to give Laws to
his Enemies, and to make no Restitutions at all, but what he pleases himself.
But to this I answer, If France has got such great Advantages over the Princes
of the League, and is so much a gainer by the War, why does she talk of Peace?
To spare you therefore the pains of alleging some good Reason or other, in
justification of a Prince whose Interests you so heartily Maintain; I shall
only repeat what Mazarine upon the like occasion wrote to M. Lionne, Secretary
of State, concerning the Negotiation of the Pyrenaean Peace. For as to what
remains, said he, I should make no scruple to acknowledge the seeking after
Peace, when the Progress and Reputation of the King's Arms in the next Campain,
shall have advanced his Majesty's Renown to the highest pitch it can arrive at,
etc.

These were the Sentiments of the most Subtle and Crafty Minister that ever
France had, who decides the Question in few words. The Most Christian King has
so well profited by the Maxims of that great Politician, that it is with him an
inviolable Law not to swerve from the Practice thereof to this day. Nor was
Mazarin alone of this Opinion: The Marquess of Louvois jumps with him in the
same Sentiments. And though he were not of so ^ublime a Genius as Mazarin, the
Reputation he acquired during his Ministry, renders ^im Authentic enough to be
quoted for a good Author. You shall hear what he said to Colbert Croissi, when
he gave him his last Instructions how to carry himself at the Negotiation of
Nimeguen, whither he was sent with the Character of a Plenipotentiary.

I know very well, said he, that the Confederate Princes will make a Judgment
to the Prejudice of his Majesty, of his Conduct in inviting 'em to a Peace; but
it matters not, the Advantages he will receive thereby, will amply recompense
the Wrong which his Honor will suffer; besides that, we shall come off well
enough by giving out that his Majesty vouchsafed to afford Peace to Europe.

Thus you see what has been all along the Temper of France; this is no Maxim of
Yesterday, as being practiced by several of his Majesty's Ancestors: Witness
what Comines reports of Lewis XI. That that same Prince to get himself out of
the Briars at a time when Paris, the Capital City of his Kingdom was within a
very little of being Besieged by the Burgundians, deemed it the only way in the
World he could take, to Temporize. He thought it by no means proper to venture
his Kingdom upon the Hazard of a Battle, and therefore labored underhand to
Dis-unite the Princes and Lords of the Confederacy; which succeeded very
luckily, and by that means he got the better of his Enemies. Henry IV. and
Lewis XIII. took the same Course: And still when France has been overwhelmed
with the great number of her Enemies, it has been always her way to ruin their
Union with fair and plausible Proposals of Peace.

But if it may be said, that the French Monarchy had always Great Masters in
this Scienice, Lewis XIV has outdone 'em all: His Reign has been a continued
Series of deceitful Promises, violated Faith, and Treaties broken. In a word,
this Prince observing himself Attacked by the most Potent Confederacy that ever
was entered into against France, can never take a better opportunity to propose
Peace then when her Triumphant Arms may seem to boast of some Advantages. The
same Arms are fickle and uncertain, and Fortune that has favored him hitherto,
may forsake him, and reduce his Affairs to the most Pitiful Condition in the
World. It looks then, if we may judge of Events by the disposal and management
of things, as if France afraid of strange Revolutions, sufficient to ravish
from him in an instant, all the Honor and Glories he has hitherto enjoyed, and
despoil her Conquests gained by breach of Treaties, sought to effect by Policy
what she cannot compass by Force.

There are four things that urge the Crown of France to press the Confederates
so earnestly for a Treaty of Peace. The First, is the ^ondition of her Affairs,
which at present is savourable enough, in regard of the Progresses which her
Arms have made. The Second is, her Apprehensions, lest the Confederates
considerably augmenting their Forces and redoubling their Efforts, should
weaken her in such a manner, as to disable her for the future from making a
further Progress upon her Neighbors, if they permit her to keep her own. The
Third is, the hopes that she has of luckily obtaining her ends by the same
Artifices which she made use of at the Peace of Nimiguen. And the Fourth is,
the low ebb of her Exchequer, and the deplorable condition of the People,
reduced to utmost Misery by Famine and want of Corn.

As to the condition of her Affairs, most certain it is, that France is well
advised in taking this time to make her Proposals of Peace. She was never so
happy, nor so much caressed by Fortune as now. For five Years together, that
the War has bin declared, excepting the First Campaign, wherein the
Confederates triumphed, upon the reducing of Mayence, Keiserwart, Bon, etc. to
which we may add, that famous Atchievment at the Boyn, the memorable Victory
with which it was attended, the Engagement by Sea, and the Duke of Savoy's
Irruption into the Dauphinate; all other things may be said to have been
prosperous for France. So that if she could inveagle the Confederate Princes
into a Negotiation, at a time when every thing smiles upon her, she may have
just reason to expect tha^ such a Negotiation will be attended with (...)
Peace, no less glorious and advantageous for her, then that of the Pyreneans,
Aix la Chapelle or Nimeguen. For proof of which, then needs no more but to
reflect upon the Offer of the Envoys of Denmark to the Court o^ England and the
States of the United Provinces, which we have already recited. Which Offers are
so inconsiderable, That it is a mee^ Insulting, and an Affront put upon the
Honor of so many Princes, to presume that they would ever listen to such
Proposals.

As to the Apprehensions of. France lest the Confederates should redouble their
Efforts, and constrain the most Christian King to confine himself within much
narrower Limits, it is as certain, That her Fears are not groundless; and that
it is but good Counsel given to the most Christian King to advise him to bid his
Generals and his Soldiers whet their Swords betimes, and have their Arms in a
readiness, because that in all Likelihood we shall have a warm Campaign of it.

The most Christian King, perhaps, did never expect that England, turmoil'd as
she had been with Factions and Dissentions, that harrass'd the Peace and
Tranquillity of the Kingdom, would have taken a Resolution to conclude the War
by Efforts of Puissance and constant Opposition, by granting the Men and Money
which King William desired. Nor (...) England the only Confederate so well
in^in'd to the common Cause: The United ^rovinces, and the rest of the Princes
and ^tates that compose the League, unanimously ^onclude, to sacrifice the
whole toward the ^btaining a lasting and durable Peace. And ^ence it is that we
behold such numerous Armies, such prodigious Forces mustered together on the
Confederates side, amounting, ^^s they say, to no less then 400000 Men: Which,
if it be true, France will find it a difficult Task to fend off the Blows on
every side. And I am persuaded, that Marshal Luxemburgh, as much pufft up as he
is with the Advantages that he obtained by number, will be constrained to
acknowledge himself mistaken, when he promised the King his Master, that he
would sing Te deum, before the end of April, in the Cathedral of Maestrich.

As to his hopes of attaining his Ends by means of the same Artifices which he
made use of at the Peace of Nimeguen, that you may be plainly convinced of it,
there needs no more then to reflect upon the Conduct which he observes in
respect of every Prince in particular, and of all in general, to disunite and
draw 'em off the one from the other. He began with the Duke of Savoy, upon whom
he put the Duke of Orleans, believing his Highness might be wrought to a
Condescension, when touched in the most sensible part, which was, when he came
to be importuned by the Duchess, his Wife.

It may be said, that she omitted nothing to infuse into him favorable
Sentiments in the behalf of France. She has been seen to weep warm Tears, to
fall upon her Knees and embrace the Prince her Husband, beseeching him with all
the Tenderness imaginable, To put an end to the War; to have Compassion upon
his Family and his harassed Territories, and lastly to rememember that France
was only able to restore him to his ancient Liberty. She also delivered to him
Letters, written with the King's own Hand, wherein that Monarch promised him,
upon the Faith of a Prince, that he would forget what was past, and that he was
ready to grant him all the Advantages that he could desire. That to render the
Peace the more venerable and inviolable, it should be sealed for a perpetual
Alliance between the two Houses, to which his Majesty would add the Marriage of
one of the Sons of France with the young Duchess of Savoy, when they should be
of Age, which would knit those indissoluble Knots, that nothing would be able
to unty for the future, etc.

After he had thus assailed the Duke of Savoy, what Springs did he not set at
work in the Court of Rome to gain their Favor, and incline the Pope openly to
favor his Interests, by inculcating into the Catholic Princes the Necessity of
Breaking those Engagements that united 'em with the Protestants. A Union, added
he, that drew after it the inevi^able Destruction of the Roman Religion, and
^rected. Heresy upon the Ruins of it, if the Holy Father did not save it, by
inspiring into ^he Emperor, the King of Spain, and the rest of the Cotholick
Princes speedy Inclinations ^o reconcile themselves with France.

As for his Imperial Majesty, what Pains ^as he Court of France not taken to
draw him off from the rest of the Confederates? And finding that all the
Importunities of the Court of Rome wrought no impression upon the Mind of that
Prince, and that nothing was able to shake his Constancy, did not the most
Christian King dispatch an Express to the Court of Vienna, to present the
Emperor with a Treaty of separate Peace, and make him very advantageous Offers,
if he would but consent to it? After he had gone thus forward, did he not
publish a Manifesto upon the Rhine, and in all the Courts of Germany, to engage
the Princes and States of the Empire to lay down their Arms, and stand Neuters,
or else to accept the Proposals already made 'em?

What has he left undone to obtain the Mediation of the Northern Crowns, of the
Republic of Venice, of the laudable Cantons, to incline those Potentates to
espouse his Interests? Has he not sent away Embassy upon Embassy, and how
many Millions has he offered besides? The Count d'Avaux offer'^ Sweden the
Restitution of the Duchy of Deu^ Ponts, and repayment of all the Losses
sustained, reckoning from the very first Day tha^ France made herself Mistress
of it; beside four Millions, and 500000 Livres, which would be actually paid
down, together with a Pension of 200000 Livres, if his Swedis^ Majesty would
effectually interpose his Mediation with King William, the most zealou^ for
continuance of the War. Upon the Kin^ of Sweden's refusal to accept these
Offers Bonrepos offered the Court of Denmark Six millions, together with
Mademoiselle de -- to be given in Marriage to the Prince Roya^ of Denmark,
according to the Project begu^ at Paris, before the departure of that Prince
(...) his most Christian Majesty offering, besides, (...) pay the Dowry, and to
decree all things immediately after the Ratification of the Peace And the Steps
which the Envoys of his Danish Majesty tread both in the Court of England and
in Holland, have made it appear that those Offers were not made in vain. Now
let us see what Proposals M. de la Hay, the French Ambassador made to the
Republic of Venice. He offered the Signiorie, besides Three Millions in
Silver, which were to be paid down, that the King his Master should engage to
prevail with the Grand Signior to grant her Great Advantages, and conclude a
separate Treaty of Peace with her, (...) the Exclusion of the Emperor and ^he
King of Poland, if she would employ her Good Offices, as well at Rome, to
per^wade the Duke of Savoy to restore Peace to ^taly, as in other Courts of the
Catholic Princes in confederacy against France. I omit several private
Conferences between his most Christian Majesty and the Venetian Envoy, upon
this Subject, before his departure from Paris, when he went from thence to
reside in ^he Court of Spain.

How did Amelot labor with the laudable Cantons? He displayed all his
Eloquence in several Speeches, which he made in their Dyets, and left nothing
undone to advance the King his Master's Interests. His most effectual
Propositions were reduced to an Offer of Four Millions and 500000 Livres, to
which he addded, the Payment of all their Arrears: All which Advantages, said
he farther, would be attended with a perpetual and inviolable Alliance with the
Crown of France, by virtue of which the laudable Cantons would be protected at
all Times, and the Liberty and Repose which they have enjoyed hitherto would be
secured from the Attempts of all that sought their Disturbance. And all that
the King demanded for so many Favors, was only that they should be Mediators
for a Peace.

Let us proceed to the fourth Reason that engages France to sue for a Peace,
which is the low Estate of her Exchequer, and the miserable Condition to which
the People are reduced. And to be fully satisfied in this particular, there
needs no more then to consider, That the most Christian King has so little
spared his People in Time of Peace, that it is no wonder to see 'em now reduced
to utmost Misery. Certain it is, let him put on as good a Face as he pleases,
that he clearly repents of a Conduct so opposite to his real Interests. Good
Policy requires that a Prince should diligently labor in search of all the
most probable ways to procure the flourishing Condition of his Kingdom, while a
sound Peace secures him from all Attempts and Interruptions of his Enemies: To
discharge his Subjects from the ponderous Burdens, with which they are
overwhelmed during the War; to revoke all Decrees and Declarations that tended
to their Ruin; and lastly, to deliver 'em from all those Burdensome
Impositions and chargeable Taxes with which they were oppressed in Time of War;
to the end they may have liberty to take Breath, and recover their decayed
Strength, that they may be the better enabled to bear new Burdens, when the
Exigencies of the State require it.

Quite the contrary were the Proceedings of Lewis the Great, for no sooner were
the Pyrenean Peace, the Treaties of Aix la Chapelle, and Nimeguen concluded,
but he turns his Arms against his own Subjects, and not content with the
Devastations of all Europe, he ransacks the Bowels of his own Kingdom and
causes his People to wish a thousand Times for War rather then Peace; to the
end that so many miserable Wretches might live ^ecure from his Ambitious
Tyranny. What ^s there to be imagined that France has left ^ndone to ruin his
own Subjects? Her Coun^il has exhausted it self, in Decrees; no ^ooner is one
made public, but three more ^re in the Press. The Parliaments and Sove^aign
Courts that were formerly Protectors of ^he People, and which were erected in
the Raigns of this King's Predecessors, to balance ^he Royal Authority, are
now reduced to such (...) base and sordid Compliance with the Prince, that they
only sit to consent to, and authorize ^is encroachments upon the People.

The Farmers, and they who have managed ^he Public Treasure, what have they
left un^^one, what Artifices have they not made use ^f to draw all the Money of
the Kingdom in^o the King's Coffers? Have we not seen a ^olbert almost murder
himself by tormenting ^is Brains in finding out a thousand Tricks to ^educe the
People to utmost Beggary? That Great Man was the Object of Court Adoration, but
the Abomination of the People. Nor can I here forbear to recite what one Day ^e
answered his Majesty, upon occasion of some new Imposts that were going to be
laid upon his Subjects. For upon the King's telling him, That such Exactions
would enforce the People to cry out, merely for Wan^ and finding themselves
utterly unable to pay their Assessments, for that no body could pay who had it
not. O, Sir, said he, your Subjects are like a Sack of Flower, the more yo^
shake it, the more Meal comes forth. However it were, both that Minister, they
that preceded, and they that followed him in the management of the Finances,
understood (...) well to squeez the Kingdom of France, tha^ whereas Thirty
Millions was the highest Su^ to which the Revenue of the Crown amounted
formerly, they have raised it to above (...) hundred and threescore. We must
not therefore think it strange to see that Monarchy oppressed as now it is, and
the People reduced t^ utmost Misery.

Besides all these ways, the most Christian King still puts in practice a great
number (...) others, which have equally contributed to the Ruin of his
Subjects; such are his Quartering of Soldiers, Creations of New Offices and
suppressing of others; his pretended Extirpation of the Huguenot Heresy; and
hi^ Pious Foundations, of which the Kingdom i^ full. His sordid Compliance with
the Monk^ and Clergy, who possessing the fairest Po^tion of his Realm, have
heaped up vast Treasures and Riches, to the impoverishment (...) the meaner
sort, who subsist only by their La^^our and Industry. His prodigious Expenses
(...) building Royal Houses, and erecting sum^^uous Monuments to his future
Fame. The ^ast Treasures he has wasted in bringing Ri^ers into Places in
despite of Mountains, the ^^lid Oppositions of Nature, which he has ^^t
through, and Valleys which he has filled (...); all which cost France several
Millions, and ^^rty Thousand of her best Men. We may ^^d to all this, the
joining of two Seas, and ^^e Royal Canal, in which hard Labors the ^^ing
sacrificed the same number of his select^^^ Subjects. The enhauncing and
abate^ent of Money, which has ruined Trade, and ^^ck'd his People to the last
drop of their ^^ood. The vast number of Forts and For^esses which he has built
and raised upon all ^e Frontiers of the Kingdom, which has cost ^m immense
Sums. The Pensions which he ^^s paid in all the Courts of Europe to make
^^liances, or for the maintenance of his Emis^ries, which costs him several
Millions, and ^e keeping afoot near two hundred thousand ^^en in time of Peace,
and 400000 in time of ^^ar; the vast Sums which he expends in ^^ring out great
Fleets, besides what his Ma^^zins of Ammunition and Provision upon the
^^ontiers cost him. All this, I say, contri^^tes to the Ruin of France, and to
reduce it (...) that deplorable Condition wherein we find ^^at this day.

Let it be as it will, the most Christian King having consumed the most solid
part (...) the Crown Demesnes, in so many extravagant ways of Expense, it may
be said, Tha^ he has acted like those unwary Gameste^^ who, having undone
themselves by Play (...) know not where to betake themselves to ge^ more. But
this Prince is not only contente^ to have played away his own Revenues, (...)
has also gam'd away the Estates of his Subjects; and by that means has reduced
Fran^^ to those Extremities which are enough to overturn it. So that it is no
wonder to see Fami^ rage within his Kingdom.

The most Christian Lewis XIV. might have wished, that his Father Lewis XIII.
in imitation of Dagobert the 'Leventh King of France had bin so pious, or
rather a Person of so mu^^ Foresight, as to have covered the Church (...) St.
Denis with Silver; to the end, that afte^ he had drein'd his Exchequer, he
might have had the same shift at a Pinch, as Clovis, the So^ of Dagobert had,
who uncovered the Church and made use of the Money to save France which then
began to be afflicted with a mo^^ terrible Dearth. But Henry IV. and Lewi^
XIII. had so much Work upon their Hand^ that their Reigns might well be said,
to b^ rather Iron then Silver Reigns; and that the^ were so far from having any
Overplus's to la^ out upon Dagobert's pious uses, that they we^^ forced to
borrow, to supply the Exigencies (...) the State.

Lewis XIV. was the Prince who of all the Kings of France possessed the vastest
heap of Trea^ure, and who beheld himself the most puissant of all his
Predecessors, by the prodigious Improvement of his Finances and Re^enues. To be
convinced of this, there needs ^o more but to consider, That the Revenues of
the Crown hardly mounted to 16 Millions in the Reigns of the Valois's. In Henry
^V.'s time, they ascanded to Thirty. Richlieu under Lewis XIII. raised 'em to
Forty five, and after him Mazarine advanced 'em to above sixty: Which was
nothing to what they are mounted at present; for, according to an exact
Computation, Colbert and the rest of ^he Publicans and Sinners, have advanced
'em ^o above a hundred and fifty Millions. But ^f the Treasures of this Monarch
were more ^mmense, his Ambition was also proportion^ble, and if they have bin
so far from being sufficient to satisfy it, that he has bin also fain ^o
sacrifize the Estates of the Church, and ^he Spoils of the Altars, after he has
laid Im^osts upon all things else imaginable, he must ^e forced, at length, to
lay a swinging Tex upon Urine, as formerly Vespasian did.

An unfortunate Gamester, after he has lost all, endeavors to recover himself
by all the ways he can imagine, and managing the Cards or the Dice by himself in
his own Hand, be^hinks himself at length of playing soul. Thus the King of
France, having ruined himself, his People and his Kingdoms, by imprudently
engaging himself in a burthenso^ War, and which having been prosperous a^ the
beginning, has proved fatal to him in the end, endeavors to get himself out of
the Briars as well as he can. To which purpose he offers Peace to the Princes
of the Confederacy, and sets all Springs at work to brea^ the Union. He makes
'em Proposals ambiguous and full of Delusion; what he offer to day, he revokes
to morrow. He order Cardinal Fourbin to tell the Court of Rome That he is ready
to lay down Arms, and t^ enter into a Negotiation with the Confederate Princes;
but first, there must be a settlement for King James agreed upon.

To the Northern Crowns his Embassador^ talk another sort of Language, and tell
'em^ That as to the Affairs of England, in regard that Royal Majesty appears to
be wounded in the Person of King James, he makes no question, but the King of
Sweden and the Emperor, will take it upon 'em to propose some Expedient to
determine that Difference. As to the Court of Vienna, it is about ten Months
since, that he made Proposals of Peace to his Imperial Majesty, quite different
from those that appeared in his Manifesto published upon the Rhine. There is
not any one of the Confederate Princes or States, to whom he has not offered
Proposals altogether different from those which he now propounds. Witness his
Temptations to the Duke of Savoy, first by Chanlais, then by Catinat, and then
by other Ministers.

As to the States General of the United Provinces, France made 'em Proposals,
first by Oxesterne, formerly the Swedish Embassa^or, who had two Audiences to
that purpose, ^esides the Proposals made 'em by M. Lenthe the Danish Envoy. She
has observed the same conduct at the Court of England, where M. Scheel now
talks at another rate. Several other Projects have been presented at the Courts
of all the rest of the Confederate Prin^es, wherein there is nothing solid or
constant. shich is a convincing Proof that the most Christian King seeks only
to draw the Confederates into a Negotiation, to obtain a Cessation of Arms on
purpose to amuse 'em, while he on the other side assays by more powerful
efforts to ruin their Union.

And this is Lewis XIV's foul Play, and the compass which he fetches to ^attain
his Ends, and disintangle himself out of the Noose that hampers him, by saving,
if possible, the best part of his Conquests, and delivering his Impoverished
Dominions from the ponderous Burdens which they groan under. And now it is for
the Confederate Princes to consider what they have to do, and not to suffer
themselves to be deluded by the false and deceitful shifts of France, and
seriously to reflect upon the fatal Misfortunes that will infallibly attend the
conclusion of a disadvantagiou Peace, if lending their Ears to the Offers o^
France, they neglect the fairest opportunit^ that ever was, to humble that
haughty and perfidious Potentate, at a time when he beg for Peace, and when
there needs no more the^ two Campaigns to obtain all the Advantage^ which they
can expect to reap from their Perseverance. Which is so much the mo^^
Important, as being the reason that has arm'^ all Europe against him, and
occasioned tha^ august and potent Confederacy of so many justly incensed
Princes, and who are equally interested therein.

But what Assurances shall they have tha^ the Peace which the most Christian
King now proposes, shall not be violated like the Pyrenean Peace, and the
Treaties of Aix (...) Chapelle and Nimeguen? How can they rely upon the Oath of
a Prince, who acknowledges no other Law then that of his Ambition and Will? At
the Peace of Arras, lip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, not being willing to trust
Charles VII. who had brok'n his word in several other Treaties, was desirous
that the last Article of the Treaty should run in these words: That the King
for assurance of the observation and full performance of the said Treaty,
should deliver it sealed by the Princes of his Blood, the Grandees of the
Kingdom, and the principal Men of the chief Cities; and that in case of any
Breach, those Princes and Lords should be absolved from their Oaths of Fidelity
toward the King, and be obliged to serve the Duke against him.

The Precautions of the Duke of Burgundy upon that occasion, might in some
measure serve as a Garranty to secure the observance of Charles VII's Word and
Oath. But it is ^o be considered, That the condition of the Grandees of the
Kingdom, was not then the same as now it is. Charles VII. wanted a great deal
of being so well beloved, and so much feared by the People and Nobility of
France, as Lewis XIV. at this day. The ways which he has taken to gain the
Affection of his Subjects are quite different. Formerly a little thing would
have opened a wide Gate to Faction and Revolt, and incensed the Grandees and
Lords of the Kingdom to take Arms: But now the Case is altered. The King has
reduced 'em all equally to such a dependence upon him, that no Body dares stir;
and it would be in vain for the Confederate Princes to think of laying the
foundation of a solid and lasting Peace upon any such Article, in imitation of
the Duke of Burgundy.

For proof of this we may observe, that since the beginning of this Reign,
looking backward as far as the King's Minority, France has no longer cared to
be sensible or take notice of the Troubles that had lacerated her very Bowels:
So that notwithstanding all the Efforts that were usd to re-kindle the same
Sparks, it was impossible to bring it to pass. To which, it may be said that
Mazarin and the Ministers that succeeded him, as also the King himself, who is
sharp-sighted enough, did not contribute a little by means of their good
management at the beginning. And in regard the People are ignorant in Polities,
and for that it is impossible for 'em to dive into the secrets of the Cabinet,
'twas an easy thing for that Monarch, being so good a Matchiavilian as he is,
to reduce his Subjects under that Bondage, wherein we now behold 'em. He easily
brought it to pass, by depriving 'em of all the means that might prove a Bait
to Insurrection.

Therefore, it behooves the Confederate Princes to take another course, which
is, to oppose him with a puissant Force proportionable to his own, and to tire
him out by a prolongation of the War, which will at length enforce him, when
thoroughly debilitated and brought upon his last Legs, to restore to every one
their Rights, and what he has usurped by breach of Treaties, and no less
treacherous in observance of his word.

As often as I revolve in my mind the Quarrels which Lewis XII. had with
Ferdinand King of Arragon, and compare the Genius's of those two Princes one
with the other, as well as their Conduct, I cannot forbear to apply it to the
Contests at this present between Lewis XIV. and the Confederate Princes. For in
all the Treaties that Lewis made with Ferdinand, the latter was always too hard
for the former: And it may be said, That of the Princes that ever reigned,
there never was one more perfidious, or who more gloriously vaunted in the
Display of his Dishonesty; as may appear by the Reply which he made his
Secretary, who telling his Master how Lewis complained extremely of his having
deceived him twice. Twice! replied Ferdinand, By God he lies like a
Tooth-drawer, I have cheated him above ten times.

I am persuaded that the most Christian King has outdone Ferdinand in point of
Knavery: So that if the Confederates should reproach him with having twice
deceived 'em, he might truly answer, that he had deceived 'em as often as he
concluded Treaties with 'em. So that the Confederate Princes have no more to do
then to consider, how little Ground they have to depen'd upon that Monarch, who
boasts the Trophies of his Perfidiousness no less then Ferdinand. But the
Friends of France will answer, That Lewis XII. was as little scrupulous in
violating his word, in his Treaties with Maximilian the Emperor; witness the
Treaties of Trent and Blois. Which if it be true, and that Princes violate
their Words and Oaths as soon as they have pledged and sworn 'em, to what
purpose do Treaties serve? We must say, as Silius said to Hannibal, That
Alliance and Justice hang at the point of the Sword, and that prevailing Power
is the only Law among the great ones: And thus you see a wide Gate set open for
Plunder and Robbery, and there Remains no more for us to do, but to prepare our
selves for open and perpetual War, and the continual shedding of Blood, with as
much Cruelty and Barbarism, as Beasts of Prey: According to the words of
Seneca, speaking of unjust Wars. I can safely say, it is not only a piece of
Cruelty, but the natural Inclination of a Savage Beast, to delight in nothing
but Blood. We may call it a turning of the Brains topsie-turvie, or a sort of
Madness, for there are several kinds of it; Though none more visible then that
which transports Men to Murder and Butchery.

We may aver, without wronging the Honor of Lewis the Great, that Seneca
learns him a good Lesson in this Place, and not only him but all other
Ambitious Princes. Nor is Seneca the only Abhorrer of these abominable
Principles. That Man, says Aristotle, must needs be looked upon as very cruel,
who makes his Friends his Enemies, out of a Desire only to make War. In like
manner says Dio the Prusiean, To be prone to War and Combat without a Cause, is
a pure Madness that seeks Mischief for Mischief's sake.

However it be, this is certain, that the most Christian King himself being the
Author of all the Calamities and Misfortunes that at present turmoyle Europe,
as well as his Counselors, among whom we may number Luxemburgh, who may be
called his Right Hand, and the Person who infuses into him a good part of these
Cruelties which his Armies commit, will be no less responsible before God, then
if he should imbrue his Hands in the same Massakers. Let him give out as long
as he pleases, by his Ministers and Emissaries in all the Courts of Europe,
That he burns with a Desire to stop the Bleeding Veins of of so many Innocents,
who shed their Blood in this cruel War: Let him publish by sound of Trumpet, by
Heralds at Arms, in all the chief Streets of his Capital City, his eager
Passion to restore Peace to his Subjects: Let him order the Archbishop of Paris
to order the tiring all the Saints in Heaven, with his Forty Hours prayers; Let
him weary the Holy Father with Importunities, to mediate an Accommodation
between him and the Catholic Princes, as formerly did Paul III. between
Charles V. and Francis I.

We must answer him in a Word, that it is not his Grief for the Sufferings of
Christendom, that inclines him to a Peace, but his eager desire to dissolve the
Union of the Confederate Princes, whose power infuses into him Fears of
dreadful Consequence; resolved, after he has recovered Strength, to recommence
the War, and plague all Europe with more Mischiefs in the midst of Peace then
in the heat of blody War.

If this Monarch have now more pious and equitable Sentiments, and such as are
truly different from those which he had when he concluded the Three so
often-mention'd Treaties, together with the Truce for Twenty Years, let him
make 'em appear by the Restitution of all that he has usurped since the first
Peace concluded in the Island of Phesants. The Roman Lawyers affirm, That he is
a public Robber, who being demanded, wherefore he detains the Possession of
such or such a thing, has no other reason to give then only because he
possesses it. To which we may add that Saying of Aristotle, speaking of those
who advise War, That they very seldom take any heed whether it be Just and
Lawful to reduce their Neighbors under the Yoke of Bondage, who never gave 'm
any Cause; or to oppress those, who never did 'em any Injury.

Should the Question be put to France, by what Rights she now possesses so many
Principalities and separate Dominions, of which she has despoiled so many
several Sovereign Princes? It would not suffice her to allege her chimerical
Rights of Reunion, Dependence and Conv^^^^ence, pumpt from the hollow Noddle of
some old Advocate of the Parliament of Paris, more fit to be derided then to be
the Ground of any serious Contest, wherein important Matters of Fact must be
supported by sound, solid and undeniable Reasons. But if you can but get France
from thence, as out of her Fortress, in regard she had no other Reason to give,
she must be constrained to acknowledge, that she possesses 'em, because she
possesses 'em. So that is not this a perfect Robbery and a manifest Usurpation
of her Neighbor's Rights? and is there any Wrong done her in demanding
Restitution? Ought she not to be contented with her having enjoyed 'em so many
Years, and to have all-a-long received the Revenues which amount to immense
Sums? It may be thought also, that the Princes of the League would do her a
great Favor, if they discharge her at so cheap a rate, as the restoring 'em in
the same Condition as actually now they are, which, without Contradiction, is
far worse then what they were in when she first seized upon 'em. For examgle,
Alsatia, Franche Conte, the Dutchies of Burgundy, Lorraine and Bar; of
Luxemburg and Deux Ponts, the County of Chini, the Principality of Orange, part
of Brabant and Fland^^s, all which she has usurped and annexed to the Crown. No
Body can be ignorant that all these were opulent and flourishing Countries
under the Dominion of their Lawful Sovereigns, whereas at present they are
impoverished, and reduced to utmost misery. Could a true Computation be made of
the Wealth which they abounded in before they were invaded by France, I am
persuaded there would not now be found so much Money in all together, as one
single Principality was worth at that Time. So that if France be discharged for
making Restitution of 'em in their present condition, she must needs be a
prodigious Gainer, considering that she goes clear away with all the Spoils, of
which she has stripped those Provinces to their Skins, to erect a Puissance
always formidable to her Neighbors.

On the other side, it may be said, that if the Confederates enforce that Crown
to dismember from her Dominions so many potent Principalities, and so many
lovely Acquisitions, they may justly promise to themselves a just and durable
Peace, by disabling her to extend her ambitious Encroachments, as hitherto she
has done. There is no doubt but the Predecessors of Lewis the Great would shave
been as active and as troublesome to their Neighbors as he, had they had the
same Force and the same Treasures. The Desire of growing Great is natural to
all Sovereigns, and it is looked upon as a Noble Passion, when it is
sufficiently supported to carry on Great Enterprises, and is attended with
Prosperity. So that if the Raigns of Henry IV. and Lewis XIII. were not so
fortunate and flourishing as that of Lewis XIV. 'twas because they wanted
Power, and because their Revenues were so small, that they could hardly bring
into the Field an Army of above 40 or 50000 Men, whereas France, under this
Ragin, has extended her Limits so far as she has done by the vast Augmentation
of her Forces, and prodigious Advancemen of her Revenus; to which her Violation
of Treaties has greatly contributed. She finds herself enlarged by a great
number of Dukedoms, Earldoms, Principalities, Lordships, Signiories and
Territories sufficient altogether to compose a Kingdom as vast and of as large
an extent as ancient France; nay, tho you should consider it as it was before
the Pyrenean Peace.

It Is Time then, most Serene Confederate Princes, to bethink your selves of
prescribing Bounds to this ambitious Puissance, such as may secure your
Liberty, your Repose, and the Welfare of your Dominions. You know full well,
what your staying so long has cost ye, and past Experience ought to instruct
ye, that you have no time to lose; and that if you let slip this favorable
Opportunity, which Fortune has put into your Hands, such another may not
suddenly return. The Marquess of Louvois told the King, some Months before his
Death, That he foresaw this War would be like the Preceding: That your Projects
and your Enterprises would vanish in Smoke; That Misunderstanding began to get
footing among ye; that one Campaign more would shatter the Union, and that
there wanted nothing but the Loss of a Battle, to make a second Peace of
Nimeguen. That is to say, a Peace both Glorious and Advantageous for France,
and unfortunate to the Confederates. This Minister, zealous for his Master's
Interests, grounded his Arguments and Conjectures upon the small Resistance
which you made till now; which occasioned the loss of several Battles, and the
taking of several considerable Towns. And, to speak, as we find things, it was
not greatly for the Honor of so many Princes as the Confederacy consiss of,
that only England and the United Provinces have fought effectually against
France.

These Two Potentates have done every thing, have paid every thing, have
supplied every thing: So that 'is no wonder if they have obtained signal
Advantages. At the same Time France assails ye on every side; Her Armies are
early in the Field; they ravage your Territories, and carry all before 'em with
Fire, with Sword and Desolation, while you remain immovable in
Winter Quarters, till the Enemy has made himself Master of the most
Advantageous Posts, and consumed your Forage.

I bury in silence a great number of Defects and Failings which King William
has endeavored to repair with indefatigable Pains and Industry. It Is to that
great Prince, to whom all Europe is at this Day heholding for the happy
condition of her Affairs, which put all the Confederates in hopes of a speedy
and solid Peace. It is only to be wished that the Zeal of that undaunted
Monarch were well seconded, and that all the Confederate Princes and States
would push on their utmost Efforts, toward putting a final End to so glorious
an Enterprise, after which so many People, under Oppression, so earnestly pant.

Now, to be convinced that there needs no more then the good fortune of one
Compaign, successful to the Confederates, to obtain of France what has been
usurped since the Pyrenean Treaty, let us only consider her Advances, and her
Condescensions to obtain a Peace. Having hitherto sown, in vain, her Treasures
in all the Courts of Europe, to purchase the Neutrality of several Members of
the Confederacy, or the Mediation of the Northern Crowns, and other States and
Princes, devoted to her Interests; finding that all this produced nothing, she
flattered her self, as her last Remedy, that the Court of Rome would have
Authority enough to awe the Catholic Princes into an Accommodation. To that
purpose she left nothing omitted to procure the Favor of that Court; and it
may be said that her Sedulities were not Fruitless on that side, and that it
was none of the Holy Fathers Fault, if the Emperor and the Catholic King did
not abandon the Common Cause, to make a separate Peace.

It had bin well for France, that the present Pope had had the good luck or the
Genius o^ Clement VIII. at the Peace of Vervin, concluded in 1598. That Holy
Father pressed s^ importunately upon Henry IV. and Philip I^ that he persuaded
those Two Princes at length into a Reconciliation, and to restore Tranquillity
to Christendom. Nevertheless it was not procured without a world of Toil and
Difficulty, witness the extraordinary Pain^ that the Popes Legate, Cardinal
Alexander d^ Medicis took, who was sent to Henry IV. and had not that Cardinal
bin as cunning as he was, he had never succeeded, nor done his Business as he
did, with that Prince. Nor was the Reverend Father, Friar Bonaventure
Calatagirone, General of the Franciscan Order, less dextrous in persuading
Prince Albert, Archduke of Austria, and Nephew to Philip. II. So that the Holy
Father wrought so effectually by the means of those two great Men, that he
persuaded both Crowns to lay down their Arms, and so second the Repose and
Tranquillity of Europe, which was almost in the same Confusion as now it is.

France having always observed that the Popes had bin always the Sovereign
Umpires and Arbitrators of the Quarrels between the Two Houses, could not take
a more advantageous and more favorable Course then ^ow she did. But, as we
have already ob^erv'd, 'twas not sufficient for France to be ^econcil d to the
Court of Rome, by sacrificing ^o her all her Resentments, which seemed to ^end
to a personal Enmity and Disobedience, which France had displayed to all the
World with so much Pride and Haughtiness, and ^y this means to have induced her
to espouse ^er Interests; there was a necessity of something more, that should
have met in the Person of the present Pope, a cunning Dexterity, ^ike that of
Clement VIII. and Paul III. who Mediated the Peace between Charles V. and
Francis I.

If Clement was put to so much Trouble before he could pacify the Troubles
that rendered Henry IV. and Philip II. Irreconcilable, Pope Paul had much more
to do with Charles V. and Francis I. who being come to Nice, where Pope Paul
III. expeced 'em to put an end to their Differences, as a Common Father and
Mediator, all that the Holy Father who was the most Perspicatious and Politic
Prince of his Age, could do, was to make those two Monarchs agree upon a Truce
for Ten Years, without seeing each other; it being impossible for him to
persuade 'em to a final Peace. So that one may safely say, that Affairs are at
present in the same posture, and that there appears but very little hope for
the Most Christian King to expect a Peace by the way of Rome. The Union of the
Confederate Princes is knit so fast, that it is in vain for him to think to
dissolve it by any Intrigues of the Spiritual Court. As Crafty as the Cardinals
Fourbin and d' Estrees are, and whatever Artifices they make use of, we do not
find they have made any progress as yet. So that France having nothing to trust
to but her Arms, of necessity she must renew her preparations for the War, or
propound more Honorable and Advantageous Offers in order to a Peace, then
those already presented by the Ministers of Denmark.

The Confederate Princes will never consent to any Treaty that is not attended
with the Restitution of all that France has Usurped since the Pyrenean Treaty.
Let her thunder out her Resentment in the rage and fury of new Cruelties: Let
her Burn and lay all Waste before her: Let her do all the Mischief that
formerly was practiced by Charles the Bald, Sur-named the Terrible, with a
design to obtain by Force what he cannot obtain by Gentle Means. Let him make
his Protestations in all the Courts of Europe, that he is ready to lay down his
Arms: Let him proclaim as loud as he pleases by the Mouths of his Emissaries,
the sincerity of his Intentions: Let him exalt himself in Promises, and with a
thousand Rodomantadoes sound forth the Advantages which he offers the
Confederates; All this will never inveagle 'em to accept of a Treaty.

The Confederate Princes are now resolved to imitate the Conduct of Henry IV.
toward Philip II. For Henry having too often experienced how little all the
Promises of the Spanish Monarch were to be relied upon, would never enter into
any Negotiation, till he had made Restitution of all his Conquests; and ordered
him to be told, that when he had restored back all that he had taken from him,
then should the Spaniard see what he would do. The Confederate Princes have
both reason, and are likewise in a condition to hold the King of France's Nose
to the same Grindstone. When he has restored to every particular Person what he
has wrested from 'em by Invasion; the Estates and Fortresses of which he has
despoiled several Sovereign Princes, Then the Allies will enter into a
Negotiation, to the end they may all together agree upon the Means the most
effectual to procure a solid and lasting Peace.

If they delay to enter into a Negotiation till France shall make a Previous
Offer of restoring all she has won fince the Pyrenean Treaty, there is no
question but she will do as she did at the Peace of Nimeguen, that is to say,
she will commit more Havoc and Cruelties then in the greatest heat of War, on
purpose to make 'em hasten the conclusion of the Treaty, and be more willing to
grant her Demands. This Condct of hers is so much the more Advantageous,
because she knows by Experience, that her talking of Peace, was wont to lull
the Confederates asleeep, while on the other side Misunderstanding crept in
among 'em; besides that, they were willing to lessent their Forces at a time
when it became 'em rather to redouble their Efforts.

If the King of France had the good luck to Succeed, and that he effectually
persuaded the Confederate Princes to accept his Offers, He had no small reason
at that imte to boast his having restored Peace to Europen, but they might well
cry out with Horace for all that,

Quid dignum tanto feret hic Promissor hiatu,
Parturiunt Montes nascetur Ridiculus Mus.
Andbe had likewise as much reason to say, that he had the honor to make all
the Confederates draw their Swords, and to Disarm 'em when they had done; and
that that same Potent League, sufficient to have made the French Monarchy
Tremble, and reduce her to her ancient Bounds, did nothing more then only Forge
the Shackles themselves, with which France intended to have bound 'em to a more
cruel Slavery then what they had endured before.

To be convinced of this, there needs no more but to consider, that all that
France offers to restore to the Confederates, may be re-taken by her Arms in
less then one Campain, so soon as the Confederates should have laid down their
Arms and Disbanded their forces. There Is no necessity for me to enlarge upon
the Proof of this: It Is sufficient to say, ^he King of France has no other Aim,
then to ^evive his old Maxims, presently after the conclusion of the Peace. And
indeed it is a hard matter for an Unlimited Prince to set Bounds to ^is Designs,
and to root out of his Heart, the principles which Ambition and Avarice, have
Planted there with so much Industry even from ^is tender Youth. And therefore
we must not ^buse our selves; so long as Lewis the Great continues Great, as
being surrounded with such a real and effectual Power as he now Possesses,
which may be said to be the highest degree of Exaltation and Grandeur to which
(...) Prince can attain, he will always give Laws to Europe, and all the rest
of the Princes must depend upon him in such a manner, as never to be able to
Affranchise themselves but by his Downfall.

Let 'em Upbraid as much as they please Charles the Gross with his want of
Sincerity during the whose course of his Reign, and the paltry Artifices he
made use of to rid himself of his Enemies; he never altered his Conduct nor his
Maxims; so long as he had the Power in his Hands, he was always the same; and
it may be said, that he never began to live in Repose and to become wise, till
he was Banished into a Village of Swabia, with a very mean Pension, where he
Died for Grief. Lothair the Son of Lewis Oultremer the XXXIV King of France,
was a Prince the most Perfidious and the most Turbulent that ever ascended the
Throne of the French Monarchy; and as he lived, so he died, and retained his
abominable Principle to his Death. So that we may safely say, That so long as
the most Christian King continues as Potent as he is at present, he will never
suffer his Neighbors to be at Quiet; and the Confederate Princes must be
always preparing themselves for new Combustions, after the conclusion of a
Peace. Which will be fo far from lessening his Forces, that it will acquire him
new degrees of Glory and Grandeur.

Since then it is so absolutely necessary to reject the present Offers of the
Most Christian King, and that there is no other way to obtain a firm Peace, but
by the continuance of a brisk War, in order to bring down the Power of this
Monarch, there is no time to lose; within a MOnth or six Weeks, his Armies will
be in the Field, and if we may believe him, he will be no longer bound to stand
to his Royal Word, which he gave the 15th of March. The Duke of Luxemburg
begins to Liquor his Boots, and is preparing in earnest to show us some new
Trick of his Necromancy. And this same Marshal, whom the Prince of Conde was
wont to call L'Enfant perdu, or a Child of the forlorn Hope, in referrence to
his turbulent and sanguinary Genius, has promised his Majesty, that though it
cost him his Life, he will make him Master this Campaign, either of Liege or
Mastricht, or at the worst of a second Field-Victory, no less Glorious then
that of Landen, out of a confidence, that one of these Events will force the
Confederates in despite of their Teeths, to accept the Peace which he Offers.

But to return to the Battle of Landen; I cannot forbear to write a pleasant
Passage, which is reported of the Marshal. So soon as the Battle was over,
seeing himself environed with a crowd of Lieutenant Generals, Camp-Marshals,
Brigadiers, Major-Generals and other Officers of the Army, who came all to
Congratulate him for the signal Victory he had own, Ha! Boys, said he, How
shall we call this Battle? Upon which, while every one stood gaping one upon
another, not knowing what to Answer, and that some were of Opinion to call it
be the Name of the Place where it was Fought, according to Custom, the Marshal
replied, No, Gentlemen, we will call it the Bavin-Battle: instead of calling it
the Battle of Landen, we must call it the Battle of Bavins. And indeed he had
reason enough to call it so. However, if he deceived the Confederates, by
Attacquing an Army of no more then Forty Thousand, with another of a Hundred
and twenty Thousand, let him take heed he be not deceived in his turn, if ever
he be forced to Fight upon equal Terms, as in all probability he may be this
very Campaign. Nevertheless we may be bold to tell him this, That if he acted
like a Master in the Art of War in time of Fight, he committed the fault of an
ignorant Apprentice, in not pursuing his Victory, and reaping no Fruit of so
much Blood as had been shed. But to return to the Subject,

Boufflers, another Favorite of the French Monarch, promised him Mountains and
Wonders; and for a greater proof of his Zeal and Devotion to his Majesty's
Service, he has already caused his Sword to be Whetted, and his own and the
Arms of the French Guards, together with the Flambeaux for the House-Burners,
to be Blessed by the Archbishop of Paris; with a resolution to fight like a
Termagaunt, and to lay Waste all before him with Fire and Sword. Catinat also
no less famous for the Laurels he gathered in the Field of Marsaglia, makes as
great Promises to the King his Master; and if his Majesty will believe him, the
Duke of Savoy runs a great hazard of losing the rest of his Dominions, and of
hearing French Te Deums Sung in the Cathedral of Turin.

The Dauphin also, who is to Command in Germany, if he be not Countermanded,
wants neither Courage nor good Will. He has given signal proofs of both upon
several Occasions, and if we may believe him, Lewis of Baden's Business is only
to seek for an Asylum and a Camp that may secure him from the loss of a Battle,
like that of the last Campaign. And as an accumulation to the Vauntings of so
many Hero's that labor by Concert for the Honor of their Prince, and to draw
Dun out of the Mire, there wants nothing but a second Smyrna Fleet, and
Tourville Admiral of a French Navy, to render him as Glorious by Sea, as the
other Generals pretend to be by Land.

We are then in great expectation of some extraordinary Event, which must
decide the good or bad Fortune of so many Princes, which the Most Christian
King has enforced to betake themselves to Arms. And the Confederate Princes are
so much the rather inclined to terminate the Differences by the Sword, because
they find it impossible to obtain by any other means an Accommodation with
France. Which is no more then what the most Christian King has made most
clearly apparent, by the ridiculous Proposals offered by the Ministers of the
Northern Crowns. So that War being indispensably necessary, it behooves 'em to
prepare for it in good earnest.

If we may believe the News that is brought us from some Persons residing in
the Court of France, it is said that his Most Christian Majesty was in a pelting
Chafe to hear that his Offers were rejected with so much Scorn; and there was
not a day past over his Head, that he did not confer with Marshal de Luxemburg,
about what Enterprise was fi^ to be undertaken, and where it was most proper to
open the Campaign. For the King well knowing of what Importance it would be to
his Affairs, would fain have something done Remarkable to raise the drooping
hope of his dejected People, and which might a^ the same time uphold the
Reputation of hi^ Arms, and constrain the Confederates a^ length to accept the
Peace which he Offer 'em. All these Considerations put him to a great Nonplus.
To begin in Flanders with the Siege of some Place of Importance, would not be
amiss; But as ill Luck will have it there are no more Mons's and Namur's to
take, there remain two Places only be worthy the Presenceof so great a King;
Liege and Maestriecht. But the Custody and Preservation of one of these Places,
is entrusted with the Spaniards; and for that Luxemburg has had too much
experience of the Bravery of the Hollanders, it is not his Opinion that his
Majesty should adventure his Fame and Reputation upon a Siege where he must
fight against whole Armies, of which the Garrisons are Composed. So that his
Majesty in all likelihood will be contented with taking a Journey into
Flanders, to give his Ladies a little fresh Air; and if he finds no probability
of doing any thing considerable, he will return by the way of Dinant, under
pretense of some Indisposition of Body.

If the Marshals of Luxemburg, de Lorge, Catinat and Bouflers, are to be
believed, there will be some set-Battles this Year; and therefore it was not
thought convenient to undertake any this last Winter, for fear of Tyring out
the Soldiers, considering the need of Fresh Men to support so many great
Actions. Only the French could wish their Cavalry were a little more Numerous,
and that they could be supplied with the Horses which the Jews of Metz engaged
to procure 'em. But the strict Order taken by the Confederates, was an
Invincible Obstacle which they never expected.

Thus you see what famous Exploits were designed in the Cabinet at Versailles.
But if the Confederate Princes do their Duty, and act, by concert, it is in a
manner certain, that France will only Triumph in Imagination, and that she runs
a great hazard of seeing her self in as bad or worse Condition in the end of
the Campaign as she was at the Beginning. The Confederates with much more
reason, hope to Ruin her by prolonging the War, and to enforce her in despite
of all her Flourishes and Bravado's, to Surrender back all her Usurpations.
It Is a good Omen for the Confederates, that France begins the first of all to
talk of Peace, and that she offers to restore some part of her Conquests. It Is
a sign she is weary of the War, and that her Conscience upbraids her with
Perfidiousness, and at the same time ordains her to make restitution of her
Usurpations, if she intends to be Reconciled with her Enemies. As for the
Confederates, who are without Reproach in that Particular, they are not yet so
Harrass'd by the incumbent Necessities and fatal Exigencies attending a long
War, but that with far less Prejudice, they can still maintain their
Resolutions of never harkening to a Treaty, unless that France submit to
surrender whatever she has possessed her self of by Invasion since the Pyrenean
Peace.

ADDENDA.
THAT it is the general Interest of Europe, to have the Pyrenean Treaty
restored to its full Force, has been shown at large in the foregoing
Discourses; but how particularly England is concerned in that Restitution, is
what will appear by the following Reflections; wherein I intend to show that it
is particularly both the Interest and Honor of this Nation, never to consent
to a Peace, till the Affairs of Europe be reduced to the same condition as they
were when the Treaty, we speak of, was concluded.

It Is agreed on all hands, That the Peace of Christendom cannot be lasting and
firm, unless there be an Equilibrium between the two Greatest Powers: For, when
at any Time one prevails over the other, Ambition never wants a Pretense to
make War; which, in its consequence, tho at first began only between them Two,
yet in the end sets all the States of Christendom together by the Ears and
involves them in all the Miseries that attends a most barbarous and unmerciful
War. So long as the Spaniards were at the Top of the Wheel, what Troubles, Wars
and Misfortunes did they not occasion in Christendom by their foolish and
immoderate Ambition, to Lord it over all the World besides And since the French
have succeeded them in their Fortunes and Designs, what Barbarities,
desolations and Cruelties have we not seen and felt? This therefore shows the
absolute necessity of an Equilibrum between France and the House of Austria;
but the Question is how to come at it.

Whosoever will be at the pains to consider well what has bin said before, must
agree, That there is no other way left to balance those two Powers, but to
revive the Pyrenean Treaty; which put such reasonable Bounds to those two
contending Empires, that, I dare say, it would be very easy to preserve Peace
in Christendom, did the Christians but mind their own true Interest. But,
perhaps, some will say against this; How can you affirm that that Treaty did
set the Scales even between those two Crowns, seeing the French are grown so
powerful since that time, and the Spaniards on the other Hand have suffered
such considerable Losses? This is a great Objection, I confess indeed, and that
which seems, at first, a Demonstration, that that Treaty was too advantageous
to France; yet when it is thoroughly inquired into, it will appear to be very
trivial, and of no force at all, as I hope to show before I have done.

And the better to clear this Difficulty, I say, first That to pretend to set
such an exact Equilibrium between France and the House of Austria, as may
infallibly secure the Peace of Europe, without the concurrence of the other
States, is a foolish and an idle Speculation, and, indeed, an Impossibility.

2. That all that we can reasonably expect, is, to set France and the House of
Austria in such a condition, that whenever one of them shall venture to disturb
the Peace of Europe, it might be in the power of another State to turn the
Scales, and command them to be quiet. And

3. I say, That the Treaty concluded at the Pyrenees, left France and the House
of Austria, in such a condition.

Now to prove this, I have nothing else to do, but to show, That there was then
such a Power in being, as was able to keep both the French and Spaniards in
Peace, and that was England. But to set this truth in its full Light, I shall
only put the Reader in mind of the Causes of the Growth of France, in which the
Author of the foregoing Treatise is, in my Opinion, very defective.

For though the great Ability of their Ministers of State, the good use of their
Money, and the Arbitrary Power of their King, may have contributed very much to
these Conquests; yet, after all, they owe more, to say not all, to the kindness
of King Charles II. and to the supine carelessness of the English. This will
appear the more visible, if we consider the happy Circumstances that King
Charles was in upon his Restoration. The Effeminacy, Luxury, and other Vices
which have bin since so common amonst us, were then unknown to the English; for
Cromwell had left him a true, sober and warlike Nation. Our Seamen having curbed
the Dutch, they defied (and that with Justice) all the Powers of the World to
contend with them for the Empire of the Sea: We were Masters of Dunkirk, a very
considerable Place, and which lying between the French and Spaniards, was, as
we may say, a Throne upon which a King of England could decide, without Appeal,
the Differences between France and Spain. In short, to crown all this, King
Charles found the most liberal People that ever was. Now, after this, who will
deny that England was then in a condition to restrain the French, and oblige
them to stand still, though they had bin in a much better posture then they were:
For these Divisions were not altogether appeased, and their Fleet, at that
time, was so very inconsiderable, that they made but a very little figure at
Sea.

By what has bin said, I hope it appears, That if a Peace has not reigned in
Europe since the Pyrenean Treaty, it is not because there was not an Equilibrum
set between France and the House of Austria, but only because those whose
gloriuos Province it was to maintain the public Peace, were corruptible Men;
and, therefore, I conclude, that if that Treaty be restored, if the Affairs of
Eurpoe were reduced to the same Condition as they were then in, we shall enjoy
a lasting Peace: For it is not to be supposed that any King of England for the
future, will be persuaded to sell Dunkirk to the Franch; to teach them how to
manage their Fleet; to join with them against the Dutch, our Confederates; and,
in a word, to suffer them to swallow Flanders, or any other Country. It Is said,
indeed, that Glory is the inseparable Companion of Princes; but sure I am, that
the Prince we speak of, must be excepted out of that Rule; for had he felt any
sting of that noble Passion, is it to be believed, that he would have divested
himself of the most glorious Advantage and Title, that ever any Christian
Prince enjoyed, viz. of being the Vmpire of Europe, and the Defender of the
Peace, as well as of the Faith?

Now since the Restitution of the Pyrenean Treaty is so absolutely necessary
for the Peace of Christendom, it is plain, That England, a^ well as other
Nations now in Confederacy wit^ her, must be engaged to continue the War ti^ we
obtain it; but, besides, we are engaged by the Ties of Honor and Glory in the
Quarrel. It has been our ofrmer Princes Negligence, or our own, that has made
s^ wide a Breach in Europe; and are we no^ bound in Honor, as well as in
Justice, t^ make it up? We have lost the fairest Flowe^ of our Crown, in
parting with the Advanta^ ges I have mentioned; are we not bound therefore, for
the Glory of our Country t^ strive to regain them? Dunkirk, I know, wa^ not
yielded to the English by the Pyrenea^ Treaty; but was it not then our own,
sino^ soon after King Chrales sold it?

How much the loss of Calais was bewailed by our Forefathers, I think needless
to te^ my Reader, since it hastened the death o^ Queen Mary her self; but with
what Tranquillity we suffered the loss of Dunkirk, is indeed a Subject of
Wonder; but I think it still a grerter, to hear many People say, that it is
against our Interest to demand the Restitution of that Place, unless they will
say, that Calais was of more advantage to England, which I have no reason to
believe, as I could easily show, if I would break the Bounds which I have
prescribed to my self.

I would conclude here, and truly it is high time, but I think my self obliged
to answer, or at least to prevent an Objection, which some People may possibly
make. If almost all the Princes of Europe in Confederacy together, are scarce
now able to resist France, how is it possible that England along should keep
the Balance even between that Kingdom and the House of Austria? To this I
answer, that if France was supposed to be always as powerful, as it is at this
day, or as it has been for many Years of late, the Objection would then hold
good, and I should reckon my self something worse then a Fool to believe that
England and Spain would be able to counterbalance it, since, as it is observed,
so many States in conjunction together, find it a difficult matter to do it;
but if the French are once brought back to the Pyrenean Treaty, and once shut
up within these ancient Bounds, then I dare say, That England will be able to
turn the Scale to what side soever she pleases, and especially if Dunkirk be
rrestor'd to us. All the World knows, that the French have made great
Conquests, and consequently that they must be stronger then they were formerly;
but the better to make this Truth sensible, and to give at the same time a just
Idea of their present Strength, I Will offer to the Reader a List of the
principal Towns and Countries which they have acquired (to use their own
Phrase) since the Pyrenean Treaty.

Dunkirk Bergue St. Vinox Ypres Menin Furnes Tournay Lille Douay St. Omer
Valenciennes Conde Bouchain Cambray Air St. Guilain Mons Charleroy Namur Huy
Dinant Charlemont Maubeuge Luxemburgh with all its Dependencies The whole
Duchy of Lorrain
The County of Burgundy, in which are very Considerable Places, as,

Besancon Dole Salins, etc. Treves or Tryers, with almost that Electorate.
Montroial Strasbourgh Philipsbourgh Landau Friburgh The whole Duchy of Savoy
Suse Cazal Nisse Ville Franche Roses, and many others which for brevity-sake I
shall omit.
All these Places are extraordinary well fortified, and have large
Dependencies, and this makes France so powerful, and almost impenetrable either
in Flanders or Germany; but it must be granted, that if the French were once
obliged to restore them to their right Owners, they would cease to be so
formidable; from whence I conclude again, that it is in the Pyrenean Treaty
alone, we can find that Equilibrium I have spoken of, and which is so
absolutely necessary to the Peace of Europe.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Bladwin, at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
A Poem on the late Promotions of several Eminent Persons in Church and State
by N. Tate, Servant to their Majesty's.

Pleasure with Profit: Consisting of Recreations of diverse kinds, viz.
Numerical, Geometrical, Mechanical, Statical, Astronomical Horometrical,
Cryptographical, Magnetical Automatical, Chemical and Historical. Published to
recreate Ingenious Spirits; and to induce them to make farther scrutiny into
these (and the like) Sublime Sciences. And to divert them from following such
Vices, to which Youth (in this Age) are so much inclined. By William Leybourn,
Philomathes To this Work is also annexed, a Treatise o^ Algebra, according to
the late Improvements applied to Numerical Questions, and Geometry; with a New
Series for the speedy Extraction of Roots; as also a Converging Series for all
manner of adsected Equations. By R. Sault, Master of the Mathematical School in
Adam's Court, in Broad-street, near the Royal Exchange.

Letters of State, written by Mr. John Milton, to most of the Sovereign Princes
and Republics of Europe, from the Year 1649. till the Year 1659. To which is
added, An Account of his Life; together with several of his Poems; and a
Catalogue of his Works, never, before Printed.

Bibliotheca Politica: Or, an Enquiry into the Ancient Constitution of the
English Government; with respect both to the just Extent of Regal Power, and to
the Rights and Liberties of the Subject. Wherein all the chief Arguments as
well against as for the Late Revolution, are impartially represented and
considered, in XIII. Dialogues. Collected out of the best Authors both Ancient
and Modern. To which is added, An Alphabetical Index to the whole Work.

The Works of Francis Rabelais, M. D. Or the Lives, Heroic Deeds and Sayings
of Gargantua and Pantagruel; Done out of French by Sir Tho. Vrchard, Knight. and
others: With a large account of the Life and Works of the Author; particularly
an Explanation of the most difficult Passages in them. Never before published
in any Language.

Mercury; or the Secret and Swift Messenger: Showing how a Man may with Privacy
and Speed communicate his Thoughts to a Friend at any distance. The Second
Edition, by the Right Reverend Father in God, John Wilkins, late Lord Bishop of
Chester. Printed for Richard Baldwin, where are to be had, The World in the
Moon, and Mathematical Magic.

An Essay concerning Obedience to the Supreme Powers, and the Duty of Subjects
in all Revolutions: With some Considerations touching the present Juncture of
Affairs.

A Collection of Speeches of the Right Honorable Henry lat Earl of Warrington,
viz. I. His Speech upon his being Sworn Mayor of Chester, in November, 1691.
II. His Speech to the Grand Jury at Chester, April 13. 1692. III. His Charge to
the Grand Jury at the Quarter Sessions held for the County of Chester, on the
11th of October, 1692. IV. His Charge to the Grand Jury at the
Quarter Sessions, held for the County of Chester, on the 25th Day of April,
1693.

FINIS.

