BRIEF REFLECTIONS ON THE Earl of CASTLEHAVEN'S MEMOIRS Of his ENGAGEMENTS and
CARRIAGE In the WARS of IRELAND.

By which, the Government at that time, and the Justice of the Crown since, are
Vindicated from Aspersions cast on Both.

Vero quid Verius?

LONDON, Printed for George West. 1682

TO THE KING.
SIR,
HAd it not been long observed that nothing is more resented by Great and
Generous Princes, than the least Affronts to their Ministers, I should not have
adventured to have addressed these Reflections (on the Earl of Castlehaven's
Memoirs) to your Sacred Majesty; committed to the Press with an Introduction
little expected: But he having before invited You to what neither contains (to
his knowledge) a Lie or Mistake, I dare not but presume so far on Your Justice,
as to be confident, that what bespeaks the Integrity of Your Ministers, and
supports the Honor of Your Crown, (severely reflected on by his Lordship)
shall never receive other than an acceptance, how meanly soever it be clothed,
by

Your Majesty's most dutiful and obedient Subject E. B.

TO THE READER.
READER,
I Have so much Charity for the Earl of Castlehaven, that if he had seriously
read, as well as (amongst the Stationers in Saint Paul's Churchyard,) took
into his hands the Histories of the Execrable Irish Rebellion, begun the 23. of
October. 1641. he would not (afterward) have exposed his Memoirs; all the
Imputations, which he lays on the State, being in them clearly vindicated. Yet
since ( to draw from the World some Compassion) he has adventured his Memoirs
abroad, I am willing the World (to whom his Lordship appeals) should judge
whether his Case was singular? or being so premeditated, not more notorious?
And this I thought sit to publish, resolving never to desert the English
Interest, as often as it is invaded, lest the confident Piece of Calumny fixed
on the State, might wander secure and unexamined; there being at this day more,
who, under a Disguise, are willing to palliate, rather than detect the Villainy
of that Age; though if you discourse on this Subject, they whisper Intrigues,
and if there be an opportunity offered, they write they will verify them to
the World. Another being set on the Tragical Conclusion of the Long Parliament
(to make that Junto detestable) spends the viij. Chapter of his Short View of
the late Troubles in England, wholly on the pretense the Irish had to their
barbarous Insurrection: wherein he re-assumes the Rebels Plea, with greater
Confidence, than they give it in at Trym March 17. 1642. But yet considers not
the Answers that have been written on that Rhapsodie of Fictions and Untruths;
thereby betraying the Innocence of the State, and the Honor of the English.
However there is a Letter from a Person of Honor in the Country, to the Earl
of Castlehaven, full of Candor, as well as Reproof, which has incomparably
well replied to the Earl's Memoirs, and might well abate my edge in this Case.
But upon the encouragement of that Person of Honor ( rather to quicken than
slacken my Intentions) I could not well defer (what has been long writ) the
publishing my Reflections, (though with great disadvantage, after so excellent
a Pen) they being merely an Epitome of the Irish Scene. In which I have not (to
my knowledge) discovered the least Emotion against the Gallantry and Worth of
that Noble Peer who has raised this Contest, his Extraction and Personal
Courage being Remarkable. But the Reasons (for the Cause) he pretends to, are
(by what he would justify himself in) not sufferable; ou il n'ya point de
peche, il n'ya point de honte, his not bebeing convinced (at first) of the
Crime, made him conscious of no Guilt. But I shall set the things in order
before him, and if Conviction arise not thence, I shall blush at my mistake.

REFLECTIONS ON THE Earl of CASTLEHAVEN'S MEMOIRS CONCERNING The WARS of
IRELAND.
AMongst some Books I lately received from my Stationer I had the Earl of
Castlehaven's Memoirs.

I little expected, after 28 years, to have seen any thing of his Lordship's
Proceedings in Ireland, in taking part with the Rebels, before the Cessation
1643. considering his, and his Ancestors obligations to the Crown of England.
Nor am I convinced why (at this time) it should come forth, unless thereby its
hoped that some Reflections may be fixed on the Ministers then to extenuate the
general Insurrection, when as we know no Artifice is more usual than to clamor
the People with Calumnies on the State, whilst others alarm them to Rebellion.
I rather expected, since he imbarqued in that business ( in behalf of which his
His Majesty's Message to the Parl. 14. Feb. 1641.
late Majesty's heart so often bled,) that the Act of Oblivion should have
sealed up those Encounters: especially since his Majesty had been prevailed
with by the intercession of his Friends in Parliament, to repair the Breaches
Time and Misfortune had made upon so ancient and honorable a Family as his
Lordships. But since he has published his Memoirs of his Engagements and
Carriage in the Wars of Ireland, as something in them new, which Castleh. Ep.
to the K.
if his Majesty's time may permit him to read, contain neither Lie nor Mistake.
I conceive him so ingenuous (having admitted others to mind him of some
Passages which The Col. Letter to him.
possibly may be more in their knowledge than his Lordships,) He will not
interpret it amiss, to be informed of some concerns nearer the Truth.

It is not my intention to arraign what (as a Person of Honor and good
Conduct) he managed in that War, having his Lordships Test for what he affirms.
But that I may take his Memoirs as they stand, he is pleased to write, ( Sect.
1. p. 3.) That it may seem a wonder how he came to engage with the Irish, being
a Peer of England, and an English man both by Birth and Descent, not speaking a
word of their Language, and having little in their Kingdom. Whereas the Wonder
easily unriddles it self, his Lordship being a strong Asserter of the Romish
Persuasion, to advance which, no Artifice or Attempt, has ever been condemned
(by the Father of it) as Disloyal or Inhumane.

And as to his Lordships coming into Ireland not long before the Rebellion' (
P. 5.) I cannot so far shrive his Conscience, as not to allow what he affirms,
That it was to settle his Affairs there, as he had done in England, ere he
ventured further on the Trade of War, to which his Genius led him: Yet I find
the Parliament (to whom the King had left the Affairs of Ireland) complain in
an Order 29 of Jan. 1641. That immediately before, and during the barbarous and
bloody Rebellion, many having Estates in England, went thither, amongst whom
his Lordship was one especially taken notice of (in a Declaration of the
Commons concerning the Rise of the Rebellion 25 of July 1643.) having sat as a
Peer in Parliament in England immediately before the Irish Rebellion; at which
time Mr. Porter, Sir Basil Brook (the Queens Treasurer) Mr. Andrew Brown, and
others went over. And though his Lordships bare repairing thither may be more
favorably censured, than to conclude, he resolved to center in that
Conspiracy; yet since he afterward espoused that Quarrel, when many (who
having observed the bloody Effects thereof) were ashamed (at least prudently
deterred) to own its Progress, all cannot acquit him of that Taint, for that as
an Honorable Person in his Letter from the Country writes, ( P. 50.) That he
could not have been engaged in that Conspiracy unless he had been resolved in
the Justice of their Cause from the beginning; though he is put in mind (by the
Letter he inserts) ( P. 5.) That immediately upon the breaking forth of the
Rebellion in the North, he (being in Munster) repaired to the Lords Justices,
and (as his Ancestors) offered to serve against the Rebels, but was told his
Religion was an Obstacle. Nor can I say but the State returned him this Answer,
and how could they well say less? when it was apparent that it was a Popish
Conspiracy, and those of that Profession were generally engaged in that
Defection. Though he must give me leave to put him in mind that the Lords
Justices (how ill soever his Party would present them to the World) were so far
from owning a public Jealousy of all of his Lordships persuasion, that it is
well known they put Arms into the hands of diverse Noblemen of the Pale of that
Religion, who, (as his Lordship) made Professions to his Majesty's Service, and
desired the same. Nor was this Concession of the Lords Justices disapproved by
the Parliament in England, they also granted See the Kings Reply for Licenses
for Ireland. Husb. Col. p. 72.
Commissions of Government, as likewise of Martial Law to several of the same
Persuasion, not in the Pale only, but in other parts of the Kingdom; inserting
a Power to spare or destroy the Rebels according to their discretion; hoping
those of the Pale might prove good Instruments to oppose the threatening
Incursions of the Northern Rebels: whilst they a few days after deserted their
Houses, and openly declared themselves in actual Rebellion; as did several of
the principal Towns, Wexford, Waterford, Dundalk, Trym, and others, to whom the
State had sent Arms and Commissions of Trust. And this not through the least
force put on them by the State: No, they yielded to whatsoever they thought
might argue an assurance of them, but they of the Pale centered with the other
through their Natural Inclination, and (as we may believe from the Lords
Mac-Guire, Mac-Mahon, Mac-Arts, and others Confessions) a designed Insurrection
through the whole Kingdom of the Popish Persuasion, cherished by an inveterate
detestation of the English, what pretext soever else his Lordship (in an
Appendix) promises We shall find the true Original Causes of the late Rebellion
thoroughly discovered: A Piece speedily desired, that the Fallacy he presumes to
cast before the King might be detected. So that something more than ordinary
(though the Particulars be lost with the time) was either known or suspected
(by the State) of his Lordship, which at that time (were it only abundance of
Caution) might well excuse the L. Justices Reply to him, ( P. 6.) As their not
furnishing him with money, who by the suddenness of that Rebellion, were
reduced to an extreme Exigence. Nor by the sequel does it appear that his
Lordship had any need of their Supply, had he really intended a remove for
England: When for so many Months after he could freely and splendidly entertain
the Duchess of Buckingham and the Earl of Antrim at Maidenstown. As to their
denying him a Pass for England, ( P. 6.) which afterward his Brother's Letter
tells him the King (being to that end petitioned at York) denied, referring him
to the Parliament, who without the King, could do nothing. So that the Lords
Justices advice to make fair Weather at home, was not justly to be blamed; nor
(considering the circumstances they were then under) was his Resentment thereof
so often to have been angerly expressed as a villainous proceeding against him.
(P. 14.) An Expression unfit for such, (and not otherwise than with scorn to be
resented) on whom his Majesty had impressed his Authority.

What his Lordship did at home, besides spending his Provision on the Noble and
Excellent Company he had there, the Duchess of Buckingham and Earl of Antrim
(who afterward sat Chairman at Kilkenny, and if he had not been supported by
his Majesty's Mercy, The Addit. Act of Sect. f. 116.
had never been able to have supported himself by his own Innocence) I never
had an itch to enquire; but I find (in the States Letter to the Lord
Lieutenant, December 14. 1641.) that on the tenth of the same, he presented (at
the Council Board) the Oath of the Confederate Roman Catholics of Ireland,
which had been tendered to him; but (as he then said) he refused to swear to,
and it was not then justified to the contrary, though his intent of producing
it there, was suspected to be in favor of them, that their proceedings might
be the easier palliated, though the Oath was so weaved, as Disloyalty and
Contradiction spun every thread. Yet hitherto the State was loath to cherish any
Heats against his Lordship, leaving him to return to his house at Maidenstown,
(P. 11.) where he continued quiet 5 or 6 Months, till having some disturbance
by a Rabble driving away part of his stock (which was soon recovered,) he sent
his Brother to Dublin, and with him all the poor English he had thitherto
protected, ( P. 7) part of which, near Rathcool, the Rebels barbarously killed;
the others that escaped (through Dungan's Rescue) being sorely wounded, and as
it was suspected, either through the Treachery of their Convoy, or a laid
Design; as a Boy serving his Lordship, sometime after betrayed a Sadler,
Servant to the Earl of Antrim. Upon which, or other suggestions (as that he had
prepared great Entertainment for the L. Mountgarret, had he defeated the King's
Forces,) his Lordship was indicted of High Treason, (the most public way of
accusing, and an Act rather of the Grand Jury than the State) upon which he
came to Dublin. ( P. 9.) The State (at the Mercy of his Brother) however being
taxed with clandestine Proceedings, for not calling him before the Council e're
that he was committed to Sheriff Woodcock's house. (P. 10.) Whereas this was
done, that a severer course might not be commenced against him, till the matter
might have been favorably heard, business at that time (thronging on the
State) not admitting a speedy Release: Grains and Scruples are not to be stuck
at when a State is on its Ruin. And that his Lordship might have very well
been sensible of, for that the Lieutenant General let him live quietly till
then; whereas in Justice he might have brought him Prisoner to Dublin, who
could find sufficient force to rescue his own People and Cattle, but none to
assist the King's Lieut. General, when he fought (near his house) the Battle of
Kilrush. Yet this Lord being impatient of his Commitment, and suspecting (for
which there was no proof) that he should be ordered to the Castle, he made an
escape the 27. of September 1642. being (as Sir James Ware has registered Wares
MSs. 1642.
it) committed for High Treason. The Earl of Strafford's Case coming fresh to
his thoughts, That Innocence was a scurvy Plea in an Angry Time; (P. 15.)
whereas the Earl of Strafford's Case was much different from his. His Majesty
being never convinced of any such Criminousness in him, as willingly to expose
his life to the stroke of Justice and Malice of his Enemies. But the cause
which his Lordship solemnly owned, his Majesty condemned with the greatest
indignation imaginable, expressing in his Eicon Basil. That the Sea of Blood
which has in Ireland been cruelly and barbarously shed, is enough to drown any
man in eternal, both Infamy and Misery, whom God shall find the malicious
Author or Instigator of its effusion. And here it is not to be passed over
(since he has mentioned this noble Earl) that some of those who were Witnesses
against him at his Trial, appeared afterward to be leading men in the
Rebellion the Earl of Castlehaven joined in, and many more of that Faction,
whose kindness (in admitting his Lordship) he says he must never forget, being
then Members of Parliament in Ireland, had there voted him a Traitor, before
his hearing in Westminster Hall. Further the Earl of Castlehaven says, That the
States Officers and Soldiers not taking care enough to distinguish between
Rebels and Subjects, killing many, promiscuously forced him to take up Arms.
Considering besides, That the whole Nation had took up Arms for their own
Defense, particularly the Lords of the Pale, who yet (at the same time) desired
the Justices (be sure weight enough be laid on them) to send their Petition to
the King, which was refused, and (as a further discouragement) Sir John Read
(who was prevailed with to carry their Remonstrance to the King, with their
Grievances, not concealing his Message) was put to the Rack for his good will.

In brief his Lordship charges his siding with the Rebels ( whether inclined
thereto in Anger or Revenge. P. 21.) on these Motives.

1. To his not being received by the State. 2. To his being clandestinely
indicted of High Treason. 3. To the States Officers and Soldiers promiscuous
killing Rebels and Subjects. 4. To the States refusal to send the Rebels
Petition to the King. 5. To the Racking of Sir John Read, entrusted with the
Rebels Remonstrance of Grievances to the King.
Upon consideration of all which, He conceived there was no safety but in So
Catiline, Mihi indies magis animus accenditur, cum considero quae conditio
vitae futura sit nisi nosmetipsos vindicemus in Libertatem. Salust. p. 14.
Arms. (P. 17.)

The two first of these being answered in the third and fourth Paragraphs, we
reply as to the third, touching the promiscuous killing of Rebels and Subjects.
That the Conspiracy was so general, and there had been such unheard of
Villainies (not in any Age before) committed by the Irish e're his Majesty's
Forces could be imbodied, to assert his Power; That the Infection seemed to
have polluted the whole Kingdom, so as an enraged Army, justly incensed by many
(who at first had suffered by the Rebels) could hardly distinguish betwixt the
Nocent and Innocent. As at Santry December. 5. 1641. (strongly insisted on by
Nettervile) the Action there being not commenced till diverse of the Pale, many
in Connaught, and all the Irish Inhabitants of Ulster had confederated, and
committed open rebellious acts and cruelties against his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects. Nor was this which they call Murder of innocent Husbandmen, any
other than (upon Examination) found to be Justice on Rebels from whom the
active Rebels had daily relief, amongst which there were two Protestants. The
Sword once drawn, Legal Pleas are seldom heard, though I think his Lordship can
hardly produce one Example where the State (being seasonably informed) did not
(as far as the time permitted) exert their Interest to acquit the Innocent. The
Discipline too of his Majesty's Army was so well known, under the Conduct of so
honorable a Person (no enemy to them further than their Disloyalty justly
enforced him) and such worthy Officers, as few (who knew' them) will ever give
credit to a report that shall blast them in that particular. Besides, it must
be considered, that what cruel acts soever were done beyond the course of
ordinary Justice, the Objectors must be put in mind that they were primi in
culpa; and that the blood in Drogheda and elsewhere shed in Ireland, lies at
their Doors; for had they not raised and continued the Rebellion through his
Lordships access (and other Officers from abroad) to their Party, in all
probability a Sword to this day had not been drawn (at least continued) in that
Kingdom; and the assurance of what Force that united Kingdom would* have
contributed to his Majesty, might have prevented all the effusion of blood in
England. Nay, so tender was the State of giving the least offense to any that
under that pretense might skreen their Villainy, as some exceptions being taken
by diverse Lords and Gentlemen of the Pale, as if they should be involved in
these words, That some evil affected Irish Papists had conspired. etc. The
Lords Justices and Council (to show they intended thereby only such of the old
mere Irish in the Province of Ulster, as were then Actors in that Treason, and
others who adhered to them) published the 29. of October, 1641. their sense
thereof; which these discontented Gentlemen seemed then to be satisfied with.
Yet their hearts being bound up with the Rebels, it was not long before they
suffered (or rather caused) the Recruit going for Drogheda the 29. of November,
to be defeated at Gellingston Bridge, and within a few days after, the Lord
Gormanston (with many more of the Lords and prime Gentry of the Pale) struck up
an agreement with the Rebels at the Hill of Crofty, meeting afterward at the
Hill of Tarragh, where they produced an Answer to the Lords Justices Summons
December. 3. to consult with them for the safety of the Kingdom; and that before
ever the Northern Rebels (as they afterward alleged) forced them to a
compliance, for want of a sufficient supply from the State to resist them;
pretending they had no security for their safety. Which the L. Justices and
Counc. Dec. 13. gave them assurance of, upon the Word of the State, safely to
repair thither without danger of any trouble or stay whatsoever, positively
then affirming, that the Lords Justices and Council did never hear Sir Charles
Coot (whom they suggested to have devised a general Massacre upon those of
their Religion) ever to have counseled so impious or detestable a thing. And
to the same intent, advised the 9. of December, Luke Nettervile Esquire and others,
met at Swords, immediately to separate. However they feigned several fears,
which the State descended to clear, though to no purpose; so as the Torrent of
the Pale ran still to make up that Deluge. Yet that the clearness of the States
Intentions might further appear to wean all from any apprehensions of suspicion
of them, the Lords Justices at that time embraced the seeming Application of
the E. of Westmeath, Sir Morgan Cavenagh's feigned Protestations, and permitted
Sir Luke Fitz Gerald, Robert Harpool Esquire, and others, (against whom they
had more than ordinary proofs of their taking part with the first Conspirators)
peaceably to return to their habitations; as they did James Warren, and Friar
Paul Oneil (both examined at the Council Board) and were not without reason
suspected of the Rebels Party; which Indulgence they soon improved to the
defiance of the State, which (of 60 persons apprehended as justly suspected to
be in the Plot) caused only one of Fermanagh to suffer death, whom the Lord
Mac-guire confessed to be privy to the Plot.

Fourthly, As to the keeping back of Petitions from the King, by which his
Lordship will have it, That the whole Nation took up Arms for their defense; he
must be put in mind (he taking pleasure to be minded of what is more in others
knowledge than his,) that in the beginning of the Rebellion, the Irish had
never less reason to complain that their Grievances were not presented; For the
Commissioners of Parliament of Ireland, (*by whom the The King's Works, Vol. 2.
p. 569.
Rebellion was hatched) who had attended his Majesty with a Collection of all
Grievances, were returned with such high and unexpected condescensions, and
those especially relating to the Roman Catholics, that it was but in August
1641. (being the last Sessions) thought that the next Sessions of Parliament
would be principally to return his Majesty their acknowledgment, that (by
taking off all Discriminations and Incapacities) he had laid a most sure
foundation of Unity and Peace amongst his Subjects. Though there is a new Piece
come forth, entitled, A short View of the late Troubles in England, which
would abuse the World, as if the Committee from the Parliament of Ireland,
after nine months attendance, were, at his Majesty's going for Scotland,
referred to the Parliament of England, and afterward constrained to return
without any redress. Besides, the Lords Justices and Council did not conceal or
debar any thing that ever came to them from the Confederates, though
warrantably they might have done it; some things being so peremptory, that it
was not for them to admit of (being the Presentative of his Majesty) and others
of that ill consequence to the injured Protestants as (without a Comment) could
not (with their trust) be presented to his Majesty. All or most of which
Addresses (however accompanied with undutiful and irreverend expressions or
overtures) were with the first opportunity presented to his Majesty's view or
knowledge. About the 6. of November 1641. the Rebels of the County of Cavan
sent their presumptuous Propositions to the Lords Justices and Council, which
with their Answer, they forthwith certified to the L. Lieutenant the E. of
Leicester, to whom (by his Majesty's express Command) the Dispatches relating
to Ireland, were to be directed. About the tenth of the same Month the Longford
Letter to the Lord Dillon of Costiloe, full of pretended Grievances and
unreasonable Demands, as freedom of Religion, a Repeal of all Laws made to the
contrary, and the like; was presented to the State in behalf of the Rebels of
Longford; which having an answerable return, his Lordship and the Lord Taaff,
went into England, promoting that which afterward centered in a Cessation.
About the midst of December 1641. Sir Thomas Carey and Dr. Cale a Sorbonist,
offered to the Council Board several Propositions from the Rebels, presuming
(upon the straits that the State was brought to) that their insolent Demands
would not have been denied, which they were; but not without representing them
to his Majesty. The 23. of December 1641. seven Lords of the Pale (who had
declared by former Letters. That they would stand on their Guard, after that
they had joined with the Northern Rebels, in the Siege of Drogheda) sent
Letters to the Lords Justices, to which (though without prejudice to his
Majesty's Honor) they could not answer, yet they certified them to the Lord
Lieutenant. And about the 16. of March 1641. there was an Overture made to the
Lords Justices by a Letter to the Earl of Castlehaven, (who by his Memoirs
gives us occasion to reflect on these things) in the name of the United Lords
of the Pale, signed by Gormanston, Nettervile and Slane, for a Cessation of
Arms; after that (by his Majesty's Forces transmitted out of England, and 10000
complete fresh men in Ulster, besides the Scotch ten Regiments then in the
Field) the Irish were beaten from Drogheda by Sir Henry Tichborn; and that his
(...)ies Army was full Master of the Field in all parts of the Pale. To which
the Lords Justices and Council thought not fit to hearken; yet certified it to
the Lord Lieutenant, and did not as some The Brief Narrative.
maliciously suggest upon this Cause merely make his Lordship Prisoner. Such
another Paper from the Lord Mountgarret the 23. of March 1642. came to the Earl
of Ormond, Lieutenant General of his Majesty's Army, containing Grievances done
in England as well as Ireland, to show to the Lords Justices, which lay not in
their power to redress; which was also sent to the Lord Lieutenant to be shown
to his Majesty. And in August the Confederates sent to the Lieutenant General a
Petition directed to his Majesty, which his Lordship presented to the Lords
Justices, who forthwith sent it to his Majesty's Principal Secretary; and
thereupon a Commission was sent to the Marquess of Ormond to meet and hear what
the Rebels could say or propound for themselves; by Virtue of which, his
Majesty's Commissioners received the Rebels Remonstrance at Trym, March 17.
1642. A mere Rhapsody of scandalous Criminations upon the Government, and a
justification of their Rebellion; since (1644.) fully answered by a Person then
at the Helm, in a Book entitled, The false and scandalous Remonstrance of the
Inhumane and bloody Rebels of Ireland, worthy the Earl of Castlehaven's further
Information. This Remonstrance, at length, brought forth a Cessation, in hope
(as David Routh, titular Bishop of Ossory insinuated) that it would at length
prove the ruin of Heresy, and the firmer establishment of the Catholic Faith
and Interest. And in truth, whatsoever pretension there was for it, it proved a
snare to the English, and no advantage to his Majesty. After which, their
Agents were heard by his Majesty in Oxford, who at their departure (amongst
many excellent admonitions, worthy so intelligent a Prince) were advised, That
if they made haste to assist to suppress the English Rebellion, they might
confidently believe he would never forget to whose Merit he owed his
Preservation and Restoration, and then it would be in his absolute power to
vouchsafe such Graces to them as would not leave them disappointed of their
just and full expectations. Words sufficiently August. By which it is apparent,
that nothing that ever the Rebels pretended should come to his Majesty's Ears,
was obstructed by the Lords Justices or State: Notwithstanding his Lordship is
somewhat positive, that the Rebels Petitions (particularly those of the Pale)
were never sent to the King. Wherein he assumes the Bleeding Iphigenia's
Language, That the Irish to December. 23. 1674.
this day were never heard to speak for themselves, which (by what is before
cited) is fully disproved. Though their Addresses (I must again say) were bold
Capitulations, rather than dutiful Submissions, or acknowledgments of their
Guilts; which Father Peter Walsh (this Earls Ghostly Father, P. 127.) takes an
especial notice of, with a Resentment worthy himself that (in the Loy. form. f.
672.
Congregation at Dublin 1666. admitted with an unusual Favor) not one moved
for a general Petition to be exhibited to his Majesty, imploring his gracious
Pardon; notwithstanding the Rebellion 1641. or the behavior of the Clergy
Regular or Secular at Waterford under the Nuncio, 1646. or at Jamestown 1650.
even after the Nuncio's Departure; or that they fought against both Laws, and
those who had not only the Laws, but the King's special Commission, and brake
both Cessations 1643, 1647. both Peaces, 1646, 1648. treated for a Foreign
Protector, for the Alienation of the Crown, stood for Mac-Mahon's Book, That an
Irish Native might be chosen for their King. Yet that nothing on the States
part (which might induce the Rebels to a submission) might be omitted, they
published the 30. of October 1641. a Proclamation, tendering his Majesty's
Grace to all seduced Rebels, but none tendered themselves. And the first of
November following they set forth another Proclamation, drawn up by Mr. Plunket
the Lawyer, (afterward one of their Party) respecting those of the Pale, who
lay next to the Northern Rebels, that in 10 days they might submit, but they
joined in the same Rebellion. And the 12. of the same, the Lords Justices and
Council reprinted an Order of the Lords and Commons of the Parliament of
England, whereby they had power to bestow his Majesty's gracious Pardon to all
such as within a convenient time (to be declared by the Governors of that
Kingdom) should return to their due obedience, which effected nothing on the
Rebels. No more did his Majesty's Gracious Proclamation of the first of January
1641. under his Royal Signature and Privy Signet, commanding them to lay down
Arms. And when the Parliament met the 16. of November 1641. and there was a
necessity to prorogue it after two days, by reason of the present state and
condition wherein the Kingdom stood. The Lords Justices and Council were so
careful, that no Jealousies or Pretense should arise thence, as if his Majesty
would withdraw any of his Acts of Grace, that they, by his Majesty's
directions, did make known to the Parliament, That his Majesty would not depart
from any his former Favors promised to them for settling their Estates, to such
as should remain faithful and loyal. Nay so desirous were the Lords Justices
and Council to draw off from that Combination the Lords and Gentry of the Pale,
that Feb. 8. 1641. when they set Prices on the Rebels heads (to which they were
authorized,) they never named the Lords of the Pale, and but few of the Gentry
amongst the Conspirators, though in an insolent and most prodigious manner they
had acted with them. And when the Lords Justices employed a Committee of
Parliament to them, they scornfully rejected them, tearing the Order of
Parliament, and the Letter that accompanied them. Using no better the Lord
Moore, and others appointed to treat with them afterward; Nor (at another
time) some of their own Clergy, that if it had been possible they might have
won them to Obedience. Yet further, so desirous was the State to compose all
difference betwixt them and the Rebels, that after Sir Richard Barnewell and
Patrick Barnewell Esquire, both of the County of Mead, had joined with the
Northern Rebels, the State (upon their pretense, that if they might have a
Commission to Parley with the Rebels, they hoped to do some good for the quiet
of the Kingdom) granted them Commissions to that end; although it after
appeared (by a very frivolous and scornful return) that this was sought by them
only to gain some color of security for their Rebellious complying with the
Rebels, dealing thence most deceitfully in all things expected from the Lords
Justices and Council. Could there be greater evidence than these of his
Majesty's Governors inclination to Peace and Mercy? It is no wonder that the
Confederates, to effect their Empire, should make their way through any calumny
they can defame the State withal; that palliating their own Treachery, they
might colourably charge the State. Whereas the Irish were so far from being
provoked by the State, that no less a testimony than the Word of that great,
just and wise Prince, King Charles I. is extant to Posterity. That he did
extremely detest the odious Rebellion which the Recusants of Ireland had,
without ground or color, raised against him, his Crown and dignity. And as for
the Lords Justices and most of the Councils being of the Parliaments
Persuasion, it is an imputation so unjust, that the World may be defied to
evidence wherein they further agreed than to manage the War as it was left to
the Parliament, taking their best measures from the King himself. And thus much
I may add, that if exceptions were particularly taken against one of the Lords
Justices, the Times being ticklish and apt (on misconstructions) to disgust
some, the other (more than that he was his Colleague) was so far from being
excepted against, maugre whosoever has the countenance to face his Majesty
with the contrary; that he was instituted again with Sir Henry Tichborn in the
Government. Nor to this day did ever any, save some Bigot in Popery and
Rebellion, blast his memory or actions; unless being reduced to little, for
being a perfect Englishman, he may be taxed with too much credulity to trust to
Acts and Promises, when he might have secured his Arrears out of the public
Revenues, then at his disposure, and yet not have tripled his Estate to what it
was before the Rebellion.

Fifthly, As to the Racking of Sir John Read: It does not appear by whose Order
it was done; nor consequently who was obliged to answer this Objection. But it
is well known the said Read faltered much in the pretense of his business. Nor
is it a thing to be wondered at, that one, suspicious, and a Stranger, should
be strictly examined in a time of general Conspiracy, the course being often
used for Discovery, though not for Evidence. But the Lord Castlehaven puts us
in mind, ( P. 12.) He was his Majesty's sworn Servant, a Stranger to the
Country, unengaged, and an Eyewitness of the Remonstrants Proceedings: That he
was his Majesty's sworn Servant, may be likely by the Impost he had upon
Butter, procured for him from the King by some chief men of the Society as a
L'Estr. Hist. C. 1. f. 182.
Reward for his detestable Service in perverting a Minister and his Family to
the Popish Religion; in whose house in Long-Acre the Jesuits Plot (discovered
by Andreas ab Habernfield, a Nobleman of Bohemia) was contrived against the
King and Kingdoms. By Nation he was a Scot, in Office a Secular Jesuit,
Lieutenant Colonel to Sir Henry Bruce a Papist, in the Earl of Strafford's new
raised Army of 8000 in Ireland, and (as his Lordship says) happily an
Eyewitness of the Remonstrants Proceedings, therefore the more to be suspected
being like to palliate that to the King, which he was privy to in so
treacherous a manner. But we cannot allow that he was unengaged, for that (as
we have shown) he was formerly interessed in an abominable Plot, and we never
heard that he detested it since, and was of the same Faith with the
Conspirators, a So termed in the Impeachment against Fa. Philips, Straff.
Trial, f. 752.
Substitute of the Jesuits. All that could be wrung from him (though his
Lordship will have it, that he carried a Remonstrance to the King to beg his
pardon for what the Confederates had done) was that he had a Petition from a
few particular persons about their own concern, not one word of a Remonstrance
of Grievances. So as hence it is clear, the State ought not to be taxed for
keeping back any Petitions from the King. Neither could that, or his Lordships
other pretenses be any just motive to desert the State. It being more rational
to have adhered to the King's Justice than (in defiance thereof) to fly to his
declared Enemies.

But the Earl of Castlehaven having taken his way toward the Mountains of
Wickloe, he cared little for the Justices; that is, for his Majesty's
Authority. Nor was it a wonder, he intending to associate himself with those
who had renounced God and the King; and so hastening to Kilkenny in two or three
days he joined with the Supreme Council of the Confederate Catholics, entering
into their Oath of Association, by which all were bound to obey them, being
persuaded thereto through the Love the Country bore him, and his Relation, in
reference to his three Sisters married amongst them. Notwithstanding his
Majesty's Proclamation Jan. 1. 1641. Declaring All adhering to those lewd and
wicked persons then in Rebellion in his Kingdom of Ireland, to be Rebels and
Traitors against his Royal Person, and Enemies to his Royal Crown of England
and Ireland; Ordering them to be prosecuted with Fire and Sword, as Persons who
(by their high Disloyalty against him their lawful and undoubted King and
Sovereign) had made themselves unworthy of any Mercy or Favor. And
notwithstanding his late Majesty's and his Parliaments difference at that time,
whereby the siding of such a Person of Quality as his Lordship with the Rebels,
brought in Question his Majesty's countenancing of them, when in prosecuting of
them, the Royal Army every where succeeded to their chastizement. Yet in
despite of this success, his Majesty's Proclamations, and the horrid Examples
of Cruelty the Rebels had committed on the English in that Kingdom in a time of
settled Peace, without the least occasion given, as his Lordship words it in his
Epistle to the Reader, He swore to the hazard of his Life and Estate, to
assist* prosecute and maintain their Association. As to which Oath I shall not
say much, it being elsewhere answered, and particularly well commented on in
the Letter to the Earl of Castlehaven. (P. 50.) But I shall mind him of what
the Act of Settlement (somewhat slightly spoken of by his Lordship) says, That
the Confederates disowned and rejected his, and his Royal Father's undoubted
Right to Ireland, even while they (in the outward form of their proceedings)
treacherously used their Majesty's names; withal, impiously seeming by words
and shows to swear unto that, which by the whole Series of their Deeds they
denied. So as whatsoever satisfaction his Lordship took in the Model of their
Government, or the pretense of their Oath (with which he was much pleased) this
Act of Settlement must brand their Proceedings to Posterity. And since the E.
of Castlehav. is so often pleased to bring in the Marq. of Ormond as consulting
with him, I cannot omit how his Excellency takes notice in his Letter to
Loughreogh, that notwithstanding the Confederates continual Declarations of
Loyalty to his Majesty, and their sincerity and earnestness to advance his
Service and Interest; they have continually by themselves and their known
Instruments, practiced the direct contrary. Which considered I cannot think his
being one of the Supreme Council, and General of the Horse under Preston
(before the Cessation) could ever sublimate his Birth or Loyalty. For in
imitation of Good the President is preferred, so is Imitation in Evil worse than
the President, and that yet worse, where there is more time for Deliberation.
His Lordship joined not with the Consederates in many Months after their
Rebellion, when he saw a Design of setting up a Supreme Council, in opposition
to his Majesty's Authority; and was not ignorant of the unpunished Villainies
and Murders by the Confederates.

And now being seated in the Supreme Council, where he Walsh s. 115.
made up the 25. with relation to no Province, but the Kingdom in general; He
observes:

First, That if a Letter came to them written in Irish, it would be wondered
at, and hardly could one be found to read it. (P. 23.) Thereby implying that
the Council was composed merely of English, the worse to be liked, not having
English spirits. But it is evident few or none (except himself) were other than
excellently skilled in the Irish. What else did Darcy, Martin, the Lords
Mountgarret and Muskery, the rest of the Commissioners, their Archbishops of
Dublin and Tuam, with Tirlogh O Neil do there? Every of which (besides all
their Covents, of which there were several in Kilkenny) used it frequently as
their Native Speech, ordering several of their Acts, sometimes in Irish as well
as English, to be printed at Waterford by Thomas Bowrke, Printer to the
Confederate Catholics of Ireland.

Secondly, That they were not in Case to bring to Justice those that begun the
Rebellion. What Justice he means, is not for me to divine* but it is apparent
that what those did, the Supreme Council countenanced; else they would not have
moved by joint Council, lived on one public Stock of Maintenance; nor had the
victory of one been the victory of the other, which through the Scene was
equally acknowledged.

Thirdly, His Lordship observes, that he never saw any of them esteemed or
advanced. I know not what he esteems Advancement, but I find in the General
Assembly Sir Phelim O Neil, Tirlogh O Neil, Philip Mac Mulmore O Rely, Hubert
Fox, Pierce Fitzgerald* John Bellew, John Stanley, James Flemming, Roger Moor,
etc. All men at first proscribed. And his Lordship tells us of Owen O Neil in
the great and notable Assembly at Waterford. And were I well acquainted with
the List of the Supreme Council, no question but I might find some that
appeared first in Rebellion brooding there, as others to the end entertained as
Generals and supreme Officers in their Army; than which, what can be more of
Esteem, or of greater Advancement?

In the next place his Lordship takes notice of his good Fortune at Birrh, to
begin with an action of charity. (P. 23.) And certainly the effect was good,
but whether from a principle of right Charity (which proceeds from a love of
God to his Creatures) or Policy, I shall not busy my self to conclude. But as
the Case stood, his Majesty's Army was so prosperous in all parts, as had any
less been done (than what he undertook) the return would have certainly been
very severe; though when the best he can pretend to is summed up at Birrh, it
must be concluded he was fortunate in Disloyalty.

It is not my intention to speak any thing of his Lordships Encounters (they
are under consideration) his P. 67.
success in appeasing Mutinies, his P. 87.
Counsels, and the P. 73, etc.
Mercy he showed to any, (with which he seems to be much satisfied;) no man
doubts but his inbred Gallantry, Education and Experience ( P. 115. 119.) in
this and other Wars (in which he had been long trained) led him to many
Attempts, all could not be unfortunate, Policy as well as Arms being often
prevalent. Though for that ( P. 33.) wherein he succeeded against Sr. Charles
Vauafor, so many miscarriages fell out to impede Sir Charles's success, as the
Encounter there rather resembled an Incursion than a Battle; and may parallel
the great Generals Parties attempt at Fienagh, where the Horse being sent over
to skirmish, the English mingling with them on a sudden, the Foot could do
nothing, but through fear to kill their own, left the Bridge, Castle* and all
free to the Enemy, ( P. 46.) And for those who were killed after quarter given
at Cloghlea Castle, the Act was so much resented by Sir Charles as (had he come
off at the Pass his Lordship encountered him) the manager of that
unsaithfulness had been no less severely punished than those his Lordship
mentions ( P. 67.) who (contrary to the Conditions given by his Men to the
Castle, he has forgotten the name of) were sadly used by his Soldiers,
rifled, wounded, slain.

Not long after this, it seems the Marquess of Ormond's Letter came by a
Trumpeter to the Supreme Council then at Ross, who was quickly dispatched with
a slight Answer, (P. 35.) which the Earl of Castlehaven resenting (on
consultation with others) returned from the Supreme Council a Letter to his
Excellency, That they had summoned a General Assembly, in order to acknowledge
the King's gracious favor in naming him his Commissioner to hear their
Grievances and redress them. Which may be well looked on as a Reflection, how
far he had deviated, and a respect to his Excellency; whilst it cannot but lay
a foul aspersion on the Supreme Council, who could be so insolent as to
dispatch a slight Answer to his Majesty's Condescentions. Though the 8. of July
afterward his Lordship joining with the said Supreme Council* in returning the
insufferable Answer they sent to the States See Hist: of the Execrable Irish
Rebel: f.128.
Warrant for the Release of Synnot, can hardly be wiped off with a tolerable
excuse.

This Letter soon after brought on a Treaty, which ended in the Cessation at
Sigginstown, September. 15. 1643. till which was effected, all Parties (writes
his Lordship, P. 36.) labored to get into possession of what they could. This
in the King's Party was very tolerable, but as to his (intending thereby to
retain by force his Majesty's Castles, to out his good Subjects of their
Inheritance, and to keep up their usurped Authority) was looked on as very
unjust and insolent. Especially when his Majesty's Commission of Grace (for a
Cessation of Arms) was in execution, and his Prime Commissioner (near the place
his Lordship besieged) employing his Officers to procure necessary Provisions
for him. However the Earl of Castlehaven proceeded in that manner to a
Cessation, which in truth proved but a Stratagem to draw the English Forces out
of Ireland, that the Confederates might reign alone. After which his Lordship
was chosen (by the General Assembly) Generalissimo, (Owen O Neil being thereof
disappointed) of which and his proceeding afterward (being that they seemed
more to respect the King's Affairs) I shall not say much, his Memoirs having
spoken sufficiently. And as to the Lord Inchiquin's changing Parties, (which he
often reflects on) his Lordship has expressed his sense, though in justification
of the Lord Inchiquin more need not be said than what he in his Letter to
Colonel Jones June 23. 1649. there says for himself, That he had changed the
Party, not the Cause, bidding him make all things the same they were pretended,
and he was the same he ever was. But to proceed, The Lord Castlehaven writes,
(P. 54, 56.) That he served not the Confederate Catholics after the Service he
had done them in his Expedition in Munster. Though he accounts it a kindness to
have been consided in by them, whom we are able to make good, did first assume,
usurp and exercise the Power of Life and Death, make Peace and War, Levy and
Coin Money, and did many other Acts of Sovereign Authority; concluding in that
excellent Model of Government (P. 22.) he takes the freedom to commend, That no
Temporal Government or Jurisdiction should be assumed, kept or exercised within
that Kingdom, or any Province thereof, than what is approved or instituted by
their General Assembly. Considering which, how his Lordship should account it a
kindness to be entertained by such a Consederacy, being a Peer of England, and
descended thence from an ancient Stock of Worth and Honor, I must confess I
have not yet arrived at that Morality to understand it such. Though to complete
this Government the Popish Lawyers were principal Instruments, making use of
their Learning and Skill for subversion of Government and good Order,
seasonably observed by the Person of Honor in his Letter to the E. of
Castlehaven, and may (I hope) for the future be an item in the States
admittance of such to the Bar. And his Lordship must pardon the shrewd Memory
of the* English, if they call to mind how (in so bloody a Cause) he could join
with the Confederates against such detestations of that Rebellion, as his late
Majesty signified almost in every Declaration and Message; and is (in his
present Majesty's Declaration November. 5.) remembered as a heinous Rebellion, and
unnatural Insurrection. Which since the Receipt of the Letter from the Person
of Honor, the Earl of Castlehaven is convinced, or (at least is content) to
acknowledge in his Epistle to the Reader (added since he published his Memoirs)
that it was a Rebellion all the Water of the Sea cannot wash off that Nation.
But to help that, his Lordship is acquainted (in the Col. Letter P. 10.) That
he was ordered to go to him, and use his endeavors to persuade him to hasten a
Peace, for which (from the beginning of the War*) his Lordship had always
labored: with respect doubtless to his Oath of Association, by which he was
obliged not directly nor indirectly to do any Act prejudicial to the Cause he
had undertook to maintain, ( viz.) the Exercise of the Roman Catholic Faith
and Religion, etc. throughout the Kingdom, and all that should engage therein.
An Oath absolutely destructive to the English and their Interest. Certainly
there is not any thing that bespeaks a Christian more than a Mind conciled to
Truth and Union. But how those ends should meet in the Peace he designed, was
very unlikely, considering his Majesty's Concessions to the Adventurers, the
inestimable loss the English Protestants had suffered, and the Enquiry there
ought to have been for the innocent Blood poured forth like Water, in Ireland;
the least of which never came under consideration. In as much as it is notably
observed by the Person of Honor, ( P. 58.) That the Irish did the English more
hurt, and advantaged themselves more by the Cessation and two first Peaces,
than ever they did or could do by open Force after the first Massacre; nothing
(writes Colonel Jones in his Letter to the Marquess of Ormond, March 31. 1649.)
being to the English Interest in that Kingdom more pernicious and apparently
destructive. However (after near three years deliberation) his Majesty was
forced to the Peace 1646. in assurance of a vigorous Assistance, as before Act
of Settlement, f. 10.
he had been forced to the Cessation. And this not as Walsh's Reply to the
Pers. of Q. P. 102.
one will have it, who (to wipe off the Force his Majesty was put to) will have
the Expression to be meant of those that erected that odious Court for taking
away the life of the Excellent King Charles the First, and not of the
Confederates; whereas the Cessation 1643. and Peace 1646. (to which his Majesty
says his Father was forced) was some years before that odious Court was ever
thought on, or erected. Upon the breach of which Peace, the Earl of
Castlehaven, observes, ( P. 80.) That Story mentions not any one thing that had
so fatal a consequence. The Articles of which being notoriously violated (it is
no matter, whether through the Nuncio's standing for Glamorgans Peace,
treacherously obtained, and disallowed of by the King, or the Confederates
private dissentions, both proceeding from animosities to the State.) But
certain it is, That all the Rebels Proceedings, and their Demands, however
condescended to, were insolent Treason. Besides the Lord Lieutenant was
infamously used, forced out of the Kingdom, the Parliament then sitting at
Dublin, Registring it to Posterity, That the Irish were an insolent and, upon
all advantages, a perfidious and bloody Enemy. None accompanying his Excellency
to Dublin in his hazardous Retreat thithes* when he and the Protestant Army
were designed to be cut off by Owen O Neil, but the Earl of Castlehaven, (P.
75.) who, upon the Rebels blocking up of Dublin, advised the Lord Lieutenant, (
P. 78.) rather to deliver it to the Parliament than the Rebels; for that when
the King should have England he would have Ireland with it* which otherwise
with the Nuncio and his Party might remain separate. A right Conclusion, and
that (if it were his advice,) determined for the best. The Marqs Letter to Col.
Jones, March 17* 1649.
Sure it is, the Marquess of Ormond chose to capitulate with Jones and others
employed by the two Houses of Parliament, to deliver up Dublin into their
hands, and other places, for that he could no longer hold them, rather than to
suffer them to be taken by an Army instigated by a Foreigner, to the danger of
the whole Kingdom, and the destruction of those he had so long protected.

Afterward I find his Lordship for some time retired, in the interim the Lord
Inchiquin, the Lord Taaff, and other considerable Persons united. Upon which
the Marquess of Ormond, at the request of the Confederates to the Queen and
Prince, was wrought upon to reassume his Lieutenantship, with whom the E. of
Castlehav* returned. The Lord Lieutenant entered upon this Employment, when the
King was in his greatest trouble; solemnly then concluding with all imaginable
satisfaction to the Confederates, (though highly dishonorable to The Pers. of
Hon. Letter. P. 27.
the Crown of England, and destructive to the Protestants) the Peace of 1648.
as before he had done the Peace of 1646. upon the frequent commands he had* not
to let slip the means of settling that Kingdom fully under his Majesty's
obedience, which none could blame the King to make, upon difficult Conditions,
That he might get such a United Power of his own Subjects, as might have been
able (with Gods blessing) to have prevented that infamous and horrid Parricide
which ensued. Though generous souls would rather have adventured all Interests,
than to have enhaunced their price on his Majesty's necessities. But to come to
the Peace, which the Confederates (as his Lordship writes, P. 81.) confirmed
and sealed with the blood of more than 20000 of their best men, who lost their
lives to maintain it, refusing in the mean while all Offers of Peace, and that
even to the very last, from the Parliament.

It would take up more time than can be dispensed with (at present) to answer
all that is here alleged.

I cannot say but as many as his Lordship affirms may be lost of the Irish; but
that they fell in maintenance of this Peace, he must give me leave to doubt:
In as much as Owen O Neil, the Earl of Antrim, and all the Northern Rebels
refused to submit thereunto. Whose assistance to the other Party he cannot
forget, and on what grounds they became Mercenary to Sir Charles Coot, no more
than that no Towns that the Confederates had but Kilkenny would receive a
Garrison, (P. 42.) And I am confident it is not out of his memory what the
Clergy did at Jamestown, August 12. 1650. two days after that they had sent the
Bishop of Dromore and Doctor Kelly to persuade the Lord Lieutenant to leave the
Kingdom, claiming thereby a Power Paramount to his Majesty's Authority,
seconding their Excommunication with daily affronts, searching for him at
Galway as for a Criminal person, their Clergy denying to revoke their
Excommunication, or to give assurance to him, or the Commissioners of Trust,
for not attempting the like for the future. The Commissioners too of Trust (on
whom much was reposed) being not all of like integrity. The Hist, of the Ir.
Reb. f* 227, 233.
The over balance of the Government being clearly in the Irish hands. Others
whom some cried were Ormonists, being upon the matter Ciphers, as eminently
appeared in the Conference at The Hist. of the Ir. Reb. f. 233.
Kilkenny, and yet 20000 lost their lives to maintain the Peace of 1648. This
Noble Earls Memoirs furnish us with Actions of a notable and active General,
such as engaged his Soldiers in Judgment as well as Duty, (P. 136.) so as it
may be expected with the Persian General, that he knew every Soldier by his
name, and therefore might the more particularly affirm that 20000 fell in
maintenance of the Peace of 1648. Yet who shall consider the Premises, and
those who afterward submitted, will believe some unites are wanting to
complete his Arithmetic. It may be he has forgot that Captain Stafford (a
Roman Catholic) yielded up the Castle of Wexford unto Cromwell, and entered
himself into his Service, by which there ensued a notable effusion of blood.
And I see it is out of his mind* how a Party of the Confederates contracted
with Ireton to give an Inlet for his Army into Limerick, by securing a Port for
that purpose; when, at the same time, Hugh O Neil their Governor opposed it.
And though he has not forgot how he hindered the General Assembly met at
Loghreogh (upon the Marquess of Clanrickards entry on the Government) to agree
with the Parliament; yet it cannot but be remembered, how unanimously they
treated about it; so as what was prevented in the General, Parties afterward
concluded severally. As May 12. 1652. all under the Earl of Westmeath and the
Lord Muskery (with whom there were several Lords, Knights and Persons of
Quality comprehended,) concluded an Agreement with the Parliament, though
others dissented by reason that they could not have the like Conditions, not
for any affection to the King's Cause, or in maintenance of the Peace, 1648.
but by reason the bloudiness of their Crimes could never be absolved. This
being the truth, how may it be said, That to the end they refused all Offers of
Peace to the Parliament. Vind. Cath. p. 208.
Non defuerunt (writes an Author of the Conspiracy) Catholici, proh pudor!
maxim Paci and Ormonio hactenus adversarii, qui hisce Cromwellii legibus sese
subderent. More we might say, but the time wastes. However we cannot draw off
till we have somewhat considered his Lordships Charge, ( P. 81.) That since his
Majesty's happy Restoration, the Estates of such as maintained the Peace to
the last, have been given away by the Acts of Settlement, some very few
excepted. The bleeding Iphigenia (a leading man in the Supreme Council) first
raised this Cry, Wonders, writes he, being done since his Majesty's
Restoration, Rebels are made honest men, and honest men Rebels, by the King's
Royal Pleasure. Excellent language! and that, it seems, which is the sense of
the principal Romanists at this day; else the late unfortunate Viscount
Stafford would not so readily (as he is charged by the eloquent and judicious
Lord Chancellor) have reviled his Majesty for misplacing his Bounty, and
rewarding none but Traitors and Rebels. Which agreeing with what we have
mentioned, may be reason sufficient to fix his Lordship a while here centering
in Opinion. Not that I do deny, but happily there were some (who after their
first defection) faithfully performed what they promised (more out of Interest
than Duty,) and are not satisfied to their expectations. Yet it is to be
weighed, that the Peace was made with the Community, not particular Persons,
with the Collective Body of the Irish, not any dissenting Clergy: so as the
Breach being almost General, Individuals could not have the benefit thereof.
Nor has the Act of Settlement declared any Estates forfeited for fighting for
his Majesty, but for being guilty of the horridst Rebellion History ever
recorded. Neither does his Majesty give any part of such forfeited Estates as a
Reward to any for fighting against him, as if thereby from being Rebels they
were made honest men: But thereby he is graciously pleased to continue and
confirm the Estates in the hands of his Protestant Subjects, formerly possessed
thereof as Adventurers or Soldiers, redeeming their Error of a Temporal
Defection by arresting the first Opportunity, (without consulting the success
thereof, or capitulating with their Swords in their hands, as did the Irish) to
hazard their lives for his Majesty's Restoration: so as it seems somewhat
harsh, to say, That the Estates of some few only were exempted, when his
Majesty in his gracious Declaration for the Settlement of Ireland, November 30.
1660. says, We cannot doubt but that all who have merited from us, will
confess that we have been so far from being failing to them, that we have as
well provided for them, as after so great troubles and confusions, and after
such blessed circumstances of our Restoration, they could reasonably expect.
And it is clear by the Act pursuant to that Declaration, that the most eminent
and considerable Persons (even such as soon after those who began the Rebellion
in the North) who took up Arms, summoned, by the Intrusion of the Clergy, a
general Congregation, they by a packed Party of bloody Papists in Rebellion and
Confederacy, a General Assembly, those a Supreme Council concurring with the
malice and hatred of the former, who necessitated his Majesty to a Cessation,
fetched in the Nuncio, abjured both Peaces, confederated with the Clergy, kept
the Lord Lieutenant out of the principal Towns, and twice forced him out of the
Kingdom, who was their Asylum, their Advocate, compassionately designing
excellent things for them, though with great hardship and damage to the
English. These afterward ascribing all his Actions, his Counsels, how
provident, how sincere soever, foedae Proditioni, (writes Vind. Cath. p. 223.)
whilst he suffered much calumny for his desire of preserving many of them that
fell into his hands, as some of the Assembly could witness, who were by his
means preserved, and might testify as much: Treating however with Foreigners
for Aid and Protection, are restored in Blood and Estate, not respecting a
Condition in that Act, That such as entered into the Roman Catholic
Confederacy at any time before the Articles of Peace 1648. should not be
restored as innocent Papists. And his Lordship dates their kindness in
admitting him to their Confederacy, An. 1642. And are these with his Lordship
only a few? When his Majesty had a Prospect of his Return for England, he was
so condescending (as having notice that Edmund Reily Archbishop of Armagh had
attempted to instigate the Male contents against his coming in, promising to
that end great assistance from a conjunction of the stronger Part of the Roman
Catholic Irish) that he had Don Stephano de Gameno (then Spanish Ambassador
with the States) spoken to, that by a Command from Rome, the said Reily might
be revoked immediately out of Ireland, else he should be put to the Stress of
signing a Warrant for his Execution. Considering which, as his Majesty's other
condescentions, it looks ill that so signal a Grace should be so diminutatively
expressed; as if a few only were exempted by his clemency. But to return to
his Memoirs.

The Earl of Castlehaven having been retired, for some difficulties concerning
Command, (P. 96.) is now joined again with the Army before Dublin, quartering
near Rathmines, the success of which, his Lordship not being in chief Command,
(P. 136.) I shall not mention; no Army or Party of Army being ever beaten so by
an Enemy as to lose their ground to the end of the Fight where he commanded in
Chief: yet his Excellency had many gallant Persons with him; and this Lord was
designed a particular Post, which he does not tell us how he quitted. However,
the blame is not always to be fixed where it may most justly be placed. Nor if
the Lord Inchiquin had not gone into Munster with the 1100 Horse, as he was
ordered to do at a Council of War See the M. of Ormond's Letter to Loghreog. f.
110.
, who is here 97.
and elsewhere 63, 64, 83, 84, 97, 98, etc.
reflected on as if it had been a particular Project of his own, could the
Contingencies of that day have been secured, all the Gallantry that was
afterward showed, being not sufficient to redeem the misfortune (I will not
say the miscarriage) of that day which in time brought on the Earl of
Clanrickard to be Deputy, before (writes his Lordship, P. 116,) no more than a
Spectator; whereas in November 1646. he was made Lieut. General of the Army and
the great Confident of the Lord Lieutenant and Confederates.

Hence the Earl of Castlehaven, upon the Lord Lieutenants retreat into France,
made a Noble Figure in the following War, though it is observed, not without
severity and fierce Prosecution of the English. And it cannot but be said, ( P.
112.) that (according to his Excellencies command) he kept a bussle as long as
he could, and seasonably opposed the Duke of Lorrain's Agent, ( P. 125.) hating
to buy a supply so dear, as to give footing, or color of pretense, or title to
any foreign Prince, on hopes of succor thence. Which redounds much to his
honor, though the Abbot of St. Katherines did land, and by the Confederates
(met at Galway) was treated with, without the privity of the Deputy who was not
far from them. Afterward not being able to bussle further, his Lordship, the
L. Castlehav. (P. 124.) was dispatched into France for Succors, which failing
he procured, the Lord Deputy his Majesty's Letter acknowledging his good
Service, ordering him that he should make the best Conditions for himself and
Party, that he could. Which was the last of the Earl of Castlehaven's
Employments; but remains a standing honor to his Lordship, and a Justice due
to the Marquess of Clanrickard's Merits.

FINIS.

