An Exact and Faithful Account of the late BLOODY ENGAGEMENT BETWEEN Captain
Booth, Commander of the Adventure, AND HODGE ALLII Captain of the Two Lions and
Crown of Algier, otherwise called The great Genoese, a Ship of 40 Guns, 327
Turks and Moors, and 88 Christian Slaves on Board. On the 16th. and 17th. of
September, 1681, as it was communicated from the said Captain to his Friend
Cadiz: And thence by Letter, of the 18 th. of October, New-Stile, communicated
to his Friend, In LONDON
SIR,
THIS comes to give you an account of my good Fortune in taking of the Two
Lions and Crown of Algier, commonly known and called by the Name of The Great
Genoese, being a Ship of Forty and more Guns; at present mounted but with 36
and four Pederoes: having on Board 327 Turks and Moors, and 83 Christian
Slaves, Commanded by one Hodge Allij a Dane Renegado, born at Copenhagen, with
a Relation of our whole Engagement.

Viz.

In Cruising alone between Cape Spartel and Cape Trafeldegar, with the
WindEasterly, on the 16th of September, about dawning of the day, we Chased a
Saitee into Barach, which belonged to France. My Chasing the Saitee proved very
lucky, for in standing off from the Land, gave me sight of this Algerine, which
I have already mentioned to you above.

At my first giving him Chase, he had an English Pink in a Tow, which he
immediately cut off, seeing me come so fast upon him, and notwithstanding my
coming up with him so fast, he hoisted out his Boat, and took the Turks and
Moors out of the said Pink, I being distant from him three Leagues, two English
Slaves that were in the Turks Boat, got out of her into the Pink, and seeing
the Turks in a great disorder, and fear upon them, they hid themselves in the
Pinks Hold; by which means they made their escape, I coming within Call of the
Pink, and seeing two Englishmen there, I gave them order to follow me, which
they did for one hour and a half, then the Pink lay by, and I saw no more of
her.

Betwixt one and two in the Afternoon, I came up along the Algerines Side, and
after we had fired our great and small Shot into her, she being very nigh, I
laid him on board before I fired another Gun, much to the Turks disadvantage, I
being so far forward as his Bow, lying so till he shot my weather Brace off, of
my Fore-yard, and Fore-top-Sail, he having the Wind upon the Quarter, forced me
a head of him, but before he could get clear of me, I had time to cut away his
Sprit-Sail-Yard, which fell under his Bow, and stopped his way, and I laid him
on board the other Bow, but could not get cross his Harser, so as to hinder his
Ships steeridge, although I laid him on board twice after.

I having by fortune a double proportion of Hand-Granadoes, threw them in
amongst the Turks, which did them great damage, and gave us opportunity of
killing them without small Shot.

His last time of clearing himself of me, I shot his Mainmast down, it being
then about 6 in the Evening, notwithstanding the loss of his Mainmast, I found
him make stout resistance, he working his Ship so well before the Wind, I could
not board him, but to my disadvantage, we fighting still within Pistol Shot,
till eight or nine in the Evening.

The Algerine having in this time so much disabled me in my Masts and Rigging,
I was forced to fall a Stern to mend my Rigging, and bring new Topsails to my
Yards.

The loss of my men was so considerable, that I was forced to new quarter them,
not having one man left on my Quarter Deck, saving one or two, but was killed
or wounded, which gave the Algerine opportunity of bringing another Fore-Sail
and Fore-top-Sail to his Yard, he firing most part of the time his Stern-Chase
at me, until about twelve or one at night.

When I got up with him again, and continued fighting each other very close,
but did not think fit to board them, by reason of my Mast being very much
disabled, we fighting before the Wind, it continuing still Easterly.

About nine in the morning, having taken a man from each Gun below, where they
could best spare them, to man those Guns on our Quarter Deck, one of the Kings
Cripples being Quartered there, to carry Powder for that place, having three
Carteridges of Powder in his hand, went into the Round-House to secure himself
from the Shot, we not knowing what was become of the man, till a great Shot
from the Enemy came into the Round-House, and shot the three Carteridges of
Powder which he had by him, which took fire, and blew him but of the
Round-House upon our Quarter Deck, and with him all our Grenades, which were
about seven or eight that were left, which Grenades did kill and wound every
man that was by me, I escaped very narrowly among the rest, being hurt in the
Neck by one of the Granado Shells.

Immediately after the Algerine's Foremast went by the Board, I being so
advantagiously placed on his Bow, that he immediately called for Quarter.

When we took Possession of our Prize, we found the Captain wounded, and five
of his Under-Captains, he having in all seven, four of which being Dutch and
Hamborough Renegadoes, the other being Nephew to Baba Hastan Governor of
Algier, and an old Turk, called by the name of Abram Rees, who was formerly
Admiral of Algier, and came that Voyage for his pleasure; the other a Moor.

The Christians tell me, the Ship had certainly yielded when she lost her
Mainmast, had it not been for that old Commander, Abram Rees, he still
encouraging the Turks, telling them of his former Success he has had against
the Christians, naming his fighting with 3 Dutchmen of War, and another time
his fighting Sir Richard Beach in the Hampshiee, with several other good
Actions.

Not having men to officiate those works that were necessary to be done, as you
may judge, when I had but 140 Men and Boys serviciable on Board when I began to
engage, not having opportunity of manning my self since my engaging. The
Golden-Horse was a great means I judge of my having so many men killed and
wounded, which were in number, fifty five, of which twenty one were killed out
right, and several others mortally wounded, which we do not expect to live,
among those killed, was the Minister, my Brother, a Voluntier, the Boat-Swain,
the Chief-Mate, the Coxon.

My two other Volunteers, Mr. Row was blown up, but I Hope will do well, Mr.
Woolfran Cornwall was shot in the Breast, and afterward shot through the upper
part of his Body, but is still alive, and in a fair way of Recovery.

LONDON, Printed for E. L. by John Gain, and are to be Sold by Mrs. Andrews in
Lambs-Chappel, 1681.


