A KEY TO HELMONT. OR, A SHORT INTRODUCTION To the better understanding of the
THEORY and METHOD Of the most Profound Chemical Physicians.

LONDON: Printed for John Starkey, at the Mitre near Temple Bar. 1682.

I Should not afford so short a discourse as this, the solemnity of a Preface,
were it not chiefly designed to apologize for its brevity. For I doubt I shall
be blamed for endeavoring to wrap up, or rather hint at so great and useful
Truths in so few words, without many Arguments, or much circumlocution, though
I produce some here and there, and enough (as I conceive) to convince the
considerate and impartial. I confess, I have assiduously avoided running into
long controversies, and taken up only what lay in my way, and was necessary for
a very short elucidation of my Hypothesis. And this I chose to do for two
Reasons: First, That my Reader might in short see Helmont's, and other the
ablest and truest Adeptists, chief foundation, main aim and method of curing,
without leading him into the confusion, which a Labyrinth of Arguments may do.
And Secondly, Since I intend this only as a preliminary discourse to an Epitomy
of Helmont, which I design (if God send me life and health) to prepare for the
Press in some time; I thought it not fit to anticipate, or rob that noble
Author, but let him speak for himself, since he abounds with so many, so
excellent, and so clear Arguments, as will beyond controversy evince the truth
of this Hypothesis, and all its dependencies. Neither would I have you think,
that I esteem Helmont to be the only man that was Master of the noblest
Arcana's, but that I have the like veneration for a great many other men's
Medicines; but I rather choose to call this, a Key to him, because he has writ
more fully of the Chemical Theory and method of curing, than any other I know;
the discovery of which to the world, is my chief design. And though I here
promise the Reader, that I will render these parts of him which are
fundamentally Theorical, as plain, short, and as intelligible as possibly I
can; yet expect not, that I will prostrate those Medicines of his (which I
understand) to every vulgar capacity, but shall faithfully report them in his
own words, since I am very sensible, that such prostration, in setting the
ignorant, careless and covetous to work, will speedily be the ruin of the
noblest Arcana's. And though it is said, that Helmont was good in pulling down,
and not in setting up; I presume, that what is said in this little discourse,
the ground and reason whereof I borrowed from him, being well considered, and
duly prosecuted, will convince the partial world, that there was never so
true, so sound, so commodious, and so useful a structure built in Physic. I
shall only desire thee, Reader, impartially to consider it, and operate
accordingly; and I am confident, that thou will never want Medicines to
satisfy thy self, and all that will see, of the truth of this Doctrine, though
perhaps thou may not attain to Medicines of the highest Class now known. That
it may prosper for the good and relief of miserable mortals, is, and shall ever
be my main end and endeavor, whilst I remain,

WILLIAM BACON.
From my House in Winchester-street, London.
CHAP. I. What are the true Principles of Natural Bodies?
THE gross Errors of the Schools, concerning Principles, and their useless
Philosophy, are so well known and exploded by this inquisitive, and therefore
sagacious Age, that it is needless to endeavor to confute them. As for the
other opinion of some Chemists, who would have the quinta, or tria prima, to be
the Principles of Bodies, since it has had, and perhaps yet has very learned
favorers of this Age, I shall according to my intended brevity only offer
this, That if they are Principles, they ought to be unalterable; whereas these
are easily altered and turned one into another. So it is certain, that such and
such a manner of operation produces such a product, and such and such a manner
produces another guise; and there are some bodies-that no Art yet known can
extract these Principles (erroniously so called) from. Whence I infer, that
they obtained such Textures from the fire, and were not pre-existent in the
concrete.

As for that opinion of Tachenius and some others, concerning the principles of
things which they would have to be Acid and Alcali, though more intelligible
and useful in the practice of Physic than either of the former, yet are not
really so, being reducible in Water. It Is strange, that Christians (who in
matters of Faith wholly rely on the Scripture, and firmly believe all the
Historical parts of it, that are either Ecclesiastical, Political, Successive
or Professive, should take very little, or no notice of the hints to Natural
History that are in in it, especially since Moses does professedly give us a
short account of the beginnings of Natural Bodies, which though short, is
abundantly more satisfactory to sense, and consequently reason, than any of the
other Opinions: We believe therefore with him and the profound Helmont, that
Water is the sole material Principle of Generation, and that the Spirit of God
that moved on the Waters, or as the Latin has it, Spiritus Dei incubabat
superficiei Aquae, as a Bird on her Eggs for procreation sake, is the formal
cause. Indeed Moses does not say positively, that that incubation of the Spirit
on the Waters was the cause of Creation, but we find the Creation follow in the
next words; and considering the brevity of that History, the manner of
expression in other places, I presume it is plainly implied, that God by his
infinite Power made these the immediate causes of the Creation. Pray think not
this too precarious, since sense it self does prove the material Principle of
it, especially in Animals, whose mucilaginous seeds do speedily dissolve into
Water of themselves: nay, a Child imperfectly born, will in a little time
dissolve into Water, and the hard seed of vegetables become like a Gelly at the
time of their procreation, whose Gelly-like substance, by an easy digestion is
turned into Water also; and the great Philosophers tell us, that by their
Liquor Alcahest, they could converr the hardest into liquid substances: and
experience tells us, that many vegetables may be solely nourished from Water,
not to mention the several experiments of this nature by many worthy modern
Authors. Think it not strange, that from Water such hard Bodies should be
produced, since it will not only cause Bodies to petrefie, but is petrefied it
self. As to subterrane Bodies, as Metals, Minerals, etc. we are told, they are
fed and augmented by a green and Viscous Water. Now here I understand not, by
the Spirit moving on the Waters, an absolute immaterial substance, or the
rational soul of man, but the sensitive, common to us and Beasts, and only
comparatively immaterial in respect of grosser substances. I conceive it to be
such an active, brisk, aetherial substance, as was and is able to rend pliable
Water into infinitely different corpuscles, and thereby to mould them into as
different forms or textures as we see in the World, and as it formed us, it
goes along with us, and preserves our textures, and several kinds, as long as
possible. But here I foresee that I shall meet with an Objection of some
learned and inquisitive Philosophers, whose Opinion is, that the diversity of
Natural Operations are the products of different Textures, and those Textures
to arise from the Position or Figures of the Constitutive Corpuscles. I readily
grant them both, being well assured, that the aptness or unaptness of Textures,
make things grateful or ungrateful, hot or cold to us; and so of all other
qualities. Yet pardon me if I cannot conceive, that either vegetable or animal
things that beget their like, can possibly be produced by the fortuitous
coincidence of Corpuscles, without the help of a guiding spirit; nay, I
suppose, that dead bodies would (I say not, could) not be generated without the
assistance of such a spirit also, which coagulateth or mouldeth such different
Textures; for though there be many excellent and luciferous productions of this
nature Mechanically obtained, which plainly show that there are such things in
nature, yet I hope it will be granted, that they would not be without the art
and guidance of the humane soul; and if so, why should we think that the world
has not an Aura vitalis, or guiding spirit in it. Now as spirits, the
Governors of the Sensories, that have a distinguishing faculty in them,
embracing good, and rejecting offensive things to the utmost of their power,
are affected, so it acts for good or evil; otherwise how could it be, that the
same Medicine, which is but a dead thing of humane facture, at the same time
given in the same quantity and vehicle, should act contraries in several
bodies; nay, in the same body at several times; nay, in the same body at the
same time, as in Women's cases it may happen, the Spirits being assisted,
exalted, and thereby enabled to do all things for the best, and to supply
Nature in her several indigencies, for the better and longer preservation of
the concrete. I could produce you many other Instances, but for brevity sake I
pass them by, presuming that this one is enough to convince the considerate, if
it be so de facto; ofw which I shall have occasion to speak more hereafter. Now
what sort of Water this is, it matters not to my design, since it is enough to
support my Hypothesis, if it be granted, that all things are made of Spirit and
Matter.

CHAP. II. A Consideration of the Actions of the vital Spirit as tend to our
purpose.
IF the vital Spirit formed us according to the Omnipotent decree, I presume
'twill be easily granted, that the same Spirit preserves us in that form, and
is the sole active and sensitive part of the body; for having taken its flight
from us, we are no longer capable of Disease or Cure.

I shall presume to give my sentiments, how that Spirit does universally act
for us and against us, and thereby hope to elucidate that saying of Helmont,
that the cause of life is the cause of death. I must first premise, that all
creatures in the universe are sustained by nourishment, which I call the
conversion of some other parts of the Creation into a symbolizing nature to the
creature nourished, which is said to be altered by virtue of the ferments; but
what nature the Leven of these ferments are, is rather guessed at than known.
It has been endeavored to be described by manifest qualities, as Heat,
Acidity, Acid and Alkali, but the coldness of Fishes, and sweetness of healthy
Ventricles, being suddenly and without terror destroyed, overthrow the two
former. And if Acid and Alcali be unequally mixed, it would be tasted also, if
equally I could never find (out of the body), that it had any power to digest,
corrode or putrify, but is e contra agreat, preserver of bodies from
putrefaction. Praeternatural Heat and Acidity, are the usual concomitants of
Diseases; and we well know that a diseased person cannot digest well according
to Hippocrates's Aphorism, Corpora impura quo magis nutrias eo magis laedas, a
Rule as little taken notice of by many Physicians as unknown to Nurses, who
think they can never do the sick right longer than they are suggesting
something to eat, little thinking whatever gross substance they take, that is
the object of digestion, is converted by a depraved ferment into filthy matter
fit to feed the disease; for it is not so much what we eat or drink, as how our
Alterative faculty is: The same Joint of meet that nourishes the well, loads
the sick; nay, will be converted into Dogs-flesh, Swines-flesh, Fish-flesh and
Birds-flesh; in a word, into the several species of all creatures that will eat
of it. And we see the poor that feed on the coursest of fare, as vigorous and
as strong as those that feed most opiparously. But pardon me this digression. I
lament therefore, that so many ingenious and industrious men, have and do still
spend so much precious time to find out the causes of vital ferments, thinking
it to be so material, as to be discovered by their senses; whereas it seems to
me most rational, that that which gave us our formation, should also prepare
our aliment, and distribute to us fit Juices for our preservation, and so to
unform the aliment (if I may so speak it) to form something for the
preservation of its own concrete out of it. If so, we shall never know it a
priori, being too subtle for our most assisted senses, but must be contented
to guess at it a posteriori, by its effects and parts it inhabits in. However I
confess and acknowledge, that these ingenious inquirers have found cut several
curious and different parts in the Ventricles, and other parts of things of
different species, undoubtedly filthly adapted to work with to alter food of
such and such a Texture, to such an end. But I must beg their pardon, that I
cannot think them the causes of fermentation, since of themselves they are but
dead things, longer than they are animated by the vital Spirits; but conceive
them as Engines stupendiously fitted for the vital Spirits to operate withal.
We see, that creatures of different specist delight in different foods, which
no doubt are such that best agree to the Textures of their bodies, and are most
fit to be digested by their peculiar ferments. Now since it is undeniable, that
we being deprived of the sensitive soul, we are incapable of sickness and
health, and all sensation whatsoever, and all ferments, except the putrefactive
one cease; though when present and active the smallest prick of a pin, or any
other the least injury given to the remotest parts, offend all the whole body,
by startling the vital Spirits, whose resentments of injuries, and disturbance
thereby, cause them to form morbifick Ideas, either through its own passions,
or other external accident, or depraved matter. So we say with Helmont, that
though there may be millions of irritative material causes, or external
accidents, yet the sole formal cause is the vital Spirit, which either being
enraged, transported or suppressed, frame diseases accordingly. Patients are
altered according to the energy and design of the Agents. Now in all bodies the
vital Spirit must be the Agent, (as the Excellent Sir Francis Bacon says in
his Natural History, lib. 1. Exper. 98. being the only active part of the body,
the rest being but a dead lump when that is gone, or become unactive,
absolutely insensible, and consequently incapable of Disease or Cure. When this
Agent acts vigorously placidly, and without disturbance, he does all things for
the best; but if disturbed, it stirs up such a hurry and disorder in him,
that he mouldeth pretern ural Forms or Textures; and thence we affirm, that the
cause of life and health, when in order, is the cause of sickness and death
when in disorder. Now the vital Spirit is the occasion of diseases of it self,
as it admits of ill Impresses or Ideas, by the senses from without, as we see
the same Spirit that is now pleasant and sedate, will on a sudden degenerate
into passions of different, nay, contrary effects, according to the nature of
the irritative cause from without, or the diseased matter disturbing the free
exercise and government of the vital Spirits within variously, according to the
quantity, quality, and texture of such morbifick matter; But it cannot be said,
that they are first or last in point of time, they being as Agent and Patient,
and therefore corival and co-existent, though in respect of the irritative
cause, we compute them one before another. For the vitals can be no sooner from
their duty, but matter will in some measure degenerate for want of its due
preserver; and there can be no offensive matter in the body, but must in some
degree affect the vitals, though many times it be so little that we cannot
discern it. Hence comes the insensible creeping on of Chronick Diseases.

CHAP. III. Where and how the Vitals do perform their chief Operation.
I Conceive the chief and regular Operation of the Vitals, is extended for the
preservation of the concrete, which is by assimulating things out of other
bodies to the nature of the body it inhabits. Now this great work is done
principally in the stomach, where meat is converted into aliment and excrement;
and as Hippocrates says, A good crasis in this first digestion, is seldom, or
by accident perverted in the second, but never amended. This is the place in
which the Juices of our bodies take the main impress, and are either made good
or evil. Pardon me Reader, if for the better understanding the thing, I bring
thee this homely comparison. I look on the vital Spirit, to be the Cook and the
Stomach, the Cook-room or Kitchen, wherein our Juices are prepared, and
according to the crasis of them, to impress our nourishment with a good or evil
texture. Now if either the Cook be sluggish, froward or forgetful, or the
Kitchen or its Vessels be foul, we can never expect well dressed Victuals; and
indeed a bad Cook makes a bad Kitchen, and a foul Kitchen injures the best
Cook. Here I cannot but take notice of the vain humors of some men, who cry
out, the blood is foul, purge the blood, purge the blood, and never endeavor
to rectify the fountain from whence it comes, which makes their endeavors
so ineffectual. The wise people of Marah threw salt into the fountain, not into
the Rivulets. Is It possible, that a foul and disturbed fountain can afford
clear Rivulets? Or is it possible, that the draining of the Rivulets should
purge the fountain? If not, away with the common use of Phlebotomy, Issues,
Cuppings and Scarifications, unless it be at a pinch, to gain a little time,
until so potent a Medicine as may rectify the disorder of the vitals, can be
obtained. I say, away with those deluding means, which too often, God knows, by
minoration does so palliate (for it cannot meliorate for the reason abovesaid),
that it causes abundance to rely on them, until they become incurable; and
sometimes relieveth them of an acute disease, and leaves them in a Cronick, as
too often we see in Quinancies and Pleurisies, etc. sometimes altering the
disease from one shape to another, making good Hippocrates his Opinion in one
of his Epistles to King Demetrius, viz. that one disease degenerated into
another, which I rather conceive to proceed from the defect of Art than Nature.
It Is also manifest, that the common cure of mad people is effected by drawing
away their Spirits, and so making them sottish and foolish. Now when the office
of the stomach is well performed, we need not doubt the other parts (unless
depraved through natural deformity, or external accidents), because there is no
bad Chyle comes to offend them; but that being perverted, the offensive Chyle
that it sends out, does by degrees pervert all the other ferments, and then
we call it, a high Scurvey, until it has begot daughter or daughters, as
Dropsy, Astma, Vertigo, Cholick and Iliack passions, etc. and then the lurking
Scurvey has lost its name again, and the daughters give their mother their own
denominations. I cannot conceive that any disease can befall a man without
passion, or undue digestion, except it be by external accidents. And truly I
think a disease occasioned by such accidents, attain their height by disturbing
the vitals, and thereby causing a disordered and vicious ferment; so that undue
digestion, though hardly perceptible at first, I conceive to be the beginning
of all internal diseases.

CHAP. IV. What is the Object of the digestive faculty.
THE Object of the digestive faculty, I conceive to be all gummous, viscous and
solid bodies, that are digestible, or agreeing to such and such a species. Not
spirituous or incorruptible things, which the ferment has no power to alter.
These things, if friendly and pure, are, as it were, snatched away by the
vitals: Nay, though impure, yet the vital spirit does so delight in the
spirituous part of them, that it immediately attracts them to himself, as we
see in swooning people. Hence I conceive the reason to be (as I have often
observed), that Brandy, though very good in its kind, will do a great deal more
hurt, and inflame more than duly rectified Spirit of Wine, because the vitals
greedily embracing the noble Spirit, draws into its curious recesses upon the
wings thereof, foulness and lavid phlegm (wherewith the best Brandy abounds),
which afterward does grate and disturb the vitals. Not that I commend the use
of either; for I think even the best Spirit of Wine very hurtful, as it is of
it self: I mean, to be taken inwardly, if this be so, what course then shall we
take to restore a decayed ferment, since whatever is given, that is the Object
of digestion, is putrified rather than digested, and becomes fit fuel to
augment the disease? for all ferments make aliquod tertium quod non fuit any,
either a good or bad tertium, according to the strength and regularity, or
weakness and irregularity of the alterer. What then, must the sick Patient have
nothing to support him? Yes, Spirituous pure and incorruptible substances, so
adapted, as that they join amicably with the vital Spirits, without giving the
least disturbance, intoxication or inflammation, though taken in great quantity.
And though such things, if volatile, seem as a potential fire, yet they quench
thirst, and allay preternatural heat, commonly giving a period to Fevers before
the first Crisis, as Helmont says, Ipse est Medicus non qui expectat, sed
facit Crisin. Which I humbly conceive they do effect, as they do comfort
easily, and friendly join with the vital Spirits; or at leastwise, the purer
parts of the Juices, wherein they inhabit, thereby assisting and corroborating
the said vitals, so as to empower them to debellate, and cast off preternatural
heat, or rather morbifick matter the occasion thereof. As for instance, a Fever
I know is generally taken to be an extraordinary and preternatural heat,
causing Ebullition, or undue fermentation of the Blood. But I must beg leave to
recede from this common Opinion, since I am convinced, that the preternatural
heat is but a symptom, not the cause of the disease, which I conceive to be a
contest between nature and morbifick matter, each striving for victory, and
thereby causing a great motion in the Juices of the body, which motion
produces so violent heat. The vitals being enforced into that disorderly
motion, to make good their post, until they conquer or are conquered I must
assure you, that I have ever found, that the hotter a man is in a Fever, the
more hopes there is of him, as arguing, that Nature is strong, and makes a
lusty resistance, whereas small external heat in a Fever argues the contrary,
and is abundantly a more mortal symptom. We find, that generally Agues and
Fevers begin with coldness and shivering of the external parts, which seems to
me, as if Nature called in the heat, strength and spirits that used to guard
these parts, and concentred them with those internal, the better to withstand
the approaching Enemy; and at that time we find a great drought to attend such
persons, which argues a preternatural heat within, occasioned, as I conceive,
by the contest, which being over, and the Spirits remitted to their usual
charge, they carry away with them their inflamed particles. Now what should we
do? should we clog and fetter our Champion, the vitals, with nasty
depauparating flegms and gross substances? or should we send proper and true
assistance to him? I leave you to judge. I desire any impartial person to
observe (in the Country, where many are so poor, as they cannot apply to
Physicians) in Epidemicks, and see how many more dye of them, that use the
common way of Physic, than of those that use none at all, though the latter
commonly want all conveniences. I could never observe any advantange the poor
had of the laboring Yeoman-like sort of people, but that at a pinch, instead
of using those cooling slops, they implored some Cordial-water of some
charitable Lady of the Neighborhood; or for want of that, did procure a dram
of Brandy, or other strong-water, to support their declining Spirits.

CHAP. V. An account of the seeming potential fire, before mentioned.
I Mentioned in the Chapter preceding, a Liquor, that was to sense as a
potential fire, yet would quench thirst and allay heat in Fevers: a thing, I
doubt, the prepossessed world will hardly credit, until they are evinced of it
by experience: Of which, that they may be induced to make trial of for their
satisfaction, I shall presume to give the best account I can, and offer my weak
Reasons with all humility and submission for the Cause.

I am entered on an abstruse matter; but being certain, that it is so de facto,
rather then it should pass without some notice taken, I am resolved to tender
my mean sentiments, if be it but to put more ingenious men on the consideration
of it. I confess, I was Master of such Arcana's before I considered the Reason
of their so benign Operation in man's body. When calling to mind the words of
the Ancients, viz. separate and unite, purify and conjoyn, destroy and revive,
etc. For it is the Hermophrodite that does the great matters in Nature. I easily
saw, that all the Noble Medicines that would raise Nature to act contraries,
whether fixed or volatile, that I knew, were of an Hermophroditical composure;
and then I conceived, and still do, that by such an union the parts satiated
one another: Of which Opinion I was so fond, that with an (...) I acquiesced in
it a long time, until upon farther consideration, I found I had taken too short
a measure to give my self a satisfactory prospect. And though I saw such
Textures most agreeable to the vitals, yet it did not satisfy me, why it
should be so; and then I called to mind the Doctrine of Des Carts, which I had
read in my youth, concerning the Analogy and disproportion of bodies, wherein
he shows, that things of like Texture do easily and friendly join; and things
of inconrguous particles, difficultly and disturbantly, and sometimes not at
all. At length, happily meeting with the excellent Books of the honorable and
incomparable Robert Boil, Esquire his Origin of Forms, and Mechanical production
of Forms, I was wonderfully enlightened and confirmed in Des Chartes's Doctrine.
And then I cast about, to find what Analogy of Texture might be between those
Medicines and the vital Spirits. And since the vital Spirits are too subtle for
the best assisted sense to apprehend, I endeavored by the same Doctrine, to
trace them in the parts where they lived and inhabited; concluding with these
Learned Authors, that nothing could delight, lie easy, well, or long continue
in a disproportionate mansion; and the blood being allowed to be the vehicle,
if not the seat of the vitals, I easily found the products (not principles) of
the purer parts thereof to consist of oleaginous, saline and sulphurous
particles. I was then convinced, that a volatile, pure and incorruptible body,
which should consist of the like particles, must readily and amicably join with
the purer and more active parts of the blood, since it consisted of parts
Analagous to it. Certain it is, that there is no more positive or innate heat,
in Spirit of Wine, or saline Spirits, than in common Water: For set them in one
place, where let them stand until all accidental or adventitious heat be
wasted, and then try them with an accurate Thermoscope, and you shall find them
of equal coldness. If so (as no one that has or shall experience it, but will
evidently find), then it is plain, that it is no innate heat in those spirituous
bodies that seems to inflame us, but as their particles affect our sensories,
common Water, whose Atomous parts we conceive to be globular and smooth,
passes smoothly and cools. The Spirits, though as cold in themselves, yet by
reason of the subtle, penetrating, pungent and sharp Texture of their parts,
prick and stimulate our tender parts and sensories, thereby causing heat,
inflamamation and intoxication. Now as the Water consisted of too dull
particles, to join with, or assist our vitals, so the Spirits of themselves are
too pungent and sharp to agree with our Juices as they are, being but several
parts of bodies made pure, and consequently cannot have particles of Analogous
Texture, with all the pure parts united, as the refinest part of our Juices
are. But if these bodies be first separated for purification sake, and then in
a due proportion, according to the Analogy of the blood conjoined (which though
it be no small Art to perform, yet I Will assure you very feasible to be attained
by the industrious), will no longer prick, stimulate or inflame, but on the
contrary, will join so amicably with the vitals, as immediately to strengthen,
refresh and agitate them, advancing natural heat and vigor, and thereby
enabling Nature to debellate all preternatural heat, fermentation, acidity, and
what not that is offensive in the body. If you take any pure part of it it self
in quantity, it will offend; for sulphurous Spirits will inflame and
intoxicate; saline, stimulate, acid corrode; oleaginous nauseate and inflame;
whereas a pure body (for so give me leave to call it) has none of these ill
effects in it: It Is so far from intoxicating, that it retrieves the intoxicated
person even in the very act of drinking, from stimulating, and much more
corroding, that it is the speediest healer of wounds, scalds, burnings, soreness
of mouth, throat or stomach, that ever I saw, from nauseating, as to eradicate
it. I have always observed upon drinking Spirit of Wine or Brandy, that it
affects the mouth, throat and stomach too, with a burning heat; whereas a pure
body does affect the mouth and upper part of the Gula only, but is never found
to give the least offensive heat to the stomach. Away then with declaiming
against hot things, since they may be so composed as to refresh, quench thirst,
and cool. And surely the vital Spirits by no other volatile means can be so
truly, speedily and inoffensively assisted, as by such a pure, incorruptible,
Balsamic and Analogous body. I Will not presume to say, that this is the
volatile Hermophradite of the Ancients, though according to my best
constructions or (if you will) conjectures of their aenigmous sayings, and the
effects, I conceive it is. They tell us, that bodies purified and conjoined,
produce an Hermophrodite which is wonderfully assistant to Nature. They only
say, there is such a thing, and what effect it has; but I cannot find the
least footstep in them, to lead me to believe, that they ever knew the reason
or cause of it is so doing: but if I have hit any thing near the mark, we are
beholding to the two forenamed excellent Authors for it.

Thus have I shot my bolt, earnestly beseeching the most judicious and
inquisitive Philosophers to consider it, that so useful a Phenomenon may be
improved to the utmost. Correct my errors, so you inform my judgment; for I am
as eager to be fully satisfied in the (...), as I am certain by a world of
experience of the (...).

CHAP. VI. Whether there may be an Universal Medicine, or no.
I Know that it is held negatively in the Schools; and truly, according to their
Principles, it seems impossible: for allowing so many formal causes of diseases
as they do, it is not to be supposed, that one and the same thing should be an
adequate removal of them all: but according to my Hypothesis, I conceive there
may: for if there be but one formal cause of diseases, and that that cause in
it self be homogeneal, and an enemy to diseases, and is forced into this
disorder through affronts without, or diseasie matter within, and still whilst
curable, inclining to return to his regular, wonted, and due composure and
government, why may not the Spots and Idea's which deprave the same, be (though
of different colors) obliterated by one Medicine, which is truly adapted to
assist its homogeneity, and natural addiction, and thereby enable it to cast
off its enemy, of what Nature soever, as a weapon that defends, and makes a
man victorious, though to be used in several manners, and to several purposes,
as the Combatant's exigency shall require, all tending to the main end of
self-preservation and victory. I would not be here understood that I mean by a
Panacea, a Medicine that infallibly cures all diseases (for to such I presume
there was no sober man ever pretended to, though our adversaries would so
construe it, and thereby impose on the ignorant and credulous), but such a one
that will cure all diseases curable. We see sometimes diseases of the mildest
denominations to be so circumstantiated, as to admit of no remedy; and on the
other hand, many of the most feral, that are listed among the incurable, to be
conquered. It sometimes, though rarely falls out, that the vital Spirits are so
subjugated, that Art cannot raise them again. Now there are Medicines of
universal tendency, and of universal potency. By universal tendency, I
understand, a Medicine that adjuvates Nature to do in some cases for the best;
and, as I formerly said, so strengthen the vitals an particular cases, as to
supply the exigencies of the Patient, though by contrary effects, and is
universally good, though specifically potent: as for instance, the same
Medicine that preventeth miscarriage, even when the wisest Midwives think it
impossible, being given in equal Dose and same Vehicle when labor comes,
expediteth it; nay, it impowers Nature to turn the Child in the Womb, and bring
it away, even when hopes are almost past, and without a hand, saving half the
pains, making the afterpains as nothing, suffering neither Fever, or any other
ill accident to happen, invigorating the person, and promoting all things for
the best; insomuch, that I never saw the least danger in any Woman lying-in,
that used it; and the like contrary effects it will produce in other feminine
cases. A Medicine that generally very gently purges, yet of it self, without
purging, safely cures venereous or cruentous dissenteries. The like I may say,
in some cases or other, of all others I prize 'em. Such as these are so
necessary, that I wonder how men can practice untouched in conscience, without
them. Were it to gain the World, I would not give a Medicine, but is so
endowed. But for those of universal potency, I fear there are none now in
being; though I doubt not, but that I have seen such a thing, and that within
this Twenty years; and therefore I do the rather believe the Ancients
assertions, that it is attainable. And truly I have a Medicine of my own, and
have seen others of other men's, that will speak fair for Panaceas, and do well
deserve the name of Polyaceas. As far as I have experienced mine, which has
been now these Sixteen years, it seldom or never failed in any case where there
was a probability of Cure; nay, many times beyond. I could never see any
Specific yet, though of universal tendency, as abovesaid, to exceed it: Nay,
when I have been called in desperate cases, when the noblest Specific, I knew,
would not do it, it has done, except in case of madness, wherein, though I
have found it an excellent Medicine, and very conducible to the Cure, yet I
prefer to it a Specific drawn from Venus, of an Hermophroditical texture and
effect also; for it raises the drooping and dejected, and reclaimeth the
transported Spirits. Yet these Polyceas of others and mine, fall mighty short
of those of the Ancients: for theirs, it seems, would cure the stubbornest
Chronick diseases in One, Two or Three Doses, and those almost incredibly
small. Now ours must be taken in large quantities, in respect of theirs, and
the Dose very often repeated in such cases. They would give theirs exactly in
one Dose for all diseases; we must give ours with some care and modification;
for by how much the worse and weaker the Patient is, by so much the more we
ought to give. Indeed it would do no hurt if we gave as much to every one. But
these Medicines are not easily obtained, and frustra fit perplura, etc. I could
here produce many other Arguments, to enfortiate the probability of obtaining
Panaceacal Medicines; but for brevity sake, which I assiduously aim at, I shall
only add, That if we can produce Medicines, and that not a few of universal
tendency, as above asserted, why should we despair of purchasing Medicines by
our indefatigated labors, of so noble purity, tecture, and extraction, as to
enable Nature to perform all things possible for its preservation, and that in
few and small Doses?

CHAP. VII. A short account of the fixed Hermophrodite.
WHat I have hitherto said concerning Medicine, is only to give the best and
shortest account I can, concerning the volatile Hermophrodite. There is also
(that I can produce) a fixed Hermophrodite, which since it is composed upon the
same reason, means, and end, the volatile is, I shall not trouble my Reader
with a needless repetition; only, that as that consists of volatile parts
made pure, and then united, so this consists of fixed parts made pure, and
proportionately married. The Ancients tell us of a grand Hermophrodite, which,
if I understand them aright, is produced by the confection concentrating, or in
true proportion, uniting the volatile and the fixed, which Art I earnestly
labor and pray for, hoping and imploring the Almighty's blessing on my
endeavors: And to which I am daily the more and more excited, as I observe the
wonderful effects of my Polyacea, which I acknowledge to be but the purer
bodies, viz. volatile and fixed, mixed, not united.

I should now give the Reasons, how this operateth, and produces such great
effects; but shall wave it at present, for Reasons given in my Epistle to the
Reader.

Pluck up your Spirits, you true Sons of Art, and maugre all the oppositions,
calumnies, and false assertions of your ignorant, insolent, negligent,
sloathful and interess'd Antagonists. Press on to obtain the prize, which I
presume (by Gods Providence) is nigh at hand.

Let it comfort, nay, establish you against all these adversities, That God, to
whom all glory, etc. has given you the knowledge to heal your wounded brethren,
beyond the pompous pretenders; that you can conquer when they palliate; that
you can eradicate, whilst they alter from better to worse; you can purge the
blood by invigorating the Spirits, thereby enabling them to cleanse and
strengthen its Fountain, and cast off heterogeneous matter, when they only
pretend to it, and seek to do it by diminishing them, in draining the Rivulets,
or other ineffectual, if not hurtful, means. In a word, you can assist, when
they hurt; you can make a Crisis, when they expect one; you can with much
confidence enter their incurable list, when they fly the Barriers, crying,
Mors in Olla, or Consumption in the Pot, their broad back Asylum. Let us
therefore return most humble and hearty thanks to the Giver of all good, for
his benevolence to us; and in like manner supplicate him for a continuance
thereof, valiantly, though modestly, appearing for the defense of Truth, as we
value the glory of the Infinite Being, the good of Mankind, and our own
Consciences.

CHAP. VIII. A word or two in defense of Chemical Medicines.
BEfore I conclude this short Introduction to the true way of curing
Chymically, I find my self obliged to offer something in defense of true
Spagyrick Medicines. I know, that partly through ignorance, partly through
prejudice, partly interest, the never-to-be sufficiently encouraged endeavors
of conscientious, ingenious and industrious Artists, are condemned, and the
cry, Oh Chemical, Chemical Medicines, take care, take care, is bellowed out by
the ignorant, and supported by the interessed. But let us see what reason there
is for this outcry; and let us examine, what the Spagyrick Art is, as it
relates to Physic. It Is not agreed from what Language the words Chymia or
Chemia are deduced; and so men agree not in the meaning of the word. The word
Spagyria seems to signify the Art of dissolving and re-uniting of bodies, and
is understood the same with Chemia, as it tends to Physic. But to leave words,
and to the matter. Sure I am, it is an Art of dividing, purifying, and
conjoyning bodies, to give them their greatest energy in Medicines, as well as
to other ends. The division is necessary in order to the purification. The
design of purification, is to separate nauseous, venomous, crude, and filthy
matter from the more noble and pure parts, so as to render them incapable to be
laid hold on, or altered by any ferment, that they may freely pass to assist
the drooping Spirits; and then they ought to be conjoined for the Reasons
aforesaid. I confess, the vain boasts of ignorant or unworthy Chemists, has
done this necessary Art a world of hurt, who pretend great matters, when many
of them cannot perform the two first parts well, very few the latter; yet such
are the Chemical Medicines sold in Shops, and prescribed in most Bills; and
indeed, which do what is done, but are very unsafe, as the common saying is,
Either cure or kill speedily. But what are these in respect of noble Medicines?
A true Artist seldom troubles himself to make them, but buyeth them at the
Operators, or the Shops, and begins where they end. And truly, did these
declaimers know what care, pains, and time after that, must be taken, before
they become fit Medicines for the body of man, they must judge, that the
Medicines were wonderfully advanced in virtue and safety by it; or those that
wrought on them, were not in their right Wits. Now what sort of Chemical
Medicines ought to be condemned let the Reader judge; either those that are half
dressed, or those that are perfectly ready; or either those that abound with
nasty excrements and crudities, or those that are so purified from their
feculencies, that they are become incorruptible. See now how the Vulgar are
deceived daily, taking such things as they justly condemn, and contemning these
noble products to them unknown, which would be of wonderful advantage to them,
if they could open their eyes to see it, and disentangle themselves from the
idolatrous opinions they have entertained of such or such persons or methods.
But now you would object, Why should not there be as good Medicines in the
Shops, as in the private Laboratories? I answer, first, because there are no
better publicly known and called for; and for the Apothecary to buy what he
cannot sell, were imprudence. Again, Many, or most of these Operators, that
prepare for the Shops, do nothing else, and know not how to go farther; or if
they did, would it be worth their labor. For what they aim at, is to make
great quantities to serve many Customers; and such as will sell to the Shops
with most profit, is fittest for their purpose; whereas a man that prepares for
his own practice, is very tender and careful in his Operations, and always
studying to advance them, both in energy and safety, for his Reputation (the
ground of his profits) sake. And truly he that has an ordinary practice, will
find enough to do to procure such noble Medicines for it: I mean, diligently to
oversee the preparation, though he has Operators under him; They are things of
difficult and tedious acquest. I know something that I could never rightly well
obtain under Sixteen or Eighteen months time. But some will say, What need any
Chemistry at all? They may as well say, what need we any Cookery at all? For if
the things that God designed for the necessary sustentation of our lives, do
require a previous preparation, e fortiori, it will be that there ought to be
the like in Physic. None will agree, that Wheat or Barley in its own nature,
crude and uncocted, is wholesome; yet we see when it has past the Culinary
Chemistry, how delicious and nutrimental it becomes, being then fitted for the
digestive faculty of our stomachs. How much care ought there then, think you to
be, to prepare such pure substances, as, when there is a necessity, may evade
the alteration of a foul and depraved stomach, and pass to the vitals in
quantity, to bear up, and strengthen the Spirits, until they have obtained
power enough to cast off the sordes, and repair the injured and weakened
tunicles of the ventricle. And if crude Wheat and Barley be unwholesom, what
may we expect from crude Rhubarb and Senna; nay, from Opium, Mercury and
Antimony?

CHAP. IX. A Character of a true Medicine.
IT has been oftentimes objected to me, You pretend to good Medicines, and so
do all other professors; but how shall we know to distinguish betwixt the good
and bad, truth and falsehood, in matters we are not seen in? Wherefore once for
all I think fit to present these ingenious Gentlemen with as many hints to
distinguish by, as at present occur to my memory.

First then, Discourse the Physician, and see whether he can give a
satisfactory Reason on the foregoing Principles, for what he is about to do; if
so, and he be a labourer in the fire for his own practice, and not for common
sale; for such men (though they take several methods in their operations)
seldom or never fail of good and safe Medicine; but if either of these
circumstances be wanting, you have good cause to suspect him: if the former,
because if he has it, it is not of his own acquest; and it is a rare and an
unwarrantable thing, for true Artists to impart such secrets to men
unacquainted with their Theory and method of curing: if the latter (though it is
not impossible, that good Medicines may be put into men's hands that know them
not), yet these men have, and can manage them but as Empericks.

Secondly, Enquire of the ground, or the matter from whence the Medicine was
made; if from Narcoticks, see that it be divested from all stupefactive
qualities; which you may do, either by the first trial on your self, or on
others experience: If from Emetick or Cathartick drugs, see they be divested of
those crude and poisonous qualities, and become only Cordial. But of this you
cannot judge on your selves; for it is possible your bodies may require purging
or vomiting; if so, a true Cordial that powerfully assisteth the Vitals, will
cause either; so that the same thing in quantity and vehicle, vomiteth one, and
purges another, does both with another, sweats one, composes another, and
purges another by Urine only; in short, has all the operations of Physic in
it on the sick, as the Disease requires, to each one's greatest benefit; yet
to the perfectly well, signifies no more than a large draught of liberal Wine,
which heightneth a man to pleasantness, not transport; if from acids, be sure
they be made sweet; if from Volatiles, see they are in due measure fixed; if
from fixed, see they are in like measure volataliz'd.; but if from the
dangerous Proteus Mercury, see it be perfectly fixed and unalterable; for if
acids or Alcalies will reduce it into Mercury again, it is an unsafe thing.

Thirdly, See on the experience of others and your selves, that it will act
much differently at least, if not contrarily.

Fourthly, Let it be such, as the weaker the person is, the greater quantities
ought to be administered.

Fifthly, Let it be such, as though never so often taken, shall not grow so
familiar or habitual (as all digestible things do) as not to produce its wonted
effect.

Sixthly, That the Patient being recovered, shall not at all desire or long
after it.

Seventhly, Whether it be a volatile or fixed, or both, let them be so truly
purified, as to be incorruptible, and consequently indigestible.

Eighthly, Adventure not on that which is given with caution to avoid sleeping,
eating, drinking, or the like; taking cold only excepted.

Ninthly, Avoid such things as cause gripes or convulsions in the working.

Tenthly, It ought to strengthen the weakest to go through its operation, and
give a sensible relief presently after it is ended, if the person be capable of
recovery.

Eleventhly and lastly, It ought to be so safe, as to be given to women with
child, or in childbed.

CHAP. X. A Word of Advice to the Chemists in general.
THough we have so many enemies, dear Brethren, that one would think it were a
madness in us to injure one another, much less that honorable and useful Art
we all pretend to; yet such is the pride, avarice, or other depravity of humane
nature, that we find Judasses in our little Family. There are a sort of men
which pass generally under our denomination, which may be duly called
Mysochymists, which have never read, or are capable to read the Chemical
Theory, and do verily believe the portentous promises of Authors, and only can
talk of the 3. or 5. Principles, the usual products of their own fire,
depending plainly on Recipes which they take out of Authors; and perhaps being
more industrious than common Operators, excel the common Medicines that are
sold in the Shops; or have got a good Recipe, or more, by Tradition, which if
duly and modestly limited, would answer in many cases the expectation of the
sick, far beyond the common practice; who are so transported at a few good
effects of their Medicine, that they presently post it up for an Universal one;
which proving otherwise, begets an ill name and opinion of the Art, and its
truest Sons. What these men do, is merely accidental and Emperical, being not
able to give the least show of reason for its manner of operation, or cause of
its effect.

There are another sort amongst men of our Character, which well deserve the
name of Pseudochymists, that post up Universals also from Recipes only; well
knowing that they will not answer the expectation of the Patients, or the
Character they give them; and this they do for filthy lucre sake, equally
producing bad reflections with the other. I could heartily wish, and it shall
be my endeavor, That the judgment of the former may be rightly informed, and
the Villainy of the other detected and corrected, and the Art and its Sons
distinguished from such Impostors. If any one of these men, or any other, have
found so noble a Medicine plainly prescribed, as will assist Nature to do
contraries, or act as is commonly said, quo natura vergit, they have had more
happiness than I, and many others that I know; and if they have not, I (for the
reasons aforesaid) reject all others.

But here may be objected, That though these Medicines be not of the noblest
nature; yet being much better than those of the Shops, why should we not use
them? It seems to me but reason indeed, until better be discovered, the best
known should be made use of; but then do not give them a better Character than
you are certain they deserve; and acquiesce not in them, but seek for greater
things. I conceive it cannot consist with the consciences of those that know
better, to use worse; the resolution of video meliora proboque deteriora
sequor, was never yet approved of. Neither want there faults among very good
Artists, who are too apt to prize their best achievements at such a rate, as
to keep them Arcana's indeed even from their fraternity, which I presume
proceeds from the narrowness of their spirits, for want of taking a due
prospect of affairs; for such men doubt, that should they part with their
Medicines to others, they should be undermined and abridg'd in their Practice;
whereas the truth is, considering the number and interest of our Opposers, and
the peoples adherencies to them, we cannot have too many to vindicate and
promulgate so useful truths: for though (as it is commonly said) Truth will
speak for it self; yet it cannot, if through the prepossession of some, and the
opposition of others, it be not suffered to speak at all. There are those in
every corner bellowing or whispering to the people against such as will not
worship their Diana; and lest the offerings of the said Dissenters to a truer
Deity should be observed by the deluded Vulgar, they will not vouchsafe to see
them themselves, but confidently condemn what they know not; what need is there
then of a vast number to vanquish so numerous an Enemy, to meet them in their
ways, detect their actions, and convert the people? It is not want of miserable
people, but for want of their being convicted of the truth, that worthy men
have not their deserved employment; and how to do so great a work with few
hands, I cannot divine. And then how great an improvement of Medicine might be
made by a true and plain discovery amongst Artists, I can hardly guess at, much
less describe. Sure I am, that all true Artists work to the same end; and
though they take many ways, yet they come to one center, viz. producing
Medicines adapted to corroborate the vital spirits. Now were there a
communication of their several Meandrous progresses, I think the streightest,
nearest, easiest, cheapest, pleasantest and safest path would soon be found
out. Do not mistake me, brethren, as if I advise you to impart such your
secrets to every one, but only your fellow-workers, who are able to add
something to the Corban; or such as are so convinced by Theory and practice, as
to become sincere Proselytes to truth. For I Will assure you, how to deliver over
my mean acquests to Posterity with safety, has much perplexed me; and I can
find no other way, but by tradition of them into worthy hands. And if so,
consider I beseech you, how many ought we to instruct in our time, lest those
excellent Medicines have the same fate of those more excellent of the Ancients.
Do not we all condole the loss of Paracelsus's, Lullye's, Helmont's and
Valentine's Arcana's? etc. and shall we be guilty of the same our selves? God
forbid. As for my part, I shall ever think it great uncharitableness; nay,
unparalled folly, to deny the eager traveller a true direction in his way,
especially if his painful Journey be undertaken for the good of my brethren and
children: wherefore you that are traveling, and are desirous to find out the
right way, come to me, and I Will show you the best I can with alacrity.

CHAP. XI. A necessary Address to the Learned.
BE not offended, Worthy Sirs, that I take upon me to revive a Theory, Method
and Medicines contrary to yours, since my conscience of the vastly different
benefit there is to the sick from the one to the other, and my charity to
mankind, obliges me. We know yours and our own: You know your own, but not
ours: if you did, there would be no longer a dispute between us. I here
therefore with all humility, invite you to come and see, make experience
whether the things be so de facto. Harbor not, I beseech you, in your breasts,
that I write this to detract from you, but with an ardent desire to inform you.
I call God to witness, I give you here a faithful account what I am, and what
my designs are: My Birth was generous, my education liberal, my dependances
competent, bred by my Fathers command toward the Civil Law, though my natural
inclination was toward Physiology; to which I stuck close after I was
emancipated by Marriage; but at length, observing what ill success Physicians
had, and that double as many recovered in Epidemicks, of the miserable poor
people that had not money to go to a Physician, or convenience of lodging,
warmth, or other necessaries, as of those that did, and had those conveniences
also; my esteem for Medicine decreased more and more, and had absolutely
despaired that any good could be done by it, until I called to mind some very
good Cures done by the Learned Dr. Edmund Dickenson; I then considering under
what appellation he then was, (viz.) a Chemical Dr. I hoped from that Art some
good might be found; and then casting about, I met with the assistance of Dr.
George Starkey, and after him Dr. George Thomson; by whose assistance, and Gods
blessing on my endeavors, I am what I am, being not fond of practice, or the
lucre of this World, but resolved, if please God, I might see this true and
efficacious Art in a prosperous way, to retire to my former solitude. Fear me
not Gentlemen, but have a charitable opinion of me, and credit my
protestations, until you find cause to the contrary. Unfetter your Reasons, I
beseech you; cast behind you all preoccupations and prejudices, and lay aside
those poisonous Principles that you sucked in your youth, which you will find
the hardest task as well as I; for Quo semel imbuta, etc. Suffer not your noble
souls to be any longer enslaved to Authority, or customs of others. Resolve to
trust your own senses to inform your Reasons, and do not superstitiously adhere
to the Ipse dixit of another.

When you are thus prepared, come see, and gratefully admire the wonderful
Virtues God has placed in his Creatures, if duly managed. Then shall you see
continued Fevers generally cured in Five or Six days, or within; an
Intermittent one in Two or Three Fits, Agues in Two, Three or Four at the most,
and that by rational and radical means, without the Peruvian-bark, or danger of
reciduation, leaving the Patient healthy and vegete. You shall likewise see by
Gods blessing, Pleurisies, Quinances cured, citius, tutius and jucundius,
without Phlebotomy, than with, and without danger of Chronick diseases to
ensue; the Small Pox generally without danger, or any considerable sickness,
within Six hours after the first administration, preserving the beauty in a
great measure; and also all pestilential Fevers that I have seen.

I never saw the Plague, I confess; but I doubt not the efficacy of my
Febrifage in that case, Deo juvante. You shall also see Cholick and Iliack
passions taken off in an hour or Two, and perfectly eradicated in Three or Four
Weeks. You shall see a Specific so advanced, as to cure all sorts of Kings
Evil that I have yet seen, though I have seen the Joint Evil. And as for the
Scurvey, that has insensibly crept upon us, through undue digestion, and in
time grown obstinate; nay, has begot a daughter or daughters, as Asthma,
Vertigo, Dropsies, etc. you shall see so subdued in a Months time at most, if
the parts are found, as that neither you nor the Patient will doubt of a
recovery; nay, many of those that are accounted consumptive, restored. But as
these diseases have a long time of growth, so they require a long time to be
destroyed; for in a radicated Scurvey, the ferments through the whole body are
depraved, so that they must have time for a gradual restoring; which being
restored to their former vigor and purity, will soon alter the whole Mass of
blood; nay, it is done together; insomuch, that persons that have scarce any
thing that deserve the name of sanguis in them, will in time have as pure blood
as any person whatsoever: Of which I have some instances at hand. I thank God,
I never saw any one yet, if the parts were sound, though languishing under an
hereditary Scurvey, but have been mightily relieved, if not cured: The Jaundice
cured in Two or Three days. You shall also find Women's Labors to be no longer
dreadful, as I have said before.

Pray Sirs, have so much virtue, as not to condemn the things you know not.
What would it advantage me to assert these things, if I had not found them by
long and large experience to be so, since I know you wont believe me, unless you
are convinced by matter of fact? To that therefore I invite you; wherein,
should I fall short of what I here assert, understood in a modest sense, I were
the veryest fool in Nature. And to give you greater encouragement to enquire
into the truth of it, I hereby faithfully promise you, that whosoever will give
himself the trouble to be satisfied of the (...), and then will peruse proper
Authors, until I am convinced, that he is fully satisfied in the (...), and
become a faithful Proselyte to truth, and like to make a conscientious and
industrious promoter of it, I will take him by the hand, and lead him into that
path, at the end whereof his desires shall be crowned. And if the elder sort of
learned and judicious men think it too late, or beneath them to learn, come you
of the younger Class, and heartily welcome: For it is from you, Worthy and
Learned men, that I expect the beautifying and augmentation of this Art. It Is
by your Assistance that I hope to see the present known Medicines advanced, and
the admirable Arcana's of the Ancients retrieved. In a word, the Art of
Medicine so meliorated, as nothing but irreparable Old Age, and Death it self,
may be insuperable: Which to see, is the humble and hearty prayer, and
endeavor of

Your humble Honourer, and sincere Servant, WILLIAM BACON.


