The Light of the World: A most True Relation of a PILGRIMESS, M. Antonia
Bourignon, Traveling toward ETERNITY.

Published by Mr. CHRISTIAN de CORT, Late Director of the Isle of Noordstrand,
Superior of the Oratory, and Pastor of S. John at Mechlin.

Divided into Three PARTS.

Which deserve to be Read, Understood and Considered by all who desire to be
Saved.

Written Originally in French, and faithfully Translated into English.

To which is added, A Preface to the English READER.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1696.

ISAIAH ix. 2. The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: They
that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light shined.
TO THE ENGLISH READER, Of whatsoever Party or Persuasion.
THE Degeneracy of the Christian World in all its Sects and Parties, from the
true Spirit of Christianity and the primitive Institution of Jesus Christ, is
the general observation of all Men; and the Regret of those who are truly sober
and serious. And as the Corruption of the best things is always the most vile
and abominable, witness Devils and Men; so that of the Christians is a Byword
and a Scandal among the Jews, Turks and Heathens; and they may rise up in
Judgment at the last Day, and condemn us, we being sunk farther below the
common Principles of Human Nature, as well as Religion, than themselves. The
Moral Virtues of Justice, Temperance, etc. are banished farther from the Minds
and Conversation of Christians, than they are from among the Turks and
Heathens; and we are so far removed from the Spirit, Life, and Doctrine of Jesus
Christ, that ours may be truly termed Antichristian.

He denied himself in all things; and we deny our selves in nothing: He never
did his own Will, but the Will of Him that sent him; and we ever do our own,
and not the Will of God: He was perfectly dead to the Honors and Riches, and
Pleasures, and Learning of this World; and we only live to them: He had a
toilsom and laborious Life, far from Ease, and full of Crosses, of Contempt,
Reproaches, and Contradictions from Men; and we still seek our Ease where we
can have it, will force others to bear the Cross rather than take it up our
selves, and would rather be contemned by God, than even for Righteousnesssake
endure Reproaches and Contempt from Men: He was meek and lowly in Heart, and
with great meekness suffered the Contradiction of Men; and Pride and
Haughtiness is the Spirit we are acted by, even when we most disclaim it, and
we cannot bear with Contradictions from any without inward Resentment and
Displeasure: Whatever he did was always accompanied with Righteousness, and
Goodness, and Truth; and whatever we do has one or all of the contrary
Qualities, Injustice, Malice or Hypocrisy: In short, Charity was the living
Principle of his Heart and Life, and all his Actions were continual Streamings
and Effects of the Love of God and of all Men; and Selflove, even to a Contempt
of God and Hatred of Men, when they shock us in any thing, is the secret Spring
by which we are always acted. The Lives of Christians are as flat a
Contradiction to his Commands as to his Life and Spirit: He bids us seek the
lowest Place; and we are never at rest, but climb as high as others will let
us: He bids us, take the Beam out of our own Eyes, and we are still spying the
Motes in our Neighbors: He would not have us lay up for our selves Treasures
upon Earth; and all our Care is about earthly things: He would have us, seek
first the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof; and that is the last
and least of our Endeavors, except in Word only: He bids us, deny our selves
and take up our Cross daily; and in every thing we seek our selves, and rather
than take up the Cross, will stick at no Injustice to avoid it: He commands us
to love one another; and for a Trifle we bite and devour one another.

Now one would think strange how the Professors of Christianity can reconcile
their Practice with the Hopes of Heaven, while their Lives are so contrary to
the Gospel. But, as the comparing the Lives and Temper of the Christian World
at present, with the Life and Doctrine of Jesus Christ, does plainly show their
Contrariety to his: So if we shall enquire into the several sorts of Corruption
and Degeneracy of the Age wherein he lived, recorded in the Gospel, and which
he did chiefly set himself against, and upon what Grounds they nevertheless did
presume of God's Favor, and of being his Children, and shall compare them with
ours; we still find the same Leaven spreads still; and tho we have other Names,
yet we have still the same Corruptions and the same Spirit. It is not in one
Age or one party that these Corruptions do prevail, but more or less in all
Ages and among all Parties; and though Names and Faces change, yet in every Age
Men's Natures and Dispositions are for the main the same. It was not needful
therefore that Jesus Christ should appear in every Age to make known their
Vices and Corruptions; the Reproof of the Age wherein he lived, is the Reproof
of all, and what he said to the several Sects among the Jews, he says to us,
and we may read our Faults and Judgment in theirs.

There are three sorts of Persons especially spoken of in the Gospel, the
Publicans and Sinners, the Sadducees, and the Scribes and Pharisees. The first
were gross and scandalous sinners, known for such by all, their Company avoided
for that Reason, and they self-condemned, as acting against the Light and
Checks of their own Consciences. The second were the Wits and Sparks, and
mighty Men of Reason of that Age. They could not believe a Resurrection, nor
the being of Angels and Spirits, these seemed not consistent with their Reason,
nor with the Ideas they had of this present World, and therefore they denied
them; even as if blind Men should deny the being of Light and Colors, because
they cannot feel them with their Hands, nor touch them as they do other Bodies,
with the End of their Staff. The third were the most Religious People of the
Age, wherein they lived; they were had in great Veneration by all; they were
not guilty of the scandalous Vices of the Publicans, they abhorred them so much
that they would not eat with them; they read and studied the Scriptures much;
they were much in Devotion, and made long Prayers, they were exact Observers of
the Sabbath Day, would reprove a Man that came to be healed, or that plucked an
Ear of Corn on it; they were very exact and scrupulous in little things, so
afraid of breaking the Command of Paying Tithes of all their Increase, that
they would not omit even their Mint, Anise and Cummin: But, in the mean time
they despised the weighty Matters of the Law, Righteousness, Mercy and the Love
of God; they were Proud, and covetous, and wordly-minded; they did all to be
seen of Men; they sought the Praise of Men more than that of God; they devoured
Widows Houses, but had still a Religious Pretense for it; they would learn
People to despise their Parents; but it was on the account of Corban; they
would hate and persecute others even to Death, but it was to do God Service;
they were mighty zealous to propagate their Religion, and would compass Sea and
Land to gain Proselytes, but then our Savior tells us, They were twofold more
the Child of the Devil than themselves.

Now, it is observable, That our Savior's Reproofs are levelled mostly against
these two last sort of Persons: The former he treats with such Pity and
Compassion, that his Enemies tax him for a Friend of Publicans and Sinners. He
tells them, There is joy in Heaven over one Sinner that repents, more than
ninety and nine just Persons, that need no Repentance: And that he came not to
call the Righteous but Sinners to Repentance. But for the other two, he warns
his Disciples to beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees. He
calls them a Generation of Vipers, whited Sepulchers, fair and beautiful
without, but within full of Corruption and Rottenness; he terms them the
Children of the Devil, and asks, How they can escape the Damnation of Hell? To
judge according to Appearance one would think they deserved a milder Treatment,
and that the other ought to have been most Lasht; and this is the Course and
Practice of the World: But that which seems Righteous before Men is an
Abomination in the Sight of God.

Our Savior's Conduct in this, we may be sure, was the effect of Divine Equity
and Wisdom. The Publicans and Sinners were not only looked on as such by all
others, but also were self-condemned; they knew they were doing what they ought
not to have done, their Conscience could not but often smite them, and the
Divine Grace exciting them, and outward Afflictions chastising them might one
time or other bring them to Repentance; and the Sense of the greatness of their
Sins might awaken in them an answerable Sense of the Divine Goodness; so that
where Sin had abounded Grace should so much the more abound, and they who saw
there was so much forgiven them, would love much. But the Pharisees and
Sadducces were not so capable of Conviction; their Sores were skinned over with
a fair Show of Reason and Religion; their Sins were mostly Spiritual; they had
no Remorse for them; the World and they themselves did approve them in what
they did; they thought they were doing God Service; and they had formed to
themselves such a Righteousness of their own as made it next to impossible to
bring them to Repentance, or to seek after the Righteousness of God by Faith.

There was no such Hazard that sincere and well-meaning Persons should be
seduced by open and scandalous Sinners. Their gross Sins and the ill Character
they went under, were as Beacons to warn others to beware of them. But it was
not so easy to avoid the Leaven of one of the other two; they compassed Sea
and Land to gain Proselytes; and the specious Reasons of the one, and the
seeming Piety, Zeal and Devotion of the other, with such a plausible
Representation of Religion, as might encourage them to hope for Heaven, though
they loved the World and followed their own Wills here, were Snares which it
was not easy to escape.

Publicans and Sinners were more capable of receiving the Truth, they were
convinced of all; and even when they were not resolved to follow it, yet the
inward Conviction of their Consciences would keep them from maligning or
persecuting the Publishers of it: But the other two resisted it with all their
Force, stuck at nothing that might suppress it, did calumniate and defame it;
persecuted its Author and Followers to the Death, and thought that in all they
did God Service.

Jesus Christ then foreseeing the Effects of the Effects of the Malice* and
Subtilty of the Devil, how forward he would be to slip into his Church, to
profess himself his Disciple, and pervert his Design and Doctrine, under Color
of owning and promoting it; and knowing well the Corruption of Men's Hearts,
how naturally the Love of themselves and of the World would make them take up
with Shadows of Religion, instead of the Life and Substance of it; he takes
Care not only to show them plainly by his Life and Doctrine, wherein it truly
consists; viz. in true CHARITY as its End, and in a constant denial of our
selves, as to our own Wills, and as to the Honors, Riches and Pleasures of
this World, as the effectual and necessary Means of attaining to this End: But
he also lets them see the false Religion that Self-love takes up with, and the
main Branches into which it divides itself, in the different Pictures of the
Pharisees and Sadducees, the one making an Idol of their corrupt Reason, and
worshipping it for their God; and the other teaching for Doctrins the
Commandments of Men, making the Commandments of God ^f none effect, either
through their own Glosses, or the Traditions of their Elders, being more
zealous for these than the plain and simple Word of God; and both of them
establishing a Righteousness of their own, a Righteousness founded on
Self-love, Self-will, and the Love of Temporal Things, and making void the
Righteousness of God, being void of Charity, and the Love of things Eternal.

And that the Disciples of Jesus Christ had need of such Warnings, the fatal
Experience of all following Ages has but too evidently testified; and, as it
seems in our Savior's Days, in the last Age of the Jewish State, these
Corruptions among them were come to their height; so in this last Age of the
degenerate Christian State, this twofold Leaven seems to have spread through
all Parties, and leavened the whole Lump.

The World is now full of those who set up for great Masters of Reason, and
measure every divine Truth by Mathematical Principles and Demonstrations, and
what will not bear that Test is ridiculed by them, and though a Truth be never so
plainly revealed in the Holy Scriptures, yet if it do not suit their way of
Reasoning, and if they think it lies fair to be pelted by their Witticisms,
they are sure to treat it in Derision, and to start Questions about it, as
their Predecessors did to our Savior about the Resurrection, of the Woman who
had been married to seven Husbands, that were Brethren, viz. Whose Wife she
should be of the seven at the Resurrection? And though they meet daily with as
inexplicable Difficulties in the visible World, in Bodies, the being of which
they cannot deny; and if they had lived all their Days in an Island among
People where the manner of the Propagation of Men and Beasts was never heard
of, when they had been told of it, would have thought it as ridiculous and
impossible a thing as any Truth delivered in the Holy Scriptures; and though they
have lived to see the Principles of the greatest Philosophers, who thought they
established all things by unerring Rules of Aequations, hissed out of Doors;
yet this will not keep them from making Idols of their own Ideas, and
worshipping their own Reason, and Christ and his Sacred Doctrine must be
despised if he will not fall down before it and worship it: And how strangely
this Spirit spreads now in the World, he that runs may read.

There is no Delusion more dangerous, and which leads to more irrecoverable
Blindness than this of making our wretched Reason and the Ideas it forms to it
self the Measure and Standard of Truth. The Eyes of our Mind are like those of
our Body, we may turn them to any Side we please, but can discern nothing
aright, unless the Light shine upon them, and let them see the Objects round
about them. So our Minds may form to themselves many Ideas and Imaginations,
but none of them conformable to the nature of things, without a suitable Light
to discover and direct them. In the Material and visible World, from the
general Notions of Matter and Motion, and the Combination of variously moved,
and figured Bodies, Men form to themselves such and such Systems of the
Universe; which they strongly fancy to be the true Model of it; but when we
come to consider more nearly the things themselves, we find them as far
different as Light is from Darkness. Our Minds must receive due and suitable
Impressions from the Objects themselves, else they can have no right Sentiment
of them. A blind Man can never conceive aright what Light and Colors, the Sun
and this visible World are, unless his Eyes be opened and he receive the Light.
The Light surrounds him, and he comprehends it not; we may by many Words and
Similitudes give him general and dark Notions of the Excellency of Light and
Colors, and the Beauty of this visible World; but one Glance of the Light it
self will discover more to him than a thousand Descriptions made by us. It is
the same of Divine and Spiritual Things. The Natural Man perceives not the
Things of God, but they are foolishness to him. No Man knows the Things of God,
but by the Spirit of God. A Divine Light and Illumination is necessary to make
us understand and relish Divine Things. And if we think to comprehend and judge
of them by our Reason and Natural Ideas, we do as foolishly and unreasonably as
a blind Man that would judge of Light and Colors, by the Ideas he has gathered
from his Touch and other Senses. And as the seeing and enjoying the Light, and
the receiving the other Impressions of this visible World are quite another
thing than the Ideas we retain and form of these things to our selves in the
Light's absence; for these notional Ideas can never enliven, and warm, and
cheer our Bodies, and make us enjoy all this visible World, as the other does,
no more than the Picture of the Sun can give us Light and Heat, as the Sun
himself does (for these are but the Pictures of the Things themselves): So the
true Light and Impression of Divine Things upon the Mind is as far beyond the
notional Ideas that we may form of them (even though they were the true Pictures
of them;) and as a blind Man ought to submit to the Judgment and Conduct of
those who enjoy the Light, and of whose Sincerity he has no reason to doubt,
and in the mean Time to strive, if possible, to enjoy himself; so ought we to
submit our Understanding and our Will to the Divine Revelation of the Will of
God made to others, and by them declared to us, and in the mean time so to
yield up our selves to God as that the Eyes of our Understanding being
enlightened we may come to comprehend what the good and acceptable, and perfect
Will of God is.

But the Leaven of the Pharisees has yet more universally overspread
Christendom than that of the Sadducees. Upon this is founded the Difference of
the several Sects and Parties that are in the Christian World, and the Hatred
and Animosity wherewith they prosecute one another, one crying, Lo here is
Christ; another, Lo he is there. The same Leaven runs through all Parties, though
it put on different outward Forms, according to the different Interests and
Engagements of the respective Parties. Some are very zealous for particular
Doctrins and Opinions which are uncertain as to their Truth, and of no
Necessity for Salvation: Some set up for particular Forms and Rites of Worship,
which may be either used or let alone, without hazard of Salvation: And others
are as zealously bent against them. Some for such and such Forms of Discipline
and Government, and others for overturning them. And though most of the Things,
for or against which they bend all their Zeal, be of little Moment either for
Promoting or Hindrance of Salvation; yet they seem to lay the whole Stress of
Religion upon them; and having drawn them up into positive or negative
Confessions of Faith, Creeds, Articles, Canons of Councils, and Acts of General
Assemblies, they baptize them into the Sacred Names of The Truths of God, the
Cause of Jesus Christ, the Interest of his Church, the setting the Crown upon
Christ's Head; they teach for Doctrins the Commandments of Men, and are more
zealous for their Forms and Systems of Doctrins, drawn up by themselves or
their Predecessors, than for the Simplicity and Plainness of the Holy
Scriptures; and tho a Man embrace from his Herrt the Divine Writings, and
endeavor to square his Life by the Rules set down in them, yet if he do not
receive their Systems, and be not zealous for or against such outward Forms and
Rites as they embrace or dislike, he is to them as a Heathen and a Publican.
And while they have a Zeal for the outside of Religion, they neglect
Righteousness, Mercy and the Love of God; while they avoid the Scandalous and
Carnal Vices that would make them hateful in the World, their Hearts are full
of the Spiritual ones, which are as hateful to God. In short, the Apostle gives
us a plain Character of them, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. warning us, That in the
last days perilous Times shall come; for Men shall be Lovers of their own
selves, covetous, proud, boasters, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural Affection, Truce Breakers, false Accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traiterous, heady,
high-minded, lovers of Pleasures more than lovers of God, having a Form of
Godliness, but denying the Power thereof.

It is strange to see how wilfully Men mistake the Nature of Christianity, and
place it in that which it does not conconsist, and what it truly is they
despise and trample upon. Christianity may be either considered in its End, or
in the Means it directs us to, for the attainment of that End. Its End is
CHARITY, to love God with all our Heart and our Neighbor as our selves. To
love God is to love his Nature, his Righteousness, his Goodness, his Truth, and
to be transformed into the same Image; to love him with all our Hearts is to
love him only for himself, and all other things only in and for God, and
entirely to depend upon him. To love our Neighbors as our selves is to love
them as his Images, as being capable to be transformed into his Nature, and to
endeavor to bring them, with our selves, to the Love and Enjoyment of God.
This is the Essence of Religion, and the indispensible Duty that God requires
of Man in all Estates, whether that of Innocence, or of his Reparation since
his Fall; and as our Savior tells us, Matthew. 22. 40. On these two Commandments
hang all the Law and the Prophets. Had man continued in the Integrity in which
he was created, no other Duty had been required of him. But he turning away his
Love from God, and setting it on himself, and on the Creatures, making himself
his last End, and the Creatures his chief Happiness, Means are proposed to Man
to bring him back to the Love of God, and to remove the Hindrances of it; and
he having forfeited the Friendship and Love of God, Hopes are given him of
Recovering his Love and Favor; for obtaining of which the Intercession of a
Mediator was needful, who by his Merits and Favor with God might obtain it;
and the main Hindrances of the Love of God being Self-love, and the Love of the
Creatures, he is directed to the Use of such Means as may effectually mortify
and subdue these in him; and Man being a wayward Patient, unwilling to take the
Physic provided for him, as being bitter and unpleasant, the Physician takes
Man's Nature on him, and takes the Remedies first himself, flies the Ease, the
Honors, the Riches, the Pleasures, and the Sciences of this World, embraces
Poverty, Reproaches, Troubles and Pains, and denies himself and his own Will in
every thing, that he might do the Will of him that sent him. So the essentially
necessary and effectual means to recover the Love of God, is Faith in God
through Jesus Christ, with unfeigned Repentance, a constant denial of our
selves, and forsaking of every thing that hinders us to love God; and for this
End the taking up our Cross daily, and following of Christ. The Holy Scriptures
are the Sacred Records wherein God's Love to Mankind, the Life and Doctrine of
Jesus Christ, and the Precepts he has given for the mortifying of our corrupt
Nature, and returning to the Love of God, are plainly manifested to us; and, in
this respect they are necessary to make us wise unto Salvation, as the written
Counsels of a Physician, would be for the Recovery of his Patient's Health.
Sermons, religious Offices, Sacraments, sacred Assemblies, Pastors,
Church Government, etc. are more remote means for bringing Men to Salvation,
and, if rightly used may be very helpful to direct them in the Practice of the
necessary and effectual means for returning to an entire Dependence upon God:
But if the first be wholly neglected, and these be rested on, and if we think
we are religious because zealous about these things, and in the mean time are
still Lovers of our own selves, self-willed, self-conceited, worldly-minded,
envious, malicious, our Actions void of Righteousness, Goodness, Truth, etc.
our Religion is the Leaven of the Pharisees, it is but a Form of Godliness, we
are alienated from the Life of God, it is a Righteousness of our own, and we
are as mad and foolish as sick Men would be, who should run about among
Apothecaries and Surgeons, and be very greedy to hear the Receipts of Cures for
their Maladies, daily read and explained to them, should fight and quarrel, and
hate, and destroy one another, in contending which were the best Explanations
of the Receipts, and which Company of Apothecaries and Surgeons, had the best
Form of Government; and, in the mean time, both Directors and Patients were
sick unto Death, yet neither would apply themselves to take those Remedies
which by all were granted to be necessary and effectual for their Recovery, and
without which they must inevitably perish.

Now the Writings of the Author of this following Treatise, containing such
bright Illustrations of the Truths of God, revealed in the Holy Scriptures, and
discovering so plainly in what manner they are perverted by the false Glosses
of the Professors of Christianity in their respective Parties, I hope it will
be no ill service done to the Christian Religion, and to this Island in
particular, to make them more generally known to this part of the World; of
which Design this is an Essay.

The Author was a Virgin called Antonia Bourignon, born in the Town of Lisle,
in Flanders, in the Year 1616. the Daughter of a rich Man there, and Baptized
and Bred up by her Parents in the Communion of the Church of Rome. Being taught
to read in her Childhood, and having read the Gospels, and being told of the
Life of Jesus Christ, how poor, and mean, and despised, and self-denied he was*
and seeing all People live very unlike to him, in Ease and abundance, and
Pleasures, and Honors, she asked her Parents, Where are the Christians? Let us
go to the Country where the Christians live? And though her Parents derided her
for this, yet this Impression ever remained with her; and it was her constant
Theme to let the World see what a true Christian is, and that none such are to
be found.

From her very Childhood she had inward Conversation with God, and gave her
self to Prayer and Divine Retirement; but this Retirement being looked on, by
the Suggestions of her elder Sister, to her Companions, as the effect of
Stupidity and Sottishness, and she despised therefore, to avoid this, she
applied her self to take part in their Recreations and Divertisements, and she
quickly gained their Esteem and Favor above her Sister, but lost her
Conversation with God.

Yet he did not cease now and then to awaken her, even in the midst of her
Divertisements; but Company and these Amusements still got the Ascendent. Then
God tried her with more severe means, filling her Mind with fearful Ideas of
Death, Judgment and Hell, whereby she came to her self again, and saw the
Vanity of all earthly things, which would end at Death, and leave the Soul
empty of true Good, and full of real Evils. This made her abhor her present
Life, all worldly Advantages, the Body, and the Caring for it. And because the
Solicitations of earthly things were apt to return again, she took Care to
have this deeply engraven upon her Spirit; she went often to Charnelhouses, to
view the Bones of the Dead, saying, See what thou art within a little while?
thou shall be like this, and yet more horrible. She handled them to overcome
her natural Horror for them, and to make the Thoughts of Death familiar to her.
For six Months she begged no other thing of God but the Remembrance of Death,
and obtained it. It was about the fifteenth or sixteenth Year of her Age that
these Combats began with her, and toward the eighteenth that she came to a
full Resolution of yielding up her Will wholly to God, and of abandoning the
World.

For seven Years after the Tears and Sorrows of her Penitence did continue,
which she accompanied with great Austerity and Mortification, wearing a Shirt
of Horse-hair next her Body Night and Day, sleeping only on a Dealboard, and
that no longer than three Hours each Night, passing the rest on her Knees in
Prayers, giving the Sheets of her Bed and her other Linen to the Poor, and
still bringing them back to be washed with those of the Family, without the
Knowledge of the Servants. She eat no more than what might preserve her Life,
and would mingle Earth and Ashes with what she did eat, to avoid the Pleasure
that might tempt her. Her Penitence and Mortifications were not the effects of
a Melancholy Humor, nor did they produce it, she being of a most cheerful
Disposition, even till Death. But she punished herself, with an inward
Contentment, out of a Principle of Justice, being convinced there was nothing
more just, than to regrate the Sin of having ceased to love so lovely a God.
God has no need of our Mortifications, but our Flesh and Corruption have great
need of them. Timothy was so sensible of this, that he stood in need of a
Caution from the Apostle Paul, to look also to his Health. No doubt there may
sometimes be Excess in these Mortifications, of which M. Bourignon was so
sensible, that she could never advise any Body in this to follow her Example,
but to resign themselves to God, and to take up cheerfully the daily Crosses
and Mortifications which his Providence shall appoint for them. This so few are
unwilling to do, that undoubtedly God loves more the readiness of those who
mortify themselves too much, than the Sloth of those who do it too little, or
not at all. She would have continued this Austerity still, if at the Age of
twenty five Years God had not commanded her to leave off all this, and to lead
an ordinary Life.

When she remembered how she had lost God, whom formerly she enjoyed; she would
pass whole Nights in crying out, My God! my God! where art thou? my God! what
shall I do? what must I do to find thee again? what would thou have me to do
to be well-pleasing in thy Sight? what shall I do to fulfill thy Will? After
much Time, many Prayers, Watchings and Tears, God was pleased inwardly to
manifest himself to her anew. And the first Answer she received to the Petition
she had so often made, was this Divine Doctrine, which contains the whole
substance of the Gospel: Forsake all Earthly Things: Free thy self from the
Love of the Creatures: Deny thy self. This was about the twentieth Year of her
Age. These were the Words which stuck ever with her, and upon these she laid
the Foundations of a Christian Life.

She forsook all earthly things for the Love of God, and to give her self
wholly to him, and yielded up her self entirely to his Conduct, doing nothing
without his Direction. She thought to have met with true Christians in the
Monasteries, and was resolved to have shut up her self into one of them: But
there she found them as full of the Love of the World, and of Self-love, as
elsewhere. God made known to her* That the Society of Christians, which she had
been seeking for in vain, was to be reestablished in the World by her means.
This seemed impossible to her, because of her Sex, her Weakness, her Ignorance,
her Meanness, and having never read nor been taught by any what the Gospel-Life
was. And having laid this before God, she had this Answer. Behold these Trees
in the Churchyard; they seem dry Wood, without Leaves or Fruit, or any
Appearance; nevertheless, when the Season comes, they shall bring forth Leaves,
Flowers and in abundance, without any Body's touching them: So shall it be of
my Work. The manner how she was trained up by God for this is remarkable. That
she might acquire Divine Light, she was not sent to Study, nor Reading, nor
Speculations, nor to fill her Head with the Knowledge of Spiritual Things: But
she resigned her self in Simplicity to God, avoiding Sin, needless
Distractions, and the Activity of her own Reason; without desiring to know more
than what was needful for her to know in the moment in which she was, referring
all the rest to God, who gave her Knowledge and Light according to the
Occasions wherein she needed them, whether for her own Conduct, or that of
others, for the Discovery of Truth, or the Refutation of Error.

When she had learned from God his Designs in general, she did not immediately,
with haste and precipitation set about the Execution of them, as many rash
Persons would have done with much Zeal: She had still this Rule, That it was
not enough that God inspired good Designs, but we must also wait upon him till
he open the Way, and direct all our Steps in the Execution of them; that the
Spirit of God acts leisurely, yea slowly, but steadily, and what he produces in
so leisurely and imperceptible a manner, has afterward a lasting and solid
Subsistence: Whereas the Spirit of the Devil moves all at first, makes a great
Noise and a great deal ado, but in process of time all slackens and vanishes
into Smoke and Nothing. She moved always by this Rule.

She made several Attempts to bring others to lead a truly Christian Life; Some
Nuns were inclined to follow her Directions; some Bishops and Priests were
convinced of the total Degeneracy of Christendom, and that the Spring of all
the Corruption was in the Clergy; but Human Respects and Worldly Considerations
kept them from prosecuting what their Inward Convictions prompted them to. She
was prevailed with to take the Charge of an Hospital of young Maids, and to
educate them in the Fear of God, and the Spirit of the Gospel: But after nine
Years Labor, though to outward Appearance they seemed most modest and virtuous,
yet, to her great Grief, she found them in Heart to be led captive by the
Devil, at his Will. She was afterward moved by God to set down in Writing the
Divine Truths communicated to her; and having asked of God, If she should keep
these Writings secret or publish them? He said to her, Yes, puhlish them; for
by them the Gospel shall be preached through all the World.

The writing of this Treatise, The Light of the World, was occasioned by M.
Christian de Cort, Superior of the Fathers of the Oratory at Mechlin in
Flanders, a Man full of Zeal for God and Charity for his Neighbor, and void of
selfseeking. He no sooner discovered that God had hid in her the Treasures of
his Divine Wisdom, than he took all occasions to be instructed by her in the
Truth; and when alone, set down in Writing the Sum of what had past in their
Conversation, but this briefly and without Order. He acquainted her with his
Resolution to publish this to the World, thinking himself obliged in Conscience
to undeceive others, as by these Divine Truths he was undeceived himself. But
when she had seen his Papers, and read a little of them, she told him, they
would be useful for himself, but not for others, because they often answered
the Thoughts of his own Mind, which no Body perceived but himself; and being
solicited by him to compose this Work anew, returning him his Papers, she her
self wrote by way of Conference, the things which God brought into her Memory,
in the same manner as they are now published in the three parts of The Light of
the World.

She went to Holland at the Solicitation of M. de Cort, in order to the
Printing of this Book. To this she had some Repugnance at first, having never
been formerly in any Place without the Dependence of the Church of Rome, and
being made believe that all the Heretics, as they called them, were monstrous
and Infectious. But having recommended this Affair to God, she was told, That
these common Differences of Religion do not bring Salvation, but the Love of
God only and Virtue, which we ought to love in all Persons who aspire to it,
without regarding the outward Religion they profess; that she ought to do good
to all, and communicate to all the Light of the Divine Truth, of what Religion
soever they be. This wrought in her Soul so perfect an Impartiality, that she
never afterward inquired of what Religion one was, provided only he loved to
put in practice the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and to recover the Love of God.

This impartiality of Spirit, and her equal Concern for the good of all, and
the Freedom she took to manifest the Corruption of all Parties, and how far
they were from the Spirit of true Christianity, made her to be hated and
persecuted on all sides. The Jesuits, the Jansenists, the Lutheran and
Calvinist Ministers, the Anabaptists, the Quakers, the Labadists, did
respectively prosecute her, either with their Tongue or Pen, or by exciting the
Civil Power, where she staid, or animating the Fury of the Rabble against her.
They made her pass for a Visionarist, a Person of a wicked Life, suspected of
Sorcery, a Blasphemer, the worst of Heretics, one who did propagate the most
damnable Opinions; but Wisdom is justified of her Children. The Innocence and
Purity of her Life, and the perfect Conformity of it to the Christian Doctrine
of her Writings was made appear by Evidences beyond all Exception. The public
Confession which she made of her Faith, and the Agreement of her Writings
therewith show the Falsehood of their Calumnies as to her Doctrine; and the
Writings published against her gave her occasion the more to clear and manifest
the Truth; so that what they were apt to except against in some of her Writings
she more fully explained in others; as appears, for Instance, in her
Advertisement against the Quakers, where she speaks more expressly of the
Respect due to Pastors, and the Sacraments.

She deplored greatly the unhappy Schisms which have divided Christendom into
so many Factions, disapproved all that savours of the Spirit of a Party, of
Disputes and Partialities; protested a thousand times against the establishing
a new one, but aimed to persuade all to observe the Doctrine of Jesus Christ,
without changing from one party to another; so that she even dissuaded some
Protestants of her Acquaintance from turning over to the Church of Rome, as
they had been solicited by others, but to obey the Doctrine of Jesus Christ in
the Communion wherein they were, such Changes being but the effect of Vanity.
She said, the Difference of Sects and Parties among Christians was founded upon
their Neglect of the Essentials of Christianity, and their Zeal for some of the
Accessories and Externals of it; and comparing the first to a Sword, and the
other to its Sheath, the great Debate among the respective Parties was, which
had the best Sheath, and in the mean time the Devil robbed us of the Sword.

She was desirous to know the Will of God, even as to the ordering of outward
things, and received from him the following Rules:

1. Do all in good order, and in season; for I am a God of order: And Disorder
comes from the Devil, and from Sin. 2. Never be eager in Temporal Affairs; but
apply your mind to do well what you do, in quietness; for the wandering of the
mind, and disquiet spoils all. 3. Take care of making a good use of every
thing, that nothing be spoiled or lost; for what is lost by your negligence,
will be required of you; and what you have no need of, may be useful for
another. 4. Keep your self still employed in things useful, saving, or
necessary. For idleness is the Mother of all Evils, and the Devil lodges in an
idle Soul. 5. Labor, that you may accomplish your Penitence; and not that you
may please Men, or gain Money, or satifie your self, for all the Labors that
you go about for any other end than to please me, are lost Labor; and you have
your reward in what you sought for, whether it be complaisance of Men, or the
Money you have gained, or your own satisfaction. 6. Apply your mind to look well
to every thing, that nothing perish through your negligence; and what you observe
to be amiss, help it as soon as you can, by repairing as much as is possible
for you all the faults that you have committed. 7. Do the same as to the good
of your Neighbor, that you may fufill that Command of loving your Neighbor as
your self.
They who were with her to whom she had recommended these Rules, being
unwilling to be so exact in the smalest matters which while they were
conversant in the World seemed to them of no moment, and she having asked
Counsel of God thereupon: she had this Answer: All that Men have to do in this
World are but trifles and of little moment, and if they will not obey me in so
small and easy matters, how will they do in great and difficult ones? Not that
I have need of them for my self; nothing can profit or hurt me: But you have
great need to observe exactly all these things that I teach you: For being made
up of a Soul and Body, both which have need of entertainment, if you do not
carefully order Temporal things, your Body will fall into a thousand sorts of
Miseries, Anxieties, Maladies, Disquiets, Confusion, Poverty and Want: which at
last will become unsupportable to you: And all this, because of your little
foresight, your disorder or negligence. Therefore I instruct you how you ought
to carry on all things, even to the least of your Actions, that you may be
happy even in this miserable Life. Not that I have need that you be Rich or
Poor, in Health or Sickness, in good Order or in Confusion, neat or unclean
outwardly: all this does not touch me nor offend me, so long as your Souls
abide in my Love, and in the keeping of my Commandments. But the love I bear
you, and the care I have for you, makes me give you these instructions for your
own good.

But the full story of her Life is to be had in the Account of it written by
her self, and the continuation of it by the R. P. P.

I know People will be possessed with many prejudices, against the Writings of
this Person. The plain representation which she gives of the Gospel Life and
Spirit, and the contrariety of the lives of Christians thereunto, of the
universal Corruption of all parties, and their taking up with the shadow
instead of the substance of Religion, will provoke many to disparage and
discredit them by all means; and the Craftsmen that live by those Silver
Shrines, will stir up the multitude against them; and from the circumstances of
her Person, and the singularity of some of her Sentiments they will take
occasion to fill Peoples minds with prejudices, so as not once to allow her a
fair hearing. I shall not offer to remove the particular exceptions which may
be made against them. I shall only take the freedom to say something as to
three or four general Prejudcies, which are most obvious.

They are ready to except against her for pretending to Divine inspiration, and
that the Doctrine she declares is immediately and inwardly communicated to her
by the Spirit of God. That God may immediately inspire Souls with his Divine
Light and Truth, cannot be denied: That he has tied himself never to do it
after the Apostle's days, and the Consignation of the Gospel in writiting
cannot be made evident: That there are many false pretenders to Divine
inspiration, and who thus highly take the name of God in vain, is but too
evident, especially in the Age wherein we live: That we ought not to believe
every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they are of God or not. The Spirit of
God has already warned us, that the surest Test whereby to try them is the
conformity of the Doctrine with the Word of God and the Gospel of Jesus Christ
(which is sufficiently confirmed already) and its tendency is to take us off
from all Earthly things and from our selves, and to bring us to God, and the
entire correspondence of the Persons Life and Spirit therewith in all things,
will I think be readily granted by many. Now M. A. B. desires to be put to this
fair Trial, if her Doctrine be not the same with the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
if the constant tract of her Life and Spirit be not answerable thereunto, and
the Fruits and Gifts of the Spirit (which he ever brings along with him
wherever he resides) were not to be seen in her. It is just then to give her a
fair hearing: And if you peruse her Writings impartially, it is like you will
meet with many remarkable Characters that are not ordinarily to be found in
many Writings. A clear and distinct account of the essential Truths of
Christianity, with a constant urging of them as the one thing necessary, and
distinguishing them from the accessory Truths which are not necessary to
Salvation: An unimitable simplicity of expression, which a Child may understand
with as singular a sublimity of thoughts; a convincing power and force going
along with them; a plain unfolding in a few Lines the difficulties about which
the Learned write many Volumes; a constant harmony and uniformity of sentiments
in the Writings of a course of forty Years (from about the 23d to the 65th year
of her Age in which she died;) with an evidence and clearness to the conviction
of our natural Reason; and all this by one who never read any Books, never
conversed with the Learned to be instructed by them, never premeditated what
she wrote, never blotted out nor mended what was once written; but being
attentive unto the love of God in the calm and inward recollection of her
Spirit, wrote as fast as her hand could guide the Pen; and when some writings
were laid by unfinished for some years, returned to them and finished them
after the same manner, without reading any more of what had been written than
some few of the immediately foregoing Lines to make a due Connection: And
innumerable instances more. But above all the exact and constant purity of her
Life, being a perfect pattern and living exemplar of the Spirit and Doctrine of
the Gospel are things that deserve consideration. If there were a Race and
Nation of People born blind, who had never seen the light, but knew their
Houses, their Furniture, their Fields, etc. only by the touch. If some
strangers should come in among them pretending to see the Light, they would not
readily take it on their word, having no Idea of any such thing: But if those
strangers at their very first entry, should describe their Houses, (where they
had never formerly been) their Dishes, their Seats, their Bulk, Places and
Shape, and going out should tell them on a sudden the Neighboring Hills,
Valleys, Rivers and Villages, their situation and distances, which the
Inhabitants themselves could not learn but by long use, and by going from place
to place, and feeling them with their hands or staff; they would certainly be
convinced that these were endued with some more ready and perfect faculty and
mean of knowing all these things than ever they experienced. So for those who
pretend to Divine Inspiration and to be led by the Spirit of God, and give no
evidence for it but their bare assertion, indulging their corrupt Nature, and
being as much Lovers of their own selves and of Earthly things as others, there
is no reason to take it on their word, but rather to look on them as deceivers.
But if any professing an inward illumination from God and a lively sense of
Divine things, should despise the Ease, the Honors, the Wealth and Pleasures
of this World, oppose constantly the desires of corrupt Nature, deny their own
Will, mortify their outward senses, have their minds ever turned toward God,
being always resigned to his Will; and withal without Study, Reading, Learning
or Meditation, should give a more clear, full, plain and consonant
representation of Divine Truths even to the conviction of our natural reason,
than we are able to do after much Study, Learning and Conversation; we have
reason to think that such are endued with a more clear, effcttual and
enlightening sense and knowledge of the Divine Truths, than our notional
knowledge can pretend to. It is by this Test that M. A. B. desires to be Tried.

It being objected to her that since she declared only the Truths contained in
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, there was no need of any new Revelation of them,
they being revealed already. To this she replied that as the Law of God of old
was so corrupted by the glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees that they had made
the Commandments of God of no effect thereby, and therefore God was pleased to
rescue his Law from their corruptions by the Divine Explanations of it in the
Gospel of Jesus Christ; so the Doctrine of the Gospel is so corrupted by the
glosses of men and these countenanced by the Learning and Wisdom of the World
that men do not think themselves obliged to obey the Gospel according to the
Letter, and therefore God has thought fit by the Divine simplicity of his Light
through the Organ of a silly Maid to rescue it from their corrupt glosses and to
confound their Learning even to their own Conviction.

They pretend to expose her also for advancing new Sentiments and Doctrins and
thereby giving occasion to more Disputes and Controversies instead of lessening
them. But never any did more abhor the Spirit of Dispute and Controversy than
she; and her proposing of these particular sentiments are far from giving
occasion to them; for as she makes a clear difference between the essential and
the accessory Truths of Christianity, so she proposes these sentiments only as
accessorie ones, which may be helpful to some to make them the more admire and
love God and despise this present World, but not as necessary to be believed by
all, and she has often said that People need not believe them, and that for
this they will neither be more nor less pleasing to God; that they even ought
to abstain from inquiring about them out of a Spirit of curiosity, for such
inquiries would beget distraction, presumption and pride of heart; that they
ought to study only Jesus Christ crucified, to imitate him, and to deny
themselves without which the Devil and sin would mingle themselves in all their
enquiries. And upon this head she refused often to explain her self upon these
Subjects: Saying; wherefore serves it to distract your selves unprofitably, to
neglect the main thing? Endeavor to deny your selves and to imitate Jesus
Christ, and you shall know one day what there is of these things; otherwise you
shall deprive your selves of them and Damn your selves by your own curiosity
and presumption. Speak no more to me of them; but hold to the one necessary,
substantial and fundamental thing Jesus Christ Crucified, out of whom S. Paul
would know nothing beside. Besides it is very observable, that these sentiments
are not only very agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, but do also explain a
thousand passages of them and the whole System of the Works of God in such a
clear manner as could not be hitherto comprehended.

Many are ready also to pick out some passages of her Writings which separately
seem harsh, and from them take occasion to accuse her of Heterodoxy and of
denying the essential mysteries of the Christian Faith, and particularly that
of the sacred Trinity. There are no Writings which by this measure may not be
represented as full of Heterodoxies. This usage she protests against her self
and disires they may not treat her Writings as they do the Sacred Scriptures,
single out and expose some passages without comparing them with the whole
tenor of the rest: And for the mystery of the Sacred Trinity, she not only
declares her belief of it in express terms, owns it in her confession of Faith,
but having used many similitudes to illustrate it as the Fathers and Schoolmen
have done, she declares in the 24th. C. of the first Part of the Light of the
World, that this unspeakable, most real, most beautiful, most good, most great,
most glorious mystery is above all that we can make or say of it, that nothing
is able to express it, and that all that can be said of it, detracts from it
instead of coming near it.

What she says in the 2. Conf. of the 2. Part of the same Book, ought not to be
understood, as if she despised Baptism in it self, or condemned the right use
of Infant Baptism. She wrote so favorably and with so much respect of the
Sacraments, that the Quakers thought her guilty of a Criminal excess, as it
appears by the Apologetical Treatise she published in Answer to their
Accusations. But notwithstanding the high esteem she expressed for the right
use of the Sacraments, she was no less zealous in condemning the abuse of them,
especially when it appeared to be universal. And it is in my opinion a general
and uncontroverted Rule that when ill-disposed Persons make use of the most
sacred things out of a principle of Self-love to flatter and increase their own
and other Men's corruptions, their practice and proceedings in this case can
only proceed from a Wicked and Depraved Spirit. Now in those places where M.
Bourignon disapproves the Baptism of Infants before they have attained the use
of their reason, and ascribes it to an ill principle, it appears manifestly
from the Text it self, that she speaks only of the present use or rather abuse
of it among wicked and ill-disposed Christians. She speaks plainly (p. 15. and
16.) of the Baptism of Infants, whose Parents have not Faith themselves, and
cannot teach them to follow the Doctrine of Jesus, since they themselves will
not do it. On the contrary, they teach them to follow the World and its Pomps;
and that the Godfathers and Godmothers, never think more on what they have
promised in the Child's name; far less do they acquaint him with it when he is
grown up, to the end the Child may remember the promise which he made at
Baptism. She speaks of Christians in parade and not in effect, for they have no
sooner renounced in Baptism the World and its Pomps, than they think of nothing
but to follow and to love it. And nevertheless (p. 17.) when they are outwardly
Baptized, they believe they are sufficiently assured of their Salvation; and
every body thinks himself a good Christian, if so be, he have been outwardly
Baptized. This is her true meaning in these passages, and it is with respect to
those, who are in that state or disposition, and are habitually inclined to act
after that manner, that she affirms it would be more expedient to put off
Baptism till they be of Age and in a good disposition of mind, without which it
would have been better for them that they had never been Baptized. Agreeably to
this, the Holy Scriptures intimate clearly, that it is the Devil who intices men
to make use of the Sacraments, while they are in an ill disposition of mind,
and that their have and precipitancy in this case proceeds from the instigation
of Satan and is an abomination to God, as it appears by the 1. and 66. Chap. of
the Prophet Isaiah. St. Peter tells us plainly, that it was by the instigation
of the Devil that Simon Magus desired to be Baptized, while he was in the bonds
of iniquity. And when St. Paul says, that those who receive the Lord's Supper
unworthily, eat and drink their own condemnation, does he not clearly give us
to understand, that its the enemy of our Salvation who incites men to make a
bad and rash use of Sacred things, to the destruction of their Souls? M.
Bourignon has made it appear in so many passages of her Works, that she speaks
only against those, who make use of the Sacraments while they continue and
proceed in a corrupt state, that it would be tedious to insert in this place:
See the 28, 29, 30 and 31. Numb. of the 1st p. of Antichrist Revealed, and the
1st Letter of the 3 p. of the Tomb of false Divinty, where she is so far from
condemning true Christians for Consecrating their little Children to God in
Baptism, that she declares expressly that Infant Baptism would be of good use,
if Parents would take care to educate their Children in the true faith, and put
them in mind after they are of Age, of the promise they made in their name at
Baptism, namely that they should be Christ's Disciples, and renounce the Devil,
the World, and all its Vanities. And though she believed (according to the
opinion of several Learned Men) that adult Persons were only Baptized in the
primitive Church, and preferred that custom as being less subject to abuses,
yet she did not think, that this rule or practice was then so generally
received, but that it might admit of just exceptions. And therefore in an other
part of her Writings, after she has declared, speaking to an Anabaptist, that
we must not amuse our selves with disputing about the external forms of
Baptism, while the Soul is not willing to die to the corruptions of the flesh,
that it might live again to the Spirit of Jesus Christ. She adds, That since
the Scripture informs us that in the days of the Apostles whole Families were
Baptized at once, it is probable that there were young Children as well as old
Persons in them. In short, These things may be done either out of a good or bad
Principle; but usually, and at present generally, these things were done out of
a bad Principle; and this is what she reproves and condemns with so much reason
and justice.

As for that Question, whether we ought to condemn the Repitition of Baptism,
when it was not duly performed at first. If that Repitition may serve to
promote a true conversion to God and his love, it is plain it cannot be
disapproved, but by a Spirit that prefers external things before God and his
love, which cannot be ascribed to the Spirit of God. Thus the Scripture
furnishes us with instances of this Repitition of Baptism, when it may serve
as a mean to receive the Spirit of God. See Act. 19. 2, etc.

Some will be apt to take up a prejudice against her, because in some places
she speaks with some sharpness against the Protestants, the Reformation made by
them, and the first Reformers. But they who consider with what severity she
treats the Church of Rome in whose communion she was, looking on her as the
great Whore that sits on many waters, how plainly she represents the corruption
of all Parties, and how ready every side is to be wedded to the little interest
of their rispective Parties, will rather admire and love the Impartiality and
Ingenuity of her Spirit than be prejudiced against her upon that head. God
dwells not in Temples made with men's hands, and the human and political
constitutions of Churches, with their respective Acts, Articles, Covenants, and
Schemes of Government have hitherto proved but the occasion of mutual hatred
and contention, and not being Cemented with CHARITY, of all these buildings one
stone is not like to be left upon another that shall not be thrown down. When
the Temple was built, all the stones were hewn and squared in the Wilderness,
and there was neither Hammer, nor Ax, nor any Tool of Iron heard in the House,
while it was in Building. And that God may thus rear up the living Temple of
his Church will be the prayer of all serious Persons.

But for a full satisfaction to the exceptions that may be made against her, I
refer to her own Writings and to the Apologetical Preface written by the R. P.
P. and prefixed to her Life.

In the mean time as her Writings seem designed for the common good of all
Mankind, and for reviving the true Spirit of Christianity in the World, so I
heartily wish they may be made universally useful, and that the communicating
them to the World in their respective Languages may have its due effect. That
the Heathen may see how by Nature they are alienated from the life of God, and
how desirous God is that all men should be saved and come to the knowledge of
the Truth: That the Mahomitans may admire and embrace the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, whom they Honor for a great Prophet, and against whose Religion the
greatest prejudice is the ill representation made of it by the Lives and
Practices of those who profess it: That the Jews may be convinced that Jesus is
the true Messiah whom they look for, who is to come again in Glory upon Earth,
and who having kept them for so many Ages scattered among other Nations in a
state of contempt and reproach, is thereby preparing them for a more exalted
state when they shall be graffed in again, and made the head who are now the
tail: That the Professors of Christianity may learn what it is indeed, and how
far they are from it, and that their eyes being open they may see they are
greater Idolaters than the Heathens, while these through ignorance and in the
simplicity of their hearts bow their bodies before the Sun or their Idols; but
those in the midst of light, with the bent of their hearts, their Love, their
Affections, and endeavors do Worship Gold and Silver, and Meat and Drink, and
Clothes, and Men, and Honors, and their own Wills and Passions; that while
they profess to abhor Idols they may cease to be the greatest Idolaters
themselves: That the several parties of Christendom may be convinced that they
have lost Christianity and are fighting for its shadow, and while its Essence
is Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth, the Devil has shed among them his
contrary Antichristian Qualities of Injustice, Malice, and Hypocrisy, under an
outward cover of Masses, Prayers, Preachings, Communions, Sacraments, Sabbaths,
Holy Days, Fasts, etc. which when the essence of Christianity is gone, are an
abomination unto God: That the Learned may learn not to be puffed up with their
knowledge and become so humble as to be willing to learn something from a
simple Maid, that perhaps may be of more use to them than all their Learning;
and that they may be sensible that Divine Light and Knowledge does as far
transcend their Notional Learning, as the enjoying and beholding the Sun, the
Light, and all this visible World does the looking upon their Pictures: That
her own Sex may admire the goodness of God, in choosing a Virgin for his Mother,
and a Virgin to be the Organ of his Light and Spirit in this last Age of the
World, that they may see they are capable of more excellent endowments than
those in which the other Sects pretend to excel them, in which God seems to
give them the preference to confound the Wisdom and the Learning of the World,
that they may strive rather to be well pleasing to God than men, that fleeing
all earthly loves which prove bitterness in the end, they may give their hearts
wholly to him, who is altogether lovely, whose love is unchangeable, who will
not disappoint them but will reward their Love with infinite Light, and Joy,
and Love: That they who pretend to be led by the Spirit of God may beware of
taking God's name in vain, and of vouching God's Spirit, for all their Dreams
and Imaginations; for where the Spirit of God resides, there his fruits are,
and the Soul that posses him has it is Affections wholly removed from Temporal
and Earthly things, and set upon those which are Spiritual and Eternal: That
the Pastors of the Church may see at whose Doors the Guilt of the universal
Evils of Christendom are like mostly to be laid, that they may fear and tremble
when they hear that Salt which has lost it is Savor is good for nothing, but to
be cast out and trodden under foot of Men; that by the grace of God they
themselves may be taught true Humility, Self-denial, and a contempt of all
Earthly things, without which Spirit they are no more capable of Teaching
others, however they repeat the Words of Christ and his Apostles, than an Ape
can make a good Picture, though he take up and use the Painters Pencils and
Colors. In one Word, that all may be brought to deny themselves and to follow
Jesus Christ in the true Love of God and of one another; and that the Judgments
of God being now abroad upon the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World may learn
Righteousness.

For a further Vindication of these Writings and the Sentiments contained in
them; I shall here Subjoyn the protestation made by P. P. after his having
Answered the Calumnies and Reproaches which some had published against them, in
the V. Sect. of La paix des bonnes Ames, page 278, 279, 280.

But says he, if all that said does not satisfy, I will make, and do at present
make this PROTESTATION before God and before all Men, that is,

That M. B. her Friends and I, never had, have not yet, and shall never have,
by the Grace of God other Sentiments or Designs than to believe and live as
true Christians, professing by word and deed all that is Fundamental in true
Christianity, and which is comprehended in the Apostles Creed.

That we receive the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament as Divine and
Infallible, and reject all that is contrary thereunto.

That we believe and adore the adorable and incomprehensible Trinity, the
Father, the Word or the Son, and the Holy Spirit, God three and one eternaly
Blessed, the inward distinctions of which (by what name soever they be called,
Real, Relative, Hipostatical, Personal, Substantial) are as true, as they are
truly incomprehensible by the mind of Man.

That we hold Jesus Christ to be true Eternal God and true Man, to be the
Savior and Redeemer of the World, to be the Mediator beetween God and Men,
who by his Merits, by his Satisfaction, by his Righteousness, by his Life, and
by his Death, is the Author of Salvation to all those who imitate him, or to
speak with the Apostle, to all those who obey him.

That we ascribe the Glory of all Good purely to the grace of God, and all Evil
purely to the fault of Man and of the Devil.

That we make the essence and perfection of true Christianity to consist in
Self-denial, in continual Prayer, in the Love of God, and of our Neighbor, and
in the imitation of our Savior.

That we consider all other speculations as accessory, for which it is good not
to condemn any body but to leave every one at liberty to embrace or lay them
aside as they find them helpful for the advancement of the essential part.

That the true Key whereby to come to the Knowledge of Divine things is
Humility and Prayer, and not the forced speculations of Human Reason.

That all States, the Ecclesiastical, the Political, the Oeconomical, are
Established by God, and that the Honor and Submission which is measured out to
them and regulated by the word of God is respectively due to them.

That when evil is reproved, this does not concern those States directly, nor
good men in them who are free of it, but only the abuse and the ill behavior
of the wicked.

That if in the Writings of M. B. or of her Friends, there be any thing that is
obscure, or that seems contrary to what has been said, we offer to clear and
reconcile it, or to disavow it, in case it cannot be made appear that it cannot
be well explained, and that it is not a mistake of words.

We protest against all that may be cited from her writings or objected by way
of consequence against what I have said; as against so many shameful Manglings,
Malicious Interpretations, deceitful Calumnies, injurious Consequences, in
which God will do us Justice, if Men are not just to us.

I protest also against all those who offer to pass hard Censures upon what
concerns M. B. her Friends or my self, without having read the principal of her
writings or my system, as against unjust and unreasonable Judges, at least as
against Persons very inconsiderate and unworthy of Credit. In short, I believe
I have reason to require that they who shall be convinced to have laid to our
charge a hundred falsehoods, and others who shall believe them without reason,
may not again be admitted, the one in the Quality of Accusers, and the other in
that of Judges, but rejected, the one as notorious Impostours, and the other as
wilfully stupid.

AN ADMONITION TO THE READER.
Dear Reader,
SInce it is my earnest desire that the perusal of this Divine Work, of which
this is the first Part may be profitable and advantageous to you, I cannot
forbear wishing that you may give no place in your mind to certain prejudices,
with which the most part of the World suffer themselves to be so miserably
deluded, that they would believe themselves deceived if they did not follow
them. Permit me to speak to you a word or two of some of those pernicious and
deceitful prejudices, which you must either banish out of your mind or forbear
the reading of this Book, as you would not bring upon you your own Condemnation
by retaining those things which may cause you to make an ill use of it.

In the first place I advise you not to regard the appearance, state, or
quality of Persons, nor any thing that is purely external, and so consequently
can neither add nor substract from the Truth, which has no dependence on things
of that Nature. Let the speaker be a Man or a Woman, let instructions come from
this or that place, let the persons who are reproved be great or small, Turks
or Christians, many or few; you must not be surpised at any of these
circumstances. Truth and Falshod may be found in either of these cases: And
it is that only we ought to examine without regulating our judgments according
to the differences we observe between the persons that speak to us. For Gal. 3.
28.
in Jesus Christ there is neither Jew nor Greek, Roman, or no Roman, Male nor
Female. It is here a Maid that speaks to you, none of those great Men who are
so frequently reproved. Do not verify by your experience that saying of the
Scripture, Eccl. 13. 28, 29, 30.
When the rich and mighty speak, all hold their peace, and what he says they
extol to the heavens; but when the mean man speaks, they say, who is this! even
though he offer wise things they would not yield to him. If there be any valuable
prejudice it should certainly be in favor of the meanest, weakest and most
contemptible persons, since God himself has declared, it is his pleasure to make
use of them, and Jesus Christ was so rejoiced at that choice, that he says to
his Father, Matt. 11. 25, 26.
I thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these
things from the wise and from the learned, and have revealed them unto Babes:
even so Father, since so it seemed good unto thee! Is there any thing meaner,
weaker and more contemptible in the esteem of the World, in the matters of
Doctrine than a Maid? And can any thing be more proper to verify that
declaration of the choice of God? He has also promised the pouring out of his
Spirit in the last times upon Daughters Jo^l. 2. 28.
as one of the most signal marks of his power. And certainly the weakness of
the instrument is an evident sign of him who employs it. It is plain that such
an extraordinary effect must proceed from a cause, that is extraordinarily
powerful; and that cause must be God himflef, when the effect is good and
useful,

Secondly in Divine things you must have no regard to the natural qualities of
the mind, or rather to the human means by which it is cultivated, such as
Sciences, Study, Reading; and the like. Divine truth is so far from depending
on such things, that it is rather obscured by them. It may be justly reckoned a
prodigy if such unnatural methods should be attended with success, when men
endeavor to derive into ill prepared Vessels by the exercise of there corrupt
faculties, things that are altogether independent upon them, and are freely
infused by a calm insinuation into Souls that are at rest from their own
tumults. Truly we might be astonished if the Learned should find solid truth by
persuing such methods as would certainly banish it out of their minds if they
were already possessed of it. Man having lost, says Solomon, Eccl. 7. 29.
by much reasoning, the uprightness in which God created him. But when God
speaks to us by simple and unlearned laiks, we cannot suspect them, as we would
suspect the Learned, that they feed us with their studied speculations or the
prejudices they have drunk in at Schools and drawn from the works of Men; and
repeat to us the songs their Teachers have taught them to sing.

The Person who speaks here is without study, even without reading and which is
more, without meditation: Search a little to find out the source of this
fountain, and to understand well what Master could have instructed her; it
could neither be Man, the Devil nor Nature.

But the thing which you ought most to observe, that you have no regard to the
conduct of Men. I mean that you do not imagine that the Truth, much less
Salvation depends upon them, their Opinions, Orders, Directions, Submission, or
that it is tied to them by a necessary bond, since it has no essential union
but with God alone, and may be forsaken by all men, if they will, as any man
may, and too many actually do. This unhappy prejudice has ruined the Christian
Church, who imagined that she could not possibly fall after she had established
her self upon the authority of certain particular Persons, human Successions,
outward Assemblies, and other Circumstances that are not at all inconsistent
with the Spirit of Error. It is certain there are few Christians and even few
Catholics, who do not see that the Church is extremely fallen away and
corrupted. But the Learned have found out a distinction to charm this evil.
They say, that though the Church may fall into a moral corruption and be guilty
of back sliding from the practice of a Christian life, she is still infallible
and incorruptible in matters of Faith. It is much to be feared, that this
distinction serves rather to flatter the Spirit of pride than promote that of
Humility, which is the Spirit of the Gospel, and that it proceeds rather from
human interest, which prepossesses and darkens even the best minds, than from
an enlightened charity which designs to excuse the evils of the Church as far as
Truth permits. May not those who have made this distinction perceive they are
so far from excusing the Church or lessening the guilt of her fall, that they
render her guilty of the fall of Devils; whereas her Adversaries pretend only
to hold her fallible after a manner conformable to human infirmity? It seems
they contradict themselves in this distraction, for can that which has no faith
be incorruptible as to faith? and that which is not only destitute of the works
of Faith, but whose works are corrupted and consequently opposite to those of
Faith, can that have Faith? Jam. 2. 18.
Show me, says the Apostle, Show me the faith of which thou boastest without
thy works, and I will show thee the faith, which I possess by my works:
Treating the Man as Jam. 2. 20.
vain and empty, who would give way to such thoughts: What then would he have
said of those who maintain that one may be not only destitute of works, but
that even his works may be evil, and habitually evil, or which is the same
thing, that his Manners may be corrupted, and that nevertheless he might be
infallibly possessed with the purity of the true Faith! But it may be they
understand by Faith, Speculations, Notions, the knowledge of spiritual Things;
but St. James reckons those things when they are alone and barren to be a
diobolical Faith, since he expressly ascribes it Jam. 2. 19.
to the Devil. And how can this diminish or cover the evil of the Church, that
though her Manners are corrupted, she has nevertheless with an infallible
certainty the knowledge of Divine things, and the decerning of Truth and
Falsehood, of good and evil: This would be rather to make her fall equal to that
of the Devil, to make her sin with knowledge in the midst of her light and
against it.

Those who assert this Opinion, represent her without conscience, render her
more odious to God and Men, more devilish, and condemn her to a place in Hell
far below the Infidels, rather than if they should say, that her Morals are or
have been Corrupted, for her being mistaken in her Knowledge, and believing
that to be good and true which is not really so; since it is certainly a less
evil, and a less fall to sin through ignorance and error, than to do it against
the knowledge of the truth. To pretend to infallibility in the knowledge of the
Truth, while at the same time it appears by her actions and her own confession
that she is corrupted in the practice of a Christian life, would be to make a
profession of sinning against the Holy Ghost, and renouncing of conscience;
which St. Paul says, cannot be done without making shipwreck of the faith. Tim.
1. 9.
So that by this excuse they equally prove that she is fallen into a greater
estrangment from God than that which they would excuse, and that at the same
time she is destitute of true Faith and the knowledge of the Truth, and seized
with a malady of presumption, which puts me in mind of that for which St. Paul
assures the Roman Church, in the Epistle which he wrote to her Romans 9. 20, 21,
22.
that she shall be cut off, if she suffer her self to be led into it. In the
mean time it is through this prejudice that they shut their Ears against the*
Truth that reproves them, and that they reject the remedies though they are not
ignorant of their disease, putting themselves in a condition, that resembles
the state of Babylon, of which the Prophet speaks, Jer. 51. 9.
we would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed; forsake her, and let us
go every one into his own country: for her judgment reaches unto heaven, and
is lifted up even unto the sky. Do not you likewise render your self
uncurable, dear Reader, by admitting of such prejudices, and suffering them to
blind you so far as to make you reject the Heavenly remedies, which God offers
you at present by the hand of a Maid without human instruction, and who
reproves the abuses of that Society which they call the Church, how powerfully
soever they are authorized and favored by great Persons, to whom they are also
favorable according to the interest of this World; which she does not out of a
principle of partiality and private malice, as they are supposed to have done
who have left the Church of Rome, since she never withdrew from it, and much
less did she list her self into any other particular Sect, but disapproved them
all, and discovered their abuses in her other Writings with as much freedom as
in this she has done those of the Roman Church, and in the general of all
Christians.

This is one of her first Works, which she wrote at a time when she was not
acquainted with those who differ in Opinion from the Roman Catholics. The
first part which is now communicated, was published some years ago in Dutch:
Since I have had the happiness to see in Manuscript the other two Parts, which
in my opinion are more admirable than this; I can indeed say, that I never met
with more extraordinary, more convincing, edifying and moving Truths, than
those which are in this Divine piece, particularly in the two following Parts
and especially in the last, to incite us to resign our selves entirly to the
guidance and direction of God. I cannot reflect upon the wonders I have seen in
these Treatises, without crying out with amasement, what other Master than
thou, O Holy and Adorable Spirit of my God, could be the Author of this most
Divine Light! O most Holy and Almighty God, there is none but thee that could
so powerfully draw thy Creatures to so holy and pure an end! And the first
essays of such a Master by the weakest instruments are as perfect Masterpieces
as the most finished works of others! for I can truly say, that I have felt as
much and even more strength and moving force in these first works, than in her
last productions. And I cannot comprehend how it is possible for any Man to
resist such holy Truths, without declaring openly for the Devil, and
undertaking the defense of Vice and Lying. There are none in my opinion but the
Devil, and those who are resolved to be his slaves, and the protectors of Sin
and Iniquity, that can hate or oppose this Light. For as for those who have
still some remainders of good desires in their hearts whatsoever Errors they
maintain, and with whatsoever vices they may be defiled, it is impossible for
them to hate those Divine Truths, and much less the person by whom they are
communicated to us, or raise persecution against her. Since they are so far
from receiving an injury by them, that they have a far opportunity of
delivering themselves from the most dangerous Evils and to embrace the
advantage of a lasting felicity. There is a vast difference betwixt
representing and doing Evil, betwixt admonishing one of his sickness and
causing his distemper. Such a warning is rather a means to make him to look out
for a remedy, and when at the same time the most proper remedies are presented
to him, it is the highest obligation that can be laid upon him, especially in
matters of eternal importance. And yet O blind and perverse World! it is your
usual custom to wish evil to those who would deliver you from your misery, and
to requite their Kindness with base and cruel persecutions, as it appears
manifestly from the fate and experience of the true benefactours of Mankind,
the Holy Prophet the Son of God himself, and all his beloved Disciples and
Messengers, who had no other design than to procure the Light and Salvation of
the World. This Messenger of God did often meet with the same treatment, as
well as the late Mr. De Cort, who discovering too open a zeal for the
publication of this Work, was prevented from accomplishing that design by a
Death, that was procured by contrivances no less secret than criminal;
concerning which I may justly use the words of the Prohpet Jeremiah, Jer. 7. 19.
I was like a lamb, or an ox that was brought to the slaughter; and I knew not
that they had devised devices against me, saying let us destroy (or poison) the
tree with the fruit thereof, and let us cut him off from the land of the
living, that his name may be no more remembered.

For Sinners cannot endure that a good Person should by declaring the Truth,
deprive them of the pretexts, which they use to enjoy their darling Sins with
peace and security. And the wise are loath to see their Wisdom confounded, when
they have once given way in their hearts to that proud conceit of being
infallible when they are Assembled in a Body. As the Church was heretofore
deluded by a Spirit of presumption in the days of the Prophets, who were
persecuted under pretext that the Priests, the Learned, the Doctors and
Pastors, whose failing as well as the Errors of the whole Church were exposed
by the Prophets, were infalliable in the possession and in the interpretation
of the Law of God, and their Determinations and Counsels concerning Divine
things. Come, said they, and let Jer 1. 8. 19.
us devise devices against Jeremiah, for the land shall not perish from the
priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet: come and let
us smite him with the Tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words.

But God has quite other Designs, (the Lord has said according to the
declaration of an other Prophet) Isa. 29. 13, 14.
Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do
honor me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear and worship
of me is nothing but formality, and taught by the precept of men: therefore
behold, I will proceed to do a mavelous work, their wise men shall perish,
and the understanding of their prudent shall be hid. This is an unavoidable
judgment, which they must resolve to undergo, and their resistance will only
serve to make them be more entirely crushed by the powerful hand of God.

This will be to the little ones and to the simple matter of joy and gladness,
and they shall sing praises unto the Spirit of God whom Jesus Christ shall send
to possess the place of that human and diabodical Spirit, which he will
extripate 18. 26.
blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord.

If you have a sincere desire to be of the Number of these little and simple
ones, you will easily perceive by the Divine Light that is communicated to you,
that God begins to fulfill his word as well as the desire that we profess to
have in that Prayer of the Church, come lovely Spirit, and renew the Earth. You
will afterward be more fully convinced of this Truth by other works of this
nature. This is faithfully and sincerely communicated to you according to the
Manuscript of the late Mr. De Cort, who nourisht his Soul with these Truths, by
which he had been regenerated to God, and incited to renounce the Vanities of
this World. I have neither added nor subtracted any thing from it, except some
words at the top of the Pages, and before the Conferences, to serve for an
Abridgment of the matter, and a help to the memory of the Reader; I began also
to quote the passages of the Holy Scripture, to show that their is an entire
conformity, not only of the Doctrine, Words, and Sentiments, but even of the
Life, Conduct, Actions, and other Accidents of this Maid, with those who were
heretofore unquestionably enlightn'd and governed by the Holy Spirit. But since
the prosecution of that Design would have required a great deal of time, and
since it may be probably supposed that most Readers will not give themselves
the trouble of searching and examining so great a number of passages; it was
thought sufficient to illustrate the first Conference with all the particular
Quotations, as a sample of that absolute uniformity with the Spirit of God and
his direction, which might have been easily carried on throughout the whole
Work: And in the remaining part of the Book you will only find the most
necessary passages cited, or those which have most manifest relation to the
Text.

God grant, Beloved Reaader that you may reap from this Work an Advantage,
which may dispose thy Soul to become a Child of his Grace, and to receive his
Holy Spirit. This is the hearty and earnest desire of

P. P. P.

THE PREFACE OF Monsieur de Cort* TO THE READER.
Friendly Reader,
I Here present you with an Account of what befell me in a Voyage I made to a
far Country, to come to which I traveled above a Year, accompanied with
several of my own Countrymen, who with me were Eyewitnesses of our meeting by
the way with a Pilgrimess, who spoke to us admirable and amazing Things, that
are capable of converting unto God all those who shall read or hear the hidden
Secrets of the Righteousness and Mercy of God, and the Blindness of Men, and
the Power which the Devil at present has over them.

The Thing is as profitable as astonishing; for it has never been conceived or
comprehended by any humane Wit. It must needs proceed from a divine
Understanding, and it must needs be a Celestial or Terrestrial Angel; for
neither Philosophy nor Theology could ever teach me the Things which this
Pilgrimess taught me in the small time wherein I traveled with her, but in a
way so simple and so unaffected, that all her Words did pierce my Heart and
enlighten my Understanding, working in my Soul Joy and Compunction together.

I was at first quite transported beside my self, and I thought all my
Understanding was renvers'd while I heard her first Discourses, being of
Opinion that the Words of Jesus Christ were fulfilled, in that he says [ I will
destroy the Wisdom of the Wise, and abolish the Prudence of the Prudent] for of
necessity all Men, how knowing and learned soever they be, must be struck dumb
and confounded by the simple Wisdom of this Pilgrimess; and I took it for a
singular Mercy of God that he was pleased yet to declare his Secrets to any of
his Servants, wishing for the Memory of an Angel that I might be able to
declare all that I heard of this Pilgrimess, since nothing proceeded from her
Mouth which was not profitable, and most enlightening, very convincing and
powerful, capable of converting the most hardened Hearts and obstinate Sinners.

But I must yield to my Weakness, not being able to declare any other thing but
what my Memory shall furnish me with, being helped by some Remarks which I made
when I had the convenience of Writing. I entreat the Reader that in this
Narrative he may not seek for Ornament of Language, nor Philosophical
Discourses, but the naked simple Truth, since God makes use of weak Things to
confound the strong.

I will not at all disguise or adorn her Language, fearing to oppose the
Designs which God has to manifest to all the World, that he reveals his Secrets
to Babes, and that he resists the mighty and the proud Ones of the Earth, from
whom he conceals and hides his Secrets and Wonders.

For this Reason we have ground to say with S. Augustine, [ The Ignorant and the
Unlearned take Heaven by force, and we with all our Sciences continue drowned
in earthly Affections: Are we ashamed to follow them because they have outrun
us? We ought rather to be ashamed not to follow them.] And to add here also the
Words which the Pilgrims of Emaus said one to another, when they remembered what
Jesus Christ had spoken to them by the way, while he explained to them the Holy
Scriptures, to wit [ Was not our Heart on fire, and did it not burn within us
when he spoke to us in the way, and opened unto us the Holy Scriptures?

This Pilgrimess in speaking to us must certainly be animated with the same
Spirit with which our Savior was; for each of us felt his Heart to burn by her
powerful Words, which did gently beget in our Souls a Contempt of created
Things, and a Love of Things eternal, enlightening our Understandings by Truths
so clear, that they could not proceed from any other than from the Father of
all Lights.

She told us Things unheard of, so mavelous and sublime, that we often
remained quite lost with admiration, for we had never heard such Things.

She explained likewise the Holy Scriptures so perfectly, that none of the holy
Fathers have ever so done, nor any Body since the Creation of the World.

That which did most astonish us, was, That she told us she had never read nor
learned them of any Body. She knew also the secret Thoughts of the Hearts of
many: For a proof of which she told us Things so particular about our own
inward State, that neither Men nor Devils could ever know them.

Which befell us many times; for she warned us of diverse Mischiefs hid under a
Mask of Piety, saying [ That we were fallen into the dangerous Times foretold
by Jesus Christ, wherein many call themselves Christians and his Disciples, who
nevertheless are of the Synagogue of Satan, who call themselves the Priests of
God, the Confessors and Guides of Souls, while they adhere unto the Devil by
express Covenant: That these do seduce many by false appearances; and that even
those who have resolved to follow God are deceived by these false Prophets, who
deceive even the Elect under a color of Holiness and Devotion; that all the
World was now full of such Guids.] Which at first did a little stumble us, for
we could not be inclined to believe that so many People in Christendom, even
Priests and religious Persons, were bound unto the Devil by express Covenant.
We asked her for what reason we ought to believe a thing so abominable? For it
was always best to have a good Opinion of our Neighbor, until the contrary
were manifest.

[She says, Gentlemen, it is meet in the general that you entertain in your
Minds a pious Belief that every one is better than your selves; but if you
piously believe, in particular, that all the Persons with whom you converse are
good, you are undone. It is more needful for you to discover the Evil which
they have hid within them, than their Good, which will advantage you nothing;
but their Evil may greatly hurt you, when it is unknown to you; for you cannot
beware of it while you do not know it, or at least are in doubt of it.

It is with this pious Belief that the Good are entrapp'd by Satan, who would
never follow the Ill which is manifest: But that which is hid under Good is
much more dangerous.

You are free, Gentlemen, to believe of this what you please: For my part, I
declare only what I learn in my inward Conversation with God.

I have many other Secrets to declare, but methinks you are too scrupulous to
hear them. I will speak no more than you please. I know very well how to hold
my peace if my Words offend you, or do not at all profit you.

Nevertheless, I tell you in Truth, that if these Evils be not made* manifest
to the World, all Men are in danger of perishing: For very shortly the Plagues
of God will fall upon Christians, and if Men will not believe that they have
thus forsaken God to join themselves unto the Devil, the most perfect will
blaspheme against the same God who shall afflict them with diverse
Chastisements, such as the like have never yet fallen out.

She said as in a Spirit of Fury, God would be very unjust to exercise so much
Rigor against the Christians, if they were as good as you believe them, or
would think them to be: It were better for us to separate, for your Thoughts
are altogether different from mine. Go, Gentlemen, pursue your way: For my part
I love rather to walk alone, and not to speak to you any more, keeping my
Secrets for my self; I never spoke so openly of these Things.] This so rough
and confident Answer did inflame our desire to speak to her the more, that we
might discover some other Thing; knowing well, that it is against the
timerousness of the Feminine Sex to do and speak so positively, to Persons of
Learning and Authority, as all of us were; nevertheless, like a strong Woman,
who would place her Confidence in God alone, she answers us without fear,
making appear sufficiently that she neither desired our Friendship nor our
Company, no more than our Approbation, but with a generous Contempt she walked
without any humane Respect, testifying abundantly that she sought for nothing
upon Earth, and that she feared no other Thing but God.

Which we remarked sufficiently during the whole time of our Voyage, having
never perceived her to baulk a word to please any Body, keeping always to the
strait Truth, as well in small Things as in great. Her Spirit was firm and
constant, always present to it self, we never saw her wandering nor distracted:
She had a Judgment so just and equitable, that she could not suffer the least
Injustice, though it had been in her own favor.

This straight Judgment was always blind, without respecting either her Friends
or Enemies, her Honor or Reproach, her Ease or Trouble, her Hurt or Profit: In
fine, we always discovered in her a perfect streightness on all sorts of
Rencounters, and a Truth so firm, that never one Word did contradict another in
so long a space of time and amidst so many different Discourses and Subjects.
She spoke very little unasked; and answered our Demands so effectually, that
often we remained mute and without Reply in very sublime Things, being obliged
to acknowledge, that the Wisdom infused by God does far surpass all the Wisdom
of Men. But it is no wonder that God did communicate himself to this Soul, for
she desired no other Communication nor Contentment, but only what she found
with her God: For if we were about to tell her some News even of pious Matters,
she begged we would not speak of them to her, saying, that they were nothing
but Distractions: And when we entered into any strange Towns, where she had
never been, she took no notice of any thing in them. For having one Day entered
into a Town, and abode there for three Days, after we came out of it, I would
needs speak of the fine Church that was there: She said, Is there a Church
there? Truly I did not see it. Thus in whatsoever place she was, she continued
always in her Recollection. We saw her often in Rencounters, where she met with
Affronts and Contempt; and on other Occasions where she received Praises, she
never changed her Countenance, receiving Contempt without Trouble, and Praises
without pleasure: She showed some Discontent when any Gift was offered her, or
when we would have rendered her any Service, which she would never accept of,
except in case of Necessity or Sickness.

We perceived her always of a joyful Countenance, but never to delight her self
in any earthly: Thing that might give her Joy. In short, we may all truly
affirm, that we never observed in her any Vice, Sin, or any weakness of Spirit,
but a perfect and solid Virtue, surpassing natural and humane Strength; which
made us say, that her Life was altogether miraculous, as if Adam had never
sinned in her.

This we do not speak lightly, but after much proof and experience by so
constant and familiar a Conversation, of so long continuance, traveling with
her Night and Day, amidst Ease and Trouble, Want and Abundance, and so many
other Occasions which are to be met with in Traveling, of observing a Person
exactly in all her Manners, where nothing can remain unknown or counterfeited,
coming under the Eye and Judgment of Persons of Learning and Judgment as this
Pilgrimess has done, who assuredly was sent to us from God, to manifest us his
Secrets and his Wonders.

This is an Instance of his great Mercy, that in the midst of so gross
universal Darkness, as is at present in the World, God has vouchsafed yet to
send us such a Light, capable of enlightening the whole World, at least all
those who will receive it: For no Body can seriously read or hear the
Discourses of this* Pilgrimess without discovering the state of his own
Conscience, and also the poor Estate into which Christendom has now fallen, the
blindness of Men, and the hazard of their Salvation.

She shows clearly that we live now in the last Times; that this is the Reign
of Antichrist; that he has almost full Dominion over all Men; that his Kingdom
will very shortly be at an end.

She does not draw her Discourses from imaginary Things, nor from fine
Speculations invented by Philosophical or Poetical Reasonings; but in a
Reasoning so firm and constant, that she seems to possess in her Nature the
Abridgment of all the Sciences of Men together, with Truths so convincing, so
clear and eloquent, capable of engaging every good Understanding to an
infallible Belief, though her Style is always simple and sincere. She spoke [
Of Ecstasies and Ravishments (which the Devout esteem Virtues) as great
Imperfections and Weaknesses for Souls established in Virtue, which consists
only in Righteousness and Truth, and Faith, saying, that all the rest were
nothing but amusements, on which a Soul established in the Love of God will
never rest. She told us such high Mysteries of our Faith, as never any has
attained to so clear Understanding of them. She spoke of Judgment quite after
another manner than all the Authors who ever wrote upon this Subject, and yet
with such clearness, that every Mind would be ravished at it with pleasure and
astonishment. She knew Things to come; and did not foretell them but by way of
supposition, or related them as if she had dreamed them.

We found diverse times that she could tell what past in her absence, and how
our Souls behaved themselves toward God.

She made no reckoning of all these extraordinary Graces; saying, That they
gave nothing to the Soul which possesses them; that neither Miracles nor Gifts
of Prophecy were necessary to our Salvation; that one might have them and yet
be damned; that all our Happiness consists in possessing in our Souls the Love
of God, which is true Charity; that other Gifts are accidental; that the Wicked
may indeed work Miracles and have the Gifts of Prophecy, when it pleases God;
that the Devils themselves do frequently Things altogether miraculous, and
foretell likewise Things to come. In short, this illuminated Soul desired
nothing but what was solid and perfect, rejecting even a great many
particularities which are mentioned in the Life of some Saints, saying, That
either they had Imperfections among their Virtues, or rather that they who
wrote their Lives were not endowed with the holy Spirit to discern true Virtue
from natural Weaknesses; that God was not visible to the Eyes of the Body; that
our Imagination may frame many Visions of diverse Figures; and that the Devil
mingles himself always in things sensible to our Gust and to our natural
Senses; that there are great Cheats among Persons who make Profession of a
spiritual Life; that the Devil slips in there as an Angel of Light; and that he
who does not force himself to overcome his natural* Inclinations, can never
come to live Christianly; that all that is of Nature, is not of Grace; that to
live a Christian one must live supernaturally; that our Soul is a Spirit; that
God does not communicate himself unto it but in Spirit and in Truth;] That
there are none but Souls purified from themselves and from all earthly Objects
who hear the Voice of God; that the Cares of ones Health, of his Honor and of
his Wealth, are great hindrances to the receiving of divine Notices, which are
formed by the sole motion of the Soul, which receives and understands them
according as it is stripped of it self. In short, this divine Soul told us so
many Secrets of the mystical and inward Life, that all our Theology was too
short and insufficient to answer her to so high Questions, not only in Matters
of Theology, but also in all other Matters, according to the various
Rencounters and Occurrences which fell out in so long a Voyage; so that one
would have thought that though a Man had perused all sorts of Histories, and
grown old in the Study of all sorts of Sciences, he could not know with such
Understanding, all the Things which this Pilgrimess told us.

Which she made very little reckoning of, saying, That all the Sciences which
do not serve as means to love God, are vain, and frequently the occasion of our
Damnation. Her Conversation was always serious; and when by chance we felt into
any unprofitable or indifferent Discourse, she was silent, and calmly withdrew,
making appear sufficiently that it was not agreeable to her; and sometimes she
said, [ Discourses which profit nothing, do weary and oppress my Spirit. I love
my Solitude better, in which it re-inforces it self, and becomes vigorous: And
therefore I entreat you let me go alone as long as I profit you in nothing, and
you will do me a pleasure.

It is impossible to write in particular the admirable Things which we heard of
this Pilgrimess: She told us so great Marvels concerning the State of the
World, the just Vengeance that God would take of wicked Christians, and the
Mercy which he would show unto the Good, that the like were never heard of; and
it would be hard to believe them, if this did not come from the Mouth of a Soul
directly illuminated, who spoke by the motion of the holy Spirit: So that we
may say of her Discourses, what S. Paul said of his Rapture, [ That he had seen
and heard things which Eyes had not seen, nor Ear heard, and that is has not
entered into the mind of Man what God has prepared for his Elect.] What she said
was to fall out in the last Time, during the Judgment, and after the Judgment,
was never before heard of nor conceived. They are Things which do ravish all
Men with Fear, with Joy, and with Astonishment. For my part I can say as to my
self, that the meeting with this Pilgrimess has withdrawn me from all sort of
Evil, has given me a great desire of Virtue, and an absolute resolution of
embracing an Evangelical Life, having discovered sufficiently by her
Discourses, that without this no Body will be saved. Her Words have so
enlightened my Understanding, that all the Learning I had acquired seems to me
as Darkness and Ignorance in respect of that divine Wisdom which is so
mercifully poured out upon the Earth by the Organ of a silly Maid. I wish that
every one had seen her, and heard her as I have done, and might receive thereby
the same Operations which my Soul has felt; for I look upon her Acquaintance as
a greater favor, than all the Graces and Favors which God has bestowed on me
in this World; yea, even than my Creation it self, for that would serve me in
little stead, without the working out of my Salvation, which would have been in
great danger, if I had not attained to the knowledge of my Self, and of the
Designs and Marvels of God, which I have learned and discovered by the means of
this Creature; and she has certainly been sent me as the only means of the
perfection of my Soul, and of all those who will profit by the recital of this
Narrative, which I find my self obliged to publish for the profit of many. This
is the true Treasure hid in the Earth. He who shall find it, ought to sell all
that he has to buy this Ground, to the end he may discover and find this
Treasure, and take it up with Joy, as the most precious Thing of the World. I
cannot hinder some who wish Evil or are Enemies to the Truth, from finding or
pretending something that is not agreeable to them, for the Light does always
offend Blear-Eyes, who cannot endure the Light, and the Truth which reproves is
never agreeable to our Senses: But I would admonish them to beware of
reprehending or making themselves Masters of the holy Spirit. I behooved, for
some time, to suspend my Judgment as to the Belief of some Points of Doctrine,
for I had learned them from my Masters in another sense; but since I have laid
aside all these Authors who have written us their Sentiments, and fixed on the
sacred Text of the holy Scriptures, I have found so much Conformity in them,
with the Life, Manners and Words of this Pilgrimess, that no Doubts could come
any longer into my Mind, and I could not, without betraying my Conscience, give
her so much as one Contradiction: Since that gives me an infallible proof, that
this Soul is truly possessed by the holy Spirit, who has brought forth in her his
Twelve Fruits, his Seven Gifts, and the Eight Beatitudes which Jesus Christ has
taught.

I should believe I committed a great sin to think that any other Thing might
proceed from such a Source than what is Divine; so much the rather, that I have
always remarked that this Soul did act in nothing naturally, but by
supernatural Motives, never being moved but by the motion of the holy Spirit:
In confirmation of which I would be ready to spend the last drop of my Blood,
to the end that none might reject this Light, to love rather their Darkness, as
Jesus Christ has foretold that many would do; but that every one may embrace it
for Salvation, to the end we may altogether enjoy the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
which is here so particularly treated of, with eternal Joy and Contentment.
Which is earnestly wished you, by

Friendly Reader, Your most affectionate in JESUS CHRIST, Christian de Cort,
Superior of the Oratory, and Pastor of St. John at Mechlin.
At Mechlin, the 10th of August, 1667.
M. A. B.'s Confession of Faith, which she presented at the Court of Gottorp,
to oppose the Calumnies which the Churchmen had spread, that they might raise
Suspicions of the Purity of her Faith.
I. I Am a Christian, and I believe all that a true Christian ought to believe.
II. I was baptized in the Catholic Church, in the Name of the Father, in the
Name of the Son, in the Name of the Holy Ghost. III. I believe the Twelve
Articles of the Creed or the Apostles Symbol, and I do not doubt of any one
Article thereof. IV. I believe that Jesus Christ is true God, and that he is
also true Man, and that he is the Savior and Redeemer of the World. V. I
believe in the Gospels, the holy Prophets, and all the holy Scripture, both of
the Old and New Testament.
And I will live and die in all the Points of this Belief, which I protest
before God and Men, to all those whom it shall concern.

In Testimony whereof I have signed this my true Confession with my Hand, and
sealed it with my Seal. At Sleeswick the 11th of March, 1675. Anthoniette
Bourignon. L. S.

A Catalogue of the BOOKS written by M. A. B. born at L'Isle in Flanders.
1. THE Life of M. Antonia Bourignon. 2. God's Call and Men's Refusal; in 2
parts. 3. Light arisen in Darkness; in 4 parts. 4. The Grave of false Theology
driven out by the true coming of the holy Spirit; in 4 parts. 5. An
Advertisement against the Quakers. 6. A Treatise of solid Virtue; in 2 parts.
7. The Light of the World; in 3 parts. 8. The Academy of learned Divines; in 3
parts. 9. The Testimony of the Truth; in 2 parts. 10. Innocence manifested and
Truth discovered. 11. The Touchstone. 12. The Blindness of Men now; in 2 parts.
13. Antichrist discovered; in 3 parts. 14. The new Heaven and the new Earth.
15. The holy Perspective. 16. The last Mercy of God. 17. The renewing of the
Gospel Spirit; in 3 parts. 18. The Stones of the New Jerusalem. 19. The
Persecutions of the Just. 20. The Morning Star. 21. The Confusion of the
Builders of Babel. 22. Saving Instructions and Advices.
The most part of these Works are Translated from the French into the Dutch and
High Dutch; the first part of Solid Virtue, the Touchstone, and the first part
of the renewing of the Gospel Spirit, are also in Latin.

A Table of the Conferences of this first Part of the Light of the World.
The First Dialogue or Conference. OF Gods dealing with A. B. particularly how
he immediately instructed her from her Infancy. The opposition of Men. Of
Christian perfection, and of the deplorable state of Christians. Page 1. The
second Conference. Of the Judgment of God: Of the last times; and of the Men of
the last times. 17. The third Conference. The methods by which Christianity has
begun to decay from the times of the Apostles, and has continued so to do to
such a degree, that at present there are no more true Christians upon Earth, to
wit, 1. The admission of false Brethren. 2. Appropriation. 3. Debates. 4.
Partialities. 5. Scholars. 6. Disputes. 7. The Victory of the Devil. 23. The
fourth Conference. Of the Qualities and Manner of acting which ought to have
been in the Guides of the Church to uphold it in its good Estate against all
Enemies, and not give way to the Spirit of Antichrist, as they have done. 29.
The Fifth Conference. Of Antichrist, and how he reigns over all in Spirit. 31.
The sixth Conference. How outward Worship toward God, and the outward Works of
Charity toward ones Neighbor are corrupted by the Devil: And from whence this
power does proceed. 36. The seventh Conference. That God has not abandoned Men,
but Men have abandoned God and resisted his Grace, in the distribution of which
he is not partial. 39. The eighth Conference. Of the Grace of God: How it is
given unto us: And of the difficulty of being Converted. 41. The ninth
Conference. What the Church is, and of its corruption. 45. The tenth
Conference. Of the Remission of Sins. Of Confession, and how it is abused. 48.
The eleventh Conference. Outward Devotions imposed by Men, are not of true
Faith Of the true Church, which cannot err in what it ordains. The Doctrins of
Jesus Christ, and those of Men. True Prayer. 52. The Twelfth Conference. That
the Conversion of Men is now desperate, as in the time of Noah; and wherefore?
59. The thirteenth Conference. Of true Faith according to the tenor of the
Creed. Of the knowledge of God and of our selves by the consideration of his
works. 63. The fourteenth Conference. How God forsakes us, and how we forsake
him, by distraction of Mind, by which the Devil does subdue Men, withdrawing
them from the Love and Gratitude which they owe to God, who discovers himself
most sensibly in all things alone Lovely. 70. The fifteenth Conference. That
God has never given unto Man but only one essential Commandment, which is, that
of his Love, which is most easy and most agreeable; and that of every other
thing, most vain. 77. The sixteenth Conference. Of continual Prayer and
constant Communion with God, for which we were created: and how we are
distracted from it by the business of this World, and by the enjoyment of frail
Creatures. 82. The seventeenth Conference. How to discern whether the motions
which press us to leave the outward hindrances to Divine Communion, be from God
or not. That there are also inward obstacles; and that we must not be wedded
even to good means. 92. The eighteenth Conference. How we may attain to
perfection and to Communion with God, resigning our selves wholly unto him,
quitting both humane Wisdom and the Instructions of others for a time.
Christians incapable of being taught. They will be more desolate than the Jews.
96. The ninteenth Conference. That all Christians ought to read the Holy
Scripture. Whether the Church can err? Where it is: Where not? 101. The
Twentieth* Conference. Of the reading of the Holy* Scripture, and of the
prohibition ^f^t* How the Church cannot fail: And what she is, and is* not.
104. The Twenty first Conference. Where the true Church is* Where God is, How
he speaks unto the Soul, and how we ought to be disposed for this Divine
Conversation. 109. The Twenty second Conference. That there can be no true
contentment but in God alone. How to return thither. Of Gifts; and of those
which are made to Churches, which shall perish. 116. The Twenty third
Conference. Of the destruction of the Church, and of the uprightness of God in
his Judgments and in all that he does. 121. The Twenty fourth Conference. Of
the enquiry about the most Holy Trinity, and of Grace; and that even the Saints
themselves are therein mistaken, none being infalliable. 125. The Twenty fifth
Conference. That the Holy Spirit sends always new influences; and that his
Light ought not to be bounded, nor the interpretation of the Scriptures unto
that which the Holy Fathers have had in past times. 128. The Twenty sixth
Conference. How and wherefore the Holy Scripture has in nothing as yet been
understood in a perfect Sense, which is shown by new Explications concerning
the Creation of Man, his Fall, the coming of Jesus Christ in Reproach, and that
in Glory upon Earth there to reign eternally. Of the Glorification of the
Creatures both Animate and Inanimate; what makes Paradise and Hell; and that
all these things shall be preceeded by universal Rods and Scourges. 131. The
Twenty seventh Conference. That the care of withdrawing ones self from
Chastisements is yet a Self-Love; and that the Communion of the Soul with God
suffices in all places. 157. The Twenty eighth Conference. How we ought to
pray, and understand the Lords Prayer in a perfect sense, which respects the
Dispositions and Graces which shall be granted us in the Glorious Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, of which there are here Mavelous things spoken. 160. The Twenty
ninth Conference. Of the signs whereby we may know that we are fallen in the
last Times; and that the World is Judged, viz. that Men are without
Righteousness, Truth and Goodness, before God; and that the execution of his
Plagues, do already appear effectually. 178. The Thirtieth Conference. How God
permits that Men should be abandoned to to the Spirit of Error. 191.
The End of the Table of the Conferences of this first Part.
THE LIGHT of the WORLD.
The First Part.
The First Conference.
Of Gods dealing with A. B* particularly how he instructed her immediately from
her Infancy; the opposition of men; of Christian perfection, and of the
deplorable state of Christian.

AS we advanced in our journey, still traveling toward the Sun rising, being
already more than half way, we perceived, at a distance, one walking before us;
not knowing at first who it was, because of the distance, we remarked only that
it was a person alone, who desired no Company, but retired aside as soon as any
body approached, and hid herself, until we mending our pace had come nearer and
when we beheld this person, we perceived she was a Maid, who appeared young
enough; and tho she was simply apparelled, she had notwithstanding a grave and
majestic Mien. We saw in her face the marks and the joy of a serene and
contented soul. Her gate was always of an equal pace, neither flow nor hasty:
her looks gave both joy and fear: she did not refuse to speak to us in our
Language, tho it was not natural to her; and having asked her whither she was
going? she said, In Pilgrimage for penitence for her own sins, and those of
others. And having asked her, from whence she came? she said, From afar: for
she had traveled many years, and was harrass'd by the way, and discolored by
the Sun.

We asked, what she designed by so long and troublesome voyages, dangerous for
a Maid alone; remonstrating to her, that there were many other means to do
penitence in her own Country without being in danger of hunger, thirst, unhappy
rencounters, and many other inconveniences, which may fall out in traveling
alone; and that at least she ought to take some Company.

To which she answered; That she was obliged to travel alone, for she had found
no body that would accompany her; and that many had indeed gone along with her
for some time, but upon the first temptation, hunger, or incommodity, they had
staid behind, not knowing how to endure penitence, because they had 2 Timothy 4.
10.
too much love for themselves, and too little affection to seek God; esteeming
their ease more, than the contentment there is in the loving and following of
him: for this cause they had left her.

And as for Dangers, God preserved her; Ps. 34. 20.
she having past through many dangers without being hurt; that her confidence was
in him alone, who Mat. 28. 18.
has all power in heaven and in earth; that he never forsakes them Ps. 25. 3.
who put their confidence in him; that she reckoned it a happiness to suffer
hunger, thirst, and other troublesome things 2 Cor. 12. 10.
; since Christ had chosen Heb. 12. 2.
such sufferings to give us an example 2 Pet. 2. 21.
, and to the end we might follow him; and that she had no other intention in
this undertaking but to abandon the world, to deny her self Mat. 16. 24.
, and to imitate Jesus Christ; which she could not so well do Ps. 45. 11.
in her own Country, since the care of temporal wealth 1 John 2. 15, 16.
, the love of friends, and the pleasures there are in being honored and
esteemed, are all things which withdraw from God, and hinder the resigning of
our selves to him; that penitences chosen after our mode Colos. 2. 22, 23.
are full of self-love; but that 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7.
those which God permits to befall us are pure; that the length of the way was
not troublesome to her, for she had no desire of ever staying in one fixed
place, because there she found too many distractions by the importunity Ps.
120. 5, 7.
of the conversation of men, who would have disturbed her inward repose; and
that she Ps. 55. 7, 8.
desired very much to live unknown.

We admired all this answer, for it seemed not to proceed from human sense,
since Nature takes no part in so pious a resolution, and one must live
supernaturally to despise ease, friends, and honors, and to love sufferings
and fatigues, and flee the conversation of men: seeing they are all sociable
Creatures, delighting themselves among their equals, and rejoicing to converse
with their like. It gave us sentiments of confusion, saying one to another,
what Confusion shall we have in the day of Judgment; when simple Girls do such
things to please God, and we, amidst all our Learning and Studies, are so far
removed from such sentiments! Truly this Child will condemn us. We resolved to
accompany her, and to examine her more narrowly, seeing there was something
peculiar in her, above the spirit and capacity of the female sex; for her
discourses were firm, constant, and full of judgment, and of divine wisdom, tho
no ways artificial nor polite, but simple and true, and in every thing
admirable.

We asked her, if it was therefore necessary that every one should leave their
Country to be saved?

To which she answered, No; for God is to be found every where, and in all
places Act. 17. 27, 28.
: that those who are not wedded to any thing have no need of doing it; but as
for her, the removing from her native Country served her as a powerful means to
love God alone; since before her withdrawing from it, her affection was set
upon her City, her House, her Parents, her Friends, as all appertaining to her;
but that having done violence to her nature to abandon them, she had acquired a
great liberty of spirit to fly unto God. But for other persons, who feel no
affection to those things which belong to them, they may indeed Joh. 4. 21, 23.
work out their salvation in every place; saying, that every one ought to
examine themselves in this matter, as in all others, and to remove or avoid all
things Mark. 9. 42.
which hinder them from resigning themselves wholly to God, without doing of
which there is no salvation.

And having asked her, if to be saved, one must suffer hunger and thirst, and
all other things troublesome to the body? M^^. 12. 37, 38. Psalm. 45. 12.


She said, That a man ought not to seek nor affect these things Mat. 4. 7.
, but when it pleases God to send them by any accident, he ought Job 1. 21. 2.
10.
to suffer them willingly, and to rejoice that he makes us worthy to follow
him, and to imitate his sufferings.

Having asked her, if poverty was necessary to salvation?

She said, That temporal Goods were not evil in themselves, but that Mat. 5. 3.
poverty of spirit was necessary to salvation: because a soul who loves and
desires temporal goods, 6. 21.
cannot love God with all his heart, nor fulfill the first and the greatest
Commandment; that riches 13. 22. 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10, 17, 18.
were a great burden; that they occasioned great distractions, and disquiet;
that the most secure way was to rid ones self of them, unless they serve as
means to advance the Glory of God, or succor our Neighbor in his necessity;
that many deceived themselves, believing they possessed them without affection to
them, while they would be much troubled to abandon them; that we may indeed use
them, but not love them; that many Eccles. 27. 1.
will be damned for having loved riches; and that a great many are stopped in the
mid way of Virtue by the cares and desires of riches.

And asking her, if one might not receive honor, or suffer to be beloved by
men?

She said, That he who makes himself be honored, robs the honor Ps. 115. 1.
which is due to God only; and if it be fit to suffer honor for any estate or
dignity, it ought to be suffered with regret, as a thing perilous to the
infirmity of our corrupt nature, which willingly delights in honor, which
ordinarily tickles the sense, and blows up the heart, Prove. 16. 18.
making the soul to perish; forasmuch as the honors which we receive, without
referring them to God, are all sins, for there is none but God alone who
deserves honor; and man, how great and exalted soever he may be, can never
merit Dan. 9. 7, 8.
any thing but contempt and confusion; for he being nothing but Ps. 27. 7.
a silly worm of the earth, has notwithstanding rebelled Lam. Jer. 3. 42.
against his God and Creator. And as to the desire Jam. 4. 4.
of Gal. 5. 26.
Mat. 6. 13.
being loved by men, that this proceeds from self love; that our nature affects
always to be loved, to receive some effect of good will from those who love it;
but that all which is of nature, is not of Joh. 3. 6.
Grace; that he who acts spiritually, and seeks the perfection of his soul,
ought to regret, and be troubled Ps. 119. 158.
to see, that man, who is created only to love God, Mat. 22. 37, 39.
should amuse himself in loving such a creature as he, who has no power to
better the object which he loves; and that it is loss of time, and the turning
of 146. 3, 4.
ones self away from God, to love men, or to desire to be loved by them. We may
indeed desire* that they love God in us 1 Jo^. 4. 7, 8. 5. 2.
, for we are all his Images; and we may also love them as the Images of God,
since he commands us 1 Jo^. 4. 7, 8. 5. 2.
to love our Neighbors as our selves, for as much as both are the Images of the
same God; but this love ought to be so purely for God, that we should have no
respect Mat. 22. ^8.
of persons, rich, poor, friends and enemies, kindred or strangers; and which
is very rare to see, that in our love, Ps. 101. 6. 119. 63.
we should affect those in whom God lives and operates most; on the contrary,
we regard often what does most delight our senses, or rather what is most Phil.
2. 21.
for our advantage; and thus we render our love vain, or please the vanity of
those who love us. For this cause I have found it more sure to avoid all
persons who would love me. Nature does often flatter us in this point,
persuading us that we love the soul of the person Gal. 4. 17.
, when we love only the body, and its endowments, or our own Prove. 19. 4 6.
delectation and advantage.

And having asked her, why she would not stay in one fixed place, since she was
out of her own Country; and why she would not be known?

She answered; Tho I am a Stranger, yet I may be taken notice of by staying
long in one place, which I do not desire; for men are full Eccles. 1. 8.
of vain curiosity, they would hinder my inward repose and quiet without any
profit; therefore I love rather to travel and continue unknown: for men cannot
give me any thing, nor I them.

And having replied unto her, that men might instruct her in Ps. 62. 10.
Jam. 2. 8, 9.
the matter of perfection, or that she her self might also instruct some
others.

She answered: Gal. 1. 11, 12. 1 John 2. 27
I never learned any thing from any man; and as to the teaching of them, they
have too much presumption Joh. 9. 34.
of their own knowledge, to hearken to a Child as I am. I choose rather to
leave them in their Ignorance Prove. 23. 9.
, than to speak to them to be pursued and persecuted by them.

I asked her, if she was not afraid of being wanting in Charity to her
Neighbors while she would not teach them, or believed that they would
persecute her in well-doing?

She said, Sir, if I had not made the experiment, I durst not say so: but
believe me I have searched in diverse places for persons who were esteemed good
men, to declare my sentiments to them, and to manifest the blindness that is
now in Christendom; and Jer. 6. 10.
I have not found any body who has followed my sayings: on the contrary, some
have reproached and persecuted me, so that I have been constrained to withdraw
out of their reach Jer. 36. 19. 26. Joh. 9. 59. Joh. 10. 39.
, for they would have treated me hardly, and even imprisoned me, because I told
them the truth, which they will not learn, because it reproves 'em Is. 29. 21.
30. 9, 10, 11. Prove. 1. 24, 25.
. They oppose themselves and are alarmed against this truth, more than against
the Devil himself: at this time it is put out of credit 2 T^m. 4. 3.
; those who possess it are obliged to hold their peace, and to conceal
themselves.

I have experienced this in diverse Countries, where I have every where met with
this opposition; by which I sufficiently perceive, that the Is. 40. 2.
darkness is universal through all the world. I cannot be wanting in charity in
this point: for I have often exposed Joh. 15. 13.
my Life for the salvation of my Neighbor, and I would do it yet if I found 1 John 3. 16.
matter disposed; which failing, I am resolved to continue alone Jer. 9. 2^ 3.
, tho with regret, seeing all the world perish while they will have no help,
and will not know their blindness. I do not believe that God will reckon with
me Act 18. 6.
, as being wanting on my part to my Neighbor in what was in my power. ( l) 51.
9.


I asked her from whence she derived her sentiments, and what Books she made
use of for her spiritual reading?

She said: She had never taken any thing out of Books; that she made no use of
them, nor carried any with her on the way, but a small one, in which were
written the WORDS OF JESUS CHRIST, which she carried instead of a Box of
Relics; not to read it, but out of devotion; esteeming those words more than
all the Relics of the world; and as for her sentiments, that they came to her
without her knowing 2 Cor. 12. 3.
how: that in her Childhood she had been instructed in the principles of the
Catholic Faith; and that coming after wards to the use of reason, she found
her self Ps. 71. 17.
replenished with the Doctrines of Jesus Christ, and entertained her spirit
with the consideration of the life of the Heb. 12. 1. 2*
first Christians. These thoughts inflamed her with a desire of imitating and
following them; therefore she said to her parents and friends, Psalm. 1. 1. 84.
1.
Let us go into the Conntry where the Christiaus live whom Jesus Christ has
taught. And when they answered her, Here is the Land of the Christians; Jesus
Christ has taught us. She thought within her self, that this 1 John 2. 3, 4.
could not be true: that the life which she, and all other persons led, was not
conformable to the 2 John 9.
* Doctrine of Jesus Christ, nor to that of the first Christians. She always
asked again, Where was the Land of the Christians? till every one derided her
Ps. 119 141. Jer. 20. 7.
, as if she had been a Fool, assuring her, that she lived in the Land of
Christians, and that they had the Doctrine of Jesus Christ: which she could not
comprehend, saying, I see here Coffers full of Silver, costly Furniture, and
sine Houses, whereas Jesus Christ was poor, and Luc. 2. 7.
born in a Stable: How can we be Christians? I cannot believe this. At last,
she resolved not to speak Jer. 20. 9.
any more of it; thinking in the mean time how she might find the way, and the
opportunity of coming one day into the Land of Christians.

While she considered all the actions and deportment of men, she found them
always more contrary to her sentiments; which made her often weep Ps. 119. 136.
when she was alone, and she made her complaint to ( n) Jo. 7. 15, 16.
Jesus Christ, and asked him, Ps. 119. 9. Act 9. 5.
how she might live as a Christian, and be his Spouse.

It seems, says she, Sir, that God had pity on my tender tears; for a little
after I received a secret advertisement Ps. 16. 7.
, as if some one had spoken 35. 3.
within me, and answered my demands. This gave me so much consolation, that
Jer. 15. 16.
childish plays and pleasures were no more agreeable to me. I could find no
other contentment, but in entertaining my self with these secret Ps. 119. 174.
thoughts, that taught me all the sentiments I still retain, not but tho through
my wickedness I lost this conversation for a time Cant. 5. 2, 6.
, when inclining to follow the pleasures of the world, and to give my self to
the vanities of youth, earthly sentiments began to possess my spirit. But the
great mercy of God has since recalled me, and 6. 13.
restored the same inward delights, with more solidity and light.

I never acquired sciences any other way than by recollection Ps. 10^. 8.
. I have no need either of Books Ps. 119. 98, 99, 100.
or Masters to teach me; on the contrary, they would be a great hindrance to me
Hab. 2. 20.
if I should make use of them; even an Angel from Heaven, Cant. 8. 9.
if visible, would hinder me.

This I could hardly understand, saying to her, if an Angel from Heaven would
be a hindrance to you, how dare we speak to you any more to hinder you?

She said, Do not mistake me, Sir, I mean that an Angel from Heaven can teach
me no more than I learn by 1 John 2. ^7.
my inward conversation; therefore he would be unprofitable to me; but you
cannot hinder me so long as you profit by my words; my Charity obliges me to
leave my own Contentment of being with God, Phil. 1. 23, 24.
to draw my Neighbor thither.

I feel indeed, that your soul receives its light in speaking to me, and Luke
24. 32.
that you profit much in hearing me; therefore ask what you please, and I will
answer you, as far as it shall please God to permit. I am well pleased to show
Charity to my Neighbor. I find my God always; but not always souls disposed to
receive his instructions. He teaches me to prefer Charity Romans 15. 1, 2, 3.
to his Consolations and the sensible pleasures which he gives me.

I felt in my Soul such Consolation as I cannot express, in hearing things so
admirable. Her words pierced my Soul. I would have done her honor. She says to
me:

Act 10. 25, 26.
Beware of that, Sir, for I hate two things, viz. honor and sin. You are a
Priest, to whom honor is due for your dignity. I am nothing but a simple
Child. If God impart to you his Graces by me, it is to him you Rev. 22. 9.
owe the acknowledgment, and not to me; for I am Ps. 39. 6. 2 Cor. 12. 11.
nothing: and if he should withdraw his Graces from me, I should be worse than
nothing, being inclined to evil: which nothing cannot be.

We observed in her a profound humility of heart, accompanied with great
righteousness and truth. She did not affect humble discourses, but held always
the exact truth in every thing, saying what was to her praise, as well as what
was to her contempt: telling us, that under humble words and countenances the
highest Pride was Micah 6. 16.
concealed; that he who affects to be esteemed humble, presumes to bear the
name and the appearance of the most perfect virtue; because this humility is
the Math. 6. 8. Math. 11. 29.
foundation of all perfection, without which nothing is to be esteemed; for
watchings, discipline, and other mortifications of the body, are nothing but
vanity Colos. 2. 18, 21, 22. 23
without humility. Even prayer ( y) without humility is nothing but hypocrisy.
For 1 Pet. 5. 5.
God resists the proud; and gives his grace to the humble.

We asked her wherein true Humility consists?

She said, In the knowledge Math. 18. 13
of ones self: for he who knows himself truly, can never attribute to himself 1
Cor. 15. 10.
any Good, either Natural Joh. 10. 8, 12.
or Spiritual: for he will truly perceive that he has not power to make one h^^
grow upon his head Math. 5. 36.
, nor to give himself one day of health, or one moment of Life: he will see
that he is in his nature more miserable than any living creature upon earth,
depending upon another in every thing; which ( x) Mat. 6. 5, 6, 7.
will keep him voluntarily pliant and submissive to others, because of the need
he has to depend upon another for the maintenance of his body; and as to his
mind, he who knows himself, will judge truly, that there is nothing more Jam.
1. 8.
frail and unconstant than the mind of man, which changes every moment, and
cannot know its true Good, since we are all born in Ignorance and Weakness,
there being nothing to be found more miserable than a person subjected to his
own passions and will Ephesians. 2. 3. 4. 17, 19.
; he is in a perpetual slavery 2 Pet. 2. 19.
, without rest, or contentment Is. 57 20, 21.
.

And as to the superior and divine part, what weakness Genesis 8. 21.
to do Good! what bent and inclination to evil! what violence to overcome vice!
in one word, man is the abridgment and the abstract of all sorts of miseries.
This is that which Job so bitterly Job 14. 1.
lamented. But whosoever attains to this knowledge of himself, he must needs be
humble of heart, and subject to the Government and Will of God, upon whom he
knows that he entirely depends. Behold, wherein true Humility consists; pride
proceeding from no other thing but from the Romans 1. 21, 22
Ignorance of our selves, and from a not depending upon God, attributing
foolishly some authority and power to our selves, desiring to depend upon our
own will, which is altogether depraved and inclined to all sort of evil, our
heart being puffed up with our very miseries, for there is no other thing in us
but miseries, for which alone we esteem ourselves to be something, tho in
effect we are worse than nothing, which does no evil.

By which we abundantly see that humility cannot consist in humble words and
gestures, but only in the knowledge of our nothingness; and that humble actions
do often serve as matter for our pride: for to desire to appear humble, is to
be proud. We ought to be truly humble before God, but not desire to appear such
before men ibid.
.

We asked her, wherein true Perfection did consist?

She said, in Mat. 22. 37, 40. 1 Cor. 13. 13.
the LOVE OF GOD: For that he who loves God cannot sin, nor offend Job. 14. 23.
him whom he ( m) Mat. 6. 28.
loves, that this love is a law and rule to all our actions; that S. Augustine
said well, in saying Love, and do what you will; because he who loves God
cannot do evil, while all that he does centers in this love which he bears to
God.

This love likewise cannot remain idle; it must needs produce all sorts of
virtues, principally 1 Job. 4. 11, 12.
Charity, which is inseparable from the love of God, for since we cannot see or
touch God, we do it in part in our Neighbor, who is the true Image of God.
This begets in our will a desire of good will toward our Neighbor, wishing and
procuring him the same temporal and spiritual good things, which we wish and
pretend to for our selves, because of the love 1 Job. 5. 1. 2.
we bear to God, whom our Neighbor represents, from whence all sort of
perfections do proceed, without which there can be no true perfection, since
that is all summed up and contained in the love of God, and of our Neighbor;
for he who loves God will exercise himself in the practice of all sorts 4. 17
of virtues, to the end he may render himself agreeable to him whom he loves:
if he sees that his God Phil 2 8.
has been little, he will never desire to be great; or that his God has been
poor, he will never desire to be rich; or despised, he will never desire to be
honored; and so of the rest. And if he love his Neighbor out of Charity, he
will yield to him, and 1 Cer. 13 3-8.
serve him in his need; wishing him no other evil than he would wish to
himself: he will willingly bear with his infirmities, procuring on all
occasions his good and advantage, as his own. So that all Perfection consists
in this LOVE OF GOD, AND OF OUR NEIGHBOVR FOR GOD. All the rest are nothing but
amusements and lies. When we place perfection in any other subject 1 Cor. 13.
1-4.
we deceive our selves.

These answers did ravish us with astonishment, being obliged to acknowledge,
that they were most true in the most perfect and accomplished sense.

Having asked her, By what means we might attain to this LOVE OF GOD, which is
true Charity, since we are all born in such misery, and that God has subjected
us to so many evils bodily and spiritual, and that our Nature has more need of
help and succor than any other Creature?

To this she answered gravely: Softly, Sir, do not blaspheme against God; for
it is not he who Jer. 5. 24, 25.
has subjected us to so many evils. He can never do evil. All that comes from
him Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
is most good and perfect; he created us Genesis 1. 26, 31.
in an altogether holy, and perfect state, with an immortal body, and a divine
soul, subject to none but himself, having given us a spirit enlightened to know
him, and a power to rule over all the creatures both terrestrial and infernal;
and if he has obliged us to aid and succor one another, this is not that he
had created us more infirm than any other living creature, but only to the end
1 Cor. 12. 25.
he might afford us matter for entertaining mutual Charity and Union together,
one assisting his Brother out of love, the other being led to love him by the
assistance and benefits which he receives from him; and thus perpetually to
maintain this love by the aliment of the need that we have of one another, to
the end we might continue united Job. 17. 22, 27.
together, as Jesus Christ is united to his Father. And even the manner of the
Generation of men, is ordained for no other reason, but always to preserve this
perfect unity of body and spirit. Thus you see that God has done all things
well, tho it seems sometimes to our ignorance that many evil things come from
God, the Jam. 1. 17.
only Author of all good, and the Rev. 21. 4.
Destroyer of all evil. It is Romans 5. 12. 1. 21.
our sin which has caused all the miseries under which we continually groan;
the maladies and infirmities of body are engendered in us by sin; the weakness,
ignorance, and inconstancy of our spirit do proceed from sin. That all the
creatures rise up against us, and hurt us, this is but to take just vengeance
of the rebellion which we have committed against God by sin. It is a blasphemy
therefore, to say, That God has subjected us to so many evils; since we our
selves only are the Authors of them; and he can never do evil, no not to Hos.
13 9.
damn us, if we do not damn our selves; and to know how, and by what means, we
may attain to the LOVE OF GOD, which is true Charity, we need only take the
Gospel, Job. 14. 21. 1 Job. 5. 3.
and there observe in particular the instructions which Jesus Christ and his
Apostles have left us in writing, and put them in practice.

Behold the sure means to attain to true Charity, without which 1 Cor. 13. 1-5.
no body can be saved. It is not necessary that we seek any other means than
those which Jesus Christ has taught us by word and deed Job. 6. 68.
.

I said to her; if to be saved one must have this perfect Charity, few persons
will attain to salvation, for we do not observe now that the Charity of which
she speaks, does possess the hearts of men.

She answers; This is to be bewailed with tears of blood, for no body shall be
saved without it, as St. Paul affirms, 1 Cor. 13. 1. 5
that Tho we would bestow all our goods to feed the poor, tho we could remove
Mountains, tho we had the Gift of Prophecy; yea, tho we would give our body to
be burned; yet all this would be nothing for our Salvation without Charity. And
if you will exactly run over all the holy Scriptures, you shall find by the
sayings Job. 14. 23
of Jesus Christ, of 1 Cor. 16. 22.
the Apostles, and of Ps. 18 1. 116. 1. Prove. 8 17.
all the holy Prophets; that never any person shall be saved without this
Charity, which consists in the LOVE OF GOD, and of our Neighbor for God. In
the mean time no body possesses this Charity, and almost all the world
presumes to be saved.

There is now, Sir, so great darkness in the whole Is. 60. 2.
world, that no body discerns truth from falsehood, since they have taught
Christians, that the means of living well, and of being saved, do consist Is.
1. 4, 16. 58 2, 3.
in going to Church, in praying morning and evening, and in confessing and
communicating often. By these things they have annulled the Law of God, and
stified Charity; for this is no more in use among Christians; it is not so much
as known by them, and they understand not what true CHARITY is, because this
name is now appropriated to the gifts which persons bestow on Monks, religious
persons, the superfluous Ornaments and Buildings of Monasteries and Churches:
they have baptizd by the name of Charity all these Gifts, Presents, and
Legacies.

And I, in my inward conversation, do find them to be ( s) Luke 13 ^6.
sensual affections, and call them, Robbery and Avarice* for he who receives
Presents, without necessity, by way of Alms, does certainly commit Robbery, and
robs the poor and necessitous, who alone are capable of receiving alms: So that
he (whosoever he be) having necessaries for the support of his life, being able
to gain them by some trade or labor, is obliged to restore all the gifts and
presents which he receives by way of alms; and that person commits the sin of
avarice, who covets more than what is simply necessary for the support of his
life: for it is a great folly for a Traveller to load himself with burdens,
which are not necessary to him for the accomplishing of his Voyage. Thus no
body can enrich himself, or heap up earthly goods without the Lust of Avarice;
which sin, as all others, does blind souls Wisd 2. 21. 2 Cor. 4 4.
, rendering them insensible Ephesians. 4. 19.
of their own hurt. But because they have introduced the calling of these vices
and sins by the name of Charity, every one believes they have it while they
cooperate to these vices; by this the Devil has seized on the Throne of God,
and reigns in the Sanctuary, by falsehood, whereas God ought to reign there by
truth.

Behold the deplorable state in which we live at present; the danger is so much
the greater, that all the evils are 2 Cor. 13. 14. Is. 5. 20.
covered with virtue and piety, that good men may be the more deceived, who
live and die in this horrible darkness, not knowing what true Charity is, far
less do they possess it; so that I despair of their Salvation: If they do not
perceive this truth, of Charity, 1 Cor. 13 1^8.
they can never be saved; since not knowing it, they cannot love it, nor
endeavor to find it, while they think it is enough to bear the name of
charitable; tho they neither know nor possess true Charity. There are so many
such errors now in Christendom, that Christians are by them led insensibly into
Hell, while they believe that they are assuredly in the way of Paradise.

I asked her; If the goodness of God would permit that so many persons should
go to perdition while they believe that they do well, and follow the counsel of
learned men, and such as are authorized by the Church?

She said: Truly, Sir, there will be more Christian Souls damned by these
means, than by gross, visible and material sins; because all those persons who
think to be saved, live and die in the sins against the Holy Ghost, which will
not be pardoned Math. 12. 31, 32.
neither in this world nor in the other.

Not that these sins are so enormous that they cannot be pardoned Is. 1. 18.
, but because they are inward and spiritual, little known, and far less Rev 3.
17. 18. 7.
feared. The most devout persons are tainted with them, and will never repent
of them as long as they presume to be sav d, according to the doctrine of the
learned of this age.

This is not against the goodness and mercy of God, because he has left us his
doctrine in writing in his Gospel and the other holy Scriptures, which will
never perish, according to the promise; that Math. 24. 35.
heaven and earth shall pass away, but his words shall not pass away. Every one
may have recourse thither without amusing himself with the new inventions of
men, Jer. 2. 13.
Leaving the fountain of living waters, to draw out of broken Cisterns, which
can hold no water.

Ignorance Ps. 14. 2-5. 1 Cor. 15. 34.
will not excuse sin. We feel indeed in our Conscience, that we do not follow
the doctrine of Jesus Christ; that our life and our manners are in nothing
conformable to the life of the first Christians; that our heart is not inflamed
with the LOVE OF GOD, nor Charity to our Neighbor: and nevertheless we would
flatter our selves with the presumption of our salvation, 2 Pet. 2. 19
because men do promise it to us, who have no power to give it to us Ps. 146 3.
, no more than to themselves. In this point our Ignorance is too gross and
affected, and will not serve to excuse us before God, but will rather serve for
our Condemnation; for we might always find the truth, if we had done our
endeavor to seek it Prove. 8. 17. Mat 7 7.
. But because our Guides have taught us ways of salvation more pleasing to our
senses and to our taste, 2 Pet. 2. 3.
we have followed them rather than those which Jesus Christ has shown by his
deeds, and taught by his word. It is just, Is. 29. 10, 13, 14. 1 These. 2. 10.
4, 12.
that he abandon us ( d) 2 Timothy 3. 16.
to the spirit of error, since of our own free will, we have more esteemed
Error than the Truth, which alone leads to Salvation.

I asked her; If she did not esteem the Priests and Guides of Souls, and if to
attain to Salvation we ought not to follow their Instructions?

She said: Yes, Sir; I honor and esteem true Priests, because they ought to be
Luke 10. 16.
the Ambassadors of God, to distribute to the ignorant the points of Faith* 2*
Tim. 2. 15.
, and the doctrine of Jesus Christ, which is the nourishment 1 Timothy 4. 6.
of all Christian Souls. But I may say with a sensible regret, that I know no
true Priests who are simple Ministers of Jesus Christ, only to declare and
interpret his word; because every one ofthem abounding in their own sense,
teach that which is most suitable to their inclinations. They ought to be
nothing Mat. 10. 20.
but the Organs of the Holy Spirit, and it seems they are become his Masters. 1
Cor. 3. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 11. 3.
Humane Learning and Studies have deprived them of the Gospel simplicity, they
ascribing to themselves what appertains to God; conducting Souls by their own
measures, not by the Rules of the Gospel, forasmuch as they themselves do not
follow them. Some indeed speak the words of the Gospel; but Ezekiel. 22. 26, 28.
Mal. 2. 8.
they do so gloze and disguise it, that no body thinks himself obliged to put
it in practice. Which is very lamentable: for Jesus Heb. 13. 8.
Christ yesterday and to day is altogether the same, and will be even to the
end of the world, Jam 1. 17.
without any change or mutation. This being most true, how is it possible that
any can be saved, while they do not follow in any thing what he has taught us?
He has said; that Luke 14. 26. 27.
he who does not deny himself cannot be his Disciple; which no body does. On
the contrary, every one loves himself; and yet they call themselves the
Disciples of Jesus Christ! It must needs be, that the one or the other is
deceived. This impossibility which Jesus Christ has laid down, is it rendered
possible by the authority of those Guides, who assure all the world of their
Salvation, while they love themselves? This cannot be true, for Jesus Christ 1
Tit. 2.
cannot lie: but men indeed may err; especially in things wherein they have
interest; for if they taught simply, that a man must deny himself, and the
other points of the Gospel* they would give severe reproofs to themselves:
because their lives and manners are very far from this practice, therefore they
study to find out glosses, reasons, and exceptions, to the end they may find 2
Pet. 3. 16
means not to be oblig d to follow and practice this holy doctrine, which 1
Cor. 2. 14.
is repugnant to their senses. Thus every one lives in a presumption of his
Salvation* without any ground; for these men are not Saviors, and cannot save
us; but are rather Seducers, Math. 24. 4.
of whom Jesus Christ foretold, that they should come in the last times, in
which we are certainly fallen 1 Cor. 10. 4.
at present, wherein the spirit of error does fully reign, where truth is
stifled Psalm. 12. 2, 3, 9.
, and lying prevails.

The Second Conference.
Of the Judgment of God: Of the Last Times; and of the Men of the Last Times.

REmarking these last words, I asked her, if she sirmly believed, that the last
times were come: and whither the Judgment approached.

She said to me; Believe me, Sir, there is nothing more true; we actually live
in the last times; and the judgment is so near, that before three years I
believe you will see the effects of it.

I could not be persuaded to believe this, continuing pensive and silent; which
she perceiving said,

Sir, the difficulty you find to believe these things, proceeds from the
universal darkness that is now upon the earth, by which all the world is
blinded, and no body sees where he goes, no more than they who lived during the
Egyptian darkness; Exodus 10. 22. 3.
which was so great, that none could stir out of the place in which they were:
this was nothing but the outward figure of the inward darkness in which men
walk at present. We do not perceive, that we are fallen into the last times;
nevertheless we may see by the lives of men, now that all the signs are fallen
out which Jesus Christ has foretold, viz. Math. 24. 12.
that iniquity shall be multiplied, and Charity in many shall wax cold; and so
of the rest. Who can doubt, that this is not at present, when iniquity is so
great and so universal, that there is no more faith, Psalm. 119. 126.
nor law among men. Mic. 7. 2-6.
People study nothing but to deceive their Neighbor; the Father cannot trust
his Son, nor the Son his Father; the Brother rises up against the Brother;
friendship is only feigned; business is full of deceit and fraud* We see
nothing but pride and ambition reigning in the hearts of all men: Judges are
without equity; Priests without sincerity; Cloisters filled with avarice, and
the devout full of malice, which has been at all times in some particular
persons; but is at present so multiplied, that it possesses almost all men in
general; and charity is not only waxt cold, but is altogether frozen, and
become dead in the hearts of men: So that these signs of the last times are all
fully accomplished. Read, if you please, the Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy,
where he says, 2 Timothy 3. 1. 6.
that in the last times there shall come men loving their own selves, etc. You
will see more clearly than the Sun all the marks and signs of the last times
fulfilled, and perfectly accomplished. The life of men is the open book in which
these truths are written, and the holy Scriptures are the equitable Judge which
pronounces this sentence. Read, Sir, with attention, they will deliver you from
the difficulty you find in believing this; for tho indeed they do not determine
precisely the day of judgment, yet they will make you see sufficiently, that
the chief signs which must precede it do already appear.

That no body will believe this, is a most certain evidence of it; for Jesus
Christ says, that Math. 24. 37, 38, 39.
it shall be as in the days of Noah, they were eating and drinking, and
marrying, and giving in marriage, and knew not until the flood came, and took
them all away.

Even so is it at present; they take their recreations and pleasures, heaping
up earthly treasures, building houses and temples, as if they were to remain
here to eternity; while all must very shortly perish. And no body will believe
it, according to the prediction of Jesus Christ; when he compares these last
times with those of the universal deluge. He says in St. Math. 24. it will be
as in the days of Noah; adding, when you shall see the abomination of
desolation to be in the holy place, flee away.

Do you not think, Sir, that this abomination is now in the holy place? if Envy
were lost, it might be recovered in the Cloisters; if Avarice were dead, it
would be revived by the Priests; Vainglory and Pride is no where so
prevailing, as among the Clergy: in one word, Simonies, and all other sins,
abound in the place which ought to be holy.

What more sure marks would you have than those which Jesus Christ himself has
declared to us should precede the Judgment? if you desire to see the Stars fall
from Heaven, the Sun to be darkened, the Moon not to give her Light; all these
are nothing but material signs, which can do no harm to Souls; but serve only
for outward evidences of the wrath of God, and to the end that even insensible
things may feel the terrors of that great day; as the Rocks did, when they were
rent at the death of Jesus Christ. This added nothing to his passion, nor
rendered those who put him to death more criminal; for they were nothing but
insensible rocks, without souls or reason. Even so will it be as to the Stars
and the other celestial bodies; if they change color, or suffer any other
alteration, this will not be hurtful to our souls which are spiritual, and
cannot receive any punishment by these visible and material Stars; so much the
rather that these signs and Stars cannot be understood but spiritually. For how
could the Stars fall from Heaven, since the Mathematicians tell us, that one
Star alone is seven times greater than all the Earth? so great a thing cannot
fall into one so small, for it would not be capable to contain it. And if we
take the mystical sense, calling by the name of Stars, persons luminous in
Doctrine, the Doctors and Guides, Prelates, Bishops, and all those who are
placed in Dignities, to whom the name of Stars Rev. 1. 20.
may be appropriated, as being the Lights of the world, this sign would also
have at present its sense accomplished; for we see every day such persons fall
from righteousness and truth, who for some worldly interest, or humane
respects, fall from the truth of the Gospel, which is the true heaven of Souls,
and wallow in the earth among its riches and pleasures as secular persons do.
In former times how many of those were seen, who had their hearts and spirits
continually toward heaven! their lives and manners did enlighten all the
world, as the Stars of the Firmament; but at present they are fallen into the
mire of earthly affections: So that it may be truly said, that the Stars are
fallen from Heaven, and that the Sun also is become without light. For Truth,
which is the true Sun of Righteousness, cannot any longer appear openly, it is
become R. v. 6. 12.
black and hateful to all the world, who desiring to be flattered and praised 2 Timothy 4. 3.
, cannot hear the truth, because it reproves the falsehood which now prevails.

These two signs of the Sun and of the Stars, appear at present in their full
accomplishment in the mystical and inward sense, which is much more than if
they did appear in the literal and material sense, for the reasons
abovementioned: and if the Moon be not as yet without light, it will be so very
shortly in the mystical and perfect sense.

The Moon, is all transitory things, which after the manner of the Moon do
increase or diminish, according to good or bad fortune. These things will lose
their light so soon as Wars shall have destroyed and ruined temporal wealth.
Then all that pomp and magnificence which shines in the Sanctuary will lose its
splendour, and will no longer yield any thing but Rev. 6. 12.
blood. Since for Gold and Silver they will cut the throats of those who are
placed in the highest dignities; so that what shines and glisters to day in the
Church, will wholly lose its luster and light; and by this means, this Moon
will be darkened. I entreat you to read attentively the 24th Chapter of St.
Matthew; it speaks of the present time. All the Parables do the same. I wish I
had time and leisure to explain them to you; you would see as well as I, that
the Judgment approaches, for all the forerunning signs are already come. People
do not perceive them, for want of reflecting seriously enough on the holy
Scriptures, or upon the inward life of men now adays: they amuse themselves
with regarding only their outward piety, imagining that there are yet a great
many good men, because they appear such: but before God all are corrupted. They
resemble the Apples of Sodom, which appear beautiful without, and have nothing
within but rottenness. This is the true symbol of the life of Christians now;
which God makes me perceive abundantly by his inward light.

This filled me with astonishment; and desiring to understand her more clearly,
I asked her whether there were not any good men, or true Christians in our
days?

She said to me: No, Sir, THERE ARE NO TRVE CHRISTIANS UPON EARTH. There are
indeed diverse persons who seem to be good men, and are really so in comparison
of the wicked: they may indeed pass for Saints before men; but before God they
are not true Christians; for tho they do not act wickedly, but frequent the
Sacraments, and other exercises of Devotion, yet nevertheless they have not the
LOVE OF GOD, nor Charity for their Neighbor, in their hearts; much less a
hatred of themselves, or a desire to embrace the Cross, Sufferings and
Persecutions, to follow Jesus Christ: On the contrary, they so 2 Timothy 3. 2.
love themselves, that all their designs aim at nothing but their own
satisfaction, even in the most pious things.

You would be astonished, Sir, to see what difference there is between the sight
of God, and that of men Prove. 16. 7. Luke 16. 15.
. I have been often deceived my self by these seeming virtues, being persuaded
that there were yet many true Christians; but having seen them tried by
tribulations and contempt, they were consumed as the chaff in the fire; and if
they had been GOLD in Charity, Persecution would have rendered them more
bright. Many souls will be deceived at death, who in their life time presumed
they were true Christians, while in the sight of God they will be worse than
Heathens. Such is the blindness wherein we live at present, in which no body
makes a right judgment of himself, or of others; every one presuming to be
saved without good works: whereas no works can be good 1 Cor. 13. 1^4.
if they do not proceed from Ps. 12. 2. Is. 57. 1. 59. 16. Mich. 7. 2.
Charity, which is at present banished from the hearts of all men; for which
cause there are no more perfect Christians upon earth, for the Christian life
is all Charity, and the Love of God, which is no longer in use.

I asked her; How long she believed it is since there was no more Charity, nor
true Christians upon Earth?

She answered: There has been no longer Charity upon earth, Sir, since
Christians left the Gospel simplicity; from that time Charity began to wax
cold, and when the Church would ^eeds establish herself in pomp, riches, and
magnificence: this outward splendour has utterly destroyed the spirit of the
Gospel. Studies have banished the holy spirit, and the learning of men has
stifled the wisdom of God; so that the evil has always encreast, till by the
traditions of men Math. 15. 3-9.
, they have annulled the Law of God, and extinguished Charity, which is no
longer known, and much less practiced in our dangerous and woeful times, the
danger being so much the more to be feared the less it is known; because no
body apprehends those truths which God himself has revealed. They content
themselves with the judgment of men, founding their Salvation upon the doctrine
of the learned, who are far estranged 1 Cor. 3. 18, 19, 20.
from the wisdom of the holy Spirit, to which even they will not yield
themselves, they lean so much upon their own Judgment. These are blind Math.
15. 14.
who lead the blind, and both together shall fall into the ditch; according to
the saying of Jesus Christ.

Who with just reason has called these last times dangerous 2 Timothy 3. 1.
; because under a pretext of Piety and Religion men are led to damnation.
Simple People believing that they hear God, when they hear those Guides who do
very often teach the doctrine of Devils. For if you observe what questions and
disputes are now formed in the Church, you will find that they make debates of
things, which humane malice could not raise. They must needs have come from the
bottom of Hell. They maintain that it is almost lawful to commit all sorts of
sins without offending God; that one may swear falsely without sinning; and so
of the rest, which you may better know than I; for I am struck with so much
horror when I hear such things, that I was never desirous to be acquainted with
these black villainies, they are grown to such a height, that they maintain no
body is obliged to love God, which overturns Math. 22. 37, 38.
the first and the greatest Commandment, and is repugnant to nature itself;
which carries in it this obligation of loving a God, of whom it holds its
being, and all things. Do you not think, Sir, that this Doctrine is of
Antichrist, since it contradicts the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and the
Commandment which God gave to man from the beginning of the world, and in all
times, and all ages? Nevertheless, they preach this publicly, with many other
abominations; and many believe that these are truths, because they are advanced
by learned persons, and such as are placed in Ecclesiastical Authority and
Dignities, who ought to be the true Members of the holy Church. Pardon me, Sir,
that I digress from the answer, which I should have made to your demand. It is
because a sensible regret transports me, and makes me exceed, when I think upon
the reasons, why there are no more true Christians.

The Third Conference.
The Means by which Christianity began to decay from the Time of the Apostles,
and has continued so to do to such a degree, that at present there are no true
Christians upon Earth, viz. 1. The Admission of false Brethren. 2.
Appropriation. 3. Debates. 4. Partialities. 5. Men of Learning. 6. Disputes. 7.
The Victory of the Devil.

I Replied to her; That she could not offend me in this: On the contrary, I was
very curious to understand more clearly, the causes and reasons, why there were
no longer any true Christians on Earth.

She said: Sir, let us sit down here, I will give you a particular account of
the original, progress, and end of this calamity.

As Soon as the first Christians began to grow remiss, the Devil, like a strange
Shepherd, slipped into the Sheep told of J. Christ, where he led astray many of
his Sheep, who by little and little forsook their true Shepherd, turning away
from Righteousness and Truth to follow Iniquity and Lies. The Evangelical
Poverty is contemned by them; sufferings are become insupportable to them;
humility is disdained. In fine, they would no longer hear the voice of their
lawful Shepherd, whose word served for the nourishment of their souls; from
that time Antichrist began his Reign, and has ever since augmented his Power.
He could not endure, that Jesus Christ had brought the word unto men, by
following of which, they might be to all Eternity in the Glory of the blessed,
from which he had been chased and banished for all Eternity. Therefore he
endeavors to make war against this word, that he might efface it out of the
memory of men, and might thereby hinder their coming to the Kingdom of Heaven.
He did not tempt them by evil deeds, or by wicked actions, but by tricks and
slights, covering his malice under the cloak of piety and reason.

First, he incites the wicked, his Adherents, to list themselves into the
Christian Life, Math. 13. 24.
that Tares might be sown among the good grain. He thrusts in Act. 20 29, 30, 2
Cor. 11. 13.
many false brethren among the true, that he might by them do his work
covertly, and under a pretext of piety; for otherwise he would not have been
able to gain any thing upon the hearts of those first Christians, who being
filled with the holy Spirit, and burning with the fire of the Love of God, he
could not have caught them with evil things, or such as had an appearance of
evil.

He multiples therefore first the number of Christians so exceedingly, that
every one judged, it was impossible to live any more in common. He moves by
humane reason, the hearts of the most perfect to yield to a separation, and to
consent that every one should possess his own particular wealth, without
forgetting in the mean time Charity, which every one should preserve in his
heart, to supply the necessities of their brethren. Thus this old Serpent has
always colored his inventions with piety and reasons.

But no sooner did every one begin to have thine and mine, than the brother is
forgotten Rev. 2 4
, and instead of bringing their portion in common, each one began to cheat, as
to his own particular; from hence came an exclusion, and exception of persons;
and instead of inviting to their table the poor, Luke 14. 12, 13
as J. Christ had taught, that they might have their reward in Heaven; they
invited their friends, and those who had the convenience to invite them again.
By which Charity was greatly diminisht, and Avarice began to gain upon their
hearts, every one seeking their own interest. As Soon as the Devil had this door
open, whereby to enter into the Church of J. Christ, he began to stir up
therein debates 1 Cor. 6. 1-8.
and dissentions, which were contrary unto the peace which J. Christ had always
taught, saying, Joh. 14. 22.
I give you my peace, my peace I leave you; and elsewhere, Joh. 13 34, 35
Love one another: by this shall it be known that you are my Disciples.

The Devil also stifled these Doctrines from the beginning; for one said, 1
Cor. 1. 12.
I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo; thus vices increased, and Charity
was lessened. Behold from what time began no longer true Christians to be
found; in process of time yet less: and in the end, which is now, there are
none. This would be too long to deduce to you in particular. You may, Sir,
conceive the rest sufficiently.

I told her; That my conception could not reach so far; that she must declare
to me the whole: so much the rather that she had promised to do it. That it was
neither good nor honest to be wanting to her promise, since I would willingly
hear it; and the affair did require it. That the Glory of God, and my own
particular salvation was concerned in it.

She said: Seeing it is so, Sir, I will proceed; but be not you weary if the
discourse be long: Many things cannot be said in a little time. Be you as
attentive to hear, as I shall be to declare it. These are excellent Truths,
which will open your understanding, and that of all persons capable of reason.
When therefore those first Christians became thus remiss, and the Devil had
made a breach upon the hearts of the most part, to oppose the Doctrine of J.
Christ, some of those who were not yet altogether perverted, set themselves to
make some reformation in the Church, lest it should become more corrupt, for
many errors and Sects had crept into it, every one desiring to believe and
practice after his own mode. This gave beginning to all sorts of Heresies: for
as long as the union of true Christians did last, Act 4 32.
all were but one heart, and one will in J. Christ; living all under the Gospel
simplicity. But when once they assembled learned Men, and introduced Schools,
there was nothing to be seen but disputes and controversies. The Sciences have
brought in so many questions little necessary to Salvation, that it had been
more desirable they had never been introduced: for instead of putting an end to
errors, they have rather raised new ones. How many Heresies have proceeded from
the learned of the Church? a Calvin, a Luther in our time, and so many others
before.

Truly, Sir, in thinking to reform the Church by the learned, they have rather
deformed it; the doctrine of Jesus requiring rather humility of heart, than
great Philosophy: for the simplicity of the Gospel has in it more true wisdom
Ps. 119. 98, 99, 100, 104, 130.
, than all the Doctors of the world can acquire in all the Schools of the
Universities. The Learning of Men has stifled the Wisdom of the holy Spirit;
and since they have chosen the learned unto the Helm of the Church, they have
thrust the Saints from it: seeing none have since that been admitted into the
Government and Authority of the Church but the great men and the learned: the
little ones Math. 4. 25. 1 Pet. 5. 5.
to whom Jesus Christ says, he gives his Grace, have been rejected and rendered
useless. Hereby in process of time there have been so few true Christians, the
number of which has always diminisht, according as the learning of men has
multiplied.

For if those learned men had observed and taught the Doctrine of the Gospel
simply as it is set down, as the Apostles did, the Church had continued in the
flower of its youth; but since they would needs polish and varnish it with
humane doctrines, they have quite disfigured it. Its beautiful countenance had
no need of ornament. Nothing can amend the work of God, but may indeed spoil
it, as they have done by so many various and unprofitable questions, as
concerning Grace, Free Will, the immaculate Conception of the Virgin, and so
many other things little necessary to our Salvation, with so many new ways and
devotions to be saved; so many cases about sins, so many circumstances
concerning virtues, which serve rather to hinder than advance them. It were
better to study not to sin, than to know its degrees. It is far better to walk
suitably to the Grace of God, than to study to know how he gives it to us; and
to have virtue and devotion, than to learn so many means to attain to it. There
is no doubt but all these buildings made with men's hands have shaken the
Edifice of the Church of Christ, which the Spirit of God had built by the
ministry of the same J. Christ. Men, who are wholly ignorant, would needs
correct and reform the work of God, which was so perfect and accomplished; by
which they have ruined themselves, and all like unto them.

I entreated, that she would explain her mind a little more at length
concerning this question, and tell me in order, if it was not expedient to
oppose the errors which had crept in amidst the holy doctrine of Jesus Christ?
If it was not needful to call the learned, that they might overcome by reasons
and arguments those false brethren, who set themselves directly to oppose that
doctrine, to the end they might stifle and blast it, even in its Cradle?

She answers: Truly, Sir, it had been much better to have opposed those errors
by despising them, than by disputing against them; because these disputes have
taught many the errors which they would have been ignorant of, who might have
continued in their evangelical simplicity; whereas these disputes have made
many grow remiss by the same errors, which being spread have captivated weak
minds. It had been far better to have rejected and cut off those erroneous
persons, than to maintain their opinion by disputes. There was no need to fear,
that the Doctrine of Jesus Christ would have been sunk by all the errors that
could be raised up against it, seeing its Author has promisd Math. 16. 18
that it shall never perish, however it be opposed and attacked; which we see
by experience* For tho the Devil and his Adherents, have always endeavored to
obscure and defile this holy Doctrine, yet it has continued in writing pure and
entire in our hands to this day, and will continue so even to the end of the
world. This is the greatest miracle that God has done upon earth, after men
have invented so many glosses and opinions to contradict it, and the life and
manners even of those, who are called the People of God, are so different from
this Doctrine, that yet notwithstanding it subsists in its integrity, in the
hands and power of those who raze out, and efface it by their manners and
actions. If it were not upheld by miracles, how often would it have been
stifled by the wisdom of the learned, who (if it were in their power) would
never suffer a Doctrine which so directly reproves their lives and manners. In
which God shows his almighty power, that all men who shall be born upon the
earth, may have their recourse to this fountain of living water, which is the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and that no body may pretend ignorance, under pretext
that there are different, or new doctrines and errors; for he who has a desire
to search, has also the means to find the real truth, written in the holy
Gospel, or the rest of the holy Scriptures. It was not therefore necessary to
maintain it by so many disputes, which Jesus Christ never Math. 12. 19.
taught us, either by word, or by deed. Men could not destroy that which God
would build. It had been more expedient to strengthen and comfort the faithful,
than to dispute against the erroneous who were raised up only by the Devil:
they would have perished of themselves; for all that is nor built by God, shall
be destroyed. A small number of faithful Believers were far better than so
great a multitude of Christians in appearance, who do nothing but debate and
dispute without possessing true living faith. The rotten members corrupt those
which are yet sound. The Jam. 4 7.
Devil is never sooner overcome, than by despising him, for then he knows not
how to take hold of the good; but disputes and debates furnish him with diverse
weapons to attack and overcome them Jam. 3. 14. 15, 16.
.

The Fourth Conference.
Of the qualities and ways of acting which ought to have been in the Guides of
the Church, to maintain it in its good estate against all Enemies; and that
they might not make way for the Spirit of Antichrist, as they have done.

I Admired all this so powerful discourse, desiring always to hear more. I
asked her how she conceived, that the Saints were thrust from the Government of
the Church, when the learned undertook it; since many learned and great Doctors
have been canonized Saints, and held for such.

She said: Sir, it is very rare to find a learned Saint, or at least one who
becomes holy by learning; for all humane wisdom is foolishness before God. All
the Saints are certainly wise, but few learned men are Saints: I do not mean,
that there have not been some Saints who were engaged in the Government of the
Church, as St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, and others: but I cannot believe that a
body is sound, when it has the Leprosy in any of its members Levit. 13. 2, 3.
. The whole body of the Church was sound, when to be an Apostle, or Minister of
the Church, 'twas only required to embrace an evangelical life; for all the
rotten members were cut off from it, or corrected, or indeed they withdrew of
themselves, not being able to endure so great a sanctity, that reproved them in
all their manners. St. Paul 1 Cor. 5 11.
forbids Christians so much as to eat with sinners; behold how he cuts off the
rotten members: and elsewhere it is said, Mat. 18. 17.
If thy brother will not believe the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen.
In many places of Scripture you will find this rejection. St. Peter Act. 5. 58.
makes Ananias and Saphira fall dead at his feet for their lying. St. Paul 1
Cor. 5. 3, 4, 5.
delivers over to the Devil the Corinthian; besides so many others, who have
been chastized for not having continued faithful observers of the Law of the
Gospel. Others have withdrawn of themselves, as Judas Math. 27. 5.
to go and hang himself: and a great many others who withdrawing themselves,
gave occasion to Jesus Christ to ask the other Disciples, Joh. 6* 66, 67.
If they would go also? to which they replied; and whither shall we go Lord?
thou have the words of eternal life. These three means were capable of
upholding the holy Church in its Integrity and Holiness, as Jesus Christ had
established it; and did himself observe these rules, that is, that the erroneous
should be rejected and despised, or else corrected for their errors; or
otherwise permitted to go out, and withdraw themselves: but these new Doctors
have found out, as a more perfect mean for the upholding of the Church, to
admit only the wise and learned to the government of it, that the erroneous
might be opposed, and overcome by disputes. Is the invention and wise foresight
of these men, more perfect than the ordinance and doing of God? Can that
eternal wisdom be ignorant, that Learning was necessary for the government of
his Church? Was it necessary that men should change, reform, or perfect what
Jesus Christ had established, to wit, that the government of his Church should
appertain to those, who have given evidence of the love they bear him? for this
cause he puts the question to St. Peter thrice Joh. 21. 15, 16, 17.
, to know if he loved him, before he made him head of his Church. On the
contrary, men are more inquisitive to know, if any Minister of the Church be
great and learned, than if he love God. This is a renversement of spirit which
has seized upon men, since they would needs be governed by the wise of the
world, and they have despised the holy simplicity of the Gospel. This mischief
could not be brought in by humane frailty; it must needs proceed from the
malice of the Devil. Man indeed through frailty, might backslide, and follow Jesus
Christ at a little farther distance than he had taught him; but could not
arrive to such an excess of wickedness, as directly to oppose, and despise his
doctrine and practice. This must needs come from that spirit of error, who from
the beginning entered into the the Church, to oppose Christ, and is therefore
justly called ANTICHRIST. He has so cunningly masqu'd and disguised his errors
with piety and reason, that they have been followed, notwithstanding there have
been at diverse times holy persons in the government of the Church.

The Fifth Conference.
Of Antichrist; and how he rules every where in Spirit.

I Begged she would tell me, whom, she understood to be Antichrist; and how he
could introduce himself into the Church in its beginning, since it appears from
the holy Scriptures, that he is to come only toward the end of the world, and
is called, the man of sin, the son of perdition, 2 These 2* 5.
and is not to reign but three years and a half.

She said: I perceive, Sir, that you take for Antichrist a humane body, which
is to be born by the operation of the Devil. I believe, that this will fall out
at the end of the world, yea that he is already born: but I make very small
reckoning of this visible and bodily Antichrist, because he can seduce none,
but those who desire to be so. He shall be known for a wicked one, because he
will deal harshly with those who yield obedience to him; which will occasion
Martyrs, and make many good men to be saved, by the resistance they will make
against him. These evils are not terrible but to the faint-hearted, who are not
trained up to sufferings: but I reckon this invisible and spiritual Antichrist,
of whom I have spoken to you, to be far more pernicious; because he seduceth
the well-meaning, under the appearance of a false good; this is much more to be
feared. The evil which is manifest, is easy to be avoided by those who hate
it; but the evil which is covered with piety and holiness, is insensibly
followed by those who are good, and love piety, who would never follow
Antichrist discovered, nor the evil which they knew to be such.

I told her; that I had never heard of this spiritual Antichrist; that I would
willingly know who he is, and what difference there is between him who is to
come in the flesh, toward the end of the world, and him who crept into the
Church from its beginning.

She answered: Sir, this Antichrist is the Devil, who from the creation of the
world made war against men, that he might make them forsake God, and their own
Salvation; for these ends he made Eve and Adam fall into sin, he tempted Cain
to kill his brother Abel, and is the Author of all the other evils and sins
which have since come upon the earth. This Devil has always led men to do evil;
from this he is called Rev 20. 2.
the Old Serpent, because he has shed his infernal venom upon the earth from
the beginning of the world. But since he knew that God so loved the world, that
he has sent his Son to instruct and save it, he has redoubled his rage against
men, and by new subtilties has endeavored to hinder their Salvation, that with
himself he might draw them into his own miserable wretched Condemnation. But
perceiving, that the word of God was sent to them from heaven, not by voices,
thunders, or burning bushes, but by a sensible and visible body, which the same
God had taken for this end, that he might teach them palpably by an Organ, like
to their humane nature: the Devil perceiving, that he could not any longer have
such hold of men, because of the virtue of that word which was able to create
the universe, he devises to appear like the Son of God; and after the manner
of apes endeavor to imitate his actions, covering himself with Sheeps skins,
tho he be the true ravenous Wolf. He slipped from the very beginning into the
Church which Jesus Christ was going to build, that he might oppose and
contradict his word under pious pretexts, and covered his malice with
hypocrisy, that he might the better contradict and oppose the doctrine of
Jesus Christ; and from thence he has truly born the name of Antichrist, and
there never will be any other Antichrist, but this same Devil, who was formerly
called the Old Serpent. There is no distinction between him, who slipped into the
Church in its beginning, and him who shall be incarnated toward the end of the
world: for it is always the same Devil, who only takes different methods, that
he may the better decoy men, according to the various occurrences of time. He
began his Reign from the birth of the Holy Church, and has always gradually
advanced it, by continuing still to oppose the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, till
he has effaced it out of the memory, almost of all men, which we may perceive
in this age, wherein the Doctrine of Jesus Christ is no more in use, than if it
had never been brought into the world, which makes me believe, that he is now
born* since he has full dominion over the hearts of men, who instead of
persevering in the Doctrine of the Apostles, have insensibly followed the
Doctrine of this Devil, and of Christians, are become Antichristians: for who
does not see at present, that Wars, Discords, and Dissentions, reign among
Christians, instead of the Peace Joh. 14. 27.
which Jesus Christ established? It may indeed be said that there is not any
longer one stone left upon another of the true Temple: that is to say, that
there are not any longer two Christian Souls united in the same heart and the
same will in Jesus Christ: and instead of that Act 2. 44. 4. 32 34.
Communion of Goods, which Jesus Christ brought into his Church, there is
nothing to be seen in it but self-interest, and selfseeking, without any care
for our Neighbor. As for the Joh. 13 34 35.
Mutual Charity of loving our Neighbor as our selves, it is so despised, that
he who should put it in practice would be scoffed at by all Christians; much
more he who should choose Luke 14. 10
the last place, or who should take less Phil. 2. 5-8. H^b. 11. 25, 26*
when he might have more: To Math. 5 ^^.
give to him who would take from us, or indeed ibid. 5. 39.
to hold up the cheek to receive a blow, would be reckoned a great folly among
the Christians of this age, who will scarce suffer an offensive word without
resenting it, or avenging themselves. Who is there Math 26. 24.
that takes up the Cross to follow Jesus Christ, since every one avoids
sufferings as much as he can, and instead of the Cross takes all Contentments
agreeable to his senses, as far as they are lawful and permitted? And so of all
the rest of the Doctrines of Jesus Christ, no body studies to put them in
practice; on the contrary, every one resists them, and does the quite contrary,
without considering, that all that is against Christ is certainly Antichrist.
And as it is not necessary for Salvation, that all Christians should see the
carnal body of Jesus Christ, to render them his true Disciples it is enough
that they know and follow his Doctrine; even so to be the followers of the
Devil it is not necessary that they see this Antichrist in the flesh; it is
enough that they follow his doctrine, which is much more hurtful to Souls, than
that incarnate Devil can be unto Bodies: therefore the furious is not so much
to be dreaded, as the crafty and concealed; he can but wound or kill the Body
by his fury, but this wounds and kills Souls by cheats and delusions.

I could not but acknowledge such clear and evident truths, neither had I more
than one doubt to propose about them, viz. whether this Antichrist in the flesh
was already born; which being supposed, how he could make any suffer Martyrdom,
and occasion the salvation of many of those who should resist him, seeing she
believed that all Christians were at present become Antichristian; so that they
could not be disposed for Martyrdom, nor for resisting of him, whom they loved
and followed?

She said, Sir, I cannot doubt that this Antichrist in the flesh is born
already, for the wickedness of the world is risen to the highest degree that it
can come to, and the Devil has gained an inward dominion over the hearts of all
men: not that wickedness is manifestly at the highest degree in the judgment of
men, for it will appear more clearly when they shall commit all sort of sins
publicly, without being afraid of any; the evil will seem then greater, but it
will be less in the sight of God, for it will then be no more accompanied and
disguised with Hypocrisy, as it is at present: The Devil having gained the
hearts of ill men, will remain no longer concealed. He is desirous to reign
publicly and openly as soon as he can for his greater Glory. As long as there
were here and there some good Souls, he kept himself hid, to the end he might
gain them: but at present he can so well disguise his malice, that all serve
him, the wicked with good will as his hired Servants, and the good serve him by
constraint as his Slaves. From hence I infer, that the time of his Reign is
come, and that he will appear very shortly visibly in the flesh.

And to satisfy the second doubt proposed, viz. how there shall be Martyrs of
Jesus Christ, and of those who shall obtain Salvation by the Perfecutions of
this discovered Antichrist; this shall be an effect of the last Mercy of God,
who will yet once send his light into the world* according to his promise, Is.
58. ^0.
That the light shall arise in darkness, and that the darkness shall be as noon
day. That is to say, that in this time of darkness, in which we live at
present, wherein the Truth is not any longer discerned from Lies, Faithfulness
from Deceit, nor Righteousness from Iniquity, that God will make his Light to
arise in this Darkness, and that these who shall receive it shall open their
eyes, and see the blindness of their understanding, and reject the spirit of
error into which they were fallen through the false persuasions of this invisible
Antichrist, and shall embrace the spirit of truth, which is the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ; and by this means dispose themselves to Martyrdom, and to saving
sufferings in the Quarrel of Jesus Christ: for many are now detained the Slaves
of the Devil through ignorance and inadvertency, believing even that they follow
Jesus Christ, when they follow this strange Shepherd through his delusions.

I thought it impossible to believe, that the Devil had dominion over the
hearts of all men, because I knew many who make profession of being good men,
who in effect are observed to addict themselves to pious and religious works,
exercising themselves in both public and private Devotions, employing
themselves according to their Callings in succouring their Neighbor, and
owning the quarrel of good men, in making peace and agreement between those who
have quarrels and debates.

She said; Sir, it is by these works which seem good and pious, that the Devil
deceives the good, and renders them his Slaves, making them to do his* will
without their perceiving it. It is for this reason our times may well be called
dangerous, because the darkness is so thick as that good is not any longer
discerned from evil. Those are esteemed good men who do often frequent the
Churches and Sacraments, and are present at the public Solemnities; and they
who do so, believe themselves to be good men, and to live well* but believe me,
Sir, if this be not done in the true Spirit of Christianity, these are all but
amusements: for the life of a Christian is an Joh. 4. 23, 25. Romans 8. 5-9. 12.
2. Ephesians. 4. 23.
inward and spiritual Life, consisting in the LOVE and Respect we owe to God,
and CHARITY to our Neighbor for God. This Love is an inward Passion of our
Soul which is known to none but God himself, as also this Charity for our
Neighbor. These inward passions are sometimes discovered outwardly, by
external operations, as to suffer willingly for him whom we love, to be subject
in all things to his will, to honor him with all our power; by these solid
virtues it is discovered if we be good men, not by making a profession of being
so: for this profession of being good proceeds often from a presumption of our
Salvation, which is a sin against the Holy Ghost. A sinner who knows his sin,
is often a better man than this presumptuous person.

The Sixth Conference.
How the outward worship of God, and the outward works of Charity toward our
Neighbor, are corrupted by the Devil: And from whence this Power proceeds.

I Desired to be satisfied concerning all these points of good works which I
had observed to be yet in use among those who profess to be good men, to see
whither the Devil would produce such operations in his Adherents. I asked her
first, If it was not a good work to go often to the Church, or to its
Solemnities?

She answered: It is very good to go to Church to hear the Word of God, since
Jesus Christ himself went thither to teach it; for there is distributed (or at
least ought to be) that word which gives food or nourishment to the souls of
the faithful. But I pray you, Sir, says she, reflect a little seriously with me
on the way of going to Church, and of teaching the Word of God there which is
now observed, and see if you will not be obliged to confess, that by what is
now done in Churches, the Devil receives much more honor than God: therefore
he incites his Adherents to go thither often, and the Ministers to perform the
Solemnities there frequently. They go to Church out of custom, and being there,
they behave themselves even as they do in profane places. The Solemnities there
are so vain, that they serve rather to satisfy the senses than to move
devotion. Among a thousand persons who follow Processions, you will scarce find
one who has his heart lifted up to God!

Sermons are made more out of vanity, and heard more out of curiosity, than to
profit by them. Behold the Theater of the World at present, judge now, whither
all these things can pass for good works in the sight of God, and if the Devil
has not ground to excite them to these actions, from whence he derives so much
his advantages. When once he could persuade men, that a Christian Life consists
in outward actions, he perverted all the good; so that they do rather follow
him than Jesus Christ, because these visible and outward things make a stronger
impression on the natural senses, than those spiritual things which Jesus
Christ has taught and commanded us.

I felt in my soul that this was true; but desiring to learn more, I said to
her; that for those who apply themselves to their Neighbors, as to visit the
poor and the sick, to own the quarrel of the good, to quiet and appease strife
and contentions; that these works could not come from the suggestion of the
Devil.

She replied: All these things are good, if they were done in the spirit of
Charity, and purely for the Love of God; but that this was so rare, that she
had not as yet found so much as one person in the world, who performed these
works purely for God: That there was through all a mixture either of vainglory,
or of self-satisfaction, or of respect to the creatures, whereby the Devil
could lay hold on them, and draw his advantages from them, tho the things were
good in themselves* That he might indeed incite them to visit the poor and the
sick, out of some natural satisfaction; and also to assist the good, and to
pacify quarrels and contentions; all this may be by the inducement of the
Devil: who seeing a person desirous to please God, he will endeavor to divert
him by good external actions, which he will cause him to multiply in such sort,
as that they shall leave him neither leisure, nor rest, and recollection to
think on the inward life which a true Christian ought to put in practice. The
Devil will have profit enough by diverting thus a soul from its own Salvation,
in permitting them to do good to others as to the body or temporal things,
which usually bring no glory to God, but serve for humane conveniences; and
thus he gains all the good, who not being aware of all his artifices, suffer
themselves to be led by this Enemy at his pleasure, (without knowing him) under
the color of a seeming good; for otherwise he could not deceive them, nor gain
them to himself; as he has done all the world.

I trembled to hear such severe discourse; which nevertheless seemed to me to
be true, for my understanding was opened by her words. I took the boldness to
ask her, how it was possible that God should give so much power to the Devil;
and how his Goodness could permit the good to be thus seduced and deceived by
this Enemy.

She resolutely said: Sir, it is not God who gives this power to the Devil, but
our sins themselves make him so powerful. The Devil is as a chained Dog, who
can go no farther than we lengthen the chain to him, and Jam. 4. 7.
cannot bite us if we do not approach him. Luke 10. 18, 19, 20.
God has given us power over the Devil, and has not given the Devil power over
us; for he can never do an evil thing, and it would be a great evil, if he had
given the Devil power to hurt men. He will permit him indeed (that we may be
tried and purged) to tempt and wound our body; but he can never take hold of
our soul without our consent. It Is very ill done to utter this Calumny of God,
that he permits the Devil to hinder our Salvation. This is for want of light;
for the Devil cannot seduce us if we continue faithful to God. We are his
Children, and the Devil is his Enemy: if he has seduced all Christians, as I
was saying, it is through their fault. They are not ignorant that these changes
and innovations cannot come from God, who never changes; and tho these deceits
of the Devil are done under a pretext of good, yet they may abundantly see,
that they are not conformable to what Jesus Christ has taught us. It is
therefore our own fault, when the Devil deceives us, since we do not persevere
in the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, which is always to be found, if we had a
sincere desire to search after it. Does God act against his goodness when he
permits us to fall into the error which we will needs follow? it would be
rather against his Justice if he should hinder us from it, after that he has
given us a free will, and a free choice.

The Seventh Conference.
That God has not forsaken men, but men have forsaken God, and resisted his
grace, which he distributes impartially.

I Said to her* Since our Darkness is so great, it is plain that God has
forsaken us.

She replied: Hold, Sir, God never forsakes any, but he suffers Ps. 81. 13*
Zach. 11. 12. Joh. 6. 66, 67.
us to forsake him, when such is our will. If we are fallen into so great
darkness, it is our own fault only; because we have left Jesus Christ, who is
Joh. 8. 12. 12* 35, ^6.
the true Light of the World. The farther we are estranged from him, our
darkness is still the greater. We have loved Joh* 3. 19.
darkness more than light: by this means we have forsaken God to follow the
Devil* under whose slavery we groan at present of our own choice and will. For
could God have done more than he has done to save us? could he have instructed
us more plainly? there must have been something above God to do more for us,
seeing that he is not content to send us his Servants and holy Prophets to
enlighten us, but he is come himself to teach us in particular, what we ought
to do and avoid, how we ought to speak, walk, sit, and perform all the rest of
our actions so familiarly, that no Christian can be ignorant how to work out
their Salvation; and if they have abandoned all these benefits of their Lord,
to follow the spirit of error* it is no wonder that they are fallen into
darkness, and the power of their Enemy; for which they ought to blame
themselves, and smite the breast with regret and penitence, if peradventure
they may obtain (t) Joh 10. 3. Ps. 138. 8.
pardon for so great an ingratitude, instead of making God the Author of our
misery, and saying blasphemously, that God has abandoned them, of which you
also doubt.

I told her; that I should be sorry to blaspheme against God, or suspect that
he might do evil; but that it is usual, when we see any fall into the Extremity
of sin, to say, that he is forsaken of God.

To which she replied: This is very ill said, Sir. It is an ill explained
phrase, for God Ps. 138 8. Wisd* 11. 24, 25, 26.
never forsakes the work of his own hands: we appertain to him in all respects,
because he created us, he maintains us, and we have no good thing but what we
have received from him; and if he forsook us, we should fall into the Nothing
from whence he has taken us. A Father, or a Mother, who have debauched
Children, cannot forsake them, nor hinder them from being theirs: but they may
let them wander after their own wills, when they will not follow the
instructions of their Father, nor yield obedience to him. They cease not
notwithstanding to be their Children, which would appear evidently, if they
should repent of their debauchery, and return to a submission to their Father.
They would then see, how much their true Father loves them; Luke 15. 11.
which appears in the Parable of the Prodigal Son. God is infinitely more good
Mat 7. 11.
than those evil natural Fathers: How then could he forsake his Children whom
he has so much loved? People deceive themselves in many things, Sir, concerning
the works of God. I know not how he suffers so long the reproaches and
blasphemies which men utter against him every moment. They say sometimes, God
chastises me; and if we examine it narrowly, they are our sins which are the
tormenters of our soul and of our body. A wicked man will say, I have not
received grace from God to do well: and if he would search narrowly his
Conscience, he will find, that he has resisted and opposed grace Prove. 1. 24,
25.
. Some say, My grace is not strong enough to make me abstain from sin; and
another will say, If God would give me his grace I should be holy. All this is
spoken, to lay the blame on God of our sins and miseries, and to excuse our
selves; and thus to make God pass for unjust, and a partial respecter of those
( c) Psalm. 106. 43. Jer. 2. 19.
to whom he gives his grace; and also cruel in denying it to whom he pleases.
Thus they look upon God as a person subject to diverse passions of love and
hatred, of good or ill will. Truly, Sir, I bewail so great a blindness among
men. How can they make a right judgment of their own concupiscence, or of their
Neighbor, when they make such unjust ones of God himself? and notwithstanding
think they judge rightly, because the learned judge so; yea they would even
think they sinned, or did evil, in believing the contrary; because this
invisible Antichrist has instilled these sentiments into the mind of the
learned, that they may never attain to the knowledge of the Righteousness,
Goodness, and Mercy of God; and that they may amuse 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5.
themselves, in disputing about questions which are not necessary to our
Salvation, but serve rather to offend him, making our selves Judges of his
works, debating about his designs. This is one of the reasons for which I blame
all those studies in the Church of God, being persuaded that they have brought
many errors into it, and wishing always that it had continued 2 Cor. 11. 3.
in the Gospel simplicity, as in the times of the Apostles, and Disciples of
Jesus Christ.

The Eighth Conference.
Of the Grace of Ged, how it is given us; and of the Difficulty of Conversion.

HAving observed, that she spoke of the matters of Grace, concerning which
there had arisen so many Controversies in the Church, of which she had hinted
something already in the former Conferences: I asked her what she believed
concerning Grace; and if the opinion of St. Augustine and his Suecessors, was
not better in holding, that all Grace comes from, and depends upon God alone;
than the opinion of some others, who hold, that Man may have Grace as often as
he desires it?

To which she replied: I fear, Sir, I shall not say the things wnich are most
agreeable to you, for it seems to me you have some interest in this dispute.
But since I have promised to answer all your questions, I shall do it truly and
in simplicity, according to my measure of light, without respect of persons,
confiding in your goodness, that you will pardon the freedom which I must use
in this discourse. As to the first Question, Whether the opinion of St.
Augustine and his Followers, is better than that of his Adversaries in this
matter?

I hold (comparing the one with the other) that that of St. Augustine is the
better, or to speak more properly, the less dangerous, because the design of it
seems to be, to persuade us, that all grace comes immediately from God, that we
may presume nothing of our selves; whereas the contrary opinion rather incites
man to attribute grace to himself, as if it depended on his own will, which
would not excite in us so much humility as the first persuasion, which for this
reason is less dangerous. But I believe the minds of neither of these Doctors
were sufficiently purifyd to perceive clearly the truth of this question; and
that their Understandings were not free of the Ideas of their acquired Learning
for receiving of this Light of Grace, which is not received but by the same
Grace, which is obseured when our own sense is in the least mixed with it. It is
necessary Ps. 4. 5.
that all the faculties of our soul should be still that we may receive the
pure light of the holy Spirit.

And to answer, as to what I believe concerning Grace; I will tell you, Sir, it
comes immediately from God Romans 11. 6.
, without any merit or cooperation of ours; for we cannot merit nor cooperate
before we have a being. Nothing is not capable of being able to desire or
cooperate with Grace: It must needs be given us through the sole mercy of God, as
it was in creating us, and drawing us out of Nothing. It was his will and
pleasure to create us after his own Image and Likeness, and to make us Deities
depending upon him, that Prove. 8. 31.
he might take his delight with us. The Center 4. 23. 23. 26.
of our Soul being the place of his Residence. He has adorned 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4.
us with all the Graces that might make us love him; and whereas Love cannot be
perfect and accomplished, unless the beloved give their free consent to the
Lover; therefore he Eccles. 15. 14-17.
created us altogether free to consent to that Love, for he would not have our
consent through Psalm. 110. 3. 1 Chronicles. 29 1. Jer 30. 21. Joh. 6. 67.
force nor out of necessity, but through a pure desire of good will on his side.
Therefore he created us a kind of creatures wholly free, and gave us all the
graces Is. 5. 2, etc.
requisite for his Love; and this out of his sole goodness and mercy, without
any cooperation of ours. But instead of applying so many graces so freely
bestowed upon us, to love him, we have made use of them to offend him.
Nevertheless, this was not capable of making God change the Love which he bare
to his creatures, or to take from them the Graces which he had already bestowed
upon them. He continues unchangeable in his benefits, and could not repent Romans
11. 29.
of having adorned man with so many Graces* which he continues to give, even
after his sin. Seeing they were not bestowed on him for his merits, neither are
they taken away from him for his demerits; for God has no need of man: Job 35.
5, 6.
if he be righteous or wicked* it is for himself: but God respecting always
himself, imparts still the influences of grace to the wicked Math. 5. 44, 45.
, as the Sun sends his Beams on the Dunghill, as well as on the Diamond: these
different objects not being able to alter or change him. Even so man receives
always grace from God on his part, 2 Cor. 6. 1.
but it is not always operative because of the hindrances which sin raises
against it; for if God did not continually give his grace to man he could not
subsist.

We see by experience, that the wicked has all things necessary for his life,
as well as the righteous, tho the one employs them to bless God, and the other
to curse him. The Sun shines upon the wicked, as well as upon the good, without
exception of persons.

The grace of God is given to every one, tho they use it differently.
Nevertheless, we cannot attribute to God, the Is. 5. 3, 4.
want of his grace, but to our own wickedness, which opposes it. Grace Ephesians. 2.
8, 9.
therefore comes immediately from God, and nothing comes from man but sin only,
which Is. 59. 1, 2.
hinders the operation of this grace, and renders him unable to cooperate with
it, not being able to enjoy grace and sin both together.

I asked her: If sinners might recover Grace as often as they pleased; and if
there needed nothing but their will to forsake their sins.

She said: No, Sir, Grace is not in their power, and they cannot recover it
Prove. 1. 26, 28. Heb. 12. 17.
according to their pleasure. It is called GRACE, because it is a thing freely
given: it is not a debt or obligation, which may be constrained, for it comes
of the sole mercy of God, and not of our desires, or merits. Neither does it
depend upon the will Rom 9. 16.
of a sinner to leave his sin. He may indeed fall into it of himself, but he
cannot rise again without the grace of God: But Deuteronomy. 4 29.
this grace will never be denied him, if he ask it in humility of heart. If we
see sinners obstinate and impenitent, it is because they do not pray earnestly
enough to obtain grace; for God is so good, that as soon as the sinner Jer. 3.
12.
is truly penitent, he pardons him. All the difficulty the sinner has to leave
off his sin, proceeds from sin itself, which Wisd. 1. 21. 2 Cor. 4. 4. 1 John
2. 11.
blinds the soul, that it cannot perceive the terror of sin, and the danger in
which it has plunged him. It has also in it so many chains and bonds Romans 6.
16. 7. 23. Heb. 12. 1.
with which it holds all his passions chained in such captivity, that it seems
to the soul impossible to leave off and forsake it; so that we hear sometimes
sinners say, It is impossible for me to forsake my sin. Not that God is the
Author of this impossibility; for Ezekiel. 33. 11.
he wills not the death of a sinner, but that he should turn and live. It is
only the bondage into which sin reduces the soul that is under its dominion. It
must do Mat. 11. 12.
violence to its self to break its bonds, and avoid the occasions of sin: by so
doing, it will recover the grace of God, which is not drawn by force, but falls
of it self into the soul as soon as sin is gone out thence. For God is always
ready at the door Math. 7. 7.
to open to him that will knock.

The Ninth Conference.
What the Church is: and of its Corruption.

I Said to her: Since the mercy of God is so great, how did you declare to me
heretofore, that you despaired of the Salvation of almost all the world?

She said: It is true, Sir, I am yet of the same opinion, and I cannot see how
one soul can enter into Paradise, after the manner they live at present. I see
that its gate is shut, and that no body enters in any longer by it, for Jesus
Christ says Joh. 14. 6.
that he is the way; and I do not perceive any body that goes or walks in him,
or even that seeks him. Since learned men have taught another way of Salvation
than he, every one 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2.
follows them, thinking they do well in believing them, because they make
themselves be called the Church, which if it were true, they could not teach
otherwise than Jesus Christ has done, since he and his Church Colos. 1. 24.
are the same thing. As Jesus Christ is no other but the Word of God, even so
the Church is no other but the same 2 Cor. 3. 3.
Word: It was sent from Heaven Joh. 6. 33, 35.
covered and wrapped up in the humane body, which is called Jesus Christ, which
God formed for these ends, that he might convey this word, which is his Spouse,
into the bodies of all Christians, and that all might be 17. 17, 21.
but one with Jesus Christ, as he is one with his Father. There is nothing but
this word 15 3. 1 Pet. 1 23
that can make the Church, which is not tied to the City of Rome, or that of
Jerusalem, but only to souls which possess this Doctrine. These only are the
Church. Neither office, nor habit, nor dignity, make the Church, but the
doctrine of Jesus Christ only Joh. 8 31.
; out of which there can be no Salvation: for it is the only one, sent from
God, and will abide always without any change or mutation Math. 24 35.
. Let all the men of the world study to invent as many reasons, means, and
controversies as they will, they can never change or alter the Doctrine of
Jesus Gal. 1. 8, 9.
Christ, it will always be such, as it was in the beginning, and shall be even
to the end, without any change or mutation whatsoever. It is an error to
believe, and damnation to follow any other thing, how good and holy soever it
does appear.

I said to her; That it was true there was no Salvation out of the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ, but there were yet many souls in the world who would follow it,
and that those who would contradict it are called Heretics, and are cut off
from the Church; but for the Pope, the Cardinals, Bishops, Pastors, all the
rest of the Clergy of the Roman Church, they believed that they had the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and consequently the Keys of Paradise, and the Way of
Salvation.

She said: There is yet some light in your Soul, Sir, since you know that there
is no Salvation out of the Doctrine of Jesus Christ: but to say, that there are
yet in the world Souls, who desire to follow it, I have experienced the
contrary, having traveled in diverse Countries, and as it were by the
permission of God, I have been acquainted with different persons, who were
esteemed holy and virtuous, but I never observed any who followed truly the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ. Every one abounded in his own sense, and were wedded
to their particular devotions, without an entire dependence on the will of God,
or the denial of their own will, Luke 14. 26, 27.
which is the foundation of a Christian Life; from which the heads of the Roman
Church are far removed, since they forbid Christians to read the words of Jesus
Christ, which is Amos 8. 11, 12.
the nourishment of Souls. They cannot open Paradise by any other mean, nor
promise Salvation to any (except in words) but by observance of the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ. Men's blindness is so great in this point, that it can no longer
be seen where the true Church it at present, because they place faith in words,
hope in presumption, and charity in gold and silver: and they make of the
Church of God which is spiritual, a Church of wood, of stone* and of metals,
which are material; and nevertheless, they believe that they are in the way of
Salvation, and that they follow the Doctrine of Jesus Christ! which is the
greatest error that ever was in the world; and therefore I fear there shall be
so few Souls at present saved, because few, or none, follow in deed, this
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and there is nothing more true than that without
doing this, we cannot be saved, as you also acknowledge. One must have very
little judgment, if he do not perceive, that in the Roman Church, the
Cardinals, Bishops, Pastors, Monks, and religious persons, and all the Clergy
in general, do not live conformably to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, nor in the
primitive spirit of Christianity. Math. 5. 13.
If the Salt have lost its savor, wherewith shall the flesh be salted? that is
the common people cannot be preserved sound, when their Heads and Governors
are fallen away and corrupted. Jer. 23. 15.
This is the cause and the origin of all the corruption of the world, and that
its evil is remediless: when a remedy is poisoned, it cannot cure the Disease,
but rather make it worse, as we see the world is declining daily, yea every
moment, to the worse. Those who are cut off from the said Church, and whom they
call Heretics, can never do so great mischief to the true Church, as these
persons do who call themselves the Fathers and Doctors of the Church, tho they
are fallen away from the Doctrine of Jesus Christ: since no well-meaning
persons will follow Heretics; they rather have an abhorrence of them: but even
well-disposed persons, leaning to the direction of those who are entrusted with
the spiritual government of the people, do insensibly commit infinite evils,
following the direction of these Doctors, while they do not lead them according
to the words of Jesus Christ; for their own doctrines cannot but poison the
most pious Souls. This is a Leprosy which has infected the whole Church of God,
which is transmitted from one to another, so far as that there are no longer
any sound members to be found. I bewail only those who desire to follow the
truth, for they know not where to find it; for it is not no longer where it
ought to be. He who believes the contrary, is deceived; and he who says it,
deceives others. Jesus Christ is the Truth alone Joh. 14. 6.
.

The Tenth Conference.
Of Remission of Sins: of Confession, and how it is abused.

I Asked her; if she did not believe in the Remission of sins; since she
maintained so confidently, that few, or none, will be saved, and that Paradise
is shut?

She answered: Yes, Sir, I believe in the Remission of sins. In that consists
my joy, and my hope. I have even told you before, that as soon as the sinner
knocks, God opens to him. He needs but turn to him, to obtain the pardon of his
sins, Is. 1. 16, 17, 18.
how great and numerous soever they may have been. It is not for want of mercy
in God, that I despair of the Salvation of men, but because they will not be
converted, because the most part do not, or will not know their sins. I have
more hopes of the conversion of gross sinners, than of persons who make a
profession of virtue; because of the presumption of their Salvation, grounded
upon their own Righteousness, they cannot be so readily converted, as a sinner
who knows his evil life; he is more ready to repent of it, than they who
believe that they live well, tho it be not true. It is of these that Jesus
Christ says, that he Math. 9. 13.
came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance. So many Souls will
be mistaken at death, who think they are certain of their Salvation, whereas
they are very far from it, taking false virtue for the true. It is in this that
Jesus Christ says, that Luke 16. 15. Joh. 16. 8.
he will judge of Righteousness. He cannot judge nor condemn the Righteousness,
which is truly such before him; but he speaks of our Righteousness which is
righteous in our judgment, and in that of men. Such Righteousness will be
condemned of God, because they were not righteous before his piercing eyes, as
they appeared unto the eyes of men, and to our own. Behold why I said that
Paradise is shut, because I cannot discern at present, true Righteousness in
the virtuous.

I ask her: Whether sins were pardoned by the Sacrament of Penance, which is
the Confession of sins to the Priests.

She said: Sir, there are so many abuses committed by this Sacrament, that I
believe more sins are committed by it than pardoned; for people believe, that
to obtain the pardon of their sins it is enough that they declare them to the
Priest, and upon this persuasion they take little care to amend them: neither
also can they have great contrition for a thing which is so easily effaced, by
the small confusion that they have in declaring their sins to the Priest. No
body would quit his pleasure, and the contentment which he finds in sin* for so
small a trouble as there is in confessing it. Hence it comes, that we see
people continue, and even endre^se their sins all their life time: Thus this
Confession, which is appointed for their Salvation, serves to procure their
Damnation* because so many Confessions without amendment make profuseness of
Sactileges, of which they never repent, because they believe they shall obtain
life with these very means that occasion their death* and when the soul is
about to be separated from the body, they only place the hope of their
salvation i^ the same Confession, which has wounded the soul with so great a
number of mortal wounds.

It was a great unhappiness did then befall the world, Sir, when the Church
taught, that to live well and to be saved a man must confess often. The
Catechisms which they teach the Children of Christians, are stu^t^d with such
doctrines; and in all the Indulgences which the Church bestows, she always
ordains Confessions as one of the necessary means for obtaining the said
Indulgences. Every body teaches the doing of what is ordained by the Church in
this case. I would willingly ask, if this be not to teach indirectly, that a
man must in frequently, when they teach, that he must confess often, since
Confession does always suppose sin? He cannot confess frequently without
sinning frequently; for they who have not sinned, have nothing to confess, nor
can they do it frequently without an express commission of sins, that they may
have matter of confessing frequently. I believe Confessors have invented these
multitudes of Confessions, that thereby they may draw the people to themselves,
instead of leading them to Christ. A true Shepherd-takes more pains to cure his
Seeep, and does not neglect its Scab, that he may be obliged to take it often
in his lap, as these strange Shepherds do, who love rather to draw to
themselves souls continually laden with sins, than to send them to God by the
spirit of true repentance. This is an error which was introduced into the
Church by the cunning of that pernicious Antichrist, that he might withdraw the
souls of sinners from Christ, who calls them, saying, Math. 11. 28.
Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, and I will give you rest; and to
lead them to men who slatter and keep them in their sins, under a false promise
of their Salvation; for there is none but God only Isa, 43. 25.
who can pardon sin; and men, who pretend to be in Gods stead, and do not
observe his word, are Seducers, since his word only can pardon sins. It is true
it was transferred to men with the same virtue which it had in the body of
Jesus Christ; but this was only as long as they should continue to persevere
faithfully in that word, and no otherwise. The 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.
Apostles did all their works by virtue of this word, and not by their own
authority. These Confessors do the quite contrary, remitting sins according to
their fancies and will; and instead of saying to sinners, Joh. 5. 14. 8. 11.
go, and sin no more, as Jesus Christ did to the persons whose sins he
pardoned, as to the Paralitick, and to the Woman taken in Adultery; these
Confessors say, come again to Confession, and 2 Pet. 2. 19.
we will still absolve you.

Jesus Christ says, Math. 5. 23, 24.
If thou have a quarrel with thy Brother, leave thy Offering, and go be
reconciled with thy Brother; and these Confessors with a word send them quickly
to the Altar without Reconciliation, Do they not act directly in opposition to
Christ?

I said to her, that I had never searched so deep in this matter, but that I
would willingly know, if it be not of Confession that Jesus Christ speaks, when
he says, Math. 5. 23, 24.
That which you bind or loose in earth, I will do it also in heaven: and then
when St. Peter asked, Math. 18. 21, 22.
If he should seven times forgive his brother who had offended him, Jesus
Christ answers, not only seven times, but seventy seven times.

She replied: Sir, take heed; this light is not from men. I never spoke so
openly to any body; but I see plainly that you will profit by it. To give a
solution to your first ( g) Joh. 15. 7.
( n) Math. 16. 19. Joh. 20. 23.
question, Whether Jesus Christ did not speak touching Confession, all that you
shall do on earth, I will do in heaven? this is certainly as to the remitting
and retaining of sins; but it is not after the manner that men understand it,
for God never gave this authority to men in themselves, but to his Church,
which is nothing else but his word; and therefore this authority does reside
always where this word resides. Moses, and so many other Prophets, who wrought
so many Wonders in the world, performed them by virtue of this word, and not by
their own authority and power. They went always to God, to know what they ought
to do; and they wrought according to his will, in no ways according to their
own: for man has nothing of himself but an impotence instead of power; but the
word of God has power in all places where it resides, even tho it should reside
in a wicked soul. Therefore sometimes, even the beasts have wrought miracles.
By virtue of this word, the heavens and the earth Heb. 1. 3.
do subsist. It has the same virtue to remit and retain sins in the bodies of
Confessors, that it had in the natural and humane body of Jesus Christ; for it
is always the same which proceeds from Almighty God. The only difficulty that I
find is to know, whether it can still reside in the Confessors at present, who
do not follow the rules of this holy doctrine. God has indeed promised to
pardon sins to penitent sinners; and these Confessors do pardon them to sinners
persevering and continuing in their sins; so that if it were true that these
Confessors could pardon sins according to their own fancy, a man would only
need to be in favor with some of them, to be assured of his Salvation. It
would be in vain therefore, for Jesus Christ to have suffered and endured so
much to ^each us Phil. 2. 3. 8.
humility, patience, penitence, and all the rest, if these Confessors with
Absolvo can thus forgive us all our sins. Every one might indeed live as he
pleased, as they do now, without caring much for God, since he might obtain
Salvation by the means of a man who would call himself the Savior and Forgiven
of sinners. I think a man must be deprived of all judgment not to discover this
deceit, whereas at the same time so many persons live and die in this
blindness. This is a grosser darkness than that of Egypt.

As to the second point: whether it be in Confession that we must forgive
seventy seven times? That cannot be authorized by this passage; since we find
no where that Jesus Christ did forgive sins more than once to those to whom he
pardoned. And if a sinner were truly penitent, he would be careful not to fall
again so often; but if he be not penitent, he is not capable of obtaining
pardon so much as once; for Absolution does always suppose Contrition,
otherwise it would not be available. St. Peter asks, how often he shall pardon
his brother who offended him? but Penitents have not offended their Confessors
when they go to Confession: these so numerous pardons respect the indulgence
that we owe to our Christian brethren, that we may leave vengeance to God
alone, but they do not at all regard sacramental Confession.

The Eleventh Conference.
Outward Devotions imposed by men are not of true Faith. Of the true Church
which cannot err in what it imposes. The Doctrines of Jesus Christ, and those
of men. True Prayer.

HAving heard all these reasons, I felt my self in very great perplexities, not
knowing what ^o reply to such firm reasonings. I said only, that the Heretics
were not always to blame, when they spoke against the Abuses of the Roman
Church.

She said to me: Sir, I never conversed with any Heretics, and I desire not to
know what their sentiments are in this matter. I was born and baptized under
the authority of the Roman Church, and I never yet traveled out of it, where I
might meet with any Heretics, to know what they say of Catholics; but I have
learned all that I tell you in a profound recollection of spirit, joined to a
serious experience. I have made frequent Confessions, and performed all the
other particular Devotions of Christians, as my Parents did, with an exact
observance; but when it pleased God to enlighten me, I perceived clearly, that
Faith does not consist in the wearing of a pair of Beads, a Belt, or a
Scapulary: nor yet in hearing many Masses, or confessing often, and
communicating, as they taught me; but that it consists Joh. 14. 12.
in the belief and practice of what God has commanded and taught us. That all
these outward devotions did rather serve as means to withdraw and distract us
from the continual attention which we ought to have upon God. Therefore I have
quitted them all, and have fix^d upon the Truth of the Gospel, which I knew
from my tender youth, tho I could not follow it, because they taught me
otherwise. In which I failed greatly by the Counsel of men. God drew me to
himself, and they drew me to them. I regret nothing more than the time that I
have spent in following them: for all that they call Devotions, is nothing but
Math. ^^. 9.
amusement, which keeps us tied to the earth, and to the creatures. Our
affections are toward our (ghostly) Fathers, their Masses and Sermons, their
Churches, and the means of adorning them, and to all that is sensual; which
hinders them from being united in God.

I asked her: whether all these outward devotions were not good and saving,
since the Church had instituted and approven them; and if she could err in what
concerned the Faith and the Instruction of the faithful.

She answered: No, Sir, the Church can never err in any thing, for she is the
wisdom, the goodness, and the power of God, the fountain of all wisdom, the
original of all goodness, and incomprehensible power. In short, the Church is
God himself Joh 17. 21, 22; 23. 1 Cor. 6. 17.
, who cannot fail, or err, therefore Jesus Christ says, Luc. 10, 16
he that hears you, hears me; because the word of God, is God ^ Joh. ^. 1.
, as our word is us: our heart must be where we speak; and also our
understanding; even so, where the word of God is, which is his Church, there
the holy spirit is; which is his understanding; and the almighty power, which
is his heart. From whence it appears, that the holy Trinity composes the
Church, which is no other but the power of the Father, the wisdom of the Holy
Spirit, and the good will of the Son. All these things are found united in the
Church: for God having a design to make man after his likeness, he transferred
to him his own qualities: therefore he gives to his Church the power to pardon
sins; goodness by the communication of his word, and his wisdom by the
understanding of that word. Jesus Christ who took human flesh has brought us
the word of God, which has taught us his wisdom, and shown us his love, even as
by our word we express what is in our understanding, and the affections of our
heart; which God also did to us, when he sent us his word upon earth, by the
organ of the humanity of Jesus Christ. He made this alhance with men, that he
might have them after his likeness. Therefore he has called them his Spouse and
his Church, which is altogether divine and spiritual. But men would indeed
disguise it, and render it material, sensual, and carnal, in giving the name of
Church to men who do not possess this word, without which they cannot be the
Church, nor have the power, the wisdom, nor the love which God gave to his
lawful Spouse: Therefore they may greatly err and fail, in appointing, and
approving of rules for Christians.

And whereas you ask, Whether all these outward Devotions, which are now in use
in Christendom, be good and saving: I doubt it very much; for Jesus Christ
taught not such varieties of devotion, as we see now adays; but he taught solid
and inward virtues, Math. 23. 23. 1 Cor. 13. 13.
as Faith, Hope, and Charity: Faith to believe in an Almighty God, of whom we
hold all things; Hope to hope in him only, without putting our confidence in
any other thing; and Charity to love him alone, without placing our affection
on any created thing, whether in heaven or in earth.

These are the instructions of Jesus Christ: but those at present who are
called Churchmen, teach no other thing but to resort to Churches, to frequent
the Sacraments, and to say a great many vocal prayers by rote and number: With
these outward things they make men believe, that they are true Christians,
which cannot be, since Christianity consists in a spiritual Gal. 6. 15.
and inward life, for it is divine, and not humane. If these outward devotions
had been means proper for us to become good Christians; we may be persuaded
that Jesus Christ would have taught us them; for he had more wisdom to foresee
our need and weakness, than these guides of souls can have; and likewise more
love to take care, that nothing should be wanting to us for the time to come.
He left only his word to serve for the nourishment of our souls, saying, that
Joh. 6. 68 and 50.
it is the bread come down from heaven, and that whosoever shall eat it shall
not die; whereas these persons give us only the Eucharist for nourishment; in
which the promise of Jesus Christ cannot be accomplished, for the host does not
descend from heaven as his word does; and they who eat it, do not all live for
ever. For we see abominable souls, even Sorcerers, do communicate frequently,
and thereafter die in their sins. We see also Bigots communicate very often,
who never attain to true faith, nor the knowledge of the truth, without which
they cannot live for evel. How then should the word of Jesus Christ be
fulfilled, that they who eat this bread shall not die, since all those die
eternally after having so often eaten the Eucharist? Jesus Christ cannot lie;
for Joh. 8. ^7.
he who incorporates his word shall never die; because it gives life and
nourishment to the soul, and makes it live eternally.

I said to her: This being supposed, we must needs be in a time of great
darkness, in which there are many errors, and many more erroneous, who run
blindly to damnation; because the most pious hold Rome, and all her Council,
for the Church.

She said: Sir, the Devil upon a false supposition finds matter enough to raise
fine edifices. I have no particular knowledge of Rome, nor of her Council; but
I tell you in truth, if the Pope with all his Council would say any thing to me
which was contrary to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, I should not be obliged to
believe him, nor yet are any other Christians. The Bark should never be taken
for the Wood, because it can never beat Fruit, as the Tree would do, tho it had
little Bark. The true Church (wherever it is) Joh. 15. ^.
brings forth always holy Fruits, and if the Tree be known by its fruit, we
will know the Church Mat. 7. ^0.
by what it brings forth. The practice of those who are Members of Rome, does
sufficiently evidence to me, that the holy spirit cannot be the Author of those
things which are contrary to the practice of Jesus Christ. We see the Prelates
attended with Servants, Coaches, and Trains, like to secular Princes: their
Furniture and Houses do surpass them. I^ they had faith to believe, that God
being man, was poor and despisd, they would blush for shame (as all other
Christians) to make themselves thus to be honored. Their faith being dead,
they run blindly to damnation. This vail which is put before their eyes, to
make them believe, that the Church ought to be upheld by worldly honors,
serves for nothing but to flatter them, and to render them insensible of their
misery. For if the Church had had need of temporal wealth and honor, Jesus
Christ would have provided it sufficiently, for all appertains to him, being
King and Creator of all things. He knew all the revolutions of time: he would
surely have foretold them, that it should be permitted them at a certain time
to make themselves be honored and served; but on the contrary, he foretells
Luke ^. ^. ^
, that God will cast down the mighty from their seats; 14. 1^.
that he will resist the proud, and will exalt the humble; and there is nothing
which he says more expressly, than that we ought Math. 11. 29.
to learn of him to be meek and lowly in heart; to which Lesson the arrogance
and the pride of Christians now, are directly opposite; and they who may be
called by their proper names Antichristians, because they are thus opposed to
Christ: for these only are Christians, who put in practice this doctrine of
Jesus Christ; all others who bear this name without doing it, are nothing but
rotten Members of the Church, and it were better they were cut off from it,
that the true Christian might be known from the false, and that we might no
longer live amidst so many errors, and in so great blindness, and consequently
in so great hazard of our salvation, by adhering to men's Laws, and despising
Gods, persuading our selves that we do well in following their errors, in^tead
of the true Light which has proceeded from Jesus Christ. The great unhappiness
of men is, that they do not know these truths, and that they fear they would do
ill to believe them.

I said to her; That it was very lamentable to live in so dangerous a time, in
which the most innocent might perish through ignorance: asking her, if she knew a
remedy for these evils*

She said: The wickedness of men, Sir, has brought this ignorance upon the
earth. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11.
Since they forsook the love of the truth, they are given up to the spirit of
error. The ignorance is very gross, for every one who would enter into himself,
might well perceive in the bottom of his soul, that he does not love God with
all his heart, nor his neighbor as himself; which are the chief Commands of
God, without the keeping of which one cannot be saved. But men suffer
themselves to be amused with little Rattles, even as they quiet Children, which
cannot at all cure the evil that presses them, but only diverts their minds a
little, that they may not think upon, nor be attentive to their pains. These
little outward Devotions are the Rattles which those Guides sound in our ears 2 Timothy 4. 3.
, not to cure the wounds which the neglect of this Command of God has caused in
our soul, but rather to amuse our attention, that it may not discover those
eternal truths. They breed up our souls with affections to their persons, Jude
16.
under a pretext that they stand in Gods stead. They persuade us, that we shall
always receive grace by confessing frequently, as if grace were given by the
help of sins: for confession can bring no other grace than pardon of sins; and
to receive this grace frequently, there is need of sinning frequently. What
real childish amusements are they, to make even those to confess frequently,
who they believe have nothing but imperfections to confess! If they did receive
grace as often as they go to confession, with so much grace they would leave
off their sins, and would not be obliged to continue for so long time these
confessions. We may believe they do, as those who take Physic out of appetite
or custom, which spoils and corrupts the health, instead of preserving it.
These ordinary Penitents do wholly the same to their souls, as they do to their
bodies: thus they suffer themselves to be amused by foolish persuasions; as
that also of going often to Church to pray to God, as if it could not be done
elsewhere. Nevertheless, Jesus Christ says, Luke 18. 1. 21. 36.
that one ought always to pray, and never to cease. One had need therefore to
abide night and day in the Church to fulfill this direction. These are all
errors and inventions of men; for a Christian is obliged to pray always, at all
times, and 1 Timothy 2. 8.
in all places, without fainting; not only when they are in the Church, as
these Guides persuade them, who are no less mistaken in prefixing a certain
number of Offices, Prayers, and Beads, and other trifles which they call
Prayers, tho they do not know what Prayer is; for it consists in an elevation
Psalm. 143. 8.
of the spirit to God; which may be done while we walk, 1 These. 5. 17, 18.
and work, eat and drink, and even while one is at rest: for our spirit ought
to be continually elevated unto God, in acknowledgment of the continual favors
which we receive from him: yea, Cant. 5. 2.
even in sleeping our will ought to bless him always: this is the continual
prayer which God demands of us. But we do the quite contrary; for instead of
having our spirit elevated to God continually, we employ it in earthly cares
and solicitudes about our wealth, our family, our business, or household
affairs: So that even in the little time that we are at Church, saying our
Pater Nosters, our Spirit Isay. 29. 13.
runs frequently astray, and is not elevated unto God for one moment in a day,
yea, it may be has never been so for our whole life: and we think we have
prayed to God, provided we go to Church, or say Prayers by muttering over our
Beads. These are all new Doctrines, which neither Jesus Christ nor his Apostles
ever taught, which do often deprive us of the attention we ought to have to
true prayer. I will not blame the going to Church to pray to God. This is very
good, when we find in the Church more means, and a greater facility of
elevating the spirit unto God, than in the House, or elsewhere: but I blame all
those novelties which divert us from God, by amusing us with things that strike
upon our senses; for which I can see no remedy, since these evils proceed from
those who ought to redress them. If I spoke to these Guides of the Church, and
told them these truths, it is to be feared they would stone me; for they will
not be reproved in their actions, far less in their authority; and tho they
should clearly perceive the truth, they would not receive it; and if I should
speak to those who are directed and governed by them, they would think that I
would deprive them of their Salvation, and render them Heretics, in not
obeying those who call themselves the Church; for they are so far persuaded
that they ought to believe and follow their directions, that they would choose
rather not to obey God, than to despise the counsel of these men: the blindness
is so far gone, that I look upon the evil as desperate: which makes me say,
that the world is judged, and the sentence is irrevocable: because no body sees
his misery, and even will not see it: they would be afraid to offend God by
believing the truth of these things.

The Twelfth Conference.
That the Conversion of Men now is desperate, as it was in the days of Noah;
and wherefore.

I Said to her; that there were yet many souls in the world capable of
receiving these truths; and if they heard these things, they would infallibly
open their eyes, and leave their errors, requesting her, that she would yet
speak to others besides me.

She said: Truly, Sir, I cannot do it, for I see no hopes that I can profit by
it. The darkness is too great, and the evil too inveterate. As long as God
shall not destroy Is. 29. 14.
the wisdom of the wise, and the prudence of the prudent, they will not receive
the evangelical simplicity; and Math. 18. 3.
If they be not converted, and become as little Children, they will not enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. It would be in vain therefore to speak to them. But
if you know any one, Sir, whose understanding is bounded, and his will
subjected to God, you may make the experiment. For my part, I desire to
continue unknown, that I may preserve my quiet, and find leisure to entertain
my self with God. I think the plagues are so near, that shortly there will be
no need of Preachers to proclaim the judgments; for the plagues will make
themselves be felt sufficiently by unbelievers, who (in my opinion, will be
converted too late; for the Mark 13. 19.
pains will be so great, that they will not know whither to turn them for fear.
Never any such thing has been seen since the world was made. I Am afraid only
for those who will not believe* Math. 24. 37, 38, 39.
because they will not be converted, and will not prepare for sufferings; and
being surpised at unawares, will be in danger of perishing with the wicked,
for thus it fell out in the time of the universal Deluge: tho it is to be
believed there were yet some here and there who feared God, nevertheless all
perished because of their unbelief. Eight persons only did escape the
shipwreck; because they believed the word of Noah. And now, when we speak of
the last times and of Judgment, they think we 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4.
tell them fables: yea, they reject them as untrue and impertinent discourses.
One says, this will not fall out in my time, and thus they thrust it out of
their minds. This has often troubled me; for one must be without Charity who is
not grieved to see his Neighbor perish, while he will not believe his danger,
nor will he have help.

I said to her: that the evil could not be wholly desperate, so long as there
was yet Life in man: that he might still be converted: that he has always God
for his Father, who abounds in mercy: entreating her to discover these truths
to men; among whom there were yet some without doubt who would follow them; and
that Ignorance was the cause of their damnation.

She said; Sir, if there were not an infatuation of mind spread through the whole
world, I would yet have some hope of the Conversion of some Souls in
particular. But this Antichrist by his Devilish arts 2 These. 2. 9, 10, 11.
has corrupted the minds of men, especially of Christians, that he might ^ender
them stupid, and without reason in the matter of their salvation, and of the
knowledge of God. This stupidity cannot be humane; for there are yet too many
fine wits in the world to suffer themselves to be deluded by false persuasions
that we are Christians; and that the Roman Church is guided by the holy Spirit;
that all the Devotions which are used at present in the Church, are things that
perfect us, or render us holy; for there needs no more than a simple human
reasoning to perceive that there is no Holiness, nor Righteousness, nor Charity
among men now: notwithstanding there were never so many Churches in the world,
so many Masses, so many receivings of the Sacraments, so many Priests, Monks,
Religious and devout persons, as there are at present. Can we conclude that all
these things which seem to be holy, are withal good, since they have produced
so many bad effects? Could holy things work wickedness in men, as we see and
feel it? If this were only among the Heathens, Jews, Turks, or Heretics, we
might have some ground to believe, that the Christians had received the grace
of God by means of their Christian exercises, and the common receiving of the
Sacraments, to live better than all those other Sects, who are not the people
of God, or at least to be less wicked than they: but we Ezekiel. 16. 48, 51.
see the quite contrary, that the Christians now adays, have less of
righteousness and charity than the Turks themselves; and in the mean time they
suffer themselves to be blinded with this amusement, that they are Christians,
and will be saved with these seeming devotions, and the receiving of the
Sacraments. I^ the Devil had not infatuated all their spirits, it would be
impossible that there should be so much as one, how simple soever, who would
let himself be persuaded to believe a thing contrary to what he saw with his
eyes, felt with his hands, and comprehended with his mind. This is
notwithstanding what all people do, while they believe they are Christians, and
will be saved after the manner that they live now Jer. 7. 4. Rev. 3. 1, 17.
, It is most true, that the mercy of God is very great, and men may be
converted so long as they are yet in life: but by what means do you judge, Sir,
that they can be converted* As long as they cannot be convinced; that this
outward Church is not the holy Church, and that all those means of Salvation
which she has appointed, are not the true means, no body will ever be
converted. For tho indeed their hearts were moved with compunction and
repentance through the fear of Gods judgments, yet they would not return to true
faith; but would go seek for the cure of their souls in the Sacraments, and the
pious exercises to which they have been so long accustomed; and thus they would
remain in the same state in which they were formerly, without ever attaining to
true repentance. For if I should tell them the truth, and teach them the true
means of recovering the grace of God, they would believe that I designed to
seduce and deceive them. So much are they pre-occupy'd with lies and delusions.

I said to her; That this proceeded from ignorance: that she ought to declare
in particular, wherein true faith does consist; that without doubt many would
yet open their eyes, and would embrace it; there being many who desire not to
be damned, of whom I was one.

She answered, Hos. 4. 1. Luke 18. 8.
There is no longer Faith, Sir, among the People of God: It has been banished
from them since men placed their faith and confidence upon one another; from
that time God has been forgotten. Men have made it be believed that they would
save one another, though these Saviors cannot save themselves, nor make one hair
of their heads. Nevertheless, by their Persuasions, they have made almost all
the World to become Idolatrous. Every one has forsaken the TRVE FAITH, to
follow and adhere to these men placed in Ecclesiastical Dignities, whom they
have followed and honored as Gods, believing they had got enough when they
knew how to please and content them. Nature took its content thus, the Mind its
satisfaction. In one word, the true invisible and incomprehensible God has been
razed out of the memory by these false ones visible and sensible to our Nature;
they have begun to make the way of Salvation broad, whereas Jesus Christ made
it narrow; and the Divine and Spiritual Church they have rendered humane and
carnal; and thus they have become still worse till now that we are arrived at
the height of all Evil. The greatest of all is, that men do not perceive it,
for they are become insensible through so long a custom. I believe, indeed,
there are yet many persons who would not be Damned, but what means is there to
save them when they will not believe that they have abandoned their true Faith?
And how can they be made to change so long as they believe that they are well
and secure?

The Thirteenth Conference.
Of true Faith, according to the tenor of the Creed: Of the knowledge of God,
and of our selves, by the consideration of his Works.

I Told her, That I did not believe that I had true Faith, and that she had
sufficiently made appear to me, that I could not be right, therefore I desired
to understand of her wherein true Faith does consist, though it were but upon my
own account, for I desired to profit in it.

She said, Sir, let us examine a little together our Creed, and see if there be
so much as one Article of it observed, even by the most perfect Christians
nowadays. If we believed that God is Almighty, that he created the Heaven and
the Earth, Mal. 1. 6.
could we live without loving and fearing him, as we do? Could we also
attribute to our selves the earthly good things which all the World seeks after
and loves, since they are all created by God, and do all appertain to him in
Property, which we do daily usurp? In the second place: If we did believe in
Jesus Christ the only Son of* God, who was conceived of the Holy Ghost, born of
the Virgin Mary, could we reject his Instructions, Luke 6. 46.
since he is the Son of God, the Fountain of all Wisdom? Could we follow a
Carnal Church, seeing she is altogether Spiritual, engendered in the Body of
Jesus Christ by the operation of the holy Spirit? Could we also live in Luxury,
when God chose a Virgin for his own Mother? Would we not endeavor to love
Virginity, since God has so much esteemed it?

Moreover, if we believed that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, has suffered even
so far as to be Crucified, Dead and Buried, could we live so softly seeking all
eases to our Body, not willing to suffer any thing that is painful, nor
affronts, nor tribulations, when we believed that the Son of God has indeed
suffered for us, even to a shameful Death, yea, was buried as a corruptible
Man* Would we not imitate, or follow him, at some distance, in case we had the
faith that we profess? Moreover, if we believed that he is risen from Death to
Life, that he is ascended into Heaven, Coloss. 3 1, 2, 34. 1 Jo^. 3 2, 3.
were it possible that we could love this present Life, while we hope that we
shall rise again, since Jesus Christ is risen again to ascend unto Heaven?
Would not this withdraw our affections from the Earth, through the hope of
ascending unto Heaven with Jesus Christ? Were it possible that we would build
Houses, and make so many other settlements as we do on Earth, as if it were our
abiding City? And if we did believe that Jesus Christ will come from Heaven to
judge the quick and the dead, Luk 12. 35, 43.
were it possible that we would live in so great a neglect of our Salvation,
with so little care of making ready our Accounts, to render them to that great
Judge who will demand of us an account of all our Thoughts, Words and Deeds?
Would we not rather lay aside all our worldly Affairs, to attend on this which
is the most important to us, yet, on the contrary, is often the least of our
^ares? And did we believe likewise, that there is a holy Spirit, and a holy
Church, R*m. 8. 9, 10, 11.
is it possible that we would be so little Spiritual, so Natural and Earthly,
so wedded to our Senses, in which we live sometimes more brutishly than the
Beasts themselves, whereas our Souls ought to be wholly Spiritual and Holy,
since we have a Holy Spirit and a Holy Church? And did we believe the Communion
of Saints, is it possible that every one should be so much wedded to his own
Interest and Wealth? If Prayers and good Works ought to be all common amongst
Christian Brethren, 1 John 3. 17.
how much more ought temporal Wealth to be for the succor of our Neighbor,
which is very far from Men's dispositions now, who study nothing but to keep up
and increase their own Wealth, understanding no other thing but mine and thine,
both in Spirituals and Temporals? And did we believe in the remission of Sins,
how would we be penitent and contrite to obtain the pardon of them, instead of
continuing in them through hardness of heart, as we see the most part of men
do, who finish their Lives in black thoughts and despair, instead of having
immediate recourse to mercy, according to their belief! For he who has promised
the remission of Sins, has not promised them time to persevere in them. If this
belief were real, they would not persevere in them for one day, for they are
not certain of living so long. And did we believe in the Resurrection of the
Flesh, how could we love and esteem our flesh in a condition so miserable as
that of this mortal Life? We would greatly contemn it in the hope we had of its
Resurrection, ( l) in which it should live most happy, delivered from so many
miseries, calamities, and maladies, under which it groans during its exile in
this miserable World, which, setting aside the hopes of its Resurrection, must
rather be called Death than Life; the belief of this Article would give a
disgust of the delights of this present Life, and make us aspire toward that
to come. And did we believe in Life eternal, what would we not do to obtain it?
Heb. 11. 8.
We would voluntarily forsake Father, Mother, and all our Goods, to obtain this
eternal Life, for it deserves more than a thousand Worlds, which cannot last
but for a small time in respect of Eternity, whereas we see the most part of
men so in love with this miserable Life, that they would fain abide here for an
Eternity, though it be filled with miseries and calamities.

Do you not see, Sir, that there is no Luke 18. 8.
more faith in the House of God? That no body lives conformably to his belief?
That they place faith only in Words, as I have told you formerly? They say
over, it may be, every day, their Creed, and yet they do not observe so much as
one Article of it. These are nothing but words that vanish into Air; and
nevertheless, they would take it very ill to make appear to them that they have
not true faith, though it be always operative, and never idle* True faith works
Gal. 5. 6.
always the virtues of which I told you, in the Souls which possess it; and if
these operations are not seen, it may indeed truly be said, that these Souls
have not faith, for it can never be any where without operating its virtues, no
more than the Sun can be without giving his beams. Consider it well, Sir, and
you will find my saying true, and you will condemn your self.

I told her, I perceived clearly that People lived in a distraction of spirit,
and that few persons knew themselves: That it was no wonder they knew not God,
since they did not know themselves; and that truly we were deceived.

She replied, Sir, he who knows God will always know himself; and he who knows
himself will assuredly know God, for the one is linked unto the other; a
serious recollection of spirit may teach us this. We speak of God (says she) as
if he were some Phantom; of Paradise as an imaginary thing; and of our selves
as a temporal and transient thing. Where is the man living who can comprehend
what God is, and in what place he abides? It is true we have need of some words
to signify what we would say, therefore we say that God is in Paradise as in
the place of his abode: But we must not be so simple as to believe that God has
any particular abode, for there is nothing which can contain him, being greater
than all things. We say that he is in the Heavens, and nevertheless the Heavens
are but his Creatures, very incapable of being able to contain him. We say that
he is on the right hand of his Father, whither he is ascended. These are all
words to signify in our Gibberish our little conceptions, but Job 36. 26-37.
23. 1 Timothy 6. 16.
we can never attain to the knowledge of what God is, or Paradise, or even our
own Souls; for this cause we make often wrong judgments, and the Learned fill
our minds in this, as in other things, with the Idea's of their Imaginations,
which are of little use for our Salvation, and far less for the Glory of God,
for frequently we give attributes to him which do greatly diminish it, to speak
after our fashion. Jer. 9. 24.
It is enough for our Salvation and his Glory, that we know that there is one
God, and that he is the fountain of all Wisdom, the accomplishment of all
Power, the perfection of all Goodness, who never had beginning, and shall never
have end; that he is an invisible and incomprehensible Spirit, and that he has
given us an understanding to comprehend all these Divine Attributes, Act. 14.
17. Romans 1. 19, 20.
through the operations which they produce in our minds. We may first know that
there is a God, because we feel in our selves that we have a dependence upon
something which we cannot comprehend, since all those things which we see in
Heaven and in Earth are not capable of having created us, nor of maintaining
us: for all men, and all the stars, with all that is created in heaven and in
earth, cannot add one hair unto our head, nor give us one moment of life. We
must conclude therefore that there is a God above all things, who has created
all, who upholds and governs all, by a supreme power, since nothing can have
given being unto its self, there must have been of necessity some author of all
things, who has given them all a being and beginning. No body can be ignorant
of this truth, tho they had nothing but a Pagan light. And to perceive that he
is the fountain of all wisdom, we need but consider this beautiful universe,
how marvellously well done it is. What artifice could keep the Globe of the
Earth among the Waters? What can give splendor to the Sun? Beauty to the Moon?
Lights to the Stars? Who can make a tree, a fruit, a flower, a plant of so many
different herbs? Who can have made the birds of the air, the beasts of the
earth and of the sea, in so many different kinds? And above all, who could have
formed the body of man so wonderfully shaped, with so many different members?
How many veins, muscles, and tendons, do concur to tie up this tender flesh!
What master could ever make such a masterpiece! must not this proceed from the
fountain of all wisdom, from which all the wisdom of men is derived, which we
admire without knowing the author of it, except by the operations which we
experience in our selve.

Who can be ignorant of his infinite wisdom, while he looks upon the Creation,
and the upholding of this great Universe? Who does not feel that he has not in
himself any power, if it be not given from a supreme power which we do not
know? Who can be ignorant of that Incomprehensible Goodness, while he receives
every moment the effects of it? All that man has, he holds it of the Goodness
of God: for he could not have merited any thing before that God of his Goodness
alone did create him. We perceive evidently that he is an Invisible and
Incomprehensible spirit, for none ever saw God, or can comprehend what he is.
He can never have had beginning, having given beginning to all things. How can
that end which is eternally incomprehensible? our soul cannot even comprehend
itself; nevertheless we may well judge that it is immortal: for the Wisdom of
God could never have created it to live for so small a time as we are upon
earth. He would have done a thing which was not good, Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
which cannot be: for our soul is always in bondage, 2 Cor. 5. 4.
so long as it animates this our miserable body. God should not be just Job 10.
3, 8.
, if he gave it not another time to rejoice with him; else the end of its
creation should be miserable. It must needs be for accomplishing the goodness
and righteousness of God, that it live a blessed eternity; so that even he
could not have created our body to live only this so miserable short life: by
far greater reason our soul, which he created after his own image, and
according to his own likeness, could not be created to be only a Prisoner in
our body, where it cannot act but by its cooperation with it; no more can God
act in us, but by 1 Cor. 3. 9. 2 Pet. 1. 5.
the cooperation of our soul, because there is an indissoluble union in
respect of the one and of the other. For God is united with our soul, as our
body is also united with the same.

I admired these mavelous and unheard of discourses; and that I might
understand more, I told her, I had never sufficiently understood, how the
knowledge of God was unseparable from the knowledge of our selves.

She said to me, Sir, this is very easy to comprehend, if you will seriously
reflect upon it; for no body can know that God is the fountain of all wisdom,
without perceiving at the same time that we can have nothing but ignorance
only; as experience makes sufficiently appear, that no body has wisdom at his
wish, that Wisd. 8. 21.
it must be derived from that supreme fountain, whose works being considered,
it must be presently known and acknowledged, that all our wisdom, how great
soever we may have imagined it, being compared with the wisdom of God, is
nothing but pure ignorance, and this not being known, we will think that our
wisdom is great: As a person is always the most beautiful, and the most
perfect, when she is alone; but approaching others who have more perfection
than she, this makes her know what she is truly. Even so when we know the
perfections of God, we know our own imperfections. If we know his almighty
power, we shall presently perceive our own weakness; or the perfection of his
goodness, we shall discover how far ours is from it. For this cause I have
said, that we cannot know God, without knowing our selves; neither can we know
our selves, without knowing God: for he who knows that he is but a pure
nothing, he must confess that there is something above him, from whom he has
received what he is; because a Nothing cannot do any thing, nor give any thing
to its self. Every one knows well, that there has been a time in which he was
not; and when he is made, he does not know how, nor from whence he is taken,
which obliges him to acknowledge a God, the Author of all things: and even tho
he went not out of himself, he must know God.

All these truths seemed to me so clear, that I knew not how they could be
called in question; tho in the mean time we see no body attains to this
knowledge of God, or of himself; that it must needs be acknowledged, that we
were fallen into a total forgetfulness of God, and ignorance of our selves, and
that we were assuredly deceived and seduced.

She said to me, Sir, the deceit is so great, that no body can comprehend it.
We run, as it were, blindfold to damnation without perceiving it; and whereas
those who guide us, ought to set us again into the right way, Isa. 3. 12.
they are the very persons who deceive us, because they themselves are deceived
by Satan. Wherefore there is nothing to be hoped for but a total ruin, Rev.
18. 21.
which will be irreparable, seeing that it is eternal. We are careful enough to
avoid the perils of the body, but we are too little careful to avoid the perils
of the soul, which are without comparison much more considerable. Man having
forsaken his God, from whom can he expect Salvation? When we leave God,
assuredly he leaves us: Ps. 3^. 8. Act 17. 27, 28.
not that he withdraws himself from us, in respect of himself; because he
abides always through all without any change. Isa. 59. 1, 2. Hebr. 1^. 38.
But he withdraws himself from us, when we withdraw our selves from him; for a
thing which we leave cannot abide with us; it is always as far from us, as we
are far from it, tho we only make this separation. It is fit to understand, how
we can truly say, that God leaves us or forsakes us; because many understand it
amiss, in attributing to God the cause of this forsaking. It may be said, that
God has forsaken us now, because this is true; but we ought always to
understand in what manner he leaves us: for otherwise we blaspheme against God,
not by words but intention, in conceiving that God does of himself forsake us.

The Fourteenth Conference.
How God forsakes us, and how we forsake him, by distraction of Spirit, by
which the Devil has seduced men, withdrawing them from the Love and Gratitude
which they owe to God, who by all things does most sensibly discover himself to
be alone lovely.

I Asked her, by what mean we had fallen into such an ignorance, and abandoning
of God, and of our selves? She said: By the straying of our spirit, which has
left off to entertain it self with the consideration of the marvels of God. Our
soul was created to love him, and to bless him continually; in which consists
the continual prayer which Jesus Christ Luke 18. 1. 21. 36. 1 These. 5. 13.
has recommended to us since he became man: for we have no other thing to do in
this world but this continual prayer; God having given us all the rest. We see
in the Creation of Adam, that he had no need to think on any other thing but to
bless and love God; and if he had entertained himself in this praise and love,
we had never fallen into all the miseries under which we yet groan.

Genesis 3. 1, etc.
The Devil, who is named the Serpent, made it his business to entertain them,
to the end he might distract them from the Communion which they ought to have
with God. How soon he got the Woman to listen to him, he began to draw her
affections (which were due to God only) toward the fruits of the earth, which
were given her only for use, and not to place her affection upon them; from
hence he likewise incited her to desire knowledge of good and evil, withdrawing
the attention which she had to God, to apply it unto curiosity, and a desire to
be great and wise. Lo this was the cause why we did abandon God, and lose the
knowledge of our selves. Our first Parents began to do this in the terrestrial
Paradise, and we have continued it from generation to generation, until we have
arrived Ephesians. 4. 78.
unto a total forgetfulness of God, and an entire ignorance of our selves. For
if you will consider it well, Sir, you will be obliged to say, that all men say
really in their hearts, Psalm. 14. 1.
There is no God; because all their actions are done as if there were none; and
this evil proceeds from no other thing, but that our spirit has no longer
communion with God.

I asked her, Whether men now do the same things which our first Parents did in
the earthly Paradise, and if they let themselves be thus seduced by the Devil?

She answered: Truly, Sir, they do much worse; for they do not follow the
suggestion of the Devil in one thing only, but in all their actions, desires,
and enterprises. Who does not see now adays, that all men have left off to
entertain their spirits with God, and that they have fixed them on the
consideration of created things, hearkening willingly unto things curious and
pleasant to their senses, as our Mother Eve did? And when the Devil proposes to
our thoughts any thing which seems to be either pleasant or profitable to our
nature, who does not presently follow it without restraint and without fear?
and instead of fixing upon the consideration of the wonderful works of God, we
are continually busied in seeking our pleasures in the creatures, in
self-complacency, or in the desires and coveting of earthly goods: which things
do entirely Math. 6. 21.
withdraw us from the total attention that we ought to have upon God alone, for
whom we are created, and not for these things which are subjected to us, and
which God created for our Ps. 8. 7.
footstools, as the earth and metals: and we will needs carry them upon our
shoulders, yea even upon our head, and in our heart! The Devil represents to us
that these earthly pleasures are delightful; that these beauties are agreeable;
that with Money we may do and know every thing: and we believe this deceiver,
and follow his counsels, employing the whole time of our life in seeking our
pleasures and contentments, and in heaping together earthly goods, which is the
cause that we are diverted from God; for our spirit and understanding cannot
attend upon two things so distant from one another, as is God and the
creatures. We abandon the All to seek the Nothing, as did our first Parents.

I said to her: That Adam and Eve were expressly forbidden to eat of the fruit
of a tree; and that we are not thus expressly forbidden by God to love the
creatures.

She replied: He has not only once thus forbidden us, but many times, in
different times and ages. The Prohibition which God gave unto our first
Parents, Sir, was directed unto all men who were to come of Adam, because he
held in his power the free will of all his posterity. Therefore God spoke to
all men, when he spoke to our first Father. The Prohibition which he gave him (
m) not to eat of the fruit of a tree, was nothing but an outward sign of the
dependence which he owed unto God; even as a Superior reserves to himself some
yearly rent in the Donation which he makes of his Lands or Manors, to the end
that always these goods or lands, may be obliged yearly to acknowledge the
Superior upon whom they depend. God had bestowed on man all this beautiful
world which we behold, with all that is in it; but he would have him still to
acknowledge the dependence that he had upon his God and Lord, that the
knowledge of this might oblige them to love such a Benefactor, who had given
them all these created things, which they might enjoy, provided always they did
acknowledge and love the God who had so freely bestowed them.

He forbad them to eat of one Tree only, permitting them to eat of all the
rest, to show that he permitted man to enjoy all the fruits of the earth,
provided he preserve always the obligation that he has to God. He requires for
a Testimony of this, that he abstain from eating of this forbidden fruit, to
the end he might never forget the love, and the obedience which he owed unto
the ( l) Math. 4. ^8.
( n) Genesis 2. 7.
Lord, from whom he had received all things. This Prohibition is no other thing
but a Command to love him, which being done, man might do all that he desird.
This Commandment was also given unto man, when God required Sacrifices from
him; not that God had need of beasts, or other things; but he demands this
outward testimony in confirmation of the inward acknowledgment, and love which
they bear unto God the giver of all things. The Law he gave to Moses contained
also no other thing but this love Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
and gratitude which we owe unto our God. Tho these Commandments are divided
into ten, yet they are all comprehended in that of loving and acknowledging
God; for all the rest are but prohibitions not to do the things which would
hinder this love and gratitude, because he who takes the name of God in vain,
or he who steals, or covets his Neighbors goods, or commits Fornication, and so
of the rest, does not love nor acknowledge God. Joh. 3. 11.
And to make this love and acknowledgment easy to him, God forbids him to
commit these things, as being contrary to this love. But as to the sum of
these Commandments it consists in one only, to wit, in the love and
acknowledgment of God; when he commands to keep holy the Feasts, and to honor
Father and Mother; all this depends upon the love of God, which we ought to
testify also outwardly in sanctifying the days which are dedicated unto him.
The honor which we owe to Fathers and Mothers signifies only an acknewledgment
that we owe unto our Benefactors, of whom God is the principal, yea even Jam.
1. 17.
the giver of all things; but because our Parents do us good in nourishing,
helping, caring for us, and teaching us during our weakness, he commands us to
honor them as little Gods, for the small good things which they do us, to the
end that by this outward acknowledgment, we may be mindful of our
acknowledgments which we owe Mal. 1. 6.
to God, in proportion to the benefits which we receive from him. Behold how
God has many times forbidden us not to love the creatures, since by so many
diverse ways he commands us to love him to the exclusion of all things. Which
Jesus Christ himself has well expressed to us, when he says, that we must Math.
22. 37,
love God with all our heart, with all our strength, and with all our thoughts.
There could not be more express terms to show, that our heart is created for
God only, and for nothing else.

I received such light by these reasonings, that it was my delight to hear
them: And to make her speak the more, I said to her, that there were some
Authors who maintained, that it was impossible to love God with all our hearts,
and to keep his Commandments.

She was moved with anger; saying: What injury do they to God by such
sentiments! I swear to you, Sir, these persons know neither God nor themselves;
when they assert such things. They are insupportable to me. What well disposed
Soul could suffer, that they should say of God, that he has given Deuteronomy. 30. 11,
12, 13.
Commandments to man, which it is impossible for him to observe. This is to
desire to make him pass for a Tyrant, and also for an Ignorant. For to lay on a
heavier burden than our shoulders could bear would be a Cruelty; and to damn
men for not having done that which was impossible for them, a Tyranny. Could
God give insupportable Laws without being unjust? Could he overcharge men
without cruelty? He who made men, could he be ignorant of their strength and
capacity, that he did not give them laws according to their weakness or
infirmities? What Blasphemies do they commit, against the supreme Wisdom which
knows all things! What injury to that straight Righteousness. What contempt to
make him ignorant of the strength and capacity of men! He who knows Psalm. 94.
9, 10, 11.
the most secret thoughts of the heart, and all things past and to come, as
well as the present. O ingrate creature! If thou knew thy self, thou
would perceive but too much, that thou art capable Deuteronomy. 30. 11-16.
of loving God with all thy heart! For there is nothing more natural to man
than love; and there is nothing which does more oblige to love, than the
benefits received without having merited them. What is wanting to you therefore
to be able to love with all your heart? Is there any thing more lovely than he,
all-beautiful, all-good, all-wife, all-perfect; in short, Cant. 5. 16.
the accomplishment of all perfections! Our heart, which cannot live without
love, could it find any object more lovely, or any greater subject of
acknowledgment for so many benefits received from him?

I said to her: That it was truth; and that no objects could be found so worthy
of our affection as God is; but the evil came from this, that we did not see
nor feel God, as we do the creatures, which are material and sensible to our
senses.

She said to me: It is true, Sir, God being a pure Spirit, is not visible nor
sensible to our natural senses. But believe me, he is more visible and sensible
to our understanding Romans 1. 20.
by his works, than are all the creatures together; and he does us also much
more good, than all that is created in heaven and in earth. For this cause we
ought to love him alone more than all other things together; for if our
understanding would apply its self to the consideration of the wonderful works
of God, it would find more ground to love God than any thing, how lovely soever
it might be, even according to the natural senses. All the mischief proceeds
from this, that our senses are distracted from the works of God, and that we
apply them to know, and to love, earthly objects which are below us, and
unworthy of being loved by us; for they can give us no other thing, but
divertisement of mind, and amusement of our senses, without any profit, since
all is but vanity, passing away in a moment, without leaving any thing in our
souls, but vexations and regrets at death. Behold the height of all the
happiness we can ever hope for, in loving any creatures whatsoever. A man's mind
must be infatuated if he do not find in the works of God, and in his operations
which we experience in our selves, all sorts of occasions to love and to follow
him. For who can consider the beauty of the Sun, and of the Stars of Heaven,
the good and fertility of the Flowers, and Fruits of the Earth, without being
ravished with admiration, in considering what beauty and goodness he must have,
who gives them to all these things! We amuse our selves sometimes in loving a
stone, a flower, or a humane creature for its beauty; and we do not raise our
understandings to love the fountain, and the giver of all these beauties, which
is God! most durably beautiful, who cannot fade, as do all these other
beauties, which are nothing but fantastical and changeable. If God had not the
perfection of all beauties, how could he give it to so many diverse things; for
one can never give that which he himself has not? Who can say therefore, that
we do not see nor feel God as we do the creatures? since he shows himself, Act.
17. 24-29.
and lets himself be felt by his operations, which are sensible to our senses.
Who can say, that he does not continually perceive God operating in him, and
doing him infinite good? That we have Job 10. 8-12.
a being, is by the good will of God. That we see, or speak, or hear, are the
gifts of God. That we reason with our understanding; that we enjoy our five
natural Senses: these are all gifts of God which no body can give unto himself,
and which cannot be acquired by Gold, and Silver, or Friends, let them be who
they will. The daily food of our body, does it not all come from God? For what
man can make a grain of Corn or a Strawberry to grow? All these things, with a
thousand others; do they not afford us sensible enough subjects to know and to
love God? Can we say in truth that we do not see him, nor feel him, since he
makes himself to be seen and felt every moment, by so many benefits which our
Soul and our Body do receive in so great abundance, which cannot come from any
other, but from God himself? It would be more true to say, that we could not
love the creatures, than that we cannot love God; for they can give us nothing,
and God gives us all that we see by our natural senses; and that this
impossibility of loving God, and of fulfilling his Commandments, is applied to
a contrary sense; and that Ps. 73. 25.
it is more impossible to love the creatures with all our heart, because they
can never fill our soul, for it is spiritual, and they are material, and
therefore no congruity in them to be loved with all our heart, which cannot be
filled but with God alone.

The Fifteenth Conference.
That God has never given to Man but one only essential Command, which is that
of his LOVE, which is most easy and most agreeable, and the Love of all other
things most vain.

I Said unto her; That she confounded the Ten Commands of God into one, and
that they who say, it is impossible to keep his Commands, speak of all, not
only of the first.

She replied: Sir, the first is the only Commandment to which God would have us
subjected. He has never laid any other burden upon our shoulders, but this
gentle Yoke of LOVE. All the other Laws and Commands are occasioned by our
sins, and are ordained by God, for no other end, but that we may know them, and
beware of them. He perceived that men from the beginning of the world, began to
appropriate to themselves Beasts, and other earthly goods, as things depending
upon themselves; which led to a forgetfulness of, and an ingratitude to God.
Therefore he appointed the Sacrifices of Beasts, and the other First Fruits;
that by these outward signs they might always preserve in their heart the
remembrance, that all which they possessed came from God. It was his will also,
that they should build him a rich Temple for the same reason, that all men
might always acknowledge 1 Chronicles. 29. 11-16.
that all their treasures, riches, and magnificences came from God, and did
belong to him. Therefore he requires, that they build him a magnificent Temple.
Not that God has need of Temples, of Riches, or Treasures, being All in
himself. But he requires, that man retain this acknowledgment of God, that by
the remembrance of so many benefits, he may be obliged to love him, and to
fulfill this first Commandment. That he gave to Moses ten Commands written in
stone, was 1 Timothy 1. 9.
when men began to multiply their wickedness, giving themselves to swear, rob,
bear false witness, commit fornication, and the rest; the goodness of God
forbids all these things, fearing lest the ignorance of these evil deeds might
be the cause of their damnation. Romans 13. 20.
By these Commands he shows them their sins, forbidding them to commit them any
longer, because all these things were hindrances of loving God, as he had
commanded them. The Law Genesis 17. 10-13.
of Circumcision aimed also at the same, to make man acknowledge that he held
his life of God; and for an outward sign of this acknowledgment, he required
that he should shed of his blood. Not that he had need either of the blood of
men or beasts; but it is his will, that all things should acknowledge that they
received all their being from God, that this acknowledgment might oblige them
always to love their Creator. Even 1 John 4. 5-19.
the Evangelical Law consists in no other thing, but in this first Command of
loving God with all our heart. The counsel of poverty, chastity, and the rest
of the Evangelical counsels, are given us only for means to attain to this
LOVE, because he who loves riches, luxury, himself, or other things, 1 John 2.
15.
cannot love God with all his heart, nor fulfill this first Commaadment. By
which you may perceive evidently, Sir, that all the Commands of God are
comprehended in the first, and that all the rest are only prohibitions to do
what would hinder this love; that God has never given us any other Law, but
that of loving him; and that the pity which he has to see us perish, made him
give all those prohibitions contained in his Commandments. Can this be evil, or
impossible to be observed, as you have affirmed to me? Is it impossible to be
in the world without killing, robbing, committing adultery, and the rest? It is
rather impossible for him who has common sense to do this, for all these evil
things are repugnant to good sense, and the love of God delights, comforts, and
edifies. How then should it be impossible to do a thing so good, and to omit
things so evil; Deuteronomy. 30. 19, 20.
this is most good, useful, and reasonable, most easy even to our natural
inclination, which cannot be without loving something, and cannot find an
object more good, more wise, more powerful, and more worthy to be loved than
God, and from which we can derive greater advantages both temporal and eternal
than from him.

I told her: That she rendered the love of God easy and agreeable; that no man
could have any thing to say against truths so clear and solid; but I would
gladly know from whence it comes, that we find them so difficult, and the love
of the creatures so easy.

She said: Sir, it proceeds from this, that we keep our mind distracted and
diverted from God, and that we apply it only to the view of the creatures; 1
Cor. 2. 14.
by this means our understanding is filled with these earthly objects, which
darken our reason, and render it incapable of discerning aright the things
which we see and feel. For if our reason were not darkened, it were impossible
that we could love the creatures in themselves, because they are so frail, so
impotent, and of so short continuance; which are all qualities very little
lovely in respect of the Creator of them, who by his works makes appear unto us
his omnipotence, his stability, and constancy, and his eternal duration. The
creatures themselves do discover to us this truth: when we behold the Sun
continue his carreer since the beginning of the world, the day still to succeed
the night, the fountains to give their waters without ceasing, the earth to
bring forth its fruit continually, the air its birds, the sea its fishes,
nature its beasts, and men. What mighty arm must it be that governs all these
things! What power that upholds and maintains them! What immobility that makes
them always persist in an equal pace! Is there any reason, how little soever it
be, that is not led to love a God, so lovely as he renders himself by the sole
government of his creatures?

How much more must he be so in himself? and nevertheless we turn away our
understanding from these considerations to turn it toward the creature, which
is so frail of its self, that it merits no other thing but Eccl* 1. 1.
to be despised by us. For what can there be of lovely in the creatures, of
what kind soever they may be? when we consider them only in themselves they are
pure Nothings, which have neither strength, nor beauty, nor goodness, nor
perfections, nor duration. All that is beautiful and good in them comes from
God; and all sorts of evil come from themselves. If God did not uphold the Sun
and all the Stars, in the bounds and limits wherein he has placed them, they
would assuredly consume all the earth. The creatures may greatly hurt us, and
no ways benefit us. We are hurtful to our selves, and if we had not strayed
from sense, and lost our reason, it were impossible that we would be led to
love the creatures, and not to love the Creator.

I told her: That there were creatures so lovely, that one must be insensible
not to love them, and that we cannot hate, or despise, that which does so
strongly tickle our senses as a most fair humane creature would do, and
likewise so many other different beanties which God has created.

She said: Sir, I perceive well that you are yet earthly, and that your
understanding is not as yet raised from all things to the Lord, since you do
not well comprehend my saying. I do not mean, but that we may love all the
beauties and goodness in the world; for God has created them all for men 1 Cor.
3. 22.
, especially for his elect, who may use and enjoy them at their wish, provided
they take them in God who is their fountain: but I blame only the love which is
carried to the creatures for themselves; for else we must love the beauties and
goodness of the creatures if we love God, because we cannot see the beauty and
goodness of God but by his creatures: He, being an invisible and
incomprehensible spirit Wisd* 13. 3, 4, 5.
, renders* himself visible and comprehensible in his creatures; so that he who
sees a fair or good thing, sees God, for there is nothing beautiful and good
but he alone. He is all beauty and all goodness; and nothing can be beautiful
and good without deriving it from God. But all that is blameable herein, is
that our understanding is not applied to the consideration of the beauties of
God, in considering these earthly beauties. We do not raise our mind higher
than these material beauties, which do debase us to the love of the earth, in
diverting us from that which we ought to have for God alone. For example; if
you regrrd the beauty of a flower, and love it because it tickles your
Curiosity, you commit a Folly, because there is nothing lovely in this Flower
but the Art of the Workman, who made it: For it it can give you no other but a
vain Contentment to the Sight or Smell, which are things that pass in a Moment;
for if you wait but one Day, you will see what you loved turned to Dung, and
its sweet Smell changed into Stink. I have seen Flowers bought for three
thousand Florins, with a too vehement Ray of the Sun, has withered in one Day,
or, a little Rain, rotted in the same Time: And, which is more, an Earth-worm
has killed its Root in one Night,

Do you not see Objects not very lovely, to be loved by reasonable Creatures,
capable of loving a God? Must* not a Man be come to the highest degree of
Folly, to set his Affections on things so frail, as to be in one Day reduced
into the Dunghill? All the Creatures are no other thing in* themselves: He who
sets his Affections on the Beasts, sees them dye, to his Regret: He who places
them in Riches, sees them perish by a renverse of Fortune: He who places them
in Honors, sees them perish by some Disgrace. If he place them in Sciences,
and in Learning, all this perishes by a small Defluxion falling upon the Brain.
Let him place his Affection on any Human Beauty, it passes as quickly as a
Flower, and is reduced to Corruption. Even so are the Pleasures of the Mouth
and of the Body, which afford nothing but great Putrefaction. In short, if we
love our selves, in whatsoever it be, we render our selves miserable, for we
cannot be reduced to a greater Slavery than to be subject to our Passions;
which are sometimes so insolent that they render the most perfect Men
miserable. By which we see, that all that is not God is nothing but Misery and
Eccl. 1. 14.
Vexation of Spirit; and that there is no Happiness in the Love of all these
Creatures, when they are not regarded in their Fountain, which is God; whom if
we did regard, all these Creatures would not be capable of gaining our
Affection. For it is impossible to love them without being distracted and
turned away from God: For if we considered the Qualities of God, and compared
them with those of the Creatures, we would see that those are but Dung compared
with Gold: Besides, that all the Creatures together cannot save us Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
nor give us so much as one Moment of Life. We pass sometimes our whole Life in
studying to render our selves accomplished among Men, and they have no Power
Isa. 33. 22.
to make us happy, even in this World; for their Friendship is changeable and
their Fortune unconstant. Their Fidelity does often depend upon our
Complaisance; a small Word ill placed will render them your Enemies: And though
it were real and constant, death can rob you of it in a Moment, and you will
never find them any more in your Need. Do you not see that all things are
frail, upon which there is no leaning? no Ground to let our selves be charmed
or our Senses tickled, if there were not a Disorder of Spirit and a
Forgetfulness of God! And if this were removed it is impossible to love the
Creatures in themselves, and to cease to love God, even tho he had never
commanded us. Even Natural Instinct Isa. 1. 11, 23.
leads us to his Love, by the consideration of his wonderful Works and of his
Benefits which we receive every Moment: There needed no other Love to oblige us
to love him with all our Heart, and with all our Strength.

The Sixteenth Conference.
Of continual Prayer and constant Communion with God, for which we were
created: And how we are distracted from it by the Business of this World, and
by the Enjoyment of frail Creatures.

I Perceived most clearly that all this was true, and moreover, that all Men
were very far from such Sentiments; that every one of them spent their Life in
the Affairs and Business of the World, and thought not themselves obliged to
keep Communion in Spirit with God, fearing that this might rob them of the Time
and Occasion of dispatching well their Affairs.

I asked her, Whether every one was obliged to keep continual Communion with
God? If this was not the particular Business of the Monks; the Religious or
other Persons, who make Profession of a Spiritual Life, tending to Perfection?

She said: Sir, all Christians 1 Pet. 2. 9.
are Religious, for there can be no other Religion but a Christian Life. Every
one, who would be saved, is obliged to entertain his Spirit continually with
God; therefore Jesus Christ says Luke 18. 1.
, That we ought always to pray and never faint. He speaks to Persons of all
Conditions; not to the Religious only, for there were none in his Time who did
wear disguised Habits, as they do now, but all Christians were religious, as
they are yet at present. Neither the Habit nor the Cloister do make Religion,
but 1 Cor. 7. 9.
the Observance of the Evangelical Counsels. We are greatly mistaken if we
think that God has a Regard to the States and Conditions Col 3. 2.
of Persons: He regards not whether we be Religious or Married; but whether we
observe his Commandments and his Doctrine. Every one is free to choose what
State he will; provided that in it he observe the Christian Doctrine. There is
not any State, nor any Condition that can exempt a Person from keeping
continual Communion with God: For he invites us to this, and we are created for
no other Thing. All other Affairs or Businesses are but accidental and of small
importance; whether they succeed or miscarry, it matters little; because all
their Successes cannot serve us but for this short Life, which stands not in
need of much, if we would content our selves with what is necessary only: In
which we would be more happy than all the Kings of the Earth; for all that we
possess beyond this Necessity is Affliction and Vexation of Spirit. God created
us to love him only; and that Prove. 8. 31.
he might take his Delight with us, and we with him. This is the only End of
our Creation. He had no need of us, but he would create us to take his Pleasure
with us. This is that which we do least of all think of or apply our selves
unto. It seems we would change the Designs that God has concerning us, while we
will not follow his Ordinance of Praying always. One thinks he is born to be a
Lawyer, an Advocote, a Priest, a Monk, a Merchant, or for any other State,
Office or Benefice, to which he is advanced, and they press hard to perfect
themselves, to increase and prosper in it, as if they were created to do this.
And, when they are arrived at the highest of their Pretensions, Death Psalm.
146. 4.
comes, which consumes all. What a silly Business have we aimed at? What a poor
Stay of all our Hopes? Our Riches are perished: Jam. 5. 2, 3.
Our Honors remain on the Earth: All our Travels, Cares and Labors have left
us nothing but Ashes and Rottenness in Recompense of all our Acquests. The
Noble and the Ignoble, the Prince and the Servant being all reduced to the same
Estate, all naked in the Grave, the Poor and the Rich having an equal Portion.
Behold the End of all the Business and Affairs of the World, for the
Advancement of which we neglect Communion with God, though this would advance
them more if we were habituated to this Communion, which would perfect all
things.

I said to her: That Men were very blind, in not considering seriously these
Truths; and that she ought to pray to God that he would take from them the Vail
which hindered them from seeing their so great Misery, and that they might
comprehend the Obligation they have to pray always, which they were very far
from doing.

To which she replied: Men, Sir, are as far from Salvation as they are far from
this Knowledge: For Jesus Christ has said nothing in vain. To be saved we ought
Luke 18. 1.
assuredly to pray always; for as soon as we shall cease to have our Spirit
lifted up to God, we shall fall into many Evils, from which we can very hardly
recover our selves, because Sin blinds the Soul, and Ephesians. 4. 18, 19.
renders it often insensible of its Evils. If this were not true, how could it
be that one should see every Day his Brother or his Neighbor die leaving
behind him all upon the Earth, without carrying away any thing; and that he
should not thereby discover his own Folly and his Blindness, in laboring with
so much Care to heap up earthly Goods, which at Death serve for nothing? What,
though I pray, Sir, God will never force their Wills; he sends them occasions
enough to open their Eyes. But as 1 John 2. 15.
long as they shall continue to have their Affections set on earthly Goods,
they cannot love God; one of these Affections must go out to let the other in:
They can never dwell both together. And for my part I can never pray for an
unjust thing. God makes no body blind; but their Sins, and the little desire
they have to seek God has closed their Eyes. He well deserves to be sought, and
Men do not deserve that God should seek them. There are a great many Persons
who say, Tit, 2.
That they desire to love God, but they desire not to quit their earthly
Affections. It is to no purpose to pray for such, because they oppose
themselves to the Grace of God, not being willing to part with that which
resists his Grace, no more than God will give his Graces Deuteronomy. 4. 11, 12. ^9.
Jer. 29. 13. 14.
but to those who seek and desire them effectually, in forsaking themselves and
all other created things, to find God.

I said to her: That all her Sentiments were very far from the Sentiments of
Men, who believed that they might love God, while they loved themselves, or
some other thing, not vitiously.

She replied to me: All Men now are possessed with the Spirit of Error and of
Ignorance: For to believe that we may love God and our selves or other
Creatures, Luke 14. 26.
is a great Error and a false Persuasion; for there is no relation between God
and the Creature, that they could dwell together in the same Place. Our Soul
was created Divine and Spiritual, to the End God may rule there; and if we
debase it by the Love of Material and Human Things, it is rendered incapable of
Divine things; for that which is Carnal Gal. 5. 17.
cannot be Spiritual; and as Cold and Heat cannot abide together, so Spiritual
Things cannot dwell with Natural, the one does always chase away the other, a
Contrary its Contrary. Men Eccl. 3. 18. 2 Pet. 10. 12.
live now as carnally as the Beasts, being sensible of nothing but according to
our brutish Senses: And yet we would persuade our selves that we are
Christians. In which we are greatly deceived, for the Life of a Christian is a
Spiritual Life Phil. 3. 20.
, not a Natural. The Beasts are not created but for the Nature of Men; but
these are created for God, who is a Divine Spirit. We may sufficiently perceive
this, by considering the Course of our Life, which is nothing but Pains,
Labors, Vexations and Miseries. Could it be possible that God should have
created us for Ends so miserable as what we possess in this World? This truly
would be a miserable End. God can never do such an Evil: For no Evils can
proceed from him Wisd. 1. 13, 14.
, but all sorts of Good. The End of our Creation must be Divine and Spiritual,
or else Man would have Reason to curse the Day of his Birth, which makes way
for a miserable Life; wherein those who are esteemed the most Happy are most to
be bewailed. We will esteem that Man happy who is a King, a Prince, or a Lord;
and they are all more miserable than a poor Peasant, who has no other Cares but
to maintain his Family and his Person; whereas these others are obliged to
maintain their Train, their Subjects, their Offices, their Honors, which they
are sometimes obliged to defend at the Peril of their Lives: Whereas a poor
Fellow will accomplish the Course of his Life in Quietness, notwithstanding of
the Affronts which he receives. A rich Man is likewise esteemed happy for his
Riches; but what Labors does he not undergo to acquire them? Psalm. 39* 7.
Or what Cares or Disquiets to preserve them? It is altogether a Trade to have
Riches. A Man needs no other Work for all his Lifetime but to keep them well.
We will esteem a Person happy, who is raised to an Estate, Honor and
Dignities: Nevertheless there is nothing more miserable, he being subject to
all that concerns his Office, not having sometimes the Leisure to attend upon
himself. How Circumspect must he be, that he displease not the Great, and that
he may satisfy every Body? which is indeed very difficult. What Care must he
take to provide for all that maintain him in Honor, fearing lest he fall into
any Disgrace or Contempt? How must he bear with the Envious and with
Slanderers? In short, Sir, all these things which are called Happiness in this
World, are nothing but fantastical and imaginary Goods, and real Evils. They
are so many Rattles which the Devil shakes, that he may divert the Attention we
ought to have upon God, and he makes us forget the End for which we are
created, by all these Trifles, which are nothing but real Amusements of
Children, and they make us perish through Ignorance, rendering us incapable of
loving God.

I asked her; Whether then all States, Riches and Honors, in which God or
Nature has placed Men, ought to be abandoned? And if we could not love God with
any of these things?

She replied: They Luke 14. 33.
must be certainly left, Sir, before God can be loved: Not that all these
things are evil in themselves; but because of the Infirmity of our Nature,
which has not found the Art of possessing them in God; and while we possess
them in themselves, they are assuredly evil and hurtful to our Soul, hindering
it from Communion with God, and from attaining to the End for which it was
created. It is just the same as if a Traveller, instead of advancing on his
Way, to arrive at the Place which he aims at, would needs stop in all the
Gardens through which he must pass, to gather and eat the Fruits which he found
in them; or to pass his Time in Smelling all the Flowers which he saw there: We
would reckon such a Person a Fool, as in effect he would be; because these
Amusements and his Loss of Time would deprive him of the Happiness of arriving
at the Place he designed for; and Night surprising him by the Way, would put
him in hazard of being pillaged by the Robbers or devoured by Wild-Beasts, or
at least incommoded as to his Rest, which he would be obliged to take on the
hard Earth, with many Inconveniences and Miseries. All these Evils and Dangers
would befall him because of the Folly he had committed, in stopping among these
Flowers and Fruits. If he had only looked on them at a distance, smelled them
as he past along, or pulled an Apple for his Thirst, this had not retarded his
Journey; but might have made it more Light by the Smell of the Flowers, and the
Refreshment of the Apple. Even so is it as to Wealth, Honors and Riches; 1
Pet. 2. 11.
We being all Travelers and Pilgrims in this Life, which ought to be compared
but to a Day, because of its short Continuance. We travel toward Eternity; but
in our way we must pass through the Garden of this World, wherein we perceive
Fruits and Flowers which tickle our Senses. On one Side we see the Riches which
our Parents have left us, or the Honor to* which we have succeeded, with some
Place or Dignity: These are the pleasant Fruits presented to our Eyes. On the
other side we perceive the Odor of Wine and of exquisite Meats, rich
Movables, beautiful Faces: These are as so many diverse Flowers and Fruits,
which charm our Smell; but if we stop to taste and handle them, we hinder our
Journey to Eternity, and we put our selves in Hazard of being surpised by
Death, and devoured by the Devil, who is always watching to catch us in this
Strait. Must not one be very ill advised to amuse himself with these Nothings,
and lose those things of so great Value? We may indeed look upon all these
earthly things at a Distance, even with Contentment, and taste them according
as we have need of them, for they are created for us, while we receive them
with Thanksgiving; but we ought never to fasten our Affections on them, else we
shall never arrive at the LOVE OF GOD; For our heart cannot be divided between
two so different Objects. He will 1 Samuel 7. 3. Prove. 23. 26. Jer. 3. 10.
have all our Heart or none of it: And it can never be filled nor fully
satisfied but with him alone.

I said to her: That there must always be in the World Persons placed in States
and Dignities, though it were but to keep the People in good Discipline: That all
the World could not abandon their Offices, and that I my self was charged with
one troublesome enough: That I thought I held it of God, for that I did not seek
for it.

She said: Sir, I bewail you, with all those who are at present in Charge: For
it is very hard for them to keep themselves right in it. I cannot believe that
God will place therein any of his Friends, because nothing is done any longer
for his Glory; and the Evil is so far advanced that it cannot be resisted any
longer; so prevalent is it, that the Good are obliged to give Place, and yield
to it by Force: So that a good Man, now in Office, must ruin himself or give
way to Evil: For he is too weak to resist the Force of the Wicked, who are so
numerous. Therefore I said, heretofore, that the Good serve the Devil, as his
Slaves, because they are obliged to acquiesce to Evil, through Force. In which,
nevertheless, they do not cease to sin, by one of the nine Ways, by which we
commit it on another; and these Sins are imputed to them, because they tolerate
Ezekiel. 33. 8.
the Evil. It is not enough that they cannot hinder it: For in not hindering it,
if they could, they would commit likewise another of the said Sins, which are
committed in another, there being nine ways by which the Sins of another are
laid to our Charge. At least, those who are now in Offices do commit that of
Tolerating Evil, and cannot escape to do this if they do not abandon their
Offices, wherereby they would show that they love God more than their Offices,
and that it was he who had placed them in them; but to believe that God has
created or called us to any State, these are but Fopperies: Because he has
created us for no other thing but to love him, as I have so often repeated.
States are our own Choice. God forces no Body to be a Pope, Bishop, Prebend,
Pastor or Priest, nor yet to be an Attorney, Advocate, Counselor, President,
Governor, or of any other such Office and Benefice whatsoever. Every one is
diligent enough to seek for them. It is not as in the former Times, when a S.
Nicholas, and so others, did hide themselves, that they might not be Bishops,
or receive other Dignities: These were not in the Darkness and Ignorance in
which we live at present, while we prefer Honors and Wealth to our Salvation,
and that with so fine Pretenses, that all the World judges we do very right in
continuing in States, Offices and Benefices, believing the World would be much
worse if all these good Men should abandon their Stations. And for my part, I
believe it would be much better: Because they would have more Leisure to attend
upon their own Salvation, and the Perverseness of the Wicked would discover it
self sooner: Which remaining hid for a longer Time, does more Harm; because an
Evil known is easier avoided.

I said to her: It was very evident that God had called some to Employments: He
said to Peter, That Matthew. 16. 18.
he was the Rock upon which he would build his Church.

She said: It Is true, Sir, S. Peter was called to the Building of the Church by
Jesus Christ: but he would have first a Testimony of him, to know if he loved
him. He asked him Joh. 21. 15, 16, 17.
three times: The first to know if it was true that he loved him in the Sight
of God; the second, if he loved him by the Testimony of his own Conscience; and
the third, if he loved him by the Testimony of Men? to teach us that these
Conditions are needful to be capable of Ruling well; to wit, the Testimony of
God, that he say of us, as he said of his Servant Job, Job 1. 8.
That we are his Servants; our own Testimony Job 27. 6. 1 Cor. 4. 4.
to search if our Conscience reprove us in nothing; and that of our Neighbor 2
Cor. 5. 11.
if our Actions are such as may make them judge that we truly love God. These
are the Conditions whereby to judge if God calls us to the Government of his
Flock: In confirmation of which he gives all the Graces requisite to govern
well, according to his Spirit. But when we perceive that we have neither the
Love of God as to his Regard of us, nor as to a Testimony in our own
Conscience, nor yet in our Works, for the Edification of our Neighbor, we
ought never to presume that we are called of God for any State or Office. It is
rather to be believed that we are pushed to it of our selves through
Presumption; and when we do not govern by the Direction of God Jer. 23. 21, 22.
we fall from one Fault into another, without knowing it. Our Natural Instinct
makes us to govern all by Human Principles. That of the Devil makes us to act
according to his Principles. And thus we commit threefold Evils when we do not
govern purely by the Principles of Jesus Christ. It were better to be Pastors
of Sheep than of Souls, and to be Subjects than Lords; for he who is in
Employments, Offices or Benefices, will not only render an account of his own
Soul, but Heb. 13. 17.
also of those whom he has under his Charge. A Pilgrim is well pleased to have
no Burdens. He travels the more lightly when he has nothing but his own Body
to bear, and accomplishes his Journey the sooner. Even so it is as to the
present Times, in which nothing can be done any longer for the Glory of God. It
were better for a Man to work out his own Salvation, than to charge himself
with Offices or Benefices, which, if we remark narrowly, are sought for, either
for our Honor, or our Pleasure, or our Interest, all which are vain and
earthly Ends, unworthy of a true Christian, who ought only Matthew. 6. 33.
to seek the Kingdom of Heaven, since Jesus Christ has promised to give him the
rest, which is but a contemptible thing.

I said to her: That I was wholly prepared to quit all Offices and Benefices,
if I knew that it were the Will of God: That I would desire rather to save my
self, than to possess all the Wealth in the World.

She said: This is a good Design, Sir; but if you wait till an Angel from
Heaven come to tell you that this is the Will of God, you will never do it; for
God has no Will to make you leave it more than he had any to make you undertake
it. It concerns every one to examine what Mean will be most proper for him to
facilitate his Salvation. One may sufficiently perceive in his Conscience,
without consulting any Body, whether Offices, Estates and Benefices have been
to us the means of more Union with God than if we had not possessed them; and
if they have made us draw others to the same Union. If we do not find this, it
is to be feared that our Offices and Benefices have not been sought for or
possessed for the Love of God, but for some Human Accommodation, which respects
nothing but the Earth. This being discovered, it is in your Will to resolve, if
now you desire to labor for Heaven, or rather for the Earth.

I said to her, That I would not pretend any longer to any thing upon Earth;
that I was very sorry that I had had some Pretensions thereto, but that I durst
not quickly abandon all, without the Advice of some learned Person, fearing
that I might do evil.

She replied: Sir, You are yet far from the Kingdom of Heaven, when you will
needs advise with Men if you shall follow Jesus Christ. Has not he said Luke 14
26, 33.
He who leaves not Father and Mother, and his own self, cannot be his Disciple?
Now would you go to ask Counsel of any Man, when Jesus Christ has given you
his? Where could you find better? Men are all interested in their own Judgment,
and will never advise but what they judge most advantageous for Men, they
having no Light to perceive any other thing. They are Flesh, and judge
according to the Flesh. Would you refer what concerns the Salvation and
Perfection of your own Soul to their Judgments? You must needs perish with
them: For the 1 Cor. 3. 19, 20.
Wisdom of Man is foolishness before God. All the Evils of the World do proceed
from this, That Men are governed and advised by one another. Is it not said
somewhere, Jer. 17. 5.
Woe to the Man that puts his Confidence in Man? I have also told you Matthew. 15.
14.
That if the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall into the Ditch. For my part,
I can say in Truth, That I do not remember that I ever committed any Faults,
but when I believed the Counsel of Men. We ought to go to the Source, Sir, and
let alone the Streams. The Gospel is left us in Writing for our Eternal Rule.
If the Apostles and other Disciples of Jesus Christ had gone to ask Counsel of
Men, they would never have followed him: For Men would have called it a Folly
to abandon all, as they do yet to this Day: For being of the Earth, they
respect nothing but the Earth, and are blind in the things of the Spirit. We
can never do ill to follow the Counsels of the Gospel, but indeed we may in
following the Counsels of Men, how learned soever: For their Doctrines are of
this World Joh. 3. 31.
, and that of Jesus Christ is of God.

The Seventeenth Conference.
How to discern whether the Motions which do press us to leave the Outward
Hindrances to Divine Communion, be from God or not. That there are likewise
Inward Hindrances; and that one ought not to be wedded even to good Means.

I Said to her, That I had not Light enough to be sure of my own Motions, and
to discern whether they are from God, or from the Devil, or from my self.

She said: That it was good to discern them: Matt. 4. 1-10.
that the Motions from God do incite always to humble things, which the Devil
and Nature do oppose, because they are things despised by Men; and therefore
these Enemies do abhor them. What comes from God incites to Sufferings and to
Patience; the things which come from the Devil and from Nature do incite to
seek our Ease and Pleasures, without desiring to suffer any thing. The things
of God do lead to Poverty and Self-denial; the Devil and the Flesh do desire
Riches, and seek to be esteemed and praised: In fine, Sir, says she, what comes
from God is always conformable to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ: For God cannot
be contrary to himself. Therefore the Light which you have received, that moves
you not to seek any longer for any thing upon Earth, is but too sufficient to
assure you that this Motion comes from God; because neither the Devil nor
Nature would ever rid themselves of their Pretensions upon each: For they
cannot profit by any other thing: Nature could not sin any more without aiming
at earthly things; and the Devils could have no hold of a Soul which did not
aim any longer at any thing upon Earth: We might walk surely on such a
Resolution, without waiting for Counsel from Men, who with their Wisdom do
often quench the Lights of the Holy Spirit. It were far better to consult the
Gospel.

I was constrained to yield to such Truths. I said to her, that I would abandon
all, and would follow her all the Days of my Life.

She said with Joy: Sir, How happy will you be to abandon all? Your Soul will
be at liberty to fly unto God: Your Spirit will be calm and your Body better
disposed. You will experience thereby both Bodily and Spiritual Good: But I
entreat you, do not resolve to follow me always; for, as for my self, I am
willing to die alone; and as for your concern, it will be a greater Perfection
Pal. 73. 25, 26.
that you be disingaged from all Creatures, to the end you may wait upon God
alone. All Company, how perfect soever it be, is not God. He requires our Heart
so pure, that he does not suffer that it should be divided. So long as I can be
helpful to you, I love indeed to discourse with you: But I wish rather that you
may speak with God, who is the Fountain of all Light. He can teach you more in
one Moment than all the Men of the World would do in a thousand Years. So soon
as you shall have found his Conversation, you will not be able to take Pleasure
any longer in any other. Speak to him always, Sir, until that he answer you. He
will do it assuredly. According as you shall separate your self from the
Creatures, accordingly you draw the nearer unto God: There needs but to remove
the Hindrances, and this Divine Sun will shine fully into our Souls, warming
them with his Love. He has Luke 15. 20.
infinitely more Desire and Affection to receive us, than we have to seek him,
even though we be great Sinners; he rejects no body, he rather embraces them as
the Father did his Prodigal Son. You are his Child, and the Work of his Hands.
Go to your Father with great Confidence: He loves you: He seeks you and calls
you. Do not delay any longer: Go forward, seek no longer for any other thing
but him alone.

With extreme Joy did I hear this Discourse, asking her by what means I might
find this Communion with God, and what I ought to do to attain to so great a
Happiness.

She replied: Sir, There are very few things to be done, but there are many
things to be left and parted with. It is a great Point to quit Honors, Offices
and Dignities; but these are all things without us. There are also within us
which hinder the Operation of God, such as 1 John 15. 16.
the coveting of all that pleases our Eyes, the Lust of the Flesh, and the
Pride of Life. If we could part with these things, we would presently find God.
For, if our Soul had no hindrances, it would fall into him, even as a Stone
cast from on high falls into its Center, which is below. Prove. 4. 23.
Our Soul has God for its Center; it can never repose it self but in him.
Therefore we can find no Rest nor Satisfaction in the things of this World,
which do only pull us out of our Center, which is God. But if we could part
with that Covetousness, that Concupiscence, and that Pride which we have in our
Heart, we would find our selves swallowed up in God, without knowing how. There
is no need of doing much to find God, because he offers himself Rev. 3. 20.
always of himself. But we must labor to remove the Hindrances which our
Vicous Affections do give him. In this the Luke 16. 16.
Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, for we cannot without Violence quit our
evil Habits. God, in the mean time, does well deserve that we should force our
selves to find him, so much the more, that by our Wickedness we have so basely
forsaken him for things of so small Continuance: For all that can be coveted in
this World passes away like the Smoke Jam. 4. 14.
: And what can the Lust of the Flesh give us, but Pains and Corruption? The
Pride of our Heart is nothing but a mere Blast of Wind, which puts nothing
within us. And these so inconsiderable things do nevertheless oppose themselves
to God, building, as it were a strong Wall Is. 59. 2.
between our Soul and him, which hinders us from hearing his Voice and his
Word. There are no other means but to break it down by Force of Combat.

I asked her,; To what Place I should retire, since she would not that I should
follow her?

She said to me: Sir, You will be well enough in any Place, provided you be
with God. There is no Part nor Place that can sanctify you, but rather a
Disingagement from your self. The World is great, and God is everywhere. It is
not meet to affect a particular Place. It were better to roll from one Place to
another; since we are Pilgrims upon Earth, let us walk always toward our
Center, without considering in what Place we are lodged, for the so small Time
that our Life is to continue. Jesus Christ had no house Luke 9 58.
of his own, yea not a Stone whereon to rest his Head. So much the more as we
are disengaged, so much the more shall we be united unto God. And this is the
only Reason why I do not desire your Company, because I am nothing but a mere
Creature, as you are, not a God, from whom you ought to look for all things.

I said to her: That her Company had done me great good; That I had reason to
desire it as the true mean of attaining to Union with God.

She said to me: Sir, So long as you rest upon any Means you will never arrive
at the End: Means are good to be made use of, as we would make use of a Way to
travel to some Place; but they are not good to be relied upon. Many Souls are
deceived in this, who have stopped in the midst of the Race, and never found God,
because they rested upon the Means: How Holy and Perfect soever the Means may
be, they are never God, and we ought not 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22.
to rest but upon him alone. The Devil has likewise so many Holds, when he
finds us wedded to any thing. He makes Mercury of every Wood. But when we are
free of Matter and adhere to God only, he cannot take Hold of us on any Side.

The Eighteenth Conference.
How we may attain to Perfection and to Communion with God, resigning our
selves wholly to him, quitting both Human Learning and the being Taught of
others for a Time. Christians incapable of being taught. They will be more
desolate than the Jews.

I Entreated, That, before I parted with her, she would tell me in particular
all that I ought to do, to have Communion always with God: That she ought to
give me all Saving Instructions.

She says: Sir, God suffices you, and Jesus Christ is your Master Matthew. 23. 8.
; seek no other Means. He is Joh. 14. 16.
the Way, the Truth and the Life. He has omitted nothing in his Gospel for the
Teaching us all things: His Word is the Bread Joh. 6. 50.
which is come down from Heaven, for the Nourishment of our Souls. Do not seek
any other Pasture; because there are now so many wild Herbs, which are
poisonous. Feed only upon the Words which give Life 8. 51.
, and you shall never die. If your Soul be entertaining itself with God, he
will make it see all that it ought to do and avoid, more clearly than we
perceive sensible Objects. Resign your self to him Psalm. 37. 5.
and he will always guide you aright. Be not careful any longer for any thing;
when you forsake all you shall find all. I have thus experienced it: According
as I disengaged my self from earthly things, at the same Time God replenished
my Soul with Light and with Consolation. I can give you no other Instructions
but those which I have experienced. I doubt not but you know much more than I:
but your Wisdom is Human. When you governed, it was but by Human and Natural
Principles: All that Wisdom must now be forsaken, since Jesus Christ says, That
he 1 Cor. 1. 19.
will destroy it; and as a Child you must embrace the Gospel-Simplicity, for he
says, Matthew. 18. 3.
If we be not converted, and become as little Children, we shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. Leave therefore all your Studies, Sir, and hear what God
will teach you, and follow him. Hereby you will be the most wise in the World:
For if you continue your Studies, they will serve you for great Hindrances. If
you have resolved to quit your Benefices, quit also your Sciences: For they
have not made you to know God, nor yet your self. Therefore you have no reason
to love them; but rather to abandon them.

I asked her, If I ought not to preach any more, nor to teach any Person,
seeing I might now do it with more Perfection than I had done it formerly; for
I had received by her Discourse much Light of the Truth, and of Falsehood.

She says: Sir, Do not teach any Body until you have found Communion with God:
For how can you give to another what you do not possess your self? You have
made so many useless Sermons, and so many Teachings without Profit for your
self or others: There is Time enough lost, you ought now to employ it well. You
believe that you can do it with more Perfection than formerly: Which I doubt
very much; for if you think to teach the People the Evangelical Life, and do
not observe it your self, this is Psalm. 50. 16, 17.
worse than to hold your Peace, because every one will have Ground to believe
that it is nothing but a Formality, which must be observed in declaring the
Gospel, and that there is no need to put it in Practice, seeing they who teach
it do not practice it themselves. I think in this Case it were better to be
ignorant of it 2 Pet. 2. 21.
than not to practice it when we know it: At least, it is a less Evil never to
have understood it, than to have known it and not to practice it; though both are
evil, because all Christians are obliged to know the Gospel, for we cannot
without Guilt be ignorant of it; but to hear it so often, and for all this not
to desire to follow it, is a double evil, because of the Ingratitudes which are
committed in not practicing what we know by the Grace of God. It is a Grace to
be caught, and an Ingratitude not to follow Instructions. Therefore you will do
nothing but spend your self in Teaching, and will not replenish others:
Besides, that in Teaching there is always the Hazard of Vainglory, because
Flattery Prove. 27. 14. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 5.
is the Ruin of our Souls; and persuades us that we have that which they say
we have.

I said unto her: That infallibly many would put in Practice the Doctrine of
the Gospel, if they knew it as I do at present, because these Truths are so
clear, that of necessity one must yield to them.

She said: Sir, Do not engage your self to declare the Truths which God now
makes known to you: For they will not be well received by the Learned. You
ought first to have overcome all Human Regards; which you have not yet done.
Likewise you must have the Courage to expose your Life for this Truth. For
otherwise you will be oppressed without any Profit; because they would
outragiously persecute you if you should declare the naked Truth of the State
of the Church at present; and if you teach, that to be a true Christian, one
must observe the Doctrine of the Gospel, they will altogether oppose you, and
will affirm, That all they who are baptized are Christians, however Wicked they
be. Thus you will have much to suffer, and will profit others nothing: Because
all that you might build up by Teaching of the Truth, the Learned will destroy
by their Arguments, and will easily dissuade People from believing you, even
rejecting your Doctrine as Evil and Seditious; for they study nothing so much
as to flatter the World 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.
, and speak as they are desirous to hear. They have forgotten that Jesus Christ
said by his Apostle, That Gal. 1. 10.
he who would please men is not the Servant of Jesus Christ. There can be no
Preaching any longer without Reproof, but what flatters the Ear, and is
agreeable to the People; for the Truth which Is. 59. 14, 15.
reproves is so disapproven by Men, that I believe, Sir, if you should speak
publicly the Truths which I in confidence have told you, they would cut you
off from the Church, declaring you an Heretic; yea, they would even pursue you
to Death, because they could not approve the Truth without condemning
themselves, their Lives being contrary thereto; and no Body hates his own Soul:
Therefore they condemn others.

I asked her: If I ought always to continue idle, without doing any thing,
seeing I could not Teach nor Preach any more, and that I had no other
Employment, for that I had passed all my Lifetime in Study, and in the
Direction of Souls.

She said: Sir, Labor first for your own Perfection, until you be entirely
united to God, and then you will be capable of other things. If there be no
Profit to be reaped among the Catholics, you may go among the Heathens, and
Heretics, who will be more disposed to receive the Truth than those who are
under the Roman Church: Because others sin through Ignorance, and these
Romanists through Malice. Many Heathens would follow the Truth if they knew it,
and likewise diverse Heretics, because they seek and ask it always. Therefore
we hear them dispute willingly, to show that they are not at Rest, but seek and
ask always after the Truth. But Rev. 3. 17. 18. 7.
the Catholics do opinionately presume of their Salvation, because they esteem
themselves the People of God, as they are truly, even as the Jews were, who are
now abandoned, but shall be converted Romans 2. 25 -- 29. Rev. 19. 1 -- 9.
so soon as the Roman Church shall be overthrown. Those will be truly capable
of receiving the Spirit of Truth, acknowledging their Errors and Ignorances.
Labor, in the mean Time, Sir, for your own Perfection, and you will very
shortly see that the Harvest will be ripe, and that there will be need of
Workmen. We approach so near, that I fear your Soul will not have so soon
acquired its own Perfection, as these things will come to pass. Therefore make
haste, fearing to be sent away as an unprofitable Servant. Occupy the Talent
which God has given you, for he will come very shortly to demand an account of
it. Apply your self to your own Perfection with the same Earnestness wherewith
you formerly applied to the Perfection of others, without any Profit.

I asked her, If she believed that the Roman Church would be Destroyed and
Ruined, and the Christians scattered as the Jews are at present?

She replied; Yes, Sir, and much more, for the Jews have continued constantly
in the Jewish Law; though they be bodily scattered through all the World, they
are, nevertheless united in an uniform Faith and Belief, holding still the Law
which God had given them: But the Christians Luke 18. 8.
have denied their Faith, though they be yet united Bodily: How would they
preserve it in Time of Persecution, when all this Luster and this Magnificence
of the Church shall be destroyed, so that there shall Matthew. 24. 2.
not be one Stone upon another in its outward State, no more than there is at
present in its inward? This must needs Rev. 19. 2.
come to pass, Sir, else God would not be Just, for the Jews might Reproach him
with Reason, That they never committed such an Infidelity against their God as
the Christians do. It is very true, they killed the Body of Jesus Christ; but
that was through Acts 3. 17.
Ignorance. The Christians do kill it a thousand times out of pure Malice. They
believe that the same Body of Jesus Christ is in the Sacrament of the Altar,
and they give it daily unto Whores, Thieves, Murderers and Sorcerers; and yet
they make them believe that they shall thereby receive Graces. The Jews never
believed that they obtained Grace in putting Jesus Christ to death, as these
Christians do believe in receiving him unworthily: Matthew. 27. 23, 24.
For Pilate said that he found no Fault in him, and was in great Fear to
condemn him: And the Christians go affrontedly to receive him, with a Soul full
of Sins, believing, in the mean Time, that he is obliged to impart unto them
his Graces, in Recompense of the Affronts which they do him. It must needs be,
Sir, that all these Falsehoods be discovered, and that God Ezekiel. 16. 35 -- 42.
show the Villainy of his People to all the World. If clear-sighted and
illuminated Men would discover it, they would immediately be hated and Matthew.
23. 34, 3^.
slain between the Temple and the Altar; therefore the Judgments of God must
discover them.

The Nineteenth Conference.
That all Christians ought to Read the Holy Scripture. Whether the Church can
Err? Where She is; Where not.

I said unto her: That the Jews and the Heretics would be well-pleased to hear
such Discourses, for they have some such Sentiments.

She said; Sir, I do not speak Gal. 1. 10.
to please any Body, and I regard neither Jews, nor Heretics, nor Catholics,
but the straight Truth, according as the Spirit of God manifests it to me. I
have never conversed with Heretics; but I have casually heard some things said
of them which are much better than what the Catholics do: Though it were in
nothing but this, That they take Pleasure to read the Holy Scriptures, and
carry them everywhere with them, studying them almost Day and Night. This is a
very laudable Ps. 1. 2.
thing; because we ought always to learn what we ought to practice: If we do
not learn it we cannot know it John 5. 39, 40.
. In the Bible the whole Law of God is contained, and also the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ; from whence may be deriv*d all the Nourishment of our Souls. If
the Heretics do not put it in Practice, they do ill as well as the Catholics;
but they have this Advantage, that they know the Truth if they will practice
it. But the Catholics are only stored with Books composed by Men, and deprived
of that which God has given us for the Nourishment of our Souls: It is just
the same as if we would take from a Child his Nourishment, and give him an
Image to sustain him. He may look long upon it before his Body receive
Nourishment and Substance from it. It seems to me a very ill thing to forbid
Christians the Reading of the Bible in the Vulgar Tongue, since 2 Timothy 3. 16.
it must teach us all that we ought to do and forsake, and the Advertisements
which God gives us, by his Holy Prophets, and by Jesus Christ himself and his
holy Apostles.

I said unto her, That the Church had forbidden to read the Bible in the Vulgar
Language, because of the Abuses which were thereby committed; for many ignorant
Persons would interpret it amiss; from whence Heresies arise. Secondly, Because
many Bibles were changed, and something taken away or diminished from the
Original.

She replied: Truly, Sir, these are very weak Reasons: They forbid to read the
Bible in the Vulgar Tongue, lest the common People do draw Heresies from it;
while the most part of Heresies are introduced into the Church by the Learned,
Priests and Monks, not by Simple Ones, who would never be followed in their new
Errors; for they would have but small Authority and Learning to Introduce them.
If this Reason ought to have place, it would be more expedient to forbid it to
the Learned, since they have invented all the Heresies, and not the Vulgar:
John 7. 48, 49.
Jesus Christ taught the Simple People more than the Learned; to show that he
found them more capable and susceptible of receiving his Doctrine than the
Great and the learned were. And if all Christians ought to practice the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, by the same Consequence, they ought to Read and to
Learn it. And if they will needs forbid the Reading of it, because of the
Abuses which are committed thereby, they must also forbid the going to Church
and to the Communion, where there are a thousand times more Abuses committed,
than can be committed by the Reading of the Holy Scriptures, which was not made
for the Learned, but for 1 Cor. 2, 13, 14.
Saints, from whom Men will needs take it, showing themselves more foreseeing
than Jesus Christ, to hinder Abuses and Errors. If there were in the Church a
Prohibition only to read the Bibles which are not approved of, there would be a
Pretext to color this Prohibition; but seeing all are forbidden, it is to
forbid what God has commanded.

I asked her; Whether the Church might indeed err in this Prohibition, or in
any other thing?

She said; No, Sir, the True Church can never err, because God has promised
that he will Matthew. 16. 18.
always maintain it: But I would willingly know where the Church is at present.
She can be no where but in the Souls Joh 8. 31.
which possess the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. Behold this is the only Place
where the Church resides. Who will show me these Souls? I would gladly know
them, I would love and follow them even to Death. I have not yet found this
Happiness. You believe it may be that it is the City of Rome, because S. Peter
did reside there; and for my part, I believe that Rome is Rev. 18. 5.
the Babylon of Confusion; that the Holy Spirit does no more govern there than
you see it in your Chapter. You have Judgment enough to discern if the Holy
Spirit directs all the Resolutions which are there taken. He does it far less
in the Roman College: For there he has no more Audience; and if he should
appear there in Form of a Dove (as he did at the Baptism of Jesus Christ) all
these Presidents would cast their Caps at him to chase him away; for they have
no more to do with his Light, since they have made themselves Gods Rev. 18. 23.
upon Earth.

The Church therefore cannot err, but Jer. 7. 4. Mal. 2. 7, 8.
the Men who are called Churchmen may err, and do truly err in this
Prohibition, by which Christians cannot any longer read the Gospel nor the
Bible, in which is contained the Law of God.

How then can they observe it, if they may not read it, in order to learn it?
This is an Error which no Body is obliged to follow, because the true Church
cannot thus command it; for it is contrary to the Doctrine of Jesus, who says,
Matthew. 26. 26, 27, 28.
Take, eat, this is my flesh; and drink, this is my Blood of the New Testament,
And these Men will not have us to touch it, but as far as it pleases them to
give it: Whereas Jesus Christ says, Take ye it, and eat ye it. He speaks to
every one.

The Twentieth Conference.
Of the Word of Jesus Christ, which is truly his Flesh and his Blood. Of the
Reading of the Holy Scripture, and of the forbidding it. How the Church cannot
fail; and what is the Church, and what not.

I said to her: That these Words were understood of the Eucharist, where we
drink his Blood and eat his Flesh.

She replied; What perfect Sense can you find wherein to apply these Words of
the Lord unto the Eucharist, seeing he says, That Joh. 6. 54.
he who eats his flesh and drinks his blood shall live for ever, and yet so
many thousand Persons, who commonly receive the Eucharist, do live and die in
their Sins? It would follow that the Words of Jesus Christ were not true, when
he says, That they shall live for ever. He has said elsewhere, That 1 Cor. 6. 10.
neither Whoremongers nor Drunkards shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Neverthelss we see daily such Persons receive the Eucharist. Can they live for
ever without entering into the Kingdom of Heaven? There would be a great
Contradiction in the Words of Jesus Christ. He cannot save those whom he
condemns, nor say to those who shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven that
they shall live for ever. Joh. 6. 63. 2 John 9.
It is assuredly his Word which he calls his Flesh and his Blood. For whosoever
shall eat it, that is to say, incorporate it as the Nourishment of his Soul, it
must needs be that he live* for ever Joh. 8. 51.
; for this Word gives Life Eternal; and he who feeds upon it as on his daily
Bread can never die; this is the Tree of Life, seeing it gave Life to all
things. This Word Joh. 1. 2. Heb. 1. 3.
has created Heaven and Earth of nothing* How should it not give Life unto the
Soul which receives it? And if it have the Force to translate Bread into the
Body of Jesus Christ, as they teach, how shall it not change our Souls into the
Spirit of Life Eternal, if we receive and incorporate it as becomes? Jesus
Christ said Luke 8. 21.
These are my Mother, my Sisters and my Brethren, who hear my Word and do it:
To show that he esteems more the Receiving of his Word than the having
contributed to the Formation of his Human Body, it being most certain that the
Virgin Mary was more happy in receiving and doing his Word, than in being his
natural Mother.

I said to her: That there were many Errors in the Church, if the Sense that
she proposed ought to be received: That it was very clear and intelligible, but
it had never been understood after this manner.

She said: Blessed be God, Sir, that he grants yet this Mercy to the World, to
send his Light amidst the so obscure Darkness, into which it is brought at
present. All the highest Mysteries of our Faith are involved in this Obscurity;
nothing is understood in a perfect Sense, and they do often apply Senses
contrary to the Truth. ^s. 55. 9 10.
They have walked as groping even till Now. It is no Wonder if they fall from
one Error into another insensibly. It is a great Happiness that it has pleased
God to let us live even until the Time that he comes to enlighten the World,
after that so great a number have perished through Ignorance. We have no more
deserved it than they. Let us endeavor to apply it rightly unto our Salvation,
without letting the occasion slip, which is now so freely offered us. How many
souls are there of such a tender Conscience, that they dare not reject a
Sentiment which comes from the Roman Church, or any Decree of its College,
fearing to offend God, because they look upon it and take it for the Holy
Church? I knew a Person of a very good Life, a Doctor of Theology, who said,
That if the Pope forbad him to read the Gospel, he durst not read it any
longer: So much was he preoccupied with this Belief, that Rome is the Holy
Church! Upon this Supposition all the most pious do follow that which is Evil,
without perceiving it, because they have taught us that we owe a blind
Obedience: As if we were permitted to Exodus 23. 2.
follow Evil blindfold; which is a great Error: For we are all obliged to
discern Phil. 1. 10.
whether what we follow be good or bad. For Example; This Doctor could not
abstain from Reading of the Gospel, without offending God highly, though the Pope
had forbidden him to read it, because this Prohibition is contrary unto Jesus
Christ, who has brought Job. 6. 32, 33.
his Word from Heaven, to be the Rule of our Life, and the Nourishment of our
Souls; and has said, That it Is. 59. 21. Matthew. 24. 35.
must abide in us for ever. How could we cast it behind us because a Pope
forbids it, who cannot destroy what God has established, nor forbid what he has
commanded, without being Antichrist? for all that is against Christ is
assuredly Antichrist. We may indeed believe and follow what the Pope and his
Councils do ordain us, when they are things conformable to the Law of God, and
the Doctrine of Jesus Christ; which is no other thing but the Explication of
the Law. Though this were taught us by the Devil himself, we could not do ill to
follow it: But the things which are contrary ought never to be blindly
followed. God has made us Reasonable Creatures, to the End we may discern Good
and Evil. All the Blindness that a true Christian ought to have, is to 2 Cor.
10. 5.
captivate his Spirit under the incomprehensible Works of God, not to captivate
it to believe that that which is Evil is Good. A man must have lost Sense and
Spirit to abandon himself to such a blind Obedience* which, nevertheless the
most part of pious Christians do, who do yield in all things to the Ordinances
of the Pope or of his Council. If this Mischief be not shortly at an End, and
if the Truth be not discovered in this Point, all the World will perish:
Because many things will be determined which will be against God, though it were
nothing but the Infallibility of the Pope. It contradicts directly the Truth;
because no Man can ever be infallible how holy soever he may be. Matt. 26. 70.
S. Peter, the first Pope, did expressly deny his Master, and did really err
Gal. 2. 11.
in dissembling, because of the Jews, for which S. Paul reproves him. Can it
ever be said, without Blasphemy, that a Man is Infallible, secing Infallibility
appertains to God alone? Neither the Pope nor any other can err or fail in
following the Doctrine of Jesus Christ; but in following their own Judgments,
or those like themselves, they may fail, and err greatly.

I asked her: How it was possible that God should have left his Church for so
long a Time in Errors?

She said: Sir, God has not left his Church in Errors, she can never err nor
fail; for she is one and the same 1 Cor. 6. 17.
thing with God: As the Bridegroom is but one Flesh with his Spouse; even so
the Church is but one Spirit with God: Therefore she can never be left in
Errors, not for one Moment. But the Errors which I discover to you, Sir, are in
Men, not in the Church, for the Church is no where but in the Souls which
possess the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, who have never erred so long as they
abide in it. The Church is a Spiritual and Invisible Spirit, which renders it
self visible by the Human Bodies which this Spirit animates. So long as these
Bodies are animated and possessed with this Spirit of Jesus Christ, they are all
Members. which make up this Church: But if this Spirit withdraw himself, they
are no more but Members of Flesh, not Members of the Church Romans 8. 9.
Errors therefore are insinuated into these Members of Flesh, not into the
Spirit of God. But whereas these Members of Flesh did possess formerly the
Spirit of the Church, they have retained the Name Tit. 1. 16.
after having lost the Spirit; and their Souls being void of Faith Heb. 10 38.
God takes no longer Pleasure in them, but they are abandoned to the Spirit of
Error. Not that God on his part leaves the Church to err; but these Men having
forsaken their Jer. 2. 13.
God, have formed a Church of Flesh, which cannot be the true Church, which is
a pure Spirit John 4. 23, 24.
; as God, who is not visible but by his Works, so the Church is not visible but
by the Bodies of those who possess this Spirit. It appears sufficiently that
what they now call the Church is not governed by Divine Principles, but by
Human and Natural.

I asked her: Whether the Pope, the Cardinals, the Bishops, Prelates, Pastors,
Priests, Monks and other Persons, making Profession of the Catholic Faith,
were not the Church? And if all these Members together do not make up a Church?

She said: No, Sir, all these Persons, though met and assembled in one and the
same Place, do not make the true Church, so long as 2 John 9.
they do not possess the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. It is nothing but an
Assembly of Flesh, subject to Corruption. Every one acts there according to his
own Sense. There they propose and resolve according to Human Arguments, not
according to the Spirit of God, who is not to be found where things are managed
only by Civil and Politic Measures, which do not regard the Glory of God, but
human Accommodations. The holy Spirit does not animate so vile Subjects.
Nevertheless, he governs always the true Church, in what Place soever it be:
Is. 59. 21.
He never abandons it. But who can discover it? It is so hid and unknown that
no Body discerns it. It is a Treasure hid under the Earth, of which Jesus
Christ has spoken by Parable, saying, That Matthew. 13. 44.
the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Treasure hid in the Earth; and that he
who has discovered it must sell all that he has to buy this Ground, that he may
find this Treasure. There is no Kingdom of Heaven, but in the Church; that is
to say, There is no Salvation out of the Church; and not knowing where to find
it, who can look for Salvation? It it no wonder, Sir, that I said unto you
heretofore, That Paradise was shut; forasmuch as I cannot see where the Church
is; and consequently where Salvation may be had. Psalm. 80. 9-17.
It is a Vine which is cut even by the Root and Ground: We see indeed its
Branches extended far enough; But they are nothing but dead Wood; being cut off
from the Root, no Fruit can be any longer expected from them. The Members,
which at present they call the Church, are cut off from the Root John 15. 4,
16. Col. 2. 7.
, which is Jesus Christ, which brought forth great Branches: But since they
have been cut off from their Root, they are fit for nothing but to be cast into
the Fire; which you will see very shortly, Sir, in case God give you yet some
little Time to live.

The Twenty First Conference.
Where the true Church is. Where God is. How he speaks to the Soul and the Soul
to him; and how we ought to dispose our selves for this Divine Conversation.

I Asked her: If there was no fixed Place, where we might find the Church?
That, for my part, I would search for her, because I would seek to be saved.

She said to me: Sir, The Church is everywhere, where there are Souls
possessing the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. There are no other Places proper or
destined for the true Church to reside in. All those Persons who are called
Churchmen, are as so many Stones, with which they have built a material Church,
which serves now for the Offering of Sacrifice, and it may be shortly will
serve for a Stable for Horses. These Stones and other Materials are not the
Church, though they serve to the Structure of a Building, which may be both for
Holy and Profane Uses. Therefore, Sir, the Church is not to be sought for in
any fixed Place which is material, but in Spiritual Souls, who also cannot be
found; because they are obliged to keep Is. 26 20.
themselves hid, as the Body of Jesus Christ did before his Passion: For they
would do them no less Evil than they did to him; because the Envy of the
Prelates is now far greater than was ever that of the Pharisees, who put Jesus
Christ to Death. God gives you a holy Desire of seeking the Church, for he has
said, Matthew. 6. 33.
Seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and the rest shall be added to you. This is a Sign
that the Church is not tied to any material Place; for then there were no need
to seek it, but to go to the Place where it is. For Example: If the Church were
at Rome, there were no need to seek it. We would know assuredly where it were.
Since Jesus Christ says, it must be sought, this is indeed a Sign that it is
hid and unknown. And likewise all they who seek Rome, do not for this receive
all the rest in Gift, since so many things are wanting to them, even after they
are Romanists. Which would not befall a true Christian, who would be content
with what were purely necessary, with which God would always infallibly provide
him.

I said to her: That I was not truly satisfied for the Good of my own Soul:
That I would willingly know, where I might find the True Church, that I might
have Salvation.

She replied: Sir, Luke 17. 21.
The Church is within you. If you seek the Kingdom of Heaven only, let Jesus
Christ reign in your Soul by his Doctrine, then the Kingdom of Heaven will be
in your Soul, God being there. He reigns always where he is. He would reign in
all the Souls of Men, if they did not put Hindrances thereto. The Center of our
Souls is God, who being Salvation and Life, we ought not to seek without us the
Church nor the Kingdom of Heaven. For he is not an Earthly and Temporal God,
but Celestial and Eternal. The Church being the Word of God Joh. 17. 17.
, it is in us, since he cannot be without his Word, as we are always in the
Place where we speak. He is not Earthly; for Jesus Christ says, That Joh. 18.
36.
his Kingdom is not of this World: It is therefore a heavenly Kingdom which is
in us, because God is there, whose Kingdom is Celestial and Eternal. Where then
would you seek the Church and the Kingdom of Heaven but in the Center of your
Soul? That is the certain Place of its Residence Ephesians. 3. 16, 17.
. We may be deceived in all other things, but not in this infallible Truth. If
every one had sought the Church and the Kingdom of Heaven in the Center of his
Soul, there would not have been so many Persons deceived. Since they have
sought God without themselves in so many diverse means, they have gone astray
from him by the same means by which they ought to find him; and whilst they
sought for the Church in so many Masters, Doctors and Directors, they have
strayed from that which is Holy, to follow a Terrestrial and Carnal Church. By
this the Devil has reaped much, and replenished his infernal Granaries to our
Damage. Therefore I entreat you, Sir, that you would not seek for the Church
in any other Place but in the Center of your Soul Matthew. 24. 26.
: For there is so much Deceit under the Mask of Piety, that the most knowing
are caught by it. Many are made Saints who are of the Synagogue of Satan Rev.
3. 9.
.

I said to her: That I had not that Method to discern and find God in the
Center of my Soul; entreating she would declare to me the way how I might find
him there.

She said; Sir, you will see him by the Eyes of Faith. If you believe that God
is everywhere, he is also truly in your Soul, and even in a special and
particular manner, as a thing which is most like to him. He is in the Elements,
giving them Being and Subsistence, else they could not subsist. He is in the
Herbs, Trees and other Plants, in giving them Vegetation. He is in the Animals,
giving them Life as he does our Bodies: For if God were not in all these
things, they would resolve into the same Nothing, from whence they have been
taken; for no created thing can keep so much as one Plant of an Herb in Life.
It is God that does all. We see this with our Natural Eyes; how much more
firmly ought we to believe that he is in our Soul, which is Divine and
Incomprehensible? This Quality comes nearer to God than any other Creature: We
cannot comprehend what a Soul is, no more than we can comprehend what God is.
It has Qualities so approaching to him, that it may with Reason be called a
dependent Deity: For we see indeed the Works which it operates in our Body; but
we cannot see what it is but by its Operations, as we cannot know God or
perceive what he is but by the Works which he produces to our Knowledge. Our
Soul gives Motion to our Body, and Agility to our Understanding, makes the
Memory to remember, and moves all the other Powers of the Soul. We feel and see
that this is done in us; nevertheless no Body can comprehend how this is done,
but we must confess that our Soul is a thing incomprehensible, as well as God;
and since there cannot be many Gods, we must conclude that God is the Center of
Souls, and that they spring from him as a Branch from the Root. And as Trees
cannot bear Branches without having a Root, so the Soul cannot have a Being if
God do not give and produce it. By which you may abundantly perceive, Sir, that
of necessity God is the Center of our Soul, and that it cannot move but by him
Acts 17. 28.
, no more than the Body moves it self but by the Motion of our Soul. This being
so, we ought therefore to seek God where he is, and he being no where so
expressly as in the Center of our Soul, it is there Is. 26. 9.
that he must be sought, as in the true Place of his Residence. And if you ask
me the Method and the Way, to find him in the bottom of your Soul, there is no
other, but to remove all the Hindrances, casting out of your Soul all earthly
Affections, that you may have no other but for him. Your Soul will no sooner be
free from all these Earthly Affections, than it will fall into God, as the
Stone falls into its Center. I know no other Method but this Disingagement from
our selves, and from all other things, to find God, and to become one with him.
I have sometimes sought him without me, by Actions which did seem good* but I
have since remarked, that those served for Distractions; and the more I acted
outwardly, so much the more did I stray from my God. Therefore, Sir, become
wise by my Loss, and do not lose your Time in seeking means out of your self;
for they serve us often for Hindrances. Our Soul is his true Temple 1 Cor. 3.
16, 17.
and the Place of his Rest. Let us only remove all that is between him and our
Soul, and we shall see him Face to Face, to speak after our manner: That is to
say, we shall see him clearly by Faith, and shall know him by the Operations
which he will make in us, and shall taste him by the Repose and Consolation of
our Conscience.

I thought that I understood well enough this Truth, and that Faith dictates to
us that God is the true Center of our Soul: But to taste him, and speak
sensibly to him, by his Operations and Notices, this was above my Capacity;
entreating her to tell me how this was done.

She said to me: Sir, The Soul is a Spirit, and God is a Spirit, and
communicates himself in Spirit, not with verbal Words but spiritual Motives:
Which, nevertheless are more intelligible than the finest Eloquence of the
World. God communicates himself to the Soul, as the Sun to his Rays; and the
Soul to its God, as the Rays to the Sun, by the great Unity and Dependence
there is between God and the Soul. When once it is denuded of its self it has
no more need of Sight or Mouth to understand God, than we have need of Words to
understand our own Conceptions. So soon as the Soul is disengaged from it self
it is so transformed into God, that it is entirely swallowed up in him, and
becomes one thing with him, having no longer any Will but his, nor Desires but
what he wishes; and it does not move it self any longer but by the Motions of
God: So that the Soul and God are not any more but one and the same thing: And
if you do not taste God, and understand not his Will, it is assuredly because
there is yet some Hindrance. Do not afflict your self for this, Sir, but take
the Pains to disingage your Soul as much as is possible for you. This is all
that you can do. For to be troubled that you do not feel nor understand the
Motions of God, would be a Presumption; for if your Soul were capable of it,
God would abundantly give it. He wants your Disingagement, fearing that you
would abuse his Graces in living yet to your self.

I was wholly ravished with Pleasure to hear how God communicates himself to
the Soul: But perceiving that I was yet far from this Happiness, I asked her,
By what means I might be disengaged from my self, and from every other thing,
that my Soul might taste God?

She said to me: It is very easy, Sir, to be disengaged from every thing, by
considering what it is. For if we were not distracted and wandering in our Mind,
it would be impossible that we could love our selves or other created Things.
We cannot do it but through a Diversion (or straying) of the Mind: For if we
seriously reflect and consider what we love in loving our selves or other
Creatures, we must confess that we are Senless. For what do we in loving our
selves? we love a thing very Miserable, Impotent, Unconstant and of short
continuance, there being no created thing more subject to all sorts of Miseries
than we are in our selves, nothing more changing, nothing more weak, nothing
more perishing. Is this capable of our Love? An Abridgment of all sorts of
Miseries, more infirm than any Animals! and the things which are without us are
yet of far less consideration. (...) we love Meat and Drink, is there any thing
more (...) for as soon as we have swallowed them they are corrupted and changed
into Putrefaction. If we love the Pleasures of the Sight, this is a thing that
passes in a Moment, and cannot give Satisfaction. The more we would satisfy
our Senses, the more they thirst; for the Eccl. 1. 8.
Eye is never satisfied with seeing, no more than the Ear with hearing. Even so
of the Lust of the Flesh; These are all insatiable things, of the nature of
Salt Water; the more we drink of it, the more we thirst. And, as for the Pride
of Life, what does it put in us but a Blast of Wind? For if a Woman bow, or a
Man be discovered in our Presence, what does that give us? These are all but
imaginary Goods, which put nothing in him that loves them. If we would search
into these Truths, it would be very easy to strip us of our selves, and of all
created Things: For they are not at all lovely, but to those who have lost
their Wits. Our Soul is created for things more great. It ought not to debase
its self to Objects so unworthy of its Love. It is very easy to forsake our
selves, and all things, when we enter into the Consideration of things that are
everlasting. All our Amusements proceed from this, that we come not to the
Knowledge of God and our selves: For if we knew God we could not any longer
love any other thing Jo^. 4. 10, 14. 1 Jo^. 4. 7, 8.
; and if we knew our selves, we would hate our selves and all things, because
we have nothing in our selves which is not Tit. 3. 3.
hateful. Thus all the Love which we bear to our selves and to other things,
proceeds from pure Ignorance and the want of Serious Reflection on our selves,
and on all created Things.

I asked her; How I might make this Serious Reflection and discover the
Nothingness of all created Things: And said, That I must acknowledge her Saying
was true, that there is nothing worthy of our Love* But I could not discover
the cause of the Blindness of my Mind in this, since I had a Desire to discover
the Truth, and to be taken up entirely with God.

She said: Sir, the Fault of your Straying, as that of all the World, proceeds
from this, That Men amuse themselves with the speculation of visible and
sensible things by which they forget the invisible and spiritual: And thus they
go on always in a Is. 5. 12, 13.
Forgetfulness of God and of their own Salvation. Men do even serve for a
Hindrance to one another* For being all full of these Distractions and
Wanderings of Mind, they speak almost of no other thing. One speaks of his
Health, another of his Meat, another of that which seems fair and good to him:
And thus they fill one another's Minds with earthly Idea's, and they neglect
the consideration of heavenly things, upon which alone their Happiness depends.
That Application of Spirit which we give to our selves, to others, to our
Affairs, Business or other things, which respect only this present Life, do rob
us of that Time and Attention which appertains to God: For we are not created 1
Cor. 15. 19.
for this present Life, but only Wisd. 2. 23.
to live for ever with God. If we are obliged to remain here for some space of
Time, this is only to satisfy the Justice of God; who being offended by us,
has destined this short Life for the time of our Penitence: which being
finished, he will pardon us, and restore us into our true Country, which is his
Presence. We ought continually to aspire after it, without pleasing our selves
in our Exile and Prison. What Folly, to take Pleasure in Sufferings! The
Riches, the Honors and the Pleasures of this World are all troublesome and
painful things, and we reckon them for Happiness! We glory even in our Chains
and Fetters! Our Sin has discovered our Nakedness, and its Shame has obliged us
to cover our Body; and this same Covering which ought to serve us as matter of
continual Confusion, serves us, on the contrary, for Vainglory, which is
altogether foolish, since our Habits are the Marks of Sin, and we wear them to
glory in them.

If you desire, Sir, to discover these Truths, and to be entirely taken up with
God, fix your Understanding on the Consideration of all the things which are
not God; and you will find them all Vain and Transitory, even your Life it
self: It passes every Moment, and ought rather to be called Death than Life,
for we die daily: And from thence ascend to the Consideration of God and of our
Soul, which are things Solid and Eternal. You will by this Mean be obliged to
love the one and forsake the other. But you can never make these serious
Remarks, if you do not quit the Commerce of Men, and abstain from all that is
unprofitable, and what does not avail for the Glory of God. By the means of
these Omissions, you will acquire a clear Understanding of the Truth, and a
continual Communion with God: For the Cause of our Blindness of Mind proceeds
from this, that we divert our selves always with Men, or the other Creatures,
who do distract us from the Knowledge of God and of our selves. For all that is
not God, is nothing.

The Twenty Second Conference.
That no true Contentment can be had but in God alone: How to return thither:
Of Gifts: And of those which are made to Churches, which will perish.

I Received a great deal of Light by such firm Reasonings, to which all Men of
the World must needs yield. I said to her, That I found only a Difficulty to
withdraw my self from all things, and to think of God only, because our Spirit
does easily wander.

She said: Sir, all the Difficulty there is in doing this, is only in our
Imagination, for in the Practice there is great Contentment. For he who
entertains himself always with God Ps. ^. 7, 8, 9.
is in a continual Feast, more pleasant even to the Senses than the most
sumptuous earthly Banquet would be: For the Soul having full Satisfaction, the
Spirit is in Peace and the Body at rest, all the Senses having a Satiety and
Contentment; whereas in the Commerce of Men, none of them can find full
Satisfaction; for as long as the Soul does not repose in its God, it is like a
Stone in the Air, which never rests until it have found its Center; or like a
Fish that is out of the Water, which remains without Vigor, dries up and dies
if it be not put into it again. Even so, a Soul which is out of God, dries up
Joh. 15. 6.
and dies, not being able to find true Contentment, even as to the Body, out of
him. There is nothing but a Life truly Christian, that is free and pleasant,
for it Romans 14. 17.
flows from God the Fountain of all Joy and Pleasures. An Human Life is a Life
of Constraint. The Life of Sinners is a Life of Slavery. There is none but the
Life of a true Christian that is filled with Delights. The Human Life must
force it self, for to maintain it self aright in State and Honor, and
constrain its Nature and its Inclinations, to yield unto and please Men,
fearing to offend or disoblige them; therefore we are often constrained to bow
as a Reed under the Power of the Great, or those in Authority, having no more
Liberty than the Good or Bad Opinion of Men gives us.

The Life of a Sinner is Joh. 8. 23. Romans 6. 16, 18, 22.
a real Slavery, for he is tortured with his own Passions, which do often serve
as an Executioner both to Body and Soul, destroying both the one and the other.
What Pain is there in doing Evil? What Displeasures and Remorse when the Evil
is done! How is a Sinner hated by others, and a Burden to himself? He has not
sometimes the Freedom to speak or lift up his Head, for fear his Sin be
discovered. Is it not therefore more easy to abandon all, and to entertain our
selves only with God, than to undergo the Yoke of a Human or of a Sinful Life?
Seeing he who is resigned to God lives as a Child, without Care, who is carried
in the Arms of his Father. He fears nothing Ps. 91.
being under the Guard of the Almighty; he desires nothing more Ps. 73. 25, 26.
, for he has found all. He can seek nothing, because all things are found in
God: Riches, Beauty, Honor, Pleasure, all are there in abundance Prove. 8. 14,
21.
.

The Soul is joyful, the Heart content, and the Body in Repose. How can you
find Difficulty, Sir, in a thing agreeable and full of all Good! It should
rather be found in the Life which you lead: Tho it be honest, yet it is subject
to a thousand Disquiets and Cares to maintain you aright, and to please every
Body.

To quit all things is to quit very little for to find the All. And not to
think but upon God is to do that which naturally we would do upon the ceasing
of the eagerness of our Imagination, which frames to it self some imaginary
Pleasure in the Conversation of Men, which is nevertheless interwoven with a
great many Displeasures and Discontents. All this may be overcome by retiring
our Spirit with God.

I said to her: That I wished nothing more than to find my self in so happy a
State, which would yield me Communion with God. That for this cause I would
willingly abandon a thousand Worlds: Begging she would tell me in order what I
ought to do for the first.

She said: Sir, After that you shall have wholly abandoned the World, present
your self before God as the Prodigal Son Luke 15. 18.
, acknowledging that you have wasted so many Graces, which he had imparted to
you, that you might love him, and that you have applied them to please Men.
Tell him plainly that you have sinned against him and Heaven: And then he will
give you the first Robe of Innocence in embracing you as his Son. Resign your
self wholly to him, as a Child newly born again, and then he will govern you in
all your Ways; learning you to speak, to walk, to eat, and all the rest that
hitherto you did not know how to do aright; for if you walked, it has been to
seek Temporal Things; and if you have eaten, it was but for the Maintenance of
your Body; and if you spoke, it was only to please or satisfy Men: All which
things are Vain, and Unworthy of a true Child of God. Quit therefore, Sir, all
your old Habits, and suffer your self now to be conducted by God, who is your
true Father. Receive Job 2. 10.
from him what shall befall you. If Prosperities come upon you, Ps. 118.
bless him; if Adversities, receive them with Joy; Jam. 1. 2.
for he had no other things, whilst in this World, but Tribulations. Esteem
your self happy to imitate him Acts 5. 41.
. Seek no longer any other thing but what Phil. 4. 11, 12.
God shall permit to befall you, and then you will find that the Lord is good
and gracious. Phil. 1. 28, 29. 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13, 14.
Though Tribulations seem sometimes bitter, yet they are made sweet by the
Conformity of the Life of Jesus Christ. Pains suffered with Jesus Christ are
rendered agreeable. This Resignation to God is the first part of Blessedness,
which draws along with it all the rest. When you shall be resigned to his
Government you will have no longer need of Masters or any other Helps: For he
alone is your Protector in this Valley of Miseries, which will not last but for
a Moment in respect of Eternity. 2 Timothy 2. 12.
Let us suffer with him, if we would reign with him.

I asked: What I should do with my temporal Goods? if I should distribute them
to the Poor, or to Churches, or rather to religious Convents?

She said; Sir, Keep your Temporal Goods for your Entertainment: For he who has
not wherewith to maintain himself nowadays, when Charity is dead, would have
Vexations to seek and find it: So much the more that Justice requires rather to
retain what we have lawfully acquired, for our own Nourishment, than to give it
away, and to be obliged afterward to ask of others. This Pretext of Voluntary
Poverty has introduced among the Religious great Avarice; for after having
abandoned their own, they seek with more Greediness the Wealth of Others than
ever they did their own. Which obliges them to flatter People, and often to
give way to evil, that they may have where withal to live, and they are
unsatiable to augment and increase it. It is a kind of Robbery to take the
Goods of others by way of Alms, when we have the Means to live upon our own.
But if you have more than suffices for your Entertainment, distribute it to
Christian Brethren, who have need of it, as the first Christians did, so that
Acts 4. 34.
no Body among them had need of any thing, because the Rich did impart to the
Poor what was necessary for them: There being then no Proposal of Building so
many Churches and Monasteries as at present, which are built more for the
Commodity and Pleasures of Monks, than for the Glory of God, which does not
consist in material Temples, as it does in the Living Temples of the Souls of
true Christians. These are 2 Cor. 6. 16.
the true Temples of God, where he will reside to all Eternity: But not in
these Machines of Stone or Wood, which will perish very shortly with their
Builder; who will be obliged to suffer Poverty by Force, since they would not
suffer it voluntarily, according to the Vows and Promises which they make
publicly of it. If at present you do not find true Christians, to whom to give
of your Abundance, keep it, for the Love of God, until you shall know them. His
Mercy will very shortly form a great number of them. For to give to the Wicked
is to cooperate to their Vices.

Having remarked that she spoke of the Destruction of Churches and Monasteries;
I asked her, If she believed that they would be shortly ruined?

She said: Sir, I believe that God will very shortly grant this great Mercy to
the World, which is very desirable, seeing that he cannot be known so long as
this Luster of Honor and Riches rules in the Church. She will never be holy
till after Rev. 19. 1-9.
the Destruction of all these visible and magnificent Things, which have chased
away the Holy Spirit, and have rendered it the Babylon of Confusion. God can
never be glorified in the same Place where Men do attribute all the Glory to
themselves; and the Church, cannot subsist but by the Virtue and Holiness in
which its lawful Bridegroom Jesus Christ did establish it. If she be joined and
allied with Honor and Riches, she has played the Adultress, and deserves to be
rejected by her lawful Husband, who has for so long a Time born with her
Whoredoms, that they are come to a height, being become unsupportable to those
who have fully discovered them. How much more must they be so to the
clear-sighted Eyes of her lawful Husband? We ought to wait for, yea Psalm. 137.
7, 8, 9. Rev. 6. 10.
to wish and desire those Ruins, which will discover where the true Christians
are. This Mask of Hypocrisy being taken off, we will see them with open Face:
Which will be a far less Evil; because there will be far less of Deceit in it.
It is now as in a Comedy, where the Servant acts the Part of a King; and so
soon as it is finished we will see indeed that the King was nothing but the
Servant. Those who reign at present in the Church, being stripped of their
Apparel, it will then appear whether they are Prelates for God, or for Money and
Honor.

The Twenty Third Conference.
Of the Destruction of the Church, and of the Vprightness of God in his
Judgments, and in all that he does.

I asked her: If there was no way to appease God by Prayer or Penances, that
this total Ruin of the Church might be prevented, which is replenished with so
great a Number of Persons, as well of Priests as Religious, which make some
say, that the Church was never so numerous, nor in so fine Order as now.

She replied: Sir, There were never so many Religious, and so little of
Religion. It is of this great Diversity that Jesus Christ said Matthew. 24. 2.
, Do you see all these things? I tell you, there shall not be be left one Stone
upon another, that shall not be overthrown. The Temple of Jerusalem was only
the Figure of the Church, of which Jesus Christ spoke in a perfect Sense,
saying, That all these Orders, all these Priests, all these Religious Persons
and Zealots which compose the Church, with all other Christians, should be
destroyed after such a manner, that two should not abide together: So that all
shall be destroyed and displaced. These things must needs come to pass, because
all study to be Priests and Religious, and no Body to be a true Christian.
Jesus Christ cannot reign in all these things. He must needs demolish them, and
cast down the mighty from their Seats, and abolish the Wisdom of the Wise; and
then he shall reign. Would you, Sir, Pray, and do Penance, that Jesus Christ
may not reign? If his Kingdom be inseparable Romans 14. 17.
from his Gospel Spirit, it must be established that he may reign there; and it
cannot be established if Riches, Power and Honors be not banished out of the
Church. For tho indeed he should come bodily into the World, as he did in the
time of the Jews, he would not be received by the Church: She would rather
Murder him a thousand times, than either hear or follow him; for she will Rule
and not Submit, and will persevere in the Glory and Wealth of the World, and
contempt of the humility and poverty of Spirit, wherein Jesus Christ has placed
her. Therefore of necessity all these Riches, Grandeurs and Honors, must be
destroyed before Jesus Christ can reign in his Church. He has no need of that
great number of Priests, nor of the multitude of Monks. But he cherishes Is 66.
1, 2, 5.
Souls humbled and despised for his Word. All that splendour and that order
which appears beautiful in Men's Eyes, is defective before the Lord, who has
chosen Contempt and Reproach for our Example.

I said to her: Seeing the wrath of God was so great that it will not be
appeased, we must resolve to suffer; but it was very hard to see the total ruin
of the Church, in which among others there might be yet a great many good men
who would suffer innocently.

She said: Sir, you do not know God yet, since you imagine that he is angry and
will not be appeased, and that he does hard things in his universal
Chastisements; yea, that he seems cruel in making the Innocent to suffer with
the Guilty. Believe me, Sir, all these Sentiments are Blasphemies which you
utter against God, without knowing it, for want of not considering sufficiently
that God is a Being All-just, All-good, and All-powerful. If he be All-just, he
can never commit Injustice; if he be All-good, he can never do an evil thing;
if he be All-powerful, nothing can be wanting to him, nor fail him. How say you
that his Wrath cannot be appeased, since an infinite Goodness cannot have
Wrath.? Is. 27. 4.
And if he could not be appeased, he were not Merciful. If he Wisd. 12. 14.
did a hard thing, this would likewise offend his Goodness. And if he should
make the Innocent suffer with the Guilty, he would act against his Justice. All
which things can never be done by God. But our narrow mind not comprehending
that Almighty Power, Goodness and Righteousness, judges rashly of God: We
imagine that he is in anger when he does not pardon any more: And if we would
fix our minds to consider the reasons why he does not Pardon, we would easily
perceive that he Jer. 15. 1, 5, 6.
cannot in justice pardon any longer, because our sins are very numerous and
without repentance: We love them, and we will not part with them. Must he then
not chastise them if he love Righteousness? and instead of perceiving that they
constrain God to this chastisement, we see nothing but that God is greatly in
wrath! as if he were subject to vicious Passions like to ours. We judge
likewise that he will not be appeased when he chastises* notwithstanding our
Prayers; but we do not see that these Prayers are not effectual, because they
are not accompanied with Is. 1. 15.
regret and resolution of amendment. We pray that God may pardon us, and not
chastise us, Jam. 4. 3.
that we may the more peaceably continue in our Sins which peace and prosperity
do nourish. Would God be merciful if he should pardon us, or be appeased in
such a case? He would rather be unmerciful in being appeased, and in giving us
time and means to sin the more. Who does not see that our judgments are
deceived, and that we would by them blame God for our own faults? as when we
say, that it is a hard thing to have universal Chastisements, when we believe
there are yet many good Men among others who are wicked, and do not perceive
that the evil is universal when the punishments are so. The sacred History of
the Scripture makes appear to us, Genesis 18. 32.
that God would have pardoned all that were in Sodom, if there had been but ten
Righteous within it. We believe there are a great many good men according to
our judgment, whereas it may be before God there are none; and even tho there
were diverse, yet it is a good thing 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7.
that the Righteous be tried by Tribulation, for they testify by it the
fidelity they have toward God, in continuing constantly faithful to him in
adversity, as well as in prosperity; and likewise they thereby try themselves:
For many are deceived who Mat. 13. 20, 21.
thought they were faithful to God in Prosperity, and yet Adversities have made
them stumble in the midst of their Race, or they have perished at the first
essay of Temptation. So that God manifests always great Righteousness and great
Mercy, chiefly in sending universal (k) Jer. 17. 1.
(l) Deuteronomy. 1. 42, 43. 45. Prove. 1 24. 31. Zach. 7. 13.
Rods, in chastning the Wicked, and in trying the Righteous, if there be any,
who never suffer for the Guilty, but for their own Perfection and Merit.
Universal Chastisements being much more profitable to the Good than to the
Evil, because they purify them and render them more perfect, whereas the
wicked become worse by them.

I was obliged to confess, That I had done a great wrong in speaking thus of
God, according to my Sentiment. I asked her how* I ought to behave my self,
that I may not any more fall into the like faults, and that I might make a
right judgment of God.

She said: Sir, never judge according to what you see outwardly, but give
always time to your Spirit to examine the works of God, and you will discover
that all that he does and permits is accompanied with Ps. 45. 5. Ps. 89. 14,
15. Jer. 32. 17, 18.
Righteousness, Goodness and Power, which are his Qualities, without which he
does nothing. Men do deceive themselves, and the most wise err in this point,
when they will censure the works of God. In which they are real Ignorants; for
if they had any small Light, they would admire and adore them only, without
making any judgments of them; for of necessity what they make is unjust,
injurious, or rash, because no human Spirits are capable of Ps. 147. 5. R. m.
11. 33.-36.
fathoming the works of God, for they are all incomprehensible. We can only see
that in them Ps. 111. 7, 8.
there is all sort of Goodness, Righteousness and Power. If we consider only a
grain of Corn, we shall find in it these three things, Power is in its frame,
because no man is able to make a grain of Corn how Great and Learned soever he
be. We percieve also in this grain the goodness of God, who gives so liberally
to the Good and to the Wicked their necessary Food. We will there likewise find
Righteousness, because having made Man subject to be nourished with this grain,
he provides it for him, even tho he be his Enemy, that he may find no injustice
in God, to have subjected him to a thing which afterward should be denied him.
He wills that we may comprehend aright that all his works are Just, and Good,
and Powerful, tho we be ignorant how he makes them.

The Twenty fourth Conference.
Of the Enquiry about the most Holy Trinity, and concerning Grace; and that the
Saints themselves are mistaken therein, none being Infallible.

I Said to her: That I had committed a great many faults in this matter; that
often I would needs dive into the works of God, even his highest Mysteries,
such as that of Grace and the Trinity; and that many holy Doctors had passed
all their Life in such Studies, to declare how God begets his Word, or how God
bestows Grace differently.

She replied, Sir, It is very ill done for a silly Worm of the Earth to seek to
comprehend that which a God does. It is enough Mic. 6. 8.
always for a Servant to know what is agreeable to his Master in the matter of
the duty of his Service, without its being permitted him to enquire into his
most secret particular Affairs. He has performed his Duty when he has done that
which is commanded and ordained him by his Master. Much more blame worthy is it
that a Creature should inform it self how God begets his Word, or how he
distributes his Graces unto Men: This is beyond our Duty. We ought to reckon
our selves very happy to learn that God has so much Goodness; Prove. 1.20.-23.
9.1-6.
that he always imparts to us Grace sufficient to enable us to love and serve
him. Every one may find this in his own Conscience; and Experience, which is
the Mistress of all Scienc, can testify that every one has received Grace from
God, even tho he be a great Sinner. What need is there after this to inform our
selves how God gives these Graces? Or if he give more to one than to another?
If this be not to seek matter to condemn God of Partiality, or to make him have
respect of Persons, and so to render him less Lovely.

There is yet less ground to inform our selves what the Holy Trinity is, for no
body is capable of comprehending it, nor yet how the Father Prove. 30. 4.
begets the Son; so much the rather, that to render unto God agreeable Service,
there is no need of knowing any other thing than what he commands and ordains
us. John 14. 21.
What is more is unprofitable or evil; for all that we should be able to say or
know of the Trinity, cannot but greatly lessen the glory of his Being, which is
above all that is most Beautiful, most Good, and most Great. There is nothing
that can be compared to God; neither are there any words that can give us the
least signification of the Being of God, who comprehends all things. If God
were Man, we would say that his Heart is the Father, His Mouth the Son, and his
Understanding the Holy Spirit; because the Heart of Man is the feat of Love;
his Mouth is the Channel by which this love is communicated; and his
Understanding is the Garden wherein the Conceptions do grow to make his Love be
comprehended. These three things are but one Person tho it have these three
diverse Operations. The Holy Trinity is but one God, who is all Love, 1 John
18. 8.
he loves Man incomprehensibly. We may call this Love 1 John 4. 10, 14.
the Father. Now, no Being is perfect if it be not communicated. The Word has
communicated unto Man this Love; therefore it may be called the Son. Joh. 1 14.
And this Word cannot be comprehended without Understanding, which has likewise
been given unto Man to comprehend this Love; which understanding may be called
1 John 4. 13. 5. 20.
the Holy Spirit. All three together are but that sole Love, which is God.
There is not in the Holy Trinity a Man, a Child, nor a Dove, as they paint it
unto us; but these are all Figures to make us conceive something of God, who
nevertheless is unconceivable: And all that they can say to us of him are but
contempts or reproaches which we commit against God; for he is not to be
compared to any thing. We must force our selves to love him, not to comprehend
him. The Saints themselves committed great faults while they would needs embark
into these Studies. I believe the Devil has raised Disputes thereupon, to amuse
Men in useless things, rather than profitable, and to seek to comprehend what
ought to be adored.

I asked her, if the holy Doctors could indeed have committed such faults,
since we held that they had the Holy Spirit.

She said: Yes, Sir, they committed many others through Ignorance: They erred
in many things: The Holy Spirit did not always guide their Pen, nor their
Understandings: They were always frail Men so long as they lived upon Earth.
They might always fail and err; for Jesus Christ says, that 1 John 1. 10.
He who says he is without Sin, is a Liar. I believe I have also told you
heretofore Sir, that none is Infallible but God. Men who have the Holy Spirit,
are not always so disengaged from themselves that the Holy Spirit has that
absolute dominion over them. Their own sense of things gives them frequent
hindrances; and as long as they act naturally, they stray from the Holy Spirit,
and do often commit in these wanderings great faults, as David did, 1 Samuel 11.
16. 4. 19. 29. 24.
tho God says, that He was a Man according to his own Heart: And Solomon, who 1
Kings, ii. 4. ii.
had received the Spirit in fullness, did notwithstanding Sin greatly against
the Faith it self, and against the Commandments of God. You must not wonder
therefore that the Holy Fathers have committed faults in the Church; the
Apostles themselves committed them, Gal. ii. 2 14.
though they had visibly received the Holy Spirit. We must never build on a
Foundation so weak as Men are: They may all err, tho they were Saints, and have
erred in many things in upholding the Church: For as soon as they perceived
that it failed in the Souls of Christians, and that its Honor and Authority
was fallen, they would needs redress it by worldly Honors and Riches, and even
defend it by Disputes and by Arms; all which things are Buildings made with
Men's hands, which shall be ruined. Ps. 127. 1.
For that which God has not built, shall be Destroyed. Jesus Christ knew far
better the means that were proper to uphold his Church: He saw the time to come
as well as the present. He has not ordained that it should be maintained by
Silver, Authority, Arms, or Disputes, but Joh. 17. 17, 19. Ephesians. 5. 26, 27.
by Holiness.

The Twenty fifth Conference.
That the Holy Spirit sends always new Influences; and that we must not bound
his Lights* nor the Interpretation of the Scriptures to that which the Holy
Fathers have formerly had.

I Could not resist so clear Truths, perceiving well that all Men are Fallible:
But because every one had always received the Opinions of the Holy Fathers, as
things certain, I said to her, that I had sworn to receive no other
Explications of the Holy Scriptures, but those of the Holy Fathers; and that
the Church did oblige all Persons placed in Dignities, to do the same: So that
in all Benefices received, they still take this Oath before they enter in
possession of them.

She said: Sir, the Church can oblige no body to resist the Holy Spirit. Your
Oath is not obligatory in this case. If God favor you, or some other Person of
your Acquaintance with any new Light, must you reject it to obey Men? Jesus
Christ did not forbid this. On the contrary he has said, Joh. 20. 22.
Receive the Holy Spirit: And 14. 26.
When he shall come, he will teach you all things. He speaks to the Apostles,
and to all Christians in them. This Holy Spirit is never idle: He operates
always new Graces in those who receive him, and gives still more clear
Interpretations of the Holy Scriptures Jer. 30. 24. Dan. 12. 9.
; according as the end of the World approaches we shall every day understand
them more clearly: We see the figure of this in the Sciences of Natural things:
There is at present more knowledge of them than ever, and Men now do know much
more of Natural things, which those who are gone before us were ignorant of,
yea, understood them in a sense quite contrary to the truth. They taught that
the Sun goes round about the Earth: Now they teach that the Earth turns, and
that the Sun is fixed; which is more to be believed. And thus in many Natural
things they have discovered many Secrets since Sciences were increased: The
Figure is never so accomplished as the thing figured: Wherefore then should the
Light of the Holy Spirit, or the understanding of the Holy Scriptures be
bounded to what the holy Fathers understood of them? Every one of them had
Discoveries according to his Talent, and no more. I believe Sir, that if you
examine them narrowly, you will find that they do not accord in all things; yea,
even that they sometimes contradict one another, which cannot come from God;
for there is never any contradiction in him. Each of the Fathers saw as far as
his view reached, and no more. God does always farther discover his Secrets.
Can Men cause others to swear, or can they swear themselves, that they shall
not receive any other Discoveries, but that which the holy Fathers have
received, without opposing the Grace and Light of God? This would be, to speak
after our way, to clip the wings of the Holy Spirit, that he might not fly
farther than Men had marked out to him. Truly Sir, there are great Errors in
all things. It seems Men would take from God Power and Authority to attribute
it to themselves, giving him Laws, and forbidding Men to obey him. The holy
Fathers could not be so rash as to believe that no body could understand the
Holy Scriptures farther than they, for they affirm that there are depths of
hidden Treasure, which they cannot comprehend. In effect I believe that nothing
has been yet understood 1 Cor. 1^. 9, 10.
in a perfect sense of all the Holy Scripture, even till now; and that likewise
there is nothing accomplished but the Death of Jesus Christ. Nevertheless ^s.
11. 9.
all must be understood and accomplished in a perfect Sense, before the end of
the World. God has not said or done any thing in vain: He will give to Men the
full understanding of all that he has said by his holy Prophets from the
beginning of the World; and nothing is so hid but it shall be discovered before
the World end. Why then should they forbid to receive other Interpretations
than those which the holy Fathers in past times have received? It were better
to command to Pray continually Ephesians. 1. 17. 18.
for greater Light, that we may know the better the Mysteries of our Faith,
that we may the better observe and follow them; for we can never have so much
love for a thing unknown, as for that which we know.

I said to her, that this Oath was not ordained to oppose directly the Holy
Spirit, but rather to hinder every one from Interpreting the Scriptures after
his own way, from which many Errors might proceed, if there were not an uniform
Belief among all Christians.

She replied, Truly Sir, you cannot cover these Evils, for they are too
manifest. Whether this opposition to the Holy Spirit be made directly or
indirectly, it is always evil. They may indeed persuade the People to believe
that the Holy Fathers had more light for understanding the Holy Scriptures,
than Laick Persons, taken up about the Affairs of the World: But to oblige
Priests to take Oaths not to receive any other Interpretations than those of
the ancient Fathers, is to make them Swear indirectly that they shall oppose
the Holy Spirit; Seeing they would believe they falsified their Oath in
receiving a new Light of the Holy Spirit, which the Fathers had not received.
If new Light must come before the end of the World, and the Priests have sworn
not to receive it, Laics receiving it will be yet less approved by that which
you call the Church, than the Priests, who have the first Rank there. To whom
then shall the Holy Spirit address to spread his Light upon the Earth? He must
of necessity bestow it on the Turks, Jews, or Heathens, since those who are
called Christians will not, or cannot receive it, for fear of falsifying their
Oath. And if God reveal his Secrets to Babes, Mat ii. 25.
as he ordinarily does; who among the Christians would receive this Revelation?
The particular Priests could not do it because of their Oath; and if they would
present it to what is called the Body of the Church, They would examine whether
the ancient Fathers have said the same things, which if they did not find, they
would reject it as a Heresy, since their resolution is not to receive any
thing, but what the ancient Fathers have said. If the Church were that which
Jesus Christ brought from Heaven, it would be always uniform, and guided by the
same Holy Spirit. There would be no need to fear that every one would Interpret
the Holy Scriptures after his own way, for there could not be but one and the
same Belief: For all would be Saints, and capable of Interpreting the
Scriptures; yea, Joel 2 28, 29.
even of Prophesying, according as God, who is free, should grant Light to
every one; tho Men would indeed Captivate and limit him by their new Laws.

The Twenty sixth Conference.
How and wherefore the Holy Scripture has not been understood in a perfect
Sense, as yet in any thing; which is shown by new Explications, touching the
Creation of Man, his Fall, the Coming of Jesus Christ in Disgrace, and his
coming in Glory upon Earth, to reign there for ever. Of the Glorification of
the Creatures, both Animate and Inanimate; and what makes Paradise and Hell;
and that universal Plagues and Rods shall preceed all these things.

HAving remarked that she spoke so often of the Holy Scriptures, which she said
had not been understood hitherto in their perfect Sense; I asked her how she
could speak of them, since she had told me that for a long time past she had
not read them, nor made use of any Books; and from whence could she know that
they were not understood in their perfect Sense.

She said, Sir, I will tell you, trusting in your Secrecy, that God has given
me the understanding of all the Holy Scripture, without having read it; and
when by chance, or casually I hear Sermons or other Conferences to Explain it,
I perceive plainly that they do not speak of it in its perfect Sense. Sometimes
they explain something in part, and at other times in a sense altogether
contrary, or ill applied, for what they say is repugnant to what I know in my
Intercourse; and the Spirit of God cannot have contrary Senses; either the one
or the other must be deceived. As for me, I think my Sentiment is immediately
given to me from God, because I never studied nor learned any thing from Men;
and this likewise cannot come from my Imagination, because I never give way to
Speculation, and desire not to know nor learn any thing; for I stop my Ears to
all that they would teach me, fearing lest there should remain in my
Understanding any Idea's of the Things which I had read or heard, which would
mingle themselves with the Light which God gives me. I would be very
presumptuous to believe that these so clear Interpretations come from my self.

I said to her, That I remember she had diverse times cited some Passages of
Scripture, and even referred to the Chapter of the Text, as speaking of the
last Times, in the 24th Chapter of S. Matthew, entreating me to read it: asking
her, How she could know this?

She said to me: Sir, I have read sometimes transiently the New Testament,
having obtained Permission of a certain Bishop: But as soon as I began to read
I perceived in what I read, all my Sentiments explained, so that if I were to
write the Sentiments which I carry within me, I should compose a Book like that
of the New Testament: so much do I find them altogether conformable. And it
seeming to me that it would be useless to read what I did so sensibly possess,
I left off to read, except where there was occasion to speak of the Gospel, or
any other thing contained in the said Testament, I was then well pleased to
cite it, that by this mean, my Saying might be more authorized by the Holy
Scripture, than by my simple Word: though it be altogether conformable thereunto.
And that 24th Chapter of S. Matthew, is so much the more in my Heart that I see
it treats of the Time in which we are fallen at present. I wish all the World
would read it, that they might apprehend the more the Danger in which we live,
without perceiving it.

I said to her; I had read that Chapter diverse Times, and, nevertheless did not
comprehend that it spoke of this present Time: entreating she would explain it
to me.

She said: Sir, I will do it, by the Grace of God: But I must have Time to
rest: Let us still go on our Way; and how soon I shall stop, I will give you
that Explication in Writing. See this Explication in the last Letter of the
First Part, of La Numiere n^^ en Tenebres.
Give me only the Text, and I believe you will receive great Light from it. You
may also confront it with the Explications which the Holy Fathers have made of
it. You will see which of all will have the most perfect Sense. That will be a
small Sample; which will show what the whole Piece will be. For it seems to me,
that I will be obliged one Day to explain all the Holy Scripture in general;
but for this end I will need to keep my self without the Reach of the Roman
Church, because by speaking the Truth of it, I will be liable to their Reproof.
Truth does always shock Lying, as Righteousness does Unrighteousness: I know I
cannot but speak the Truth, and also that they who do not follow it, do resist
it. For this cause they killed the Holy Prophets and Jesus Christ himself,
because they bear Witness to the Truth. I can expect no less Recompense from
Christians now; for they being without the Truth will strongly resist it; and
practicing Unrighteousness, they will not suffer Righteousness in their
presence; because it would reprove them: I can very well hold my Peace, as I
have done for so many Years bygone: But when God shall will that I speak, I
will cry to all the World, Matthew. 10. 27, 28.
without fearing those who can but kill the Body. Death would be agreeable to
me, if with it I could enlighten my Christian Brethren, and draw them out of
Error.

I said to her: That the Church did not put to death the Holy Fathers, who had
explained the Holy Scriptures: But, on the contrary, had honored and esteemed
them: That neither ought she to be afraid of being ill treated by them: but
rather received and approved in explaining the Scriptures.

She said to me: Sir, You would always excuse this Church, because you have
espoused her, as I have also done. It proceeds from this, that you do not yet
distinguish what the true Church is, though I have so often spoke to you of it.
The Church, in a perfect and defined Sense, is no other thing but the Souls
Joh. 17. 19-, 26.
which are united in Heart and Will wholly unto God. These are his only
Spouses. He never had any others, no more under the Old Testament than the New,
yea from the Beginning of the World, and will never have, even to the End, yea
throughout all Eternity. Nothing can be the Church, but that which is united
wholly unto God: No more than a Woman can be a Man's Spouse, if she be not
united to him. For if she join herself to another she is an Adultress; the same
is it, without Comparison, in the Alliance which God makes with Souls. If Hos.
2. 2.
they withdraw from him, and join themselves to any other thing, they are
Adultresses, and worthy of being divorced. If God permit a Man to forsake his
Wife for Whoredom, wherefore should not this Law be observed by himself? If
Rome, with its College, does remain united to God in the Spirit of Truth, she
is the Church, and his Spouse: But if she be separated from that Truth and
Righteousness, she is no more but a Civil and Political Assembly. Make always
this Distinction, Sir, or otherwise you will be deceived, taking Falsehood for
Truth. If there were a thousand Popes, with as many Counselors, assembled, and
if they did not possess the Spirit of God, they are not the Church; but if a
simple Woman, that spins on a Distaff, do possess the Spirit of God, she is the
Church. The Holy Fathers were not ill treated by Rome, in expounding the Holy
Scriptures, because there were yet perhaps in their Time, in those Assemblies,
some Souls, which were Churches, and who, by confequence, did defend the Truth:
But at present this Support is not to be expected, but rather mortal
Persecutions. An evil thing, Sir, ought not to be maintained blindly, as if it
were good: Therefore God has given you a good Judgment to make this
Distinction; for if you continue always fixed in the Resolution, to take this
outward Body of the Roman Church for the Holy Church, it is in vain for me to
discover to you her Evil and the Infidelity she has committed toward her lawful
Husband. You would do as he who would permit his Wife to play the Adultress, in
dissembling it without being desirous to know or discover it. The Sin is as
great to tolerate it, as to do it. If God permit me to speak the Truth openly
to that Church which you esteem, you would see with Regret how ill she would
treat me, you could not deliver me from the Peril, to which your pious Belief
would expose me.

I said to her: That for the Exposition of the Holy Scriptures she needed
offend no Body: That this was but what God had declared unto us: That every one
ought to desire to have still a more clear Understanding of them, yea even the
Wicked themselves, that this ought not to displease them. I entreated her to
write boldly.

She said: When you shall read, Sir, the 24th Chapter, which I have promised
you, it may be, you will change your Opinion; for the Word of God Heb. 4. 12.
is like to a twoedged Sword. Truth cuts all that it meets with, in Opposition
to it: So that without respecting any Body, we cut all sorts of Errors and
Lies, in following only the straight Truth blindly; and without knowing it we
do often wound those of whom we are not thinking. If the Word of God were well
explained, it would offend all the Persons that live now in the World, yea
those who are esteemed Holy and Perfect. For as we do not see so many little
Atoms flying in the Air when the Sun does not shine brightly, as we do when he
spreads his Beams clearly; even so the Souls which are full of Sins and
Imperfections, Rom 7. 9.
do not perceive them so long as the clear Understanding of true Perfection is
not given them. They believe that they are very clean; but so soon as this
Divine Light shall give its Rays, every one will see evidently that he is
deceived, that he has no Righteousness, and that he is no true Christian.
Therefore the Devil will hinder, as much as he can, this Light from being
discovered, and will oppose himself thereunto, even by those that have most
Authority; that very few may perceive their Blindness: For if these
Explications were maturely considered by every one, all the World would be
converted, for there is nothing more charming than to consider that which God
has done for Man from his Creation, and continued even till now, which is
nothing but a continued Course of Benefits, all corresponding to one another,
always in great Perfection. The Creation, the Law of Moses, the Prophets, the
Gospels, are all the same thing, by an excellent Harmony.

I asked her; Whether the Ancient Fathers had not discovered these things
aright, and if they had not declared this to the World by so many Expositions
and Books which they had written?

She said: Sir, It was not necessary that the Ancient Fathers should have the
Understanding of all things: It was enough that they understood that which Men
had need of then; but since we draw near to the Fullness of time, it is
expedient for Men now, that they learn that which must fall out in their Time.
Therefore God now reveals the Secrets which he would then have to be kept hid.
When the Apostles asked Jesus Christ, when these things, which Jesus Christ had
told them, should come to pass? He answered them, That Act. 1. 6, 7.
it was not for them to know the Times, which the Father had in his own power:
To show, that unseasonable Light ought not to be desired; and that to him alone
appertains the knowing the Time and the Hour of all things. Thus he thought fit
to reserve the Understanding of the Scriptures, till the Jer. 30. 24. Dan. 12.
9. Rev. 10. 4.
necessary time, which is at present. The Holy Fathers could not know then what
he would reserve till now; and all that they declared of it by so many
Expositions and Books, was but what they could know by Divine Light, joined to
their own Conceptions, which were not always guided by the Holy Spirit: For
their Studies and proper Sentiments often hindered this Knowledge, and served
for Clouds to that Divine Sun, who could not dilate his Beams fully upon their
Souls, because they were not entirely free and disengaged from their own Idea's
and Preoccupations. It is true, they said many things useful for that Time, but
not sufficient enough to enlighten those of the present Time. All now must be
known as it is. The Prophets have indeed declared all that must come to pass,
even to the End of the World; but neither they themselves, nor any others
understood their Sayings; Jesus Christ himself declared what they had said, by
Matthew. 13. 34, 35.
Parables, not being willing to give the Understanding of them, but only tell
them: That they might adore the Marvels of God, when they should see the Things
come to pass, which had been for so long a Time foretold.

I asked her; If she had received from God those Discoveries, which have been
for so long time hid from all the World.

She said: Yes, Sir, I may say it with Confusion, That it has pleased God to
communicate his Secrets to me, which he had Matthew. 11. 25.
hid from the Wise and Great of the Earth. If such has been his Will, who can
reprove it, or find Fault with that which he finds good? Is not he the absolute
Lord of all things? That which he wills, he can do, without Men's being able to
contradict it: (c) Dan. 12. 8.
for no Body is capable of giving Law to him. He is as Powerful as Just and
Good. Let us only adore his Designs. Though I were even the most wicked Creature
of the World, he might serve himself of me in what pleases him, and damn me in
the End if I have merited it. All things being subject to him, all things must
obey him, the Infernal Powers as well as the Celestial and Terrestrial. Nothing
can resist his almighty Arms. I must submit, Sir; if God will declare his
Marvels by me, I cannot hinder him. If he will speak by a Stone, or Wood, he
ought to be heard with Respect. I have not sought nor asked these things; they
have been poured into me insensibly: When once I desired no more to know any
thing, I have learned all things, even to the greatest Mysteries of our Faith,
and all that shall befall Men, even to the End of the World. Nothing has been
concealed from me. I know the Masterpieces of the Works of God, and the
Accomplishment of the Holy Scriptures: The Re-establishment of the Holy Church,
and the Reign of Jesus Christ upon Earth: The Alliance which he promised unto
Abraham, and all the Things which are foretold by the Holy Prophets. Nothing
shall pass without having its accomplished Sense, and its present
Accomplishment in the Mystical, Literal, Divine and Material Sense. It it an
Abyss Psalm. 92. 5, 6.
of Joy to think of it. What Joy to see it Rev. 19. 7.
brought to pass! If you saw it as I do, Sir, you could no longer love any
other thing, no more than all other Men: For no Delights can be imagined
greater than those which Jesus Christ Is. 64. 4. 1 Cor. 2. 9.
has promised to Men, to Live, to Converse Rev. 20. 4. 21. 3.
and to reign among them, Visibly and Bodily upon Earth. This is a thing which
ravishes my Soul with Joy and Contentment. You need not be astonished that I
take no more Pleasure in earthly things, since these heavenly ones do take me
up entirely.

I heard all these things with Admiration, not knowing what to answer, but to
entreat her that she would explain herself a little more upon this Subject.

She said; Consider, Sir, God created Man to Prove. 8 21.
take his Delight with him. For this End he made him after his own Image and
Likeness, because there can be nothing more delightful than to rejoice Cant 4.
10.
with ones like. Therefore he made Man Wisd. 2. 23.
with a Divine and Immortal Soul, like to himself. He made him Good, Righteous
and Powerful, in nothing different from himself, but in this, that he must
depend upon God, as his Creator, whereas God has a Sovereign Independency,
without Origin or Beginning, and Man received Being at a certain Time,
produced by the Goodness and Power of God; whom he ought always to acknowledge
and obey. But instead of doing this, he slighted this Dependence, desiring to
stand by himself, and, as God, to know all things; Which destroyed and ruined
him; for no sooner did he conceive the Desire of knowing Good and Evil Genesis 3.
6.
, and of equalling himself unto God, eating the Apple which God had forbidden
him, for an outward Mark of his Ambition, but he presently perceived the Misery
into which he had reduced himself, finding himself stripped of all the Graces and
Prerogatives into which God had so freely placed him; and fell into Derision
with God, because of his Arrogance. Notwithstanding of this, God does not
change, and will never change his Designs Is. 4^. 10.
. He desires to take his Delight with Men: For he created them for no other
End. Therefore he will not destroy or annihilate them, as they merited; but
makes Wisd. 12. 2.
them only know the Fault which they had committed, in desiring to shake off
their Dependence upon him; and he gives them a certain time to do Penitence for
this Fault, to the end that this ( Penitence) being finished, he may receive
them again into his Favor, and give them the first Robe of Innocence, with the
same Goodness and Power wherein he created them, that throughout all Eternity
he might accomplish his first Designs, which are to take his Delight with Men.
This Time of Penitence is this short Life, wherein we breath at present, which
is the Exile into which we were banished from Paradise, which was the Presence
of God, that Adam enjoyed before his Sin, for he then communicated himself to
him as a Friend unto his Friend. This makes Paradise, there being no other
Place Psalm. 73. 2^* 26.
that can make it but this Presence of God; this alone is the Paradise of
Delights* For though indeed Adam had remained in the earthly Paradise, in which
he was, he had continued as miserable as on the Earth which we possess at
present, after having quit the Conversation of God* through his own Fault,
because nothing can be Paradise but this Divine Canversation. And if Adam had
remained in this Earthly Paradise after his Sin, he had been even much more
miserable than we are in this strange Land: Because he might have eaten of the
Tree of Life Genesis 3. 22.
that he should not die, and consequently have continued always miserable
without ever finishing his Penance, which the goodness of God foreseeing, he
banished him out of it, that his Penance might be only temporal and passing. In
this he has shown us great Mercy: For as soon as we shall have finished this
short Penance which he has enjoined us Rev. 21. 7.
we shall return into the same Conversation with God that Adam had before his
Sin, and even more familiar, since God is become Man-like to us; and then our
Souls only were like to him. It is a more perfect and accomplished Conversation
of Body and Soul than that of the Soul only. But because God will give in the
End an accomplishment to all things, in an altogether perfect Sense, he would
have taken Human Flesh, that he might converse with us perfectly, even though
Adam had never sinned; and though there had not been any need of redeeming us by
his Death. God is not become Man, to suffer or to die, but to converse with us
and reign in us visibly and sensibly upon Earth* Ps. 95, and 96* and 9^. Rev.
5. 10. Rev. 21. 1.
which will be made the Paradise of the Delights of God with Men.

I asked her; If it was not needful that God should become Man, to redeem us,
since we were all lost by Sin?

She said: No, Sir, God is not subject to any thing Acts 17. 24.
and has no necessity. He had no need to become Man, to redeem us. He might
with a Word have rendered us the first Grace; seeing that with the same Word he
had created the whole World. He could have created a thousand Adams, and a
thousand earthly Paradises with the same Perfection in which he had created the
first of nothing, whom he might justly have let perish eternally, instead of
becoming Man to redeem them: But he could not take his Delight with Men,
perfectly, unless he made himself Man, like to them. If Man had been like to
God, and (y) Joh. 1. 2.
not God like to Man, there would have been some Defect in these Delights, at
least on Man's part, who would not have had perfect Delight without seeing his
God like unto him; as a Lover takes Pleasure to wear the Colors which his
Mistress wears. This testifies reciprocal Affection, when one renders himself
as like as may be to that which he loves. This Fountain of all Love could do
what he would. It was needful, therefore, that he should become Man, even though
Man had not fallen into Sin; to the end he might live with him in perfect
Resemblance unto all Eternity, in all sort of Delights; which Happiness is
suspended unto Man, until that he have accomplished his Penitence, to which he
is subjected by his Sin: Which being finished, he will enter again into
Communion with God, as if he had never offended him. He will speak with God, 1
Cor. 13 12.
Face to Face, by his Humanity, which will be rendered immortal Job 19. 25, 26,
27.
as well as that of Jesus Christ, that they may delight themselves perfectly
together upon Earth, which will then be rendered Paradise, by the lovely
Presence of God, who for these Ends became Man; not that he might suffer or
die; which he would needs do by accident for the Instruction of Men and their
Relief.

I said unto her; That this had never been understood after this manner, and
that many Fathers had called the fall of Adam happy, which had caused the
Incarnation of the Son of God, without which Fall God would not have become Man.

She said: Sir, This is very ill understood. The Fault of Adam ought rather to
be called very unhappy, which has caused the Sufferings and the Death of Jesus
Christ, who would assuredly have become Man, not suffering, but reigning; not
despised, but honored by every one; not poor and vile, but in Riches and in
Glory; not in Reproach, but adored by all Men living; He would have become Man,
to reign, not to suffer, for if the designed End of his Incarnation had been
Suffering and Death, the Fathers of the Ancient Law would not have had Ground
to have so much desired and aspired after that happy Day, that they might see
with their Eyes God made Man, who should deliver them from their Captivity.
Could they Desire their Deliverance at so dear a Price as the Passion and the
Death of Jesus Christ? They would have had a pure Self-love in regarding only
their own Deliverance, and not the Glory of God, which could not be met with in
the Reproaches, Affronts, Pains and Death of Jesus Christ, which are all things
repugnant to his Glory, who could not be honored by being hanged between two
Malefactors. So many Holy Prophets, who have foretold the Coming of Jesus in
the Flesh, did not speak of his Coming to suffer, but of his Coming in Glory.
When David Psalm. 9^* 9^, 97. 148, 149, 50.
invites all Creatures to praise the Lord, he does not speak but of the Time
that he must reign upon Earth: For he says; Heavens, Waters, Earth, and all
Creatures bless the Lord. Nothing of all this has blessed him in his first Coming
in the City of Bethlehem: For even Men themselves did then reject and pursue
him to put him to Death: As King Herod searched for him, a little after his
Nativity. If the Angels did sing then Iuke 2. 14.
Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth Peace, to Men of Good Will: This
could not be but by a Prophetic Spirit, in regarding his Glorious Coming,
which will glorify God, and will give universal Peace to all Men of Good Will,
who shall then be upon Earth; seeing that at his Birth, as since, Men of Good
Will have never been in Peace, but pursued and persecuted; yea, even Jesus
Christ himself. And how should God have been glorified by this Birth, seeing
that he has been the more blasphemed by Men.

I entreated her to tell me, for what Reason Jesus Christ became a Suffering
Man, since he could have redeemed us without Suffering or becoming Man, before
the Time of his glorious Coming.

She said: The Joh. 3. 1^.
LOVE, Sir, which God bears unto Man, made him take Human Flesh before his
Coming in Glory, he perceived that Men would stray always more from him, and
altogether forget their Duty, so that almost no Body would any longer
acknowledge God. Atheism was almost through all the World. Even his own People,
which were the Jews, had made his Law void by their Traditions. Every one
followed Luke 11. 52.
the Learned, and were lost through Ignorance. To remedy which, God became Man,
that he might come and teach them, and redress their Faults by Deeds more than
by Words. For these Ends, therefore, he takes a Human Body, like to us, to the
End he might walk first in the Life, which he would point out unto us; and
perceiving that Men were undone by the Wealth and Honors of the World, he
takes a poor Mother, who was so despised and abandoned, that she was obliged to
bring him forth in a Stable, with all the Inconvenience that Poverty brings
along with it. And to make appear to Men that Prosperities, the Friendships and
Caresses of Men did serve for Hindrances of Conversation with God, he leaves
his Country to go into Egypt, out of all Acquaintance, being obliged to this
by the Pursuits and Persecutions of Herod. He Matthew. 6. 3.
labors for gaining his Bread, that Men might willingly labor for
accomplishing their Penitence. At length he begins to teach by Word, and to
show to Men wherein they were wanting, that they might attain to Salvation. He
explains to them wherein the Law of God consists, and gives them the
Evangelical Counsels for observing it aright. He is despised and rejected by
the Great Men of this World. He is also Reproached, Buffeted, held for a Wicked
One: To show that the Praises of Men are not to be sought for, but their
Reproaches rather to be endured for the Love of God. At last he is put to Death
for the Truth, enduring all with Patience: To teach us to suffer patiently,
even to Death. And all that he has endured has been 1 Pet. 2. 21.
to give us an Example.

I asked her; In case Men had not come to so great Extremity of Evil, whether
she believed that Jesus Christ would have come so soon to take Human Flesh?

She Replied: No, Sir, he would not have come till the end of the World to
judge and condemn Men, in abolishing Evil: He would have come in the glory of
all his Majesty, with all his Angels; not in Contempt and Sufferings: He would
have come to Reign, not to undergo an infamous Death. If you read attentively
the Prophets, Sir, you will find that they speak far more of this coming in
Glory, than of that in Reproach: For the coming of Jesus Christ in Glory, is as
it were THE SUM OF THE DESIGNS WHICH GOD HAS OVER MEN: And the coming in
Reproach, is as it were the Accident of the said Designs. Therefore there will
be much more spoken of through all the Holy Scriptures. Read Sir, attentively
all the said Scriptures from the creation of the World, you will find that they
all will aim at this Kingdom of Jesus Christ on Earth with Men, for this is the
end of their Creation. God can never reign fully in Men until the time of this
coming in Glory; because that they living yet in the liberty of doing evil, do
not yet give full possession to God to reign in their Souls; for very often, or
at least by accident, Sins do rule there: Which we have seen in the greatest
Saints of the World. A David, a Solomon, all the Apostles and Disciples of
Jesus Christ, yea, all those who have since been esteemed Saints, have all in
general fallen into Trespasses, and have strayed from God for some time: By
which he could not find in them his perfect reign, as he will do after his
glorious Coming: For then all will be 1 Cor. 15. 28.
Deify'd, Bodies as well as Souls: And there will be an end of all Evil. God
will then have his full dominion over all Flesh; which has never been: For the
most part of Men in all times have Blasphemed and Despised him, tho all were
created by him to love him and to adore him. They have yielded their honor and
love to the Creatures instead of the Creator. Is it not fit, Sir, that these
things be one day repaired, and that God be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth,
by his Creatures? Mal. 1. 16.


I said to her, That assuredly God would after that manner be adored in Heaven;
but that I could not comprehend how he could be so here upon Earth.

She said: I perceive, Sir, that you take for Heaven and Paradise, some precise
place, or some particular part which ferves for a Residence to God: And for my
part I cannot believe that there is any thing capable of containing God, for he
is greater than all things, and cannot be contained by any thing less than
himself. The Heaven is but his Creature, which we say is on high, and God has
neither high nor low, for he contains all. Heaven and Paradise is always in
him, for there can be no other but his Presence; and he who is in his Presence
is in Heaven and Paradise. For my part, I know no other. They tell us many
imaginary things of God and of Paradise, which have very little relation to
what they are. It seems God is like an earthly King, who is lodged in some
Palace of Wood or Stone: These are all Speculations of Men, as earthly, as
their Affections: For God cannot have any fixed place for his Residence, seeing
he comprehends all things. When I say that God will be upon Earth reigning with
Men, the Earth will then be Paradise; for in all Places where he is, there is
always Paradise. If God were in Hell, Hell would then be Paradise, there being
no other but the presence of God. That makes in all places where it is, Heaven
and Paradise. When this presence is in our Soul, our Soul is Heaven. How, can
you not comprehend, Sir, that God could be truly adored in Spirit and in Truth,
upon Earth, seeing he has so often promised Jer. 32. 40.
to make an Alliance with Men? Must not this Alliance be made upon Earth? God
being a pure Spirit, has no need of any Station; but Man having a Body, has
need of some Place to contain him. The Earth was created Isa. 45. 18.
for this necessity, that it might contain the Bodies of Men. Why then should
not God come upon Earth to dwell with them, seeing they cannot go where God is,
in that purity of Spirit? Of necessity he must either come upon Earth, or
indeed they could not be entirely united together.

I asked her: When Jesus Christ shall come to reign upon Earth, and to Allie
himself with Men?

She said: Isa. 45. 18.
As sooon as the Plagues shall have rooted out all the Wicked, or the greatest
part of them; then He will appear in the Clouds, and all the World shall see
him. You may indeed live till then, Sir, if God please. For my part, I hope to
see him and to reign with him Eternally. In this all my hopes and my joy do
consist: For this Life is too miserable to take any contentment in it, without
the hope of this time to come. I say, it will be very shortly, for I see the
Measure full, and Men's sins are come to the height: They cannot be more
numerous: And if there were not some small Veil of Human respect, they would
Murder, Rob, commit Adultery, and do all sorts of Abomination publicly, as
well as they do them before God. But Pride keeps these things yet concealed,
that they may not be despised by Men: And as for what passes only before God,
or a few Persons, they (n) Mat. 24 30.
make no more reckoning of it. It seems all is lawful, provided it be not
discovered. What greater Evil can be expected? Mat. 24. 1^.
The abomination of Desolation is in the Sanctuary. Tho Christians be the
People of God, they have denied his Faith, and have abandoned it to become
Idolaters of one another. Every one has his proper Idol; one worships his own
Body, another his own Spirit, another his Learning, another his Riches, another
his Honors, another his Children, or other Creatures: In short, none adore God
but Is. 29. 13.
with their Lips. Is it a wonder that the Judgment is near, when we see that
all Men have abandoned their God? Is it not time that he likewise abandon them?
which he cannot do; but according as Man withdraws himself from God, by the
same consequence God is withdrawn from Man; for two things cannot stay together
when the one withdraws it self; the one withdrawing, makes a separation as if
they both withdrew: So that God is as much removed from Man, as Man has removed
himself from him. And having thus abandoned God, what can we expect but
universal Plagues, which our universal Evils have drawn down upon our guilty
Heads? Which Plagues having purged our Mat. 3. 12.
Crimes, and burnt the Tares, the good Grain will then be gathered into the
Granary of God, which is the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

I asked her: Whether this Kingdom of Jesus Christ shall remain upon Earth for
ever.

She says; yes, Sir, It will be Eternal, Ps. 72. 17. Dan. 2. 44.
and never end. If you believe in Life Eternal, which is an Article of our
Creed, you believe in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ upon Earth. I have also told
you, that there is no other Paradise but the Presence of God: And whereas Jesus
Christ is God, as my word is me, his Body must have some Station, as also all
the other Bodies of the blessed God, being a pure Spirit, has no need of any
Station, nor yet our Soul, which is also a Spirit. A Spirit is through all, and
comprehends what is at a distance, as well as that which is near: As our
Thoughts have no need of a way to go to Jerusalem: They go thither in the
twinkling of an eye, for they do not stay in any place. Even so God has no need
of Heaven, nor of Earth to stay in, being a pure Spirit; nor yet our Souls,
which are in Paradise when they are united unto God: But our Body has need of
Heaven and Earth, and of all the other things which God has created for it;
because it is material, it must also stay upon material things, suitable unto
its nature. Therefore God has created all this World, with all that is in it,
that Man may have his full delights as well in his Body as in his Soul: For God
makes nothing imperfect; but all his Works shall have their complete
Perfections: And resolving to create Man a kind of Creature Spiritual and
Bodily both together, he gives himself to him for to satisfy his Soul, which
is a Spirit; he will give him likewise all created things to satisfy his Body:
So that the Soul shall take its delights with God, and the Body its delights
with Heaven and Earth, and all the other Creatures: For God has created them
for those ends, and for no other thing, that Man might have his full perfect
contentment of Body and Mind in that Life Eternal, wherein Jesus Christ will
reign always in Body and Soul with the Bodies and Souls of the Blessed, who
shall be united in Spirit unto God, and in Body unto the Body of Jesus Christ.
Behold the alliance which God promised unto Abraham, which he did not see See
Heb. ii. 13.
but very far of, and we see it now very near. Do you not think, Sir, that this
Kingdom of Jesus Christ must be upon Earth, seeing that he has taken a Human
Body like unto ours? A spiritual thing cannot support but that which is
spiritual: But a material must have a stay agreeable to its Nature, which is
also material. Who can or would change that Excellent Order which God has
established in all his Works so just and so perfect, which alone are worthy of
Admiration as the Author is of Adoration? Can you yet doubt, Sir, that Jesus
Christ shall reign upon Earth, seeing it is a just and necessary thing? Would
you believe that God should create all this beautiful World only for this
miserable Life of Penitence; and that at the end of it he should abolish this
great Work of his Hands, or that he should consume by Fire the whole Universe?
This would not be a just thing that he had made all these things only for our
Miseries. This would be as much as to say, that God had had little Wisdom.

I was ravished out of my self, to hear things so unheard of, so admirable and
so charming: And that I might understand a little more, I asked her, if the
Earth and the World would abide for ever?

She said: Yes, Sir, the Eccl. 1. 4. Baruch 3. 32.
Earth, and all the rest that God has created will abide for ever in the State
in which he established them at their Creation; For the whole works of God Ps.
138. 8. Eccl. 16. 31.
are all Everlasting. Therefore he has created all things with Seeds for to
spring and to engender Eternally. All which Generations must be made for the
delight of Man, without Pain or Labor. All things would have brought forth
their Kind according to their Species in a good and delightful manner. ( x) The
Sun would have given his light and heat in measure, without any Excess; the Air
without Storms; the Sea without Tempests: The Fire could not have burned us,
nor the Water drowned us, nor the Earth brought forth Thorns, nor the Beasts
bitten and poisoned us; but all sort of things would have served us for Delight
and Recreation. So many little Beasts which are upon the Earth, and in the Air,
which se^ems useless to us, were created to the end that even the least of our
Senses might be Recreated. Even the diversity of Flies, and many other sorts of
Animals, Herbs, Trees and Flowers; all these were created not only for the
necessities of Men, but also for their Delights. Which things had nothing but
Goodness and Perfection, without Sharpness, Prickings, or Bitings. How much
more ought Man to be Good and Perfect, seeing all these other things which were
subjected to him, had so much Goodness and Perfection! You might ask me, from
whence it comes that all these Creatures are become Evil, seeing they were
created so good and perfect? I will answer you, That Romans 8. 20. Prove. 8. 31.
the sin of Man has caused all these Disorders, and with Justice. For all the
Creatures of God ought to rise up against Man, and take vengeance of his
Ingratitude, according to their power, because he had merited that all that was
given him for Joy, should serve him for Grief: Seeing he who ought to have
served for a delight ( z) unto his God, turns away from him to offend him; his
Justice would require that all the Creatures should do the same toward him,
since he had done it toward his God, who had infinitely benefitted him more
than any other Creatures, which might well offend Man, and become his Enemy,
when he was become the Enemy of God; who tho he could not render his Creatures
Evil, because he is the source of all Goodness, from whence nothing that is
evil can ever proceed; yet he might well permit, that his Justice should be
exercised by those inferior Creatures, when Man had so justly deserved it.

I asked her, If all those Creatures, Animate and Inanimate would have an
eternal Being?

She said: Yes, Sir: nothing will perish of all that God hasmade: But the evil
that is in all these Creatures Romans 8. 20.
shall be taken away, because it does not come from him; and all that comes
from Men shall Perish. For Example, That the Sun burns us and dazles the eyes
which look upon him: This comes from Man, who has distempered that excellent
Star by his Sin: That the Air is stormy; that the Water is troubled; That the
Earth brings forth Genesis 3. 17, 18.
Thorns and Thistles: This is for no other reason but to take Vengeance of the
Disobedience which Man has committed against God. The Dog bites; The Wolf
devours; the Serpent Poisons; and all those other Evils which the Beasts do to
Man, this is for no other reason, but to render him the Punishment that he has
merited by his Sin. If the Fire burn him; if the Air infect him; if the Water
suffocate him, this is but for a just Punishment. If the Earth does not bring
forth its Fruits without Labor, this is but for a Penance of Man's Sin. In
short, all the Creatures whatsoever, even to a Flea, are obliged to hurt Man,
because of the Disobedience that he has committed against their Creator; and
this by Right and Justice. But as soon as his Penitence shall be accomplished,
and he shall obtain the absolute pardon of his Sin, all shall be re-established
in their first Estate, and shall not fall away any more, for the glorious
presence of Jesus Christ will confirm them in Grace, maintaining them in
eternal Peace, all the Creatures with men; and they shall do then what they
should have done from the beginning of the Creation, Man's Rebellion against
God ceasing. Is. 65. 18, -- 25.
This will then be a continual (c) Rev. 20. 1, -- 5.
and eternal delight for all things; God will do the will of Man, who shall
love him; and Man will do the will of God, upon whom he shall depend. All the
Creatures will do the will of Man, who shall command them. In short, God, Man,
and all the Creatures will have but one and the same will, without any
Rebellion. Will not this then be a Paradise of all the universal World? They
have sometimes told us extravagant Stories of Paradise; but this was but to
make us understand that it should be filled with all sort of Contentments; as
they say to Children, that there they shall eat Sugar with Spoons, because
Children have their delight in it: But nothing of all that is told us of it can
be true, except what God has revealed of it at present, because the time
approaches, and will not be long in coming.

I asked her: If Men will be confirmed in Grace, without being able to sin or
fall any more, as they have done once in Adam?

She said: Men, Sir, will not remain without Sin, by constraint or necessity,
because God would have them in a Free State Ps. 110. 3.
, that the love he bears them might be perfect; but they Is. 4. 2, 3. and 33.
24.
canuot fall nor sin any longer, for they will be eternally united unto Jesus
Christ, beholding God in Spirit, and that glorious Body in Flesh, who will
Govern them, and take his continual Delight with them; which will hinder them
from thinking of sinning, or falling. It is true, Adam did converse sometimes
with God, but in a manner that was not Humane; and had also Intervals: For if
he had always continued in Conversation with God, he could not have Fallen: But
in diverting himself from him to hearken to his Wife and the Serpent, he falls
into Disobedience, through the wandering of his Spirit. Now, in the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, there can be no Straying, he will be always Rev. 22 3, 4.
present with them; he will replenish them with Graces and Joys so abundant,
that nothing can any more divert them: No body will say any longer, Jer. 31. 34.
Know the Lord: For all shall Know him and Love him. The fault of Adam, and the
hard Penitence which it occasioned, will make them see abundantly what it is to
forsake God. Likewise they shall not be any longer subject to Concupicense; for
they shall all be satisfied in Body and Spirit, by the glorious Spiritual and
Bodily Presence of Jesus Christ, who having removed all their Sins, will
replenish them with the Holy Spirit in Fullness; so that they cannot have any
more inclinations to any Evil; so much the more, that it shall be removed from
the whole Earth; and that all that is evil shall perish.

I said to her: That all the Interpreters who speak of Judgment, say, That the
last Fire must consume all the World.

She said: Sir, These Interpreters could see no farther than their Sight
reached; but hold for certain all that I tell you. These are Divine Truths. Ps.
102. 26, 27.
The World will not be utterly Destroyed, but all Evil shall be Consumed. Zach.
13. 8, 9.
One part of wicked Men will die by the Sword; another part by the Pestilence
and Famine, and all those Beauties and Riches which have served as Fuel to
sin, will be all burnt and consumed by Fire, which will purge the whole Earth
by its heat: And as heretofore the World was once purged by the waters of an
universal Deluge, even so shall it be then by Fire. The World did not perish by
the Waters; but indeed all wicked Men, with all their Wickedness and the
Subjects of it. The same altogether will come to pass by Fire, which will burn
and purge all Iniquity, without sparing any thing: But nothing will perish of
the Works of God. The whole Globe of the Earth will remain. The Heavens and the
Elements will be shaken, but will not perish, no more than the Servants of God;
for whom he will reserve Is. 26. 20, 31. Is. 56. 4, 5. Rev. 12. 14.
some little corner of the Earth, to save them from Shipwreck, as he saved Noah
in the Ark. How greatly desirable is it to be of that Little Number!

I asked her, If these things would fall out at the day of Judgment, or rather
at the coming of Jesus Christ in his Glory?

She said: Sir, We speak of Judgment, as if it would be done in one day, or as
suddenly as an Enchantment. This will not be done as we think. The Judgment
Joh. 12. 31.
is already made, I believe I have told you heretofore. The irrevocable
Sentence is given; there needs no more but to put it in execution. The
Unrighteousness of Men has so opposed the Righteousness of God, that it cannot
be any longer without Chastisements, or otherwise he would not be Just. The
Sword of Justice must needs cut off all that it meets in opposition to it: And
at this time all oppose this Righteousness. Therefore all must be cut off. This
is the Sentence which shall not be revoked, because Men will not revoke Rev. 9.
20.
their Unrighteousness. This Sentence will be put in execution; not in one day,
as People imagine, but by little and little, to give time and leisure to Men to
be Converted, if they will seriously think on it. Wisd. 12. 9. 2 Pet. 9. 4.
Wars are the beginnings Luke 21.
of Sorrows: After that will follow the Pestilence and Famine; Earthquakes in
several places: Yea, even Fire it self Ps. 50. 3.
as the forerunner and giver of Advertisement. All this will prove worse until
the consummation of all Evil: As the waters of the Deluge always continued,
yea, increased until they had carried away all the People who then lived upon
the Earth; so shall it be of the last Plagues, which are already begun, and
will continue; yea, and will increase even to the end of the wicked World.

I begged She would yet tell me one thing upon this Head; Whether Jesus Christ
would come upon Earth before these Plagues, or in the time of them, or after
them?

She replied: He will not come before these Plagues, Sir, since they are
already begun; nor in the time of them, for that will be the remnant of the
Reign of Antichrist, whom Jesus Christ will overthrow by the breath of his
Mouth: Is. ii. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
His coming will be the end of that incarnate Devil, who Rev. 19. 20.
will be confined for all Eternity into Hell, as he shall deserve; but the
Plagues will go before Mat. 24. 6, 7.
the coming of Jesus Christ, by which the Servants of God shall be tried 1 Pet.
4. 17. 18. 19. 22
as Gold in the Furnace. They must drink the Cup of Penitence, before they
enter into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. This is what he enquired of the two
Sons of Zebedee, Mat. 2. 20.
if they were able to drink this Cup; that is, to suffer Tribulations, that
they might enter into his Kingdom: For they will be so great, Mat. 24. 21.
that the like has never been since the Creation of the World. The Plagues are
as the Forerunner of Jesus Christ, who Preached Penitence, and said in Figuring
these last Times Mark 14 Acts 13. 24.
I Baptize with Water; but there comes one after me who shall Baptize with the
Spirit. The Water represents Penitence, which must prepare us to receive the
Holy Spirit, which Jesus Christ will bring upon the Earth, to Baptize in Spirit
all those who shall be washed with the water of Penitence. Jesus Christ
therefore will come upon Earth in Glory toward the end of the Plagues, and at
the end of the reign of Antichrist; and he will judge the Quick and the Dead,
that is, the Good and the Bad, who shall then remain upon the Earth, and Mat.
25. 32,-41.
will draw the Wicked apart, saying unto them, Go, ye Cursed, depart from me
into everlasting Fire. And to the Good he will say, Cow, blessed of my Father,
Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the World. In
sending the Wicked away from him, he sends them into Hell: For Hell is the
privation of the Presence of God, as Paradise is the enjoyment of that
Presence. So that to give Paradise unto the Good, he does not send them into
Heaven, or some particular place, but only says, Come unto me, and you shall
Inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. By which he shows, that this Kingdom is his
Presence.

I entreated her to tell me, how Souls shall Perish, since she had said
heretofore, that never any of the Works of God shall perish. Now, Souls are the
Works that he has made, those of the Wicked as well as those of the Good; for
Body and Soul are his Workmanship.

She said: Sir, The Souls of the Wicked shall not perish, but shall only be
deprived of all sort of Good, and shall live for ever in all sort of Evil. It
would be a far less evil unto them to Perish and be Annihilated; because
thereby their evils would be at an end: But because they are the works of God,
they will never end, but will have a miserable Eternity. Being banished from
the presence of God, they will 25. 46.
be sent into the Abyss of endless Miseries, as the Good will be preserved in
the Abyss of endless Happiness, by the presence of God, which comprehends all
Good: Therefore it cannot be found any where else; for All is in God. And
according as they are estranged from Happiness; they are plunged into Evil,
being no other thing but the privation of Good. Once contrary from it, is
always contrary from it. In like manner Hell is not Sir, what People imagine it
to be; there needs no material Fire to burn the Devils, nor the Souls of the
Wicked; for they are but Spirits, upon which Matter has no power, as being a
far less thing. The Hell of Devils and damned Souls, is no other thing but a
separation from God, who is all Good; and in the privation of him, consists All
Evil: For nothing can be Good but the privation of all Evil, and nothing can be
Evil but the privation of all Good; which the Devils and damned Souls do
possess, when once they have abandoned God, who alone contains all Good. Wicked
Souls who live yet upon Earth, have not altogether abandoned God; for they have
yet some hope in him, notwithstanding their Wickedness, and therefore they are
not as yet fallen into all sort of Evils; for they have not forsaken all Good:
But 4 Esdr. 9. 9.-12.
these Souls which have past the time of their Saving Penitence, are Desperate,
for they cannot any more approach to any Good, which consists all in God alone,
whom they have forsaken of their own will, and consequently are abandoned to
all sorts of Evil.

I said unto her, That I had read some Authors of good Note, who affirm, that
there is material Fire in the Hell of Devils and damned Souls.

She said: Sir, These Authors may indeed have had some Light, that there will
be material Fire in Hell., Is. 13, 21, 22. Rev. 19. 2.
as well as things hurtful to Man, even Naturally: But they have confounded one
Time with another, not knowing to discern the works of God, neither in regard
of the joy of Blessed Souls, nor of the pains of the Miserable; and therefore
they have committed great faults in desiring to know things before the time
that God would reveal them. There will therefore be truly, Sir, material Fire
in the Hell of the Devils and the Damned, and likewise Darkness, Poison,
Thunders and Lightnings; bitings of Beasts, tempests of Water; storms of Wind;
gnawings of Worms, prickings of Flies and Thorns; and all things that are
hurtful will be materially in Hell: Even so blindness of Eyes, deafness of
Ears, leprosy of Body, with all other sorts of Maladies and natural
Infirmities. But this will be only after the Judgment, when God shall take away
Is. ii. 4,-9.
all Malignity from the Earth, and from all the other Elements; when he shall
take away the Venom from Serpents, Scorpions, and other venomous Beasts; and
even Maladies Is. 33. 24.
and infirmities from the Bodies of Men and Beasts; yea, weaknesses and
imbecilities from Spirits 35. 3. 4. 40. 31. Rev. 21. 4.
All this shall be reduced unto some corner of the Earth, all in a Mass, that
these Malignities may act together upon the Bodies of the Damned; and that the
works of their hands may Is. 3. ii.
be rendered unto them; For God has never made any of all these evils; He
created all things Good. Men only by their Wickedness have given Malignity unto
all Created things, and therefore it ought to appertain to them, and to be
rendered them by right of Justice; which will come to pass at the Judgment, when
the Bodies of the Wicked shall rise also, that none of the works of God may
Perish, and shall be sent into that miserable Corner with all the Evils, which
shall be removed from the Blessed, and from the whole Earth; from Plants,
Beasts and all the Elements, that all these things may serve them only for
Delight and Pleasure, without being able to do any more evil, as they were in
the beginning of their Creation; and all the Malignities which they have
contracted by the Sins of Men, shall be rendered unto their Authors. The Fire of
Hell will not be like that which we see, because it is now a mixture of the
works of God, with the malignity of the works of Men, as all other things are.
God has given unto Fire a sweet and agreeable Light and Heat; and Sin has given
it blackness and to burn: These two evils shall be removed and confined to
Hell, that it may burn and blacken the Bodies of Men, who have thus spoiled the
works of God by their Rebellion. There will not be in Hell Elements, or Beasts,
or other things as God has made them, but only the malignity which every one of
all these Creatures has contracted by sins. For Example, the Venom will be
removed from Serpents and other creeping things, and will be reserved for Hell:
As also the fury from Lions and Bulls, that they may converse with the Blessed
with Meekness and Gentleness; and that nothing may be able any longer to give
them pain; that Fire may give heat and light without burning; that the Air may
surround them without being troubled; that the Water may refresh and recreate
them without being moved; that the Lions, Serpents and all other wild Beasts
may sport with Men for their Delight and Recreation, and that all things may
remain on the Earth to render the Body of Man happy, that with his Soul, it may
have a perfect eternal contentment; seeing that the Body has born with the Soul
the saving Penitence which God had ordained it: Whereas, on the contrary, the
Bodies of the Wicked have rebelled against this Penitence, and desiring to take
their Delights instead of Sufferings: To which the miserable Soul acquiescing,
they have justly merited to suffer jointly in Hell, which will likewise be
Material and upon Earth, that it may act upon Bodies as well as Souls; which
was not necessary before the Judgment, since that Devils and Damned Souls had
no need of a material Place for their being Tormented; for all the evil of
Souls consists in the privation of the Presence of God.

The Twenty seventh Conference.
That a care to withdraw from the Plagues is even a self Love; and than the
Conversation of our Souls with God suffices us in all Places.

I Said to her, That I saw evidently we drew near to the end of the World,
because God gave these Discoveries of many things, which never any body had
understood: That her Light was not Human: And I entreated her for the love of
God, to tell me where that little corner of the Earth might be which God would
reserve for his Servants, that I might save my self during the Plagues.

She said to me: Sir, be not curious to know where this material Place will be,
which God will reserve for his Friends. I my self durst not ask him, fearing to
seek my self or my own repose. We are yet in the time of Penitence. If we would
withdraw that we may not suffer, this would be but self-Love. We shall be every
where in security, when our Soul shall be united with God; and even tho our
Body should feel the Plagues, our Soul shall be comforted in the midst of
Sorrows; as S. Lawrence was in the midst of burning Coals, and so many other
holy Martyrs. Let us rather think of conversing always with God, than of
putting our Body in a place of Security, because it will be always secure in
conversing with God. If there be a danger which he would not have us suffer, he
will warn us of it always in time, as he did Noah, Lot and so many others of
Friends. He will not permit any thing to befall us, but that 1 Cor. 10. 13.
in which he would try or purge us. Do not so much desire to know the place
where you may retire, as to know the place where God resides, to converse with
him: For in this alone consists all our safety, both Bodily and Spiritual. You
might indeed withdraw bodily into some place of Security, where your Souls
notwithstanding would not be sure of being Saved. And if this were, it would be
but a poor Safety; for our Life is so miserable, that to lose it is more
desirable than to preserve it, were it not the fear of not having yet
accomplished the Penitence due for our Sins: Otherwise Death is pleasant, and
this Life grievous, were it not that it may have God to converse with. Without
this, there is nothing but Miseries.

I asked her, In what place I might find this continual Conversation with God,
that I might be every where in Security, and not fear Death?

She said: Sir, You must not go out of your self; for God is the Center of your
Soul. You must not seek him among the public Places of the City, as Cant. 3.
2, 3.
the Spouse in the Canticles did, who was beaten by the Soldiers: But reenter
into your self, and you will find him. He is no where more particularly than in
Ephesians. 3. 17.
the Souls of Men. These are his real 2 Cor. 6. 16.
living Temples, where Cant. 1. 7.
he rests at Noon, that is in his most clear Light. There entertain your Spirit
with him, and he will entertain himself with you. He is more desirous to hear
us than we are to speak to him; Cant. 2. 14.
neither going out nor in, nor any other affairs whatsover, can hinder this
inward Conversation: On the contrary, it perfects all things. So soon as our
Affections are taken off, from all other Objects, and set upon God alone, we
will find him every where, and he will never cease to give us his Graces, to
accomplish perfectly all our Enterprises, how little so ever they be; for his
Spirit was the true Wisdom, which is not ignorant of any thing; no more of
Temporal things than of Spiritual. This Spirit perfects all sort of things.
There is no place or condition be what it will, that can divert us from this
Conversation, when our Affections are carried toward it. Make a little
Experience of it, Sir, and you will find what I say to be true: You could not
any longer fear Death, in possessing the Author of Life: for whether we live or
die, we will be always in the Earthly Paradise; in which nevertheless we may
indeed sin, as Adam did, because there are yet in this miserable Life so many
things which may divert us from God, that without great violence we cannot
remain in this Spiritual Conversation: but if Nature must do so great violence
to it self at Death to separate from the Soul, why may it not do a less to
separate it self from that which hinders our union with God? It is in this that
Jesus Christ says, Mat. 5. 29, 30.
if your Eye, your Foot, or any other Members of your Body do offend you, cut
them off, pluck them out, and cast them from you; To show that we must force
our selves to part with all that may hinder this our Conversation with God,
even tho it were our own Eye, which we ought to pluck out if it hinder us.

The Twenty eighth Conference.
How we ought to Pray, and to understand the Lord's Prayer in its perfect
Sense? which regards the Dispositions and Graces that shall be bestowed on us
in the Glorious Kingdom of Jesus Christ, of which there are here Mavelous
things spoken.

I Asked her, How I ought to Pray, to the end I might attain to this continual
Communion?

She said to me: Sir, This Conversation is true Prayer, which consists in the
Joh. 4. 23.
elevation of ones Spirit unto God: And as long as we converse with God, we are
still in Prayer, whether we adore him for his Almighty Power, or bless him for
his Favors, or beg of him his Light, and that which is necessary for us. This
is to Pray always as long as our Spirit is elevated unto God. I know no other
method of Praying. If you ask of me words for Praying, I will tell you what
Jesus Christ told his Disciples when they entreated him that he would teach
them to Pray Luke ii. 1. 4. Mat. 6. 9.
as St. John did his Disciples? Say, Our Father, which art in Heaven; hallowed
be thy Name; and the rest of the Lord's Prayer; in which is comprehended all
that we can ever ask of God, for his Honor and our Salvation. In these words
are comprehended all the Adorations which we owe to God; all the Thanksgivings
which we can render him; and all that we may, or ought to ask of him, for our
selves, and for all others. This is the Prayer which Jesus Christ himself did
compose, and the only one which he taught his Disciples, of which we ought to
make more reckoning than of all the Prayers in the World. Many Persons give
themselves to diverse Vocal Prayers, composed by some Saints; or to a number of
Beads; saying, a great many Paters and Aves without reflection, so that if we
should enquire of these Petitioners, what they asked of God by so long Prayers,
it may be it would be hard for them to tell, because all passes in many words,
without much attention. Others who seem more Pious, and advanced in Virtue,
give themselves to some mental Prayers, and pass many hours in silence on a
design to pray to God: But at the upshot of all, there does not proceed any
fruits from all these Prayers, for we see them as imperfect at the end of
twenty Years of their Prayers, as the first day that they began them. Yea, very
often they break their Head, and crack their Brains by the force of multiplied
Conceptions; one Petition only of the Lord's Prayer well understood, is of more
worth than all these.

I said to her; That I did not well understand the Petitions of the Lord's
Prayer, entreating her, that she would explain them to me.

She said to me: Sir, you ask a thing which a long time ago I judged necessary
for all People: For I think no body does yet well understand that Prayer. But
we will need a little time to rest to declare it to you in particular. Let us
sit down here, and I will tell it you. First when we say, Our Father which art
in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name: We acknowledge, That God is our Father, that
it is he who has Created and Formed us. Who art in the Heavens: That is, higher
than all things. We use the word Heaven because we know nothing by our Humane
Understanding, which is higher than the Heavens; and when we would say that God
is above all things, we say, he is in the Heavens; to make our Sentiments in a
certain manner to be understood. And when we say, His Name be Hallowed, this is
to wish that all Creatures may adore and bless him, which has never yet come to
pass on Earth; where Men themselves do Blaspheme his Holy Name on all
occasions, by Word and Deed. God could not have formed this Petition for us, if
he were not one day to grant it to us: For he Joh. 16. 23, 24.
could not make us ask a thing which he would not give: And whereas all his
Works will be perfect, it cannot suffice that some particular Souls do hallow
his Name Ps. 148. 150.
: It must be in a perfect sense, that all Men in general, with all other
Creatures do hallow him, which will not be until Jesus Christ Reign in his
Glory upon Earth. Then ^s. 96 98.
all things will hallow the Name of God, but never before.

And when we say: Thy Kingdom come: This is no other thing but to Pray, that we
may arrive at that blessed Kingdom, wherein Jesus Christ shall reign over all
the Souls and Bodies of the Blessed, and over all Creatures: For we have never
had this Happiness that God should Reign entirely, even in our own Souls:
Having always given hindrances thereunto by our corrupt Nature, yea, even in
the Souls of the Apostles and other Saints Romans 7. 23.
, God has never completely reigned, having always there met with some
hindrances or rebellions of their own Will against his. He can never reign
perfectly in us, until he have rooted out all our Evils and Miseries that we
may Reign with him. Which we have never as yet done, though we have desired to be
wholly unto God, we have never reigned over all our Passions and Affections, so
as that we might reign fully with God: But we hope that after the Judgment,
this Kingdom of God will come unto us. This is the hope of our Prayers, Thy
Kingdom come.

And when we say, Thy will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven, We beg also
the same Kingdom: For in our present state we cannot obtain that the Will of
God, be fulfilled in us and in others as it is fulfilled in God, who is always
without any contradiction. No body can perceive his own Will to be so united
unto the Will of God, as that of the Blessed who are dead in the Lord: On the
contrary, many do directly resist his Will; and the most Perfect follow it at
some distance, and not as the Angels and the Blessed do in Heaven: For where
God is, all his Will is accomplished; and where he is not, all is there
contradicted. Therefore in this Life we never do the complete Will of God, as
we shall do it in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, where Earth and Heaven will be
the same thing: Then his Will shall be fulfilled in Earth as it is in Heaven;
which we must always pray for until we have obtained it, as also, That He give
us daily Bread.

That is, what we stand in need of daily for the Soul and for the Body. Now
likewise we cannot obtain these two things during this Life: For he who would
have bodily aliment, ought always to labor, and take pains, and be
sollicitous, both in Body and Mind to obtain his aliment; and when we receive
it, it is but in form of a reward, because of our Cares and Labors: For
otherwise we must dye for want, if we did not labor both in Body and Mind. So
that this daily Bread is not given us, but acquired by Cares and Labors: No
more than the Food of our Soul which is the Word of God, which ought daily to
maintain it. This is not given us daily; for we must be at great care to search
for it, yea, we know not where to find it. So many Glosses, so many
Explications of this word, that they would indeed make us swallow Poison for
Bread. We must indeed watch, and be at pains to find this true Food of our
Souls. But in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ the Word of God will be given us by
the mouth of Jesus Christ himself Rev. 7. 17.
which will nourish and fully satisfy our Soul: As likewise all things
necessary for the Entertainment of our Body, shall be given us without pains,
care or labors. The Fruits will grow so agreeable and substantial that it will
require no other pains to be sustained by them, but the delight of eating them.
Our Bodies will have no longer need to be covered or warmed; for all the
Elements will of themselves serve them with delight. All this will be daily
real gifts; for they will be all freely given us of God without our Care or
Labor: Whereas in this World we have nothing, but are as Workmen who receive
the Wages of their Labors. So that God cannot have made us ask the things
which are impossible for us to obtain in this World. Of necessity he must give
us another, in which we may obtain in Perfection the effect of our Perfections:
For as much as he never gives any thing imperfectly; neither will he have us to
put up unprofitable Requests, as the seven of the Lords Prayer would be: For
there is not one of them which can be perfectly given in this World.

For if God did not forgive us our Offenses but in the same manner that we
forgive those who have offended us, there would befall us no great Happiness in
Paradise, because those whose Offenses we forgive are not always in our
presence, on the contrary, we withdraw from them. Sometimes out of Aversion,
sometimes that we may have no more occasion of being offended by them. If God
pardon us after this manner, we would be of the Damned Souls: For the Hell of
our Soul is no other but the privation of the presence of God: And as we do not
give our Goods nor our Favors to those who have offended us, and we think we
do them enough of favor when we do not wish them Evil, nor rejoice in their
Misery; If God, after he has pardoned us our Sins, should give us no more of
his Goods and Graces than we give unto those who have offended us; what
Felicity could we hope for after the Pardon of our Sins, but to fall again yet
into greater Faults! For his Graces and Benefits are necessary for us every
moment to preserve us from Evil. And if he did not give us his Kingdom and his
Treasures, from whom could we expect for Happiness? For no other but he can
give it. By which it appears clearly, that we cannot ask for this World here,
That he forgive us our Offenses, as we forgive those who have Offended us,
because we would ask an Evil thing for our selves. It must needs be that we ask
these things for the time that we shall live with Jesus Christ in his Kingdom,
where being united unto his great Mercy, we shall pardon our Enemies so
perfectly, that we shall desire the same Happiness for them which we shall
receive from God, who will not only pardon us our Sins, but will deal with us
as if we had never offended him, giving us his Treasures and his Glory, which
will oblige us to do the same with those who shall have offended us: For it
would be unjust for us not to show to our Neighbor the same Mercy which we
receive from God. This we cannot do, nor comprehend, during this miserable
Life, where being removed from his perfect Mercy, we are as far from the
Commiseration of our Neighbor; and we can no ways beg of God that he deal with
us as we deal with our Brethren, without begging our ruin, seeing if he should
grant us this Request, he would confine us to Hell, which is the privation of
the Vision of God. From whence it appears 2 Pet. 3. 13. Is. 65. 17-24.
, That we look for another Heaven and another Earth, where God will grant us
all the Requests that he has made us to ask by this Prayer, seeing that not one
of them can be granted in this present World.

For if we examine also the Sixth, Lead us not into Temptation: We will find
that the more we Pray, the more we are Tempted: For the Holy Spirit says,
Eccles. 2. 2.
If you would serve God, prepare your Heart for Temptation. Could Jesus Christ
have made us to pray not to be led into it, while in the mean time he lets us
fall into it the more strongly? This would be unjust. He has taught us to ask
nothing, but what he will give us in a complete and perfect sense: But this
will be after that we shall have accomplished this short penitence, and shall
go to reign with him. Then there will no longer be any thing in us that will
lead us into Temptation, for we shall be fully satisfied with the presence of
God, not being able to love nor desire any other thing, nor to move but by the
motion of the Holy Spirit; who will deifie even our Bodies, which can no longer
be led into Temptation, as they will be always during this Life: For the Devil
Ephesians. 6. 12.
will never cease to make War against us, and more against the Good than the
Wicked, who are his own without trouble: But for the Good, he must win them by
the strength of Temptations. Therefore we must not hope to obtain in this Life
the Sixth Petition of this Prayer, Which is not to be led into Temptation; no
more than the seventh and last, wherein we pray that God May deliver us from
Evil: For we shall Romans 7. 24.
never be delivered from Evil: Seeing we are still more and more oppressed with
it; and the Just themselves are never without suffering of Evils which the
Wicked do them in abundance, Despising, Persecuting and pursuing them even to
Death. If these are never delivered from Evil, how much less can others be, who
are likewise charged with the Evils of the Soul besides those of the Body,
which are common to all? Could we always pray to be delivered from Evil,
without ever obtaining it? What vain Prayer would this be, to groan under the
burden of all sorts of Evils, in Body by so many kinds of Diseases; and in
Spirit by so many Infirmities, Weaknesses and Inconstances; and in Soul by so
many Sins and Imperfections; and with this to pray to be delivered from the
Evils which are unseparable from this Life! It must needs be that God would
have us to ask at present what we ought to obtain afterward.

And if this Kingdom of Heaven were nothing but spiritual or imaginary, as they
would sometimes make us believe, why would Jesus Christ have made us to ask so
many different things? If Paradise were not accompanied with the Earth, and
with all the Creatures which we see, and with our Body with all its Functions,
why must we pray to have our daily Bread, when there will be no need of Eating:
Why should we pray that the Name of God may be Hallowed, seeing all the Blessed
have always Hallowed it, and will never cease to do it, though we should not pray
for it? Must there not be in this a Sense which we have not as yet discovered,
and that this Hallowing of the Name of God ought to be underderstood, Is. 45.
22, 23.
that all the Men who are upon Earth may Hallow his Name; for it cannot be done
fully by Angels, by the Blessed, and by some particular Souls living upon
Earth? But this Name must be Hallowed generally by all Men in Body and in Soul.
Which will be when this Kingdom shall come, wherein the Will of God shall be
done upon Earth, as the Angels and the Blessed do it in Heaven; and wherein
shall be given us also our daily Bread, that is, every day in particular Graces
in abundance for our Souls; and all sort of delights to satisfy our Bodies;
wherein we shall pardon our Brethren their Sins, as we shall see that God has
pardoned us, in giving us besides Pardon Eternal Happiness; wherein there shall
be no Temptations of the Enemy, nor of our Nature, for it will not any longer
feel any vicious Inclinations; where in short there can never enter any Evil,
but all sort of Happiness, of Joy, and of Contentments, Perfect and Complete,
Incomprehensibly Delightful. This is what S. Paul saw, when he said, 1 Cor. 2.
9.
That they had never entered into the Mind of Man, the things which God had
prepared for his Elect. All the Holy Scriptures are full of this Kingdom which
is to come to us. This is the Feast signified by the Parable of Math. 22. 2.
the King, Who made a Marriage for his Son. This Son is Jesus Christ, who is
Allied with the Human Creature. His Nativity in Flesh was but the betrothing,
wherein he has indeed promised unto Man an Alliance, as he had done before to
Abraham, which will be accomplished and consummated only at the coming of Jesus
upon Earth in Glory, when he shall be perfectly United to Man, Body and Soul
with the Divinity all together. This is that also which is signified unto us by
the Parable Math. 25. 15.
Of the Master who went into a far Country, giving Talents to his Servants, to
every one according to his Ability, and at his return, he demanded of each of
them an account to give them their Wages. Jesus Christ having given his Graces
and Talents by his Gospel, has ascended unto his Father, which is the Long
Journey: But he will return in his Glory to demand an account of every one of
all the Graces received in this time, and to place his faithful Servants over
great things, and make them enter into the Joy of their Lord. This is also the
Parable Luke 14. 16.
Of the Master who made a Feast, and sent his Servants to call those that were
bidden, who all excused themselves: One had bought Oxen, another a Field,
another had taken a Wife. The Birth of Jesus Christ was the time when he came
to invite Men to the Feast which God would make that he might take his delight
with Men; and as soon as the day shall come, that all shall be ready upon Earth
for receiving the Son of Man in his Glory, those who were invited by his
Evangelical Doctrine, will excuse themselves. One will say, I have been a
Merchant, I must wait upon my Merchandise, I cannot attend it: Another will
say, I have been a Labourer, I must take care of my Labors, I cannot attend
it: Another will say, I have been Married, I must satisfy my Wife and Family,
I cannot attend it. And when Jesus Christ will swear that none of those who
were called shall taste of his Banquet: That is, that all they who have
received the Gospel, and have not obeyed it, shall never enter into his
Kingdom; For no State or Condition ought to hinder the observing of the Doctrine
of the Gospel: For Jesus Christ has not brought it from Heaven for the Monks or
Religious only, seeing there were none such then; but he has brought it for all
Christians in general, whom he has particularly invited to make this Alliance
with them. And they who would not observe this Holy Doctrine, shall never taste
the Delights of that Marriage Feast. All the other Parables speak of nothing
but this Kingdom of Jesus Christ upon Earth, when he compares this Kingdom of
Heaven to Math. 13. 31.
A Grain of Mustard, he signifies, that it will be only the Little and the
Humble who shall inherit this Kingdom; and when they shall be mortified upon
Earth, they will grow so strongly, that the Angels of Heaven shall come to rest
in their Branches. And when this Kingdom of Heaven is compared Math. 13. 44.
To a Treasure hid in the ground, that he, who has found it ought to sell All
that he has to buy this ground, that he may have this Treasure: That is, that
this Kingdom of Jesus Christ is hid from the Judgment of the Wise, being as it
were sunk in the ground till the time appointed, and then it shall be found by
the Simple, who labor in this Life to find the Kingdom of Heaven; and when
they shall discover it, they will sell all that they have, that they may follow
this Evangelical Life.

In short, Sir, time would fail me to relate to you in particular all the
Parables, with all the Passages of Holy Scripture, which treat of this Kingdom
of Jesus Christ upon Earth, because it treats of nothing so much as this, as
well in the Old as in the New Testament. Luke 1. 68.
The Song of Zaohary is that he saw by a Prophetical Spirit, the
Re-establishment of the People of God in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. The 1. 46.
Song of the Virgin Mary speaks of no other thing. For what ground would she
have had to rejoice in the Lord, since all his Life was a train of Sadness and
Sorrow? What ground would she have had to Sing his Magnificence, since she saw
him so Poor and Despised in the Stable of Bethlehem, and pursued to Death in
his Tender Infancy, as he was all the rest of his Life? What ground of
rejoicing to see him Imprisoned and Accused as a Malefactor? Luke 2. 35.
The Sword of Sorrow had always pierced her Heart, to see her Son, God and Man,
Beaten, Torn, and at last Hanged upon a Cross in her presence. It must needs be
that her Joy proceeded from a Prophetic Spirit, in seeing that one day he
would be upon Earth in Glory, wherein all Generations would call her Blessed,
which has never been done: For none Praise her but a small number of Christians
amidst so many Nations: And that sometimes in such a manner, that very often
instead of calling her Blessed, they offend her by those Idolatries which they
give to her Image; and Jesus Christ himself would not suffer that they should
call her Blessed Luke 11. 27, 28.
for having born him in her Womb, and suckled him with her Breasts. By which it
appears, that it is not in this Life, that all Generations call her Blessed;
that it must needs be that She saw in her Spirit that Kingdom of her Son in
Glory, wherein her Joy shall be accomplished, and her Spirit Shall rejoice in
God her Savior. It will be then that he shall Cast down the Mighty from their
Seats, and Exalt the Humble: Which as yet has never been done: For the Mighty
have greatly Exalted themselves since the coming of Jesus Christ; and the
Humble have been, as they are yet, despised and rejected. The Holy Virgin could
not lie in her Song called the Magnificat; but she spoke of the time to come,
which she saw as present in her Spirit: Which made her rejoice and utter all
the things which must come to pass in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, in which all
Generations will call her Blessed, and all Souls will Magnify this Glory;
where the Humble will be Exalted, and the Mighty Abased, and Humbled.

I was quite Transported beside my self to hear things so Admirable, which had
never been heard of; and I saw them so clearly in my Understanding, that I
could not but say within my self: It is so, these are clear Truths. I
nevertheless said to her, that many of these things are understood of the
Empyreal Heaven, which is the Divine Place where the Souls of the Blessed will
live Eternally with God, where the Body and the Soul shall have four Qualities,
Agility, Splendour, Impassibility, Subtility, which being like Spirits, will
have no longer need of any thing, but the presence of God.

She said: Sir, these are Speculations of Men, who not having the gift of
Understanding, would nevertheless conceive something of what they do not
understand. If these Bodies of the Blessed had need of nothing, wherefore
should God create so many beautiful Creatures to serve only for Man's Misery?
For Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, and so many other things not very necessary
for the maintenance of his Life, would then have been created only for his
Mischief, since they did not serve but for this Life, where the most part of
Men do Destroy and Damn themselves for Money. Wherefore then would God have
created so many fine Fruits and other things for the nourishment of Man, only
for so short a time of Penitence as this livfe? Would it have been worth the
pains to have made the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and all the Elements, that
they might remain for so small a time? Would God amuse himself for a little
profit? No, Sir, this will not go as People imagine; for all the Works of God
are eternal, and will never Perish; as I have told you heretofore, all things
will continue in their kinds eternally Ps. 119. 89, 90, 91.
to serve and rejoice the Body of Man made Blessed, after he shall have
finished his short Penitence. Gold and the other Metals will serve to build his
Houses, and the precious Stones to adorn them. They will not be Buildings made
by Men's hands, with the sweat of their Faces, but wrought by the power of God,
who has formed the Body, and will likewise form the abode of the same Body. And
when the Holy Spirit speaks of the heavenly Jerusalem Rev. 21. 22
, that its Gates shall be of precious Stones, and its Walls of Gold. This is
not only in a mystical and spiritual Sense, but also in a material Sense; as
all things must be perfect and accomplished in their time, Spiritually,
Corporeally, and Materially. For God cannot do any thing Imperfectly Deuteronomy. 32.
4. Mat. 26. 29.


I asked her, If they should eat and drink in the Kingdom of Heaven?

She said: Yes, Sir: Do you not see in the Gospel (a) that Jesus Christ says a
little before his Death, That he will eat no more of the fruit of the Vine,
until he shall drink it with his Disciples in the Kingdom of his Father. This
is applied to the Mystical sense, because they know no other thing: But it will
be also in a Material sense, that they shall drink delicious Wine with Jesus
Christ, besides the Mystical Wine of the admiration of his Glory, which will
inebriate Souls. They shall eat also at the Table of the Lord, where Jesus
Christ himself says, Luke 12. 37.
That he will come forth and serve us; And when he says* Luke 6. 21, 25.
Woe to you that are rich, that are full; for you shall be hungry: He adds,
Blesled are they that hunger and thirst; for they shall be satisfied. Read,
Sir, the Holy Scripture, you will find there in many places, that of necessity
it must be understood that we shall drink and eat Bodily in the Kingdom of
Heaven, with all sort of felicity, Bodily as well as Spiritual: For our 1 Cor.
6. 19.
Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, in which he will dwell eternally.
When the Children of Israel were brought out of Egypt, they eat and drank with
Delight: Their Deuteronomy. 29: 5, 6.
Clothes and Shoes did not wax old, and they increased with their Bodies; even
their Nails had no need of being cut: So particularly did God provide for their
Necessities. This nevertheless was but the Figure of eternal Life. If he
provided for them Clothes, Meat, and all things which were even delicious,
without their care or labor, tho they still offended him, how will he not
provide the delights of the Bodies of the Blessed, who will bless him always?

I ak'd her: If there would be likewise human Propagation in this Kingdom of
Heaven?

She said: Yes, Sir, there will be Is. 65. 23.
Propagation eternally, but altogether Holy; altogether pure and Deify'd. It
will be produced more leisurely than in this World, because God by his Mercy
has here abridged our days, to abridge our Penitence: But that Kingdom being of
eternal duration, will give time and leisure to Propagate stayedly, without
Pain or Sorrow, or concupiscible Appetite, but by pure union of Charity in God,
which will extend it self to the production of new Creatures, to the glory of
their Creator; which is very reasonable: For, since this World was created, few
Men have been brought forth who have glorified their God: On the contrary, in
all Times and Ages the Devil has derived his Glory from Men; for Genesis 3. 1,-6.
when there were yet but two Persons upon Earth, they yielded to the Devil, and
followed his Suggestions, in abandoning their God: And when the World was fully
replenished, Men gave themselves to yet greater Evils: For at 6. 7.
the time of the Deluge, eight Persons only of all that great Universe were
found obedient to the Word of God: And in time of the Children of Israel, when
they were brought out of Egypt, to go into the promised Land, Numb. 14. 30.
two Persons only did enter into it. In the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, Let
alone with his Family did fear God: And when God would have forgiven that
People, Genesis 18. 32.
providing that Abraham had found but ten in it, he would not have consumed
them. And when Jesus Christ himself came upon Earth, all was corrupted, having
Mat. 15. 6.
made void the Law of God by the Traditions of Men; as he reproached the Jews
with it, who were then his People. And now, Sir, since we have had the Doctrine
of the Gospel, what a small number Is. 53. 1.
of Persons do you see who have remained constant in it? And on the contrary,
how many wicked Christians are there besides the Turks, Jews, Heathens, and so
many other Sects, who are Enemies of God? Should it not be said that God had
created the Earth, and so many reasonable Creatures, only for the glory of the
Devil and his adherents, if he did not renew the Earth and make it bring forth
fruit for his glory? This would be an evil thing, which God can never do. And
that the Creation of Men may be good, of necessity there must be a time in
which they may glorify their God: And if there were no Generation in the
Kingdom of God, a very small number would bless him; even tho you should sum up
the Prophets, the Apostles, and other Saints, this could not suffice to give
glory to God, for the least favor that he had bestowed upon Men. It must needs
be that the Generation of the Blessed multiply eternally, as the Generation of
the Miserable does multiply temporally from the beginning of the World; or
otherwise God would not be just.

I said to her: That some Writers had spoken of this reign of Jesus Christ upon
Earth, but that the Roman Church had condemned it as Heresy.

She said: Sir, No body can have spoke truly of this Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
because it is Mat. 13. 44.
the hidden Treasure, which has not yet been discovered nor revealed to any.
They may well have said something of it according to the Speculation of Men:
But they could never understand it; for the time was notcome to discover it.
This is the Masterpiece of all the Works of God, and the accomplishment of all
the Holy Scripture. Whether the Roman Church approve it or disapprove it, that
makes nothing* Truth continues always Truth. Tho all the World should
disapprove it, it will never change. That which is true, cannot become a Lie,
by the approbation or reprobation of Men. There can be no Heresy in that which
the Holy Spirit has spoken by the Mourh of the holy Prophets, of Abraham,
David, Solomon, the Apostles, and Jesus Christ himself, who have all largely
spoken of this Kingdom of Jesus Christ upon Earth, as well by Prophecy as
Parables, and other ways, tho the full understanding of it has been reserved
for the last Times Dan. 12. 9. 12.
, in which we live at present. All the Revelation of St. John speaks of no
other thing. If they would have received any understanding of it, this could
not be but by application, and not in a perfect Sense: And they who said they
understood nothing of it, have been the most wise; because till this time none
has understood any thing of it. In short, Sir, the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, are
the Treasures of God, Which he has reserved unto Men; of which S. Paul has
said, That Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has entered into the Heart of
Man, what God has laid up for his Servants. It were also better to adore all
these Mysteries, than to dive into them out of Curiosity: For the great and the
wise of this World do understand nothing of them: They will be revealed unto
the little ones, for such is the will of God: For which Jesus Christ blesses
his Father, Mat. 11. 25, 26.
That he had hid these things from the great Men and the Wise, to reveal them
unto Babes.

I said to her, That I was very desirous to know when this Kingdom shall come,
and how it shall begin?

She said: Sir, I do not know the day Mat. 24. 36.
, but that this indeed will be as soon as the wickedness of Men shall be so
multiplied, that in Justice they will draw upon them his universal Plagues,
which will purge away all Iniquity. Then shall the Son of Man appear in his
Glory and Majesty Mat. 16. 27. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
to render unto every one according to his Works. In that day Zach. 13. 8, 9.
the remnant of all Nations shall appear before him, for the most part shall be
dead with distress and fears; and then he will judge them. And those who shall
be found dead unto his Grace, he will banish into eternal Fire: But those who
shall be found living in his Grace, shall be confirmed in it, to live in Body
and in Soul eternally with him; of whom shall begin the eternal Generation, as
it began in Adam and Eve, our first Parents. Then all malediction Rev. 22. 3.
shall be removod from the Earth, (q) 1 Cor. 2. 9.
and it shall be again blessed. All malignity shall be removed from the
Elements, and every Creature, especially Is. 65. 16, 17.
the Reasonable ones, who shall live without any Maladies or Infirmities,
either of the Body, or of Spirit and Soul: Too much heat Rev. 7. 16, 17.
or cold, shall not any more incommode them; no evils shall touch them: They
shall handle fire without being burnt, and Is. 11. 8.
Serpents without being Stinged: Our Passions shall be well regulated, there
being no longer Lusts there, neither of the Eyes, nor of the Flesh, nor of the
Spirit: No more Sorrows, Griefs or Groanings; no more of Love that heats; no
more of Desire that makes thirsty; no more Terror; no more Fear; no more
Forgetfulness; no more Sloth; no more Pusilanimity; no more Cares and
Anxieties: In short, no more of any thing that can hurt, shall be found upon
the Earth: But all things shall serve for the recreation of Men, who shall love
one another in a perfect unity in Christ Jesus, being not only reestablished
into the Estate of Innocence, wherein Adam was before his Sin, but with a
thousand times more Perfections. Man shall possess all things in the glorious
presence of Jesus Christ, Rev. 21. 4.
who will wipe away all Tears from his Servants, giving them Glories in time to
come for their Sufferings, by a straight Justice, each what they shall have
merited in this Valley of Tears, for he is the 21. 5.
Restorer of all things. Ought not Sir, all these things to be re-established?
How many Innocents are there here accused as Guilty? How many of these
Persecuted wrongfully? How many Injustices done to the Just? How many
sufferings do the Good endure? Does not all this Luke 18. 7. Rev. 5. 8.
cry to God for Vengeance ^ Must he not render it? and how could he render it
in a Spiritual Paradise, as they make us believe? The Body has here suffered
with the Soul: Is it not just that it should rejoice also with it? The Body of
Jesus Christ, which has received so many affronts and sufferings, should it not
be seen glorious in this World, as it has been seen suffering: What reparation
can be made of all material things in a spiritual Heaven? I wish for this
glorious Reign, that all the World may so and acknowledge the Justice of God,
which will (b) 35. 8, 9, 10.
(f) 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5, 6, 7.
leave nothing of all our good deeds without 2 Thessalonians. 5, 6, 7.
a recompense; no more than our evil deeds without a punishment, which every
one shall receive by the just balance of his Righteousness: To accomplish
which, we must in this World have reparation of all the wrongs which have been
done us, and the falsehood must be discovered; the Mask must be taken off from
all Men, that their deceits and their hypocrisies may be known: How they have
dealt fraudulently with the Innocent. All must Romans 6. 16. 4. Esd. 16. 65.
be discovered at the coming of Jesus Christ in Glory, and all things, even
material, which have served for our reproach, must serve for our glory: As to
S. Lawrence's his Grid-Iron, and to S. Andrew his Cross: And so of all the
other Martyrs, and chiefly the Instruments of the Passion of Jesus Christ,
which will shine in his glory like precious Stones, and that materially; for
otherwise there could not be had a perfect and complete reparation, if we
looked but for a spirtual Paradise, because we suffer here in Body and Spirit
both together. Luke 21. 26, 31.
This Kingdom approaches, Sir, for the Plagues are already begun.

I said unto her, That no body believed that the last Plagues were begun; nor
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ upon Earth.

She said: Sir, Rev. 21. 8.
The incredulous will go with Sorcerers: For he who has no belief of this
Kingdom, can never well suffer the Plagues which go before it. There is nothing
but (k) this hope alone that can give force to sustain those so great
Persecutions; that there never were any like unto them. It is therefore to be
feared, that these incredulous will perish with the Wicked: For if we do not
believe that we are fallen into the last times, and that the Plagues are begun,
we will assuredly be deceived by that pernicious one Antichrist, who reigns in
Persons in Authority. whom we take sometimes for Holy and Virtuous, and believe
that we do well to let our selves be guided and governed by them, if we lay
aside the doubt or belief that we are fallen into that dangerous time foretold
by Jesus Christ, wherein Evil is covered with Piety: And if we Luke 21. 9, 19.
do not believe that the Plagues which are begun are the beginnings of Sorrows,
with which God will purge the (l) Ps. 27. 13. 14.
Earth, we shall easily be brought to Murmour against him: Yea, we shall fall
it may be into Despair, in seeing the best Christians Persecuted by Persons who
seem worse than our selves; yea, Churches ruined, the Religious banished, and
all that they call a Church, overturned and oppressed in its source. All this
will give occasion to Blaspheme against God, in case we do not know the
wickedness of Men which had drawn down these Plagues upon our Heads. We will
commit a thousand sins of Murmurs against our Enemies, and also against the
disorders of those who ought to govern us: Setting our selves to seek Human
Succors, which will sometimes do us more harm than our Enemies, and thus we
should suffer miserably, as 1 Pet. 4. 15, 19.
do Thieves and Murderers: Whereas did we believe that we are fallen into the
last times, and that the Plagues are begun, we would return to God by
Penitence, taking all from his Hand, as well the Rod as the Bread: For all
these things must come to pass, and by Sufferings we must enter into his Glory,
Luke 21. 26.
as Jesus Christ has paved the way.

I said unto her, That I my self could hardly believe that the last plagues
were begun, and also that Jesus Christ would come to reign upon the Earth, were
it not that she gave me the view and understanding of these things.

She said: Sir, this proceeds partly from want of Application of Spirit, and
partly because the Devil has bewitched the Spirits of all Men, that they may
not discover the truth of their Happiness, nor of their Misery: For if this
were known, many Persons would get out of Darkness, and would follow the Light
of Truth: Whereas by that infatuation of Spirit, the Good perish with the
Wicked: And thus he gains all to himself. To give you a firm belief that Jesus
Christ will come to reign upon Earth, Sir, apply your mind seriously to the
reading of the Holy Scriptures: You shall find through all that they declare
this glorious coming, and all that Man shall receive thereby. This has been
figured from the beginning of the World, and by all that has past in it since;
all has been nothing but the Figures of this glorious Reign of Jesus Christ.
You have now a little prospect of this by what I have declared unto you. Search
into the matter, you will find the thing more true than all the other mysteries
of our Faith: There is no more obscurity in it, for the time is come for the
understanding of it. What the Fathers in past times have explained with so much
pains, and so imperfectly, will be easy to you, and in a perfect sense. No
body will be able to doubt or be ignorant of it, who will submit his Spirit
unto God with Humility of Heart. All that Jesus Christ and the Apostles have
said, has been fulfilled but in part: But you will find the accomplishment and
the perfect sense in this Luke 22. 16.
glorious Reign of Jesus Christ: By discovering assuredly that all which they
thought fit to declare cannot be understood of any other thing but of this
Reign. Remark all the Petitions of the Lord's Prayer, which I have elsewhere
explained to you. No body can imagine that all that we ask in that Prayer can
be obtained during this miserable Life, and it must needs be granted, that we
pray for another Life, which we do not yet know 1* Joh. 3. 2.
, and that this Life also must be material, as well as spiritual: For if it
were only divine, we would not ask for daily Bread, nor that the will of God
should be done there, or that his Name should be Hallowed: For all these things
are done always in the Empyreal Heaven, where no body has need of material
Bread, Spirits being filled with the presence of God: There is nothing there
likewise to be forgiven, for no body there offends his Brother: Temptations are
banished from thence, and Evils cannot enter there. The blessed Life that we
look for, must needs be material as well as spiritual, in which we shall have
need of all the things which we ask in the Lord's Prayer, since they cannot be
obtained in this present Life, and Jesus Christ could not have made us ask for
unprofitable things, or for those which he would not give. This could not be
done by a God who can do and know all things: For it would be altogether
unprofitable to ask what we cannot obtain here, and it would be a superfluous
thing to ask that of which we would have no need in the Empyreal Heaven, as
they imagine Paradise to be; all the other Doctrins of Jesus Christ, are also
like to the petitions of that Prayer: For when he says Math. 6. 33.
seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and the rest shall be given you, this also will
not come to pass in this Life: For the Servants themselves who seek the Kingdom
of Jesus have suffered many Necessities; and Lazarus at the the Rich Man's Feet
could not obtain a crum of Bread, though he did not cease to ask it. If the
Promise which Jesus Christ has made of giving the rest to those who shall seek
his Kingdom were to be understood of this present Life, none if the Friends of
God would stand in need of any thing, though they should not ask of any, it would
be needful that God accomplish what he has promised them. And if the Kingdom of
Heaven were only spiritual, as People do imagine, there would be no need of any
rest (or other things) after having obtained this Kingdom, which would suffice
fully. Do you not see, Sir, that this promise of Jesus Christ is to be
understood of his Kingdom upon Earth, where he will give besides his Glory, all
material things for the delights of our Body? Which he calls, The Rest; and
makes us understand, that we shall not need to seek and labor to have them,
but that he will give them freely as an excess of Blessedness. And when Jesus
Christ says, Mark 10. 29, 30.
He, who shall leave Father, Mother, Brethren, Sisters, Lands, or any other
thing for his Name, shall have a hundred fold in this World, neither can this
be understood of this present Life, for the Apostles, and so many other Saints,
who abandoned all to follow him, had not an hundred fold in Earth, Mother,
Brethren, Sisters, Houses or Lands, but on the contrary, had need of many
things after having abandoned them. Jesus Christ himself, after having
abandoned the delights of Heaven, says, That Luke 9. 58.
he had not in this Life a stone where to rest his Head. How then should his
Promises be true, that he would render a hundred fold in this Life? Jesus
Christ can he lie, and make all who have abandoned all for his sake, to be
afterward in want of things necessary? which would be very far from having the
hundred fold of them. We see the Wicked have ordinarily more Prosperity in
Earthly Goods, than the Just. Jesus Christ would be a deceiver, to falsify his
Promise which he has made unto all those who shall forsake all for his sake.
This cannot be thought: But he promised to those who shall have left Father,
Mother, or any other thing for his sake, that they shall possess Life Eternal,
which shall be in that World, when Jesus Christ shall come to dwell with his
Creatures; where he shall render the hundredfold of all the things which they
shall have forsaken for his sake for one Father they shall find an hundred;
because all those Blessed Ones shall have the Hearts of a Father and Mother
toward their Neighbor: All shall be Brethren and Sisters under the government
of one and the same Father: And the Earth being purged from all the Wicked,
shall suffice to give unto the Just an hundred times as much as they shall have
abandoned in this miserable Life. Lo, thus the Promises of Jesus Christ shall
be accomplished in a perfect sense in his Kingdom, which can in no wise be
accomplished in a perfect sense elsewhere; no more in the Empireal Heaven, as
is imagined, than in this time of Penitence. There would need years of time, to
relate unto you, Sir, all the passages of Holy Scripture which verify these
Truths; for when Gabriel says of Jesus Christ, Luke 1. 32.
that he shall be great, and be called the Son of the most High; he cannot
speak of his coming in the Stable of Bethlehem, for he was but a little Infant,
abandoned and neglected of Men; where his Grandeur did consist of Poverty and
Miseries: And when he began to be known and to speak in public, they call him
Mat. 13. 55.
the Son of the Carpenter and of Mary, amongst the common People: Which is very
far from being called Luke 1. 32.
the Son of the most High; and how should Luke 1. 69.
he lift up his Horn, seeing he was wrapped up in Swadling-cloths, and bound with
Swathing-bands: And it seems he had not strength to resist King Herod and the
Pharisees, who pursued him to death, before whom he fled, instead of resisting.
Do you not see, Sir, that nothing has in this World its perfect Sense?
Nevertheless, all that is spoken by the Holy Spirit, must be entirely
fulfilled: And if we hope that this accomplishment ought to come to pass in
this time of Penitence, we deceive our selves; for the more it shall continue,
the more will Men mistake the greatness of God, and the less will they call him
the Son of the Most High, and the less will he make his strength appear, that
he may give place to Man to use his Free Will. But as soon as the time of the
Reign of Jesus Christ shall come, he will exalt his Horn, to exercise his
Power, and condemn the Wicked; and he shall be known of all Men for the Son of
the Most High: For he will come in Majesty and Power to rule Zach. 14. 5. 9.
over all things: Whereas in the Empireal Ether there will be no need of
exalting his Horn, and showing his Power, seeing all submit to him by Love. It
is therefore of the day when he shall come to reign upon the Earth, that
Zacharias Luke 1. 68-79.
speaks by his Prophetical Spirit, when he saw the Glory of Jesus Christ upon
Earth: And when he himself says, John 12. 22,
If I be lifted up, I will draw all unto me, he does not speak but of this
Kingdom to come: For he has not drawn all unto him by his death upon the Cross,
because the most part of Men has since voluntarily yielded themselves unto the
Devil.

The Twenty ninth Conference.
Of the Marks to know that we are fallen into the last Times; and that the
World is Judged; to wit, That Men are without Righteousness, Truth and
Goodness, before God; and that the execution of the Plagues, makes it already
effectually to appear.

I said to her, That I understood sufficiently what she meant by this Reign of
Jesus Christ upon Earth; that I would apply my self to discover it more,
entreating her to tell me the Marks, whereby to know that we were in the last
times, and that the Judgments were at present begun.

She said: Sir, observe well the deportment of Men, and you will see clearly,
that it must needs be that they are Condemned, for therein you do not perceive
any Penitence, nor desire of amendment: On the contrary they grow every day
worse, and cannot so much as suffer that the truth of their faults should be
shown them, and reckon themselves more secure in evil-doing, than the Good have
ever been in well-doing: For the Saints themselves have feared God and dreaded
Death: Whereas, Men at present have lost the fear of God, and fear only Men;
and instead of dreading the passage of Death, they dread only the day in which
they must lose their Life, which they love more than God. Every one lies in a
desperate Estate, without knowing it, and far less fearing it. God has reason
to say of Christians now, Jer. 2. 13.
My People has forsaken me, because no body knows God any longer. Every one
lives as if there were no God, and yet they would have Prosperity and
Salvation; as if God were our Servant, obliged to serve us by force. We have
changed the Order that he gave us, of doing Penitence here, and we Is. 22. 12,
13.
would here take our pleasures and rest at ease; and instead of laboring and
suffering, we would rule and rejoice. God ordained that Genesis 3. 17.
the Earth bring forth Thorns and Thistles, and we would gather nothing from it
but Roses without Thorns. He said to the Woman 3. 16.
that she shall bring forth her fruit with Sorrow, and she will needs conceive
in Delight; in which she would also bring forth, if it were in her power. So
that no body acquiesces in the Ordinances of God but by force; and instead of
embracing the Penitence which he ordained us, we resist it with all our power;
for we seek nothing but ease and repose, in the time in which we ought to
labor, watch and be at pains. Thus we resist God and all the designs that he
has about us. This is the most assured Mark to discover that all Men have
forsaken God, and that no body fears nor knows him any longer. It is very true,
that in all times there have been wicked Persons, and such as did not know God:
But when all in general do forget him, it is to be believed, that we are
assuredly in the last times, and that the Judgment is given out, because the
Measure is full, and the Evil cannot be greater than generally it is, and
without hope of remedy.

I said to her, That to me it seemed there were yet many good Men mingled among
the People, that all had not forsaken God.

She said: Sir, there are many good Men in appearance, but none who are such
before God. They are good Men in respect of those who outwardly do more evil,
but I do not know if they do less evil inwardly in their Souls, because
presumption possesses them, and hypocrisy blinds (e) Has. 4. 1.
them. Luke 18. 10.
The Example of the Publican and the Pharisee, who prayed in the Temple, ought
to make us fear, that these outwardly good Men will be rather Condemned than
the ill-Livers outwardly, because they condemn themselves for Sinners, and
smite their Breasts with Humility; whereas the others rely upon their own
Righteousness, and become Impenitent. I do not see that either the one or the
other are good Men at present: For no Sinners smite their Breasts through
Penitence, far less do we see them change their Life, or forsake their Sins:
And the Righteous in appearance, do live and die in the presumption of their
Salvation, not desiring to change a manner of Life which they esteem to be
good; tho all have abandoned God to follow their Passions. If some follow them
in Wrath, or in Luxury or even in Robbery, they become the enemies of God: But
others who are of more mild Complexions, follow their Passions in Jealousy, or
in Self-love, or in the esteem of their own Virtues. Is not all this before God
reckoned the same evil? Is it not enough that we have forsaken him to cleave to
our selves, and are become Idolaters of our own Inclinations? Tho even they
were not Vicious before Men, yet they are sufficient to Destroy and Damn us,
because unless Ps. 7^. 27.
we be wholly resigned to God, we can never be Saved. Therefore if God should
say to me as he did to Abraham, Genesis 18. 32.
that he would pardon the World, provided there were yet Ten righteous Persons
in it, I would not hope for this of being able to deliver it from the Plagues,
or to revoke the Sentence by which the World in general is Condemned, because I
cannot find so much as one; which I must say with great regret.

I said to her, That I knew diverse of my Friends, who seemed to me to be truly
Just and Pious, fearing God.

She said: Sir, if you were in union with God, you would partake of his
Righteousness, of his Goodness, and of his Truth: And then you would perceive
well, that the Righteousness of Men now is not true; and that their goodness is
but Natural, and their Truths are Lies; because all the Virtues which you
believe, you see in them, are nothing but Moral Virtues, which do oppose those
of God. Their RIGHTEOUSNESS is only Human. They would not do wrong to any Body,
because Injustice and Cheating, is blamable in all Men of Honor; and he who
desires to preserve his Reputation, will beware of deceiving or cheating any
Body, and you will esteem such a Person Just, because he renders unto every one
what appertains to him. Believe me, Sir, this Righteousness is nothing but a
Moral Virtue, which is recompensed by the good Reputation they acquire among
Men. Mat. 6* 2, 5.
It must not at all be expected that God will recompense in the other World
what has been done for this. A Man gives satisfaction to every one, that he may
have the reputation of being a just Man, which being obtained, he is fully
satisfied. Even so is it of GOODNESS, wherein diverse Persons are Born, their
natural temper being inclined to sweetness, renders them lovely to every body:
This goodness makes them takea ll in good part: Even ^vil things they desire to
believe they are good: If the evil of one were told which might grieve them,
they would reject this Truth as evil, and would say, I will not believe ill of
my Neighbor: And even tho they knew the evil openly, they are too good to
resist it or oppose it. This is the disposition of the good Men of the World,
who love rather to be deceived with evil, than to believe it, that they may
avoid it. All this goodness is but natural, and is recompensed with the
contentment they have of being good: They even endure Injustice, without having
the force to resist it: And upon this, it will be said of such a Person that he
is patient and good: Not discerning that this Patience and Goodness proceeds
from an effeminacy of Heart, which makes them presume upon a false goodness and
patience, which is nothing but Human, Hypocritical and Deceitful. Even so is it
of Moral VERITY, which before God is Falsehood. One will say, I am your Servant;
and he will deny his Brother the least Service! One will say, I am a great
Sinner, while in the mean time he presumes that he is a good Man! for if he did
believe himself truly to be a Sinner, he would seek the means to be converted.
One will say, I am not worthy of drawing near to God, and he will receive every
day the Sacrament, and will say, that it is to receive Grace; which is nothing
but a Cloak to the former Lie: For Men experience sufficiently that they have
not received Grace by receiving it so often. One will say, I am for the Service
of God; and he is as careful to have Honors and Riches as Secular Persons! One
says, that he loves God, and he loves nothing but himself. One says, I am
retired from the World; nevertheless he has as much affection for it as before,
and studies to satisfy himself. In Short, Sir, there is nothing but Lies and
deceit among all Men, even those whom you esteem to be good Men, they have
nothing but apparent Virtues, which are very displeasing to God, and draw down
his avenging hand upon our criminal Heads: Because no body fears God any
longer, but by word; and they who fear their Damnation, persuade themselves,
that they fear God, while out of pure self-love they fear the evil due to their
Sins, that they may continue in them; and they place their Piety in outward
Devotions, with which they do more distract their Understanding from God, than
fix it upon him. And Is. 29. 13.
yet they believe they are Just and Pious, fearing God; tho in the mean time
they have neither the one nor the other of these Virtues. Thus you are deceived
with thousands of others who are in the good Opinion, that there are yet many
good Persons upon Earth.

I asked her: How we might know the true Righteousness nd Virtues of Men?

She said: Sir, no body can know it as to others, but they who possess it
themselves. Therefore I told you, that 1 Cor. 2. ii. -- 15.
union with God is needful for to know true Virtue. This union makes us partake
of the Virtues of God; so that he who is in God, partakes of his Righteousness,
of his Goodness, and of his Truth. The RIGHTEOUSNESS of God, is always just Ps.
119. 137.
doing justly to all, as well to our Enemies as to our Friends, not enduring
any Injustice no more in our selves than in others, neither in small matters
nor in great- Our Works are always accompanied with this Righteousness, and
also our Words, our Counsels, our Business, and even our good Works: Knowing
well that without this divine Righteousness, nothing can be good. And even as
God never does any thing without this Righteousness; So we do all things
righteously; so much as we draw near to God, we are as much Righteous, and no
more: and he who partakes of this divine Righteousness, discerns and knows very
easily the Righteousness and Unrighteousness of others: For if their
Righteousness be of God, it will always be conform to that which we partake of
the same God, and if it be not, it will directly oppose it. There are some who
would believe that one had the art of Divination, when he can discover false
things which appear true to the eyes of Men: But this does not proceed from any
Divination, but only from the Righteousness of God: When it refides in a Soul,
it perceives immediately that these apparent Righteousnesses do resist and are
contrary unto the Righteousness of God. For Example, a Judge will give good
Justice to a Party, because he is recommended to him by some of his Friends.
This is nothing but an Human Justice, because it has had respect to Men: For to
be Divine, it ought to have respect only to good Right; which is not observed
in the present time, wherein the Proverb says, He who has good Right, has need
of good Help. It is the same as to Piety and Devotion: If they go to Church, to
the Mass, and the frequenting of the Sacraments, out of natural custom or
inclination, or because it is good and laudable. This Righteousness is not of
God, because it respects our selves or Men. And if you partake of the GOODNESS
of God, Sir, you will do good to all Creatures indifferently, as he does,
without wishing good to your Friends, and hating your Enemies, or not helping
them in their need. But when our good deeds are partial, respecting our
Kindred, our Allies, our Friends, and Neighbors; then our goodness is nothing
but Human. This is easy to be observed by him who partakes of the goodness of
God, who loves nothing but that wihch is good and conformable to Righteousness
and Truth: Whereas Human goodness respects nothing but that which is sensible
to Nature, leaving sometimes Righteousness and Innocence without help, to
succor its Friends; yea, even to excuse or cover their Iniquities. These are
all goodnesses without Fruit, having received in this World the reward of such
good Works. For if we do good to our Friends, they will do the like to us; and
so we shall be paid, without having right to pretend any other recompense
therefore in Heaven. Jesus Christ has advertised us of this, Luke 14. 12, 13,
14.
saying, When you make Feasts, do not call the Rich, lest they bid you also,
and thereby you receive no reward. And if you partake of the TRUTH of God, Sir,
you will very easily discover Lying, because this strait Truth does always
oppose that which is contrary thereunto. There needs but to walk Strait to
overturn that which is Crooked. The Spirit of Truth, is incompatible with that
of Error. There needs but to speak the Truth simply, to reprove Lying. Many
Persons are troubled to understand the Truth, who if they were not in Lies,
could not be troubled at it, because it is always desirable and enlightens the
Understanding. Truth being God, ought to be loved and received by every one,
and as much as it is now out of credit, it is so much an evidence, that all
have abandoned God, in abandoning Truth, Righteousness and Goodness. There is
no other God but he Ephesians. 5. 9. Ps. 89. 15.
who is the source of these three Virtues, of which Men now have not retained
any footsteps, and at present those are esteemed Saints who have but human
Righteousness, natural Goodness, and political Truth, and yet they will not
believe that we are in the last Times, and that the World is Judged. What more
certain Marks can we have? Outward Signs are a very small matter in respect of
seeing that all Men have Abandoned their God. Draw near to God, Sir, and Ps.
36. 10.
you will discover it as well as I.

I said to her: That if it were needful to exercise the very same
Righteousness, Goodness and Truth, of which she spoke to me, that all the World
would Perish, and no body should be saved: For all Men are very far from it.

She said: It is true, Sir, all the Wicked will perish, among whom
notwithstanding there will be yet some saved: because they are so through
Ignorance: These indeed will yet receive the Light of Truth, with which they
will discover the Lies, which have been taught them: For many have entered into
the Spirit of Error, thinking they did well, and if they had been taught there
is no Salvation but for those who resign themselves wholly to God, and unite
their Wills to his, they would assuredly force themselves to find this Unity of
their Wills with God, and would have resigned themselves to him far more easily
than they have done, to follow so many different Exercises of Devotion. For one
has taken the Order of S. Francis, and goes barefooted, without wearing Linen
upon his Body: Another that of the Carthusians, never to eat Flesh, nor
converse in the World: Others rise in the Night to pray: Others wear Sackcloth,
and exercise Discipline, making long Prayers and singing Psalms, vowing
Obedience, Poverty and Chastity, with a great many other Things, painful to the
Body and to the Spirit: In which all the People desire to imitate them
according to their Condition: Some will fast sometimes a Week, will take
Directors to submit their Wills to them, will force themselves to say a great
many Chaplets, or other Prayers, and to be in Churches as much as is possible
for them, with a great many other things which are troublesome, and oft-times
of little profit for the Salvation of their Souls. But if they had been taught.
That to be saved they must resign themselves to God, they would more easily
have found this Resignation than all those things which are superfluous for
many, and would more easily have resigned their Wills to that of God, than to
some Man, subject to all sorts of Passions. Those, I say, having discovered the
Truth will be converted by the Plagues, and will endeavor to approach to the
Righteousness, Goodness and Truth of God; as much as they are now far from it,
through Ignorance. No Body must any longer be flattered, Sir. All those who shall
not have this Righteousness of which I have spoken to you, Matthew. 5. 20.
will not be saved: Neither you nor I, nor any Body, be who they will, can be
saved, but by God, therefore Jesus Christ has said, 19. 26.
That with Men it was impossible to be saved, but that it was possible with
God: To show that upon this Union with him our Salvation does depend: And that
all those means introduced by Men are a very small matter, for they can serve
only to some for means to attain to this Union, serving for others for great
Hindrances: For this Union requires a Recollection of Spirit, and not the
Diversion of it to so many different things.

I said to her: That no Body doubted that our Salvation depended upon God: That
no Body could save either himself or others: That this Passage of the Gospel
was so understood.

She said: Sir, you do not understand me well. Our Salvation does not depend
upon God, as you believe it, that he saves one and damns another without our
contributing thereunto. This is an Error which puts the Salvation of the most
pious in hazard. For God will damn no Body without Sin, and likewise he will
save no body unless they give themselves to him John 7. 37.
of their own Free Will. And what Jesus Christ said to his Apostles. It is
impossible as to Men to be saved, but that it is not impossible to God; is to
be understood, as long as a Man shall live to himself, it is impossible for him
to be saved: But if he come to unite himself to God, returning with the Heart
to him, he will save him. And when you say to me, That all the World will
perish if they must needs Exercise the very same Righteousness of which I
speak, because Men are very far from it; it is a certain Truth, that continuing
in the State in which they are, they will Luke 13. 3.
all perish: For living to themselves, it is impossible as to them: But if they
be converted, and return unto God, he will save them. No Body can look for
Salvation after the manner that they live at present, for they know not God any
longer, all having abandoned him.

I asked her; How she perceived that the World is judged, and that the
irrevocable Sentence is given?

She said: Sir, I perceive this by the Justice of God, which cannot suffer an
Universal Evil without an Universal Chastisement. When there have been
particular Wicked Men, God has condemned them in particular: For his upright
Justice never exceeds nor diminishes any thing from the Merit or Demerit of
Men, doing always justly, as well to the Evil as to the good. Now Men having
generally all of them abandoned their God, have, in doing this, given Sentence
of the general Destruction of the World, which shall not be recalled, because
the Will of Man is not inclined to return to him; but rather to be the more
estranged from him, if the Plagues should yet be delayed. Therefore I affirm
with Assurance, Sir, that the irrevocable Sentence is given to purge the whole
World by diverse Plagues of War, Pestilence and Famine, which are framed of the
three means which have caused Men to abandon God. Three general Sins Ezekiel 5.
12. 15. 21.
will have Three General Plagues. The first is, that Men have all abandoned the
Love of their Neighbor, and instead of loving him as themselves, according to
the Commandment of God, every one endeavors to make War against him by
Contempt, Envy and Jealousy: By Quarrels, Lies and Cheatings. All these things
have made Man abandon God in his Neighbor, who is his true Image. They study
not only not to love him as themselves, but also to vex him in all things.
There is nothing but Wars and Divisions even among Kinsfolk, yea between the
Father and the Son. All these Discords together, do they not make an Universal
War? We are astonished to see the Wars of Provinces and of Kings, without
considering that every body does the same thing, according to his Power. A
Clown will sometimes fight with his Companion for a Farthing. He does as much
Evil, in proportion, as a King, who fights against his Equal for a Kingdom; for
God regards nothing but the Wickedness of the Heart, and not the Worth of the
Subject. If he permit Kingdoms to be everywhere in Wars, it is by an exact
Justice, when all private Men are so already. Could he deny Kings the same
Liberty that he permits to all others, since they were all equally created with
the Disposal of their Free Will, the King as well as the Clown? Would it be
just that God should take from Kings the Power to make War, and permit it to
private Persons? He would be a partial God, an accepter of Persons. If we did
live in Peace with our Neighbor, God would only punish in particular the Kings
which make War: But our Domestic Wars do merit that we should suffer Universal
Wars; and that by a just Judgment. Since we will not continue in Peace with
God, with our selves and with our Neighbors, it is not at all meet that we
should be so with Kings: For our Wars have made us abandon the God of Peace,
and draw upon our selves the Plague of War by our Sin of Dissension.

The Plague of Pestilence is also justly prepared for us: Because all Men in
general have abandoned their God for the Affection which they bear to this
miserable Life. It is therefore just that it be taken away from us, since it
has served us for a mean to abandon our God, who gave it unto us, only that we
might love him, and we have loved the Gift more than the Giver; our Life being
the Time of Penitence, wherein we ought always to aspire to that which will be
eternal: But, on the contrary, we would be content to lose it (the Eternal)
provided we might live here always: All Men almost are in this Error; by which
they draw down the Plague of Pestilence, to put an End to Desires so impious,
which have made them abandon their God. This Life must needs be taken away from
us, since it serves as a mean to withdraw us from God. The Plague of Pestilence
is justly sent upon us to give Death to those who love their Lives more than
God. As is also that of Famine, because so many Men have abandoned their God,
for the Pleasures of the Mouth. How many are there who love Is. 5. 11, 12.
Phil. 3. 18, 19.
Meat and Drink more than Spiritual Delights? Provided the Mouth and the Belly
be satisfied, they care very little for God. Is it not fit that they endure
Hunger who think of nothing but of filling themselves? This evil is so general
that in the best Assemblies of Christians, nowadays, they speak for the most
part of Eating and Drinking, to keep themselves cheerful. Is it not fit that
this should be chastised with Justice by an universal Hunger, since this
Sensual Appetite has caused an universal Sin, by almost all the Men of the
World? From whence I draw the certainty that all are judged, and that the
Sentence is irrevocable: Because no Body repents of these three Sins, which
form the last Plagues, and God cannot defer longer to send them 4 Esd. 15. 16.
14-18.
.

I asked her; how we could believe that the last Plagues were begun?

She said: Sir, Do you not Romans 1. 28. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
perceive that we are abandoned to the Spirit of Error? That Lying prevails,
and Jer. 9. 3, 4.
that Truth is oppressed? That Men Jer. 6. 14. 8. 11. Ez. 1^. 18.
promise themselves Peace and Security in the midst of such evident Perils?
That there is Is. 59. 3, 4, 8.
no longer Righteousness nor Sincerity or Fidelity among Men? That Evils are
conceived without Fear, and brought forth without Reprehension? That the Just
Ez. 13. 19.
is punished as guilty, and the Guilty supported and defended? That there is no
longer Jer. 5. 1. 7. 28.
neither Faith nor Law among Christians, and that they live in a Neglect of God
and of their Salvation? Are not these the greatest Plagues that could ever
befall the World? They are more to be dreaded than Fire, Pestilence, War and
bodily Famine, which can but kill Bodies: Whereas these Spiritual Plagues kill
the Soul, which is an Eternal Spirit. Behold, Sir, with the Eyes of Truth, and
you will see that all Souls perish without perceiving it. Which is the greatest
Punishment that God can ever permit to befall Men. Many say blindly, We are at
the End of the World, for Wickedness abounds in all places: There is no Trust
to be given to any: They deceive one another without Faith or Honesty. In
saying this they speak the Truth, without knowing it, far less apprehending it.
Many Signs have appeared Joel 2. 30, 31. 4 Esd. 5. 1-12.
in Heaven, in the Sun, in the Stars, fearful Comets, menacing great Evils,
which did affright some at first, but so soon as the Devil had Leisure to make
his Adherents study to find out Reasons, showing that these were but natural
things, engendered in the Air, he made the Fear of those threatenings of God,
sent as the Forerunners of his Justice, to evanish out of their Minds. The Sea
has yielded blood* And as soon as this has ceased, the Memory of it has been
effaced. Fire has burnt many Cities, and they have presently found out some
Invention to cover all these Warnings which God gives us, saying, That these
are Casual and Natural Things: As also the swallowing up of several Towns and
Cities, caused by Earthquakes: They attribute all these Things to future and to
natural Causes, saying; That these Countries, situate toward the Sea, are
subject to Earthquakes. In short, Sir, they make all the Threatenings and
Warnings of God to evanish out of Men's Minds, that no Body may enter into
himself to be converted unto him through Fear and Trembling. Some Strokes of
Thunder used sometimes to shake entire Cities; where the People ran to
Confession, to prepare themselves for Death. But now, when they see so many
several Effects of the Justice of God, by Men's being abandoned to all sorts of
Sins, and also by all those outward Sings in Heaven and Earth, which have
appeared in our Time and to our Eyes, no body is converted unto God for this:
Far less do they Embrace the Spirit of Penitence. It seems they mock at God's
Warnings, saying; These are Natural Things. But I would willingly demand of
these Ear-flatterers, If God ought not to send his Plagues but by supernatural
Things, and to make Chimera's in the Air? He, who has created all the Elements,
must not he make Use of them Wisd. 11. 16.
to chastise the Offenses which we commit against him? Is there not need of
Natural Things to make our Body suffer, which are likewise Natural? If the
Bodies of the damned shall indeed be punished with Natural Things, why should
not, in like manner our Bodies, which are yet living upon Earth? Since they are
not sensible but of Natural Things, they must needs have Subjects conformable
to their Nature. The Deluge was made by a Natural Rain: And the last Plagues
will be made by Pestilence, War, Famine and Fire, all Natural Things, because
the Heaven, the Earth and all the Elements ought to rise up against us, to
avenge the Offense that we do against their Creator and ours. If the Fire shall
kindle by some accident, or the Earth quake by the Tossings of the Sea, and
overturn Cities, would Amos 3. 6.
this be accidental unto God, who says Matthew. 10. 30.
that, to him, the Hairs of our Heads are numbered? Would he thus let such
grievous Accidents fall out Without his Permission? this cannot be true. But
the Devil, to divert us from believing that these things are Matthew 24. 8.
the beginnings of the last Plagues, makes it be said by his Adherents, that
these are Natural Things that no Body may turn to Repentance.

The Thirtieth Conference.
How God permits Man to be abandoned to the Spirit of Error.

I Asked her; How God permits that we should be thus abandoned to the Spirit of
Error?

She said: Sir, Kings 22. 22.
God permits it by his Justice, because we have left Romans 1. 28. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
10, 11, 12.
his Spirit of Truth, to hearken unto and follow Jer. 13. 25. Ezekiel. 13. 19.
Lies. He compels no Body, leaving every one in the Liberty wherein he created
them. If Man therewith will needs abandon his God and adhere unto the Devil Ps.
81. 12, 13.
he lets him, for he will not take away again the Free Will which he has once
given him, which God will never take back again, for he is Jam. 1. 17.
unchangeable in all his Doings: And having once found it good that Man should
be a kind of Creature altogether free, he cannot afteward find it evil, but
will leave him this absolute Liberty unto all Eternity. If he will use it to
love God, he will follow the End for which it has been given him; and if he
will use it to do evil, and to withdraw himself from God, he is free: God will
not be moved for this, remaining always, Just, Good and True. Whatever Man
does, God remains always what he is in himself without being moved, and without
hindering Man to withdraw himself from him, when he will needs do it by his own
Free Will. God can lose nothing, even though all the Men of the World would
follow the Devil. They only wrong themselves. God will never take away again
the Free Will that he has given them, for their evil Deeds; but permits them
still to use it, as well to their Damnation as to their Salvation. All the
other Creatures do the Will of God of Necessity, as a Servant does the Will of
his Master by force, for it is necessary to the other Creatures, as well
animate as inanimate to do the Will of God without their being able to resist
it, being bounded, limited and constrained not to pass over the Bounds and the
Limits wherein God has placed them: But Man alone, who participates of the
Deity, has the Liberty to resist the Will of God, which he will not oppose, for
he cannot repent Romans 11. 29.
of the Liberty that he has given unto Man. Thus God permits Man to abandon
himself unto the Spirit of Error, and to forsake that of Truth: For he would
act against his Goodness, to take back again that great Advantage which he has
given unto Man, of his Free Will, with which he ought to rule over the Earth as
a little God, independent from every other thing which is not God. And if he
did not permit Man to follow the Spirit of Error, when he will needs follow it,
he would render him a limited and forced Creature, as all the rest, which serve
the Will of God by Force, as, Servants and Slaves: Which would be contrary to
the Designs of God, who has chosen our Souls for his Spouses Cant. 4. 10, 11,
12. Apoc. 19. 7.
in making them partake of his Power, to do that which shall be most agreeable
unto them.

The End of the First Part.
THE SECOND PART OF THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD.

Being a Continuation of the Conferences which Antonia Bourignon had with the
deceast Mr. Christian de Cort; which deserves to be read, understood and
considered by all who desire to be saved.

Written originally in French.

S. Paul to the Romans, XI. 19, etc. Be not high minded, but fear: For if God
spared not the natural Branches ( the Jews) take heed, lest he also spare not
thee. Behold therefore the Goodness and Severity of God: on them which fell,
Severity; but toward thee, Goodness, if thou continue in the State wherein his
Goodness has placed you; otherwise thou also shall be cut off; and they also if
they bide not still in Unbelief, shall be grafted in: For God is able to graft
them in again. LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCVI.

TO THE READER.
Dear Reader,
IT is more than twelve Years since I had the following Conferences in this
second Part of the Light of the World, and those also which shall follow in the
third Part; which you may afterward see, when it shall please God that they be
published; and I had no Inclinations to make them public: For all these
Questions were proposed to me by the deceast Mr. Christian de Cort, when he was
a Priest in the Roman Church, Pastor of the Church of S. John in the City of
Mechlin in Brabant and Superior of the Congregation of the Fathers of the
Oratory in that City; who being desirous to understand the Matters relating to
his Religion, proposed to me diverse Theological Questions, touching the Faith
and Manners of Christians who aspire to the Perfection of their Souls: To which
I answered according to the Wisdom and Experience that God gave me. This the
deceast de Cort having exactly noted and set down in Writing, he designed to
have printed it in the Year 1667. But it was afterward delayed by the Advice
of many of his Friends; who knowing the Partiality and Jealousy of many
Divines of the Roman Church, were afraid, that the said de Cort and I might be
put into the Inquisition for having declared too openly the Faults and
Corruptions which are crept into the Roman Church; telling us, that this would
be insupportable to many Zealots of that Religion.

But the deceast de Cort being very earnest to make the plain Truth known to
the People, resolved to go to Holland, and to print all these Conferences
there, judging it very necessary that they should be communicated to sincere
Persons, who he thought were perishing through Ignorance, saying often I was
deceived as to Matters of Faith and Manners: And through this Blindness I have
also deceived others, by teaching them Shadows for Substances; and I Will never
be at rest till I have communicated to them the Truths of God that you have
declared to me: And so by his Persuasions and many importunate Requests, I
resolved to go with him to Holland to cause him to print all these Conferences,
that we had had together for a long time. I was much averse to this; because I
had not yet printed any of my Writings; and also the Matters contained in these
Conferences would greatly shock many who are in the Roman Church, whom I loved
tenderly, and desired not to offend them, esteeming them my Brethren, and I had
never yet conversed with any, nor had I been in any Place or Country, without
the Obedience of the Roman Church: And I knew not what sort of People I might
meet with elsewhere: For I imagined I should find there People that were
monstrous, or of a different Shape from those of my own Country, where they
represent to Children those who are not Romanists, a Wolves covered with Sheeps
Skins, that they may imprint on the tender Hearts of the Children, a mortal
Enmity against those who in all things have not the same Opinions that are
professed in the Roman Church. This made me afraid to go to Holland to cause
these Conferences to be printed.

But after I had seriously recommended it to God, I resolved to go on that
Errand: For God made me understand, That it is not Religion that saves the Soul,
but the Love of God that begets true Virtue: And that I ought to love all, and
to do good to those of every Religion, and to declare the Truth of God
impartially. And this inward Voice planted in my Soul an Impartiality toward
all sorts of Religions indifferently, without caring to inform my self of what
Religion Persons were, or the Places and Countries to which I was to go, nor
with whom I was to speak. This has been my Practice ever since, regarding only
the Disposition of the Souls with whom I was to treat without considering what
Religion they professed, or what Party they were of as to outward Worship;
since in Effect in all Kinds of States, Professions and Religions I Have met with
Persons disposed to receive the Truth that comes from God: Yea, some of those
that are without the Roman Church, are more ready to receive it, than they who
call themselves Roman Catholics; though this they hold for an Article of Faith,
that none can be saved out of her Communion.

This is very ill conceived, since God is universal, and he is to be found every
where by those who seek and worship him: For he is not fixed to any material
Body. All Souls who take their Delight in him, are his Spouses, call them by
what Name or Religion you please: For all these different Names or Opinions do
not make a Christian* but only the Practice of the Doctrine of Jesus Christ
makes a Christian. And all those who put in Practice the Doctrine of the
Gospel, are Christians and Disciples of Jesus Christ, even though they were Turks
or Heathens: Of which Professions, I believe several condemn and judge the
nominal and professing Christians since God has Acts 10. 34.
no Respect of Persons* and will judge all Men according Romans 2. 6.
to their Works. This the Scripture* confirms, saying Matthew. 12. 37.
by your Works you shall be judged, and by your Works you shall be condemned:
And Jesus Christ himself taught the Truth of God his Father, to the Samaritan
Woman, and to many other Nations who were not Jews, saying to his Apostles,
Mark 16. 15. 16.
Go, teach all Nations; He that believes, shall be saved. He even ate, and
conversed with Sinners, to see if any of them would receive the Truths of his
Father, and put them in Practice; and though at first he rejected the Canaanitish
Woman as a Dog, yet he showed her Grace and Mercy by her Conversion and
persevering Humility. For the same Reason he says to Christians, Matthew. 8. 11,
12.
that Publicans and Sinners shall enter into the Kingdom of God, and the
Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out; which still farther confirms this
Truth, That Religion does not save a Man; but the Love of God that sanctisies
him.

This made me get over all Humane Respects and declare the Truth of the things
which were asked me by so many different Conferences, all about the Roman
Church: For at that time I knew no other Religions; and (with Compassion) I
booked upon all those who died out of the Roman^ Church as damned (as our
Divines taught.) So that being asked by a Romish Priest, I answered plainly to
all his Questions: Upon which, many took Occasion to say that I had changed my
Religion, and was become an Enemy of the Roman Church; which is not true, since
being born in it, I will live and die therein, without changing Name or
Religion; but only my Manners and Life: And will endeavor to be regenerated in
the Spirit of Jesus Christ, and to follow and imitate him even to Death,
letting Ignorant Men say and judge of me as they please. In the mean time I
offer this LIGHT OF THE WORLD to all good Souls who seek the Truth, and desire
to become true Christians, that they may truly discern Reality from Appearance:
For this prevails now through all the World, among all sorts of Sects and
Religions, where every one cleaves to the Bark, and does not touch the Wood,
fancying that Virtue consists in having a fine Religious Name of that of the
Reformed, the Evangelicks, the Catholics; Yea, that, they are persons guided
by the Holy Spirit, of which the Quakers boast, though all these sorts of Names
are false, and not at all suitable to the Life and Manners of those who call
themselves so.

For if they, who are called Reformed, were truly so, we would see the
Reformation in their Life and Manners: Whereas we find they all live according
to Flesh and Blood; which the Scripture says, 1 Cor. 15. 50.
shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. They are neither reformed in their
Movables nor their Apparel, nor in their Eating or Drinking: They seek in all
the finest and the best: They labor and trade diligently, that they may have
wherewith to maintain themselves in Pomp, Excess or Plenty as much as they can,
without bridling their fleshly Appetites or their Sensualities in any thing;
still coveting more, that they may give it as much Satisfaction as they can,
that in this World they may have Ease, Honors and Pleasure.

Thus they are called Reformed, though in Effect they will not reform
themselves in the least thing for the Kingdom of Heaven. By which we see that
they who call themselves Reformed bear a false Name, that makes them
Hypocrites, and Deceivers of others and of themselves.

As those also are deceived who call themselves the Evangelicks: For in all
their Works and Practices, there is nothing conformable to the Gospel, but all
directly opposite to it: For they do not observe so much as one Point of the
Evangelical Councils: For instead of loving voluntary Poverty,; they love the
Abundance and Riches of this World unsatiably; and they who ought to be the
Guides to those Evangelical Perfections, are the farthest removed from them,
abandoning their Flocks and Churches to find others that afford them more
temporal Profit: They are far from imitating the Apostles, who said Matthew. 10.
8.
freely I have received, and freely I give thee; since these modern Evangelicks
give at the greatest Price, and to him that bids most. And therefore they do
not justly bear the Name of Evangelicks, since they neither teach nor Practice
so much as one Council of the Gospel, and have nothing but false Names and
Parades, that they may appear to be in the Sight of Men what they are not at
all in the Sight of God.

No more than those are Catholics who bear the Name, since to call one a
Catholic, is to say, he is a Person joined in the Communion of Saints; which
these are not who call themselves Catholics, since we perceive not any
Holiness in their Lives, but much Vice and Injustice, accompanied with
Hypocrisy, and seeming Virtue, without any Reality or Sanctification. They
boast that they are Abraham's Children, without doing the Works of Abraham; or
that they are Christians, without observing the Commands of Christ: They
content themselves to be called Catholics without conforming their Lives to
those who lived holily upon the Earth, whose Lives and Histories they read
without endeavoring to become holy, as they were whose Feast*s they solemnize,
though they shall never be in their Communion, nor truly Catholics, till in
their Lives they follow their Virtues, and walk in the straight Way that leads
to Life. So that this Name of Catholic, will condemn them rather than justify
them, whereas they presume to be preferred by God to all other Religions;
because they are of the most Holy and Perfect Religion, according to the Name
of Catholic, which they bear. This would really be if their Souls were united
to Jesus Christ in the Communion of Saints; which only and no other thing,
makes a Catholic. By which we see that these Persons bear a false Name, since
they presume of their Salvation, because of the Name Catholic; and bebelieve
they are in the true Church, out of which they say, there is no Salvation.

This would be true, if the Roman Church were the only Communion of Saints: But
because Souls who are not sanctified, are not truly Catholic, neither will
they be saved for their Religion, since no Religion saves, unless the Heart be
truly Religious, or truly Catholic.

In which also those who are called Quakers, do greatly deceive themselves, who
through a foolish Imagination, fancy that they are guided by the Holy Spirit as
soon as they have begun to conform themselves to this Sect, as if it had more
Force to sanctify Men, than all the other Religions together, even the most
perfect, none of which can save so much as one Soul: For there is nothing that
saves, but the LOVE OF GOD, and not a Religion. Every one ought to hold the
Religion that serves him as a Mean to attain to this LOVE, without taking his
Religion for the End of his Salvation, if they would not be greatly deceived at
Death, thinking to plead their Religion which they imagine to be the best, as
the Quakers believe they have the Holy Spirit, and so take the Name of Quakers,
tho they have him only by Imagination, and false Persuasions; and the Devil
makes them believe they are better than all the rest of Men; because they have
quitted outwardly the gross Sins of Drunkenness, Theft, Lying, and the like,
though in their Manners they be as vicious as others, presuming that they have
the Holy Spirit, which they have not, living in an Esteem of themselves, and a
Contempt of others, calling themselves spiritual, while they remain carnal,
despising all the Means of Piety and Devotion to adhere to their own Caprices;
and they imagine they are illuminated by the Holy Spirit when they are moved
only by their own disorderly Passions, which do often precipitate them into
fruitless Sufferings and Persecutions, with the Scandal of their Neighbor: So
that no body has Ground to believe that he shall be saved for being of the
Quakers Opinion, no more than the being of any other Sect or Religion, since
all these Names do nothing to the Salvation of Souls: But to be saved of
Necessity, we must be renewed in the Life of God: And the Scripture says, 1
James 15. 22.
Obedience is better than Sacrifice.

This shows that it is better to be resigned entirely to the Will of God to be
ruled thereby, than to profess any Religion how good and holy soever we think
it to be. These material Bodies do not save the Soul, but the Love that it
bears to its God will save it, and nothing else. In which Men deceive
themselves, when they lay the Stress of their Salvation upon some means which
they make use of to be saved. How good soever these outward things be, they
give nothing to the Essence of the Soul, which is wholly divine and spiritual,
and cannot attain to Salvation, if it be not united to its God, who created it
for this End; though the Blindness that Sin has brought upon Man's Spirit, does
not often persuade him that he shall be saved by other Means: as by going often
to Church, frequenting the Sacraments, hearing many Preachings or spiritual
Books, or in being able to discourse of these things, in giving to the Poor out
of his Abundance, in making long Prayers and so many other Actions which they
call pious; as if God to save us, had need of these things! Which is a great
Delusion: For it is only our Infirmity and Weakness that has need of these
outward Things: For it is written, John 4. 23.
that the true Worshippers shall worship God in Spirit and in Truth, and not in
the Temple nor on the Mountain; That is to say, not in material Temples, nor in
Mountains of high Speculations; but the Spirit and the Heart must be truly
possessed with the Love of God, without which no body will be saved.

Not that I would reject or despise all these pious Means or good outward Works
(as these Reformed do blindly reject all sorts of good Works as evil) since
these good Works may serve as effectual Means to attain to this Love of God,
seeing the covetous Man mortifies his Avarice by giving his Goods to the Poor;
and he who cannot pray to God in his House for the Distraction of his Affairs,
does well to go to Church, that he may be the more recollected; Or he who feels
more Compunction and Piety in his Soul, in frequenting the Sacraments; or has
more inward and saving Light by going to Sermons or reading the Scripture or
some other spiritual Book, he is obliged to use all the Means which lead him to
the Love of God, without despising the least Mean that may help his Weakness in
raising him to the Love of God; since every one is obliged to seek the Means of
his Perfections: I blame only the Abuse that is made of these things, in taking
them for the End of Salvation; whereas they are only Means to assist Humane
Weakness, which forgets easily Eternal and invisible things if she be not often
put in Remembrance of them by outward things: But I blame those who are so
ignorant as to believe that they shall be saved for being of some Religion, or
for using the Sacraments, and doing some good Work, since these things do not
sanctify us, being of themselves dead Works which cannot give Life to our
divine Souls; and the Devil himself might do all these outward things though he
shall never be saved.

I believe indeed some captious Spirits will take Occasion to say that I am not
truly Catholic in speaking against the Use of the Sacraments and other
Ceremonies of the Roman Church; but I cannot preserve my self from the Calumny
of partial Persons, who love their Darkness rather than the Light that I offer
them from God, who has given me his Holy Spirit promised by Jesus Christ which
teaches me all Truth, since Jesus Christ himself could not avoid the being
calumniated, imprisoned, persecuted, and at last put to Death by means of the
Jewish Priests, who said they were in God's stead, and sat in Moses's Chair,
as the Priests of all Religions say now: While in the mean time they
outragiously persecute the Truths which I learn immediately from God, without
Study, without Meditation, Discourse, Reading or any other Means, which would
rather prove a Hindrance to me, than an Illustration of the Light of the Holy
Spirit who endites to me all things necessary for the Salvation of Souls, and
gives me also his Gift of Strength to bear joyfully those Persecutions and
Outrages, which these more than Pharisaical Priests exercise against me: For
they will not suffer that the Truth of God should come to light by any but
themselves, though they have rendered themselves most unworthy of it, because they
will not apply themselves to the Imitation of Jesus Christ, nor to the
Sanctification of their Souls; and if these be wanting, they shall never
understand the inward Voice of God. 'Twould be a great Virtue in them, if at
least they would suffer another to understand it: But they cannot attain to this
Christian Virtue of rejoicing in the Good of another. They cry out against me
as the Jews cried out against Jesus Christ: John 18. 15.
Away with him, away with him, Crucify him. And I believe if the Priests had
me in their Power, they would gladly cut me off; and would have done it long
'ere now.

But God saved me from their Power that I might yet farther declare his Truths
to good Souls who seek and desire them, which in Obedience to God I Will do, even
at the Peril of my Life; since Jesus Christ exposed his to teach me the Way of
Salvation: And I entreat the Reader to peruse with Attention this Second Part
of the Light of the World, waiting till the Third follows. He shall therein
find the Wisdom of the Holy Spirit, the Truth of God and the Light of Truth,
which must teach all Truth: The Truth of the Impartiality of Christian Charity,
and of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, and particularly the discerning of true
Virtue from that which is but apparent, and the Errors crept into Holy Things
more clearly than they have ever yet been discovered in the World. Receive it
therefore as a Present of great Value from her Hand, who loves only the
Salvation of your Soul, and continues, Friendly Reader,

Your very Affectionate in Jesus Christ, Anthoinette Bourignon.

THE SECOND PART OF THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD.
The First Conference.
How the Opinions of the Learned are injurious to God, they being ignorant of
his Works. Of God's Presence, and of his Grace. Of the Liberty, Power, and
Weakness of Man; and of the State of Infants before the Use of their Reason.

I Said to her, That never any Body had known so much of the Works of God, and
that many Disputes and Questions had been raised in the Church to discover such
Secrets.

She said; Sir, I have often trembled upon the hearing so many Blasphemies as
they thunder out against God by such Disputes. One makes God the Author of
Evil; another makes him the Complice; another unjust and partial: some
attribute to him the Cause of Men's Damnation; others the Want of their
Salvation: every one judges of the Works of God according to his Fancy, Liking,
and Inclinations. The Learned do greatly deceive themselves, while they will
needs comprehend by humane Sentiments, his Divine Works. If any simple Woman of
a humble Heart, would seriously consider the Works that God does in her
Interior, she might give a better Definition of all his Secrets, than all the
Doctors of the World would ever do with their Learning. They amuse themselves
in contending about Words, or some Terms that they lay down upon which to found
their Disputes; and thereon they raise great Buildings without any solid
Foundation: and the more they will dive into the Matter, the more they trouble
it; because God Matthew. 11. 25.
hides his Secrets from the great and the wise of the World, and reveals them
to Babes and to the simple; for he says, Matthew. 18. 3. and 20. 27.
Except you be converted, and become as little Children, you shall not enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven: making appear sufficiently, that it will not be by
Philosophical Reasons or Disputes that we shall discover the Truth of his
Works, but by a dove-like Simplicity.

I said to her; That many believed that Man has his full Liberty to do evil,
but that he is not so free to do well.

She said; These are all Errors; for Man has even more Advantage and
Inclination to do good than evil, if he did not Prove. 4. 23.
go out of himself, by diverting himself to hear the Discourses of Men's
Inventions; for God having created him for Salvation, did consequently imprint
in him the Instinct of doing good, and the Will also; because good is always
agreeable and lovely. Evil then must needs be contracted from without us: for
God being the Center of our Soul, cannot but lead it unto Good; and if it
followed its self, its Bent and Inclination, it could not do Evil: because Evil
is Genesis 4. 7.
without us, we being led to it either by the Devil, or some other Creatures
without us, who stir our Passions, and the Powers of our Soul, to pervert them
to the Will of doing evil: otherwise it is far more easy for us to do good than
evil. And as the Ray cannot be separated from the Sun, so the Soul cannot be
separated Psalm. 13. 3, 5, 7.
from God, the Fountain of all Good; because it has the same Relation to him
that the Ray has to the Sun. If our free Will did not put a stop to the Rays
of Grace, they would enlighten our Soul continually, and could not cease from
illuminating and warming it: But Isa. 59. 2.
Sins and vicious Affections do stifle and oppose this Light; which, being
hindered, cannot any longer shine into our Souls; and then, during this Darkness
they fall from one Precipice into another. The Fault is not that this divine
Sun ceases to shine for one Moment, but that our Sins put a stop to it; which,
if they were removed, this Divine Sun would as suddenly shed forth his Rays. We
must not labor, as we think we ought to obtain the Grace of God; but we must
only labor to remove Isa. 1. 16. 17, 18.
the Hindrances which we give to it; because Grace always offers it self, being
inseparably fixed in God, who is the ter of our Soul. He cannot leave it: But
our Sins hindering him, keep us from enjoying the Effects of this Grace.

I said to her; That Man indeed received Benefits from God in his Creation, and
his Graces did abound in him: But since he fell into Sin, he has lost these
Graces, and is become unable to do good.

She said; Sir, you wrong the Goodness of God to speak or believe so: For God
has not Act. 17* 27, 28.
withdrawn from Man though he fell into Sin: He contains in himself all things,
and cannot retire from any thing: He is as much the Center of our Souls, since
Sin, as he was before, and can never go out of any Place, because he
comprehends all in himself. This being so, he does not deny his Graces to any
Body: For they are wherever he is; and being in the Center of our Souls, his
Graces consequently are there with him; but it is our Fault only that they do
not there perform Operations. It is true, if our first Parents had not sinned,
we had been born in the state of Innoceence, and in coming into the World, had
not brought with us a Hindrance to Grace, which we have contracted by our first
Parents; but by accomplishing the Penitence that God enjoined them for the said
Sins, we enter again into the same Grace of our first Parents; since God treats
with us as if we had never offended him, their Sins not being able Mal. 3. 6.
to change the Grace of God, but to subject us indeed to Penitence till we
arrive at the Use of Reason; and then, being transplanted out of the free Will
of our Parents we enter into our own. If from that Instant, our Will desires to
reunite it self to that of God, we shall receive the Effects of his Grace; but
the Mischief is we stray to see and hear the other vicious Creatures, and
commit the Sins that we see in others with the Consent of our own Will; which
withdrawing it self from God, puts Obstacles and Hindrances to his Divine
Grace, by which it is impossible that we should feel the Effects of it; not
that we are ever rendered unable to do good for want of the Grace of God, which
Is. 30. 19. 2 Pet. 3. 1.
always waits that we may make use of it; but it is because of the small
Endeavors that we use on our Part to remove that which hinders this Grace that
freely offers it self to us; so that we cannot say truly that we are rendered
unable to do good, since the Sin of Adam, which cannot extend it self farther
over us than till we are arrived at the Use of Reason: Then we are restored to
the liberty of doing Good and Evil, though all Good comes from God; he never
denies his Matthew. 7. 7, 11.
Graces to him who seeks and desires them. For he Wisd. 11. 14, 25.
loves us always as the Work of his own Hand, even though we be wicked; and if we
feel some inability to Good, this can never be but through the Opposition that we
will needs make to the Grace of God, who desires to give it us Luke 15. 20, 22,
23.
more than we desire to have it. This is but to flatter our selves, to say that
the Sin of Adam has rendered us unable to do good: For it is nothing but our
perverse Habits, and Deuteronomy. 30. 11. Mat. 23. 37.
our Self-will that can give us this Inability: We ascribe it also sometimes to
the Devil through the same Spirit of Flattery; for the Devil cannot hurt us in
any thing without our own Consent: He can only represent evil things to us, our
Will being free to follow or reject them; as also our natural Inclination
cannot commit Evil without the Consent of our free Will. Sir, Slanders and
Blasphemies ought no longer to be uttered against God; for he is All-good,
All-just and All-true, and can never do any thing that is evil, or unjust, or
against Truth.

I asked her, If Man, after having sinned of his own free Will, could indeed
recover again, and return of himself to God.

She said; Sir, it seems you would use the School Terms, which have occasioned
so many unprofitable Disputes: For, to say that Man could recover again of
himself, would be the desiring to show that he had no need of God's Grace, and
that his Conversion depended only upon his own Will. This would be an Atheism,
not to acknowledge that all Grace comes from God: For there is no Good but what
comes from him, as being the only Source of all Good: If therefore Man forsakes
his Sin, and returns to God, this can only be through his Grace: but this Grace
is always given and never denied to those who seek and desire it; and even God
prevents us before we ask it Prove. 1. 20, -- 33.
. Sir, let us leave these Terms of Schoolmen and use our own Experience: We
know well enough how many Graces God has given us, even while we have offended
him, and withdrawn from him; how many times has he called us back by Remorse of
Conscience, by inward Light, by Adversities, by inward Reproofs, and so many
other Means which God has made use of to draw us to himself after that we have
forsaken him by our Sins? are not all these preventing Graces? If the greatest
Sinner in the World would tell the Truth of what he has experienced in himself,
he would tell to his Confusion, that God has never been wanting to give him his
Grace, but he has strongly resisted it: Every one may make this Trial on
himself; Why should we amuse our selves with scholastic Terms which are
nothing but forged Words? We must come to the Essence of the Thing; that is,
that God gives always his Grace to Man Ezech. 18. 23, -- 32.
how wicked soever he be; and when this Grace is not operative, it is still
through the Hindrances which the free Will of Man gives it: For God does not give
his Graces imperfectly, but they have less or more of Efficacy, according as
Man contributes thereto, by his Consent or Cooperation.

I might answer to your Question, if Man can of himself arise again from Sin,
by saying yes and no: For he cannot recover himself without the Grace of God;
but he will obtain it always, even to his last Gasp, Luke 23* 42, 43.
if he will by his free Will cooperate therewith. That so many Sinners cannot
get rid of their Sins, the Fault is not, that the Grace of God is not
effectually given them, but only that they cleave so closely to their Sins,
that their Will has not effectual Desires to forsake them. S. Austin was one of
this kind of Sinners; for the Habit of Sin made him believe that it was
impossible for him to forsake them: But no sooner was his Will effectual than
he abundantly experienced the help of God's Grace, which attended him.

I asked her, what she meant by saying, that having the Use of Reason, we pass
out of the free Will of our Parents, and enter into our own?

She said; Sir, I mean that our Parents hold our Will united to theirs, as long
as our Understanding is not capable of making full use of its Reason; in that
time they may give us to God or to the Devil by their free Will; because
nothing can continue void neither in Grace nor in Nature; it must needs still
subsist in something: Now free Will cannot subsist in an Infant, for it is not
yet capable of it; neither can it 1ubsist in God, since he has given it to Man
in creating him: He cannot retake what he has once given; for a thing given, is
no more his who gives it: Of Necessity therefore, this free Will must continue
united to that of our Parents, till we have arrived at the Use of Reason, and
are capable of being able to use it our selves, as the free Will of all Men
remained in that of our first Father Adam, and this by an equitable Justice,
because God gave to all Men free Will in the Creation of the first: so that
Adam was free to save or damn all Men, who died before the Use of Reason; but
having lived till they attain to the Use of it, every Man enters into the same
Liberty of saving or damning himself into which Adam was created; For God has
created all Men in Adam, and has not since taken from or added any thing to
them, because he maintains eternally Eccl. 3. 14.
what he has once done, never changing it: All his Creatures will be upheld in
their kinds to all Eternity, and none of the Works of God shall be altered from
the State in which he has placed and ordered them; so that we are born and
abide in the Will of our Parents as we were, and abode in the Will of our first
Father Adam; but as soon as we attain to the Use of Reason, we are put in
Possession of our own free Will.

I said to her; If it be so, that our free Will remains in the Power of our
Parents, till we have attained to the Use of Reason, where can the free Will of
Children remain who lose Father and Mother in their Infancy, or as soon as they
are born?

She replied; Those, Sir, abide in the Will which their Parents had in their
Conception and Production, or as they leave them when they die. In whatsoever
Will they leave their Children when they die, these abide in it till they have
attained the Use of Reason; for then they are always put in possession of their
own Will, whether they have been till then, given to God or to the Devil; they
can nevertheless choose the one and leave the other: But the Child who has been
given by his Parents to the Devil, shall have much more Difficulty of returning
to God, than he who by his Parents has been given to God, because of the Bent
to Evil which he has already contracted: He must do a far greater Violence to
his Nature, than he that has been habituated to Good from his Infancy, because
Custom is another Nature; so that it is very hard for a Child trained up in
Evil, even till the Use of Reason, to forsake* or change it afterward:
Therefore he who is born of good Parents, fearing God, has great Advantages
beyond him who is born of Mahometans, Jews or evil Catholics* who must use
great Efforts before he overcomes the Evils acquired during his Weakness and
Childhood. Nevertheless, God will never be wanting to give him Grace to do
this, if he has an effectual Desire and Will for it; for he created Man for no
other end but to serve him, and he can deny him nothing that is necessary for
his Salvation: On the contrary, he affords him on his Part all Occasions and
Means of Salvation, even though he be born of evil Parents or Sorcerers. They
have no more Power over their Children after they are come to the Use of their
own Reason, Ezec. 18. 14, 17.
if so be they will apply it to know and love God: For they are put in such a
State as if they were beginning to be born, except as to the evil or good
Habits contracted in their Childhood.

I said to her, That we see two Children sometimes begotten of the same Father
and Mother, and yet the one inclined to Good and the other to Evil.

She said, This may very well be, Sir, because Fathers and Mothers are not
always in the State of Grace; sometimes they fall from it, and afterward they
recover it: The same befalls their Children, as long as they have the free Will
of these Infants in their Power, it is still united to theirs; and while the
Father and Mother live, they may put the Souls of their Children being yet in
Childhood in Favor or Disgrace with God: Therefore one may be inclined to Good
and another to Evil, according to the diverse Dispositions and Desires of the
Parents, who at one time give one of their Children to God, and at another time
give another to the Devil. They may indeed give their Blessing to one of these
Children of the same Womb, and their Malediction to another Eccles. 3. 8.
, which will operate in their Children so long as they are not yet arrived at
the Use of Reason; because their free Will is united to that of their Fathers
and Mothers. From this Ground has proceeded the use of giving a Blessing, which
Use has past beyond Father and Mother to the Priests, as being the spiritual
Fathers of Christians, though they have not the same Power that the natural
Fathers have; for they have not co-operated to the Formation of their Body, nor
yet very often to the Instruction of their Souls, which Fathers and Mothers
ought to do under Pain of their own Damnation. We have seen Examples enough of
the Power which Parents have over their Children; for many have received the
Devil in their Body by some evil Wish of their Fathers. Genesis 27. 33.
Jacob prospered and was blessed by the blessing of his Father, though he was not
his eldest Son. Many Curses have befallen Exodus 20. 5.
some Children for the Sins of their Fathers; and this is just; because the
free Will of the Child remains always depending on that of the Father, till he
has received full Judgment to be able to use it himself: Therefore the People
cried at the Condemnation of Jesus Christ, Mat. 27. ^5.
His Blood be upon us and on our Children.

I said to her, That it fell out often that good Fathers and Mothers had evil
Children; and on the contrary, those who were very evil, have had very good
Children.

She said, This falls out, Sir, when the Children of good Parents have attained
to the Use of Reason, being put in Possession of their own free Will they
forsake the good Instructions of their Parents, and contract evil Habits by bad
Conversation, or by other Means, which turn them away from their Parents
Benediction to follow their own perverse Will, over which the Father has no
more Power, since they are emancipated from the Power of their Fathers Will. In
like manner, when the Child of an evil Father becomes good and lives well, this
is still after he has acquired the Use of Reason, and that then opening the
Eyes of his Understanding to consider his evil Life, he returns to do good by
his Liberty and his free Will, in which the Conversation of good Men does
greatly help him: But as long as he continued in the Power of his Fathers free
Will, he must of necessity be damned or saved according to the Disposition of
his said Father; and this by an equitable Justice, because of the great
Sympathy there is between the Father and the Child, as being Flesh of his
Flesh, and Bone of his Bones: And as the Child who is in its Mothers Belly,
receives no other Nourishment but that of the Mother, who may by her Food, give
Life or Death to her Infant, which is in her Power so long as she bears it in
her Womb; even so is it of the Soul by the great Sympathy there is between the
free Will of the Father, and that of his Child; Though they be two Souls, they
are nevertheless dependant upon that which has its full Reason; as the Body of
the Infant and of the Mother do both of them depend upon the Food which the
Mother takes; because she alone is capable of receiving it to make it pass to
her Infant: so that these two Bodies are reputed but one till the Infant be
brought to Light, and become capable of receiving its own Food: Then the Mother
is no longer capable of causing Life or Death to it, except with what the Child
may take of it self. God acts ordinarily as to our Soul, the same way that he
does as to our Body, at least by Similitude.

I said to her; That she gave me very profound Thoughts; that never any Body
had searched so far into this Matter; but that all they whose Spirits were
perplexed about the Reasons why God damned one Infant and saved another, did
still referr to the Power of God, and to his admirable secrets.

She said; Sir, God will never damn any Body; Wisdom 11. 24.
for being the source of all Good, He cannot do any Evil; and the Damnation of
a Soul is the greatest Evil of the World. The loss of all the Wealth, and all
the Bodies of Men, together is nothing in comparison of the Loss of the Soul of
the meanest Infant. How durst you believe that God would do so great an Evil as
to damn it? I have already told you, Sir, that People do nothing but blaspheme
against God on all Occasions, and this for want of not considering sufficiently
his Works which are comprehensible to our Senses. If our Understanding did
apply it self seriously to consider them, they are all so clear, so just and
good, that no body can with Reason form a Doubt about them. God has created all
Men unto Salvation, and none to Damnation, having given to every one Grace
sufficient for his Salvation. If some are damned, it is their own Fault, and
always with their own free Will. God has Power to save One and damn Another,
but he will never do it, because his Almighty Power will never depart from his
Righteousness and his Goodness. We make God, as it were the Complice of our
Passions, when we say, he saves one Child and damns another, whom he could not
have created but to save them, without doing an Evil, and an unjust Thing;
which the Child might reproach him with who should find it self damned before
it was capable of committing any Sin. It might say with Reason, Wherefore have
thou created me to damn me? It had been better for me to have continued in the
Nothing from whence thou have taken me, than to have damned me after my
Creation. Those who referr to the Almighty Power of God, in the Damnation of an
Infant, do tacitly condemn him of Injustice; for God should use his Almighty
Power Unjustly: which he cannot do. There cannot be admirable Secrets in that
which is not: Nothing is to be admired there.

I said to her; That at least God did permit a Child to be born of an Heathen
Parent, or of an evil Christian, or to die before the receiving of Baptism.

She said; God permits this as he permits all other things. On God's Part the
Heathen were born to Salvation, as well as good Christians; if they are become
Evil or Heathenish, it is their own Fault, because he has created all Men in
creating of Adam, who was certainly chosen by God to Salvation, with all his
Posterity. And having given to him, as to all others, a Liberty and Free Will,
he must needs permit every one to use it according to his Pleasure; for
otherwise he would not be just to hinder every one from enjoying this Gift of
his Free Will. It Is thus that all Evils are committed in the World: Not Eccles.
15. 20.
that God permits Evil, but he only permits Men to make use of their Free Will.
This is a most good thing that God does not withdraw from Man that first
Liberty which he gave him as the greatest Treasure which he could ever receive;
and if he abuse it, it is for himself: For after that God has made all things
beautiful and good, he does not change them any more, but lets second Causes
act: If they be well applied, he permits not a bad Use to be made of them; but
he cannot hinder it when Man does it of his Free Will. For Example, God has
given to Man the Industry to make Knives for the necessary Uses of his
Entertainment: This is a good and very convenient thing; but if with the same
Knife he comes to kill his Brother, can it be said that God has permitted him?
no ways, for if he had asked permission of God, he would have forbidden him.
Even so is it as to the Children which are born of Heathen Parents, or Evil
Christians, or other Enemies of God. This is not his Permission, but the
Wickedness of those who are become Enemies of God through their pure Malice,
and if they beget Children God will not hinder them, because he has ordained
this natural Production, which he will never change, for it is very Good in it
self, as are all the Works which he has made. Man does all Evil only by the
Consent of his evil Will, and not at all by the Permission or Consent of God,
who cannot but do all Good, without ever permitting Evil, except indirectly, in
permitting Man to use his Free Will.

The Second Conference.
Of the State of little Infants, which come from good or evil Parents: And of
Baptism.

I said to her; That Infants who die without Baptism, and are come of good
Christians, are damned without their own Consent, or that of their Parents, who
dedicate them to God; together with their own Souls; and so they cannot have
co-operated to the Damnation of their Children.

She said; Sir, here are many things to be considered, because Parents are
often guilty of the Death of their Children through Negligence or Intemperance,
and a thousand other Accidents which fall out as to this Matter. I believe many
will be found guilty of Murder before God who are not aware of it: But as for
Infants who die before Baptism without the Fault or Cooperation of their
Parents, these are certainly saved by the Will and Desire of the Free Will of
their Parents; for God can damn none but those who die in sin, either actual or
original. Now the Children who die before the Use of Reason, cannot have
committed actual Sins, for they are not yet capable of them; and if their
Parents are true Christians, they have certainly satisfied the Penitence due
for the Sin of Adam. If their Children partake of their Sins till they have
attained the Use of Reason, by the same Consequence, they partake of their
Merit and their good Works, because they are still reputed the same thing Ps.
112. 2. Romans 11. 16. 1 Cor. 7. 14.
being sympathetically but one Body and one Soul, though in Effect they be two,
and that separated when the Child comes to the Use of Reason: So that when a
Father and Mother, having begot their Children in the Grace of God, do offer
and consecrate them to him with all the Power of their Free Will, if they come
to die e're they are baptized, they go assuredly to enjoy God, as did all the
Children who died before Circumcision in the Old Law, as in the New those of
the first Christians, who died e're they were baptized; in which State, a great
many died, because then it was not the Custom to baptize young Children, as
they do now.

I asked her; If she believed that Infants begotten of truly Catholick-Parents
who had offered them to God, dying without Baptism, could be saved; and that
they who died after Baptism, having been begotten of wicked Parents, who of
their Free Will had given them to the Devil, were damned.

She said; Yes, Sir, the first are saved by the Free Will of their Parents, and
the second Ps. 58. 4.
are damned by the Will of theirs; because both of them, the Good and the Bad,
had the Free Will of their Children joined to their own, and might save and
damn the Soul of their Children, as they might save and damn their own Soul;
because they were inseparably joined and united together for Good and for Evil:
So that Baptism cannot save the Soul of a Child who is without the Grace of God
through the Free Will of his Parents; and the want of this Baptism, cannot hinder
the Salvation of an Infant, who is in the Grace of God through the Free Will of
his Parents, though he should die without being baptized: For if this outward
Baptism be so necessary to Salvation, the Primitive Christians, and they who
followed them, would have baptized young Infants; and likewise all those
immediately who came in to be Christians: On the contrary, they kept many in
the State of Catehcumens for a long Space of Time, during which, they might
die, as it is to be believed many did. Those who had the Will to follow Jesus
Christ perfectly, should they have been damned for not having received the
outward Sign of Baptism? No, no, Sir; It does not go so before God, as Men make
us believe: For a real Desire only to be a Christian, is capable to save us,
even though we should die without Baptism, because God Jer. 17. 10.
searches the Heart and trys the Reins, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
having more Regard to the Baptism of Desire than to that of Water, which is
given only to confirm the Will of the Heart of Man; and if we should be
surprised with Death e're we have made this outward Confirmation, we should not
for this, cease to enjoy Eternal Life, and to reign with God in his Glory.

I said to her; That many Fathers had written of the Necessity of being
baptized, and that it was taught through all the Roman Church, that Baptism gives
Salvation to all those who receive it, that it even cleanses from all actual
Sins, if we have been defiled with them before Baptism.

She said; I know not what the Fathers say, nor what is taught by all the
Romanists; but I declare to you what God makes me know and understand in the
Inward of my Soul. I do not think that all they who are baptized, shall be
saved; for Jesus Christ has said that Mark 16. 16.
they who believe and are baptized, shall be saved. Now Infants newly born are
not capable of believing; and if their Parents be wicked, they likewise have not
Faith to believe in the Name of their Children; how therefore can Baptism work
Faith, since Jesus Christ places it before Baptism? Faith Mark 16. 16.
must be the chief Piece for working Salvation; which being wanting, Baptism
can do nothing: How would you therefore have wicked Children to be saved by
Baptism? For Example: A Sorceress being with Child, gives her Soul to the
Devil, and also that of the Child which she bears, and as soon as it comes into
the World, it is carried to Baptism, and thereafter dies; By what do you think
that this Child should be saved? If it be not capable of having Faith, and if
its Parents have denied ( e) Ephesians. 2. 8. Heb. 11. 6.
God, should the Water of Baptism alone have more Force than the Free Will of
its Parents, who would give it to the Devil with the Consent of their Will? Can
God resist their Will, after having given them the Power of enjoying this
Free Will, both in regard of their own Salvation, and that of their Children?
We see that by an exact Justice, Subjects bear the Punishment of the Sins of
their Kings, 2 Samuel 18. 19. and 20 Chap and 24.
as David's People were chastized for the Adultery and Murder which their King
had committed; How should not Children bear it with much more Reason for the
Sins of their Parents Exodus 20. 5. Ps. 58. 4.
who have much more of Union and Dependence than the King with his Subjects,
who has nothing over them but a voluntary Submission which they yield to him?

I said to her; That no Christians doubted but that a Man must be baptized to
be saved, and that none could enter into Paradise without having received
Baptism.

To which She replied; Sir, if this were true, it would be a great Unhappiness
to many good Men who are dead long ago; because many were not baptized aright,
through the Fault of the Priest, who, may be, did not pronounce the Words of
Baptism, through Neglect, or his Mind being carried otherwise, or he had not the
Intent to baptize, or, which is worse, if the Priest, who baptized was a
Sorcerer, as it falls out but too often, and instead of baptizing Children in
the Name of God, he should give them to the Devil; all these Persons ill
baptized, must according to your Saying be damned, even though they should have
lived holily, in case this Baptism were so necessary to Salvation. God would be
cruel thus to damn Persons for the Fault of some wicked Priests, who had no
Relation neither to their Souls nor their Bodies: Nevertheless it should be in
his Power to save or damn all those whom he should baptize. Truly, Sir, these
Sentiments which they have of God, are insupportable to me, because they
contradict his Justice and Truth: They must be ignorant of him, to believe that
he would yield up the Salvation of his People to the Disposal of some wicked
Man, who adhering to the Devil, might give him all the Souls of those whom he
should baptize. If he left us the Free Will Eccles. 15. 14,-17.
to save or damn our selves, and that he himself would not reserve this Power
over us but still leave our Free Will Ps. 110. 3.
to act, without forcing us to Salvation, nor yet hindering our Damnation, when
such is our Will, how should he give to a Man the Power of being able to damn
us by an evil Baptism? There can be no Appearance of Truth in this; and if it
be difficult for you to believe that Parents have the Free Will of their
Children in their Power, how is it not much more uneasy to you to believe that
a Priest should have the Power to damn so many Persons through his Fault of not
having the Intention to baptize them aright? For Parents have contributed to
the Formation of the Body, and the Soul of their Children; whereas this Priest
has never known them: And what Jesus Christ said to the young Man in the Gospel
Matthew. 19. 17.
that to be saved, he must keep the Commandments, would not be true in case
Baptism were so necessary, seeing he who should keep them without being
baptized, could not be saved, since Salvation depends on Baptism.

I was so convinced by such powerful Reasonings, that I knew not what to reply:
Nevertheless, I yet said to her, that Faith was necessary to Salvation with
Baptism; but that it is supposed the Faith of the Parents supplies that of the
Children; and that the Godfather and Godmother are likewise taken to confirm it
in Name of the Children.

She said, Sir, it is an ill-contriv'd thing to baptize Children before the Use
of Reason: For they cannot have Faith, and their Parents or Godfathers and
Godmothers are also sometimes void of it: They content themselves with doing
the outward Ceremonies without considering what is done. Baptism is an outward
Sign to show that he who is baptized, gives up and consecrates himself to the
Service of God, and will live in the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, renouncing the
Devil, the World, and its Pomps. This is what he ought to do in the inward of
his Soul who desires to be baptized, and then to come publicly to the Font of
Baptism to confirm the Vows and Promises that he has made to God in his Heart,
that they may be publicly known and owned by the Church: But in the Baptism of
new born Infants, nothing of this can concur; For the Infant being weak, has
not yet the Will to give it self to the Service of God, or to follow the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, nor yet to renounce the Devil, and the World, and its
Pomps: For it has no Sense nor Understanding more than a silly Beast; and the
most Part of Parents, who ought to supply the Defect of the Infant, have not
Faith themselves, and cannot teach them to follow the Doctrine of Jesus Christ,
since they themselves will not do it. On the contrary, so soon as their
Children begin to have any little Judgment, they teach them to follow the World
and its Pomps, which is very far from minding them, that they have renounced it
by Baptism: What Effect therefore can this outward Sign have, when nothing is
effectuated in the Heart of him who receives it, neither by himself nor by his
Parents? And when Godfathers and Godmothers speak in the Name of the Infant,
they lie: For they say that he desires to be baptized, and the Infant cannot
have this Desire. They say, that he renounces the Devil, the World and its
Pomps, and as soon as these outward Ceremonies are ended, they never think more
on what they have promised in the Child's Name; far less do they acquaint him
with it when he is grown up, to the end the Child may remember the Promise
which he made at Baptism: For in doing this, they would give a Reproof to
themselves; because neither Father, nor Mother, nor Godfather, nor Godmother,
nor any Body at present, observes the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, though all
Christians are outwardly baptized. They would count him a Fool or a very
Precisian who should affirm that we are obliged to keep and observe the
Evangelical Life, because it is not any longer in use: They would even be
ashamed to renounce the World and its Pomps, because the most wise and the most
holy follow the World and its Pomps. The Wise say that one must live civilly,
and maintain himself in Honor; and the Saints at present say, that a Man must
accommodate himself to the World, that we cannot make a World by our selves. We
see the most Reformed, Monks study to please the World, desiring to be loved
and honored by it, and would be very sorry to be hated by the World, as Jesus
Christ foretold his Servants Joh. 15. 18, 19.
should be. On the contrary, every one seeks to draw the World to himself, and
to have its Friendship, to the end, that having gained the Heart, he may
likewise gain the Purse. Are not these fine Christians in Parade and not in
Effect! For they have no sooner renounced in Baptism the World and its Pomps,
than they think of nothing but to follow and to love it; as if their Promise
were nothing but a Formality of Words; They do with God, as they would do with
a Fool, promising him a great many things to please him, without having any
Desire to give him them. Baptism ought not to be received, but by him who
resolves in himself to consecrate himself to God, and to follow the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ, which he ought to know before he be baptized, and resolve of his
own Free Will that he will follow it, quitting the Maxims of Men, which are all
contrary to those of Jesus Christ. Acts 2, 41, 8, 37.
The Christians of old did so: No body was made Christian but they who of their
deliberate Will would consecrate themselves to God, and follow the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ; but at present, they force every one to be baptized before they
have the Use of Reason without knowing what they do, or what they promise.

I said to her; That the Custom of baptizing Children in their Infancy, was
Instituted on good Grounds, to the end no Christians might die before they were
baptized, that all those who died in their Childhood, might assuredly be saved.

She said; Sir, I believe rather that the Devil invented this to the end no
Christian might be saved; as it falls out that very few shall be saved of those
who are baptized in their Infancy; because, when they are outwardly baptized,
they believe they are sufficiently assured of their Salvation, Romans 2. 28, 29
which is the greatest Mistake in the World: For Baptism operates nothing in
our Souls, no more than the other Sacraments; but according to their
Disposition. How can a Child without Judgment have the Dispositions requisite
for receiving Baptism? If their Baptism were delayed till they had their full
Reason, we would certainly yet find true Christians; for they who had no Mind
to follow Jesus Christ, would not be baptized, unless it were out of
Hypocrisy: But at present every body thinks himself a good Christian, if so be
he have been outwardly baptized, without considering that this Sign gives
nothing to our Souls Pet. 3. 21.
if we have not suitable Dispositions. If they were not baptized in their
Infancy, all those who desire to be saved, would study to know what is
necessary for becoming true Christians, and would have no Rest till they had
obtained this Happiness; but at present, every one rests satisfied with this
outward Baptism, not considering that to be Christians Luke 14. 26, 27, 33.
they must follow the Instructions of Jesus Christ; without which, it had been
better they had never been baptized. It is just the same as if a Servant should
go hire out himself to serve some Prince or Lord, and as soon as he had got on
his Livery, should quit his Master to give himself to Robbery, setting himself
to steal and rob in the same Habit, which would serve him the better to catch
his Prey: For the Merchant who should see him clothed with some Prince's or
Lord's Livery, would not be aware that he were a Robber, till he saw the
Effects, of it: But if this Robber were some Day seized by Justice he would be
more severely punished for having committed his Thefts and Robberies in some
Prince's Livery, than if it had been in his own Habit. Even so it is when a
Person is baptized, and immediately abandons himself to the Vanities of the
World; he deceives God and the World, and renders himself subject to greater
Chastisements than if he were not baptized; because this outward Sign which
should serve him to obtain Grace, serves for his greater Condemnation, as the
Liverty serves the Robber. We see the Devil has found out this Invention to
baptize young Children, knowing well that no body when he came to Age would
remember what he had done so soon as he was born, and that he would easily
banish out of Men's Minds the Promises which they made in Baptism. He has also
invented the not reiterating of Baptism, fearing least peradventure some coming
to be converted, should come afterward to receive Baptism in a due manner and
with requisite Dispositions. All these Devices have been covered with a pious
Pretext, That no Christian should die without having received Baptism. This
every one has asserted under this Appearance of Piety, which nevertheless is
founded but upon a false Supposition of this express Necessity of Baptism for
Salvation; which cannot be true, seeing so many true Christians died in the
Days of Jesus Christ and the Apostles in their Nonage, or while they were yet
but Catechumens, or at the Instant of their Conversion. Should not all these
Persons be saved after they have been in Heart and Affection consecrated unto
God? as also those who should yet at present live according to his Law in a
Country where Baptism is not used. I would fain know, Sir, if you read any
where that the Apostles themselves were baptized; and if you could doubt of
their Salvation, though they had not been?

The Third Conference.
How the Devil has crept into the Church as Antichrist, and is there maintained
and authorized.

I Asked her, How the Devil could start these things which are decreed by
Councils?

She said; Sir, do you not remember that I have already told you, that the
Devil slipped into the Church from the time that Jesus Christ would establish
it? He had then almost all the World at his Devotion, and he needed not great
Labor to maintain the World in its Wickedness; for it was as it were become
natural to it: But how soon he saw that Jesus Christ came to enlighten the
World, and to make known their Sins to them, that he might bring them back to
Repentance; The Devil then Ephesians. 6. 11. 12.
unites all his Force and Power to oppose himself to this Light, and every way
to countermine the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. From that time he got the Name of
Antichrist; because he sets himself against Christ; he has ever since continued
in the Church, that he might destroy and ruin it if he could; and from time to
time he has gained Act. 20. 29, 30. 2 Cor. 13. 14, 15. Rev. 2. 3.
some who have followed his Suggestions and his Malice, whose Number has always
increased, and he has maintained them in Honor and Dignity, making them by his
Artifices to arise to the highest Degrees of Honor; because then his Adherents
did render him the more Service. I doubt not but he has made many come to the
Office of a Bishop or other Prelacies, who being consulted or convened together
about the Determining of Points relating to our Christianity, may have given
Sentiments in favor of the Devil, and prejudicial to the Salvation of
Christians. If this were not, Sir, it were impossible that the Roman Church
should have made Decrees so contrary to those of Jesus Christ, who never
required any thing of any body, but in Love 2 Cor. 8. 8, 12.
: For he says Mat. 19. 21.
if YOU WOULD be perfect, or Mat. 16. 24.
whosoever WILL follow me, let him deny himself, etc. requiring always our WILL
in all the Virtues that he teaches us; and God himself from the Beginning of
the World unto this present time, gives us no Command but to love him: For all
things are nothing but Means to attain to this Love, even leaving Men free to
observe his Ps. 110. 3.
Commands according to their Free Will Deuteronomy. 30. 19. Eccl. 15. 15.
without Constraint; but those of the Councils, do oblige Persons by force to
observe their Decrees: So that they who transgress them, are imprisoned and
punished. This is very far from imitating Jesus Christ in his Meekness; which,
he says, we ought Joh. 6. 67.
to learn of him who is meek and gentle; whereas these use Force and Rigor to
make their Commands be observed: For if a true Christian should not go to Mass
on the Days which they have appointed, they would commit him to Justice or the
Inquisition; or if another should not communicate at Easter, he would be in the
same Condemnation. Is not this contrary to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, who
demands nothing of any body but what they WILL do; requiring always a free
Consent; drawing no body by Force, but still saying, Mat. 11. 29.
he that WILL be my Disciple? This rigorous Spirit which is now observed in the
Church, is not conformable to that of Jesus Christ, whose Mat. 11. 30.
Yoke is easy, and his Burden light; whereas those impose troublesome and
grievous Commands, yea, even impossible to be observed; for he who would live
as a true Christian, would have no need of confessing once a Year: Nevertheless
these make a Command of it.

I must confess, Sir, that by the Grace of God, I do not observe it; for since
I yielded my self wholly unto God, and left the Conversation of Men, I have had
no Ground to confess once a Year: Should I be therefore obliged to go and
offend God, that I might have Matter to confess at the End of the Year, that I
may observe the Ordinances of these Councils? These are things so far from the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, that I know not how some Saints could cooperate to
such Resolutions, except by Force, when the greatest Part carries it; because
the most of those Decrees and Commands are more political than divine, and
Jesus Christ did not follow these Ways. They ought to come from above.

The Fourth Conference
Of the Reformation of the Church, of its Councils, Commands and Ordinances.

I Said to her; That the Councils were held, that they might redress the great
Abuses which had crept into the Church; that it was expedient that the Church
gave Commands, or otherwise every one would live after his own Will.

She said; Sir, we have the Commandments of God: Had it not been a more perfect
way to reform these Abuses, by taking up again only what Jesus Christ had
taught us, than to make new Commandments? What Prove. 30. 5, 6.
could be wanting in the Doctrine of Jesus Christ that other things must be
added to it? They who would make a good Reformation, ought always to take up
again the first Institution, and make it only be observed: For the Holy Spirit
can never be mistaken. Eccl. 3. 14.
There is nothing to be mended in nor added to any of his Works; and since we
can never change a perfect Form, and give it another without spoiling the
first, so we cannot form new Commandments without deforming those of God; Ps.
19. 7.
which were complete and perfect. The great Abuses which had crept into the
Church, would have been redressed better by the Doctrine of Jesus Christ,
taking it in the plain Letter, than by so many other new Precepts and
Ordinances. No body could have lived any longer after his own Mode, when once
the Doctrine of Jesus Christ had been set again in its Light; for it regulates
all our Actions and Manners: There needed nothing to be added to it in order to
revive the true Spirit of Christianity with more Ease than all that they would
join to it since; which things have been the Cause that many have withdrawn
themselves from the Church to forge Heresies according to their Fancies: For
they judged they were as learned as those who would oblige them to their Laws.

I said to her; I could not comprehend how the Commands of the Church had
deformed the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, since they were only added as more
express Means to make it be well observed.

She said; Sir, you do not reach to the Bottom of this Affair: For if you
remark it more nearly, you shall find direct Contradictions; because these
Councils would have by force what Jesus Christ would not have but by Love: He
never pressed any body to follow his Doctrine: On the contrary, when any of his
Disciples left him, he asked his Apostles John 6. 67.
if they would leave him also leaving always every one to his own Free Will;
whereas these damn the Souls and oppress the Bodies of those who will not obey
them. They condemn as guilty of mortal Sin all those who will not observe their
Commandments, and even imprison their Bodies, banish them from their Country;
yea, for this they sometimes put them to death. Matthew. 20. 25, 26.
This Spirit of Rigor, does it not destroy the Form of that sweet Gospel-Law
which was so perfectly formed by the greatest Artist that ever was or shall be,
that is, by Jesus Christ who was God and Man? Could there be any thing to be
added to the excellent Work of such a Master? For there can nothing be added
more than taken away, without altering the first Form If one take from a
Picture the sweet Draughts of some Figure, by adding to it some rude ones, the
Figure ceases to be what it was before: For it is impossible that two contrary
things should abide together in the same Subject. Could Rigor be introduced
into the Church to make Meekness be observed there? These Arguments which you
lay down, Sir, are without Foundation; but you do it to excuse what you have
once espoused, (as I have done also): Notwithstanding, I cannot cover its
Deformities so well known to the Eyes of my Savior, who will very shortly make
them known to all the World, though they strive so earnestly to cover them.

I said to her; I should be very sorry if I should aim to cover what displeased
God; but that it was the common Sentiment of all Christians to own and follow
as a good thing, what the Church, assembled in a Body, had ordained, and
determined: For we say in our Creed, That we believe in the Holy Catholic
Church.

She said; Sir, you would have reason if you did not take the Bark for the
Wood, and a Humane Church for the Divine. The Holy Church cannot err, as I have
told you diverse times; because it is the same thing with God. If it be Holy, it
is Apostolic: Now the Apostles never commanded the going once a Year to
Confession upon Pain of Sin, nor even taught it to any as a Virtue. On the
contrary, Jesus Christ said to all those whose Sins he remitted, Joh. 5. 14.
and 8. 11.
Go, and sin no more, This was far from commanding them to go once a Year to
Confession: For this would be tacitly or indirectly to command them to sin once
a Year; because Confession always supposes Sin; yea, they even teach us that he
who receives Absolution without Matter of Sin, commits a Sacrilege, as he does
also who gives it. Therefore of Necessity a Man must sin every Year, that he
may confess every Year, if he would not commit a Sacrilege. Do you not see,
Sir, that the Holy Spirit cannot have instituted such things? This must come
from elsewhere, as many other things ordained and resolved upon by this Church
collegiately assembled, though it be in use amongst Christians to referr to it
and believe it? This can be nothing but a blind Submission: For if we had good
Eyes, we would still look 2 Cor. 10. 15.
whether what they command or ordain us, be truly good and conformable to the
Gospel, before we follow it. They tell us indeed, that Faith ought to be blind,
because it consists in believing what we do not see; But this Faith does not
extend so far as to believe what Men say to us, but only what God himself has
told us by the Holy Prophets and Apostles, or by Jesus Christ himself, who Ephesians.
2. 20.
has foretold us a great many things which we do not see, because they are not
yet come to pass. In this we must use Faith; because God cannot lie nor fail in
making good his Promises: But our Faith does not stand in that which Men say to
us or command us: For they themselves are often fallen from the true Faith
while they ordain us things contrary thereunto.

I asked her, If she judged the Commandments of the Church to be evil things?

She said; No, Sir, there are diverse things which of themselves are good; as
fasting in Lent, in imitation of Jesus Christ, who fasted forty Days in the
Desert; and also the communicating at Easter in Memory of the Supper which
Jesus Christ made with his Apostles at that time; and also the Sanctifying the
Days dedicated unto God; because he himself has commanded it: All these things
are good in themselves: But this Constraint under Pain of Damnation, or civil
or bodily Punishment, is most evil; because good Works done with regret, cannot
please God, who has no need of our Fasts or Sacrifices; but he regards our
Heart and our Will. If this do not concur to our good Works, Mal. 1. 13, and
2. 3.
he will throw them as Dung into our Faces: For nothing can please him but what
is offered him by Love: Therefore he says in so many Places, He that WILL come
after me, or he that WILL follow me. In all things he requires our affectionate
Will, and nothing by Force or Violence. This belongs but to cruel Men, who are
not of God, seeing he 1 John 4. 8.
is ALL LOVE, and has given us no other Laws but that of Love; whereas these
Persons come with a great many Commandments under Pain of Damnation, and other
Temporal Punishments. Have you ever read, Sir, that Jesus Christ, his Apostles
or Disciples did at any time imprison any or impose Fines on any for not
obeying their Ordinances; as these Councils do, who deforming this beautiful
Law of Meekness and Love, do forge troublesome and constraining ones. Does not
God deserve that we sanctify the Days which are dedicated to him out of Love?
Is not the Desire that we have to follow and imitate Jesus Christ, powerful
enough to make us fast the Lent, and communicate once a Year, without the being
obliged to it by force? He who does it not out of Love must do it with regret*
or in Hypocrisy. Were it not better not to be constrained to it, than to do
things so troublesome without meriting any thing, and to die the Devil's
Martyr, which this violent and forcing Command does occasion? For a true
Christian has no need of being forced; and they who are not so, have no need of
these Commands.

I said; I believed that all our good Works to make them meritorious ought to
proceed from the Heart and from our Will; but that God alone can search the
Inward; and therefore the Church ordained outward things of which she could
judge, and that to keep Christians united together, it was needful to give them
Laws and make them be observed.

She said; Sir, you grant me by what you say, that the Church at present is not
that which Jesus Christ established, since to keep Christians united, she makes
Laws that are nothing but civil and temporal ones, respecting only outward
things; because that which was established by Jesus Christ, ought not to be
upheld, but Col. 3. 14. Joh. 13. 34. and 15. 10.
by the Bond of Charity, uniting Christians by a Conformity of their Wills in
God; which Unity of Spirit appears sufficiently by outward Operations; because
the Christian who is possessed with Charity cannot remain hid: For Charity is
always working. There need no other outward Laws to make appear to Men, whether
we be true Christians, but THE LOVE of GOD, and CHARITY FOR OUR NEIGHBOVR.
These things are as well outward as inward, and may be judged by Men: For to
discover true Christians it was not needful to ordain them so many Precepts
under Pain of mortal Sin: For the Doctrine of the Gospel was but too sufficient
to regulate all their Actions and Manners: Why should they command the hearing
of Mass under the Pain of mortal Sin, since Jesus Christ in his Gospel, has
never obliged, nor even counseled any body to do it, nor yet to confess their
Sins once a Year? Though indeed he says, Jam. 5. 16.
confess your Sins one to another; this is not that one must do it once a Year;
But when he has sinned he must be humbled and confess to his Brother that he is
a Sinner; and this rather in public than in private; that the Humility of
declaring our selves Sinners, and the Confusion that we have to be known for
such before Men, may give satisfactory Punishment to our Sins. This is not to
say that he must go and confess at certain Times and Days; But when the Sinner
desires to return to God in Heart and Affection, even though this should not
befall but once in his Life, and at the end of it: He should not cease for this
to have the Pardon of his Sins, and to obtain Mercy from God: And if to be
saved, it were so precisely necessary to communicate at Easter, how could a
Paul, a Macarius, and Anthony, and so many other holy Hermites have been saved,
who ended their Lives in the Deserts of Egypt and Thebais, without having ever
communicated or heard Mass? If Jesus Christ had spoken of the Eucharist when he
said, Joh. 6. 53.
Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you shall have
no Life in you. This Church which you believe to be holy, would have erred in
holding all these Persons for Saints, who never communicated, or at least very
seldom: For St. Paul the Hermit having been for so many Years in the Desert
without seeing any body, died without receiving the Eucharist: The Egyptian
Mary after having been thirty Years without seeing any body, received it once
only before her Death, with a thousand such like. What, could these be saved
without observing so much as one of these Commands of the Church? For they
sanctified all the Days of their Life by a continual Union with God, as all
true Christians ought to do. It was not needful for them to pitch upon certain
Days appointed by the Church, all their Days (none excepted) being sanctified
by continual Prayer. In like manner they could not observe the Fasts of Lent,
and the other times expressly appointed: For their Life was nothing but a
continual Fast, taking no other Food but what was purely necessary, as all true
Christians ought to do, who expect to be satisfied in the other World, without
desiring to satiate themselves in this. Why should they who have studied to
defend this Church, say, that People cannot marry in Lent or Advent? Neither
Jesus Christ nor his Apostles ever forbad such things, neither did they command
the Paying of Tithes: For that great Apostle St. Paul says, that Act. 20. 34. 1
These. 2. 9.
his Hands gained his Bread, and that he was chargeable to no body: And Jesus
Christ bids his Disciples, though Luke 10. 7,-11.
The Workman be worthy of his Reward: take and eat whatsoever is given them;
and when they enter into a Place and are not received, that theygo from it
shaking the Dust off their Feet; whereas those Councils ordain the Payment of
Tithes by Force: So that he who is wanting in it, should be treated as a
Criminal. I do not know, Sir, how you can say, that all these Laws, with so
obliging them were needful to keep Christians united, by many others, to
observe them by Force! Because I can see nothing in all these Ordinances which
has the Property of uniting Hearts On the contrary, rather of dividing them,

I said to her; That in all well ordered Commonwealths, there must always be
heads and Superiors, whom we ought to obey, and follow their Laws; or
otherwise there could be no Order.

She said; Sir, if you hold the Church for a Civil Commonwealth, you have
Reason; but if you hold her to be Holy and Spiritual, or the Spouse of Jesus
Christ, you are Col. 2. 20
much in the wrong: For her Head was still her Superior, and has given her
such excellent Laws and Rules, that no body can add any thing more perfect to
them: Those who would needs make some Changes in them, have wholly confounded
them; and they who would be their Superiors, have abused the Graces of their
Liege Lord: Since being appointed his Lieutenants on Earth, to maintain his
Ordinances, they have neglected them, and have made others after their own
Mode, or for their own Advantage, against the Designs of their Sovereign
Master: For by forbidding to marry at certain times, they disturb the Order
that God has set from the beginning of the World. Nothing was more holy, nor
ever will be, amongst Men in this World, than Adam before his Sin. Nevertheless
God gave him a Wife, that he might know her for the Generation of Men, and for
the perpetual Unity that they ought to have together. If God found it meet that
this Marriage should be instituted in the Earthly Paradise in the most holy
time that ever was, before Adam had sinned, why do these Persons forbid to
marry in the times of Lent and Advent? If it were for the Piety of the Time,
they would not give so many Dispensations to do it after they have forbidden
it: For ordinarily we see more of the Rich married in this forbidden Time, than
in that which is allowed. It seems this Prohibition is but for the Poor, who
have not Money enough to obtain these Dispensations. It is a Pain to me to bend
my Mind under these Laws: For I find them not at all conformable to those of
God: And if we must leave the doing good things because Men forbid them, they
are then greater Masters than he.

I said to her; I did not believe that the Church can forbid good things, or
command evil things.

She said; Sir, consider narrowly this Prohibition of marrying at a certain
time; it cannot at all be good in it self: For they themselves call Marriage a
Sacrament, and they say well; for all the Works of God are sacred and holy: If
therefore it be a sacred thing, why may it not be received in the times of Lent
or Advent, which they reckon also to be holy times? May not holy things be done
in holy times? This ought to be the fittest time for receiving the Sacraments;
and Marriage is certainly instituted of God from the Beginning of the World,
and he did nothing more perfect in Nature than the Institution of Marriage, as
he did nothing more perfect in Grace than the Free Will which he gave to Man;
and those who call themselves the Church, would indeed by their Ordinances
hinder both the one and the other, bounding and limiting the Will of Man to
their Submissions, and interdicting them Marriage at certain times limited by
them. Jesus Christ Joh. 2. 1.
went in Person to a Marriage with his Mother, and his Disciples: that he might
authorize it by his Presence: Why then should these forbid it for the Piety of
the times of Lent and Advent? as if Marriage was evil and unworthy to be
celebrated in pious times! while Marriage has even more of Piety and Sanctity,
than this Lent and Advent, which are not authorizd but by the Commandment of
Men, and Marriage by the Ordinanece of God himself, and confirmed by Jesus
Christ himself, being at a Marriage in Cana of Galilee, where he did the first
Miracle, turning Water into Wine for a Blessing to the Married.

I said to her; That Marriage was truly instituted of God, and consequently
good in it self; but that the Customs of Men had rendered it evil and insolent,
by Excess of Feasts and Luxuries; and that for this Cause it was forbidden in
holy times.

She said; If Marriage is become evil through the ill Customs of Men, the Church
ought not to permit an evil thing at any other times, no more than in Lent and
Advent: For it is not lawful to do evil things at any time; and if they will
forbid good things for the ill Use of them, they must forbid the Use of all the
Sacraments; because in general they are all abused: And instead of forbidding
all by the same Consequence that they interdict Marriage, they incite
Christians to use them more, and even in the most holy times: For if they send
them some Jubilee, or some other Indulgence, it is always on condition that he
who would obtain them do confess and communicate. In the mean time, no body can
be ignorant of the great Abuse and ill Use that is made of the receiving these
two Sacraments, which are almost never received but they commit Sacrilege, we
see by Experience that Sorcerers do nothing more willingly, than go to
Confession and Communion. Baptism, as I told you also heretofore, is greatly
abused in the receiving of it, since, we see, no body lives according to the
Promise made at Baptism. Nevertheless, the Church is so earnest to make all
Christians receive it, that they will not wait till they have the Use of Reason
to know what they do. If this ill Use has given Occasion to interdict the
Sacrament of Marriage at certain times, wherefore do they not likewise
interdict this of Baptism until the Child have attained the Use of Reason, that
he may use it aright? Confirmation was a verygood thing, that the* Child
baptized at its Birth might confirm the Promises which the Godfathers and
Godmothers made in its Name: But they are also so eager to confirm Children,
that sometimes they will not wait till they be out of their Swadling-Clothes:
So that they do no more observe the Promise of Confirmation than that of
Baptism; because it is usual never to think any longer on what they have done,
when they received these two Sacraments in such Nonage: They content
themselves with receiving the outward Signs, without caring any farther, either
for Faith or for the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. Are not these great Abuses and
very ill Uses of them? Yet they interdict no body, no not for a Day: On the
contrary, they press and draw all Christians to them with Precipitation,
without caring for the Abuses which are committed in them: So is it likewise,
as to the Sacrament of Orders. How many Priests are there who abuse this
Dignity? How many are there of them who lead a debauched Life? How many
Vagabonds and Sluggards? As soon as they are made Priests, instead of employing
their time in the Study of a truly Christian Life, they amuse themselves with
Plays and Pastimes, and worldly and vain Recreations. Notwithstanding of all
these Abuses, they interdict no body to become a Priest, provided they have
studied sufficiently: On the contrary, they consecrate them profusely, and in
an excessive Number: And whereas Jesus Christ said to his Disciples, that Mat.
23. 8. Jam. 3. 1.
they should not be many Masters. The Church makes so many of them, that one
cannot tell which of them to hear or obey; because of such a Diversity of them,
and yet she commands to pay them Tithes, under Pain of Sin.

Judge you, Sir, whether all these things are ordained, forbidden, or commanded
by the Holy Spirit, who is the Righteous, Good, and True God, always constant
and unchangeable.

I said to her; That Jesus Christ himself said, that the Workman is worthy of
his Reward, and that the Church might very well ordain the Paying Tithes to the
Priests, who being continually occupied in the Service of God, the Instruction
of the People, and the Administration of the Sacraments, could not gain their
own Living.

She said; Sir, if none pretended to the Tithes but they who are in the Office
of a Pastor, or continually employed in the Service of God, there would be no
need to make People pay them: For all good Christians would be well pleased to
maintain their spiritual Fathers, even though it were never enjoined them: But
this Command extends much farther; for the Tithes must be paid to maintain
those Priests who have no other Charge but their own Persons, and desire to
rule like secular Princes, employing the Wealth of their Tithes in Coaches,
Horses, Trains, Rich Movables and Sumptuous Buildings. This is so much the
Fashion that nowadays there is scarce any body to be seen that will be
content with what is necessary; but they will have all in excess and abundance,
even they who manage their Wealth, as to their own Persons, heap it up to
enrich their Kinsfolk. Are these Goods employed aright in the Service of God?
On the contrary, they are spent rather in the Devil's Service, who is still
glorified by the Pride and Avarice which those Persons commit in the Abuse of
their Privilege; Because those Goods which are dedicated to the Service of God,
whether Tithes or other, are not proper to the Priests who possess them* but to
poor Christian Brethren: and they cannot take of them for their own Use beyond
what is justly necessary, even though they be Pastors, or have Charges: This
cannot warrant them to distribute or heap up this Wealth of the Church, except
for the Entertainment of their poor Christian Brethren, after the Example of
the Apostles; who distributed to every one according to their Necessities: So
that no body had need of any thing, even though they did not oblige them to give
them Goods by Force: For when Ananias and Saphira brought a Part of their
Wealth to St. Peter when they came to be Christians, he said to them, Act. 2.
48. 4. ^5.
your Wealth was your own, and you might have kept it; Wherefore have you lied
to the Holy Ghost? To show that they constrained no Body to give their Goods,
leaving every one free to do it who would; whereas they constrain Men by Force
to give their Goods to the Priests, and damn them if they do it not; as if
they, by their own Authority could damn them; which they cannot do: For Jesus
Christ has said, Act. 4. 4.
Judge not, and you shall not be judged; condemn not, and you shall not be
condemned. For my part, I think, if People did not give so many Tithes, they (
x] Mat. 7. 1.
would not cooperate to so many Sins, and that temporal Wealth has been the
Cause of the Church's Ruin, and that the Holy Ghost has been entirely banished
from her: For since she would needs maintain her self by Wealth, Honor, and
Authority, the Holy Spirit has been banished from her, and she governed by a
purely Humane and Political Spirit; or, to speak truly, a Diabolical one:
Because a Spirit simply Humane, could not ordain things contrary to Jesus
Christ: For Humane Wickedness does not extend farther 1 John 2. 15.
than the Pleasure, Honor, or Profit of Man; but these ordain things wherein
they have neither the one nor the other of these Advantages, as to cause,
baptize, and confirm Children in their Infancy, and to fast on Pain of mortal
Sin.

The Fifth Conference.
That all Men ought to labor to satisfy the Justice of God, by this Penitence.

I said; That it was at least needful, that some Tithes or Goods should be
appointed for those who were necessary for the Service of God and of Christian
People; because they were forbidden to trade, or work to get their Breaed.

She said; Sir, this forbidding the Priests to work that they may get their
Bread cannot come from God,; because he commanded all Men in Adam Genesis 3. 19.
to gain their Bread with the Sweat of their Body. Why then should the Priests
be exempted, who ought to obey him more precisely than others; because they
make a particular Profession of it, and they ought more punctually to be
subject to the Commandments of God, who having appointed bodily Labor for
Penitence, did not exempt the Priests, nor his Apostles, nor Joseph, nor Mary,
nor Mark 6. 3.
even Jesus Christ himself, who labored for his bodily Food. How can they
change so general an Ordinance, confirmed by so many Saints, and by Jesus
Christ himself? If Labor were evil, God would not have appointed it; for he
cannot do evil things; and if it were not good and saving, the Saints and the
Apostles would not have exercised it, and Jesus Christ would not have confirmed
it by working himself with his Mother and his Father. By what Spirit could they
forbid the Priests to work, when we hear St. Paul say, Act. 20. 34, 35. 1 These.
2. 9.
Lo, these Hands gained my Bread, not being willing to be chargeable to any.
What greater Dignity would the Priests pretend to nowadays, than the Apostles
had, and Jesus Christ himself, that they should be interdicted and forbid
Working; Do we not plainly see, that these are but the Inventions and
Commandments of Men for their Ease and Commodity? For God never changes his
Laws, and can never find that to be evil which he has once found to be good. If
Labor be good wherefore should it be forbidden the Priests, who ought to be
more good and perfect than others? And if Labor were not good, yea, necessary
for Man, God would never have ordained it as a Satisfaction for his Sins.

I said to her; That Labor was forbidden the Priests that thereby more time
might be given them for attending on their Studies, and the Perfection of
Souls, for fear temporal Labors and Business should deprive them of the
Leisure to attend upon what is for the Glory of God.

She said; Sir, these Ends have not their Effect: For though the Priests use no
bodily Labor, yet notwithstanding they do not apply themselves to labor for
the Glory of God, but rather to offend him by their Sloth and Idleness; which
is the Cussion whereon the Devil rests. The ceasing to labor, defiles them
with a double Sin: For notwithstanding of this, they do not give themselves to
the Study of Perfection: On the contrary, they give way to Temptation, and give
the Devil Leisure to tempt them at his Pleasure: For wherever he meets with
Idleness, there Eccl. 33. 31.
he enters as into his own House. It were better to command the Priests to
labor much, that the Devil might get no hold on their Souls; because being
disoccupied from all the Business and Affairs of the World, they are the better
disposed to hearken to the evil Thoughts and Suggestions of the Devil: Whereas
a Soul that is continually employed, takes no Leisure to give Ear to the Devil.
Do we not see so great a Number of Priests, Monks, and Religious, pass their
Time without doing any thing, and live in Sloth upon the Sweat of the People?
They will not be ashamed to go beg their Bread at the Houses of poor Laborers
and Tradesmen; who have no other thing but what they can gain by the Sweat of
their Face, who sometimes give them what they have need of themselves:
Nevertheless they dare not refuse them, because they are Churchmen: But if
they were of the true Church, built by Jesus Christ, Acts 20. 35.
they would be so filled with Charity, that instead of asking or receiving Alms
of these poor Workmen, they would work themselves to give them the Gain of
their Labor. Sir, I look upon what is received by Form of Alms as a Robbery,
when we may get our own Bread by our Trade or Labor, or we may have whereupon
to live of our own Goods; and I believe it is thus Eccl. 40. 31, 34.
before God: For it is an unjust thing to live on another Goods, and to keep
our own; or to go beg, when God has given us an healthful Body and sound Mind
that we may labor. But you will still excuse that Church which you have for so
long a time looked upon as holy. It were better to open your Eyes to discover
the Reality of its Wickedness, that you let not your self be deceived to your
Perdition.

The Sixth Conference.
That the Roman Church is the Spouse of Jesus Christ; but that she has
falsified her Faith to her lawyul Husband.

I Said to her; That she gave a deal of Light in diverse things for which I did
infinitely bless God; but I could not deny, it troubled me a little to hear
that the Roman Church was thus fallen from the Spirit of true Christianity.

She said; Sir, it is more expedient for the Salvation of your Soul, that you
know the Misery into which the Church has fallen, than if you knew the highest
Mysteries of the Trinity; or the greatest Good of all Men together; Because an
Evil known, is easy to be avoided: But as long as it is unknown and hid from
us, it is always dangerous, and may greatly hurt us, without our being aware of
it. Therefore you ought to give the more Attention, and to apply your
Understanding more to understand and comprehend the Truth, which I tell you of
Evil, than to discover the Good: For if I told you the Good of all Men, this
would only give you some little Contentment, or sensual Satisfaction; which
would add nothing to your Soul: But by knowing the Evil as it is, you may
prudently beware of it, that it do not touch or harm you: For all these Evils
which I said were introduced into the Church, even while it was yet Holy, are
all covered with Appearances of Good and Piety, and Reason; because the Devil
could never have gained so many Souls as have followed him, but under this
Color or Mantle of Good: And he will yet gain many by their Ignorance of these
Evils, or by their Unbelief of them: For as long as they take Evil for Good,
they will still blindly follow it; and Ignorance will not excuse the Sin: For
God having given us an Understanding to comprehend, and a Spirit to discern,
Ephesians. 5. 15, 17. Phil. 1. 9, 10.
we ought particularly to apply them to what concerns our Salvation; and when
the Truth is set before our Eyes, and we will not open them to consider it; we
resist it, and may look for the Condemnation of the Holy Spirit; who says, that
Rev. 21. 8.
Unbelievers shall have their Portion with Sorcerers.

I said to her; I would not be incredulous, but believe the Truth: But that I
felt an inward Opposition when it thus overturned the Church in the chief*
Points of Belief, which we owe to it in case it were the Holy Church.

She said; Sir, I believe in the Holy Church; and if I had a thousand Lives, I
would voluntarily expose them for its Defense, and would think my self happy to
spend the last Drop of my Blood for such a Cause: But when God makes me see
clearly that She is not Holy, nor that which Jesus Christ established; but that
She is the Whore Rev. 17. 1.
which is spoken of in the Revelation. I cannot resist so clear Truths, which
do not only lie secret in my Soul, but God gives me also Terms and Words
whereby to explain them to you, that you may likewise receive the Knowledge of
them for your Salvation: For which I have often blessed God, who bestows on us
so many particular Favors, hoping he will do it also to others, But I entreat
you, doubt not what I tell you of the Miseries into which Men are fallen: For
they are yet greater than I have told you: But persuade your self assuredly, if
they were not true, I would not have engaged my self in Discourses so
melancholy and disagreeable to your Sentiments. It would be more pleasant to
me to tell you, that the Roman Church is Holy and Perfect; and that those who
obey and follow her, are holy. This would recreate both my Heart and yours, and
the Hearts of all who could hear it. I should be very lightheaded, or void of
Understanding, to please my self with things which displease all the World, and
which oblige me still to hold my Peace, and to conceal my self: Because I know
very well, if they should hear me declare those Truths, all the Romanists would
rise up against me, and even the most Pious Joh. 16. 2.
would think they made a Sacrifice to God in killing me: For they are ignorant
of these Truths, and are wedded to their Church, as if she were Holy; knowing
no better; because the great Darkness that is now throughout the whole World,
wherein the Devil has bewitched all Minds with Errors, 2 These. 2. 10, 11.
they may never come to the Knowledge of the Truth, which every one withstands,
even thinking they do well in it.

I asked her, If I might not suspend my Belief of those things which were
contrary to the Church, and believe only what concerned Virtue and the Love of
God?

She said; Sir, you can never follow Good without departing from Evil; nor
adhere perfectly to God without abandoning that which is contrary to him. Have
you not remarked in how many things this Roman Church is contrary to the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ? How therefore can you adhere to her, and follow
Virtue and the Love of God, so long as they are really contrary? Jesus Christ
says, that Mat. 6. 24.
We cannot serve two Masters, without being unfaithful to the one or the other.
You must choose which you love best. Good can never profit you without the
Knowledge of Evil; because while you do not know and believe it, you will
insensibly fall into it; yea, you will often take Evil for Good: For the Evil
of this Church is still covered with the Sanctity of pious Reasons and
Arguments: And if Antichrist did not cover his Wickedness with Virtue, he could
gain none but the Wicked; but with pious Pretexts, he gains all the Good, who
would even make a Scruple not to follow him, as you do, Sir, by your Demand:
For if you do believe, and follow Virtue and the Love of God, you will
certainly hate all that is contrary thereunto. I think I have already told you
enough to let you see that the Rules, the Commands, and Ordinances of this
Church are not conformable to those of God; who, when he created Man, gave him
full Liberty to use his Will; whereas those constrain it in all Points, and will
not only subject it by Councils or Advices; but by Force and Violence both
bodily and spiritual: So that as much as in them lies they destroy the Law and
the Ordinances of God, to establish their own Authority, and to bind the Souls
of Christians by so many Constraints, that it is impossible for them to satisfy
them without displeasing God, though there were no other thing but the forbidding
Priests to labor, and making them swear never to explain the Holy Scriptures
otherwise than the ancient Fathers have done.

Do you not see, Sir, that all their Laws are nothing but political, and made
to maintain their State and Authority? If a Prince or a King, to whom you were
subject, did become a Tyrant; would you make any Scruple to abandon him when it
were in your Power to do it, though he were the lawful Son of your King and
gracious Father who had preceded him? A Man must be his own Enemy, or of an
effeminate Heart, if he have not the Courage to leave his own Country, that he
may avoid his Tyranny and Severity, and live in Repose and Tranquillity.

I said to her* That this Comparison was not suitable, and that I had not found
the Roman Church Tyrannical.

She said; Sir, that is because you have always submitted to her Laws, without
considering whether they were good or evil; and the good Impression they
cunningly gave you of her Merits, made her Burdens, though very weighty, seem
light to you. If you have done it in Innocence, God will pardon you, because
you perceived no other thing at that time: But at present when God sends you
his Divine Light that you may discover the Dangers in which you have walked
amidst your Darkness, do not resist it by Doubts or Scruples, which the Devil
will put into your Mind, which have no other Foundation but a Pusillanimity and
Softness of Heart; which more regards Natural Sensibility, than the Perfection
of the Soul, to which if you would attain, you must hear what 2 Timothy 3. 17.
God teaches and commands you without amusing your self with so many other
different things which Men propose to you, who are not to be trusted: But God
can never deceive you, no more than he can suffer any Mutation or Change. He is
our lawful King, who has always governed us by Fatherly Affection and Love: And
even when Men had offended him through Excess of Wickedness, he sent them Prove.
1. 20. etc.
his Word clothed with our Humane Nature, that he might bring us to
acknowledge our Fault, that we may return to him by Ps. 110. 3.
Love and not by Force: For the whole Doctrine of Jesus Christ is filled with
the Light of Counsels and Admonitions, 2 Cor. 5. 20. 6, 1. Acts 20. 31. Ephesians. 4.
1. 2 These. 2. 7. Phil. 9. 10. 20. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 3. 2 John 5.
not with forced Commands or violent Drawings; but gentle and willing, making
no Change to the first Law of God, but ouly an Explanation and Illustration of
it: For Jesus Christ gives us no new Commandment by his Gospel Mat. 5. 17. Romans
3. 3. Gal 2. 18.
but enlarged the Means by which we may the better observe the first
Commandment of God, declaring to us what we ought to do and to avoid for this
End: But this Church which succeeded him has indeed changed the Government: For
instead of preserving the Spirit of a most gentle Father, she has taken that of
a real Tyrant and wicked one.

I asked her; If she held the Roman Church to be that which succeeded Jesus
Christ and his Apostles?

She said; Yes, Sir, the Roman Church was in her Beginning the true Spouse of
Jesus Christ, who had received all the Riches of the Gospel, the true Word of
God, and the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost: But since she left that, she has fallen
into the Misery into which Adam fell, when he would quit his Dependence on God,
and become his Enemy, that he might depend on none but himself. Adam was the
same Person after his Sin that he was before it; but he was not clothed with
the same Graces, nor with the same Spirit: For he was ashamed and confounded,
subject to all sorts of Miseries, bodily and spiritual, ignorant, inconstant,
and malicious, with all the other Miseries under which we now groan. Even so is
it of the Roman Church which was established with all the Graces of the Holy
Spirit; but since she would needs depend upon her self and establish her own
Authority; (m) 1 John 2. 7, 8.
she Romans 11. 20, 21, 22.
has lost the Grace of God, with all the Hos. 2. 9.
spiritual Gifts with which she was adorned, and has consented to the 2 Cor.
11. 3.
Suggestions of the Devil, as Adam did; and has ever since Ezec. 16. 15.
been estranged from God, and increased in Rev. 18. 5.
Wickedness, as Man did after Sin. Though he was the same by Nature, he was not
the same by Grace: For by his Free Will, he had denuded himself thereof, and
clothed himself with Wickedness. The same has befallen the Roman Church. Since
she Jer. 6. 16, -- 19. John 15. 6.
changed the Order in which God had set her, and would needs Isa. 66. 3, 4.
give Orders and Praecepts to her self, after her own Way, ^ and according to
her own Inclinations, she is fallen from the Grace of God, and sunk into all
sort of Miseries: Though Jesus Christ had chosen her for his true Spouse, she has
falsified her Faith, and the Fidelity she owed to her lawful Bridegoom Rev. 17.
2.
to go join her self to the Kings of the Earth, whereas Jesus Christ has had so
carefully warned her John 18. 36.
That his Kingdom was not of this World; yet she would needs reign he^e, and
rule over all Earthly Powers; whereas her dear Husband would only suffer and be
despised. Thus she has withdrawn from him to her Loss, to commit Adultery with
the Honors, Grandeurs and Riches of the World; and therefore has deserved to
be called THE GREAT WHORE in the Revelation.

I said to her; That Jesus Christ had promised to his Church that he would
never leave her: asking how this could be, that she was now abandoned to so sad
a State?

She said; Sir, Jesus Christ will never be wanting in his Promise, and has
never left his Church, no more than a Man ceases to be espoused to a Wife, though
she falsify her Faith to him: She continues always his Wife; but he may, both
by Divine and Humane Right, repudiate her; and with just Reason, when she will
needs continue in her Whoredoms, he ought in good Conscience to reject her, and
thrust her away as unworthy of his Company. Even so God cannot abandon his true
Church: He Mat. 28. 20.
will still uphold her, though she were but in one Soul only. She shall never
perish: For she shall be always united to the Spirit of her Husband, who is God
Immortal and Unchangeable, who cannot change nor forsake any thing; but 2 Timothy
2. 12, 13.
when those Men who represent the Church, do falsify their Faith to him, and
will needs take their Pleasure in worldly Riches, Grandeurs and Honors; they
withdraw from and forsake their lawful Husband for this Earthly Trash; and
instead of continuing the faithful heavenly Spouse, they become Harlots, by
cleaving to earthly Honors and Pleasures. By which you may see, Sir, that
Jesus Christ has not left his Church, but has only repudiated the Harlots, whom
he has discovered in it, who are not such by Faults or Falls that are casual,
of which she repents, or Rev. 2. 21.
desires to amend; but by so long inveterate Habits, that she will never change
from them but by Death: Rev. 17. and 18.
Therefore there is nothing to be looked for but the Destruction of that
BABYLON, and the Fall of that GREAT WHORE* who is spoken of in the Revelation:
For she will never leave her Whoredoms; but by a total Falland Ruin which
shall be irrecoverable.

I asked her; How it came that God had not preserved his Church in the same
Place where he had established her, though it were but in one Person only? That
this would be a great Happiness to find it in the College of Rome.

She said; Sir, God has Acts 10. 34.
no Respect of Persons, and has no fixed Place, being universally in all
things. Even so is it of his Church which is united to him; she has no fixed
Place: Therefore she is called Catholic, or common and universal: For she is
to be found in all Places indifferently: For otherwise, none should have the
Liberty to be of the Church, but they who remained in this fixed Place. No,
Sir, this cannot be so; because God has given Liberty to all Men in the World,
without having limited them to any particular Nation or Country, but to all in
general. The Church consequently may be as well among the Jews, Turks and
Heathens, as among the Church of Rome: For she does not consist but of Souls
who possess the Law of God John 8. 31.
or the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, which is all the same thing; because this
Doctrine is no other thing but the Explication of the proper Means for
observing aright this Law: So that he who among the Heathens should live in an
entire Dependence upon God, having his Will conformable to him in all things:
Such a Person would be the Church, even though he knew no other Precept or
Doctrine: Because all that is written in the Law of Moses, and even in the
Gospel, are no other thing but Means to attain to this Dependence upon and
Conformity to the Will of God: So that he who is in this, needs no other
Command or Precept to be assured of Eternal Bliss; because all is comprehended
and contained in this Prove. 3. 5, 6.
Dependence upon God. All other things are but for enlarging and explaining,
wherein this Dependence on God consists. Therefore the Gospel says Matthew. 16.
24.
deny your selves; to make us understand that as long as we live to our selves,
we are not resigned to God: For if we rejoice in Prosperity, and are grieved in
Adversity, it is a Sign that we are not yet resigned to God, but that we live
to our own Desires and Wills, not to those of God, who will never permit any
thing to befall us but what is good and wholesome. But when we live to our
selves, we will have this and that, according to our own Judgments, which are
blind as to Eternal Things. For this Cause Jesus Christ has taken the Pains to
teach us so many diverse things, that he may make us know what hinders us from
coming to this Dependence on God, and also what makes it easy to us: But if we
find this Dependence without these Means, we have fulfilled the whole Law, and
are the Church.

I said to her; That we hold in the Roman Church that out of it there is no
Salvation.

She replied; And I doubt, Sir, if one can be saved in it, since she is not
governed by the Spirit of God, how can she guide any to Salvation? If the Devil
sit in her Throne, is it to be believed that he will say us? His Malice
increases as his Authority augments. I cannot believe that one truly Christian
wholly resigned to the Will of God, can remain in the College of Rome: For they
would not suffer a Spirit so contrary to that which rules them. These Reproofs
would be insupportable to them. God himself could not preserve his Church among
them, though it were but in one Person only. They would certainly destroy it, and
that without Delay. If they teach that none can be saved out of their
Dependence, it is because they would fain rule over the World, and be as great
as God; as the Devil had this Ambition since his Creation, and retained it
hitherto with a great deal of Success; because he holds at present almost all
Men under his Authority: For to say that there is no Salvation out of the
Dominion of Rome, is to contradict the Gospel. For the Apostle having told
Jesus Christ that some taught the Gospel, who notwithstanding, did not follow
Jesus Christ nor his Disciples, he says to them, Luke 9. 50.
Let them alone; for they who are not against us, are with us. Should the Pope
be a greater Judge to condemn those who observed the Law of God, because they
did not depend on him? This could not be true, even though the Roman Church were
as yet guided by the Holy Spirit: She could not notwithstanding, make void the
Salvation of those who did not follow her; since Jesus Christ has not done it
in his Gospel; which is their Rule, and that which they ought to follow. The
Apostles never condemned John's Disciples, who followed not them, and did
otherwise than theirs. There was a Complaint indeed that they fasted not as St.
John's Disciples did; Mat. 9. 14, 15.
and Jesus Christ excuses them. Each Apostle had his Disciples apart; and all
the Churches were also separate. That of Peter was not the Church of Paul, or
of the other Apostles: Every one had his Church and his Disciple separately;
and none of them said that those who did not follow them were damned. It
sufficed that all had the Gospel for their Rule, without making any Difference,
whether one was of James or of Philip: S. Paul even severely 1 Cor. 1. 12. 13.
reproves those who said, I am of Paul or of Apollos, asking them, If they were
not all of Christ who died for them? But at present, they will have none to be
saved but those who are under one Man only; whereas then all were saved who
were under Jesus Christ. Have we gotten another God, or rather another Law
since the Doctrine of Jesus Christ? that these Men will needs damn all those
who will not follow this Pope! For my Part, I would rather upon Pain of my own
Damnation, assure all those of Salvation who shall observe the Commandments of
God in whatsoever Place and Condition they may be: For Jesus Christ said to the
young Man in the Gospel Mat. 19. 16, 17.
who asked him What he should do to be saved? Keep the Commandments, without
any other thing; because all is comprehended in this. A Man must not go by four
Ways when he knows one that is straight and sure. What ever Men would make us
to believe, the Truth that is of God, is always the most certain.

I begged, She would explain to me how God could not preserve his Church in the
College of Rome, even though it were but one Person only, seeing he is Almighty.

She said; Sir, the Almighty Power of God will never extend it self beyond his
Righteousness and his Goodness. He has given to Man a Free Will to use it at
his Pleasure, by which he has made him partake in the Deity; which is the
greatest good he could ever do to Man: For by this Free Will he renders him
capable of taking his Delights with him; or otherwise there would not have been
any Correspondence of God with Man, since Likeness begets Love, and Love is
always bent to love its like. If Man had not had Liberty of using his Will, he
would not have been like to God in any thing: For a Creature bounded and
constrained, has no relation to an Almighty God. It was necessary that the
Power of using his Free Will, should be given him that God might take his
Delight with that which in some manner was like unto himself, and nothing could
resemble him but this free Power of his Will. Though he had created Man's Soul
divine* this had been but a limited Spirit without this Free Will which must
certainly concur to complete the Delight which God would take with Men: For as
a King can take no Contentment in recreating himself with a Slave, as he would
do with a Queen, who is nearer his Quality; so God would make Man in his full
Liberty, and capable of using his Free Will fully, that in this Liberty he
might be some way like to him. This being done, Romans 11. 29.
he cannot repent of any thing, but lets Man enjoy his Gifts: However he abuse
them, his Righteousness and Constancy will not let him withdraw or take from
him what he has once given him; but he leaves it him, and will leave it to all
Eternity: Whether Man save or damn himself, Free Will shall never be taken from
him; for God is not changeable in his Gifts, no more than in all his Works.
This being so, Rev. 12. 6, 14. 18, 4.
he cannot hinder the Romanists from killing any body amongst them who would be
the true Church, without bounding or limiting the Free Will that they have to
do this: But his Goodness preventing their Malice, will move his Church John
12. 39.
to withdraw out of their Power, or to hide her self, as Jesus Christ hid
himself to avoid the Jews Tyranny; and by this means he exercises his Goodness
toward his Church, and leaves those Men of ill Will in the Liberty that he has
given them, who do only the Mischiefs that are in their Power, and cannot reach
the doing those which the Good by their Light and Foresight can avoid. It Is
thus, Sir, that I said, God could not preserve his Church among these
Romanists, because he will never use his Power against the Justice of the Right
that he has given them to use their Free Will. Sir, we ought always to take
things in their Source, or else we would utter Calumnies against God, either in
saying that he is not Powerful to hinder Evil, nor Almighty to preserve his
own, or not just in not letting Causes work according to the Order in which he
has established them, which would be so many Blasphemies: Because God can never
do any Evil, for he is the Source of all Good: He cannot permit Injustice, for
he is perfect Righteousness: And likewise he cannot against Promise, take from
him the Free Will that he has once given him: But he does all his Works in such
Perfection, that Ps. 89. 15.
Goodness, Righteousness, Faith, and Truth concur in all, in an excellent
Harmony, which ravishes the Understanding of him who considers them.

I said to her; That the Impression of Dependence on this Roman Church, was as
it were naturalized in my Soul, and that it would be very ill in me to leave
her altogether, though I absolutely desired to resign my self entirely unto God.

She said; Sir, be not any ways troubled. Continue confidently under the Roman
Church, provided you do not follow in her, but that which is good in it self;
abundance cannot hurt. After you shall be entirely resigned unto God, he will
uphold you, and will govern you through all: The more you shall be united to him,
the more you will partake of his Virtues; and his Light shall be given you more
clearly, to discover the Truth of every thing. You are now yet a Courtier of
this Roman Church: Therefore you love her and would feign excuse her Faults,
that you may not be obliged to forsake her; which likewise you ought not to do
by the Inducement of any; but if you approach to God you will partake of this
Light as the Ray partakes of the Sun, according as it is near it. When you
shall partake of the Righteousness of God, you will see with an upright Eye the
Injustice of this Roman Church; and when you shall partake of the Truth of God,
you will discover their Lies; and having partaken of the Goodness of God, you
will discover that Malice which now you can scarce believe: For all the
Perfections of God do assuredly discover the Imperfections which are opposite
to him. Labor therefore, Sir, to find this Union with God, and be not troubled
under whose Dependence you are. Rome cannot hurt you, when you hearken to none
but God. We need not be at the Trouble to learn where the true Church is: For
she will be in us as long as we possess the Law of God and the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ, which only makes up the holy Church. It remains only that in the
Roman Church you beware of the Seductions which are crept in there. This is
what Jesus Christ has so often warned us of in his Gospel, sayng, Mat. 7. 15.
24. 5. 11. 24.
Beware of false Prophets, who will come deceitfully, and shall seduce many.
False Christ's and false Prophets shall arise, who shall, if it were possible,
deceive the very Elect. He neither speaks of Turks nor of Heathens, but of
false Christ's.

The Seventh Conference.
Of the Mass, and of the Sacraments and Ecclesiastical Functions.

I asked her; How I should behave in the Administration of the Sacraments in
the Mass, and other Functions of my Charge? She said; Sir, Do all this in the
Spirit that God requires you to do it in; because there are great Abuses in
this: For all these things are not what they made us believe of them. Many
Superstitions have crept into them, against God's Honor and our Salvation:
Therefore you must always join your Intention with what Phil. 2. 5.
God may have in these things, or otherwise you will commit many Faults, and
will likewise deceive others. For my part, I believe the Mass represents the
Communion that Jesus Christ had with his Apostles, who eat and drank with them
every Day, blessing the Bread and breaking it to distribute them; which the
Apostles Acts 2. 46.
continued to do with their Disciples, and afterward all the Primitive
Christians, who assembled every Day to eat together, and blessing God, imparted
to every one as he had need; which maintained and nourished among them the true
CHARITY which Jesus Christ had left them by Testament; Luke 22. 19. John 6. 55.
Do this in Remembrance of me, and you shall live for ever; because without
this Charity no body can be saved; as St. Paul assures us; 1 Cor. 13. 1, -- 4.
Though one could even remove Mountains, though he gave all his Goods to the Poor,
yea, his Body to be burned, etc. all this would be nothing without Charity;
which Jesus Christ had recommended to all his Disciples a little before his
Death. This is now out of use, and instead of nourishing and maintaining it by
these daily Acts 6. 1, 2.
Meetings of Christians, those who did assemble to eat and drink, blessing God
for what he bestowed on them, they have changed it into the Mass, which we
observe to this Day with little Profit and Salvation, except that the
Intentions of some may be to do it in the Spirit and Desire which Jesus Christ
had when he appointed it, and left it in his Testament. It is to this I exhort
you, Sir, that you may lose no Occasions of following the Designs of God, and
that you deceive no body in teaching them that they have done enough in going
to Mass: For though they should hear a hundred every Day, this would avail them
nothing if they have not Charity, which is not now cherished amongst Christians
though they assemble every Day to Mass; because they are not taught for what it
is instituted, since these Romanists have turned all things to their greater
Advantage. If we would examine narrowly all the other Sacraments, we would find
all the same Mischiefs done to the Interest of Salvation by those new
Inventions and Changes.

I said to her; That it were better than that I did not exercise the
Ecclesiastical Functions, since there was so much Abuse and Hazard in them.

She said; You would not do Ill, Sir, to abstain from them, and to live as if
you were no Priest, were it not that not having as yet Light enough to discover
the Evils which are hid in them, you would by degrees fall into Scruples for
leaving off all your pious Exercises. Pray to God that he may let you see what
you ought to do; and he will show you (as he does me) that all holy things are
become profane, and that there is not any thing in this Roman Church which
does not savor of its Corruption. All People believe that having declared
their Sins to the Priest, and got Absolution from him, they are pardoned, though
it Mark 2. 7.
is God only who can pardon Sins. The Priest can indeed pray for the Penitent
who humbles himself to declare his Sins as an Intercessour between God and the
Penitent; but he cannot pardon him by his own Authority. He may indeed judge by
the Word of God if the Penitent in Justice be disposed to have the Pardon of
his Sins, and may give him Ground to hope that he shall obtain it of God, but
not deceive him by making him believe that he himself will pardon them, if so
be he declare them to him; for this Declaration will do nothing without a
sincere and a firm Resolution of Prove. 28. 13.
Amendment, which God regards, that he may pardon according to his straight
Righteousness, and not according to the Judgment of the Priest, who may be
mistaken as well as all other Men. How could God have so little Equity as to
commit to some frail Men the Power of saving and damning others? What Justice
could there be that a Confessor for want of the Intention to absolve, should
by this means damn thousands of Persons who made their Confessions to him? It
must needs be an horrible Blasphemy against God, for any to have such a
Persuasion, that a well-meaning Person, truly penitent, after having duly
confessed, dying in this State, should be damned, because the Priest had not
the Intention to absolve him. If this were true, it would be to render God a
Tyrant; because all our good Works would serve us for nothing, in case our
Salvation did depend upon a good or ill Absolution. These Thoughts or this
Belief would make us fall into Idolatry, in taking Men for God, who could save
or damn according to their Fancies. This God himself would never do, because he
can never depart from his Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth, to judge us
always according to them; whereas Men full of Passion, Injustice, and Impiety,
could not but judge us according to these. How little Wisdom should we
attribute to God in believing that he would give Men Power to save and damn us?
He who has commanded us to worship none but Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
one God alone, he should give us Occasion of worshipping all these Confessors,
who would be the Saviors of all Christians? Do you not palpably feel, Sir,
what evident Perils there are in the Administration of those Sacraments, after
the manner they are used at present? It were far better to be Idle than to do
Evil. It Is no Wonder that I doubt of the Salvation of Christians now, when I
see in their religious Functions so many things against the Righteousness* the
Goodness, and the Truth of God. Nevertheless I will not give you Advice in
this: You may with your own natural Judgment discern aright Truth from Lying,
and thereafter resolve to continue or leave off your Ecclesiastical Functions:
For God never constrains any body, each one remaining free to choose the Means
which he perceives to be most expedient, without believing any thing blindly,
no more what I say, Sir, than if another said it to you: But enter into your
self, that you may judge uprightly of the pure Truth, you will perceive and
feel it if you be disengaged from all the Discourses which these Romanists have
forged, to make their Authority valid. Free your Spirit of all sorts of
Imaginations and Arguments, and come to the Center of the Truth to judge if God
would in Justice put our Damnation or our Salvation into the Power of any Man
unknown to us, who might be a wicked Person or a Sorcerer; in which Case he
would damn as many Souls as he could to gratify the Devil, to whom he
belonged. It must not be said in this, God is Almighty, or his Works are
incomprehensible: For he never exerts his Power without his Righteousness,
which is Wisd. 12. 14.
not incomprehensible but makes it self Ps. 98. 97, 2.
be seen and commprehended by all those who seriously consider it: Because no
Good is perfect, if it be not communicated and known.

I said to her; It was much to be feared, I had committed many Faults through my
blind Submission to this Roman Church, enquiring of her the Means to repair
them.

She said; All that is past is no longer in your Power: You must beg Pardon of
God, who is full of Mercy, and does not so much reprove the Faults which are
done with a good Meaning as those which are done through pure Wickedness. Though
Ignorance does not excuse Sin, yet it lessens its Malignity; because it has not
the full Consent of the Will. But now endeavor to search more to the Bottom
the Things which concern your Salvation, and 1 John 4. 1.
Do not believe every Spirit, but try if what you are to do or believe, be of
God, or of Men, or of the Devil: For all that is not o* God, is evil Matthew 1 5.
13, 14.
; and for want of discovering this Truth each one runs blindly to his own
Perdition, believing even that they do well in following so great a Number, of
great and wise Men who maintain this blind Submission Matthew. 15. 14.
, which is not fit but for mean Spirits, though so many of good Judgment have
followed it for this long time bygone; which could not have been found without
some Infatuation of the Understanding with which the Devil has possessed all
those who leaned to their own Wisdom or Authority. These having their Minds
bewitched, have insinuated their Errors or Ignorances into others; and so the
Devil by little and little gains all; some by Malice and others by Ignorance:
So that I do not see any Remedy can be put to this but by the total Ruin of
this Roman Church, the Rev. 19. 1, ^^9.
Fall of which will open the Eyes of all those who are not in Covenant with the
Devil; which covenanted Persons will continue in their Darkness,
notwithstanding of the Light that is given: But others, though Wicked, will be
obliged to confess their Delusions, cursing those who have thus deceived them,
under the Masque and Color of Good. How many Priests, Monks and Religious,
have said and yet say, Come to us who are Christ, we'll pardon you your Sins:
Give us, and you shall be saved. But Jesus Christ forbids us Matthew. 24 26.
to go here and there while they say to us that Christ is there.

I asked her, How the Righteousness of God could permit so great a Number to
perish through Ignorance?

She said; It is a culpable Ignorance; Because we have always had the Means to
search the Truth if we had had a Desire to find it: For the Gospel was
recoverable, especially in the Roman Church, where it remains as the Testament
that Jesus Christ has left his Spouse. What Unrighteousness was there in God,
in suffering these Persons to remain in the Ignorance of their Errors, since
they loved them 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12.
more than the Truth? and because these Errors were more agreeable to their
Sensualities, they have voluntarily followed them, building on 2 Pet. 2. 18, 19.
the Flatteries of those who promised them Salvation by these Errors. It would
be rather an Unrighteousness in God, if he had constrained them to follow his
Truth, after having given them their Free Will: He could not take it back again
without Injustice, no more than we can any thing that we have given to another.
It is not in our Power to take it again without committing a Robbery: Because
the thing given away, does not any longer appertain to us. Thus God by an exact
Righteousness, may let the Ignorants err; Because their Ignorance is affected:
For if their Ignorance were out of Simplicity, God is so good that he would
rather send an Angel from Heaven to enlighten them, that Psalm. 25. (24,) 8.
they might not perish; but 2 Timothy 4. 3. 4.
when the Free Person gives ear to Flatteries, and to those who study to speak
recording as they desire to hear, he ought not in Justice to hinder them. For
it is most true, that if I were to Day among these erring Ignorants, and if I
told them the Truth, I would not be heard, and far less followed: Because they
who teach them these Errors, speak more to their Liking and accommodate
themselves more to their Sensualities than the Truth does; which often reproves
them, and never flatters them. Thus they with just Reason are abandoned to the
Spirit of Error; since according to the Saying of the Gospel, They John 3. 19,
have loved Darkness more than Light. Therefore they shall perish in the
Darkness which they love. If you knew, Sir, the Righteousness of God, it would
be impossible that you could once doubt of it: For it is so just that neither
Man nor the Devil can find any thing in Truth to blame in it: But when we look
on Things on the Outside, and according to our Ignorance, it seems to us that
God does unjust things, when they are most perfect.

The Eighth Conference.
What are the Sins against the Holy Ghost, and how much they prevail.

I Entreated her to tell me, In what Sense she understood that all Christians
do now live and die in the Sin against the Holy Ghost, which shall not be
forgiven them, neither in this World, nor in the other, as she had sometime
declared to me?

She said; Sir, it is most true, the most Pious nowadays are lost by these
Sins: For no body is aware of them, and they believe that they are the Sins
which are abominable before Men; because they shall not be forgiven, neither in
this World, nor in the other Matthew. 12. 31.
; But they are only spiritual Sins, which a Man may commit without having done
an ill Action* Therefore they shall never be forgiven, because they do not know
them; and far less will they repent of them. For this Cause they will not be
forgiven in this World: For no Sin is forgiven here without Acts 2. 37, 38.
true Repentance and absolute Desire of Amendment* which two Conditions are
nottobe met with in the Matter of those Sins against the Holy Ghost: For they
are contrary to Repentance and to Amendment; and therefore will not be
forgiven, neither in this World, nor in the other: For no body will then
receive Forgiveness, but they who shall receive the Truth; which those who
commit one of these Sins do resist, by impugning the known Truth: So that the
said Sins will neither be forgiven in this World, nor in that to come. I do not
speak of an imaginary Paradise; because no Sin enters there, and consequently
they cannot be forgiven if there be none. But in the other World, which shall
be the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, he will yet find many Sins to be forgiven Rev.
1. 7. compare Zach. 12. 10.
at his coming: Nevertheless those committed against the Holy Ghost shall not
be forgiven there no more than here in this World; because they are opposed to
all the Means which can procure this Pardon. It is of these that Jesus Christ
says, Matthew. 12. 31, 32.
That he who has sinned against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him; but
he who has sinned against the Holy Ghost, it shall never be forgiven him:
Because this Coming of the Holy Spirit on Earth is the last Mercy that God will
grant the World; and he who shall resist this, can never any more repair his
Fault. He must needs die in it.

I entreated, She would show to me in particular, the Meaning of these Sins
against the Holy Ghost.

She said; Sir, I do not know them all in Order, but I shall speak of those
which I remember, beginning with that of the Presumption of being saved without
good Works. This concerns all those who profess to live will Matthew. 6. 1, -- 8.
: For amongst them there are very few who do good Works; because they esteem
their Works good, when they appear such to their own Judgment or that of some
others, though very often, they are not such before God: because all that is good
before him must partake of his Goodness, which is always Righteous and True.
Now our good Works for the most part have neither the one nor the other of
these Conditions: For they are done, either out of Humane Respects, or out of
Natural Inclination, or they are not truly good in themselves: and when we do
any good Works out of Humane Respects, they are not good before God, and can
never make us obtain Salvation; because we have received our Reward in this
World, having obtained the end for which we have done them, to wit, the
Satisfaction of Men, and we have no right to pretend to any other Recompense:
And if we have done our good Works out of Natural Inclinations, or for our own
Satisfaction, these Works likewise can give us no Pretension to Salvation;
because they are rewarded by the Satisfaction which we have received in them.
Thirdly, we do Works, as good, which are but indifferent, or indeed, sometimes
evil. For to go to Church only out of Custom, is an indifferent Work; and if
being there, we behave as in a profane Place, it is an evil Work. It is the
same as to the frequenting of the Sacraments: And if we give Alms through some
Natural Tenderness or Inclination this Work has not that Righteousness nor
Goodness to make it pass for Good in God's Sight. So that to do no good Works
before God, and notwithstanding to presume of Salvation, is a Sin against the
Holy Ghost: So that we believe we have merited Salvation by good Works, which
do not derive their Goodness from God. Nevertheless we think he is obliged to
give us Paradise Mat. 7. 21, 22. 25, 11.
as the most part of Pious and Religious Persons do, presuming to have that by
Right of Justice which is not due to them; because there are none but true
Righteousness and Charity that can be called good Works by which we may hope
for Salvation: And though none be adorned with these Virtues, each one
notwithstanding believes he shall obtain it, as if God could save without
Righteousness.

There is also another Sin against the Holy Ghost, which is to impugn the known
Truth. This is now commonly Practiced by those who are called Spiritual.

For if we should tell any of them that they are not true Christians, or that
we live in the Reign of Antichrist, or that the World is judged, and that its
Wickedness is come to the Height, they would believe nothing of this; loving
rather to stick to their old Customs, than to learn how they may become true
Christians, and they would likewise scruple to believe that we are fallen into
the Reign of Antichrist though we see by Men's Lives and Manners, that of
Necessity, they must be engaged to the Devil; and though they see no Hope or
Appearance that the World will grow better, yet they do not believe that it is
judged. Thus they impugn the Truth of all these things, the Belief of which
might bring them to Conversion and to a Life leading to Salvation; but they
impugn all these Truths, that they may continue in their so dangerous Darkness,
though they be sufficiently known to all those who will open their Eyes: But they
who will impugn the Truth, commit this Sin against the Holy Ghost, which shall
not be forgiven, neither in this World, nor in the other: For they will never
be converted Mat. 7. 21, 22. 25, 11.
, because of the Resistance which they make to the Truth, which is that that
gives Salvation. They know well enough that their Life is not that of a true
Christian: Nevertheless they impugn this Truth; because they have no Desire to
become one. They see the Devil rules through all in Lies and Deceits, and that
all oppose the Doctrine of JesusChrist; and they will not believe that this is
the time of Antichrist, that they might resist and beware of him, and by
impugning this Truth, they desire not to avoid his Snares. They see that
Wickedness is universally at a Height; and they will not ( h) 2 Timothy 3. 8.
believe that the World is judged, that they may not be afraid of this Judgment.

Another Sin against the Holy Ghost, is the Envy of the spiritual Good of
others, which is so generally committed, that almost they make no Reflection on
it, and among the most Pious this Envy is the most ordinary. We may only remark
the several Orders of Religious Persons: They are almost insupportable to one
another, each one valuing his own Order and Community, and they cannot hear the
Perfections and Praises of others mentioned, without having a spiritual Envy
against them secretly in their Hearts; and even if a particular Person among
them excel the rest in spiritual Good, he would be envied, yea, hardly used by
all the rest, or imprisoned, if he should live in greater Perfection among them
than generally they do, or should declare the truth of their Faults: So that if
a votary of any of their Religious Orders, should observe literally the Gospel
which Jesus Christ has left us, I believe he would be martyred, or so hardly
used by the rest, that it would be impossible for him to live among them
without suffering a thousand Deaths of Persecutions; and for any secular Person
who would observe the Gospel in the World, he would be envied likewise by all
those who profess to be virtuous and are not, who would reject with Contempt
this manner of Practice, which would not be conformable to their own: For there
is such a secret Pride in their Hearts that they cannot suffer that another
should lead a better Life than themselves, nor even that he should have the
Name of it; but they would endeavor to vilify and despise him, or make him to
be suspected of Levity or other Evils; in which is now fulfilled the Prediction
of Jesus Christ, when he says, Luke 21. 17.
You shall be hated of all for my Name's sake: For the Apostles were never
hated of all; because many still loved and followed them: But at present this
Warning is fully accomplished; because he who walks in the Truth is hated of
all: For this Sin against the Holy Ghost of the spiritual envying of another,
possesses the Hearts of all those who make a Profession of Virtue: Because
having no true Virtue, they envy that which is true and continue therein all
their Days without desiring to change, because they do not esteem this a Sin,
but rather Wisdom; that they will not own what they do not practice, covering
this Sin with a Fidelity and Constancy in what has been first taught them: And
thus they die in Envy.

Another Sin against the Holy Ghost, which is Obstinacy in Sin, is also in use
amongst those who make a Profession of Virtue: For not being willing to own the
forementioned things to be Sins, they continue obstinate in them, and therefore
will not be forgiven; because they will not ask Pardon nor repent of them: For
as much as they are persuaded that they are not Sins, because they are inward
and spiritual: Therefore they die in Obstinacy in Sin: And even though they
should live till the other World, they would not be converted from the
Presumption of their Salvation; because they are possessed with a good Opinion
of their good Works, neither will they submit to the Truth, which would show
them the contrary. Thus they commit this Sin with the other following ones,
which are against the Holy Ghost.

Wilful Munder is also committed by the same spiritual Persons, and they will
not acknowledge it: For very often they occasion Death to themselves or others
by their sensual or indiscreet Inclinations. How many of those do we see wedded
to their Appetites of Eating, Drinking and other bodily Exercises, though they be
prejudicial to their Health? They will not change nor leave them, even though
they be advertised of it. How many die before their time by too much Eating or
Drinking or taking something prejudicial to their Health or through too much
Labor? And on the contrary, how many are there who kill themselves by
indiscreet Fastings, or other Penances, or the Neglect of necessary things? All
those are wilful Murderers, because they kill themselves, to satisfy their
own Sensualities or Inclinations; and they are also often Murderers of others;
because they occasion sometimes their Neighbors Death by indirect Ways, as in
forcing some to work beyond their Strength, or in crossing and vexing them so
much in their Goods and in their Spirit, that they die of Grief; or by not
taking away Debates and Quarells when they can do it; and these increase till
they come to kill one another; or when by some Act or Omission they occasion
the Rise of such Debates; or when one comes to die through the Neglect of our
necessary Succor or Assistance. By all these things wilful Murder is
committed; though the Will be indirect, it ceases not to be before God as great a
Sin as a direct Murder: For the Life is taken away indirectly as well as
directly: And sometimes it would be less evil to kill a Person at one Stroke,
than to kill him by degrees; and the Sin also would sometimes be less, by a
Stroke given in a sudden Passion, than when it lasts for so long a time; and
these Sins are often repeated. Nevertheless none do perceive these kinds of
Sins to be such as they are; but the most spiritual fall into them through
Negligence, and very often without desiring to know them: And thus while they
do not repent of them, they cannot obtain Pardon no more than of the other Sins
against the Holy Ghost, because they are committed secretly, and without
Repentance; which draws on a Despair of Salvation, which is also one of those
Sins. This Despair of Salvation is ordinarily excited by the Devil at the End
of their Life. When he he has trained up Souls in the other Sins against the
Holy Ghost he discovers them to them at Death to make them fall into Despair of
their Salvation: For then their Eyes being opened to consider the great Number
of Sins which they have committed against the Holy Ghost, all the Days of their
Life, of which they have never repented, and how often they have received the
Sacraments in this evil State: This makes them fall into a Despair of being
saved, because the Soul is disordered, and cannot perceive the Means of its
Salvation: Yea, though they should not distinctly perceive all those Sins, they
are notwithstanding in such Confusion and Perplexity that they durst not hope
for Salvation, and they would be ashamed to declare their Misery to Men, who
still held them for good Men. Hence it is that these Souls die without
Repentance, which is the Consummation of all their Evils: For by the straight
Righteousness of God no Sins will ever be pardoned without Repentance; and
they, not embracing this, die miserably, though they have lived in a seeming
Holiness, they go notwithstanding to receive their Portion with Devils; even
though they had but one of these Sins against the Holy Ghost, they shall never be
saved.

I said to her; That I began to doubt of the Salvation of all Men, since they
who are called Saints do so commonly perish: That these Sins against the Holy
Ghost were so much to be dreaded, and nevertheless so few are afraid of them;
that God's Judgment of things is quite different from that of Men.

She said; Yes, truly Sir, God's Judgment is quite another thing than Man's:
Luke 16. 15.
For most frequently what they esteem (k) Is. 55. 8, 9.
Good is in God's fight very bad. This is since they left his Righteousness and
leaned to their own. They are now incapable of making a right Judgment; because
their own Righteousness is blind, and founded only on their own Imaginations,
and not at all on the Truth, which could never deceive them: For it is
unchangeable, and without Dissimulation; but the Truth and Righteousness of Men
is lying and deceitful, and he who trusts in it, must of Necessity perish;
because it flatters us to our Perdition. If we had continued in the
Righteousness of God, our Judgment would have been conformable to his: But
since we are fallen into Unrighteousness, we judge unrighteously, both in
respect of God and of our selves: For we judge falsely of God on all Occasions,
attributing very often to him the Blame of our Damnation, and of all the other
Evils which befall us: Though notwithstanding no Evil can come from God, he being
the Fountain of all Good, to which all Evils are opposite: We may also judge
amiss as to our selves, believing often our Salvation to be sure, when it is in
great Hazard as you may see by the Deduction of the Sins against the Holy
Ghost, of which I have so particularly spoken to you, to let you see, Sir, how
the most Pious are deceived, since they strayed from the Righteousness and the
Truth of God, they are full of frivolous Devotions, which blind their
Understanding, that they know not real Truth, nor solid Virtue, but amusing
themselves with the Discourses of Men, and seeming Virtues, they live and die
in a Presumption of their Salvation, without good Works, and thus they perish
for ever.

The Ninth Conference.
That no body can be saved, but he who professes the Goodness, Righteousness
and Truth of God. The World is at present without them, but it shall be
renewed. The Danger that Men are in. Secret Evil ought to be discovered.

I Said to her; That many would be deceived at Death; because no body is endued
with that Goodness, Righteousness and Truth of God; and if there can be no
Salvation without these no body will be saved, or very few.

She said; No, Sir, no body can be saved if he do not possess Ps. 15. (14). Ps.
112, (111,) 4.
the RIGHTEOUSNESS, the GOODNESS and the TRVTH of God. Therefore Jesus Christ
says, Matthew. 5. 48.
. Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect. He does not mean that we
should be perfect as God, in his Power or his Essence; but in proportion to our
being in his Righteousness, his Goodness and Truth. The Righteousness of God
makes us do all things justly, as well in Regard of our Enemies, as of our
Friends and our selves: so that we must always, at all times, and on all
Occasions, be righteous both in Word and Deed. In this consists the
Righteosness of God: For if we are righteous only according to our own
Inclinations, we have nothing but a Humane Righteousness, which ends with us,
and cannot save us Consider, Sir, the Righteousness of the Pharisee Luke 18
10,-14.
, you will see that he fasted twice a Week, paid Tithes of all that he possessed,
and did other good things in the Judgment of Men; and notwithstanding he is
rejected by God, and not justified; which makes it appear to us sufficiently,
that to be saved, we must have another Righteousness than our own; that it must
be conformable to the Righteousness of God, or else it will not avail us for
Eternity; because it is said elsewhere, Matthew. 5. 20.
If your Righteousness exceed not that of the Pharisees, you shall not enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Nevertheless there are very few who attain to the
Righteousness of the Pharisee, and yet every one believes he shall be saved,
though he has neither Divine nor Humane Righteousness. Must there not be many
deceived at Death? For to have the Goodness of God also, a Man must do Good to
all* Matthew. 5. 44, 45.
without respect of Persons, and he must not do Evil Romans 13. 10. 3 John 11.
: For he who is evil in something ceases to be good, and to partake of the
Goodness of God, who does always good, and never does evil. And to have the
Truth of God, a Man must be true in all things; which Men are very far from:
For they lie in all things, to God, to themselves, and to their Neighbor. They
lie to God, in saying that they love him, and are resigned to him, while there
is not so much as one Person in the World that is resigned to the Will Is. 59.
15, 16.
of God. Every one will needs depend on himself, and follow his own Will, or
that of some other Pe^so^ he has chosen for these Ends and is not satisfied
with the Will of God, except in so far as it is conformable to his
Inclinations. We lie also to our selves, persuading our selves that we are
Christians, though we do not in any of our Actions follow the Instructions of
Jesus Christ: We make our selves believe that we are just and virtuous, that we
would not offend God in any thing, while we do it every Moment, having nothing
in the sight of God but an imaginary and hypocritical Righteousness and
Perfection. We lie also in respect of our Neighbor, who looking upon our
outward Works of Devotion, or Habits, or Words, thinks that we are such before
God as we appear* but it is not so. In fine, we are as far removed from the
Truth of God, as Hell is from Heaven; and also from his Righteousness and
Goodness; and yet we think to be saved! What a great Presumption is this of
Salvation, without good Works, which will never be forgiven, neither in this
World, nor in the other: For we will never repent, because of unknown
Blindness! For he who should know it, would endeavor to find out a Remedy or
Cure; and would say as the blind Man in the Gospel Luke 18. 41.
Lord, that I may see! But as long as we believe that we see clearly, we take
no care to search for Remedies to an evil that we will not know which causes
the Damnation of all Men in the World, because none are free of this horrible
Darkness.

These last Words made me tremble, being joined to those she had said before;
that there was not so much as one Man in the World who was resigned to God. I
asked her how it was possible that God should create all Men to be damned?

She said; Sir, God has created no body to be damned; 1 Timothy 2. 4, 5.
but all Men for Salvation: For God can damn no body. It must needs still be
that Man damns himself of his own Free Will; otherwise God should do an evil
thing, which he cannot do, but does all good. This being so, Sir, you must ask
Men, each one in particular, how is it possible that they damn themselves? But
you must not ask God, how is it possible that each one is damned? For he would
answer, it is Prove. 8. 36. Wisd, 1. 16.
because they will be so of their own Free Will; which shall never be taken from
them. Every one damn us himself, for his own particular, and all these
particular Damnations being put together, make this general Damnation, which
God cannot hinder: Matthew. 23. 27.
For he cannot save so much as one Soul without the Consent of the Free Will
which he has once given it; letting each one enjoy this Free Will without any
Constraint; all Men in particular are free to damn themselves, as they do;
because they will not resign themselves to the Will of God, which Resignation
would assuredly save them, rendering them happy both in this World, and the
other. But since we will not continue in a Dependence on God, but will follow
and depend on our own Wills, we render our selves miserable, both in this
World, and to all Eternity. The Sins of our first Parents ought to have made us
wise: For by forsaking this Dependence, they brought on themselves all sorts of
Miseries; and we not satisfied to groan yet under these by participation, do
daily increase them by our own proper Resolution, that we will not be ruled and
governed by the same God, who demands of us the same Dependence which he
demanded of those our first Parents; which we do constantly deny him, and will
needs depend on our own Will, and follow it as much as we can, without
informing our selves of the Will of God. Now every one doing this as to his own
particular, is it a Wonder that all in general perish since none in particular
will resign himself to the Will of God, without which no body shall be saved?

I asked, If God could have created so beautiful a World, with all that is
within it, only for Men, who will damn themselves since all in general will
needs depend on their own Wills, and that no Person in the World is resigned to
the Will of God.

She said; God has not created this beautiful World, Sir, for these Men who
shall be reprobated, but for the Elect only; and those who of their free Choice
and Free Will shall depend entirely on God, and be ruled and governed wholly at
his Pleasure, renouncing altogether their own Will and Desires Ps. 37.
These shall enjoy to all Eternity this beautiful World, with all that is
within it, in all Perfection, as I have already told you, Sir, the World shall
last always, and none of the Works of God shall ever perish; neither Men, nor
Beasts, nor any other Creatures; but each of them in their kind, shall remain
for ever for the Honor of God and the Delight of Men who shall live after the
Extermination of all Evil.

But if the Men who live now, will not resign themselves to the Will of God,
but follow that of the Devil or their own: These shall not possess the World,
but shall only sojourn in it for a little time, and they shall go out of it
without carrying any thing away but the Sins with which they have loaded
themselves during so short a Voyage: But all that is beautiful and good in the
World, shall remain for the Elect Rev. 21. 7. Is. 60. 21. 65. 9, -- 25.
, who shall enjoy it to all Eternity. For if this were not, we should have
indeed a mean God, who had created the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, all the
Elements, so many different Creatures as there are in the World, and all this
only for the Devil, and for Men who will damn themselves, as they do at
present. It would follow that God should have little Power to be thus
frustrated of his Pretensions, in having created so many excellent things, if
they should serve only for the Use of the Reprobate, and the Devil should carry
away all the Fruits of the six Days Labors which he did in creating this
beautiful World, if all this should be for the Devil and his Adherents! No, no,
Sir, this cannot go so. God must have his time to reign over all his Creatures,
that they may adore and know him the only true God, and that the Number of his
Elect may be multiplied, as much as he has destined them; that these never
dying, may bless him to all Eternity. This is the Kingdom of Jesus Christ which
I wait for, Sir, with Cheerfulness. Nothing can afflict me in this Hope. It is
a joyful Life to think on it, what Joy must it be to possess it?

I said to her; That these Words did ravish me with Pleasure; but that I had
also in Exchange the Grief to believe, that all Men now are in a State of
Damnation, for fear lest I also be of the Number.

She replied; You may indeed rejoice, Sir, It Is the greatest Ground of Joy that
we can ever have. It Is the Masterpiece of all the Works of God, and Rev. 21. 6.
the Accomplishment of all things. For this the World is created, for this Man
is created, and for this God is become Man. The Coming of Jesus Christ in
Sufferings, was for Sinners; but his glorious Coming will be for the Righteous.
Therefore he says, being in the World, Matthew. 9. 13.
I am not come to save the Righteous, but to bring Sinners to Repentance. God
from all Eternity designed to become Man, to the end he might not only make Man
like to him, but that God also might be like to Man, that he might take his
perfect and complete Delight with him. It Is good to consider this, Sir, that
God is not become Man, only on design to suffer and to die: For this would have
been a sad Subject; and the ancient Patriarchs would have had little Ground to
have prayed and desired so earnestly that God should become Man to see him
hardly used, suffering Reproaches, Scourges, and so cruel a Death. The Love
they bare to God would rather have made them desire to remain in their
Captivity, than to be delivered from it at so dear a Price as the Sufferings
and the Death of God-Man. All those Wishes and Aspirations which all the
Fathers and Prophets of the ancient Law made, could not be for this Coming in
Sufferings; but rather that glorious Coming, wherein Jesus Christ Jos. 12. 32.
being lifted up, will draw all Men unto him; which his Death on the Cross has
not done, because very few followed him then, and no body follows him at
present. This is very far from drawing all to him, seeing so few have been
drawn from the Beginning of the World even till now. Must there not a Time come
wherein that he may fulfill his Word, he will draw all in general to him? Must
he not also to make the same Accomplishment John 1. 29.
take away the Sins of the World? For his Death, instead of taking away the
Sins of the World, has rather brought on more; because they have increased and
multiplied since. Can God fail in his Promise? Must there not come a time when
he will take away all the Sins of the World? If this were not, God should not
be faithful in his Promises; which cannot be true: For Matthew. 24. 35.
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but his Promises shall not pass away. There
is not a Syllable of them which shall not have its entire Accomplishment in an
altogether perfect Sense. They would sometimes make us believe that all this
shall be fulfilled in Paradise; and they tell us that nothing defiled can enter
there: How then shall there be Sins there to be taken away? And if all the
Blessed are united to him, there will be no more need of drawing them.

I said to her; That I was so convinced, as to believe that we must look for a
new World and a new Earth, and that I knew well enough that nothing of the holy
Scripture shall have its Accomplishment in this World; but that I was not freed
from the Trouble of believing that all Men now were in a State of Damnation, of
which Number I was one, though nevertheless I desired to be saved, whatever it
cost.

She said; Sir, to discover Truths, you must always take things in their
Source. Consider, I pray you, that the Coming of Jesus Christ in Sufferings,
was for no other Grounds but to make known to Men their Sins. in which they
lived so blindly that the most Part knew not what they did, but followed one
another insensibly in the Way of Perdition, as they do yet at present, God of
his great Mercy would have become Man before his Coming in Glory, that he might
bring Light to Sinners, whereby they might know their Sins, and to teach them
in particular what they ought to do and avoid, to the end they may observe the
Law of God, which he came not to change nor abolish, no more than to give a new
one; but only to teach the Means by which Men should easily attain to the
observing of this Law of God, which was given from the Beginning of the World,
and will never be changed: For God will never demand any other thing of Men but
the Dependence, which they ought always to acknowledge, they have on their God,
who has created them and given them all things. In the Practice of this
Dependence is contained all the Law and the Prophets, and the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ. They can have no other thing in Substance: But Men being fallen from
the observing of this first Law, have need from time to time of diverse Means to
raise them again from their Fall. For these ends Jesus Christ is come into the
World timously, and ere it perish, before his limited time; that taking Humane
Flesh, he might teach Men palpably, according to their Senses, to the end they
might not be any more ignorant of any thing, but might get out of Darkness to
discover their Sins, and see clearly the Way they ought to take, to come to
Salvation. And that those Means which Jesus Christ came to teach them, might
not seem too grievous and difficult to them, he would needs pave the Way
himself, and put them in practice all the time he was on Earth, to the end Men
might afterward follow his Steps 1 Pet. 2. 21.
, and imitate his Example. By this Foundation, Sir, you can easily discover
whether all Men be in the Way of Salvation or Damnation. Lay this down first,
that Marth. 7. 21.
no body shall be saved but he who keeps the Law of God. Secondly, that Men
through their Frailty, cannot observe this Law but by such Means as Jesus Christ
has taught them Romans 8. 3.
; because they imagine that they live in a Dependence upon God, when they do
but depend on their own Wills. To make this known, Jesus Christ teaches them,
that to be his, Matthew. 16. 24.
they must deny themselves. Not that this Law of denying ones self, was
ordained in these precise Words in the Beginning of the World, but it was
tacitly contained in the Law of LOVING ONE GOD ONLY; because we cannot love him
only, when we love our selves; and whereas Men did not understand well the
Contents of this Law, Jesus Christ is come to explain it to us so particularly
by all the Precepts of his Gospel, that no body can be ignorant any longer, how
he ought to keep the Law of God, and consequently, work out his Salvation;
because this Gospel Law does precisely mark out to us all that we ought to do
and to avoid: So that we must not look any longer from any, neither from God
nor Men, for other Instructions in order to our Salvation; because Jesus Christ
has omitted nothing, nor said any thing that is superfluous, but shown us all
things necessary for obtaining eternal Life.

Now consider, Sir, if you know any living this Day in the World who have
entirely resigned their Wills to that of God, and who love no other thing but
him. If you do not know any, be firmly persuaded, that none within your
Knowledge, is in a State of Salvation. And fearing lest you be deceived by this
general Persuasion, as many are, who persuade themselves that they are resigned
to God, and love none but him; remark particularly if they observe the Gospel
Law: For we cannot observe the one without practicing the other: For he who has
entirely resigned his Will to that of God, Gal. 2. 20.
lives no longer to himself, but God lives in him, and works there all that
Jesus Christ has taught; seeing the same Spirit lives in one resigned to God,
which lived in the Body of Jesus Christ. There can never be any difference
here, being in both the same unchangeable God.

I said to her; That this being supposed, I had good Ground to fear, that all
the World was in a State of Damnation, and I likewise, but that I would get out
of this Darkness and receive the Light that God should give me, that I might
follow him.

She said; Sir, you will be happy in doing it: For otherwise it is to be feared,
you may perish with others; because all the World goes on blindly to Perdition;
but the Light Is. 58. 10.
is now arisen in Darkness. Do not reject it, Joh. 3. 19.
to love your Darkness rather than the Light; but rather Joh. 12. 35, 36.
walk according to it while the Day does last, that is to say, our short Life,
which is nothing but a Day in Comparison with Eternity: The Night of this Day,
is our Death, after which there is nothing more to do: In whatsoever Eccl. 11.
3.
State we die, we shall abide in it. Therefore we ought not to let the Occasion
slip that is now offered us. Let not your felf be gained by Flatteries, nor by
false Persuasions. Seek always the Truth: For they who flatter us, Is. 9. 15.
ruin us. Look on all those as Flatterers, who speak to you according to their
sensual Inclinations, and hold those for Deceivers who persuade you that you
are a good Christian, and that you will be saved after the Way that you live at
present: For there are no true Christians but those who follow and imitate the
Life and Doctrine of Jesus Christ; and there is no Salvation to be hoped for,
but in keeping the Law of God. You must take up with these two Things, Sir, if
you would attain to Salvation, the Law of God and the Doctrine of Jesus. The
Holy Spirit, which is now come into the World, brings no new Law, nor new
Explications of it; because Jesus Christ has sufficiently explained it: He
comes only to make the Law appear John 16. 8.
and the Sins that are opposite to it, to the end that we may embrace the one
and reject the other. You have wondered sometimes that I told you so many evil
Things of the Church and of spiritual Persons: Believe me, this was not but by
the Light of the Holy Spirit, that you might avoid the Evil in order to the
doing well, since you cannot love the one without hating the other: Truth must
always discern the one from the other, or otherwise you will be easily
deceived, as all the World at present is, who take Vice for Virtue, and
apparent for true good. Therefore receive the true Light, that you may judge
uprightly, and not according to the Appearance of Things: For the Devil is so
covered with Virtue, and clothed with Hypocrisy, that he deceives even those
of the best Dispositions. There are frequently so many false Goods in the
World, that we do not distinguish them from the true: And that we may not come
to discover them, he puts some Scruples in the Minds of good Men, that they may
not believe the Truth of the Evil, and makes his Adherents teach, that it is a
Sin of Detraction to discover the Faults of Priests, and of those who make a
Profession of Virtue, that their Sins remaining secret, they may deceive the
more, and may commit them more honorably; and they say, that a Man should take
his own Garments to cover the sins of the Priests. That you may see that this
Doctrine comes from the Devil, you need but mark what Jesus Christ did in such
Encounters; whether he covered with his Garments the Sins of the Popes, Bishops
and Priests who were in his time. We will find Matthew. 23. 8.
that he declared them openly before all the World, calling them Hypocrites,
Generation of Vipers, wicked Sepulchers, and so many other Names, to the end he
might declare to People their Wickedness, that they might beware of them: For
he says, Mat. 16. 6.
beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, and Mat. 7. 15.
of those who come to you in Sheeps Clothing, and inwardly are ravening
Wolves. All this, with many other Evils, Jesus Christ spoke of the Priests of
his time; and now they teach that we must honor them and speak well of them,
though they live ill! Does not this Doctrine oppose that of Jesus Christ? and
therefore it is Antichristian Nevertheless, you, Sir, with so many others,
think you commit a Sin to hear the Truth of Evil. It Is by this false Piety,
that the Devil takes his Advantage: For their Evils being concealed, they
commit them more than if they were discovered; because Shame and Humane Respect
would withold them from Sin; and also the Good and Pious would not be so
easily deceived, as they are by the good Opinion of Evil, which often draws in
the Good by Ignorance, who are persuaded that they who have the Reputation of
being good, would not do Evil. How many thousand have been deceived after this
manner! Take heed that you never be one of these; but stay yourself on the
living Rock, which is Jesus Christ. He cannot deceive nor fail. Take up with
his Instructions, Sir, and follow them. You Will be sure of your Salvation, which
otherwise I cannot promise you. Whatever Men say, they are not our Saviors:
For it is written, Jer. 1. 17, 5.
Woe to the Man that put his Confidence in Man. He is truly miserable who
grounds his Salvation on the Words and Sentiments of Men, who can give us
nothing but vain Hopes, founded on their Imaginations. It is not enough to
trust to these weak Stays; we must take another Aim, and direct our Selves
toward that Morning Star which appears to our Eyes, that we may follow it till
we have found this Holy Spirit who must teach us all things.

The Tenth Conference.
That the Time is come that Man shall receive the Holy Spirit in Fullness, and
what hinders them to receive him.

I Asked her; How I might find the Holy Spirit? For I could not meet with an
Assembly of Apostles, nor pray with them Forty Days, that I might receive him.

She said; Sir, you shall receive the Holy Spirit without being in the Company
of the Apostles: For even they did not receive him in Fullness, 1 Cor. 13. 9 --
12.
but in part only, and the Promise that Jesus Christ made to send us John 16.
13.
the Holy Ghost; who shall teach us all things, had not its full
Accomplishment: For there were many things which the Apostles knew not; and
there were also several Faults committed by them after having received the Holy
Spirit. It is in these last times that the Holy Spirit comes, who shall teach
us all things. If your Soul were wholly resigned to the Will of God, it would be
prepared to receive the Holy Spirit in Fullness: For his time is now come. Do
you not even now feel some Rays of his Light by so many different things which
I have told you in our so frequent Conversation; Do you not see that many of
these things have not been known nor discovered in former times? Can you doubt
that there is at present a Treasure hid in the Earth, which begins to be
discovered? From whence otherwise should these precious Stones of the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, come, the so fragrant Roses of true Virtue, and so many new
Notices which appear in our Eyes as Buds of Paradise? Would you have a Holy
Spirit visible and carnal? Men since the Apostles Days have more Understanding
of spiritual things. Therefore God has multiplied their Knowledge and refined
their Understandings, that they may conceive the Light of the Holy Spirit by
lively Reasons and solid Truths; not by material Forms and Figures, which were
given only for outward Signs, capable of being seen by the Eyes of Flesh, which
did not yet perceive those things of the Spirit: For the Holy Spirit not a
Dove, nor Wind, nor Tongues of Fire; but an intelligible Spirit who makes us
know God and our selves, and brings always along with him Galat. 5. 22.
his twelve Fruits, and his Isa. 11. 12.
seven Gifts, all which are spiritual, and cannot be seen no more than their
Author, but by their Operations. This is the Holy Spirit which you ought to
desire, Sir, and not a visible and material one. Resign your self to God, and
you shall certainly receive him: For his Time is come. He is born upon the
Earth in Spirit, as he was born in Flesh in the Stable of Bethlehem. ( c)
Matthew. 13. 44.
( d) Dan. 12. 4,


I said to her; There were yet many Souls in the World as well as I, who
earnestly desired to receive the Holy Spirit.

She said; Sir, every one will say that he would receive him, but I know no
body yet who would effectually resign his Will to God's and let himself be
ruled and governed by him. We still wish for this and that according to our
Bent and Inclinations. We are sorry for Adversities. We do not willingly suffer
Tribulations and Crosses. We complain of Wrong and Affronts done us. We desire
to be honored, served, and loved, and to have our Ease. In one Word, all our
Life is a constant Tract of Self-love; and yet we say we are resigned to God;
and if this were true, we would have no longer self-will, but that of God would
be our Rule and our Contentment, as well in Troubles, Adversities and
Derelictions, as in all sort of Prosperity and Abundance: For regarding nothing
but the Will of God, we would receive all things with Joy: But as long as the
one's too sweet, and the other too salt to our Taste, it is a sign we yet live
to our selves and are not resigned to God, nor ready to follow his Will, and so
are not disposed to receive the Holy Spirit, because our self-will hinders him:
For he cannot operate in a Soul which is not disengaged from its own Will,
which still opposes the Gifts and Fruits of the Holy Spirit, and directly
hinders his Operations. It Is thus that I say I know no body, yet who will be
resigned to the Will of God, except in Words but not in Deed. Indeed we would
do God's Will as long as it is conformable to ours; but as soon as it opposes
that, there is no more Submission. We give God our Will as long as all goes
right according to our Desires and Wishes; but as soon as the contrary falls
out, we take back this given Will to dispose of it our selves: and thus we
continue always full of self-love, and yet we would receive forsooth, the Holy
Spirit to join him with our Filth and Imperfections to make a very unsuitable
Marriage, as that would be of God with Sin 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16.
which are two incompatible things, as Heat and Cold, which can never dwell
together. Yea, truly though there were nothing but the Sin of self-love, it is a
mortal Wound, against the Commandment of loving one God alone.

The Eleventh Conference.
How Man must resign himself to God.

I Said to her; That I would very willingly resign my self to God, and yield
myself to be entirely governed by him, and to follow all that I shall know to
be his Will.

She said; Sir, this Resignation has some Exception yet, and is not wholly
disengaged: For if you wait till an Angel from Heaven come to make known to you
what the Will of God is, you will no ways be resigned to him; but you must take
Joh 1. 11. 2. 10. Romans 8. 27.
all that befalls you for his Will, great or small things, all comes from him,
without excepting any thing: For if you are resigned to him, you will have no
longer Desires of your own, and will no longer seek any thing: Therefore all
that shall befall you, shall come by his Order; when you take it from his Hand,
you can never fail, even though it were the Devil himself 2 Cor. 12. 7.
or some wicked Creature did it: he will never permit them to hurt you Joh 1. 12.
2. 6.
but in so far as it shall be his Will. It Is true, a wicked Man has his
Liberty, to do what Evil he pleases; but God has Power also to preserve us that
their Evils do not touch us: Or if he permit them to touch us, gives us
Strength to Phil. 1. 29.
suffer them, and that with Joy; and so they cannot wound us: For all worldly
Good and Evil are for the most part but imaginary things; and when our Mind is
brought to take Afflictions joyfully, they seem to us Contentments, and no
longer Afflictions. This depends so strongly upon our Imagination, that our
Happiness and Misery seems to depend upon it. If we imagine that Riches are a
Burden, Poverty will be a Repose to us. And thus it is of every other thing.
Take confidently all that shall befall you for the Will of God; for otherwise
that would be but like a forced Resignation which would require to know
precisely on every Occasion, if this were the Will of God or not. This Study or
Application of Mind, is an Hindrance to a perfect Resignation.

I said to her; That I would take all from God's Hand; and that I had often
told her, that I yield my Will to him.

She said; It Is true, Sir, you have often said it; but I doubt you have notdone
it; because I observe often yet Oppositions in your Will. He that has gained a
Place, does not fight against it any longer. Far better be a Conqueror than a
Combatant. If your Will were given up to God, as you think, you would not have
it any longer: For a thing given* does not any longer belong to us. How could
your Will make Opposition then, if it truly belonged to God? You could not feel
any Combats of that which you had not any longer: For if I had not a Hand, I
could not suffer any Evil in it. We often say and think some Things that are
not true. Reflect but a little seriously, Sir, upon all your Actions, and see
if you will not find that they are done by your own Will; Yea, even your own
pious Exercises. Consider a little if it would not be a trouble to you to
change or leave them by reason of some Accident which God should permit to
befall you. This is a Sign that they proceed from your own Will: For if they did
proceed from the Will of God the abstaining from them would be as agreeable to
you as the doing of them: For there is little on Earth, the Want of which does
not give as much Honor to God as the Enjoyment of it; and a Will resigned to
God, does no longer feel Self-contradiction: So that if such a Soul were
deprived of all sort of Spiritual and Christian Exercises by some Accident of
War, Sickness or other Inconveniences, which might happen, 'twou'd not so much
as regret that it could not perform them; because God's Will would be more dear
to it than all the Contentment it might receive in the Performance of all its
pious Duties: Yea, it would think it self in a more happy State; because the
Practices of Virtue brings along with them some Self-satisfactions and
Pleasures, which lessens their Merits: For having received a Recompense in this
World, we ought not to look for it in the other. Thus, Sir, you may see and
observe, if it be true that you are resigned to God, not only in Spiritual
things, but in all temporal Affairs. I believe you will not find one that is
delivered from Self-Love or natural Inclinations.

I asked her; How I could perfectly make this entire Resignation to God without
ever revoking it?

She said; Sir, resign your self to God in such a manner as that you no longer
follow your own Will in any thing: For Matthew. 25. 21.
He who is faithful in a few things, will be set over great things. Every
Moment, and on all Occasions, you may make a Sacrifice of your own Will: For it
acts always. It will see, hear, walk, and do many other things that are not
needful, and always for the Glory of God. In all this, you must deny it the
Satisfaction of executing these sort of Wills, which are unprofitable, and robb
us of our time, that is so dear and precious: And if we must render Matthew 12.
36.
an Account of every idle Word, much more of idle Actions: And it should never
be said that Matthew. 10. 30.
these are but small things: For God takes notice of small things, since he
says, that ( h) the Hairs of our Head are numbered, and that the Leaf of a Tree
shall not fall without his Permission. It is because God has given us this
limited Time to do Penitence in, that he will exact an Account of it from us,
even to a Moment, that it may appear wherein we employ it; and if we employ it
in unprofitable Actions, according to our own Will, we are certainly to blame;
because we do not accomplish the Penitence enjoined us, and we apply the time
allotted for it, in idle and unprofitable Actions. We ought, Sir, on this
Occasion, to deny our Will by way of Penitence, and to remember that we have
given it to God, and that we our selves ought not any longer to dispose of it;
and by combating it thus, we shall certainly overcome it: For our Will is like
a Horse, which the Bridle turns whither we would lead him. If we yield it up to
the good Will of God, we must constrain it to follow him in small things as
well as great, or otherwise it will endeavor to escape in Perils and Dangers,
and from unprofitable things will fall into evil things. The best Curb is to
put the Reins into God's Hands, that he may guide as it shall seem good to him,
and never take them back again; because we our selves have not enough of Wisdom
and Force to govern it: But he alone must guide it to its blessed End.

I asked her, How I might accomplish my Penitence, and how I might put in
practice this Resignation to God?

She said; Sir, we must choose no other Penance but that which God gives us.
When we endure the Cold, and Heat, the Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, Infirmities,
and Diseases, that it pleases God to send us, we must suffer them in the Spirit
of Penitence; because all would not come upon us if it were not for Penance for
Sin: For before it nothing troubled us. All our Miseries and Corruptions come
by Sin, even the Vermin of our Body, the Lice, and all the other Beasts
engendered by Corruption, are produced by Sin; and therefore we must suffer
them willingly, since this is the Penance which God has in Justice permitted to
befall us instead of the Punishments due to our Sins. We ought not to invent
Penances according to our Fancy, since God has enjoined those which he thinks
fit, that is, to gain our Bread with the Sweat of our Face Gen 3. 16.
: so that all our Travels, Pains, and Labors, both of Body and Mind, are all
fatisfactory Penances enjoined us by God himself: But the Penances chosen after
our Fancy, are often invented by the Devil, who would thereby drive us
headlong, or at least excite us to vain Glory; because ordinarily those who
fast or wear Sackcloth, are chagrin and presumptuous, believing themselves to
be better than others, and that God is obliged to them for their good Works, as
the Pharisee Luke 18. 11.
who thanked God for his Righteousness. All this proceeds from Self-love: But
true Penitence consists in taking patiently whatsoever God permits to befall us,
either to our Body, Estate or Mind, and willingly to suffer it in the Spirit of
Penitence, to satisfy for our Sins. This is the true Practice of the
RESIGNATION of our Will to God: For every Moment there falls out Occasions of
Suffering and Submission; so that we need not seek for them. It is only
necessary that we practice this Resignation of our Will to God for
accomplishing the saving Penitence which he has enjoined us, and for the
Exercise of all sort of Virtues: For as soon as God shall be Master of our
Will, he will lead it to all good: so that we shall do no longer Evil, even in
temporal things: For God will govern all with his Spirit of Righteousness,
Goodness and Truth, which can never fail in any thing. Righteousness doing good
to all and evil to none. Truth giving Light to discern all things and so to
bring all to a good End. If you resolve, Sir, truly to resign your self to God,
you shall enjoy all this Happiness; but as long as you act by your own Will,
you will spoil all, and shall not be saved.

I said to her; That this Way was so straight, that one would be afraid to pass
through it; and that it would make one afraid that he could not be saved.

She said; This Way is only a little straight at the Beginning; but as soon as
one has forced himself to depart from his own Will, it is then so large, free
and pleasant, that there can he nothing more agreeable: For the Soul which has
resigned its Will to God, lives Ps. 36. 37, 5.
like a Child, without Care: and though Heaven and Earth should be overturned,
she is still in Repose, and without Fear, knowing well that God who governs
her, is able to preserve her through all: She seeks no longer after any thing,
knowing well that her God will still provide for her; Ps. 72. 73. 75.
She has no more Desire after any thing; for she finds in God a Satiety and
perfect Satisfaction: She places her Hope no longer in any thing but the
Promises of God. In short, Sir, this is a Life wholly delightful and pleasant,
full of solid Contentment* which is not founded upon the Levity of Chances, or
Changes of Men, but upon a permanent Stability: Whereas on the contrary, the
Life of one who is governed after his own Will is very miserable, and he walks
continually upon the Briars and Thorns with which it is sown: So that a Soul
subject to to its own Passions furnish him with a kind of Martyrdom. How many
Vexations and Cares are there to satisfy this Self-will which often is
unsatiable? The more it is satisfied, the less it is contented. How often does
our Self-will throw us into irreparable Mischiefs? It Is ignorant, inconstant,
insolent, hasty and inclined to all sort of Evil; so that he who follows it, is
obliged to lead a miserable Life and to end it in an unhappy Death. It seems,
Sir, you are, afraid yet of resigning your self to God, as if this
Resignatination were a straight Way, and troublesome Life! when you see by so
many Truths, that it is so sweet and agreeable: and on the contrary, that which
seems so pleasant to you, is so painful and dangerous. All the Difficulty that
you will find to make this Resignation, is no other thing but a Shadow which
appears something, and in Effect is nothing As soon as you shall turn away your
Eyes from your self, to look toward God, this Shadow of Apprehension will
vanish, and you shall see it no more.

I said to her; That I was not so much afraid of resigning my self to God: For
I would willingly do it, but that in several Recounters she had given me
Occasion to doubt of my Salvation.

She said; Sir, do you love flattering Discourses more than the Truth? If it be
so, you may retire from me: For I am settled in the Truth, and I have no desire
to depart from it. I can make no Reflection whether it pleases or displeases my
Hearers; but I am resolved still to observe it, though it would cost me my Life:
For he who forsakes the Truth, forsakes God, which I will never do. I love
rather to lose the Favor of all the Men of the World, than to omit the Truth
when I am obliged to speak it: But setting aside this Obligation, I can very
well hold my Peace; because Jesus Christ has said, that Pearls should not be
cast before Swine. If the Truths that I have told you beget Scruple in you,
it is a sign that you are not resolved to be saved: For otherwise you would
greatly rejoice to understand the Truth. Those who are called Matthew. 7. 6.
Swine in the Gospel, are Men who make a Dunghill of the Roses of true Virtue,
or of the Pearls of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. Those hidden Secrets are
precious Stones; and he makes a Dunghill of them who says that they are
imaginary or contrived things, or Heresies. All these Sentiments make a Dunghill
of the Pearls which are presented to them, and according to the Counsel of
Jesus Christ, they ought not to be told to such, but to those who value them as
they merit. And when yor tell me that I give you occasion to doubt of your
Salvation, by speaking of true and solid Virtue; it seems you would also make a
Dunghill of its Roses. I have told you the Truth, That no body shall be saved
but he who of his free Resolution, resigns his Will to God's, and denis his
own. You need not therefore doubt of your Salvation, if so be you will do this,
Sir; but if you will not, doubt confidently of your Salvation: For you shall
never obtain it. This Doubting is good if thereby you take a Resolution to
search for the means of your Conversion: For Prove. 1. 7.
the Fear of God is the Beginning of true Wisdom. If you be not in Fear as to
your Salvation, you will presume of it, and therefore will be sure of your
Damnation: Because he who presumes to have it, uses no Endeavors to obtain it,
but dies in a Sin against the Holy Ghost. Therefore it is a great Advantage
that I have made you doubt of your Salvation, since this Doubt will certainly
lead you to Salvation.

I said to her; That I desired indeed to have the Fear of God, and of my
Salvation; but that I saw my self so far from this perfect Resignation, that it
seemed to me I could never attain to it.

She said; Sir, that is nothing but a panick Fear; because there is no Ground
to fear what we would willingly do. If you have been resolved in it for so long
a time past, suffer not the Devil to tempt you now: For there is no more
Difficulty at present than the first Day you had the Will to do it. Be not
carried away by imaginary things which are nothing but Amusements. Fix on the
Reality of the thing. You perceive clearly that you have a Free. Will and
Choice and that by this you act in all things. It is by it you go from one
Place to another: It is it that desires to see and hear: It makes you covet or
pretend to Wealth, Places, or Honors: It is it also that desires Pleasures and
Prosperities: It is it likewise that would rule over others, and cannot suffer
from any: It is it that desires its Ease and Repose with many other things for
our Advantage: It is always our selfwill, that Works in us without ceasing.
This being discovered, there is nothing more to be done, but to interdict and
forbid it these Operations, to the end it may let God work Heb. 13. 21.
alone in us what it shall please him; and then there will be nothing more to
fear: For when we shall attain to this so much desired Resignation, there is
nothing more to be feared: For God who will rule us, will give us all things.
Does this seem difficult to you, Sir, that you doubt you cannot attain to it?
There is nothing to do here, but to cease: For God does then all in us. There
is nothing necessary but to rest: For this Resignation consists not in Actions,
but in Omissions. The Practice of it is so sweet that there is nothing more
desirable. All consists in taking care not to let our own Will act: And so
often as we perceive that it is inclined to any thing to Bridle it, and to say
to it, Cease; for God only ought to move thee. Is not this a sweet Exercise,
upon which notwithstanding our Salvation depends? For if it depended upon
wearing Sackcloth, taking Discipline to our selves, Fasting, Watching, or other
troublesome things, we would have ground to say and to fear that we could not
attain to it: but when we must only resign our Will to God, no body can excuse
himself, without Hazard of perishing.

The Twelfth Conference.
Of discerning the Motions of God from those of Nature, which must be done by
Righteousness, Goodness and Truth, which are three divine Qualities, according
to which, all our Motions and all our Actions ought be regulated with great
Care.

I Asked her, how I might know when my own Will acted, that I might make it
cease?

She said; Sir, as often as it is led to any thing that is evil, or very
unprofitable, it is certainly always our self-will: Because God cannot incline
it to such things: And when we seek our Honor, Pleasure or Profit, this also
proceeds from our self-will: For God will never give any such Desires. Indeed
he permits them sometimes to befall us; but he will never make us seek or desire
them. Therefore if we have a serious Application of Spirit, we will remark
presently if it be God or our self-will that acts in us: For God can never move
it but to good, or necessary things; and will never make our Will act but what
shall be for his Glory, or for the saving Good of our Neighbor. Nothing else
can come from God, but from our self-will, which is wholly depraved, and ought
never to do any thing for it self; for it spoils all. It were better to make it
cease without any more ado than to let it act alone and without God: Because we
presume often that we have done many good Works, which Luke 18. 14.
will be found to be evil and condemned by God: because our selfwill was
corrupted from the Beginning of the World in Adam, and is yet more corrupted by
our own actual Sins: so that it is not capable of moving it self but to Evil,
and not at all to Good. This may be very easily observed: For we feel always in
our selves some Inclination to do Evil: And if it were not restrained or
bridled by Reason or Virtue, we would do nothing without Sin, or which did not
^avour of its Corruption: For if we speak, it will be still with an Inclination
to augment what is for our Liking or Advantage, or to excuse our Faults: so
that naturally, we would never abide in the straight Truth: And if we converse
or do Business with our Neighbor, it will be still with a Spirit of
Covetousness, either of Wealth, Honor or Pleasure: so that all our own Bents
and Inclinations are carried always to Evil, unless we be habituated by Virtue
or good Breeding, not to follow Lying, Rapine or Deceit, nor the Spirit of
Covetousness.

I asked her, By what means I might discover if it be God that moves my Will in
all my daily Actions?

She said; Sir, there are certain Marks whereby to know when these Motions come
from God; because they are always accompanied with Righteousness, Goodness and
Truth, which Qualities are still inseparable from God's Spirit* Ephesians. 5. 9.
who never changes, but abides always righteous, good, and true; and therefore
cannot move to any Actions, Words or Thoughts, but those which are accompanied
with these three Conditions or Qualities. Therefore when we feel our selves
moved to undertake any thing whatsoever, we must always bend our Mind to remark
our Undertaking 'ere we begin it, and see if it respect the Glory of God, or
the saving Good of our Neighbor: And if so, we may pursue our Undertaking; but
by means that are just, good and true: For else we may be yet mistaken,
thinking that it was for the Glory of God, and the Good of our Neighbor, when
it was only our own Will and Inclination. For a Motion that comes from God, is
still accompanied with Righteousness, Goodness and Truth; and if we must lie or
be unjust, or hurt our Neighbor that we may attain to our Pretensions, however
they may be good in themselves, yet nevertheless they are not of God. That we
may follow the Motions of God, we must always observe this Rule, to remark in
all our Actions, whether small or great, if they are accompanied with
Righteousness, Goodness and Truth: And if all these together are not to be
found in them, we must still reject them as evil things, and produced by our
self-will: For God will never move to any thing how small soever it be if it be
not just, good and true. This is the true Touchstone whereby to discover when
Motions come from God: We need not consult Oracles, but examine well if our
Works be disinteressed from all our own Advantages, and if they be just, good
and true.

I asked her, If my self-will might not mingle with the Divine Motions?

She said; Yes, Sir, our self-will does very readily mingle with the Motions
from God. By this many Saints have committed great Faults. This falls out when
we arenot wholly disengaged from our selves, and Nature does yet live with
Grace: Notwithstanding it is easy to discover it when we are not precipitate
in any thing, and when we take time to examine narrowly what we do, to see if
it be just, and good and true. Then there is nothing to be feared whether our
own will mingle there or not. It Is God always is just, good and true. Our
Nature being transformed in him, does the same Functions of Righteousness,
Goodness and Truth. Therefore St. Paul said, Gal. ^. 20.
It is no longer I that live, but Jesus Christ lives in me: because the Soul
which is resigned to God, does so habituate it self to his Will, that it always
becomes one 1 Cor. 6. 17.
and the same thing with it: so that its own Will, being purged from it self,
moves no longer but by God: So that the Motions of the Soul and those of God
become the same thing, and they can no longer be distinguished; because the
Soul cannot now do any thing but what is just, good and true, unless it should
depart from its Union with God, and during this Straying should follow its own
Will: In this case it may do amiss, and not otherwise: But for you, Sir, you
are not yet habituated to this Union; examine still whether what you think,
speak or do, be just, good and true. With this you cannot be mistaken, even
though yourown Inclination should incite you to do things which have those three
Qualities of God: They are always of him, though the Devil himself should move
them; because there is nothing just, good and true which is not of God; because
he only is just, only good and only true: And by these Marks you will certainly
discern your own Motions from those of God; and even though they were but mingled
with them, there would still be something evil, or unjust, or untrue, and then
you must purge your Works from this Malignity, or else omit them altogether.

I told her, That I had yet one Doubt; that is, whether I ought to do or omit
the Works in which I perceived not precisely these three Qualities, of
Righteousness, Goodness and Truth; whether the Works were indifferent or
necessary, or out of Complaisance.

She said; Sir, you ought to do all necessary Works when they cannot be easily
done by others; And for those which are indifferent, to do them, is but to lose
time. They must either be unprofitable or have some end. If this end does not
respect the Glory of God, take good heed of mis-spending time, which is so
precious. Never be persuaded of this Indifference; because under that Name we
often do evil things without being aware of it. We can never do indifferent
things, except very subtly, before we reflect upon what we are doing: For
otherwise all our Actions, how small soever they be, have some Scope at which
they aim: And as for Works of Complaisance, they are forbidden by Jesus Christ,
when he says, Gal. 1. 10.
that he who seeks to please Men, is not the Servant of Jesus Christ, unless
your Complaisance aim at some good or necessary End: Otherwise every Deed of
Complaisance is vain and evil. Resolve, Sir, to do those things only, which
have the Righteousness, Goodness and Truth of God: For all others are to be
suspected, and bring no Glory to God, nor saving Good to our Neighbor; and
seeing you would follow Jesus Christ Col. 3. 1, 2.
seek those things which are above, and not those which are upon the Earth,
which must very quickly perish. It is better Matthew. 6. 20.
to lay up Treasures for Heaven, where the Rust does not corrupt: For though you
should gain herethe Friendship of all the Men of the World by your Works of
Complaisance, they cannot give you any thing. One Degree of the Glory of God is
of more worth than ten thousand Worlds. Endeavor, Sir, to labor for this, or
be still. Make no more fruitless Labor: For all that is not of God, is
nothing, and God alone is all permanent Good.

I said to her; That I had not made this serious Reflection to remark if all my
Actions were accompanied with Righteousness, Goodness and Truth, but that I did
them often without thinking on any thing, if I did not remark in them any of my
own Wickedness.

She said; Sir, you do therefore commit many Faults, both in respect of this
present World, and that to come. For by proceeding inconsiderately, it is
certain you act only according to the Motions of Nature, which being corrupted,
can do nothing that is good. After this manner, your good Actions are but
humane, and will end with you: this is a very prejudicial Ignorance not to know
that all the Works which we do naturally, shall not be rewarded before God, and
that all their Reward is received in this World. Many Persons have done many
such good Works who notwithstanding shall never be saved: And even though they
should 1 Cor. 13. 3.
suffer Martyrdom by natural Motions, this would profit them nothing; because
to partake of Eternal Life, all must have the Righteousness of God: For finite
things cannot come to be infinite. Now all our Works which do not partake of
God, are finite, and cannot reach Eternity; because they have not these Eternal
Ends, but Natural or Temporal ones. In this many do greatly deceivethemselves,
looking for Salvation by Works simply Humane or Natural, believing that all
Works are good when they are not accompanied with our designed Malice. It Is
thus before Men who judge only according to the Reach of their short Sight: But
the clear-seeing Eyes of God do judge according to Eternal Truth and
Righteousness. Therefore we must endeavor to do our Actions according to
these, else we shall remain empty-handed at Death. It Is not enough that we
cease to do evil: we must also do well, or otherwise we shall fall into the Sin
against the Holy Ghost, which is a Presumption of being saved without good
Works; and none can be called good; if they bear not the Righteousness,
Goodness and Truth of God. His Righteousness does every just thing, both as to
our selves and our Neighbor. His Goodness does good to all and evil to none.
His Truth is always straight and single; and when our Actions are not
accompanied with these three Conditions, they don't proceed from God but from
our Nature, or the Suggestions of the Devil, who willingly covers his most
subtle Temptations with seeming Good that he may make every one believe they
shall be saved without good Works, by making them esteem their Natural and
Temporary Works to be good.

I said to her; I should have great Difficulty to apply my self so as to remark
always whether my Actions had these three Qualities, and if they were only
divine Motions.

She said; Sir, if you do not this, you will lose all your Reward, and will also
occasion the Damnation of many others, while you think you are doing good
Works. For Example; you see some one in Want: Your Nature is moved with
Compassion toward him: Without more Reflection you give him of your Goods,
either what is superfluous, or even what you need your self; and you believe
you do a Work of Charity. Nevertheless it may be ill done: For if you don't
consider from whence the Poverty of that Man proceeds, you will often occasion
his Condemnation: For your Gifts may serve him for means to offend God; as, if
he be inclined to drink, your Alms will lead him to new Acts of Drunkenness; or
if he have a proud and haughty Heart, by your Gift he will be the more puffed up,
employing it upon sumptuous Apparel or other Vanities to nourish his Pride and
his Boasting, or to commit other Excesses to which he is addicted, of Luxury,
Arrogance or Contempt of his Equals. In short, this Good that you think you
have done him, will often occasion diverse sort of Evils to this your Neighbor,
and also to your self, in case you have need of what you have given him: For
Charity well ordered begins always at ones self; and he who should give his
Goods to another, and leave his own Debts unpaid, would commit Robbery, by
taking from him to whom it is due, to give it to another out of tender
Compassion. Therefore I say we must always observe whether our Works be
accompanied with Righteousness, remarking whether this necessitous Person would
do any saving Good with our Gifts, whether they would draw him out of spiritual
and bodily Miseries, whether he shall not abuse them by employing them to do
evil: Then the Giving him will be accompanied with the Righteousness of God,
provided you have what is superfluous to give him: But when you have only pure
Necessaries, it is not just to give them to others unless they be in some
Extremity of Want: Then you must succor your Neighbor as much as you are
able, yet without casting your self into the Extremity from whence you would
bring another: For this would neither be just nor good: For a Man should never
ruin himself voluntarily: This is to do an ill thing and against the Goodness
of God. To do therefore a Work of Charity that has the Righteousness, Goodness
and Truth of God stamped upon it, we must firstsee if it be true that the
Person whom we would assist is really poor: This is the Truth of God: For there
are now so many Cheats and Lies, that the most part of the Poor are so through
their own Fault; because they will not work or they are prodigal and Cheats, or
they will not manage, but are careless of the Goods that God has bestowed on
them. In all these Cases the Person is not truly poor; and therefore we cannot
find the Truth of God in our Alms, neither can we therein find his Goodness:
because it would be ill for the Salvation of him to whom we give it: Neither
would it have his Righteousness; for it would not be just to feed by Alms any
in their Sloth, or in other Sins of Gluttony or Carelessness. You see clearly,
Sir, that it is necessary to remark always by what Spirit we do our Actions; or
else we shall commit great Faults without perceiving them. If you find some
Difficulty in this serious Reflection, yet this should not make you omit it:
For our Salvation, and that of our Neighbor does well deserve all this
Trouble. If so many Men of Wit and Quality do so earnestly study to render
themselves honest, civil and accomplished in the Eyes and Judgment of Men, how
much more ought you to do to renderyour self such in the Sight of God, This
Difficulty will be well rewarded by your Salvation, and that of so many others:
Whereas these Persons are often obliged to bow their Wills as Reeds at the Will
of those whom they honor; who nevertheless can give them nothing but perishing
Things, either some Breath of Honor or transient Pleasures, or some Riches
that perish by a Turn of Fortune; and yet for this they force and torment
themselves exceedingly. Sir, let other Men's Folly make you wise. Study as much
to gain the Favor of God as they do to have that of Men; For your eternal
Happiness depends upon it. You can never follow God if you do not embrace his
Truth. Without it all your Works are vain and temporal, ending with your self.

I told her, That I would absolutely study from benceforth to become agreeable
to God, but that I never yet had Light enough to discern in all my Actions,
whether the Righteousness, Goodness and Truth of God was to be found in them.

She said; Sir, this comes from no other thing but Inconsideration of Mind: For
if it would apply it self, it would certainly know all that it ought to do and
omit, more clearly than your Eyes perceive, sensible Objects. Apply only the
Understanding that God has given you for the Perfection of your Soul, and you
shall learn all things. As soon as you John 7. 17.
shall firmly resolve to seek no longer for any thing upon Earth, but only to
seek the Glory of God, you shall obtain the Light of the Holy Spirit which will
teach you all things. There is nothing to be feared on this Occasion but the
Bent that we have to the Earth, which if we follow, we should soon lose the
Star which should guide us to the Place where God dwells. Therefore I exhort
you never more to look behind you, nor to aim at any thing on Earth: For all
that we can see or hope for here are but Chains and Bands to withdraw us from
God, our alone Savior: Therefore, Sir, forsake your self and all things: For
they are Enemies of your true Good. The Love we bear to Men, hinders us from
the Love of God, and the Love of our selves renders us his Enemies; which
Things stifle in our Soul the Light of the Holy Spirit. But if we are resolved
to seek and love no longer any thing but the Glory of God, we shall soon
perceive, if what we speak, think or do, be for this Glory or not, by the least
Diligence or Care to do it. Only you must be firm in your Resolution, that you
will do nothing but what shall be for this Glory, and thrust far from you all
other things as unworthy of your Pretensions. Then shall we walk with a steady
Pace, and shall no longer do any thing but what shall have these three
Qualities of the Righteousness, Goodness and Truth of God: For all that is for
his Glory, brings still these Conditions along with it his Glory being
inseparable from his Essence, his Essence from his Righteousness, Goodness and
Truth, nothing can be wanting there any longer. ( k) Jam. 4. 4.


The Thirteenth Conference.
That Persons illuminated by God, may serve as powerful Means for Salvation;
but it is God only who can give it; and that now the Company of Men is dangerous.

I Said to her; That all these things were true; but that my Soul was not yet
purified enough to discover them so precisely and that her Company was
necessary for me that I might learn to practice that Righteousness Goodness and
Truth.

She said; Sir, I believe indeed my Company may serve you as a Mean to preserve
you on Occasions; but it is not necessary for this: For God alone is sufficient
Ps, 73. 23, 24, 25.
who will guide you through all, provided you continue firmly faithful to him: For
you know not me yet; and if you knew me, you would see in my Practice all the
things that I tell you by Word. My Thoughts, Words and Deeds, must have the
three Qualities of which I have spoken to you; else I should be like the Brass
that sounds outward, and has nothing within it self. I have remarked that you
have not yet discovered these Truths; and therefore my Conversation would be
useless to you, and a great Hindrance to me: For you not perceiving God in my
Words and Works, would not follow them, and you would hinder me from hearing
God perfectly. It is true, you do me no hurt when you look upon my Actions as
Humane; but you cannot profit by them. It were much better that you sought God
purely, and leave me alone to enjoy him more particularly: Because the least
Unprofitableness does always darken the Soul. I have spoken to you of many
different Things which may give you Light into the Secrets of God and your own
Salvation and particular Perfection. There remains only to put them in
Practice. Read the Holy Scriptures, they will confirm you in all that I have
told you, and give Credit to nothing but the Truth of the Gospel, be he who he
will that speaks to you. Ps. 116. 11.
For all Men are Liars: And if I should say things contrary to the Gospel, do
not believe me: For you ought not to believe any thing because I say it to you,
but only because it is really true: And if you knew me, you should also know
God; because 1 Cor. 6. 17.
he is one and the same Spirit in all things. So far as you shall discern
Righteousness, Goodness and Truth in any Person, so far shall you discern God
living in them, and no farther. So that it is never good to follow Persons for
themselves, but to follow the Righteousness, Goodness and Truth which you shall
discover to abide in them. Therefore it is not needful to have their bodily
Presence, it is enough to accompany them with Spirit and Will in their
Righteousness.

I said to her, That she ought not to deprive me of her Company, since it gave
me so much Light and good Purposes, and that I heard her Discourses as
proceeding from the Holy Spirit; but that I had not as yet strength enough to
put them in Practice: that I would be constrained to accompany some other
Person; because I could not stay alone.

She said; Sir, if you do this you are undone: For now you will meet with no body
in the World that possesses these three Qualities of Righteousness, Goodness
and Truth; and consequently you seek in vain among Men what you will certainly
find with God, from whom Men will divert you, and fill your Mind with their own
Idea's and Imaginations, enticing you to follow them. Though they are not in the
Truth, yet they think they are, and willingly draw over every one to their
Errors, while they even believe they are doing well. Be on your Guard, Sir,
for we are fallen into the dangerous Times foretold by Jesus Christ, wherein
Matthew. 24. 11.
Many false Prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many. Obey these Warnings,
and let not your self be deceived: For many come in the Name of Jesus Christ,
who are in League with Satan, and do deceive many. Remember still that we live
now in the Reign of Antichrist, and that God Luke 18. 8.
at his Coming finds no more Faith in Israel, that is, among his People; For
all have denied him. Faith consists in the Belief of the Promises and Word of
God. Who is there now adays that hears his Word, and acts according to it? The
Christians are the People of God, nevertheless none of them has Faith: For if
they did believe in one only God, they would not make so many Idols, that each
one has his particular Idol; One makes an Idol of his Wealth, another of his
Honor, another of his Wisdom, and so of all other things, which they adore and
esteem. So that none has any longer Faith to believe that there is but one only
true God, whom we ought to worship, nor yet the other things which God taught
us by his holy Prophets, his Apostles and Jesus Christ himself. The Church has
no longer Faith to believe that all these things must be practiced in order to
Salvation. These seem to be but Stories of the ancient Times, and that it is not
necessary now to put them in Practice: So that the word is now fulfilled, which
says that when the Lord shall come, he shall not find Faith in Israel. He is
come and he finds no Faith in his People. Therefore, take good heed, Sir, of
applying to any body; because there is no Faith now among Christians, but many
Deceivers and Seducers. Continue rather alone, or follow me yet a little.

The Fourteenth Conference.
That the Habit does not make the Monk, and that Religions of themselves make
none holy. Of the Corruption of them and of the Church.

I Asked her, How it was possible that there should be no longer Faith in
Israel, and yet so great a Number profess the true Faith, and in particular, so
many devote themselves to God in Cloisters and Monasteries, that they may the
better observe the Word of God, and the Doctrine of Jesus Christ.

She said; It Is true, Sir, a great many profess to be Christians, but
notwithstanding they are not so. While you conversed in the World, did you
observe any that followed the Doctrine of Jesus Christ that denied himself,
that chose the last Place or the least when he might have a better, and so many
other things taught and observed by Jesus Christ? I know indeed you will answer
me, No: And I ask you if there can be other Christians than those which follow
his Doctrine? They call none a Calvinist but he who follows the Doctrine of
Calvin; nor a Lutheran but he who follows the Doctrine of Luther: And why would
they reckon those 2 John 9.
to be Christians who don't follow the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. They bear the
Title falsely, and they lie to the Holy Ghost: For they are not Christians
before God, if they do not observe the Doctrine of the Gospel. They but flatter
themselves to believe it, and deceive themselves to doubt it. Do you need any
other Evidence, Sir, than your own Understanding, which sees and comprehends
clearly enough that these who are now called Christians do not follow Jesus
Christ, neither in his Doctrine nor in his Works, and that they are not
Christians but in Word and in Picture, having nothing of true Christianity,
neither following Christ at a distance, nor near at hand? On the contrary*
their Lives and Manners are directly opposite to the Life and Manners which
Jesus Christ laid before us for an Example, when he lived upon Earth.
Nevertheless you ask me if it be possible to believe that there is no longer
Faith in Israel: And I ask How is it possible to believe that there are yet
Christians upon Earth?

I said to her; That they who retire from the World to become Religious or
enter into Cloisters, ought precisely to follow Jesus Christ, since they make
solemn and particular Vows.

She said; Sir, do you not see that these Vows are not well observed? They vow
Chastity, Poverty and Obedience. Remark if this be observed in the Cloisters or
among the Monks. These are only outward things which seem as little obligatory
as Baptism seems* For neither the one nor the other is observed; and after the
outward Ceremonies are performed, they do not think any longer on the Promises
they have made to God: Every one lives according to his Inclinations. Religious
Vows are as it were a second Baptism, or a Confirmation of it; because they
enter into a Religious Life that they may renounce the World, its Pomps and
Vanities as they had promised in Baptism: And when they have taken the Habit,
and made Vows, they love the World more than they did before. There is often
greater Pomp and Vanity under the mean Habit of a Religious Person than under
the Purple of a King. Who does not perceive the Heart of those Persons puffed
up, because they have the Name of Saints or virtuous Ones? It seems all the
World should do them Honor and Reverence; because of their mean Habits which
People kiss kneeling, with more Reverence than they worship God. They get the
Titles of Venerable, Reverences, most illustrious. In short, Sir, it cannot he
true that these Persons have renounced the World, since they desire to be
loved, honored and esteemed by it. On the contrary, in their Religious State
they do often require more worldly Honor than would have belonged to them, if
they had remained Seculars. Does it not hereby appear that there are no where
any true Christians, and that all Christianity now consists only in outward
Idea's? For no body renounces the Devil, the World and its Pomps, though all have
promised it in Baptism: And though they have confirmed these Promises by
Religious Vows, yet they are not more careful of one Obligation than the other.
This may be concluded even from the Deeds and Practices of all those Religious
Votaries.

I said to her; That at least, the Religious did follow Jesus Christ at a
distance.

She said; She knew not one thing in which they followed Jesus Christ: For all
their Practices were contrary to him: For he said, Matthew. 11. 29.
Learn of me who am meek and lowly in Heart; and these are proud and arrogant.
He was poor throughout his whole Life, and these desire to be rich. He had not
where to lay his Head, whereas these have all sorts of Conveniences, building
Houses as if they were to dwell here for ever. Jesus Christ did still labor,
sweat, toil and suffer in this Life; whereas these Monks will live at ease*
without laboring or suffering any thing. Jesus Christ chose Reproach, Contempt
and Confusion; whereas these make themselves to be honored by all, taking to
themselves the first Place, choosing still the finest and the best: whereas
Jesus Christ did always choose the least, though he was the Lord and Creator of
all things. He chose a poor Mother, Apostles from among the Common People, a
Stable to be born in, and a Gibbet to die upon. Do you think, Sir, that there
is any Resemblance between the Life of the Monks and that which Jesus Christ
taught us by his Example? For my part I cannot perceive any thing in which they
follow Jesus Christ, neither closely nor at a distance: For even all their
Outside is directly contrary to him. The pompous Ornaments of their Houses and
Churches do show the Vanity of their Hearts: For he who is not vain, seeks
nothing but what is necessary. These Superfluities are real Evidences of it;
For he who is not luxurious (or loves not Luxuries) will never heap up
Treasures upon Earth. All that Gold, Silver, Silk and those other Ornaments,
are all worldly Pomps which they renounced in Baptism, and since in making
Religious Vows. Nevertheless every one endeavors to heap up more. Is not this
to mock God, to make false Promises to him, which we have no Mind to keep? For
those who at present enter into a Religious Life, have no Design to follow
Jesus Christ: But on the contrary, many enter therein, that they may be
provided, and have their Conveniences and Pleasures, or that they may be free
of the Cares and Troubles of maintaining their Families if they should live in
the World, or for some Reasons which are for their Profit: All which
nevertheless are covered with a Pretense of following Jesus Christ, though they
will or desire nothing less than this.

I said to her; That some of them did sincerely enter into a Religious state;
being persuaded that hereby they shall more really imitate Jesus Christ.

She said; I bewail these, Sir, who go thither upon so good Designs; because
they cannot put them in Execution in these Societies at present, who are
established more for their own Profit than according to the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ. How many have entered into them who have been dissinteressed from
worldly things, and they have learned them to cover and seek them? If a Monk
know not the way to bring the Water to their Mill, they will cast him off as
unprofitable for the Good of Religion. So that to observe his Vows aright, he
must study to be covetous rather than poor. I doubt not but there are yet
several particular Persons among the Religious Orders who have a sincere
Intention to please God; but they are so blinded with the Reasons and Arguments
of others that they follow their Vices insensibly, without perceiving it,
because these Vices are changed as to their Name, and they call them Virtues:
For the Pride; Luxury and Avarice of these Persons are called by the Name of
Charity. Their Hearts will be full of these three Vices; and to make them pass
with others for Virtues, they will persuade them that they ought to procure to
themselves, Honor, as being the Servants of God, or Priests consecrated to
him; and that therefore all Honor is due to them, that God may be honored by
them. Those well-meaning Persons believe this to be true, and follow others
blindly, without reflecting upon the Behavior of Jesus Christ, his Apostles
and Disciples, who were despised by the World: For Jesus Christ says that he is
Ps. 22. 7.
the Reproach of Men; and when they would have honored the Apostles for the
great Miracles they wrought upon the Sick, they said, Acts 3. 12, 16. 10. 26.
14. 15. Ps. 115. 1.
see that you do it not for we are Men like to your selves; we do these Wonders
in the Name of Jesus Christ, who ought to be honored and glorified, and not we
who can do nothing. Now these at present ascribe all Honor to themselves,
making the World believe that it is Charity to give them Goods wherewith to
maintain their Luxury, as well in their Movables and Buildings as in the
Ornaments of the Altars under Color, that it is the House of God which deserves
all good and fine things, as if God were honored by their Luxury and
Superfluities, which are so well masqu'd that the most Pious follow them
without considering that neither Jesus Christ nor his Apostles did ever build
magnificent Temples or Houses, but followed a plain Simplicity. Can God be
honored by the Sins of Luxury and Excess? He who being in the World did choose
Poverty and Misery! Thus he would be indeed a changing God if he should now
glory in the Magnificence of Temples, Houses and Ornaments, who would neither
have the one nor the other, though he was Lord and Creator of all things. If the
Glory of his Father had consisted in Churches and sumptuous Ornaments, would
not he to whom all appertains, have pitched upon them and built them? What
Dotages do Men now publish, that God is honored by great Buildings and rich
Ornaments! So our Dung should be his Honor: For Luke 16. 15.
all that is fair and good in the Sight of Men is nothing but Dung before God.
We have renounced the Pomps of the World that we might become the Children of
God; and by the same Pomps we would honor him in his Churches! It is not fit
to renounce the Pomps of the World to become Christians, since these give Glory
to God. It had been better to increase these, since they honor God, that by
the Increase of them, God might receive Increase of Glory. What Blindness of
Mind is it, Sir, that makes Men believe that God is honored by worldly Pomps
when they are applied to Church-Walls. If they displease God in the Souls of
Christians, how much more should they displease him in Churches and Places that
are peculiarly dedicated unto him for Prayer, since this does still require
Attention, and these pompous and magnificent Ornaments serve for nothing but to
distract and divert the Mind by regarding these Pomps and Ornaments of Churches
which do certainly distract the Mind of all those who regard them, and can
serve for nothing but to satisfy the Avarice of those who covet them.
Nevertheless they call those charitable who afford them Money wherewith to
provide all these Pomps and Ornaments of Churches. Every one praises and
esteems them, as if God were a vain God, who would be adorned with fine
Garments. If he would have a rich Temple in Solomon's time, it was because
People were then so gross, that they could comprehend nothing of God or of his
Majesty, but by gross and material things. But now that we have the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ, we have received Light enough to know that God John 4. 24.
is a Spirit and Life, and not bodily or material. So that they who go to
Cloisters or Religious Orders that they may follow Jesus, are greatly deceived;
because there he is not at all followed, but opposed: For which they ought
rather to be called the Cloisters of Antichist than of Christ; because the
things wherein they contradict him are more than those wherein they follow him.

I asked If those would not be saved who should enter into a Religious state
with a good Intention, and being in it should endeavor to live well according
to their Language.

She said; Sir, these are all Impostors in the Sight of God: For they promise
Poverty and they observe it not; because they yet covet worldly Goods, and do
all they can to please Men, that they may give them of their Goods. These Vows
oblige them not to desire Riches, and they do their best to have them. If they
cannot desire them, much less can they posses or receive them. They vow
Chastity also and very often they are content only by Force, and for want of
Occasions. God who tries Jer. 17. 10.
the Reins, sees well if their Hearts and their Thoughts are chaste, since so
many things contrary thereto are heard of them. They vow Obedience, and they
are full of self-will. So far are they from obeying God, that they do not so
much as hearken to him, and are subject only to their own Wills and Desires,
without any other Submission. By what means would you have these Persons saved
who falsify their Faith to God since those cannot be saved who falsify their
Faith to Men? Some falsify their Faith to God out of Malice and Hypocrisy,
and others falsify it out of Ignorance, being directed in their Faith more
according to what others do persuade them, than according to their real
Practice. They make them believe that Poverty is observed when they possess
nothing in particular, and in the mean time since the Kings and the great Men
of the World do ordinarily profess nothing in particular having People and
Officers under them who govern their Revenues: Even as these Votaries of
Poverty have, who would not by it be deprived of a Glass of Wine or any the
least thing. They are in this more happy than secular Persons, who are obliged
to care and labor for necessary things; whereas these Monks have all at their
Wish without Pain or Labor; and if they be deprived of a Wife, they are free
also of the Labors which Marriage brings along with it: So that their Chastity
is more sensual than the being joined with some Person of a froward or contrary
Humor, which is more irksome than Continence: So that these Monks who are
called Penitents, do far less of Petence in their Monasteries than they would
do if they were out of them: For their Vows of Obedience do constrain them only
to what they have a Mind to do. They have no sooner passed their Novitiate but
they are absolute Lords, and taking the Will of their Superiors for that of
God, they make them easily to condescend to theirs, else they would become
rebellious and chagrin or Disturbers of others: And nevertheless they will
think they have kept their three Vows, and believe that for this Cause they
shall go to Paradise, though indeed all their Virtues be nothing but imaginary
ones or Apish Tricks: And though they should live well according to their
Knowledge, yet they perish; because Ignorance does not excuse Sin. To be saved,
we must of Necessity have the Righteousness, Goodness and Truth of God; these
for the most part have none of these Virtues: For that cannot be true
Righteousness, to quit their own Wealth to go afterward and beg that of
others, who very often have need of it themselves, and yet dare not refuse
these whom they esteem to be the Servants of God: neither is it just to live
upon Alms, when the Body and Mind is sound for Labor, neither is it just to
leave their own Goods to their Kinsmen to enrich them, and they themselves go
live at the Charge of a Commonwealth. For my part, Sir, I perceive in my
interior that all these things are Unrighteousnesses before God however they
cover them with Perfections and Virtues: Neither do I see the Goodness of God
reign in these Souls; because its Property is to do good to all, and to do evil
to none: But we see these Religious Persons do good only to themselves or those
who are associated with them, studying to do Mischief to all those who will not
follow them. And as for the Truth of God, it is yet less observed by them than
the two other Virtues: For all their Works are nothing but external, far from
the real Truth of God, which appears always to be what it is, and these Monks
make a show of the Holiness and Virtues which they do not possess, but are
truly Hypocrites.

I said to her; That many of these Monks were Saints, and did Miracles.

She said; They became not Saints, Sir, by that manner of Life which is
observed now in the Cloisters. They must either have been Saints before they
entered there, or being there, they must have resigned themselves to the Will
of God, and followed the Holy Spirit; and if so, they might be holy in any
Place, and in any State and Condition, and not in the Cloister only; but these
Monks extol their Sanctity for their Honor and Profit, attributing it to the
Perfection of their Rules, though these have often proved Hindrances to those who
were guided by the Holy Spirit, who is always without Constraint, whereas these
Rules do fetter and bind Souls with so many Chains, that they are more chained
than Slaves in the Galleys. This cannot but bring great Disturbance to truly
Christian Souls, whom these Constraints do not render holy, but the Conformity
of their Will to that of God; because there can be no Holiness but what is
derived from him, and therefore no Saints, but according as they partake of his
Holiness, Righteousness, Goodness and Truth, from which Men's Practices are very
remote; and if Men were not sitting in greater Darkness than that of Egypt of
old was, they would not reverence the Monks to day, because there were Saints
among them formerly: Since their Lives were wholly different from the Lives
which the Monks lead now; and if they observe narrowly the Histories which they
themselves write of them, they will find them a Reproof to them in every thing.
For they write that those Holy Monks did greatly despise the World, and these
at present do love and seek it; that those loved Poverty, whereas these love
and seek for Riches: The first were humble and despised, and these are
self-conceited, and will be honored. Read, Sir, if you please, the Lives of
all the Holy Monks, you will find them wholly contrary to what we see at
present So that what ought to raise their Esteem, confounds them.

I said to her; That Saints had instituted these Orders and Rules; and
therefore they must be good.

She said; Sir, if these Orders and Rules had remained in the State in which
their first Founders established them, they might have been helpful for Sinners
who would reform their Vices; because when Nature is left to its own Freedom,
it contracts such evil Habits, as that it cannot afterward be delivered from
them but by Rigor and Constraint. This is the Reason that moved those first
Founders to observe bodily Mortifications and Austerities; because the World
was so addicted to all sorts of Sensualities, that Men almost thought of
nothing else but their bodily Ease and Pleasures: To remedy which, these Lovers
of Souls, introduced Ways of living that might resist such inveterate Vices,
appointed Fastings to 1 Cor. 9. 27.
subdue the Body, Watchings Matthew. 26. 41.
to attend upon Prayer, bodily Severities to resist Lust, and so of all the
other Means that were proper to withdraw Men from the Vices to which they were
habituated. All these things cannot be evil provided they be observed in the
Spirit and Intention with which they were established, because they may serve
as powerful Helps for Sinners who desire to be converted; but every one has no
need of these Means to be holy; because they cannot give Holiness, but serve
only to correct the Vices that might make the Soul still cleave to bodily
Sensualities* and should hinder the Resignation they should make of themselves
to be disposed of by God. But to believe that these Austerities can of
themselves render us holy, is a great Error: For even the Devil might observe
them, and continue a Devil still: So also wicked Men may become Religious, and
observe their Rules, and yet not change their Affection to their Vices: since
the same Means which might deliver them from them, may plunge them farther into
them, as we see by Experience that they will sometimes study more Sensuality
when they eat but Fish and Pulse, than they would do in eating Partridges and
other good things, and will have more Vanity in wearing a course Habit, than in
Silk and Purple: We may also meet with more Avarice in a poor Man than in one
who abounds in Wealth: Therefore we cannot judge the Virtue of the Soul by
outward Exercises, since both a good and ill Use may be made of them.

I said to her; That Vows and the constraint Rules were Powerful Helps to
regulate ones Life, and that the Cloisters cut off many Occasions of offending
God, being out of the Hurry of the World.

She said; Truly, Sir, I cannot believe that that Constraint of Vows and Rules
have been established by the Holy Spirit: because it is contrary to the
Free Will that God has so bountifully given us. The same Spirit cannot Romans 11.
29.
give and take back the same thing. He should be subject to the Passion of
changing as we are, which cannot be in God. He cannot hold that to be evil
which he has once approved as good. The greatest Favor which ever he bestowed
on Man, is the having given him his Free Will, which renders him a depending
Deity, and capable of conversing with God as with his like; because he is
pleased to make a Creature of such a Nature, that it should have this Free Will
to all Eternity: And how is it possible that the same God should change his
eternal Designs, and should inspire the Saints to curb Men, and to deprive them
of this same Liberty wherewith, when he created them, he would endue them, to
oblige them afterward by Vows to follow or love him? If God had these Designs,
no body should be damned; because the Goodness of God is so great, that it
would by force constrain all Men to be saved. No, no, Sir, this cannot be true:
God can bind no body to Vows. This must be the Invention of Men, who having a
good Will and Desire that many should be saved, thought it was good to
constrain them by Vows and Ties, that they might be bound to continue in pious
Exercises. This can come only from humane Prudence* and not from the Holy
Spirit, though the Founders of Orders instituted it, or the Church after them
found it expedient by Vows to oblige* the Religious, that thereby they might be
preserved in their first Resolution of serving God. This cannot at all proceed
from the Holy Spirit, who will never act contrary to himself. And to know
whether Vows and Constraints were powerful enough Means for the well ordering
of Men's Lives that they might cease to offend God, and live as true Christians,
we need only come to experience, which is still the Mistress of all Sciences.
How many thousand Persons in Christendom are now under Vows in Cloisters and
Religious Orders, and how few of them are there who do Miracles? If these Vows
and Rules came from the holy Spirit, they would certainly be all Saints: For
the observing the Commands of the Holy Spirit, does still produce Holiness: so
that all who would be subject to the Vows which the Holy Spirit should dictate
to them, would receive all the Fruits and Gifts, which are not to be found
among the Votaries in Cloisters: On the contrary, we see they are rather guilty
of six Sins against the same Holy Spirit, which are so ordinary in these
Votaries, that it may be said, they are inseparable from them: For we find in
them always a Presumption of being saved without good Works; because being full
of self-love, they can never be good. They oppose also the known Truth, because
the real Truth reproves them: Therefore they will not hearken to it, choosing
rather to perish in their Darkness, and to lay the Stress of their Salvation
upon the Opinion or Discourse of Men. So that we need not enter into
Monasteries to discover clearly that they are not become Saints by their Vows
and the Constraint of their Rules, nor yet have quitted all Commerce with Men,
since we see they desire as much their Conversation as secular Persons do. And
what will it serve for the Perfection of Souls, to have their Wills bound by
Vows, and even their Bodies shut fast up, when the Spirit is yet curious to
know what passes in the World, as the Practice is in the enclosed Cloisters?
For if one would learn all sort of News, he may go into one of their Parlours;
and if our Will were bound to God when it is bound to the Will of Men, there
would not be such Contradictions in the Cloisters, where as many Persons as
there are, there are almost as many contrary Wills. All this does sufficiently
make appear that the Rules and Vows do not make the Person holy, or depending
upon the Will of God: On the contrary, they rather estrange him from it: For as
soon as they have fulfilled their Obedience to their Superior, they believe
they have wholly satisfied God; whereas very often they offend him: for these
Superiors are often estranged from the Spirit of God, neither is it to be
accounted a great Virtue that we acquiesce in the Will of some Person whom we
love. This is purely natural, and not from the Holy Spirit.

I said to her; That we have sometimes heard that Miracles have been wrought by
this Obedience to Men.

She said; Sir, these cannot have been true Miracles if they had their Rise
from Obedience to Men. There are so many things to be distinguished in the
matter of Miracles, that the Devil may easily work such as the World would
admire: And I believe he has already deceived many pious Persons by false
Miracles: For he can dazzle Men's Spirits, and make them take nothing for
something. He can also trouble the Humors of the Body and cause Diseases,
which he can afterward remove; because it is done by Charms, and by the same
Charms it may be undone again: Besides that, he has so many who are bound to
him by precise Covenant* who do his Will, by whom he can work many Malefices
which might seem real Miracles, though they be only all Tricks of the Devil.
Therefore I will not believe that those Stories which they tell us of Miracles
fallen out by this Obedience to Men, are true, nevertheless I do not reject the
Approbation that God has sometimes given of the Submission rendered to his
Servants, who possess his Spirit, and spread it by teaching it to others, in
obeying of whom, they obey God himself; because they are not moved but by him:
So that those who obey them, do indirectly obey God. In this manner I believe
that God may work true Miracles to confirm that it was his true Spirit which
dwelt in these Superiors: As he wrought Miracles to confirm that the Apostles
did possess his Spirit, because he did not remain in the Flesh to converse with
Men and teach them. He taught them by his Servants: Therefore he said Luke 10.
16.
He that hears you, hears me: But he says not this to all bodily Superiors, as
it is now taken; because it is to be feared, that many of these do directly
follow the Devil's Will, and consequently teach others to do the same, at least
indirectly. By which we may fear the Hazard there is in this Submission to Men,
and may learn also the Deceit there is in what they teach Christians now, and
particularly those who would serve God in Perfection.

I said to her; That the Vows were approved by the Church as a perfect thing,
and that all the World did look on them as good things.

She said; And for my part, Sir, I look upon them as evil things for all
Persons: For he who resolves to be resigned to God with all his Heart, has no
need to be constrained to this by Men; because the Love he bears him, is still
strong enough to tie him to God without needing that Men should interpose in
it; and he who has not this resolute Will of resigning himself to be governed
by God, cannot make Vows in any Order, except in Hypocrisy: Because Vows
cannot constrain his Will, but his Body; and when the Body is constrained to do
good against the Desire of the Will, he is then the real Martyr of the Devil;
because he suffers much and merits nothing. And thus Vows cannot be good,
neither for the Wicked nor yet for the Good, who, if they are so truly, have no
need to be forced to do good by the Constraint of Men, if these Holy Founders
have instituted Vows (which I do not believe) this must have been only out of
humane Respect or Persuasion, or for want of divine Light; and if the Church
approves them, it is to keep these Persons in a precise Dependence upon her,
from which, if these Vows were laid aside, many would deliver themselves; which
is to be desired, and it were far better that all these Persons in Vows had
their Liberty, than to continue cloistered to the Damnation of their own Souls,
and the deceiving of others, who look upon those under Vows as Saints;
submitting to their Council and Government, though very often they are governed
by the Devil, and he by their Means, gains the most Pious, who could not be
gained any other way but by this Cover of Religion, which all the World esteems
to be good and holy. By this the Devil gets into the Throne of God, that he may
deceive by false Appearances. If he had remained among the Turks, Jews or
Heathens, he could not have become Antichrist, seeing one cannot shock an Enemy
at a distance, unless he approach him: So the Devil could not stock the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, if he had not insinuated into the Church it self, and
among those in it, who make a Profession of Virtue, as the Monks and Religious
Persons: and he having slipped in among these, draws all the World after him, and
yet they do not discover him, neither dare they believe that he dwells in these
Persons, who in Appearance and in the Esteem of all the World, are holy;
because he has on his side the (...) earned.

I said to her; That they who had entered upon a virtuous Course of Life, went
into the Cloisters, that they might learn it better, and that by submitting
their Wills to Superiors, they might learn to submit them to God.

She said; Sir, this School of Perfection is not good, for there they cannot
learn true Virtue if it be not there. He who truly desires to resign himself to
God, would do very ill to enter into Monasteries now: For the Spirit of God is
departed from them. The first Founders informed themselves whether those who
would enter into a Religious Life, were endued with or aimed at the Love of God
and Charity for their Neighbor: And these Institutors at present ask how much
Money they have to bring with them into the Monastery? And if they have Friends
to give them Money after they are come there? This is a general Custom. They
must have one of these Qualifications, else there is no Entry into the
Cloisters: They must also have a good Body, a good Voice, and good Health,
unless Money supply all the rest, and for it they would receive the Devil
himself, if he came there with abundance of Money. How can Virtue be found
there, since nothing but Money and Gain is there sought for? So that a virtuous
Soul who should enter there, would be constrained to yield to the Prevalence of
Vice, or else to go out again: For if such a one thinks to learn Submission to
God by Submission to some Superior, he will be very far from it: Because their
Will is still contrary to that of God, who does all things that are just, good
and true; whereas these take Wealth unjustly against the Intention of their
first Founders, who desired to live in Poverty. They act also against the
Goodness of God, when they will receive none but the Rich, or those by whom
they may reap Advantage; whereas Jesus Christ receives every one, without
Respect of Persons. They act also against the Goodness of God, when they teach
their Novices holy Gestures and Countenances while the Heart is far from it,
and they do not teach them any true Piety, but that only which has the
Appearance of it, and is not true: So that the Novice cannot learn to subject
himself to God by his Submission to Men, who in all things are contrary to him.
Therefore I am sorry that a truly sincere Person should enter into a Monastery:
For there he will find himself deceived, and will lose the Virtue that he had
before he came thither: For there God is not to be found any longer.

I asked her yet one more Question upon this Head; that is, Whether one who in
Simplicity believes that the Monasteries are yet governed by God, and goes
thither with a Design to lead a better Life than in the World, and being there
Endeavors to live well as to his own particular, without following the evil
Maxims which he sees are practiced by others, would do Ill to go there, or to
stay among them, having taken the Vows.

She said; Sir, this is a great Question; but I will answer it, since I have
promised to answer to what you ask. One who in Simplicity believes that God
does yet govern the Cloisters, would not sin by entering into them; But if he
discover the Reality of the Evil, he is obliged to depart from them, even though
he were professed, provided it be in his Power: For before God his Vow is null;
because he is disappointed of the Conditions for which he made it, which were
to learn Perfection, and to be ruled according to God's Spirit. These supposed
Conditions being wanting, he by Consequence may in Conscience and before God
break his Vow, but not before Men, who by the greater Force, will maintain
their Authority: So that one who has taken his Vows going from them, though for a
good end and his greater Perfection, shall by them be held for, and treated as
an Apostate. In this Case he must conform himself to the Sufferings of Jesus
Christ, and endure Persecution for Righteousness. It were better therefore not
to enter into them, fearing lest he have not Strength enough to endure
Persecutions. But if he have been there for a long time, and cannot find the
way to get out from them, he must resolve upon a long Martyrdom: For they will
not only hinder him to live well, as to his own particular, but they will
oblige him by Force to follow the evil Maxims of others: For the Devil is of
this Temper that he will never suffer Good where he can hinder it; and these
Persons being guided by the same Devil, will not suffer another to do good
where they can hinder it. Hereby we see evidently that their Malice is not
humane, but devilish. For humane Malice extends it self only to Evil by its own
Malice and Infirmity, or ceases to do good through Sloth or the Corruption of its
own Will, which is never inclined to do Good. Nevertheless it esteems and
honors the good Deeds of others, though it be not inclined to follow or imitate
them. This is the utmost that humane Malice extends to; but it never goes so
far as to hinder another stom doing good. How great soever this Sinner be, yet
he willingly recommends himself to the Prayers of the Good: But devilish Malice
hinders all the Good it can, as these Monks do at present.

I said to her; I was much troubled to understand that there were such
Mischiefs in the Cloisters; because some of my Friends were there, whom I
esteemed to be good Men, and desirous to please God.

She said; Sir, If they are such they must be persecuted there, else I will not
believe that they can be truly the Servants of Jesus Christ, and yet remain in
the Cloisters without Persecution. A truly good Man can no more abide in the
Cloisters than Water can abide in the Fire. There are many indeed who seem to
be good Men, and have a good natural Temper to be at every body's Service, as
Hackney-Horses are. These are not good Men though they seem to be such; because
like a Reed they bow with every Wind. The Devil and wicked Men make use of such
Persons to cover their great Wickedness; because by some such Simpletons, the
World will judge that all are good and simple. But if your Friends be Men of
Understanding, and of solid Virtue, they will easily perceive that all is
corrupted in the Monasteries, and if they love the Righteousness of God, they
cannot be silent, but will speak against Iniquity in, doing of which they shall
be oppressed with Persecution. If you speak to them in particular, Sir, and if
they trust you with a true Relation of what passes among them, they will tell
you yet more than I do: For I know not the Particulars of what passes in these
Cloisters, but only in general, that they are abominable before God; of which,
their Behavior in general is Evidence enough to those of good Understanding,
who will observe it that they may conceive it aright. The greatest Evil is,
that they cannot discover these Truths in any body; because they are so
powerful, and have such Authority, that all the World dreads them; and thus the
Evil being unknown, does Mischief to many, and increases daily, and there can
be no Remedy applied to it: And he who should attempt to do it, would be
crushed under their powerful Arm: For they govern now all the Kings and great
Men upon the Earth; as it is declared in the Revelation, that Rev. 17. 1.
The Whore commits Adultery with the Kings of the Earth.

I asked her, If this Whore of the Revelation was the Roman Church?

She said; Yes, Sir; doubt not of it. It is of her only that S. John speaks in
his Revelations. Her Whoredoms will suddenly come to a Height. Jer. 14. 11.
You will very quickly see her overturned and rendered infamous before all the
World. All those who follow her shall be desolate. For she shall be so
miserably treated, that all the World will bewail her; and according as she
lifted up her self in Glory and Magnificence, she shall be as much debased and
contemned. All her Courtiers, who at present extol and defend her, shall perish
with her, and shall swallow down as much of her Curse, as they now drink of her
delicious Wine. Yet a little while and she shall have no longer Force to
persecute the Friends of God. Then we may preach the Truth through all the World,
and every one shall receive it. What is now hid and covered with Silk and
Purple, will then be discovered to their Mischief and Confusion. Read, Sir, the
Particularities of this Whore in the Revelation, you will find more than I tell
you of them; for I see its Mischiefs only in general, and they are so horrible
to me that I tremble to think of them, and cannot, notwithstanding, (o) pray
that they may not come to pass; because this is what she has merited by the
straight Righteousness of God, which will never be truly known or followed but
by the Ruin of her who has quitted her lawful Husband to join her self with
Fornicators; Such are all false Christians with whom she commits daily new
Adulteries to the wronging of her faithful Husband, who has loved her so much,
and enriched her with all sort of Graces and Virtues, which she abuses, to give
up her self to her own Voluptuousness and Pleasures. These if considered, will
be found the Abyss of Evils: For she has no longer Fidelity nor Loyalty for her
lawful Husband: She despises his Commandments and Laws: In short; she will
depend only on her own Authority and Power, without reserving it to him from
whom she received it, with all that she has and possesses, which she per^erts
so miserably to the Prejudice of so many Souls, whom she leads with her self to
Damnation.

I asked her, How it was possible that a thing so holy, established by Jesus
Christ, could become so abominable? ( m) See Rev. 17. and 18.


She said; Sir, the most perfect things become the most vile when they abuse
their Perfections. We see Examples of this, both in divine and humane things.
The Angels who were such excellent Heavenly Creatures, are they not become most
infamous Devils? Men who were created by God, with all sort of Perfection,
surpassing all other Creatures, are they not become more miserable in Nature
than any other Animals, for having abused the Graces of God? Consider a
beautiful Woman that gives up her self to Lewdness: Does she not commit more
Sins and Impieties than an ugly one would do, though she should prostitute her
self as well as the fair one? The more wealthy a Man is, the more he loses when
ruined; and one that stands very high, when he falls, hurts himself worse than
if the Fall had been only from his own Height; because the greater Height we
fall from, the Fall is the more grievous. Jesus Christ had raised the Roman
Church above all the People of God Romans 1. 8.
that ever were in the World: For neither the Children of Israel, nor the
People of the Jews, nor any others, did ever receive such Graces and
Prerogatives as the Church did that Jesus Christ himself came to establish upon
Earth. He bestowed on her, and adorned her with all sorts of Gifts and Graces,
promising her a perpetual Assistance and infinite Happiness, sending her the
Holy Spirit to rule and govern her: But she abusing all his Favors, falsifies
her Faith promised to her God; makes no reckoning of his Laws and Ordinances;
but will follow her own Institution. She abandons her self to that which most
pleases her Sensualities, and makes Alliance with the Kings of the Earth, and
Creatures like her self, having wasted with them all the spiritual Treasures
which she had received from her only Husband: So that in her there is no
Footstep any longer to be seen of the Path in which she trod, nor any of the
Ways by which he walked, nor any Observance of the Precepts that he gave her.
Instead of Poor, she is become Rich, instead of Contempt she is honored, and
instead of renouncing the World, she seeks it, follows and carelles it: Are not
these Heights of Infidelity great enough to make her be rejected and abandoned
unto the Miseries in which she is plunged?

I said to her; That this Change of the Church from Poverty to Riches, and from
Contempt to Honor, was introduced for a good End; and that the Councils had so
ordained it for to support her.

She said; Sir, these are all vain Amusements, to believe that what Jesus
Christ found to be evil, the holy Spirit would now find it to be good. We have
not a mutable God Jam. 1. 17.
who changes his Resolutions as Men do. He never changed and never will change.
The Doctrine that Jesus Christ brought upon Earth is the last Instruction that
God will send Men for working out their Salvation. We must not look for any
Gal. 1. 8, 9.
other thing. Whatsoever is contrary to his Words, does certainly come from the
Devil, who presided in these Councils, who thus changed the Rules that Jesus
Christ gave his Church for maintaining her aright in his Spirit. But they would
not persevere therein but devised to find out Ways to maintain themselves in
the Name and Authority of the Church by worldly Riches and Honors. It had been
much better for the Salvation of Souls, that the Church had perished outwardly,
when inwardly she did so, than to invent new Ways contrary to Jesus Christ to
maintain her in Reputation. Even as it would be much better not to have a Body,
than to have one that is rotten: For that would only infect others. I cannot
express to you, Sir, the Stench that I feel of the Corruption of the Body of
this Church. How much more Stinking must it be in the Nostrils of God? Would it
not be a great Sin to praise and commend a Whore that outwardly were beautiful,
but Pocky within, and design that many might go into her to be infected with
her Filthiness? Such a one would commit as many Murders as there were Persons
killed by Familiarity with her. Are not you afraid, Sir, to do the same, when
you will so much commend and excuse this Roman Church, which you may easily
perceive to be corrupted? And the more she is dressed up with Virtues and
Sanctity, she is the more capable of corrupting the Innocent, who approach her,
thinking to find the Spouse of Jesus Christ without Blemish, while in the mean
time they contract nothing but the Corruption of an infamous Strumpet. Thus the
most Sound become diseased, and will perish if their Maladies be not quickly
laid open, and dressed, as is meet, by that divine Physician, who comes upon
the Earth to teach us all things, according to the Promise that Jesus Christ
gave us speaking to his Diciples, saying, John 16. 13.
that he would send the holy Spirit, who should teach us all things. He is now
come, Sir, hear him.

The Fifteenth Conference.
That the Time is come when the Holy Spirit will teach us all Truth. How
Christians do reject his Light; and what Progress the Devil has made among
them. For what end, how, and to whom God communicates his Spirit.

I Asked her, Who this Physician might be, who could cure such Sores and such
Corruption?

She said, It is the Holy Spirit, Sir, which Jesus Christ did promise us a
little before his Death, who will teach us all things. This is that LIGHT Isa.
58. 10.
which shall arise in the Darkness, which the World will John 14. 17.
not receive, but John 3. 19.
Love their Darkness rather than the Light. Therefore is it known by so few,
because they will not receive it; giving more Faith to their Darkness than to
this Light which breaks forth as a new Day upon the Earth, and comes to
discover the Truth of all things. But Men are become now 2 Timothy 3, 2, and 8.
so much Lovers of themselves that they will not learn the Truth, except in
things Isa. 30. 10.
which are agreeable to them, resisting the Truth that reproves them, or is not
conformable to their Liking and Inclinations. In this they will give Laws to
the Holy Spirit, and make him speak what they incline to hear. In these Times
the Sins against the Holy Ghost are fully accomplished: Therefore Jesus Christ
calls them 2 Timothy 3. 1.
dangerous times; because the Sins which are committed then will not be
forgiven neither in this World nor in the other. When Jesus Christ came into
the World, they committed many Sins against him: Nevertheless all those shall
be forgiven; because the Jews never 1 Cor. 2. 8.
understood that he was the Son of God: Neververtheless they have perceived and
confessed that they did ill in putting him to Death, and all the Sins of which
we repent shall certainly be forgiven: But this Sin which is now committed
against this Holy Spirit, will never be repented of; and therefore will never
be pardoned, neither in this miserable World, nor in that blessed one which is
to come; because they will never ask forgiveness for them, since they will not
acknowledge them; and if they will not suffer the Physician to lay open and
search into the Sores of a Patient, how can they hope for a Remedy by his Cure?
Even so the Holy Spirit cannot heal the Wounds of our Souls, if we will not let
him discover them.

I said to her; It was very desirable that these Wounds of our Souls were laid
open, that they might be healed.

She said: Sir, it is indeed a desirable thing, but it is very little desired:
For all the World resists this Discovery, and they think they do a very pious
Action, when they will hear nothing spoken of the Evils which have crept into
the Church, nor yet of the Monks and others who prosess to serve God. The Holy
Spirit, it seems must accommodate himself to the Times if he would be heard,
and must praise the Vices and Sins that are at present committed against him:
For that String must not be touched to speak evil of those who desire to
continue in Reputation or Authority in the Church, even though they should commit
all sort of Abominations, and though they were Sorcerers and Devils. They teach
it as a Principle of Virtue that we ought to excuse their Sins, and take our
Garments to cover them, that no body may perceive them. This is very far from
desiring that these Wounds may be laid open that they may be healed. It Is no
wonder, Sir, that I have so often told you, that I cannot see by what way there
should be so much as one Person at present saved in Christendom; because the
greatest Part live as Atheists, without acknowledging God any longer Ps. 10. 4.
or thinking on him; and the rest having the Reputation of good Men, are so
full of the Sins against the Holy Ghost, that I know not what way they can be
gained. If it should be told a Priest, Sir, you are deceived in the
Administration of the Sacraments: They do not operate of themselves, as you
think, he would think this Advertisement came from the Devil, and would resist
it as a very ill thing: Or if it should be said to a Monk, or any other devout
Person that they were not true Christians, they would presently take the Alarm
and withstand the Person who should tell them this Truth, as if he were an
Enemy of God, and a Liar: because he who has no desire to amend, will not be
pleased to have his Faults discovered to him: Thus every one continues in his
Sins, and desires not to leave them off, or so much as discover them. In this
Men love Darkness rather than the Light, which arises so graciously, upon which
depends the Salvation or Damnation of all the Men in the World: For the
Darkness is John 3. 7.
universal and there is no Sect or Nation whatsoever that is in the real Truth.

I said to her; That she was obliged to discover these Truths, that they would
be of great use though it were but to my Soul.

She said; Sir, you are no more disposed than any other to receive the Light of
the Holy Spirit, unless your Heart be humble and your Spirit simplified. This
is what Jesus Christ told Matthew. 18. 3.
Nicodemus, that he must become a Child, and enter again into his Mother's
Womb; affirming elsewhere that ( l) If we are not converted, and become as
little Children, we shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. These very
Words must now have their complete and perfect Sense: For he who shall not
submit his Spirit in Simplicity as a little Child, cannot receive the real
Truth which the Holy Spirit brings into the World; because the Doctrines of Men
and their evil Customs have so blinded and darkened their Understandings, that
it is impossible for them to receive the Light of Truth, unless they be first
stripped of all their Sciences acquired by humane Means, which prove Vails and
Bandages to the Eyes of the Soul: For these humane Maxims are all lying and
deceitful, teaching to honor Men, and give Deference to them, when they are in
Place and Dignities, not considering that Honor is due to God alone by ( h)
Isa. 60. 2.
his Commandment, and that Deference ought to be given to the Truth only, to
which it is due; and as long as we don't apprehend these things, we will think
we do well to adhere to the Sciences we have learned from Men, and will not
empty our selves of them, that we may receive the Wisdom of the Holy Spirit;
especially when by it we shall discover things quite contrary to our
Sentiments, or those which our Masters taught us. You are not more than any
other, Sir, delivered from your own Wisdom, which hinders the Holy Spirit, and
that even under a Color of good: For you would make Scruple to believe the
Holy Spirit, when it should tell you things contrary to the Councils held in
the Roman Church, as I perceived when I spoke of such things to you; because
you have been brought up in it, and fostered with a Belief that these Councils
were directed by the Holy Spirit; though this cannot be true; it being your
Resolution not to depart from her. This will hinder you from submitting to the
Light of the Holy Spirit, which will have no Opposition nor Resistance, but a
simple Submission.

I said to her; That I could not disown I had Difficulty to believe things
contrary to the Councils: Nevertheless I would follow the Light of the Holy
Spirit.

She said; Sir, you cannot follow the one without quitting the other; because
indeed they are as far from one another, as Truth is from Lies: For the Holy
Spirit teaches only the Truth, which makes for the Glory of God; whereas these
Councils teach only that which makes for their own Glory and Authority. Take
off a little, Sir, this Veil of Preoccupation of believing blindly that Rome is
the Holy Church; and submit to God that he may show you what Truth is in this.
You will feel evidently in the Bottom of your Soul, that God cannot change as
these Persons have changed the Institutions of Jesus Christ. We must not be so
void of Judgment, as blindly to lay the Foundation of our Eternal Salvation
upon false Suppositions; but we must fully open our Eyes and consider if what
we have learned hitherto, be more clear and solid than what is now discovered.
You will thereby perceive which of the two is farthest from the true Light: But
as long as you are partial, and can hardly believe this or that, your Soul is
not free to receive this Truth. If you believe things, because Councils or
others have told you them, you are not established in the Truth of these
things, but only in the Opinion you have of those who tell you them. And do you
not know that the Holy Spirit says Psalm. 116. 11.
that all Men are Liars? Wherefore then will you believe things because Men say
them? I would never have you to believe my Words, because I say them; but I
would indeed have you to believe them because they are true. We ought always to
follow and love the Truth, wherever it is; but never to believe and follow a
Lie, even though it should come from the Mouth of a holy Person: For otherwise we
shall commit great and irreparable Faults as to the Salvation of our Souls,
especially in this dangerous time, wherein the Devil is placed 2 These. 2. 4
in God's Throne, and teaches us Lies instead of the Truth. That God has given
us an Understanding to comprehend, is not for temporal and transient things,
but that we may understand and discern the Things that concern our Salvation
and Eternal Life. In this we ought to employ all the Force of our Spirit Acts
17. 11.
to discover if what they tell and teach us now in this Matter be true or not,
without adventuring upon a blind Belief, as all Christians do at present.

I said to her; That I would not lean to a blind Belief, but to the straight
Truth.

She said; Sir, if it be so, you will have no trouble to believe what I tell
you, though it be contrary to the Councils: For I do not speak of my self, and I
tell only what the Spirit of God dictates to me. Take good heed to my Words:
they proceed always from the Spirit of Truth, who must teach all things. He
cannot deceive you, as would your Learning and Studies, that you may have
acquired by humane Means. Be jealous of them: For it is so long since the Devil
did insinuate himself into the Church of God to corrupt it, that almost it
cannot be told from what time it was corrupted: Insomuch that even while Jesus
Christ was yet upon Earth, the Dvil John 6. 10.
listed himself as a Soldier of Jesus Christ, on design to thwart his Doctrine,
and in the time of his Apostles he became a Captain; because he had already
gained many under his Power Psalm. 1, 16. 3. 18, 19.
; and in the time of their Disciples he had yet more, and might then by just
Title have born the Name of Colonel; because he ruled many; and after the
Apostles Death he became a Governor by the Increase of his Power: But since
they would needs form this Body of the Roman Church, the Devil is become
General of it, by which Government, he has now conquered all the World, and is
universal Emperor, especially over the Christians, whom he holds under his
particular Empire. He is therefore justly called Antichrist; because he has
gainsaid the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, which by him has been abolished and
annihilated; because under this Pretext of Christ, he has infatuated Men's Minds
to make them believe that what is contrary to Christ, is Christ himself, and
that what Rev. 2. 9.
is the Synagogue of Satan, is the holy Church. And thus by these false
Persuasions, he has deceived all the World, and the most Religions believe they
follow God, when they follow the Devil: because he is so masqu'd with the Veil
of Piety and Devotion, he could have prevailed with well-meaning Persons, by
teaching them Evil; but under this Color of Holiness and the Holy Church, all
the World do blindly follow him with such Fidelity, that it would be very hard
to divert them from him. Every one would think he did ill to quit this Church,
which is so only in Appearance, to follow the true one. I only regret you, and
such as you, Sir, who sincerely intend to follow the real Truth, and
nevertheless fear to resist Lies, out of a frivolous Imagination that the
Church will still continue in the material Place where Jesus Christ established
it.

I said to her; That when I should discover this Spirit of Error, I would
never follow it: That I would gladly abandon it, and follow the Spirit of Truth.

She said; Sir, if you would follow the Spirit of Truth, quit then all these
foolish Persuasions that Christians have now, which are only invented by
Antichrist, that he may gain all the World to himself by apparent Holiness.
They would persuade you that Rome is the Holy Church, that you must obey her in
all her Ordinances. If you do this, you shall be an Idolater, ascribing to Men
what belongs to God only; as Honor, Power and Infallibility. Every one
believes that this belongs to her; though it belongs to none but God alone to be
Infallible, and to use his Almighty Power: As also to receive Honor,
appertains to God only: and he who seeks and desires it, is a Robber, and
receives what does not belong to him. Moreover, if you refer yourself in all
things to the Church, she will oblige you to things against God and your
Conscience, and make you to acknowledge that some Saints are Heretics, as if
the knew of me, she would condemn me for such, though I act only by the Holy
Spirit, and all the Books that handle the pure Truth, are condemned and
forbidden by this Church. There is no longer any thing but Lying that triumphs
in her: For she even teaches that we may have the Pardon of our Sins without a
precise Love of God; which overturns all the Law and the Prophets: For they are
established, and have spoken for no other End Ps. ^ 15. ^.
but to teach this Love which Man owes to God: And now there are Glosses and
Arguments found out to disguise this Love, and to give it the Mantle of
self-love, with which they promise us Salvation, that they may make us perish
insensibly, without knowing it: For all they who do not precisely love God,
Matthew. 22. 49.
go to the Devil. Say the Church what it please, it cannot change the Ordinance
that God made from the Beginning of the World. I see nothing there but Tricks
and Distractions: For instead of saying to us what Jesus Christ said to the
Young Man in the Gospel 1 Cor. 16. 22.
If thou would enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, keep my Commandments: For
the obtaining of this Kingdom, she teaches us a thousand Fopperies which Jesus
Christ never taught us, by Indulgencies, Confraternities, Cords, Girdles, or
Scapularies, and Devotions, to Images. All this to me seems so far from the
Spirit of Christianity, that I am pained at the Heart when I think on it. I
believe all these things serve only to dazzle Men's Spirits, that they may never
come to the Knowledge of the Truth, and to amuse us as they do the Children,
with Rattles to charm our Miseries.

I said to her; I would fain discover where the Holy Spirit was, that I might
follow him.

She said; Sir, he is now come in the World. You shall know him by Truth,
Righteousness and Goodness: For he is the same with God. There are not in God
three Persons, as People imagine; because all that we can say of God, is, only
that he is perfect Mat. 19. 17.
Love, all-just, all-good and all-true. Behold, Sir, all that we can know of
God in this present Life; and when we are told, that there are three Persons in
God, it is to be understood that there are three Powers, that Love is his
Essence, that his 1 John 4. 8.
Word communicates this Love, and that his 1 Cor. 2. 12.
Understanding makes Man to comprehend it. This Love being the Essence of God,
never beginning, and also will never end, which Love was communicated to Man
from the Creation: But seeing he understood it not sufficiently, God made his
Word 1 John 5. 20.
to become Flesh, that it might be the better understood by an Organ suitable to
our Senses. Jesus Christ therefore is no other thing but the Word Joh. 1. 14.
16.
which Rev. 19. 13.
communicates to Man this Love that is in God; and the Holy Spirit 1 John 4. 9.
is the Wisdom' that gives the Understanding to comprehend this Love. Behold
the three Persons that must be known in God, these are, the LOVE, the WORD that
declares this Love, and the UNDERSTANDING, that comprehends it. Now the Essence
of Love, was from all Eterniry; But Men could not know it but since the
Creation, and even then imperfectly. Therefore the Goodness of God found out
the Means to make it known by this humane Body which he took for this end Ephesians.
1. 17.
when he came to treat familiarly with Men; he becoming Man to make them see
manifestly how much he loved them: And not being yet satisfied with this, to
communicate this Love so sensibly, he Joh. 3. 19.
moreover sends his Holy Spirit to teach them all things. You shall know him,
Sir, by the principal Qualities of God, which are Righteousness, Goodness and
Truth, which are always inseparable from the Spirit of God. Remark well, if
what is told you, be still accompanied with these three Qualities.

I asked her, If the Holy Spirit comes into the World in Flesh, as Jesus Christ
did at his Birth?

She said; No, Sir, there is no need of his coming in the Flesh, to communicate
himself to Men as Jesus Christ did; because he comes not to show them any new
thing for working out their Salvation, Jesus Christ, having sufficiently taught
them all things, though Men have not comprehended it; and now the Holy Spirit
comes to give unto the Mind the Understanding of the same things which Jesus
Christ taught while he was on Earth. Even as Jesus Christ came not to destroy
the Law of God, but Joh. 16. 13.
to perfect it, so the Holy Spirit comes not now to destroy the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ, but to Matthew. 5. 17.
perfect Ephesians. 5. 9.
it, and to give the perfect Understanding of it to all those who will receive
it. It Is not Needful that for this end he take a Humane Body; because he brings
no new Words but new Notices, that may be conceived by Men's Spirits. These
Notices being spiritual have no need of a natural Body that they may be
communicated to the Spirits of Men. If you would receive him, Sir, you must
become a Child, and Gal. 4. 6.
submit your self wholly to God, and then you will find the Effects. But never
let your self be deceived by false Appearances: For there are now many false
Prophets that come in God's Name, and are of the Synagogue of Satan, as I told
you formerly. Try always if they who speak to you do possess these three
Qualities of God: Thereby you shall assuredly discover them. For if you let
your self be amused with good Words, or even by the Gifts of Prophesies or
Miracles, the Devil can counterfeit enough to deceive you. Reject also all
those who praise or flatter you: Because the Devil does ordinarily use these
Means to deceive those whom he desires to gain to himself. The Spirit of God is
always firm and true, full of Righteousness and Goodness. There is no need that
he make himself visible to the Eyes of the Flesh, he shall be sufficiently felt
by the Sentiments of the Soul, and the Eyes of the Spirit. He shall illuminate
all Flesh, and enlighten the Spirits of all those who will hear and follow him.
But there must be an humble Heart, and a Spirit entirely yielded up to God.

The Sixteenth Conference.
How we must beware of false Christ's and false Prophets, which seduce all the
World, and are so much followed at present. How to discern true Prophets from
the false; and that it would be to no purpose at present to aim at the
Conversion of Christians by preaching the Truth to them.

I Asked her, How it was possible to beware of these false Prophets, since
there were so many of them, and that they were disguised with Virtue and
Holiness.

She said; Be upon your Guard, Sir; For it is in this Age that we 1 Pet. 5. 8.
ought to be sober, and watch continually; because the Devil goes about us on
design to devour and destroy us. If we have not Faith to believe all that Jesus
Christ has foretold us, we could not resist him; because he is so disguised
with Sanctity, and covered with Hypocrisy, that the most Pious will blindly
believe and follow him. Resist him strongly, Sir, because of the warning that
Jesus Christ so often gave us, Matthew. 7. 15.
to beware of false Christ's and false Prophets, that they will seduce and
deceive many. It is not as to Turks, Heathens or Heretics, that Jesus Christ
bids us be so much upon our Guard, but false Christians who sit in the Throne
of God. He who has not Faith to believe that this is the time now wherein
Matthew. 24. 15.
the Abomination of Desolation is in the Sanctuary cannot resist the Devil,
because he resists the known Truth, and so commits a Sin against the Holy
Ghost: For this Abomination is so true and manifest that no body can be
ignorant of it, but they who are obstinate in Sin, and will die without
Penitence, blindly presuming of their Salvation, without desiring to discover
the Truth which is now set before their Eyes. The Holy Spirit who is now come
to bring into the World the Light of Truth, clearly discovers all things, and
shall make manifest the Lies and Defects of those who are believed to be the
Church, if the People will only give ear to the Truth, and not continue
obstinately in the Persuasions which they blindly received: For such shall be
destroyed Rev. 21. 8.
with Sorcerers; not that they shall commit the same Sins with those Sorcerers,
which poison others, but because of their Unbelief, they shall persist to
believe and follow these false Prophets, who shall lead them into the Depth of
their own Miseries, and this by the just Judgment of God; because they loved 2
These. 2. 10.
the Darkness more than the Truth, which God sends so liberally for enlightening
the World; and those who will not receive it, resist the Holy Spirit, and
therefore cannot be forgiven neither in this World nor in the other; and
consequently they shall be obliged to continue with the Sorcerers, whom they
would not leave in this Life, reckoning themselves to be more holy than the
Holy Spirit: For they would not believe the Truth of the Evil hid under a
Color of Virtue and Sanctity, and resisted the Truth as an evil thing.

I asked her, How I might avoid these false Brethren, with whom I must daily
converse? and if I ought to have an ill Opinion of all?

She said; Sir, trust no body, unless you see clearly that the Righteousness,
Goodness and Truth of God lives in them; or at least, that in the whole Course
of their Actions they strive to attain to these three Virtues: For otherwise
you will be easily deceived; because you are of easy Belief. You shall think
you treat with a Servant of God, when you shall be treating with a Sorcerer.
There are so many of them through all the World that they make up more than three
parts of it, and the most Wicked have the Appearance of Virtue and Holiness;
and by this Hypocrisy they deceive good Men who would scruple to have an ill
Opinion of their Neighbor. You must not be of the Opinion that all your
Friends are Sorcerers, thereby to hate and condemn them; but you must distrust
every one that you may not be deceived by them; not to shock them through Malice,
but to beware of them Matthew. 10. 16, 17.
through Prudence, till you know assuredly that they strive for these three
Virtues of God; because the Devil can never possess them, but in Appearance,
and it is easy to discover when they are false: For the Qualities of the Devil,
are Lying, Inconstancy, Hypocrisy; and those who are of the Devil, deal
usually in Lies, and are inconstant and changeable, disguised and dissembled,
John 3. 20.
hating the Light, fearing lest their Works should be known and made manifest.
He who is of the Devil, is always haughty and proud, and affects Honor, and
will not willingly yield to any body. On the contrary, he who is of God, or
seeks him, has ordinarily these Qualities; he is true, sincere and single in
Heart, and endeavors to conform him self to the Life and Doctrine of Jesus
Christ, and neither seeks, nor fears, nor hopes for any thing without him. All
these Marks, Sir, will make you easily discern with what Spirit those are led
with whom you must converse, that you may not let your self be advised by any
erroneous Spirits, who are now so numerous, and in the highest Places and
Dignities: Because the Devil being so powerful, he still prefers his own to
Honors and Offices, that by these Means he may gain the more Followers.
Therefore I advised you heretofore to abandon all, that you may not continue in
so great Perils as there are now in conversing with Men.

I said to her; That I had a long time ago quitted the Conversation of worldly
and evil Men; but as for those who seemed to me to be good Men, I had never a
hard Thought of them, and I could hardly believe that they belonged to the
Devil.

She said; If none but Worldlings and wicked Men could deceive us, Jesus Christ
would not have so often said, Matthew. 24. 4, 5, 11, 24.
Beware of those who come to you in my Name and deceive many, yeae, even if it
were possible the very Elect. These Words make appear sufficiently that it is
not Worldlings and wicked Men, of whom Jesus Christ says so often, Be not
deceived; because all good Men do abhor these Worldlings and wicked Men: They
are therefore out of Hazard of being deceived by them. But these devout
Persons, or who wear Religious Habits, being nevertheless in the Devil's
Service, may deceive many under these false Appearances. It is with just Reason
that Jesus Christ calls our Times dangerous, wherein the Dangers are so covered
and disguised with great Advantages, that the one can scarcely be discerned
from the other. We will esteem it a great Happiness to have some Friend a
Priest or a Religious Person, or placed in some Dignity, who being a Man of
Honor and Learning, will give us his Advice and Counsel, both as to our
spiritual and temporal Good: Nevertheless this Person shall sometimes be
engaged to the Devil to do all the Mischief he can. Is not this a very
dangerous thing? For we take their Counsel as if it came from God himself; and
it comes directly from the Devil, who makes us follow his Will under the
Pretense of its being the Will of God. Was it not needful, Sir, that Jesus
Christ should so often and so precisely warn us to take heed of these Dangers,
to which no Perils, neither from the Wicked nor from visible Devils, are to be
compared? because all good Men will always resist them: But these false
Brethren who come in Christ's Name, would deceive the very Elect, Therefore,
Sir, trust no body, though they should say, I am Christ: For Christ is not here
and there, but only in the Doctrine John 14. 21, 23.
that he left us by his Word. He who believes any other thing, is deceived.

I said to her; That if this were true, many Souls would be deceived; because
all they who profess to serve God, do follow the Counsel and Direction of some
Man; and if he be of those who belong to the Devil, they may deliver many Souls
to Satan.

She said; Sir, this is lamentable in our Days, wherein they have introduced
these Directions of Men, by which so many are led to Damnation, even tho they
were not directed by some Sorcerer, they are at least turned away from God to
adhere to Men. This is a great Hindrance to Virtue, and the Salvation of Souls:
For as long as we adhere to the Creatures Cant. 3. 2, 4.
we shall never find God. The one must go out before the other enter; and these
Guides instead of leading Souls to God do withdraw them from him, even though
they were good Men; because God is jealous, and will not suffer a Rival, nor
our Hearts to be separated or divided. If so many Souls be engaged to the Devil
by these Directions, it is because they chose rather to be loved by Men than
God. This gives the Devil Power to gain them by the Means of these Directors,
who are much more loved and followed than God is: For he is often forgotten,
that they may remember these Men. Wives esteem them more than their Husbands;
Daughters more than Father and Mother, and Men take more of their Counsel than
that of Jesus Christ: Thus every one furnishes Matter for the Devil to be
deceived by him. It is by this* Door he enters to make himself universal
Emperor of the whole World. He had gained many before the Coming of Jesus
Christ; but since he slipped into the Church by these Directions, he possesses
all, the Wicked with their own Will, and the Good indirectly by the Conduct of
his Adherents, whom he has introduced into the Church: For Jesus Christ did
never establish such Directions in his Church, nor yet his Apostles, nor their
Disciples. If this had been an Institution of the Holy Spirit, it wou^d have
been observed by the Primitive Christians, who had more Zeal to gain Souls to
God than these new Directors have: For they rather draw them to themselves than
lead them to God. This often makes the Guides and those who are led by them to
perish and go both together to the Devil.

I asked her, By what Means I might avoid the Seduction of these false
Prophets, since they had the chief Ranks in the Church? how I might discover
them from the true ones? If the one be Priests and Religious Persons as well as
the other?

She said; It will be very hard for to discern them, unless you read diligently
the ancient Prophets,: There you will find how the true and how the false
Prophets have spoken: For both the one and the other are this Day guided by the
same Spirits. The holy Prophets were and still will be led 2 Pet. 1. 21.
by the Holy Spirit; and the false ones were and still will be led and directed
by the Devil 1 Kings 22. 21, 22.
, as well at present as under the old Law. There is only this difference of
times, that then there were many holy Prophets, and now there are few or none;
because the Number of the False is so encreast that they have almost swallowed
up the Good. And as God is not visible by the Eyes of the Body, neither is the
Devil visible after that Manner, both being invisible Spirits; who nevertheless
render themselves visible by their Gal. 5. 19, 22. 2 Cor. 6. 7. 13. 8.
Operations: For he who is guided by God, will still speak ( o) the Truth
without regarding whether it please or displease Men: On the contrary, he who
is led by the Devil, will still speak 1 John 4. 5, 6. 2 Timothy 4. 3.
as Men are willing to hear. Remark well, Sir, in the holy Scripture; you will
find 1 Kings 22. 12, 13. Jer. 6. 14. 23. 17, etc.
that all the false Prophets did then always tell good News, and promised to
every one Peace, Prosperity and Assurance whereby they deceived all the World.
This is even practiced at present: For if you take notice of all these Priests
and Religious Persons, you shall hear them always promising Peace and Safety to
every one, and that even in temporal Affairs, whether as to the State or as to
particular Persons: You hear them always telling good News, and promising that
all shall go well: So that if you remark the Discourses of these false Prophets
of the old Law, and the Preachers and Confessors at present, you shall hear
them all speak almost the same Language: For the most Pious nowadays study to
please Men, and to tell them things agreeable to their Senses, and hereby they
destroy all the World: For if they were in the Spirit of God, they would tell
the Truth, and would preach to all the World Matthew. 24. 15.
that the Abomination is in the Sanctuary, and that it is high time to turn to
God. That Matthew. 3. 10.
the Ax is laid to the Root, to hew down the Tree, and to break down Dan. 2.
that great Statue of the Church which Sin has rendered abominable in the sight
of God; and also that the Life of Christians is very far from true
Christianity; and that the best of them live in a Presumption of their
Salvation, and in other Sins against the Holy Ghost. Which is most true: But
instead of doing this, they praise and exalt the Church as if she were holy;
and they persuade People that they are Christians when they are baptized; and
though they do not at all live according to the Rules of true Christianity, that
yet nevertheless they shall be saved. In which they deceive and seduce them:
For there are no true Christians, but they 2 John 9.
who observe the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and no body can be saved, but Matthew.
7. 21. 19. 17.
he who keeps the Commandments of God, the first of which, is, to love God with
all our Heart, and our Neighbor as our selves, which no body does:
Nevertheless all these false Prophets tell the People that they shall assuredly
be saved, and that all shall go well with them. Is not this a sure Mark to
discern false Prophets from the true? because the False flatter us always for
our Ruin, and the True reprove us for our Salvation. He that would deliver
himself from being deceived, must diligently examine whether these Churchmen
speak to us according as they are willing to hear, or if they truly reprove
what is blameworthy, of which sort we shall find so very few, that almost none
will speak the Truth when it is displeasing to People, especially to those who
are in Places and Dignities. For this cause our Times are justly called
perilous Times 2 Timothy 4. 1.
, since the Evil is so masqu'd with Virtue: For if the Evil were manifest,
there would be no danger; because all good Men would avoid it, and so would put
themselves out of Hazard of being deceived: whereas when it is covered over
with Piety and Virtue, they think sometimes they would do evil if they should
look on it as evil. Therefore Jesus Christ has great Reason to say to us so
often, Beware of false Prophets that come in my Name, and be not deceived by
them; and also to tell us Matthew. 24. 16.
that we must get out of Judaea; that is, out of the Church, when we shall see
the Abomination of Desolation. For this Cause I think, Sir, it is now time to
flee.

I asked her, If it would not be better to abide in the Church, and endeavor
to make others like my self see the Deceit and Dangers in which they live, than
by flying out of her to abandon them to these Perils?

She said; If you could illuminate them and make them see the Truth without
destroying your self, it would be better to remain in her, though it should cost
your Life; but there is no Appearance of prevailing with any, because they are
so obstinate in their Sins, which they will not know: For if you should tell
any beneficed Person in the Church that he is not a true Christian, and that
the Church has fallen away and become more Pharisaical than ever the true
Pharisees were, they would not believe you, but persecute you; and your best
Friends, the most Pious of them would believe you were become an Heretic, and
that you would also pervert them: Because the Darkness is so great that they
take Lies for Truth without perceiving it; and they should esteem that to be
evil which were most good. Therefore you would do others no good, and you would
do evil to your self, and draw upon your self many Persecutions, and bring your
self in hazard of falling from the straight Truth through an Infatuation of
Spirit, with which the Devil directs every one, and hinders them from knowing
or discovering the Truth. Therefore Jesus Christ said very well, Matthew. 7. 6.
that we ought not to give Roses to Swine nor Childrens Bread to Dogs Matthew.
15. 26.
: The Swine are Persons who would make a Dunghill of the most fragrant Virtues;
and Dogs are they who would tear the Truth by Reproaches and Calumnies. It
would not therefore be advisable at this time to remain in the Church, when
Jesus Christ advised to depart and flee out of her: For there you shall not
find Children who will receive the Word of God, which is the Bread of our Soul,
but Masters and Mistresses who believe they are more wise and more just than
the Holy Spirit.

I said to her; That it seemed to me, we were wanting in Charity, when we
minded only our own Salvation, and that it was grievous also to follow God,
without any other Company.

She said; Sir, you will not act against Charity, by withdrawing from
Christians now; because they are obstinate in their Courses to which they are
habituated, and in which they will die without Repentance, and therefore it
will avail nothing to preach to them: And the Holy Spirit tells us somewhere
Isa. 58. 9, 14.
that we must leave off to point out and speak that which does not profit; and
that the God of Peace will very shortly Romans 16. 20.
bruise Satan under our Feet. I understand hereby that it is no longer
seasonable to represent the Truth to Christians now, because they will resist
and quarrel the Truth, even when we would make it known to them. It is to them
we ought not to point out the Finger, nor to speak; because no Words, how true
soever, will profit them any thing. Yet for all this, you shall not remain all
alone in following God; but Rev. 7. 4,-9. 14. 1,-15.
a great many will follow him with you; but you must go among the Jews, where
many will be converted and receive the Truth, and will flee from the Spirit of
Error, in which they have been detained for so long a time; For of God's
People they became his Enemies: For this cause they were scattered and divided:
But by this Coming of the Holy Spirit Isa. 44. 3. 59. 20, 21.
they shall recover the Light and Isa. 40. 11. Ezekiel. 34. 12, -- 31.
shall re-enter into the Sheepfold of Jesus Christ, and shall be Hos. 1. 10.
2. 23.
his People, and the Members of his true Church. And because these are only
guilty of the Sin against the Son of Man, it shall Matthew. 12. 32.
be forgiven them; whereas those Christians will sin now against the Holy
Ghost: Therefore they shall not be forgiven in this World nor in the other. You
need not then amuse your self any more about this Matter; I have made Trials
enough, having accosted the Persons most renowned for Virtue among the
Christians, and I found not so much as one of them capable of receiving the
Truth; they are so pre-occupied with their Roman Church, their Maxims, and
seeming Virtues, that it may be said of them that as Jannes and Jambres
resisted the Truth, even so Christians do resist it in the same manner. You are
the first who has heard me tell the Truth: For till now I could not explain it
to any body. This did often trouble me and made me also resolve to quit the
Conversation of all Men, and travel so long till I should find some one to whom
I might declare the Truth; Because FOR THIS I AM BORN.

I said to her; That therefore she was obliged to declare the Truth to many,
since she was born for this end, and she knew those who were capable to receive
it.

She said; Sir, it is not my Business to enquire for Men; because my Life
consists in my Recollection, from whence the Conversation of Men would withdraw
me: For I know by Experience that all Creatures are a Hindrance to me, and loss
of time. I love rather to remain alone: But if you will transmit to others the
Truth which I have communicated to you, you are free to do it, or rather
obliged to it: Because God having permitted you to rencounter me, and given me
time and Place to tell you so many diverse things, I shall believe he will
require of you that you impart them to others: But you must consider well to
whom; because every one is not capable of so great things, and if you address
to some that are in Covenant with the Devil, of which there are so many at
present, they will use you hardly, and consult with all these Followers of
Satan, to oppose and to stifle these Truths in their Cradle. Therefore in this
you must Matthew. 10. 16, 17, 18.
use the Wisdom of the Serpent, and beware of Men; For they will deliver you up
to Governors, and will persecute you, or kill you because of the Truth, which
is God. Rev. 12. 17.
This bad Usage foretold by Jesus Christ will in this Age have its full
Accomplishment: This in the Beginning of the Church of Jesus Christ was but
fulfilled in part, because the Apostles only and some few others suffered for
the Truth; but at present many shall be put to death for this Truth, Mark 13.
12.
The Father shall rise up against the Son and he against the Father; and they
shall deliver up one another to the Rulers to be put to Death; because Luke 22.
53.
the Hour is come, and the Power of Darkness, which has so seized upon all the
Earth; Isa. 60. 2.
that they who shall kill you for the Truth, shall think John 16. 2.
they do God Service: For Satan's Power is so great and universal, that it has
almost blinded all Men; and their Spirits being infatuated, they take that
which is false, to be real, and esteem Lies more than the Truth: And all this
is so well masqu'd with Virtue and Sanctity, that even the best Men will think
they do offer Sacrifice to God, when they kill you. Therefore take heed always,
Sir, that you give not the Children's Bread to Dogs, nor cast Pearl before
Swine; but try well before you speak to any, if he hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, or some other of the eight Beatitudes, which are the Marks that
Jesus Christ gave, whereby to discover those who shall be blessed and shall
receive the Spirit of Truth: But as soon as you shall meet with Opposition to
the Truth, leave off to tell it, and never move in that which will avail
nothing: For God has promised that he will shortly bruise Satan under your
Feet. Yet a little while the Devil has his Empire, Rev. 12. 12.
which increases greatly; and so soon as it shall be at an end; God will bruise
him under the Feet of his faithful Servants, who shall Luke 10. 19.
triumph over all the Powers of Hell: But they must yet suffer a little, and
Rev. 2. 10.
continue faithful unto death.

The Seventeenth Conference.
That the Jews and Heathens are better disposed to be converted unto God than
the Christians; and that the Jews shall be restored, and the Christians
rejected.

I Asked her, If I would run the Risque of these Dangers by going among the
Jews, since according to her saying, they were more disposed to receive the
Truth?

She said; Yes, Sir, there is Hazard there as well as elsewhere; because the
Devil has those who are in Covenant with him, in every Place, in every State,
in every Sect, and under every Law: For he has run to and fro through all the
Earth, and has devoured many, as well among the Jews as among others: But I
except the Good among the Jews, and I know certainly that these are more
disposed to receive the Truth than any others; because they sin through
Ignorance: For they never knew that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, and do not
yet know it: For they look for this Son of God in Glory, and know not that he
shall be the same who came already among them in Dishonor. As soon as they
shall discover this Truth Matthew. 23. 38, 39.
, they shall return from their Exile, and re-enter into the Promise made to
Abraham, and shall return to be God's People, in Exclusion of the Christians,
who having abused so many Privileges Romans 11 21, 22, 23.
shall be cut off, and the Jews settled again on their Ruins.

I asked her, Wherefore the Christians could not be reformed, that they might
become the People of God as well as the Jews Converted, to take away their
Crown?

She said; Sir the Jews are much more disposed to receive the Truth, than the
Christians are: For these sin out of pure Malice, and have forsaken God and his
Laws. This ( b) Romans 11. 25,-31.
the Jews have not done, They do yet fear and know God, and the Christians do
neither: For they preach publicly that to obtain the Pardon of our Sins, we
are not obliged to love God; that to save us from going to Hell, it is enough
to have self-love; that this Fear of their Damnation is capable of procuring
them the Pardon of their Sins and Salvation; and they utter a thousand other
Blasphemies against God in every thing. This they cannot do through Ignorance;
because besides the Law of God which they have received as well as the Jews:
They have moreover the Law of the Gospel and the Doctrine of the Apostles,
which was left them in Writing for an everlasting Memorial, which all
Christians ought still to follow. The Christians have received Faith to believe
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that he came into the World, where he
suffered Pains, Labors, Poverty and Contempt, was persecuted, imprisoned,
scourged, buffetted, and at last put to Death on a Cross, as a Malefactor, and
all this to give an Example 1 Pet. 2. 20, -- 24.
to Christians, that by following his Steps, they might enter into his Glory.
They do believe all these things, and also that the same Son of God is really
in the Sacrament of the Altar, with a great many other things contained in the
Creed. Nevertheless, against their Belief they live directly contrary to what
Jesus Christ taught them, and what they believe by the Command of God. If the
Jews believed this, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, they would mourn for
the Sins which they committed against him, and would follow his Example, (which
Zach. 12. 10, -- 14.
shall very shortly come to pass:) whereas the Christians shall die obstinate
in their Sins without Repentance.

By which you may judge, Sir, that the Jews are much more disposed to receive
the Spirit of Truth so soon as it should be communicated to them, than the
Christians who oppose the known Truth. They know that Jesus Christ is the Son
of God and that he is in the Sacrament of the Altar, and they show him less
Respect than a Servant would do to the meanest Master, and eat and swallow him
as a Piece of Bread.

How would you have these Persons to be reformed, since they would reform all
the World, looking on themselves as Gods of the Earth, and Children of the true
God, while they are led by the Devil? This they will not acknowledge, choosing
rather to perish in their Darkness, than to give ear to the Truth: whereas
those Jews would gladly hear what will enlighten them, and would be bettered by
knowing the Truth: For many good Spirits among them aspire after it, Jer. 31.
25.
hungring and thirsting after Righteousness, which when they see and know, they
will immediately embrace it; because nothing but Ignorance hinders them from
resigning themselves wholly to God: Whereas the Christians through pure Obstinacy
in their Sins, will not do it: So that if I should go to the College of
Cardinals at Rome, and tell them that I come from God to advertise them that
they are not true Christians, and that Jesus Christ taught another way of
living, than what they observe, and that to be saved, we must of Necessity
follow Jesus, they would presently seize on me as a Criminal, and put me to
death, if I would not retract my Words, though they knew well enough they were
true; even though they should evidently perceive that I had the holy Spirit, they
would oppose this Truth, that they might maintain their Errors. How then, Sir
would you have such Persons to be converted?

God will never force any body, having given to all Men their Free Will, to use
it according as they please. If these Christians will acknowledge no other God
but their own Authority, they would deal hardly with God himself if he should
come to speak against it. How could God in Justice reform these Christians, who
will not be reformed, loving rather to perish in their Blindness, than to
receive the Light, and this of their deliberate Will? Whereas those Jews are
still looking for and aspiring after the Coming of their Savior in Glory: Though
in many things they err, Nevertheless they persevere in this Hope which will
infallibly come to pass Rom, 11. 26. Rev. 1. 7.
to them, provided they Hos. 5. 15.
acknowledge the Fault they committed in putting Jesus Christ to Death.

I asked her, Whether there was any Sect or Nation more capable of receiving
the Truth, than the Jews, who were a People rejected by all Nations, and
despised by every body, as unworthy of the Conversation of all good Men?

She said; Sir, I know not precisely what the Jews are; but as a Friend I can
tell you, that they are yet the People who love God more than any other. Their
being rejected and despised by every body, shall perhaps serve for a
Satisfaction to God for the Sins which they committed in putting him to death:
Because this is God's Way, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28.
to choose always the Things that are most vile and most contemned by the World.
I do not at all doubt but the Jews will be the first in the Kingdom of Heaven;
because they have been so humbled and despised in this World; in which they
have imitated Jesus Christ more than the Christians; who honor themselves more
than God, and every one esteems them as the People of God* and Jesus Christ has
told us by the Mouth of his Mother, Luke 1. 52.
that he will put down the Mighty from their Seats, and will exalt the Humble.
This makes me believe that this People of the Jews, so humbled through all the
World, shall be exalted, Isa. 62. 2, 3.
above all others; and that the Roman Church which is placed in the highest
Chair on Earth Is. 47. Rev. 18.
shall be cast down from all her Power: Because God has said Luke 14. 11.
that he who exalts himself, shall be abased; and he who humbles himself, shall
be exalted. It must needs be, Sir, that all the Words of God be fulfilled in
all Respects. The Jews having been the most humbled People among Men, Isa. 60.
14, 15, 16.
ought to be according to the Justice and Truth of God, the most Exalted, as it
shall Isa. 49. 23. 54. 11, etc. Jer. 31. 17.
come to pass. For as soon as they shall receive the Truth which I commit to
you, they shall be converted, Isa. 53. 11. Hos. 6. 3.
and receive the Holy Spirit, by whom they shall discover all things, see their
Errors and the Truth, and embracing it, shall arrive at the Time so, often
desired by them, in which Isa. 66. 5, and 18.
they will see the true Messiah and Savior of the World come in Glory, who
Isa. 40. 9, 10, 11.
will receive them into his Kingdom; from whence the Children of it Luke 12. 28.
shall be shut out. These are the Christians who shall never taste of his Luke
14. 24.
Feast, though they were invited and ( i) Isa. 27. 9. 40. 2.
( l) Zach. 8. 23. Rev. 7. 4. 14. 4.
called unto it: But the Jews and Heathens shall sit down there, and the
Christians shall be thrust out; because they would not obey God's Call; who
having called them to Christianity, they would not conform themselves unto it:
Therefore they shall never taste of his Dainties; because this is the last
Mercy of God, who will bring to his Table the Sick rather than the Whole, who
resist his Will, as the Christians do now.

I asked her, If I might declare to the Jews all the things she had told me, as
coming from God by a Prophetical Spirit?

She said; Sir, I am not Prophetical as the Ancient Prophets were, who spoke of
very obscure things: So that many times, neither Jer. 30. 24.
the People, nor Dan. 12. 8.
they themselves understood well what they signified; because the Time was not
yet come to give the full Understanding of them: But at present, in this
Fullness of Time, God declares his Secrets very manifestly, that every one may
understand them: So that you must not say, Sir, that you are sent in the Name
of some Prophet: because the Things that I have told you, are such plain and
lively Truths, that no body of a good Judgment can doubt, but the Holy Spirit
must have inspired them: For if they believe that God is Truth, my Words are so
sensibly inseparable from it, that all Nations, both great and small, must
confess, that in all my Discourses, the Truth is in its Source: And this Truth
being 2 Pet. 2. 16.
God; it is therefore God assuredly, who declares these Truths: For the Devil
is the Father of Lies, and Nature finds out still Excuses, either in its own
Sins, or in those it loves. By which you may see evidently, that Truth comes
immediately from God, though it should come out of an Ass 1 Cor. 13. 8.
as once it did. Therefore you need not so much stay to judge whether I have
the Spirit of Prophecy, as you ought to examine very narrowly whether I speak
the Truth: For that is always God. The Prophesies of the Ancient Prophets, will
all of them very shortly be fulfilled. There is no Need of any longer having
obscure Prophesies; because we are fallen into the last Times, wherein 1 Cor.
13. 8.
all the ( c) 1. John 5. 6.
Prophesies shall cease, and we shall see them all entirely accomplished, and
we shall not receive any more new ones: Because the King of all the Prophets
will himself govern his People, and will give an entire Accomplishment to all
that has been prophesied of him. So that, Sir you shall not need to say, that
you hold these Truths from a Prophet; because the Work does always bear Witness
who its Workman has been. Even so when the Truth is lively declared, it gives
sufficient Evidence by what Master it is formed. I cannot conceal that I derive
all my Wisdom from God; because I never learned any thing from Men: But there
is no Need to say that I have a Prophetic Spirit, when God gives Reasons and
Comparisons to explain it after the Manner of Men.

I said to her; That in many of her Discourses she spoke of the Future, and of
the Time to come, and that as to those, we could not know yet, whether they
were true or not.

She said; Sir, what is to come, is as true as what I have already experienced.
Receive all with Humility of Heart, and you shall see in its Time as clear as
the Sun, that all shall be accomplished: For God cannot lie. The holy
Scriptures must say the same things that I say: Because all proceeds from one
and the same Spirit, and the Jews will understand me yet better than you do,
because they are more versed in the holy Scriptures. I think if I spoke to
them, their Hearts would be overjoyed and ravished with Pleasure, to know that
so great a Happiness is to befall them, as to become the People of God, and to
suffer for his Love, till they shall see him come in Glory, with his Angels, to
render to every one according to his Works. The Christians have this in their
Creed; which contains the twelve Articles of Faith, that Jesus Christ who is
ascended into Heaven, shall come again to judge the Quick and the Dead: And
notwithstanding they will not believe it, though they say it daily: Or, they
imagine that this Coming shall be so suddenly, as if the Judgment were to be by
Way of Enchantment, and that it were to pa^s in an Instant, or in one Day.
These are foolish Speculations: For the Judgment is already begun, and I know
not how many Years it shall last; only at the End Matthew, 24. 30.
Jesus Christ shall appear upon the Earth in Glory and Majesty, and so shall
Rev. 12. 13.
converse with Men, who shall be all made happy with his glorious Presence,
which shall fill them with Glory, and shall wipe away all their Tears and
Griefs to bring them into Joy that shall never end. They who will not believe
this, are Enemies of their own Good; because there is nothing in the World that
can give them Romans 8. 18. 2 These. 1. 5.
more Constancy to suffer, than the Hopes they have, that in the End they shall
see the glorious Coming of Jesus Christ upon Earth. All sorts of Consolations
are comprehended in this.

I said to her, That the Jews look for the Coming of their Messiah in Glory,
that he would come to reign and abide with them: but that the Christians looked
for him only to come and judge the World, and to go away again, carrying along
with him all the Blessed,

She said; Sir, the Jews shall not be disappointed of their Expectation: They
shall see their Messiah in Glory, Ezech. 34. 23, 24.
who will govern them upon Earth, conversing, eating and drinking with them:
For he himself says, that Luke 12 37.
he will make his Friends sit down at his Table; and that he will rise up and
serve them; now in this Paradise, which the Christians imagine, there shall be
no need of sitting at a Table, nor eating nor being served: And also when Jesus
Christ said to his Disciples Matthew. 26. 29.
that he would drink no more of the Fruit of the Vine, till he drank it new in
the Kingdom of his Father; he means certainly of the Earth; which shall be the
Kingdom that God will give to the Body of Jesus Christ: Because in the Divine
Kingdom, there can be no Planting of Vines nor making of Presses to drink Wine
there. Truly, Sir, the Christians are superstitious in many things, and they
judge rashly of all that they do not comprehend. They may clearly see by the
holy Scriptures that Jesus Christ shall have a glorious Reign, and that he Rev.
21. 25.
will be the Restorer of all things, and also the Savior of Men; Because all
Acts 3. 21.
the Prophets with the Apostles and other Saints have sufficiently spoken of
these things which shall certainly come to pass: For the Scripture cannot err
or fail: But because they have not received the complete Knowledge of them to
explain all, the Christians Fancy in their Speculations; that this shall come
to pass in a divine and incomprehensible Paradise without reflecting that the
divine Kingdom could not be promised to Jesus Christ; because as God, he always
possessed it, and has no need of being promised what he possesses: For
Possession is always greater than Promise; for that is wholly accomplished by
Possession. Therefore the Promise of Jesus Christ must be on Earth; where he
shall reign Psalm. 2. 8. Psalm. 22. 29. 71. 8. Zach. 14. 9.
over all Men, shall save them, and re-establish all things; because in the
divine Heaven there is nothing to be reestablished: For nothing was ever
spoiled there: Nor any to be saved; because all that are there, have Salvation;
and whither, can they imagine that God should carry the Blessed with him, since
he comprehends all things, and cannot be contained by any thing? They speak of
God, as if he had a Closet somewhere for his Retirement.

I said to her; That the Jews had looked a long time for the Messiah; but that
the Christians did not expect him till the Day of Judgment and the Resurrection
of the Dead.

She said; Sir, the Jews have done well always to wait for their Messiah: For a
Thing is then more loved when it is long desired. It is a constant Faith that
makes them persevere in this Expectation, which shall be recompensed with a
great Joy, when they shall receive the Fruit of their Hope: For it is not vain,
but very well founded on all the Holy Scriptures; which is the most solid
Foundation in the whole World, since it is the Word of an all-wise, all-good
and all-mighty God: But when the Christians look for their Savior only on a
certain Day, Luke 12. 45, 46.
they are not so diligent to prepare for his Coming, which they imagine to be
yet far from them. They confound diverse things together, which have no Relation
to one another; and they make but one Day of the Plagues, the Judgment, the
Resurrection of the Dead, and the Coming of Jesus Christ in Glory; as if all
these things were to be done together: But they are greatly deceived. 1 Cor.
14. 33.
we have not a God of Confusion, who surprises Persons at unawares, confounding
them by precipitating things: On the contrary, all his Ways are so well
regulated and ordered, that there is not a Devil in Hell that could say in
truth that God gave him the least Surprise, or that he could find in all his
Works the least Injustice or Want of Goodness and Truth. This being so, how
could it be that God should send all his Plagues in one Day, that no body might
have Leisure to be converted, being surprised so suddenly with so many
different Evils as to be chastised, judged, raised again, saved or damned all
in one Day? If God has been just, good and true from all Eternity, would he
become impious at the last Day? This cannot be: But Men mistake him, and every
one judges of him according to their Fancy: For if they would judge uprightly,
they would not dare to say that God could surprise Men to judge and chastize
them so suddenly. I would gladly ask Christians, where they find it Written,
how long the Judgment shall last?

I said to her; That no body had distinguished these Times, and that all
Christians believed that the Judgment, the Chastisement, the Resurrection of
the Dead and the Coming of Jesus in Glory, were but one and the same thing, and
that they should come to pass all together.

She said; Sir, They are very much deceived: For these are all diverse things
which must come to pass at different Times: For first of all the Judgment is,
when God saw the universal Iniquity of all the Men of the World, and that not
so much as one knew and loved him; he by straight Justice judged and condemned
the World: And that he might not surprise any, 2 Pet. 3. 9.
he delays the Execution of his Sentence, that Men might discover by Experience
that the World is judged, seeing the Evils to increase, and Peoples Amendment
desperate. This is the greatest Evidence to verify that the Sentence is
irrevocable. God does this, that Men remarking these Truths, may quake for
Fear, and be converted unto him, that they may obtain his Mercy, at least every
one for their own particular. I believe, Sir, that these thirty Years the World
is judged and condemned; and that now the Time is come to put this Sentence in
Execution. It will begin 4 Esdr. 16. 18, etc. Matthew. 24. 8.
with the Plague of War, and then that of Pestilence, and after of Famine, that
there may be time given to all Men of good Will to repent, and to take these
Plagues in Penitence for their Sins, and by these Sufferings to find a Way to
return to God with all their Heart and to rise from Death to Life, that is to
say, from Sin to Grace, as the Jews shall do by being converted first of all,
that the Lord may find Isa. 62. 6.
them watching at his Coming, and may say to them, Matthew. 25. 21.
Well done good and faithful Servant; because thou have been faithful in a few
things, I will set thee over great things: Enter into the Joy of thy Lord:
Which Joy shall be recovered at the Coming of Jesus Christ in Glory, who will
overthrow Psalm 97. 3, 4. Zach. 14. 4, 5. Rev. 1. 7.
all Evil by the Brightness of his Coming, which shall be seen and understood
by all the Men who shall then be remaining on the Earth. Thus it is that God
orders these last things Wisd. 11. 20.
with Weight and Measure, that he may still exercise his Righteousness,
Goodness and Truth, even to the End of the World, waiting still for Sinners to
Repentance, being desirous Ezech. 33. 11.
that they should be converted and live. Whatever Men say, God will never
depart from his eternal Qualities, and will not confound his last Works no more
than he did his first: For he continues still firm and constant in all his
works. If Men will not know this, it is their own Fault, and the Effect of the
straying of their Minds: Nevertheless it is time to open their Eyes: For the
Plagues are begun.

I said to her; That the Jews were wilfully obstinate not to believe that Jesus
Christ was God, which the Christians did believe assuredly; and consequently
they were nearer to be converted than the Jews.

She said; Sir, the Jews are less obstinate than the Christians; because there
is more Ground for their Unbelief than for that of the Christians, who reject
the Coming of Jesus Christ in Glory, though it be verified by all the Holy
Prophets, the Apostles and Jesus Christ himself, who in so many diverse Places
declare his glorious Coming, and very few speak of his Coming in Reproach. This
makes the Jews doubtful, knowing that God never surprises any; but often
foretells the things that must come to pass; and they finding so frequently in
the Holy Scripture the Prophecy of his Coming in Glory, and so seldom his
Coming in Reproach, they have some fundamental Reasons, for which they cannot
believe his Coming in Reproach: But so soon as the Truth shall come to
enlighten them, they will yield to it; because they love it: Whereas the
Christians do formally resist it, and wilfully impugn it, and will not believe
what they read so often, nor hearken to the Light that is offered them
thereupon; being desirous to continue obstinately in the Persuasions in which
they have been trained, and blindly to believe the Sentiments of Men's
preferring them to the Truth of God. So that the Jews will sooner believe that
Jesus Christ is God, than the Christians will believe that the same Jesus
Christ shall come to reign in Glory upon Earth, tho this Coming be much more to
be desired and valued than that Coming in Sufferings and Reproaches: For he who
highly esteems God, will be troubled to believe or see he should be abased or
despised, and become the Reproach of Men, he who deserves all Honors in Heaven
and Earth. Hereby the Jew's have more humane Ground not to believe the Coming
of Jesus Christ in Sufferings, than the Christians have not to believe his
Coming in Glory, which is more honorable, pleasant and desirable, though the
Jews as well as the Christians do very ill not to believe both the Comings of
Jesus Christ, which are equally true, both the one and the other.

I said to her; That she seemed to hold the Jews Part more than the Christians.

She said; Pardon me, Sir, I am not partial; and if I were, I would rather take
the Christians Part, among whom I am born, than that of the Jews whom I never
saw. I hold only the Part of Truth without leaning to any Side; because I have
no Pretensions upon Earth: Neither Jews nor Christians will give me any thing:
But God will judge me in Truth and Righteousness: Therefore I will always
observe it without Respect to any body. If I knew not that the Jews are more
disposed to receive the Truth than the Christians, I would not speak to their
Advantage: But I cannot conceal the Truth, when it is asked me. If you address
these Jews, you will find my Saying true: For I know nothing of my self: All
comes from a Source from whence no Lie can be drawn. I am not inclined for the
Jews, nor for any other Sect in the World: For I know none of them that are
well pleasing to God: But I love those best that are most disposed to receive
the Truth, and to be converted unto God, and I remark this People of the Jews
to be more disposed for this than any other: Which, in Trust, I declare to you:
Not that I may be loved or despised; but that I may simply declare the Truth as
I know it. Make a Trial of it, Sir, and of all the other Things which I have
told you, you will find them in their Time, all true: For I am not for telling
things that are extravagant, or without Necessity. You will have Need after
this, to know all that I have declared unto you. They will be very profitable
for you, and for those whom you shall judge capable of receiving them. Doubt
nothing of them. Conceive and digest them all. You shall receive from them
great Light in your Understanding, and Strength, and Nourishment to your Soul,
and you shall still enter farther into the Knowledge of God and of your self,
which shall be an Everlasting Happiness for you. Beware of being tempted to
believe the Contrary: Because the Devil will surprise you with false
Appearances under a Pretext of scrupulous Piety and Justice.

The Eighteenth Conference.
How the Holy Spirit gives his Light to the Soul.

I Said to her; That I would not doubt of her Words; because I believed that
they all came from the Holy Spirit.

She said; Softly, Sir, all my Words come not from the Holy Spirit: For he does
not dictate to me all the Words that I must pronounce; but the Substance of all
that I say; because I would never speak otherwise than by his Motion; and no
other Discourses are necessary for me: For I have no Desire to please any; and
all that makes not for the Glory of God, seems to me a superfluous and useless
Thing. Therefore I do not willingly utter any Discourse but these to which the
Holy Spirit moves me: But he does not dictate to me all my Words. I have Need
to express my self by Humane Reasons or Comparisons; because otherwise they
could not understand me: For the Holy Spirit speaks so succinctly, that one
Word makes me comprehend many things. He gives Subtilty to the Understanding to
conceive great Things by one of his small Motions. It is just as if one were in
a fine Room* well adorned with diverse Furnitures and Rarities: But there were
no Light in it whereby to see all these things. In such a Case it would require
a great many Words, to make him who had never seen them, understand in
particular all the fine things and Furniture that were in the Room, telling him
here are such and such Pictures, such Tables, such Seats, and such like Things;
and yet we could not make him comprehend well the Beauty of this Furniture and
Rarities: But if a Light were brought into the Room, tho it were but that of a
Candle, in a Moment it would give more Knowledge of all the Things that are in
the Room, than all the Discourses that were uttered to make them known. So it
is with the Light of the Holy Spirit when it enters into a Soul, it makes it
know and comprehend all things very clearly: Nevertheless these things cannot
be seen by Souls who are yet in the Darkness and Obscurity of their own
Passions; Many Words and Discourses must be used to make them understand the
Rarities that are in the Works of God. It is thus, Sir, that I tell you all my
Words do not come immediately from the Holy Spirit: But indeed all the
Substance of what I say; Because I never had any other Master, nor any other
Study, but that of purging my Soul from Earthly Affections. By this I received
the Light of all the things of which I have spoken to you with many more, which
nevertheless I could not make you understand, but by Words and Discourses,
accommodated to your Capacity, which are not all precisely endited by the Holy
Spirit Word for Word, except that in general they are produced by the Gift of
Wisdom, which Isa. 11. 2.
the Holy Spirit always brings along with him into the Soul where he resides,
giving it the Skill to express it self, and to make Divine Things be understood
by those who are in Darkness. Therefore, Sir, you are not deceived in believing
that my Words come from the Holy Spirit: For it is true, if you take them in
Substance: But if you would maintain a precise enditing of Words, the Enemies
of the Truth might surprise you in some Terms not well expressed, or some Word
of a contrary Signification, or other Faults of my Language, which come from my
Weakness or Ignorance: For the Holy Spirit can commit no Faults. He always
gives his Light perfect and complete to the Soul that is purified from it self:
But he does not always give precise Words and Terms to make it be understood by
others; because it does not remain always precisely harkening to the Enditing
of the Holy Spirit, being often distracted by Earthly Objects, which divert it
sometimes without its being aware; and in this Diversion it may commit many
Faults, even though it had received the Holy Spirit. For this Cause our Life is
always dangerous, and we ought 1 Pet. 5. 8.
still to watch that we be not surprised by our Enemies.

I asked her, How she could see by the Light of the Holy Spirit, things which
consist in Matter of Fact, as the Deportment of the Jews, and Christians, and
others?

She said; Sir, this is manifested to my Understanding even as Divine Things
are, without any Distinction, except that the Soul receives more Contentment in
conceiving and understanding the Things of God, than those which respect Men;
though all come from the same Source, nevertheless they have different Effects:
For when God shows to the Soul his straight Righteousness, his universal
Goodness, his pure Truth; it is filled with Wisdom and solid Virtue by those
which it remarks in God; and when he makes it see his Glory, Majesty, and his
Almighty Power, the Soul is filled with Joy, Honor and Strength, in
Consideration of the Qualities of its God; But he no sooner makes appear to it
the deplorable State to which Men are reduced now, than the Soul is afflicted,
and thirsts with a Desire to see them converted unto God, who also shows unto
it all the necessary Means for this Conversion. And as a Physician cannot
rightly cure a sick Person or Patient, without seeing first the Cause of the
Disease, or laying open the Sores of his Evil; even so does God toward a
charitable Soul, that is touched with a sensible Regret to see its Neighbor
perish, and with a Desire to succor him with all its Power. Then God makes it
see the Sores, that is, the Faults and Sins of his People more distinctly than
if it conversed daily with them, even though it has never seen them by the Eyes
of the Body. Nevertheless it knows them better than they who converse daily
with them; Because the Light of God pierces to the Bottom of Souls; and the
Sight of Men perceives only outward things. Therefore many are often deceived,
and take what is false for true: But God judges always with an upright
Judgment: And when the Soul has Bowels of Charity to help its Neighbor, God
shows it the State in which he lives, and also the Means by which he may rise
again from his Fall. This is the Reason why God makes Matters of Fact, which
respect our Neigbour, to be as well perceived as divine Things, and that by the
Light of the Holy Spirit, which is so much the brighter the farther it is
removed from Humane Light and Natural Knowledge. For this Cause, Sir, I retire
so much from Men, and will learn nothing from them; because their Wisdom
hinders and obscures the Light of the Holy Spirit; and according as I am
removed from them, accordingly I approach to true Knowledge: For sometimes I
would tell you better what passes among the Turks or other remote Places, than
what is done in my Presence: For my Eyes may deceive me: But the Holy Spirit
cannot deceive me.

I asked her, How this Light had its Original? If the Holy Spirit did
immediately declare things to the Soul, or if the Soul did propose them first?

She said; Sir, this is done differently: For sometimes the Holy Spirit gives
Notices of the Things which the Soul never saw nor thought of: At other times
he makes it understand something which it saw or understood imperfectly: But
for the most Part, the Light is demanded by the Soul when it prays for it or
for somewhat else: Then if it be well recollected, it receives the
Understanding of what it asked, either God grants it, or makes it see wherefore
he denies it, or else what it ought to do or forsake to cooperate with the
Designs of God, and to obtain its Request. Behold how the Lights of the Holy
Spirit have their Rise. All that is needful in this, is Ps. 73. 23,-28.
to disengage our Soul from Earthly Affections, and to resign it to the Will of
God; Then he governs and illuminates it in such sort as that it cannot be
ignorant of any thing that it ought to know: For as for simple Curiosities, we
ought never to ask or desire them; but only that which is well pleasing unto
God, or profitable to our Neighbor: The Knowledge of which Things God does not
deny to Souls who are faithfully dedicated to him. I wish, Sir, you may be one
of them, that you may learn in a Moment more things in these Matters, than I
could tell you in a whole Day: For one Word from God contains more than Ten
Thousand Discourses of Men, which are still accompanied with many Defects and
Imperfections: Whereas the Holy Spirit has a perfect Accomplishment in every
Thing, and enlarges himself according as the Soul is emptied of it self. We
have nothing else to do, but to empty our selves; because God being always in
the Center of our Soul, he would enlighten it abundantly in case the Hindrances
were removed: For take them away and we receive Light.

The End of the Second Part.
THE CONTENTS.
Conference. I. How the Opinions of the Learned are injurious to God, they
being ignorant of his Works. Of God's Presence, and of his Grace. Of the
Liberty, Power and Weakness of Man; and of the State of Infants before the Use
of their Reason. p. 1. Conf. II. Of the State of little Infants, which come
from good or evil Parents: And of Baptism. p. 11. Conf. III. How the Devil has
crept into the Church as Antichrist, and is there maintained and authorized. p.
19. Conf. IV. Of the Reformation of the Church, of its Councils, Commands and
Ordinances. p. 21. Conf. V. That all Men ought to labor to satisfy the
Justice of God, by this Penitence. p. 31. Conf. VI. That the Roman Church is
the Spouse of Jesus Christ; but that she has falsified her Faith to her lawful
Husband. p. 33. Conf. VII. Of the Mass, and of the Sacraments and
Ecclesiastical Functions. p. 44. Conf VIII. What are the Sins against the Holy
Ghost, and how much they prevail. p. 50. Conf IX. That no body can be saved,
but he who professes the Goodness, Righteousness and Truth of God. The World is
at present without them, but it shall be renewed. The Danger that Men are in.
Secret Evil ought to be discovered. p. 57. Conf. X. That the Time is come that
Men shall receive the Holy Spirit in Fullness, and what hinders them to receive
him. p. 66. Conf. XI. How Man must resign himself to God. p. 69. Conf. XII. Of
discerning the Motions of God from those of Nature, which must be done by
Righteousness, Goodness and Truth, which are three divine Qualities, according
to which all our Motions and all our Actions ought to be regulated with great
Care. p. 76. Conf. XIII. That Persons illuminated by God, may serve as powerful
Means for Salvation; but it is God only who can give it; and that now the
Company of Men is dangerous. p. 84. Conf. XIV. That the Habit does not make the
Monk, and that Religions of themselves make none holy. Of the Corruption of
them and of the Church. p. 86. Conf. XV. That the Time is come when the Holy
Spirit will teach us all Truth. How Christians do reject his Light, and what
Progress the Devil has made among them. For what end, how, and to whom God
communicates his Spirit. p 105. Conf. XVI. How we must beware of false Christ's
and false Prophets, which seduce all the World, and are so much followed at
present. How to discern true Prophets from the false; and that it would be to
no purpose at present to aim at the Conversion of Christians by preaching the
Truth to them. p. 114. Conf. XVII. That the Jews and Heathens are better
disposed to be converted unto God than the Christians; and that the Jews shall
be restored, and the Christians rejected. p. 124. Conf. XVIII. How the Holy
Spirit gives his Light to the Soul. p. 136.
The End of the Contents.
THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD.

The Third and Last Part.

CONTAINING The Last Conferences WHICH M. ANTONIA BOURIGNON HAD WITH The
Deceast Mr. CHRISTIAN de CORT, Priest, Pastor of St. John's at Mechlin,
Superior of the Fathers of the Oratory there, and Directour of the Isle of
Noorestrandt.

Which deserves to be Read, Understood, and Considered by all who desire to be
Saved.

Written Originally in French.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCVI.

Isaiah 58. 10. Thy Light shall arise in the midst of Darkness; and thy
Obscurity shall become as Noonday. To the READER.
HERE is, FRIENDLY READER, the Third Part of the LIGHT OF THE WORLD, which is
also the Last Conferences that I could have with this Zealous CHRISTIAN DE
CORT, (Superior of the Oratory, and Pastor of the Church St. John at Mech^in
in Brabant) since to hinder him from having any more Conferences with me, they
poisoned him, and so murdered him, to hinder the Prosecution of the Pious
Designs which he had to make known to the World the Truth of the Decay of
CHRISTIANITY.

This Third Part shows yet more clearly than the Two foregoing, how much the
Church of God is fallen from her first Institution, and how far she is removed
from the Principles of the Apostles, and the Life of the First Christians; how
many Errors and Corruptions have by little and little crept and slipped into
Christianity; what Appendages and Circumstances they have added to it: How many
New Laws and Ordinances for the Ornament of it, which in effect have deformed
and disfigured it? So that whereas Christendom was in its Beginning The True
Spouse of Jesus Christ, she is now become The great Whore, which commits
whoredom with the Kings of the Earth, drinking in their Cups, and eating of
their Dainties, which are the Ambition, the Pleasures, and covetous Desires of
the Things of this World. Which Things are now as common among the Churchmen as
among the Kings of the Earth, to say no more. This is very far from the
Lowliness of Jesus Christ and of his Disciples, who lived in Humility of Heart,
in a Contempt of the Honors and Glory of the World, and would take no other
Delights but Labors, Fatigues and Sufferings; and despised Gold and Silver, as
appears by the Offer that Simon the Sorcerer made to St. Peter, of giving him
Money to buy the Grace of God* He curses him and his Money. And when they asked
Alms of him, he says to the poor Man; Silver and Gold have we none, but the
Power of God which will heal thee: And elsewhere they say; Freely we have
received it, and freely we give it: And to show the Poverty there was* in the
College of the Apostles, we need but remark that they had not wherewith to pay
the Tribute, since Jesus Christ sent them to catch a Fish in which they should
find a Piece of Money to pay this Tax. Consider now* FRIENDLY READER, if there
be any Resemblance between the Churchmen of our Time, and the College of the
Apostles, and if every one does not strive to come by the Fattest Prebendaries,
thirsting still insatiably for more Honor, Pleasures. and Riches, that they
may Rule in this World, instead of Enduring and Suffering in it, in Imitation
of their Master and Captain Jesus Christ, who says so clearly to them, I have
done all to give you an Example* and, Be ye Followers of me.

But those Persons at present, do directly the contrary, despising Lowliness
and Humility, abhorring Poverty, and avoiding Sufferings as much as they can.
Are not these Adulterers who falsify their Faith promised to Jesus Christ in
Baptism to renounce the Devil, the World, and its Pomps? And after their Oaths,
they go and take up what they have renounced conforming themselves to the
World, and its Pomps and Vanities, as much as they can: And in the mean time
they will still bear the Name of Christians, which signifies, the Spouse of
Jesus Christ: As in effect those Persons really were, if they had continued in
his Spirit and the Imitation of Him. From which they being fallen, they are
nothing now but unfaithful Whoremongers and Adulterers, worthy to be cast off
by their Lawful Husband, as they infallibly shall be; for He cannot acknowledge
them for Christians when He sees them in their Manners wholly Antichristian.

It must not be imagined that this Evil is only in the Roman Church, as all the
Reformed would persuade themselves, calling the Roman Church commonly, The
great Whore in the Revelation: since all and every one of these Reformed are
more Whores than their Mother, the Roman Church, from which they have
separated, not to Reform her, but to Deform her the more, by rendering her a
greater Beast than she was in her self, For we see these Reformed live much
more licentiously than those who continue in the Roman Church, who being under
Discipline, are regulated and restrained in their Manners, whereas the Reformed
being subject to none, live as Beasts, every one following his own Will and the
Inclination of their corrupt Natures.

This is that which made all these Reformers to depart from the Roman Church,
that they might make New Institutions, accommodated to their Looseness. For
since they were resolved to give the Reins to their Brutish Senses, they could
not abide any longer under the Obedience of a Superior; and being inclined to
follow Carnal Pleasures, they must depart out of the Roman Obedience, where
they had taken Vows and Oaths of Chastity, for else they had been cast into
Prison as perjured and impious: And that they might have Money enough to
satisfy the Pleasures of their Taste, they must be followed by Rich Persons
who might furnish them with Money in abundance. For this Cause they made
Schisms in the Roman Church, and they Established New Churches every one after
his own Fashion, who contradicted one another, and understood one another no
more than the Builders of the Tower of Babel; and in this they were followed by
many Honorable Persons, who thought there was some Good Thing in the Reformed,
and so much the rather that they were agreeable to Corrupt Nature, which they
flattered and nourished in its Vices. For these Reformers did not bid the
People, separate from the Roman Communion, that they might live in Gluttony and
Whoredom: This would have been too infamous and reproachful among Good Men; but
they told them the Abuses of the Roman Church, proposing to reform them: Though
in Truth it was but that they might lead a Licentious Life, shake off Piety and
Truth, and give Loose Reins to the Motions of their Corrupt Nature, and let it
follow its Desires and Inclinations without constraint.

For if they had designed a Pious Reformation, they would not have despised the
Good Things that were in the Roman Church, and would only have resisted the
Evil which they judged to be there, and Reformed that Evil first in themselves,
that by their good Example they might have led others to Reform themselves too;
since Example is an Effectual Preaching. But these Reformers proceeded after
quite another manner, and rejected the Good with the Bad, without distinction:
Because if they had maintained what was Good in the Roman Church, they would
have been obliged to observe it them themselves. This they had no mind to do,
being resolved to lead a Licentious Life, and to give Loose Reins to all their
Brutish Senses. They could not subject the People to the Obedience of a
Superior, since they themselves would not at all depend upon one. Therefore
first of all they persuaded the People to shake off a Dependence on the Pope
and other Superiors, that they might live every one after their own Way, as
the Beasts who have neither Fears nor Cares but eat and drink well. This is
against all Decency; since no Country, no Common wealth, no Family can be well
ordered and governed without a Head, a Superior, or a Father of the Family, to
whom the rest are subject: And I pray you, FRIENDLY READER, what would a City
or a Province be, if it had no Magistrate, no Superior? No other thing but a
Den of Thieves, Robbers, and other Malefactors, who would hinder all Good Men
from dwelling there. And though Superiority be so good, useful and necessary
even in the Civil State, yet these Reformers reject it as an Evil Thing, and
will depend on none but themselves, and live independently, that they may the
more follow the Swinge of their Brutish Senses, whose Motions they let loose
without Restraint. These Reformers did not only cast off Obedience by their
Reformation; but also the Confession of Sins in particular: For they would not
declare to another the Luxury and the Excess which they had a mind to
perpetrate; and they could not enjoin others what they would not do themselves.
Therefore they rejected, and even despised this Confession, though the
Scripture says expressly, Confess your Faults to one another: And Confession in
its self is Good and Holy, humbling the Heart, and serving for a Bridle and
Restraint to Sin in Time coming. All this sort of Good these Reformers
rejected, together with the pretended Errors they said they had discovered,
forgetting that the Scripture says, Try all things, and hold that which is good.

I will not excuse the Errors and Abuses which have crept in among these
Auricular Confessions; since I blame them more than these Reformers themselves
did, as may be seen in this LIGHT OF THE WORLD: But they ought not to pluck up
the good Grain with the Tares. That belongs to the Lord to separate them in the
Day of Harvest, and not to these Reformers to come before the Time and pluck
out of the Holy Church the good Things which Christ had planted there: Such as
Fasting and Abstinence are, which these Reformers have so absolutely rejected
and despised, though in the Scripture Fasting is recommended; for the Apostle
says, Be ye sober, and watch: And elsewhere it is said, Sanctify your Fast.
And Jesus Christ speaking to his Apostles of one possessed, says to them, This
kind goes not out but by Fasting and Prayer. He himself fasted Forty Days in
the Desert, and was an hungered. But these Reformers speak of nothing but
filling their Belly well the better to excite their Lust. Are not these who
would Reform the Roman Church, fine Zealots for the Glory of God? We see also
that all their Reformation has brought nothing but Schisms and Divisions among
the Reformed themselves. There is nothing there but Debates and Dissensions.
They wrote to me some while ago that Two Preachers of the same Reformed
Communion had fallen by the Ears together even in the Temple, and the one had
rent the others Garment from Head to Foot. These are the Effects of their
Reformation, and of the Remedy they say they have provided for the Abuses of
the Roman Church: The Scripture says, That the Tree is known by its Fruit.
From whence we may infer how pernicious these Reformations must be, which have
caused such Mischiefs in Christendom, having brought in nothing but Hatred
among Christians, though Jesus Christ did so much recommend to them, To love
one another. By these Reformations they have despised, hated and persecuted one
another, beat, robbed, killed and murdered one another without compassion, to
maintain the Opinion that they have undertaken to believe, though all their
Opinions be equally bad, the one erring one way, and the other another. So that
to maintain the Errors of these Reformers these Christians killed and
murdered one another, instead of loving one another according to the Counsel
of Jesus Christ. And these Enmities continue to this Day, and they hate and
despise one another upon the Account of their Religion, though all of them
signify nothing, and no Religions can save any.

Nothing but the Love of God brings Salvation; and all these Persons love
themselves only, and live all according to the Motions of Corrupt Nature: Their
Religions consisting in nothing but Theory, and vain Speculations, not at all
in Practice. But to flatter them with some Piety and Devotion; their Reformers
have put the Bible in their Hands, and some Songs to sing in the Temple: since
the Priests and Religious Romanists used to sing in the Temple, and corrupt
Nature has no Repugnance to Songs; it rather delights in them, as all these
Reformers do at this Day, who lift up their Voice as well as they can to make
their good Voice be heard in the Temple, where they sit at their own Ease, with
the Bible in their Hand, on which they profess to read that they may learn to
discourse of it, though I have not known one Person who puts in practice so
much as one Point of the Gospel. Lo this is all the Service that these
Reformers have learned their Disciples, together with the Lords Supper, that is
performed without Devotion or Piety. And notwithstanding of this they call
themselves good Christians, Evangelical Persons, Predestined, or Regenerated
Ones, and other good Names: Though they be as far from Salvation as Heaven is
from Earth. But these Reformers have known so well how to persuade them of an
Imaginary Salvation by their Scholastic Reasons and Glosses, that they have
thereby so confounded their Spirit, as that they receive Lies for the Gospel.

That which is most to be admired, is, that among so many Persons of
Understanding who have followed these Reformers, none have perceived the Cheat
of these Sensual Reformers, who teach a Life quite contrary to the Evangelical
Life, which speaks of nothing but denying a Man's Self, bearing down his Flesh,
and doing Penitence, with a Threatening that without this Mean we shall all
perish. It must indeed be said, That from that time Men have been abandoned to
the Spirit of Error and Lying, and that Men's Spirit has been quite blinded by
Sin, and is since still more blinded; since yet in our Time we see Persons of a
like Temper li^t up themselves above others, and call themselves the Reformers
and Restorers of Israel, and separate from the rest of the Reformed, that they
may live separate from the World in greater Holiness than others: Though in
their Manners they be as sensual, yea more, than those whom they have forsaken.
For having no Accommodation of Worldly Goods, and being unwilling to Work, but
desirous to be well Treated and Served, they undertake Reformations, drawing
over to them Wealthy Persons that they may obtain their Aims, and they make all
their Goods common: In which the Poor cannot but have Advantage, and the
Reformers Services, and a good Time of it, according to their Aim; since in
effect many follow them, and give them all their Wealth, with which they Eat
and Drink and Marry as those did in the Days of Noah: On which Terms they make
them Preachings of Fine Studied Words and fitted for the Gust of the Hearers,
who are well pleased to have found out a way of Salvation so well accommodated
to their Corrupt Natures: since they make them believe, that they are all ruled
by King Jesus. They are persuaded by their frivolous Discourses that this is
true, and thus Men are yet amused by Men as they were in former Times.

And I can see no other Remedy but that God overturn all these Churches made
with Men's Hands, that he may establish one made of Spirit and of Life, where we
shall worship God in Spirit and in Truth. Which he makes me hope shall come to
pass very shortly; since he makes me declare so many Truths with the hazard of
my Life to overturn Babel and revive True Christianity. Blessed shall he be who
shall receive them from God's Hand, and shall not resist the Truth as Jannes
and Jambres did; since these are undone for ever: But receive the saving Truth
that God has communicated to me in this LIGHT OF THE WORLD, which will
Illuminate you^ Soul. In the mean time, I remain,

Friendly Reader, Your very Affectionate in Jesus Christ, ANTHOINETTE BOURIGNON.

THE LIGHT of the WORLD The third Part.
The first Conference.
Declares that God has never demanded any other thing of man but the dependence
of his Will on Gods; and that all other Laws are given him by Accident, and to
discover his Sins.

HAving been absent for some time from this illuminated Soul, I went to find
her again to entreat her to pray for me, and to tell her I was resolved more
than ever to resign my self wholly to God, that I might receive his Divine
Light.

She said, Sir, as soon as you shall make this Resignation of your self, and
shall deliver up into God's Hand the Freewill that he has given you, you shall
receive the Holy Spirit, which will teach you all things. But never turn back
again to resume your own will; otherwise the last Fault will be worse than the
first: Since you have now received more Light than formerly, walk according to
it, and do not any more regard the World, nor the Creatures, for they cannot
save you. You must fall into the Hands of God Ps. 139. 7. 12.
whether you will or no: No body can escape this, whether he live well or ill,
he shall have no other Judge. It Is a very small matter for us to yield to God
the free will that he has so freely given us; since it is his Property, and he
has entrusted it in our Hands only for our Benefit. Shall we procure our own
Misery with the greatest Present that God has ever given us. Since we have so
often experienced that we always abuse this Free Will, Is. 66. 3. 4.
employing it rather for our Damnation, than for our Salvation; Let us
acknowledge, Sir, our weakness, and resign our Free Will into the Hands of God,
that he may dispose of it at his. Pleasure during this short Life. He will give
it back to us in the other, with such Perfections that we shall not be able to
abuse it any more. Do not delay longer, Sir, so much as one day to make this
transferring of your Free Will to God: For in this consists Joh. 6. 38.
all Perfection, all the Law and the Prophets, and Life everlasting: For all
Virtues, the Old Law, and the New, are no other but true means to attain to
this Resignation of our Freewill to that of God: in doing this we fulfill all
things, we need not be sollicitous for any more.

I said to her, I was greatly comforted to understand, that to fulfill the
whole Law we need only resign our own Will to that of God, and that I heartily
resigned it.

She said. Sir it is most certain that God has never demanded any other thing
of Man Prove. 23. 26. Is. 58. 13.
but the resignation of his Will to his, and only gave him Laws and Precepts
Wisd. 12. 2.
when he saw Man withdraw himself from him to follow his own Will, by which he
is Fallen into all sorts of Sins and Miseries; and fearing lest through
Ignorance and Inadvertence he should dye and perish in his Sins, God gave him
Laws and Precepts that Man might know* Sins, and abstain from committing them:
Otherwise Man 1 Timothy 9.
would never have needed any Laws in case he had continued in a dependence on
the Will of God: He might have done all that he pleased, and enjoyed all things
Created for his Use, and that even with delight. By which you may see, Sir,
that it is sufficient for Man to resign himself to the Will of God, though he
should not follow any means appointed for the Attainment of these Ends, as the
Commandments of the Church are, he will assuredly be saved; yea, though he were
a Turk or a Heathen, Act. 10. 34,
or of any Sect or Nation whatsoever: Because God has never given any other Law
to Man, but the DEPENDENCE that he ought always to have upon his God: And all
the Laws are occasioned by Sin, and their Goodness consists in the Gal. 3., 17.
discovery of it, that this knowledge may withdraw Man from it, and remove from
him all these Sins, which prove hindrances of this Resignation to God: For if
Man had no Sins which turn him away from God, he would certainly be resigned to
him: For he is created for this, that God may take Delight in him, Prove. 8. 31.
without any resistance, and that he may accomplish all his Will in Man Is. 1.
19.
with his free Consent and Will, which is the most perfect thing of all that
can be imagined; for if Man were united in Will to God, he would partake of all
his Qualities; and as God is the Fountain of all Good, Man would be also all
Good; and all Just, because united to the true Righteousness; and also all
true, being conformable to the Eternal Truth; and consequently he would fulfill
all the Laws by this sole Resignation to God. without his needing to learn or
follow them in particular, they being all comprehended and summed up in the
inseparable DEPENDENCE of our Will on that of God.

I said to her, That my Soul was ravished with Pleasure to understand that God
demands no other thing of Man, but the submission of his Will to that of his
God, and that by this means I hoped many would yet be Saved; whereas (according
to her Discourses) I had sometimes despaired of all, and of my self also. ( g)
Ps. 37. 4, 5.


She said, You had reason for that despair, because we see no body in our times
who has his Will resigned to that of God, except in Words. which 1 Cor. 4. 2^.
perform nothing in effect; but it is most certain, that if a Heathen who never
heard of God nor of his Laws, should consider by his natural Judgment that
there is a God who governs all things; and if he should resign himself to this
God, unknown to him, taking from his Hands all that befalls him, acknowledging
him the Author of all Good, resolving with the consent of his Will to yield
himself to be ruled and governed by him; Math. 8. 10, 11.
such a Heathen would be a Saint, though he should not observe any of the
Commands in particular, because he would observe them all in general, without
knowing it; for he who is resigned to the Government of God Ps. 37. 5, 6.
can never do Evil, nor commit Sin, unless he withdraw himself from this
Government to follow his own Will. I would believe that there are yet some
Persons scattered up and down the World who have resigned their Wills to the
Will of God; but taking the generality of the World, and considering how men
govern themselves, it is manifest enough that no body resigns his Will to that
of God; for we see nothing but self-will reigns every where: From thence it
comes that so many Sins are committed. We see the self-will of all Men bear
sway in all things with the same affectation, for they esteem nothing more than
their own Will; they seek and follow it as much as is possible for them, in
eating and drinking, and in all other bodily things, in Sciences, and in the
choice of Estates, and Dignities, and in all things that give Contentment to
the Mind, yea, even in pious and spiritual Exercises, they are done according
to the desire and inclination of Self-will, and no otherwise; for if our Will
were resigned to God, it would not seek it self in any thing, neither in small
things nor in great: For one who is truly resigned does not any more possess
himself: He takes and receives all that God is pleased to give him, and is most
content with what he thinks fit to deprive him of. This is very far from the
practice of Men now, who would willingly set themselves against the Will of
God, if it were possible for them, in all that he permits to befall them
against their own Will; yea, even though they be Persons consecrated to God by
solemn Vows, we discover and find them to be so wedded to their own Wills and
Inclinations, that all their Actions as well good as bad, are nothing but a
constant course of Self-Love, which never ends till Death, and even sometimes
follows them after it by Legacies or Testaments made according to this
Self-will; and nevertheless they believe, and all the World owns, that they are
the Servants of God, entirely dedicated to him, without observing what Jesus
Christ says, that Math. 16. 2^.
to be his Disciple a Man must deny himself: By which words he explains to us
what this DEPENDENCE on God ought to be; for the whole Law of the Gospel is
nothing else but the Explication of the dependence that we ought to have on the
Will of God: And when he says, Deny your selves, this is nothing else but to
say, Resign your selves to God, because he who follows himself, hinders God
from ruling over him; so all the other Precepts of Jesus Christ are but to
point out to us the means by which we may attain to this Resignation of our
Will to God's; for when Jesus Christ says, Luke 14. 33.
Renounce all that you possess; This is not that God has need of Silver, or
other Possessions, but because Man has so set his Affections on what he
possesses in this World, that he would not be content that God should take them
from him, and as long as he has a desire to possess them, he cannot be resigned
to the Will of God, for he has yet his own: And when Jesus Christ says Luke 9.
33.
Take up your Cross, and follow me; this is also to lead us to this Resignation
of our Will to that of God; for being all good, he cannot do Evil to any, nor
take Pleasure in making us suffer; but he who will not endure the Pains and
Crosses that shall befall him, cannot be resigned to God, for he does not
willingly suffer, though his Sins have deserved it. And when Jesus Christ says,
that we must Math. 5. 29.
cut off the Foot, or pluck out the Eye that offends us; It is not that God has
need of any of the Members of our Body, but to teach us that he who is resigned
to the Will of God, ought willingly to lose his Foot or his Eye, yea, his Life
when God shall permit it; for he who has resigned his Will to the Will of God,
has no more any Care of, or respect to himself, suffering himself to be
entirely governed by God, independently from his own Will. And because we did
not comprehend sufficiently how this dependence ought to be, and were so far
removed from it; Jesus Christ came upon Earth to explain to us by what means we
ought to recover it; for all his Precepts are only means to attain to it.

I asked her, how we might know when we are wholly refi n'd to God, and that
our Liberty and free will is yielded up to his disposal.

She said, Sir it is very easy to know this; for he who has truly yielded up
his Free Will to God, will use it Mat. 26. 39.
no more, but deny all that it demands, even to the least things; he yields no
longer to it in any thing, but waits on God for all that he must have, having
no more to yield up to him but this Free Will, he only receives from God
without acting in any thing. Such a Person performs all his Actions in
dependence on God, if he eats and drinks it is nothing but out of pure
Necessity, without regarding whether it be sweet or sour, all is good to him,
provided it be wholesome and sufficient for the maintenance of his Life: He
seeks neither Ease, Pleasures, Honors, Riches, nor any Earthly Contentment;
and if any of these things occur, he takes them indifferently from God's Hand,
for he has no longer any desire of his own. He neither desires Honor, Estate,
Riches, nor any thing that delights the Mind, knowing well that it is not in
this Life that one must take his Contentment, no more than Jesus Christ did
while he was on Earth: On the contrary, he finds in his Soul a willingness 2
Cor. 12. 10.
to suffer Reproaches, Pain, and Labor, though contrary to his natural
Inclination. A Soul dead to it self, and resigned to the Will of God, neither
seeks good, nor even Virtues, but those which God will give it, and affects no
means to obtain them; but is well contented to be most ignorant, and stripped of
all sorts of Sciences, and means even of perfection. In one word, Sir, a person
who has yielded up his free will to God, desires no longer any thing on Earth,
and expects only what it shall please God to permit or send him, receiving
Prosperity and Adversity with an even mind, without Joy or Grief, since he
believes, That Romans 8. 28.
God will not permit any thing to befall him but what shall turn to his good.
All these are signs to know whether we be resigned to God, or not; for we must
not flatter our selves in saying, that we are resigned to God, while we live
wholly to our own wills, and follow, as much as we can, our own inclinations.

I said to her, That I never knew any on Earth who was so resigned to God, as
to take all from his hands, and to have no self-will, on occasions; though many
pretend, that they will live wholly to God, and do his will.

She said, Sir, Do you not see, that these are all Cheats, and that those who
say, they would please God, and do his will, deceive themselves, in believing,
that God is pleased with their words, without effect. If you never knew any
person, who yielded up to God the free will that he gave him, you may well say,
that you know none in a state of salvation: for no man can be saved Isa. 66. 4.
who follows his own will. For Adam committed no other sin to undo us, but the
following his own will: The matter of eating an Apple was not sufficient to
cause all the miseries under which we yet groan. That which ruined the Children
of Israel was nothing else but Psalm 81. 12, 13.
that they would not be contented with the Government and Will of God, desiring
rather to suffer the miseries of Egypt, in doing their own wills, than to enjoy
the delights they had while they Resigned themselves to God. When all the
world-perish'd by an universal Deluge, it was because every one was more bent
to follow his own will, than to submit to the word that God proclaimed by Noah.
And when the Jews were given up to the Spirit of Error, it was for no other
Reason but that they valued more their own will than the light that God sent
them to receive, and know His. By which we may see, that in all Times and Ages
God has always demanded the Submission of Man's Will to his own, and has
rejected all those who follow their own Will. Do you believe, Sir, that it will
not be thus with Christians and all the World now? It is certainly the very
same thing, for God never changes. What he required from Adam, he certainly
requires from all his Posterity. We are mistaken if we think to deceive him now
with formal Words and Discourses, saying that we will be resigned to him, and
do his Will, when in effect we will only follow our own on all occasions. This
is one deceit among others, which are crept into Christendom, to make all the
World Perish: For no body knows what it is to be resigned to God, while every
one says, he is; and on this false persuasion, they insensibly destroy
themselves.

The second Conference.
Of Free Will. That it is the only thing which represents in Man the Infinity
and Liberty of God; That the greatest Gift which God has given to Man, is, to
love him freely and infinitely, which is the greatest Perfection in Grace,
figured by that of Marriage in Nature.

I said to her, since our own Will is so dangerous, it were to be wished we
had never received it.

She said, Sir, what Blasphemy do you utter against the Goodness of God, who 4
Esd. 8. 56.
has given us this Freewill as the most precious thing that ever was; for by it
we are made like Genesis 1. 27.
to God, whereas otherwise we should be nothing but limited Creatures, in whom
God could not take Pleasure? To desire that we had no Free Will, would be to
despise extremely the Treasures of God, since it was purposely given us that we
might Ps. 40. 9. see 2 Cor. 8. 8.
be the more united to him, without which we could not be the Images of God,
because we should have had no resemblance of him, without this Freewill, which
makes us Act. 17. 28, 29.
Little Gods, without which all Men would be but Filth: For, according to their
Nature alone, they are more miserable than the Beasts. Could God take delight
in a thing so unlike to himself, could so powerful a God unite himself to such
an Impotent Creature, who had not Free Will to love him? God having no bounds
nor limits, could he take Pleasure in a Creature whose Will was bounded, and
could a limited Will attain to the Love of a God without limits? How could a
finite Being love an infinite? There would be no proportion there, and if
Likeness beget Love, how could a being so vastly different be united in
Affection? God who ^^eut. 32. 4.
has made all his Creatures so perfect, even to the least Creature that ought
to serve for the use of Man, would he have made Man so imperfect, who ought to
serve for his own delight? In this there would be neither Justice nor Goodness,
and Man alone might lament and bewail his misfortune, who would find himself
destitute of all the qualities requisite for the end for which he was Created,
that is, to love his God. And this Free Will which is given him for this Love
only, can it be blamed, or despised, because we abuse it? It had been better we
had never been Created, than to have been without our Free Will, which is the
greatest Good that the Goodness of God could bestow upon us. Would we not judge
a Father very cruel, who having great Wealth and Treasures, would not give them
to his Children, and who, because some of them had abused them, would leave all
the rest in Poverty, and give all his Wealth to Strangers? Can we wish that God
had done us this Injustice to deny us our Free Will, since there was a
necessity he should give it to some? Are we not his true Children, since he has
( e) Ps. 110. 3.
said, Genesis 1. 26.
Let us make Man after our Likeness? We are thereby made his Legitimate
Children, resembling him more than any other Creatures; and therefore his
greatest Treasures belong to us, among which Freewill is the chief, and most
precious Good. If some abuse it, 4 Esd. 8. 56.
it is their own Fault. God has always exercised the Justice and Goodness of a
true Father in giving it to us, we are to blame if we will abuse it; for these
Benefits ought never to be upbraided to any: A Son who has wasted all his
Patrimony, ought to smite his own Breast, Luke 16. 8.
acknowledging his Fault, without ever believing that it comes from the
Goodness and Equity of his Father, who on his part has done him all the good he
could; but he ought to beg pardon for having thus abused his Favors. All those
who say they would have wished rather not to have had Free Will, are unworthy
to be called the Children of God, for they impute to him the Fault which they
commit themselves. This is a quality of the Devil, always to blame others for
the faults which they do themselves, and to accuse the Good of their own
wickedness. And to wish we had never received Free Will, is to wish never to
have been a Child of God, and indirectly to blame him for the Faults which we
commit in abusing his Graces. This is a great contempt of God, that deserves a
double Punishment, one for the Ingratitude that we commit against God, and
another for having thus abused his Benefits. And as a Beast is not capable of
knowing the Beauty and value of a precious Stone, so Man would have been a
brutish Animal if God, had not given him an Understanding to comprehend, and a
Free Will to love Him, without which he would be as incapable of knowing and
loving God, as a Beast is of a Jewel, which surpasses its Capacity. And yet
they would wish that this Free Will, which is the only advantage of Man, had
not been given him! what Ingratitude to take such inestimable Favors of God
for a Misfortune!

I said to her, That I intended not to despise the Gifts ( g) Act. 17. 18.
of God, by saying, that it had been desirable he had not given this free will
to Man: but I only considered, that by it Man so easily ruined himself.

She said, Sir, by all these humane Sentiments every one Blasphemes against
God; it is no wonder that the Whore in the Revelation is Rev. 17. 4.
full of names of Blasphemy, since Blasphemies are so common in the Christian
Church, which she represents: They esteem that good which God reckons to be
Evil, and they hold that to be Evil which God counts good; yea, his most holy
and perfect Works are rejected or despised by Men, which is evident by your
present Sentiments; since it seems to you, it had been better not to have
received Free Will from God; that is to say, by way of Reproof to him, that he
had done better not to have given it to Man. Do we not show by this, that we
would be God's Masters, and Directors, to teach him his Duty, and correct him,
by saying, he had done better not to have given this Free Will? To what is Man
come, that silly Worm of the Earth, who would give orders to so wise and
powerful a God? Is it enough for Man to excuse himself by saying, That he
considers only the ill use that is made of these Graces of God, without
applying his Mind to consider that the Works of God are always good, just, and
true; and that all the Evil that can ever be found in them, proceeds only from
the wickedness of Man, who abusing the Favors of God, makes use of his Graces
to offend him? It were better to have a Sentiment that reproves Man for this
wickedness, than one that reproves God in his Works; as Men do now, who
judging with carnal Eyes, condemn the goodness and righteousness of God. It Is
more than time, Sir, that he should take order with so many evils, without
suffering any longer so many Blasphemies as are daily uttered against him, and
wherein even the Holy judge sinistrously of the most holy and perfect of his
Works. It must needs be that all things be very shortly overturned; for no
body knows God any more, nor his Works.

I acknowledged my Fault in having so often spoke evil of the Works of God,
saying to her, that it was only through Ignorance, and not through Malice.

She said, Sir, Ignorance excuses not Sin. You are always obliged to know that
God is a perfect Good, from whom no Evil can ever proceed; and that all his
Works are accompanied with Truth, and all sorts of Perfections: And that he can
never do any Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Ps. 33. 4.
imperfect thing; and therefore you ought not to wish that any thing were
otherwise than he has appointed it; for all the Wise Men who are, were, or
shall be upon the Earth, cannot have all together the least Wisdom of God, and
all that they have, they have from him. Is not this general Rule sufficient to
make your Spirit submit to these Ordinances, especially as to this Free Will of
Men, which he has' given them as a Pledge of assurance that they are his real
Children, in acknowledgment of which they ought to bless and praise him day and
night, because he could never testify more Love to them than by this liberty
he has given them to love him. For my part I can say in truth, that I would
choose rather that God should annihilate me than take from me the Liberty to
love him. Therefore I resent it so much when I hear it said, That it would be
better not to have Free Will; for I feel by Experience that it is the only
thing that unites Men to God, and that also which Is. 1. 19.
can make them enjoy Eternal Happiness; no body can comprehend (but he who
experiences it) what Consolation the Soul receives Cant. 7. 12. 8. 6, 7.
when it can unite this Free Will to God. This is so perfect an Alliance, that
nothing can be found in Grace more accomplished, no more than there can be any
thing found in Nature more perfect, than that two Persons united in their Wills
in God, join also in Body, this compleats their Contentment; but if there were
force, limitation or constraint on either side, the Pleasure could not be
complete, This is the Figure of the perfectly free Union that the Soul ought to
have with God; and if the Soul were constrained, or forced to this union, God
could not take perfect delight in it, ( m) Wisd. 9. 6, 17.
( o) 1 Cor. 2. 14.
because to have a complete Contentment in the Union of two things, they must
needs equally concur to it.

I said to her, That I must confess I had been in great Darkness, and that I
had never conceived that so great a Good did proceed from Free Will, no more
than the happiness which is found in Marriage, when two Persons are united in
Body and in Mind.

She said, This is because People consider things only superficially, and on
the outside, without piercing into their Sources, for, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. Eccles. 5.
17, 18.
it is the Free Will of Man only that gives him a perfect Union with God,
without which he could never come to love him perfectly, therefore among all
the Spiritual Graces that God has imparted to him, this Free Will is the
greatest good, as also Marriage among natural Goods is the most perfect; though
Men do very frequently abuse both, making use of their Free Will to damn
themselves, and of Marriage to sin. This is not God's Fault, who has ordained
both the one and the other holy and perfect; but only Man's, who abuses the
most perfect Gifts of God, as well in Grace as in Nature. Ought we for this to
desire that he had not bestowed these Graces on Man? This would be to own that
Man's Wickedness should make the Goodness of God to cease, which cannot be, for
God will never cease to be good, because Man is evil. He remains still the
Fountain of all Goodness Jam. 1. 17.
and the giver of all Good, though the men of the World be wicked. God will
never change for the Goodness or Wickedness of Men, nor for any other thing,
because he continues always that which he is. Let Man do what he will, with all
the other Creatures, they shall never be able to make God desist from the least
Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth, which he possesses in himself, and will
always exercise without regard to the goodness or wickedness of Men. Their
abuse Lam. 3. 22. Math 5. 45.
of his Graces will never hinder him from extending his Goodness toward them:
If they use them well, they shall receive the promised reward, and if they they
use them ill, they shall meet with the just Punishment, without any mutability
in God. It pleased God to Create Man after his Likeness, and so he was made,
for God's Power is equal Wisd. 2. 18.
to his Will; and he would have this Man also joined to his Like, as God was to
him, that is to say, entirely, spiritually, and bodily. Now Man could not be
like to God by his humanity; for God was not corporeal or natural; neither
could he be like to God by a bounded and limited Will and Spirit, because God
has a free Power to do, or not to do any thing: God then must needs have given
to Man the same free Power of his Will, or otherwise he could not be like to
him in any thing. And since he would create Man after his own Likeness, he was
obliged to give him the free disposal of his own will, there being nothing else
in which he could resemble God. By which we see that Free Will is the greatest
spiritual Gift that Man has received from God, since without it he could not
any way resemble Him. And afterward to render this resemblance most complete,
God took a natural Body, and a reasonable Soul, like to Man, that he might in
all respects resemble him, that is divinely by the free Power of his Will, and
after the manner of Man, by the Body and Soul which Jesus Christ assumed in due
time, that not only Man might be like God, but that also God might be like to
Man, that there might be a perfect and complete Contentment between God and
Man, which will appear after the end of all Evil; when God shall reign with Men
on Earth, Divinity and Humanity together joining themselves inseparably by an
indissolvable and eternal alliance of Will, Body, and Spirit, by a perfect Bond
and Union. This is the final Cause for which God became Man, that they might
dwell together in an Eternal holy Union, the figure of which he showed in the
Earthly Paradise when he created the Woman to give Adam Genesis 12. 18.
his complete and perfect contentment; for though indeed he had been created
with his Freewill to be able to love God, and take delight in him, and also in
all the Creatures which were made subject to him, yet his Contentment was not
fully perfect; for God was to be the delight of his Soul, and all the other
Creatures of his Senses. But his Body did not see its like; therefore God says,
Genesis 2. 18.
It is not good for Man to be alone, let us make a help like to him: Because
God will make all his Works perfect in all respects. He is not satisfied to
have created Adam in the enjoyment of his Free Will, by which he might have his
Will united to God's; he gives him also all beautiful things to recreate his
Sight, and all ^avoury things to recreate his taste; all pleasant things for
his hearing; all things necessary for his Entertainment, and he will needs also
give him a Companion suitable to his Person, that both as to Body and Soul, he
might have perfect Contentment, complete in all respects, therefore he
instituted Marriage, that the Souls which are united together by will in God,
might be also united in Body; and that Man by this Figure might see how
complete and perfect the Union must be that he must have with God in all
respects, and without any defect.

The Third Conference.
Speaks of the Perfection, and of the abuse of Marriage.

I said to her that Marriage was very holily instituted, but that it was very
ill observed because no body observes narrowly the works of God.

She said, Sir, this Isa. 5. 12, 13.
is the cause why the World is condemned: for God is no longer known nor loved
in it: and no body is sensible of this Fault. They use their Free Will to
satisfy themselves; every one willing and desiring that which is pleasant to
his Senses, or advantageous for his Interest in this World. They will all that
which God does not will; and notwithstanding they hope to be saved, and make a
contrary use of all that God has given us. Marriage is a Holy thing, and may
well be called a Sacrament, for God has instituted it; and all that he has done
is Sacred and Holy. But what do we see in the use of this Sacrament, but the
Sin of Lust and filthiness, people carrying more disorderly in it than the
Brute Beasts? They join Bodies, when their Desires and Wills are far divided.
The ends for which God instituted it are no longer regarded by married Persons.
It is their only desire to satisfy their Lust or Avarice. For the rest they
only mind it but by accident. And as there is nothing more holy and perfect
than the Bond of Marriage for two Persons who have dedicated their Wills to
God, because it unites three things which make now but one, to wit, the will of
God, and the wills of the Married Persons, who by excess of their united Wills
unite also Bodies in the Spirit and Design of God; so on the contrary, there
can be nothing more wicked than two Bodies united by Carnal Concupiscence: for
this Alliance is the source of all sorts of Sins, yea, the Abyss of all Evils:
And as those who are united to God, have, by being married with a Person
equally united to God, a perfect Contentment both of Soul and Body; so those
who live after their own will, have, by marrying with their Like, still some
discontent both of Body and Soul, because their Souls not being in God they
cannot have Peace, and their Bodies being joined without Love, cannot be
satisfied nor contented, but they are in Body and Soul as in a temporal Hell,
which prepares the way to Hell Eternal; for these Bodies united without Souls
and Wills can produce nothing but Sin through the Lust of the Flesh, besides
Contention and Strife, with a thousand other kinds of Excess, Vainglory,
Luxury, gluttony, to which Married Persons excite one another: So that their
whole Life is nothing but a constant course of sinning, which extends also to
their children, through the bad example of the Parents, who train them up in evil
customs, and they increase the number of the wicked. Hereby the world grew
still worse, and its wickedness is still increased, and the perverse generation
is become so numerous, that the Evil is without Remedy; for no body is aware of
it, because every one treads the same path: Custom is changed into Nature. And
whereas they ought to marry for the Two Ends that God gave them; that is, to
preserve a perfect Unity among his true Children, and to increase the number of
them by generation, they usually marry to satisfy their Concupiscence; and so
they beget Children for the profit of the Devil. Thus the works of God are
perverted by evil practices; for of all that God has done in Nature, there is
nothing more holy than the Matrimonial Conjunction, which by a perfect Union
binds persons in Love: for otherwise, God might have made men engender as the
Fishes, or in any other separate manner, which his Almighty Power and Wisdom
could have provided for. But resolving to have in Nature a figure of the Union
of his Three Powers, and of the entire and perfect Alliance which he would make
with man, he ordained, that their generation should be by the conjunction of
two persons; that he might keep them always inseparably united to his will in
body and will, by a Bond of Charity; and gave them a natural bent and
inclination to this conjunction, which is the most perfect thing in the world,
if it were observed in the spirit of charity.

I said to her, That it must be acknowledged no body understood the works of
God, and that they made an ill use of all, especially of this Matrimonial
Conjunction, from whence so many sins did proceed; and instead of regarding it
as an holy thing, it was matter of shame and blushing amongst the most sober
persons.

She said, Sir, It Is sin that renders it shameful, even as that of Adam made
him see his Nakedness Genesis 3. 7.
, and gave him ground, through confusion, to hide and cover himself. If he had
remained in innocence, he would never have been ashamed of being Naked; but it
was his sin only that caused this shame: He had no need of covering himself
before he sinned, for his body was more beautiful, and more artificially
contrived than ever the most costly Stuffs, with which he could cover himself;
but the imagination being disordered by sin, made him see beautiful things as
if they had been filthy. This has remained even till now in the imagination of
all men, who esteem that to be good and beautiful which they imagine to be so;
and reckon that also to be filthy and evil which seems so to their imagination.
Hence it comes that they look on natural things as shameful; but if they
regarded them in Truth and Innocence, all would seem good and beautiful to
them; for God could never make any thing evil; but man perverts all good into
evil, and by his sin corrupts all things; the most innocent become the most
wicked by sin. It must be acknowledged, Sir, that the way in which men now join
for generation, is very filthy, and makes chaste souls blush, because they
observe nothing there but the sin which is in it, which is infamous: For this
cause they are ashamed of it: But if this sin were removed, they would see
nothing in it but what is pleasant; as if two little children should play
together quite naked; there would be nothing but pleasure in this, because of
their innocence; but if they did the same things when grown up, it would be
infamous, because of the malignity of their thoughts. A thing that is in it
self the same, is rendered good or evil by the wickedness of the Heart. The
sins that are committed in Marriage, do not proceed from its being evil in its
self; for it is good: but they are introduced there through the perverse will of
men. Even as the Church is holy in it self, but man's perverse will has
rendered it abominable in the sight of God; for they have changed the Order
into which God had established it. And if men commit the greatest sins by the
inclination they have to this natural conjunction, this proceeds from nothing
but the wickedness of the Heart, since the thing in it self is good and holy.
If man is become so negligent as to abuse all the works of God, is it not through
his own wickedness that he perishes, tho he lays the blame always on God? For
if he sin through Carnal Lust, he will say, wherefore has God given me this
Natural Inclination, by which I am led to sin? And if men be chastised by any
Rods, they will say, that God afflicts them, or that he has forsaken them; and
so of all other things: How great soever men's wickedness be, they lay the blame
always on God; tho they do not say it by word, yet they do it in deed, while
they neglect to discover, that all his works are still Psalm. 36. 9, 10.
accompanied with Righteousness, Goodness and Truth; and that nothing that is
evil can ever come from God, who is the Jam. 1. 17.
Source and Original of all Good, still doing good to all, without excepting
any. By which we see evidently, that he is no longer known at present; for they
abuse all his Favors, and blaspheme him in every thing, and yet are not
willing to confess it; for every one of these Christians have it in their
mouths, that they love God and honor him; Tit. 1. 16.
while truly and in effect they disown and blaspheme him by their works.

The Fourth Conference.
Of the blindness of men, who amuse themselves with the outward things which
are delivered to them, without searching into the depth of the Truth it self,
they are so infatuated and withheld, through the fear of displeasing those who
are in Reputation.

I Said to her, That men were in horrible darkness, and that the Truth was no
longer known, but every one had for saken it, and taken a quite contrary way,
while in the mean time they think they are in the right way.

She said, Sir, This is what I bewail continually, to see men so far from their
salvation, and yet they think they are in the right way to it. This causes the
Damnation of those who are esteemed the best men; for while they think they are
good, they will not endeavor after a Change, but will live and die in a
presumption of being saved without good works; which shall not be forgiven
neither in this world nor in the other: and no body thinks on it; for the
darkness is so thick, that they cannot see whither they go. Truth is always
bright, and discovers every thing, but it is no longer known. No body knows the
Truth any more, since the Devil spread this horrible Darkness on the Earth; but
every one walks in darkness, and believes he is in the right way; and while
they are perishing they think to be saved. Have you not observed, Sir, all that
I have said to you, that man knows not God any longer, nor his works; and that
they understand them in a quite contrary sense, and that in truth they observe
nothing of what God has commanded, and Jesus Christ taught, and yet every one
says, that he desires to come to God? Must there not be a lie in the one or the
other of these two contrary things? For what I say, and what Men do, are as
distant from one another, as heat is from cold. Nevertheless truth cannot
change, it remains always true: Let Men say what they please, let them stray
from it, or approach it, it abides still firm in its Integrity. Who that
understands me aright can doubt that I speak the Truth? And if you are obliged
to confess it, will you not consequently be obliged to acknowledge that all the
World is deceived, and fallen from the Truth, and in forsaking it they have
forsaken God? And if they have forsaken God who can uphold them any longer? The
World must certainly perish, for its disease is at the height; and the worst of
all is, that they do not know it; for if they knew it, there would yet be some
among them, who would open their Eyes, and perceive the reality of Truth.

I asked her, from whence this great blindness of Spirit, and this so obscure
darkness could proceed?

She said, Sir, this comes from the Devil, since he crept into the Church, and
began to countermine the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and took the title of
Antichrist; he has labored so strongly in this, that he has spread among them
an universal Darkness, and so confounded the Spirits of those Christians with
so many different things, that they are no longer capable of knowing the Truth.
Instead of it he has inspired them with a great many false Opinions, that he
might divert them from the pure Truth. So that I do not believe there is any
Sect or Nation in the World farther from it than the Christians of this Age,
because they discover it no longer in any thing: whereas the Heretics, Jews,
or Heathens, know the Truth in some things, tho in others they are mistaken:
but these Christians are mistaken in all, through the ill use they make of all
things, as I have formerly told you, Sir, that they know neither God nor any of
his works, judging of all in a quite contrary sense. And because they could not
have quiet without doing good things, the Devil has furnished them with so many
seemingly good works, that they have no longer any leisure to think of the
Truth, and to examine whether these New Devotions be true or not: but they
blindly follow them without making any other Reflection, but that they are the
Ordinances of the Church; without examining also, whether this Church be holy
or not, they lay aside the Truth to receive that which is proposed to them,
supposing it to be a good thing. Hence 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12.
there is such blindness of spirit, and such obscure darkness, that there is
scarce any way to make them see the Truth, their understanding being so
preoccupied and darkened with diverse things, that they can no longer consider
the Unity of Truth; on the contrary, they would think they did evil to follow
this Truth, and quit the New Practices introduced by men. So that if we should
advise a Christian now adays to do nothing else in order to his salvation, but
to resign his will to that of God, he would think we designed to make him an
Heretic; and would cleave more firmly to the Ordinances of the Church than to
those of God.

I asked her, Whether she was a Catholic, and whether one could be saved out
of the holy Church?

She said, Yes, Sir, I am a Catholic, and ready to die for the Faith and
Doctrine of Jesus Christ; because it is necessary for me. If I had remained in
innocence, without having contracted so many evil habits by the conversation of
men, Mat. 9. 12.
I should not have needed the Law of God, nor the Precepts of Jesus Christ; but
having departed from that innocence in which I ought to have resigned my self
wholly to God, yielding up to him the free will that he gave me, I have need
now of this Law, and those Evangelical Counsels, as means to recover that
innocence; and that I may with singleness of heart resign my will to that of
God; as all other men also have need of them; for every one has departed from
that innocence, and contracted many evil habits, which hinder this resignation
to God. I embrace indeed the Apostolical Faith and Belief; but I do not believe
many things which those who call themselves the Christian Church lay before us;
because they are not true; for he who should believe to be saved by going to
Church, and frequenting the Sacraments, or such like things, would at death
find himself deceived, because no Prayers or Sacraments operate without Joh. 4.
24
an inward disposition: And whereas we see people frequent the Churches and
Sacraments without piety or devotion, we may well judge that the world is
deceived by such like things, while they place the hopes of their salvation on
outward things, which are but the signification of the inward disposition of
the mind 1 Pet. 3. 21.
. You will say, It may be, Sir, that the Church supposes this inward
disposition; which is a false supposition; because we see evidently by
experience, that the inward disposition is very far from what appears
outwardly: and upon this supposition the Church could not appoint the baptising
of new born Infants, who are not at all capable of inward dispositions. I doubt
not but these Romanists would bring many Reasons and Arguments; but I hold to
the Truth of God, and know no other Church but the souls which possess the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, Lo Joh. 8. 31.
this is the only true Church out of which there can be no salvation John 2. 9,
; for every one has need of taking up these means, that by them he may attain
to a RESIGNATION to God.

I said to her, That truly there must be some infatuation of Spirit that tied
us to this Church: for tho we see she does not at all possess the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ, yet we are afraid to leave her, as if she were the holy Church;
tho the truth makes it evidently appear that she is not.

She said, Sir, I bless God that he opens your Eyes to discover the truth in
what concerns your salvation; for as long as you do not discover evil, you
cannot avoid it, but will still be in danger of being deceived by it. If the
Devil were not in this Church, it is impossible that so many good spirits
should thus blindly follow her. It Is certainly by an infatuation of the
understanding; for they see enough in the outside to judge assuredly that she is
not guided by the holy spirit, and that she follows not in any respect the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ; and nevertheless they continue so wedded to her through
some panick or pusillanimous Fear, that they dare not shake off her dependence,
fearing they should do evil in following the truth: And if any person of a
sound Judgment discovers her deceits, and uncharms his Understanding, so as to
perceive her Errors, yet out of respect to the Glory of the World he dare not
forsake her, because this Church is advanced to so great Honor and Authority,
that no body dares leave her, for fear of being disgraced or persecuted by her,
as she would certainly do so long as it is in her power. For this cause Jesus
Christ, speaking of the last Times, in which we are fallen, says, Mark 13. 14,
15, 16.
That a man must get out of Judea, and flee, even without returning to his
house to take his Clothes. Judea is the Church and the Sanctuary, where the
abomination of desolation is now so increased that it is at its height. A man
needs not glory in being a Son of the Church: for the Children shall be cast
out of the Kingdom of Heaven M^t 8. 12.
; and the Jews and Romans 11. 26, 31.
Heathens shall be admitted into it; for God can make of these stones Children
of Abraham Mat. 3. 9.
. Lay aside therefore, Sir, all these Fears and Pusillanimities; they proceed
from a softness of spirit. Keep close to the Truth, and follow her without
Fear; for she will guide you to salvation. If Glory or Interest do not hold you
in a dependence on the Church, leave her boldly; for her Reign will be very
shortly at an end, and she will perish with all her Glory and Possessions. It Is
better lose our Garments than our Life, or even our Wealth and Honor, than our
souls.

The Fifth Conference.
Of the Destruction of Christendom.

I Said to her, That I was not so afraid as she thought, and that I had asked
many things of her, of which I made no doubt: but I desired always to be
further cleared, and therefore proposed many questions; Yet on the contrary I
had long suspected that the Church was the Whore in the Revelations Rev. 18. 4.
; in which her behavior had confirmed me; therefore would flee out of her
Dependence.

She said, 'T will be your best course; for her time draws near, in which she
Rev. 17. 16. 18. 2.
shall be razed and rooted out, and her Children scattered and divided. All the
World shall bewail her, and call her miserable; fot her misery shall be great,
and all her Villainies shall be discovered. It would be then too late to forsake
her: for all those who shall be found drinking out of her Cup shall perish with
her. Therefore Jesus Christ has said, That we must not wait Mat. 24. 26.
till the winter, or the Sabbath Day; That is, till the time of persecution,
and the Day of the coming of Jesus Christ in his glory: for in her persecution
there will be so great evils, that the like Mat. 24. 21.
were never seen; Luke 21. 26.
Men shall pine away for Terror and Fear, and be very incapable of studying how
to find the Truth; Therefore you must not wait till the time of extremity, but
flee and get out of her before. Neither must you wait till the Day when our
Savior shall come in his Glory, because he Mat. 16. 27.
will render to every one acecrding to his works; the time of penitence shall
be past: it must be done presently, or else we shall all perish, For the Lord
Ps. 72. and Ps. 75.
will overthrow all evil by the brightness of his coming, which is to be looked
for only in order to receive our last Judgment, for which it is more than time
to prepare our selves, and to flee to the Mountains, taking heed of men, who
have for so long deceived and abused us, to the prejudice of the salvation of
our souls. We must no longer trust in any body; for all have left and forsaken
their God: tho some remain still in the Faith, nevertheless they are not in the
works of Faith; for the Jews with Faith have not the Doctrine of Jesus Christ,
which is the work of Faith; and the Christians have no more Faith, and shall
not recover it, since Jesus Christ says, Luke 18. 8.
That at his coming he shall not find Faith in Israel. They are of the House of
Israel, and the people of God, who nevertheless have denied his Faith, and
given it to men only.

I asked her, To what place I ought to flee, since the whole world was judged,
and the Plagues would be universal? That I might put my self in greater danger
in the place to which I should flee, than in that which I had left.

She said, Flee first out of the Dominions of Rome, Sir; for that place will be
first of all destroyed; God ordering all his affairs with Judgment Ps. 119. 37.
, Weight Wisd. 11. 21.
, and Measure. He will visit first of all those who have most offended him.
Justice regulates all things; and because Christians have more treacheroustly
offended him than any others, they have drawn on themselves the first
Vengeance. All others will follow the order Romans 2. 9.
of their iniquities; as they grow worse in wickedness, accordingly they shall
be nearer their punishment. It is fit always to retire into places where the
abomination is less: There the Chastisements will be less; tho Is. 24. 1 -- 6
-- 17, 18, 19. Hab. 3. 5 -- 18
indeed no place shall be exempted from Plagues, because all parts of the world
have deserved them; Nevertheless they shall be inflicted only according Rev,
18. 6.
as every one has merited, and deserved them, and no further; for sins beget
Jer. 2. 19.
miseries, and they proceed not from God, as they would make us believe;
because no Evils come from God, who alone is the Author of all good: So that
all the good that we see and feel, comes always from God; and all the evil that
we see and feel, comes always from sin; and as the goodness of God continually
brings forth good things, so the malignity of sin continually brings forth evil
things; and Rev. 18. 4, 5.
as sins increase, evils increase the more. Hence it comes that the Plagues are
universal, because the sins are so; for as long as there were places where God
was yet honored on Earth, he bore with others, waiting for their Repentance;
and the universal Plagues shall not fall out so long as there are any who have
not deserved them; For God is too just to afflict Genesis 18. 23, 25.
a righteous person, or to chastise one that is innocent. That is but the
manner of unrighteous men; but God always exercises Righteousness both as to the
good and to the evil. However men imagine that God sends his Plagues, they are
deceived; for nothing but sin can bring them on, and produce them. According as
men Offend, their Evils increase.

I said to her; that these were most excellent Truths, that no evil could come
from God, and that nevertheless nobody did comprehend this.

She said, Sir, the reason is, Men do not know the Righteousness, the Goodness,
and the Truth of God; but they judge blindly of all they see, according to their
Passions. If they knew the righteousness of God, they could never think of
praying that God would keep off his last Plagucs; John 17. 9.
for they would see that they will never fall out but when sin shall be
universal, because God is perfectly Righteous; but because we do not conceive
this Righteousness, we believe that there are yet many good men in the world,
because they seem so to us. In this we give a tacit Reproof to God; for if our
belief were true* that there were yet at present so many good men in the World
as we are persuaded there are, God would be unjust to send on us so many
different miseries as we feel at present. If he would have forgiven them in
Abraham's time provided Genesis 18. 30.
he could have shown him but ten righteous Persons, yea, even fewer, how could
he chastise the World now, if there were so great a number in it as we believe
there are? Is he not the same God still? And has he not the same goodness since
he cannot change? Truly Sir, men mistake God in every thing; and through this
mistake, they utter reproaches against him, and blaspheme against his
Righteousness, goodness, and Truth; particularly Christians, who with their
seeming Piety lay the blame on God of all their mis-deeds. Is not this horrible
darkness, since they choose rather to charge God with their Faults, than
discover them by the Truth, that they might repent of them? Truly Sir, the
power of Darkness is great, that it can so obscure all the Men of the World,
that no body knows the Truth any longer, and even the most part shut their Eyes
that they may not discover it, and in so doing they think they do well. The
Egyptian Darkness was far less dangerous, for it was felt, and they durst not
stir, Exodus 10. 23.
out of the place. for fear of falling; but those Christians now do not
perceive their Darkness, or their Errors; on the contrary Rev. 3. 17. and 18.
7.
they think they are in the Light, and condemn others who see more clearly than
themselves. By what means should the Children of the Kingdom be saved, when
they take lying for Truth, which they reject as an evil thing.

I said to her, that nevertheless truth was a very lovely thing; and as for my
self, I would follow it as far as I could discover it.

She said, You will discover it* sufficiently, if you love it; for the holy
Spirit, who is now born into the World, will discover it to all those who shall
search for it; but there are few among the Christians who would receive it,
though it offer it self first of all to their Eyes, because they are so full of
Errors and Superstitions, that they will not make way for (i) Jam. 1. 17.
this truth which is lovely. They live in a presumption of their Salvation,
yea, they condemn all the World to Damnation, because it does not follow their
Laws, though in the mean time they be but humane, and no ways divine Laws. And
whereas God says, 1 Pet. 5. 5.
that he resists the proud, and gives Grace to the humble; he who is Truth Joh.
14. 6.
will resist them, even as* they resist the Truth, which is God. But, if for
your part, Sir, you do it, and will follow it, you shall obtain the happiness
of reigning with Jesus Christ in Glory. But without Faith you cannot be saved;
for if you do not believe that the World is Judged, you are not in the light of
Truth; because the deportment of Men is a certain Evidence of it, since we see
them without Repentance and Amendment; and if you do not believe that we live
now in the Reign of Antichrist, you will assuredly be deceived; For under the
covert of Holiness he will deceive the Elect, Math. 24. 24.
if it were possible; and if you do not believe that Jesus Christ shall come to
reign on the Earth with Men, Ps. 96. 13. Hab. 3. Rev. 5. 10. 11. 17, 18. 20. 4.
etc.
to render Justice to every one, and to root out all Evil, and recompense ibid.
2 Timothy 2. 12.
the sufferings of the Righteous; without this persuasion you can never support
the Evils which hang over our Head; for without knowing these Truths, it will
be impossible not to fall into despair or murmuring against God, if we know not
his Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth, with which he does all things. Thus we
cannot besaved Heb. 10. 37, 38.
without Faith, which discovers the Truth. All these things are true of
Judgment, of Antichrist, and of the coming of Jesus Christ in Glory; but if you
will not believe them, you resist the known Truth, which is a Sin against the
Holy Ghost, that shall never be forgiven.

The Sixth Conference.
Discovers the Signs that the World is Judged, and that ANTICHRIST Reigns now.

I said to her, I would be very careful not to commit any Sin against the Holy
Ghost, though I kn^w not yet the Truth in every thing, entreating she would
afford the means to discover the Truth of all the things she told me, to wit,
the Judgment, the Reign of Antichrist, and the coming of Jesus Christ in Glory.

She said, You would infallibly believe them, if you would seriously remark
what you may see with your Eyes, and conceive with your Humane Understanding;
for these things are so far advanced, that one may feel them, provided his Mind
be not infatuated. For first, as to the Judgment, as I have already told you,
it is easy to see that the world is Judged, because sins are universal, and no
body will Repent. There is every where 1 John 2. 16.
the Lust of the Eyes, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life; of which
no body Repents and Amends; and there can be no forgiveness, where there is no
amendment; and therefore of necessity the World is Judged, because these evils
are not among some particular persons, as they have been in all times; but they
are generally among all men, both small and great: If you observe them
narrowly, you will find, Sir, that these three sins reign infallibly in the
Hearts of all men, of whatsoever condition; those in whom you cannot discover
them, are very often the greatest Hypocrites, who know better to dissemble and
cover their sins. And for the second, The believing that we are now in the
Reign of Antichrist, you need only Remark narrowly by what Spirit Men are led,
because they who are led by God, follow his Righteousness, Ephesians. 4. 9.
his Goodness and his Truth: On the contrary, they who are led by the Devil,
oppose themselves to this; and if you Reflect upon the Actions of Men now, you
will find nothing in them but Injustice, Malice and Lying, which are three
qualities of the Devil, opposed to the Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth of
God: This is so common at present, that there is nothing to be seen but
Injustice, Malice, and affected Lies.

I said to her, in my opinion there were some men who seemed to follow
Righteousness and Truth; tho it must be acknowledged the greatest part live in
Injustice and Deceit.

She said, Sir, Judge John 7. 24.
righteously, and examine everything to the bottom. You grant already that the
greatest part of men now live in Injustice and lies. All the World finds this
by experience: And when the greatest part is for the Devil, we may well fear
that he will shortly have the whole; for as rotten Apples spoil the sound ones,
1 Cor. 15. 33.
so Men corrupted by the Devil, are still corrupting and drawing in those who
are yet sound. If all men in general, or almostall, were on the Devils side,
the Reign of Antichrist would be at an end, for he could gain no more; he would
be pleased to have all his Adherents with him to Hell; for the reason why he
keeps them in Life here, and raises them to places and preferments, is, that
they may serve him in corrupting others, and in doing all the mischief to the
good that may be. Now there would be no need of this, if all in general were
dedicated to his service; he could go no farther; and God would not continue
the World in being to wait for men's Conversion; for those who are Dedicated to
the Devil, will not be converted, as some other sinners would be who have not
yet renounced God, nor given their Souls to the Devil, as his sworn Votaries or
Sorcerers do, who are precisely dedicated to the Devil of their own free will;
as the greatest part of men have done. This may appear sufficiently by their
Malice, which is not only human, but Devilish also; for human Malice extends it
self no farther than to that which is pleasant or profitable to the Malicious
Person; but at present we see men's Malice so black, that he who acts it, has
neither pleasure nor profit by it; and nevertheless they afflict the good, and
ruin sometimes the wealth and honor of their Neighbor, without any profit to
themselves: And lies are so common, tho frequently without any advantage, that
the truth is seldom or never spoken, from whence it appears, that it certainly
comes from the Devil, for men could not arrive at such a malice as that is,
which we see now reign in the World.

If I told you, Sir, that I had these truths by any particular Revelation from
God, you would entertain, it may be, some scrupulous doubts about it; but I
refer you to your own experience, that you may know by human Reasons, that we
are fallen into the last times, that the Judgment is past on the whole World;
And that this is now the Reign of Antichrist. For as to the coming of Jesus
Christ in Glory, I cannot make it appear to you so precisely, as the things
that are already come to pass; but if you read attentively the Holy Scriptvres,
they will plainly enough declare it to you; for of all contained in them, there
is See Ps. 50. 72 75 96 97 98. Isa. 40. etc.
nothing more spoken of, than of the coming of Jesus Christ on Earth in Glory:
Ps. 40. 8. Heb. 10. 5* 7.
From the beginning of the World we are told, that Jesus Christ was to become
man to Reign with men on Earth; and tho he had not been man to suffer, he had
become man to Reign: Because he would take and give to men a perfect
contentment of 2 Cor. 6. 16. Rev. 21. ^.
Conversing together with them in Body and Soul, Divinity and Humanity. I
cannot make you see this, Sir, by the Eyes of the Body, because the time is not
yet come: Therefore I send you to the Holy Scriptures. But as for the Judgment
and the Reign of Antichrist, you may see it with your Eyes, and comprehend it
with your Natural understanding: For it is visible and comprehensible by him
whose Spirit is not infatuated, and who seeks to discover the Truth. The thing
is so manifest, that it speaks out it self: Many say blindly, We are in the end
of the World, and they perceive not that they speak truth: Others say, The
Devil reigns over all; and they see not that this is the Reign of Antichrist,
who Rules as Universal Emperor of the whole world. They Judge by the effects,
without searching into the cause. The Devil hinders this, for he well knows
that if the cause were discovered, many would be Converted; therefore he
darkens their minds, that they may never come to the Knowledge of the Truth,
because it would confound him.

I said to her, I perceived clearly enough that the world was Judged, because
sin abounds in it, and no body will be Converted: But that we were in the Reign
of Antichrist, I did not perceive so clearly, for we have always been taught,
that he shall be a Visible and corporal man.

* She said, Sir, it is well that you see the World is Judged. You shall
perceive the rest sufficiently, for the Reign of Antichrist is yet more
manifest. Antichrist, that is to say, against Christ. He whose understanding is
not dark'ned may easily see, if men follow Christ, or if they go in a way
contrary to what he walked in while he was on Earth: And you see that
Christians now adays live a quite other Life than what Jesus Christ led, and
they not only do not follow him at a distance, but are directly opposite to
him; for there Pride Reigns, instead of Humility; and Avarice, instead of
Poverty; and instead of Charity, there is nothing but Envy; and so of all the
other things which Christ Jesus Taught us; They act wholly in opposition to
him, and they do not consider that all that is contrary to Christ, is Assuredly
Antichrist. The time is come wherein men would fain have a God and Devil
Visible to their Eyes, that might go before them. This is great and thick
darkness; because neither God, nor the Devil are visible; For Joh. 4. 24. Ephesians.
6. 12.
they are Spirits, who cannot be known but by their Operations, when they are
good or evil, according to the Spirit that Animates them. Hereby we shall know
by what Spirit the World is animated at present; For the Spirit of God is
always Just, Good and True; Ephesians. 5. 9.
and that of the Devil is always evil, without Righteousness, and without
Truth. By these real Signs, we may certainly discern if Christ rules the World,
or Antichrist: We need not go to consult Oracles to make this Discovery; for
all Men of good judgment, may make a sufficient trial, and see it with their
Eyes, and feel it with their Hands, by taking the Marks which discover the
solid truth: For if they will needs make this discovery by the signs of
apparent Virtues, they will remain in their Darkness; because the Devil has so
disguised and colored his wickedness with outward Devotions and Piety, that he
thereby deceives all the World. We must come to the Essence of Virtue, to see
if it be God or the Devil, who animates these outward Devotions; for if they be
of God, they will always be accompanied with Righteousness, Goodness, and
Truth. But we see but too much the contrary; for the most part of those Devout
Persons at present, are without Righteousness or Equity: There was never seen
so much going to Church, receiving the Sacraments, and so little Fidelity; so
many Pater nosters, and so little Truth; so many good Words, and so little true
Charity. Do you not see, Sir, that all order of Justice is renvers'd, and that
there is more regard of doing Justly before Men, than before God? And yet these
are the best now, who do justly before Men; for the most part deceive and deal
unfaithfully, as well before Men as before God: For Iniquity is become so
common, that now almost they are not ashamed to commit it publicly. If a man
go to Church, 2 Timothy 3. ^*
and frequent the Sacraments, he passes for a good Man, though he be no ways
just. If we consider well all the Qualities of the Devil, we shall see them all
practiced in the behavior of Men now; he is a Liar, an Hypocrite and
Unconstant, a Deceiver and Unfaithful, abounds in all kind of Malice, Proud,
Arrogant, Envious, Contentious, without Faith or Honesty, Obstinate in Malice,
and in a desperate Rage: These Qualities are but too much practiced by the most
part of Christians; and yet we perceive not that this is now the Reign of
Antichrist! Men must be extremely blinded, that they do not see this more clear
than ( d) Jer. 8. 12*
the Day; because the evil is too manifest. But many Minds are so infatuated,
that they cannot believe what they perceive so manifestly by their
Understandings, but they wait to believe this Antichrist, till they shall see
him in a Humane Form: Which is a very small matter, in respect of his Doctrine;
for that Body can never cause Damnation to our Souls, as his Doctrine will do,
which being contrary to Christ, leads us to Perdition. Since Jesus Christ Joh.
14. 6.
is the way, we can never attain to Salvation but by him; contrary ways lead to
Damnation; it matters little whether we are led into them by a Body, or by a
Spirit, since we are undone as to Salvation.

I asked her, If we ought not to believe, that this Antichrist will be sometime
corporeally visible in a Humane Form?

She said, Yes, Sir, I believe this will be toward the end of his Reign; for he
has set himself to counterfeit all the Actions of Jesus Christ, and to ape what
he sees he has done: And perceiving that Christ became a Natural Man, he also
will move his Sorcerers to produce Men by the operation of the Devil; which is
done many times, for there are certainly many of these Antichrists born already
in the World, who make great Havoc in the Church, and have in their Train
those who are most in Authority; and as the Apostles of Jesus Christ labored
to introduce Truth into the World, these incarnate Devils labor to introduce
Lies into it, and to sow Tares, as they did good Grain. I doubt not also, but
they have a Head of their Iniquity, who will appear openly when his 2 These. 2.
8.
wickedness shall be discovered, and when he cannot deceive any longer under
the Cloak of Holiness, he will deceive then by pure Wickedness, and will
exercise cruelty toward all those who will not be his Followers. That time,
Sir, will not be so dangerous as the present is, because he shall be known for
the Devil, and now they follow him as if he were God. Therefore he keeps
himself so long concealed, and does not appear bodily; for he could not do so
much prejudice to Souls, if he were known. He has spread Darkness through all
the World, that no body may discover 2 Timothy 3. 2.
him, exercising all his wickedness UNDER PRETEXT OF GOOD THINGS, OR OF NATURAL
OR CASUAL THINGS, that no body may believe that all the evils which we see, do
come from this Antichrist, and that no body may be on his guard, because he
does not appear yet in human Flesh: This blinds all the World; for tho they see
all the qualities of the Devil rule in men, yet they will not believe these so
solid marks, as they would do if they saw him bodily, which bodily appearance
is not real: For the Devil is pure Spirit, and has not the Power of forming to
himself a Body, unless it be a fantastical one, or else by the Seed of some
Sorcerer, which is abominable.

I said to her, It was not to be doubted that we live certainly in the time
when Antichrist Reigns by his Doctrine and his Operations; because Men (in the
general) have all, or the greatest part of them, the qualities of the Devil.

She said, Sir, there is no reckoning to be made of any other thing, but what
concerns the Salvation of Souls; for if the Devil be followed in his Doctrine
and in his Works, he needs no more to make himself Master of our Souls: He Will
do no more hurt to men by his Body than he does by his Spirit; and if it were
not to Ape God, he would never take a Natural Body; for he knows well enough,
how to make a body of Air, or some other matter, to deceive Sorcerers, whose
imagination he so blinds, that they believe they see and feel some real body,
tho it be only Fantastical. By this he prevails with them to commit all sorts
of Evil, pretending to dwell with them, that he may still profane the works
which God has introduced for an Holy end. So that the Natural Body of the Devil
is not so much to hurt men, as to bring Glory to the Devil, when he shall be
discovered; and shall be corporally Honored and followed by all his Adherents,
as Jesus Christ was by his Disciples: And that he may leave none of the works
of Jesus Christ unimitated, that he may pervert them; he must also take a body
of Flesh, that he may likewise Reign Bodily, thereby to consummate his wretched
Kingdom, which began as soon as God became man, 2 These. ^^ ^^
and has still encreast, even till this present time, without being known, or
revealed: And since God has the goodness to Reveal him at present, he should be
discovered, if it were possible, to all the world, that he may no longer
deceive any body under the mask of Virtue; and that those who will needs follow
him, may know what they do* For the Body of Jesus Christ went not through all the
world in order to the forming of his Church, but he has herein only introduced
his Doctrine, which sanctifies Joh. 17. 17.
the Souls of those that follow it, tho they have never seen his body; it is the
same as to the Doctrine of the Devil, which corrupts Souls, tho they should
never see his Body: They are as Diabolical in following the works of the Devil,
as others are holy in imitating the actions of Jesus Christ, whose Body they
never saw.

I said to her, It was a great Loss that these Truths could not be published to
all the world; for all are ignorant of them, and believe there is no Antichrist
until he appear in his humane Body.

She said, Sir, it is lamentable that these things, so prejudicial to so many
Souls, must be concealed; and that the Marvels of God, which are so important,
cannot be discovered. The last Times are come 1 Cor. 10. 11.
: Antichrist Reigns over all Rev. 13.
: And Jesus Christ Rev. 16. 15.
will come quickly to Reign here in glory: The forerunning plagues Math. 24. 8.
of Judgment are begun; and no body will believe any thing of all this, because
we cannot speak of them openly. You are the first, Sir, to whom I have declared
these secrets: Make a good use of them. I shall reckon it a gain, tho none but
your Soul alone should receive the Light of them. The world is deceived, and
will be, while they do not open their Eyes to the Truths I have told you: They
are nevertheless from God, and cannot fail; if all the world will needs ruin
themselves, Sir, save your self: For tho none of these things should fall out
in your Lifetime, and you should not see the utmost extremities of the
Plagues, nor the Body of Antichrist, nor yet the coming of Jesus Christ in
Glory, yet it will be most expedient for you that you believe all these things,
which will open your eyes to discover your particular faults, and the dangers
in which you live, and will give you prudence to avoid the deceits in which we
live at present. Make use of the occasion, Sir, without contending out of
curiosity about words, and the times of every thing: because the Judgment still
falls out Heb 9. 27.
when we die; and it Eccl. 11. 3.
will never be recalled. Tho even there were not a general Judgment; yet there
is always our particular Judgment, which precisely respects us; and if all the
People of the world perished by the Deluge, excepting eight persons, it was
through their unbelief; for Heb. 11. 7.
if they had believed the words of Noah, they would have been saved in his Ark:
Even so now those shall Perish who will not believe the Truths that I tell you
from God. They shall certainly Perish in the Shipwreck, because they will not
save themselves in time, it will be in vain for them to ascend into their
Houses of Honor and Glory, that they might avoid the Plagues which will follow
them every where.

I said to her, That I could not doubt any longer of the things she told me,
because of the Operation of her words in my Soul, which could not but come from
God: But I wished earnestly that many might enjoy the same effects.

She said, Sir, Your desire will be fulfilled: for many will receive this
Light, tho very few among the Christians; because they are so obstinately
wedded to a presumption of their Salvation, being falsely persuaded that they
shall be Saved by their frivolous Devotions. These will resist the Truth, and
believe they are Holy, and Perfect, till they shall see themselves swallowed up
of the Plagues; and when it shall be too late Prove. 1. 28.
they will cry for Mercy, without any hope of succor, no more than in the days
of Noah, for it is not written that he took so much as one into the Ark after
the Deluge was begun: Those who had not formerly gone into it did all perish,
even as those shall do who will not now believe that we live in the days of
Antichrist. They must of necessity be deceived by him, and Perish. What remedy
can there be for their evils, since they seek not to be healed, because they
are insensible of them, as they would be of a Leprosy? We must flee from them
that we may not contract such a dangerous malady as this blindness. because
they shall be destroyed 1 These. 5. 3.
before they know it. It shall be with them, Luke 17. 26.
says Jesus Christ, as it was in the days of Noah; They Ate, they Drank, they
Married, without any apprehension: Even so tho they see and feel the beginnings
Mat. 24. 8.
of sorrows by Wars, they do not apprehend them to be the last Plagues; they
endeavor to escape and avoid them by Human means, going from one place to
another, without remembering what Christ says, Luke 17. 34, 35.
That two shall be grinding at one Mill, the one shall be taken, the other
left, or even two in the same bed: To show that it avails nothing for one to
save his Body; but he must endeavor to be united unto God; or otherwise, he
shall be taken in what place soever he go to.

I said to her, That I would follow her even to Death, because she had the
words of truth, tho all the world should withstand it.

She said, Sir, There is no need that you follow my Person, but my words; keep
them in your Heart, and thereby you will attain to Salvation; for they are
saving. Never turn away from them: For the Devil has this invention, to raise a
great many distractions that he may divert us from following the Truth; he
sends sickness, Troubles, Affairs of Importance, and a thousand other
occasions, to divert our good purposes, that we may never bring them to effect.
If you were speaking, Sir, with all good men who are in public Offices,
whether Civil or Ecclesiastic, they would acknowledge to you that they were
never so thronged with Affairs or Business as now; because the Devil being
unable to gain them entirely to himself, he endeavors, at least, to give them
so much business, as that they may not have leisure to think of their
Salvation, nor of the Dangers in which they live: We must certainly discover
his wiles, or otherwise he will draw us along with him insensibly. He has
deceived so many by these means, making them believe that their employments
were profitable for the Public, or their Neighbors, when they served for
nothing but human accommodations, without any advantage to the Glory of God, or
the Salvation of Souls: And under this False Persuasion many have lost their
own Salvation, without procuring that of others. It is not in these last times,
Sir, that Places, Offices, or Employments are saving; it is much for a Man to
save his own Soul; for the times are too dangerous, and the world too blind and
obstinate. If they perceived their blindness, they would seek to find a remedy:
But while they believe they see clearly, they cannot think of a remedy, and
they fall easily into eternal ruin: But if you, Sir, for your own part, would
be saved, remember the Truth, and follow it, for without it there can be no
Salvation: For it alone makes us to know God, and the Devil, and likewise the
state of the World, and that of our own Conscience; Truth shows us also the
certain way of Salvation; and by it all the wonders of God are discovered. It
is the Light of the World, and the sure harbor of Salvation, without which
nothing can be good or beautiful.

The seventh Conference.
Shows that Jesus Christ will come in Glory, or else he should not be the
Savior of the World, as he is; and there would be no just Recompense for the
Good, and for the Wicked.

I said to her, that I had sufficiently discovered the truth of this, that we
are in the last times, that the World is judged, and Antichriso reigns, and
also that the Plagues are begun, because there is no truth nor Righteousness
among Men; but that I did not yet see why Jesus Christ shall come to reign in
Glory upon Earth.

She said, This is the most evident truth, and the greatest Goodness and
Justice of God, because Jesus Christ is the Savior of the World, 1 John 4. 14.
and the restorer Ps. 75. 3, 4. Act. 3. 21.
of all things. You see clearly by all the Truths that I have told you, that
very few will be saved of all those who live at present after the usual manner;
and if this miserable World should last yet longer, there Matthew. 24. 22.
would still be fewer, because every day it grows worse. How therefore should
Jesus Christ be the Savior of the World, if he did not restore all things? No
body could be Saved; for the whole World perishes. There must come a time Is.
4. 3. 45. 22. Luke 3. 6.
that the whole World shall be saved, that he may be fitly called the SAVIOR
OF THE WORLD. And this cannot be in Heaven as People imagine, because all who
enter there shall be Saved, having received Salvation at the hour of Death; and
this respects only particular persons, who by reason of their small number
cannot well be called the WORLD, because it consists in a Generality, and not
in some particular Persons. It Is a truth therefore that in a certain time Ps.
98. 2, 3.
Jesus Christ will save all the World in general: This will be at his coming in
Glory, when Ps. 98. 9. 96, 97. etc.
he shall have judged the World and condemned the Wicked, he will save the Good
with all Is. 60. 21, 22
their Posterity, who can never perish any more, because of the continual
Presence of Jesus Christ, God and Man, who Is. 40. 11. Ezekiel. 34. 12. etc.
will govern and lead them to Salvation. This his coming in Glory is also
necessary Matthew. 19. 28, 29. Rev. 11. 17, 18.
to restore all things, because there has been no reparation yet of all the
Injuries and Affronts that were done to his Humanity: His low Condition has not
been raised up; his Poverty has not been enriched; his Tears have not been
wiped away; his Humility has not been exalted; neither have any other of his
Contempts and Sufferings been repaired, nor of those who have loved and
followed him: One has died as a Malefactor, another as a Seducer, a St. Andrew
on the Cross, a St. Lawrence on the Grid-iron, and so many other holy Martyrs
who have suffered Persecution and Death for Righteousness and Truth. There has
been no reparation of all this hitherto, but by imaginary things, as they say,
that Jesus Christ was exalted on the Cross, which is an infamous reparation, to
dye on a Gibbet as a Malefactor. If those who hold this Cross to be a
reparation of Honor, were hanged after this manner themselves, they would not
believe that their Honor were repaired by this: How can they imagine that that
of God was so* It is not to be imagined that Honor should be repaired by
Infamy it self. But because his coming in Glory was unknown to them, they have
applied Infamy to Glory, that they might say something of it. The truth is,
Jesus Christ will come upon the Earth to Rev. 20.
repair all things; for it would not be just that he should have suffered so
innocently, and after him so many other Saints and Martyrs, who were free from
Crimes, and that they should continue dead, without being repaired Spiritually
and bodily for what they have suffered unjustly, or for the Love of God; and if
People imagine that all these things must be repaired in a Divine and imaginary
Heaven; they are deceived, because this reparation cannot be perfectly made
there; for natural sufferings ought also to have suitable reparations, unless
God did as Charmers do, who cure bodily wounds with spiritual rememedies, or
some artificial words. No, Sir, this will not go after that manner; because God
does his works always in a perfection, every way accomplished. Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
He will repair both bodily and spiritually all that has been done unjustly;
and the whole world shall thereby discover his Righteousness, Goodness and
Truth, that every one may know that he is worthy, and just; worthy of all
honor; which then all the world will render to him Is. 45. 23, 24
; and just, to render complete Justice to every one Rev. 11. 18.
. There are so many innocent persons afflicted, and Saints unknown and
despised; on the other hand there are so many wicked men honored, raised to
places and Honors, and even held for Saints. All these being Dead, and the
Truth, as to them, undiscovered, must not God avenge the quarrel of the Good,
and make appear the wickedness of the wicked, that he may be Just, Good, and
True?

I said to her, That every one looked for these Reparations in the day of the
general Judgment, which must be done in a little time, or suddenly, where every
one shall be recompensed in Heaven according to his Merits or Sufferings.

She said, Sir, They will make God a God of Confusion: What appearance is there
that this Judgment can pass in a day, or suddenly, since the whole world must
appear there? It should be necessary that all the men in the world, should,
after the manner of an Enchantment, be Transported to the same place in an
instant; who could hear in that crowd the Justification of the Righteous? If it
were to be done only by word, they would not hear one, by reason of another;
and if every one in particular must be spoke to, to declare his good or evil
Deeds, it would need a long time before all were repaired: Years would not
suffice to Judge so many men as have been upon the Earth. Truly, Sir, all the
speculations of men are nothing, in respect of the Truth, but Chimera's in the
Air. God took six days Genesis 1.
to Create the World deliberately and in order, as he has done all his works by
weight Wisd. 11. 21
and measure, without any disorder or confusion. He made Noah prepare an
hundred years before the Genesis 6. 3, 13, 14.
Deluge; and when it came, it began to Rain, which Rain lasted Genesis 7. 14.
forty days. The Plagues are now begun, and will follow in order even to their
end, and the Judgment will also go on in order, so deliberately, that there
shall not be the least confusion in it; for that can come only from men, and
not from God, who does all in Order.

Neither is there any imaginary Heaven, as people fancy it, where every one
shall be Rewarded or Restored; for Heaven is no other but the presence of God,
who contains all things, and cannot be contained by any, because he is greater
than all things. We are in Heaven when Psalm. 73. 25.
we are resigned to him, whether we live or die, we are still in Heaven when we
are in God: Now being thus Divinely in God, we do not, notwithstanding, receive
the material and bodily reparation of the sufferings which we have materially
and bodily endured: And as God has given us both a Body and Soul, he has also
given us a Paradise both of Body and Soul: For this cause God would have become
Man, even tho man had never sinned; for God makes all his works perfect and
complete: The Soul can indeed have its complete Paradise by the Presence of
God, because it is a Spirit like to him; but the Body can have no Paradise but
a Material and Bodily one like it self; because it is of a Material Nature, it
cannot have a perfect happiness by a Spirit, or Divinity. Lo, this is the
reason why Man, that he may be happy, must of necessity have his Paradise in
the world, which was Created by God for no other end Isa. 45. 28.
but to serve for a Paradise to Man, whom he was pleased to Create of a Bodily
and Spiritual Nature, both together; and he has also prepared for him, both a
Bodily and Spiritual Blessedness, which are, the Presence of God as to the
Spiritual; and for the Corporeal, the Earth, and the World, and all that
therein is: By which you may see, Sir, the truth of the coming of Jesus Christ
upon Earth, to Reign with Men, that their eternal Blessedness may be
completed, and that every one may have a Reparation, by fulfilling all
Righteousness; not in a speculative or imaginary way, or of a short
continuance; but a Real, Divine and Corporeal Reparation, Isa. 65. and 66. Rev.
13. 14. -- 17.
which will last for ever: For God's Recompenses are not Temporal and Finite,
but Eternal, as coming from an Eternal God, who cannot give finite or imperfect
gifts. Consider, Sir, all these Truths, and you will perceive sensibly, why
Christ must come to Reign upon Earth; and that he has not taken an human Body
to Reign in the Empyreal Heaven which is Divine, but only to Reign on Earth;
for this Divinity has no need of any Body; but this body has need of, and must
of necessity have some material place to contain it, such as the Earth is. And
if to repair an injury done to any, it be needful to make the reparation in the
same place, and before the same persons where the injury was done; why should
not God repair upon Earth the injuries received there? On Earth they shall be
Psalm. 37. 9, 11.
repaired, as on Earth they have been committed.

The Eighth Conference.
Shows that M. Anthoinette Bourignon is sent from God to declare the Truth to
Men.

I said to her, that I was now convinced of all; that I must confess before all
the world, that she possessed the Holy Spirit; for a humane Spirit could never
give so clear an understanding of all the marvels of God.

She Said, Sir, you are not deceived in believing that I possess the Holy
Spirit, because he lives in me and teaches me all that I have told you; for I
have never learned any thing from any man, neither would I learn of them,
because they are in darkness, and do not know the Truth in any thing. They
believe they are very Learned, and they are nothing but Romans 1. 22.
ignorants, being turned away from the Truth by so many Novelties which they
have made them believe. They will needs maintain the Roman Church to be holy,
and own her Councils as acted by the Holy Spirit, while neither the one nor the
other is true. For the Church Rev. 17. 5.
is the Babylon of confusion, and the Councils are the means by which the Devil
has withdrawn Christians from the Law of God, they having Ordained so many
outward things, that the inward may be forgotten; and that through so many Natural
things, People may think no more of the Spiritual. Their Commands, their
Sacraments, their Indulgences, are all diversions from Salvation, to obtain
which there is nothing needful for all persons, even those who are without
God's Grace, and straying from the way of Salvation, 1 Cor. 7. 19.
but the observing the Commands of God, and the Doctrine of the Gospel; for God
will never give any other Commands, and Jesus Christ will never give any other
Counsels, than those he has given us by his Doctrine of the Gospel: He says,
That he is not Math. 9. 13.
come for the Righteous, but for sinners. This being so, all sinners, who
desire to be converted, must take up this Gospel-Life, by which they shall
certainly attain to Salvation, since Jesus Christ is the way to it: But the
Devil to divert men, has introduced by these Councils so many diverse things,
that this Doctrine is destroyed. To discover this Truth, Sir, you need but
observe men's Behavior: This will give you certain Evidences of it; for you
will see that all trust on the Councils, the Sacraments, and the Ordinances of
the Church; and no body observes the Counsels of the Gospel, which are so
banished out of the minds of men now, that they reckon them foolishness.

I entreated her to tell me if she was sent from God to delare the Truth to
men?

She said, Yes, Sir, I AM SENT FROM GOD TO BRING LIGHT TO THE WORLD, AND TO
BEAR WITNESS OF THE TRUTH, as he does all his works in Righteousness, Goodness,
and Truth, and never surprises any Body. He has SENT me to tell, That the Last
Times are come; That the World is Judged, and the sentence is irrevocable; That
the Plagues are begun, and will not cease till all evil be rooted out; and that
Jesus Christ will come shortly on the Earth to finish this, and then he will
continue to Reign with men of good will, who shall enjoy Eternal Peace.

I AM SENT with a Commission to declare all these things to men, to the end
that, peradventure, some of them may be Converted and Repent, that they may
Reign with Jesus Christ in his Glory: But wickedness is come to so great an
height, that the Truth cannot be declared to Men, at least they will not any
more receive it: They love nothing but 2 Timothy 3 3. and 4.
Flattery and lies, and reject the Truth, because it agrees not with their way
of Living; for he who will continue in his Sins and Errors, will say, that we
trouble him, by Declaring the Truth to him; and he who will not amend, will
say, that we raise scruples to him, by telling him the Truth, that reproves
him. Thus all the World perishes, without being desirous to be helped.

I AM CERTAINLY SENT FROM GOD, to declare the Truth of every thing: But no body
will hear it but in so far as it is agreeable to them, and does not reprove
them. Should I study Sir, to please Men or God? A Messenger ought not to
receive either Good or Ill, when he is but the Minister of good, or ill News,
without having caused them. I have loved the Roman Church, for I was born and
baptized under her; and have punctually followed her Ordinances, and the
decisions of her Councils when I knew them: But since God has made me see, that
she is unfaithful to him, and has forsaken him to join herself to the Devil,
ought I not to declare these truths to my Christian Brethren, who are ignorant
of them, that they may not perish in their ignorance? They would be much to
blame to render me evil for good, and to persecute me for procuring their
Salvation; for I have no advantage by declaring these truths to them, except
the obedience I owe to God, and the charity I have for their Souls; for
otherwise I should beware of speaking things that are so disagreeable to them.

I asked her, What person on Earth could be so wicked, as to persecute her for
declaring simply the truth that comes from God without any passion?

She said, Sir, all good men will perceive abundantly by my words that I am not
moved by any vicious passions; but by a pure desire of declaring the truth;
because I neither seek nor pretend to any thing from any body: The friendship
and hatred of men is all one to me, there is nothing but the pleasing or
displeasing of God that touches me. Notwithstanding the Devil having so great a
number of his adherents who are in authority, he will excite them to rise up
against me, because of the truth which discovers his wickedness. He has for a
long time ruled in the Church under a color of Holiness, by which means he has
gained the most Pious to be his Followers without their perceiving it: But as
soon as the Truth shall be shown them, they will easily discover his deceits,
and will abhor them. This will enrage him against me, and Rev. 12. 13, 17.
he will pursue me with all his force. But I do not fear that he shall be able
to touch me; for God is my defense. I will not fear all those Enemies, how
Powerful soever they may be. The Lord whom I serve is above all things. I have
never done Evil to any Body; but all sort of good to all, according to my
Power. Nevertheless I shall not fail to be pursued and Persecuted by all those
who are the Devil's adherents; because by my means his head Genesis 3. 15. Confer.
Rev. 12. 11. and 17.
will be bruised, and he will gain none any longer but by force; for his
falsehoods and deceits will be discovered and brought to Light for those who
desire to see and know them: God indeed never forces any Body, but he sends his
Light into the World, that every one that pleases may receive it. I AM CREATED
FOR THIS, and cannot be silent, when it shall be time to speak I will speak,
both in public and private, when it shall please God, but still the truth,
without straying from it. I doubt not but at first they will suspect me to be a
Heretic, because the Roman Church condemns, as such, all those who do not
yield to her sentiments; and for my part, I look on all those as Heretics, who
are contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, among which those Romanists are the
first: But this is a maxim which the Devil ordinarily observes, to lay the
blame on others of all the evils which he does himself: By this means they will
find the way to declare me a Heretic, because they Luke 18. 8. Tit. 1. 16.
have denied the Doctrine of Jesus Christ.

I said to her, That the Roman Church would be a strong adversary, for she has
great power and authority, and will yield to nothing that is not agreeable to
her Doctrine.

* She said, Sir, the power of that Romish Church shall be very shortly taken
away by the Lord of Hosts who will Rev. 6. 10, 11. (13. 7.)
destroy her in such a manner that of all those magnificences there shall not
be one stone left upon another. All her members shall be disjoynted, and
dislocated, and without power. She must bear rule yet for a little time, and
exercise her villainies outwardly, as she has done for this long time inwardly;
her murders and imprisonments are at the door, to the end her evil may have its
full accomplishment, both inward and outward. Till then God will let her go on,
because his justice never inflicts a perfect punishment Mat. 23. 32, 33. Rev.
18. 5.
till the evil be perfect and complete in all respects; for evil always Jer. 2.
19.
begets punishment, according to the greatness of the evil the punishment is
measured out. I have no apprehension of her power; because he who has given it,
will take it from her. She will not do so much evil in killing bodies, as she
does now in killing Souls; for it will be the happiness of those Rev. 14. 13.
who shall die for the real truth, if they receive it. For hitherto it has not
been yet discovered, nothing of the Holy Scripture has been explained in its
perfect sense, every one has drawn conjectures from it according to his Light,
not according to what is in it in effect; thus they might well die for holding
some opinion which was not the real truth, but the opinion of some Author, for
which they might die indeed without being for this the Martyrs of Jesus Christ.
For to be such, a man must die for the Defense of the Law of God, and the
Doctrine of the Gospel, or otherwise he cannot be a Martyr before God, however
men call many others by this name; this shows that there is obscurity and
darkness through all; even in the ( x) Mat. 24. 2. Rev. 17. and 18.
most holy things: Every one walks in the dark, not discerning the pure Truth:
Even many who have the best Maxims, would judge indeed that I were an Heretic,
in speaking against the Decrees of the Councils of Rome, out of a pious belief
that they have been all held by the Cooperation of the Holy Spirit. Which is a
false Supposition: For the Holy Spirit never changes. With what he inspired the
Apostles, he inspires also at present those who hear him. They are always the
same things.

I said to her, That the Holy Spirit did sometimes inspire diverse Means for
the attainment of the same End.

She said, It Is true, Sir, if the Means which those Councils set before us did
all aim at the keeping of the Commands of God, and at his Doctrine of the
Gospel, I should believe that they came from the Holy Spirit; but when they aim
at a quite contrary sense, I may well judge that they come not from thence;
because God never contradicts himself: He has commanded, that we love him with
all our Heart; and these Councils say, that to get the Pardon of our Sins, and
obtain Salvation, it suffices that we have a sorrow for sin out of fear of
Hell. Can these two contrary senses come from the same God? And there are so
many other things which are variously opposed to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ,
(as I have told you formerly); as the baptizing little Infants; and a Thousand
other things, which are directly contrary to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. I
know indeed, that they deny this Truth, saying, that they have ordained nothing
contrary to the Law of God: For with studied: Words and Terms they cover all
their Faults; and I am neither a Philosopher nor Divine to answer their
artificial Arguments or studied Words; but I say in truth, that they do in
effect directly contrary to the Law of God, and the Doctrine of the Gospel: Not
that they say so; but they do it: And Deeds are more Tit. 1. 16.
than Words. I doubt not but they would surprise me by my Words: For the Devil
has nothing but Subtilties wherewith to cover his Malice: But they cannot
surprise me in the matter of the Essential Truth, which abides always true.
They might say indeed, the Councils do not say that we ought not to love God
with all our Heart; but only that Attrition is sufficient for Salvation: Is not
that enough to teach indirectly that we are not obliged to love God? And is not
this indirect Doctrine much worse than the direct, which no good Men would
follow?

I asked, If the Light which she received from the Holy Spirit was contrary to
what the Councils had ordained?

She said, Yes, Sir, the Decrees which the Councils have made (so far as I know
them) are all directly contrary to what the Holy Spirit dictates to me: And you
your self may perceive it: Though there were nothing but the forbidding to read
the Gospels and the holy Bible in the Vulgar Tongue, is not this contrary to
the Doctrine of Jesus Christ; who has given his Word rather to the vulgar and
simple People, than to the Learned 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28.
? And if it had not been his Will they should read it after his Death, he would
not have left it them in Writing. This is the Nourishment of the Children of
God Mat. 4. 4.
: And these Councils would make them die for hunger. Is not also the forbidding
Priests to labor against the Commandment of God, who ordained Adam, Genesis 3. 19.
the most holy of all Men, to labor in penitence for his Sin? And the Oath
which they cause the Priests to take not to receive any other Explications of
the Holy Scriptures but those approved by the Church, is it not also against
the Holy Spirit, who Joel 2. 28, 29. John 16. 13. Phil. 3. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19,
20.
offers every Moment to give new Light, which these Councils do not approve,
because it would reprov^ them: For all that comes from the Holy Spirit reproves
Evil. There are also many other things which these Councils have ordained, that
are contrary to the Light that God gives me which is wholly conformable to the
Law of God and the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. I have no need to read any Books
to know if they be endited by the Holy Spirit, because the Sentiment of my Soul
gives me still evidence enough of them. When I understand only the substance of
a thing, I perceive certainly, whether it come from the Holy Spirit or not. You
may easily see, Sir, by all that I have already told you, that this Church and
her Councils are not guided by the Holy Spirit; but Isa. 29. 9, 10.
by the Spirit of Error which deceives all the World under this false Masque
of the Holy Church and Holy Councils, whereby the most Innocent let themselves
be ruled by the Devil at his pleasure, while they believe that they follow the
Truth, which is God.

The Ninth Conference,
Speaks of the Sins which we commit in another; and that to declare the Truth
of Evil, is not Sin.

I said to her, I was more certain that she was guided by the Holy Spirit, than
that the Church and her Councils were so; and therefore she must tell me what I
ought to do.

She said: Sir, You may indeed lean to my Sayings, because I speak nothing of
my self. It is true, it seemed somewhat hard to you, that I overturn the Church
and her Councils; and also when I say that the Devil rules them: But I know
this by the Light of the Holy Spirit, which obliges me to declare it, perhaps
for the enlightening of others, that they may be converted; or to give them a
full Measure, that no body may pretend Ignorance: For if I were not pressed in my
Conscience, I would beware to speak of such Evils, as one trembles to hear
them. It were more pleasant and agreeable if I could say in truth, that the
Church is guided by the Holy Spirit, and that Rome is the Church of God. This
Discourse would comfort my Soul, and give content to all those who are under
her Obedience. But this not being true, I should flatter them to their
destruction: Whereas the true knowledge of Things may save them. You have been
also troubled sometimes to hear me say that all men now are in a state of
Damnation, which notwithstanding is most true; and if I could say in truth the
contrary, I would be loved and followed by all those who believe they are in a
state of Grace: But because I cannot speak a Lie, every one leaves me that they
may flatter themselves with fine Hopes; Truth seeming to them more hard than
Damnation; though the one be much more lovely than the other; Because Truth
enlightens always the Understanding; though it be sometimes hard to Sense, yet
it can lead us to Salvation, and make us happy to all Eternity; whereas
Damnation renders us for ever miserable. It Is a trouble to us to be told that
we are out of the way of Salvation, and we ought rather to be grieved for being
ignorant of the truth in those Things which concern our Eternal Happiness: Isa.
4. 13.
The ignorance of this occasions our Damnation. Therefore, Sir, never be
troubled any more to hear me tell the Truth in evil Things; for it is much more
useful than to have it declared in good Things. For if I should say to you,
that you are in a state of Salvation, your Soul should receive no advantage
thereby: On the contrary, it might be tainted thereby with Vainglory, or
contract a sloth in that which is good: And i^ I should say to you, that the
Roman Church is Holy, and guided by the Holy Spirit, it would be of no
advantage to you, since you obey her as much already as if she were really
Holy: You could not gain any thing by my saying so. So that to know the Truth
of Good is much less profitable than to know the Truth of Evil, from which one
cannot preserve himself without knowing it. This the Devil knowing, he has
found the way to introduce into the Church a Maxim, That we ought never to
speak evil of any, though it were true. They call this the Sin of Detraction;
that her Evil may be still concealed, and none may dare to discover it for fear
of committing a sin. It were good we knew in what place the Holy Spirit has
declared, That to tell the Truth of Evil is a sin: For if this were true, Jesus
Christ would have committed many sins, when he publicly called the Priests and
Pharisees, Mat. 12. 34. Chap. 23.
Hypocrites, Generation of Vipers, and so many other Names, discovering their
Wickedness and Falsehood, saying, That they were whited Sepulchers, fair
without, but within full of dead men's bones; and that they made clean the out
side, leaving the inside full of uncleanness. Could all these Truths
discovered by Jesus Christ, be sins of Detraction? as they have persuaded all
those which declare such Truths; since all that Jesus Christ did while he was
upon Earth, was to give us an Example? Is it not evident enough, Sir, that the
calling that sin, to declare the Truth of another man's Evil, has been invented
by the Devil, to cover his filthiness, and that all sort of sins and Evils
might be cherished by the privacy of them? For the most part of good men
endeavor to excuse and cover them, believing they do well in it, though
notwithstanding it be a very ill thing, because it is hurtful Three several
ways: First, to him that does evil, who will not amend so easily while his evil
is concealed as if it were discovered: Secondly, It is very prejudicial to him
to whom the evil is done; because it is very hard to avoid or guard against an
unknown Evil: And Thirdly, To the Person who conceals another Evil, who
co-operates to the Evil of him that does it, and of him that receives it; and
nevertheless, they call that great Good of declaring the Truth of Evil, the Sin
of Detraction. This unhappy Silence makes all sort of Abominations daily to
increase in the sight of God; because they having lost his Fear, they lose also
that of Men; since their sins cannot be discovered without offending God. This
is also a Doctrine which the Devil has invented, with so many others, to the
end that every one may follow Antichrist, while they think they are doing well:
For if it were a sin to declare the Truth of Evil, Jesus Christ would not have
done it of his Apostles themselves, calling Mat. 16. 23.
St. Peter publicly Satan, and reproving him in all his Faults; as the
Apostles St. Paul to the Corinth. and Galat.
afterward did their Disciples: But these new Masters teach, That it is a sin
to declare the Truth of Evil without any other ground but that of covering
their Wickedness, that their Evils may not be discovered, and they may commit
them the more, by continuing in the Reputation of being good Men, though they
be wicked. If they had considered well the Nine ways by which we may sin in
another, they would find, that it is a sin to conceal the Truth of Evil; whereas
they teach, that it is one to discover it.

I entreated she would explain to me the meaning of these sins which we commit
in another; and if we are guilty of them, that I might guard against them.

She said: Sir, We are as guilty Romans 1. 32. 1 Timothy 5. 22.
of the sins we commit in another, as of those which we our selves commit: for
God regards not so much the Action Mat. 5. 28. John 8. 44.
as the Intention. Sins being Spiritual Things, have no need of Material Acts.
God Jer. 17. 20.
searches the Heart and the Reins, and not so much the Feet, or the Hands.
These inward Sins are so much the more dangerous than the outward, because we
take less heed of them; for they are not so manifest and known, Psalm. 19. (18)
13.
though notwithstanding they be mortal and damnable sins. Every one excuses
himself of them before Men: Which he cannot do before God; for Ignorance never
excuses sin: If we are very careful and diligent to know and discover what is
necessary and profitable for our Body, we are obliged to be much more so as to
our Soul. It Is not enough that one says he knows not these sins, because every
one is obliged to know them; and our Salvation or Damnation depends upon them:
For he who sins ignorantly, goes ignorantly to Hell. We are created for no
other end but for Salvation: This is the only Affair of Importance that
concerns us most nearly; for setting aside Salvation, all is perishing. For
this cause we must study to discover what Sin is.

Therefore to satisfy your Demand, I will explain the Nine Ways by which we
offend God in another.

First, We commit sin in counselling to do evil. How many are there who are
guilty of this sin without perceiving it? If you have a Friend affronted, you
will say to him, I would not suffer this Affront without revenging my self: Or
you will tell him, You would not have the Heart to suffer it; and such like
things: Or if we give any Counsel that is not according to the Righteousness,
Goodness, or Truth of God; or if we counsel any to do evil for our pleasure, or
profit, or otherwise. These Counsels are as many Sins as the wicked Actions
which those commit whom we have counseled to do them, whether they be in Word
or Deed; because our Advice is often the cause why the Sin is done: By a just
Title then, we ought to bear the punishment of it; as we shall certainly do
before God, who looks more to the Wickedness of the Heart than to the evil
Actions: And he who counsels another to do evil, is sometimes more wicked than
he who does it out of complaisance to his Counselor, or out of the esteem he
has for him. Those in Offices, or Attorneys and Advocates who give Counsel, and
not according to straight Justice and Truth, do often fall into these Sins, and
therefore they ought to be condemned of the same guilt with him who commits the
evil Deeds to which they have advised him; for they have both equally
contributed thereunto, and the Counselor often with more Wickedness than the
Doer, because to counsel Evil is worse than to do it.

Secondly, He who supports Evil commits also the same sin with him who does it,
because if Evil were not supported, it would not be so often committed:
Therefore, the Supporter of Evil causes the evil Deed, and gives the Man
boldness to commit it the more; and therefore he who supports it, ought justly
to bear the punishment of him who does it, yea, even more; for it would be in
his power to hinder it, by not supporting it. Those are doubly guilty, that is,
of the support that they themselves give, and of the Evil done by the other,
which he would not do, if he were not supported in it.

The Third Way by which we commit sin in another, is, In commanding to do Evil.
In which Fathers and Mothers, Masters and Mistresses, and other Superiors, do
very often fall; who command those under them, to do something that is not just
or good. These are guilty of as many sins as they command their Subjects or
Inferiors, who very often, if they were left to themselves, would not, or
durst not, commit the Evils which are commanded them: Though Inferiors are not
obliged, and never ought, to obey the Commands which are given them to do evil,
yet the Commanders cease not to offend mortally (q) Acts 5. 29.
only by commanding it; as an Inferior commits a mortal sin in doing the Evil
which has been commanded him, because the sins of the one cannot lessen the
sins of the other, but both are guilty of the same commanded sins. In which
many are deceived, who believe that it is lawful for them to do the Evils which
have been enjoined them by Father, Mother, Masters or Mistresses, or any other
Superiors, whosoever they be; as also such Superiors deceive themselves, who
are persuaded that they have not committed sins, when they act not in the evil
Deeds; for truly, and in the sight of God, they commit as many as they have
commanded to be done; for if their Wills were not evil, they would never advise
to do evil, much less command it.

The Fourth way by which we offend God by another, is, When we commend or
approve Evil, This is very common in this Age, wherein evil Doers are
commended. When we see any one avenge himself of an Affront, we will say, He
shows that he has Courage; we are ready even to praise Children that are
malicious in defending themselves, as well as others who give blow for blow; or
those Psalm. 49. (48) 18.
who signalize themselves by Pompand Vanity; or we praise those who exceed in
Feasting, or other Evils, whatever they be. Now the Praise of Evil incites Men
to do it the more, and encourages them to commit it the more boldly. And
therefore he who praises it, is guilty of as many sins as he who does the Evil.

The Fifth Way by which we offend God in another, is, In partaking of the Evil;
as, when one has some Advantage by the Evil done by another; or, if any one
profit by the Theft which another commits, whether by buying what is stolen, ot
eating and drinking it, or by enjoying some ill-gotten Goods: So also he who
makes gain by the Gluttony or Drunkenness, or other sins which other Men
commit. By all these Things Men are partakers of other Men's sins, and thereby
do the same Evil with him who directly commits it, yea, even more; because he
who commits Theft, or any other actual Wickedness, runs the hazard of his Life,
or of other corporal Punishments; but he who partakes in it only, lives without
fear though he be equally guilty with him who commits it* nevertheless he does
not undergo the same Penance in this World; neither does he acknowledge his
Faults, that he may give satisfaction for it in the other: Therefore his sin is
so much the more dangerous, because he does not weigh it as it is weighed
before God.

The Sixth Way that we offend God in another, is, When we take pleasure in
another Man's sins; as he who takes pleasure to see Men fight a Duel, or
otherwise; or is pleased that another cheats cunningly, or steals handsomely,
or provides for his Accommodations with Luxury and Vanity. Thus, whatever the
Evil be, the pleasure that we take in seeing another do Evil, is sin: For he
who loves God, ought to be grieved Jer. 9. 1. 2 Cor. 12. 21.
for all kind of Evil that he sees committed by others, as well as for what he
commits himself.

The Seventh Way, is, When we do not correct Evil, as much as is in our power;
as, Fathers, Mothers, Masters, Mistresses, who tolerate the Evil of their
Children or Inferiors, because they desire not to offend them, or for some
other humane Respect, or even out of softness of Temper, or natural Goodness,
suffering Evil rather than they will correct it, when they are obliged to do
it. All these are guilty of the same Evils with their Children or Inferiors;
for their tolerating them is the cause that they are habituated and continue in
Evil, who might have amended if they had been rebuked and chastised for it.
Thus, many will be damned who are not apprehensive of it: For all the Evils
which Subjects or Inferiors commit for want of reproof, will be laid to the
charge of Superiors, as if they themselves had committed them by their own
Deed Ezekiel. 33. 6, 7, 8.
, because of the Obligation that lies on them to correct Evil, and their
neglecting to do it upon whatsoever pretext.

The Eighth Way that we offend God in another, is, When we do not hinder Evil
when we may do it; as, if Two Persons quarrel or fight, and we might pacify or
divert them, nevertheless we will not give our selves the trouble, either
through sloth, or humane respect, or some other cause; or when we see one ready
to do evil, and we might hinder it by admonishing him, or discovering his Evil
by crying out, or otherwise; which we omitting, we commit the same Evil with
him who does it, when it is in our power to hinder it by what way soever this
might be, as by giving too much liberty to those under our Charge, or leaving
them in dangerous occasions, or giving them Money, or other things, with which
they take occasion to offend God. In all these, and diverse other Cases, we are
guilty of the sins which others commit, by not hindering them, when we might
have done it.

The Ninth and Last is, That we do not tell the Evils that we know of others to
those who might put a stop to them; as, in not telling the Faults of Children,
Scholars or Servants, to Fathers, Superiors or Masters, who might prevent
them. Silence, in this respect, does as much Evil as the Faults which are
committed without the knowledge of the Superiors, because if they were known
to them, they might hinder or correct them; which they not doing, being
ignorant of them, the fault and blame falls upon those who conceal them,
whether to please the Evil doers, or upon any other pretext whatsover, because
by their silence in some manner they cooperate to the sin. Nevertheless, there
are very few who are apprehensive of these kinds of sins, and much less do they
repent of them; for they imagine, they are not guilty of them, because they
have not committed them effectively in their own Persons; yet they will be all
imputed to them as well as if they had personally committed them; and they
cannot be excused through ignorance, because all Christians are obliged to know
what they ought to do or avoid; for Jesus Christ and his Apostles have set down
all for him who will take the pains to search for it. But the darkness is so
great, that they perceive not the things that are necessary; and they live in
such a negligence of their Salvation as if they were assured of it, though they
be very far from it; because no Rev. 21. 27.
unclean thing shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Those who enter there
must be holy. None can otherwise Heb. 12. 14.
draw near to God, the Source of all Purity and Holiness. In which many are
deceived who believe that Holiness belongs only to the Perfect, whom they
imagine to be some singular Persons: And yet without Holiness no Man shall ever
be saved.

I said to her, That very few Persons considered these things, and scarce any
look on themselves as guilty of those sins which they commit in another, no
more than of those which they commit against the Holy Ghost, because they
perceive not that they are guilty of them; though notwithstanding I see
clearly, that those who are esteemed holy or perfect are tainted both with the
one and the other of the said sins.

She said: Sir, I am well pleased that you begin to discover that by which the
World is condemned, that you may not need to believe it blindly; for if you
perceive clearly that the Holy and the Perfect now are polluted with the sins
which they commit in another, and with those against the Holy Ghost, those whom
they call Wicked are visibly defiled with diverse kinds of Actual Sins: Which is
known to all the World, Of whose Salvation then can you hope for? The Wicked
bring their Condemnation upon them through their obstinacy in a wicked Life;
and the Good draw it on by the sins which they commit in another, and those
against the Holy Ghost, which they will not know, and much less amend, because
they presume upon the certainty of their Salvation without all these
Circumspections whereby they might discover the state of their Souls, or the
Sins with which they may be defiled, which are Spiritual, and of which through
blindness they are insensible. Hereby the Proof is just of the World's being
universally judged, because the sins are universal; which sins Jer. 2. 19.
do judge and condemn Souls. For God judges no Body: He only fulfils all
Righteousness; and those who shall be condemned, shall be so always by their
own sins, and never otherwise. And if Sins condemn, then all they who live in
them do bear their Condemnation: And since we see that in this Age neither the
Good nor the Wicked are free from sins, we cannot but see and confess, that the
whole World is judged and condemned, and that we are arrived at the general
Judgment, seeing generally sin rules and bears sway. We must not look for any
other cordemnation but that of our own sins known to Gods Justice, which
condemns always all that is unjust, without hatred and without favor. The
Righteous Balance of this Divine Justice being still kept steady by a Hand
that never shakes, does always condemn Unrighteousness.

I said to her, That I was wholly convinced by so clear and true Arguments:
That I acknowledged, without doubt, the World was generally judged by its
general Sins; asking her, if while this Sentence was putting in execution,
there were not means whereby a Man might be converted.

She said: Yes, Sir, there are means of Conversion as long as we have life.
There is place for Repentance till Jesus Christ shall come upon the Earth, and
root out all Evil; yea, even when he shall come Revel. 1. 7.
there will be yet hopes of Pardon: Therefore he says, Matthew. 8. 11, 12. and
21. 31, 32.
That Sinners and Harlots shall inherit the Kingdom, and the Children thereof
shall be cast out; because these wicked Persons may be yet converted, and
acknowledge their sins; whereas those Children of the Kingdom, who esteem
themselves holy and religious, continuing obstinate in the presumption of their
Salvation, will be cast out, though they be called the Children of God and of
his Kingdom. There are therefore means of Conversion for those who will repent
and change their manner of Life, even though they were the greatest Sinners of
the World; yea, even for those who are full of the sins against the Holy Ghost,
or of the sins committed in another, provided they get out of their darkness,
and receive the Truth. For these ends Wisd. 12. 2. and 10.
God puts his last Sentence in execution slowly, and sends his Plagues one
after another, that he may give time and leisure to all those who desire to be
converted, to do penitence: In which he still exercises the Effects of his
Almighty Goodness and Mercy, 2 Pet. 3. 9.
not willing that a sinner should perish, but that he live and be converted.
The sins against the Holy Ghost will be forgiven as well as other sins,
provided they repent of them; which they not doing, they shall no more be
pardoned when Jesus Christ shall come upon the Earth, than at present: For
where there is no Repentance, there can be no pardon; for this cause the sins
against the Holy Ghost will be very rarely pardoned, because they are very
seldom repented of and amended.

The Tenth Conference,
Shows what Souls shall be happy; and explains the Eight Beatitudes.

I asked her, By what means we might know or discover those who are truly
converted to God.

She said: Sir, Take the Eight Beatitudes which Jesus Christ Mat. 5. 3-10.
has declared, and see if those who say they are converted do possess them: For
these only shall be blessed, and no others. Many say by word that they would be
converted, and be wholly for God; and notwithstanding, there are no appearances
of it. These are nothing but wouldings without effect, with which we deceive
the World and our selves, and think to deceive God; which cannot be, for he is
too penetrating, and is not amused with Words; therefore he has told us the
Marks that one must have of true Conversion, and of a Right to Blessedness, by
which real Converts may be discerned from Hypocrites.

First, He calls those blessed who are poor in Spirit; to show, that all they
whose Heart or Will is yet bent to the desire of having Wealth and Temporal
Riches, are not converted nor blessed; because he who yet desires Earthly
Goods, is not converted to Eternal Goods; for these Two Affections cannot dwell
together (f): However we say we are converted to God, we lie, so long as we are
not poor in Desires, and that we still covet Earthly Things.

Secondly, Jesus Christ calls those blessed who are meek; to show, that they
who are converted to God do always partake of his Goodness, and do good to all
as they are able. we hear People often say, that they are wholly devoted to
God, while on occasions we see them chagrin, angry, froward, at variance with
their Neighbors, quarrelling instead of bearing with them, or doing them no
good but by constraint. Such are not converted, no more than they who in this
World seek their Pleasure and Contentment, because Jesus Christ says, Blessed
are they that mourn; and when we see that they will not endure or suffer any
thing, but seek their Ease, Honor and Contentment, that they may live in as
much Mirth as they can, these are not converted, and do not willingly mourn
under persecution.

Fourthly, We know those that are converted to God, when they hunger and thirst
after Righteousness: that is, thirst earnestly to become righteous, and seek
the means and occasions to attain to this Righteousness. These are not
converted who content themselves with their own Righteousness and Virtue,
without aspiring to Gods Righteousness, or thirsting after true Virtue; but are
more careful for Earthly Things, than for those which are Eternal.

The Fifth Mark that Jesus Christ has given whereby to know those who are
converted, and shall be blessed, is Mercy. As long as we see Men's Hearts
hardened, without Charity for their Neighbor, minding only their own Interest,
and not caring for the Troubles and Necessities of their Neighbor, these are
not converted; because they have no Mercy, which is a Mark of True Conversion.

The Sixth Mark is purity of Heart. He who delights in dishonest Thoughts or
Actions, cannot be converted? nor he who is subtle, and not sincere in his
dealings, but deceitful and overreaching, bearing envy or ill will to another.
None of these are of a pure and clean Heart, and so are not converted to God
nor blessed; for a pure Heart is still upright, simple and chaste: By which we
may discover if it be converted to God. As also if a Man be a Peacemaker, and
of a peaceable Disposition within himself, and toward his Neighbor; this is a
Mark of Conversion to God: For he who should say he were converted, and
nevertheless should live in trouble and disquiet within himself, or in Debates
and Quarrels with his Neighbors, he would be a Liar; for conversion to God
brings along with it Peace, and Tranquillity, and Repose: This the Children of
God experience, who alone can be called blessed and converted, they having the
Marks that Jesus Christ has given whereby to know them from the Children of the
Devil. That none may falsely persuade himself that he is converted, he declares
all the Conditions necessary for this Conversion, that is, the Eight
Beatitudes; the Eighth of which is, to suffer Persecution for Righteousness
sake. Many believe they are happy when they are without sufferings;
nevertheless, this is a sign that they are not faithful to God; for he who
faithfully serves him, will certainly suffer, because the Devil and wicked Men
will persecute him for Righteousness, and true Virtue; which is still
reprehended by them. By this Touchstone true Converts may be known: For he who
does not willingly suffer Persecution for Well doing, desires not to imitate
Jesus Christ, who is the true Pattern of all the Works which lead to Bliss; and
none can be happy or saved but they who follow his Steps.

And we falsely persuade our selves of being converted to God if we possess not
the Eight Beatitudes which Christ has publicly taught us: And as few as we see
possess them, there are as few converted unto him. It Is all amusement to
believe that any will be saved without the possession of these Eight
Beatitudes, which Jesus Christ has given as Marks whereby to know his true
Children from those who say they are, and are not.

And that you may not be deceived, Sir, I have explained them all to you, one
by one, that you may know what manner of Persons these ought to be who in these
last Times, and during the Plagues, desire to be converted to God, wherein many
if they will may be converted: And that their Conversion may be true, they must
still examine if they have these Eight Beatitudes, and they may be persuaded
that as long as they have them not, they are not entirely converted; for Jesus
Christ has said nothing in vain, and he has named in particular all the
Qualities the Blessed ordinarily have, without which they cannot be so. These
are not the Speculations or Words of Men, but the Warnings of Jesus Christ
himself, who cannot lie. Men would indeed gloss and dispute to amuse the
World, but they can never change the Truth.

I said to her, That the Behavior of Men being well considered, it seemed
there were none now in the Grace of God, or in the Blessed Estate that Jesus
Christ had marked out, but rather that all did abound in sin.

She said: Sir, It seemed strange to you formerly, when I told you such things,
because you had not examined it narrowly enough, and the darkness is so great,
that the truth is not any longer discerned. The Devil has so blinded Men's
Minds, and distracted their Understandings, that they look to nothing now but
the Appearance of Things, and not the reallity of them. Every one believes he
shall be happy, though he have not so much as one of the Eight Beatitudes.
Either all the World must be deceived, or Jesus Christ has not pointed out
aright the signs of those who are in a state of Salvation: For these Eight
Beatitudes are not pronounced for those who are in Heaven; because all those
who are with God, possess all the Beatitudes in perfection; and also there is
no more persecution, nor Hunger or Thirst to be endured there; for there they
are in perfect peace, and fully satisfied; neither is there any thing to be
bewailed there, being in perfect joy; neither can they have poverty of Spirit,
since they possess all things; there also there is no more occasion of showing
Mercy to their Neighbor, for none has need of any thing, the least of the
Blessed possess more than the worth of Ten Thousand Worlds: By which it
appears, that Jesus Christ speaks only of those who are upon Earth, who are
obliged to have these Beatitudes if they would be saved, and come to the
possession of the Promises made to each of the said Beatitudes, which are the
certain Marks whereby to discover if we live in a state of Salvation or not.
Nevertheless, no body examines himself upon this Head, to see if he have those
Beatitudes, no more than if they were not proclaimed for us. We say them as a
Litany, and not as things that we are obliged to put in practice. In which we
deceive our selves; for no body will attain to the state of Blessedness, but he
who in this World shall put these Eight Beatitudes in practice: And as far as
Men are estranged from them, they are as far from their Salvation.

I asked her, What Remedy there was for such general Evils in which no body
could be saved?

She said: Sir, I told you long ago that Paradise was shut, My meaning was,
that no Body now at Death attains to Bliss; because in their Lifetime they
make no Preparation for it, but they are every way estranged from God: For it
is not now known what is Sin, nor yet what is Virtue: They imagine they are
Virtuous when they do something that is good in appearance, and that they are
not guilty of sin when they do not commit wicked Actions. This is the most
crafty delusion of the Devil; by which he certainly gains all the good through
this blindness of Mind. This is an universal Evil, which makes me afraid that
not one Person shall be saved; because none do perceive their Evil but gross
Sinners who live in Actual sins: As for others, every Moment they take the Name
of God in vain: One will say, I trust in God; another, God will help us;
another, God will show us Mercy; and thus on a Thousand other occasions the
Name of God is still in their Mouth, calling on him to cooperate in their
sins: For when they say they trust in God while the Soul wallows in sin, is to
desire that God would do Injustice: Wherefore they may wait long in this sort
of confidence, and shall never obtain their Desire: For God cannot help those
who go on in sin, without being unjust; which he will never be. And he who says
that God will help him, while he lives as People do at present, says that God
will help him to sin; which he cannot do: For he cannot contribute directly or
indirectly to any Sin; and if he assisted us in the way we live, he should
contribute to many sins Isa. 20. 10.
which we commit: For if he assisted us to preserve our Temporal Goods, we
would continue, yea, increase our Pride, our Excesses and Vanities; and if he
delivered us from Wars, Peace would give us occasions to forget God, and to
abandon our selves the more to bodily Pleasures and Sensualities; and if he
delivered us from our Miseries, of whatsoever kind, we would certainly be led
to greater Evils: For Ease and Sloth engender all sort of Sins. And when we
say, God will have Mercy on us, and nevertheless we go on in a state of sin,
this is to blaspheme against the Righteousness of God: Because he can never
have Mercy but Exodus 20. 6. Ezekiel. 33. 12.
upon penitent Sinners: Which the Godly now a days are very far from; for they
encourage themselves in their Sins as if they were Virtues, and even call them
by the Name of Virtues: For the Avarice of the Cloisters and of the Religious
is called Charity done them; and the Adorning of Altars, building of Houses and
Magnificent Churches is called the Honor of God, though these be but Vanities
and Superfluities by which God is greatly offended. For if at Baptism we have
renounced the World and its Pomps to become Christians, how can we adorn
Churches, which we call the Temples of God, with the same Pomps and Vanities,
which Christians are not permitted to seek after in their own Persons, nor in
what belongs to them? How can it be allowed to use them in Places particularly
dedicated to God, without tacitly Insinuating that God is served with our sins
and Impurities, as are all Mal. 2. 3.
sort of Pomps and Vanities, which are so common in Churches as well as in
other places? Nevertheless all this is covered with an Appearance of Virtue and
Holiness. This renders all the World impenitent: For every one amuses himself
with the belief of being saved in a state of Sin and Damnation; Which is truly
a desperate state; because he who believes he is good, will never repent, and
much less will he do Penitence, and consequently he shall never obtain Pardon:
For God cannot pardon Luke 13. 3.
without Repentance. All the Remedy that I see in this, is a perfect Conversion
unto God, and a New Birth, as if till now we had never been in the World: For
all that we have done hitherto has been evil and blameworthy in the sight of
God, though to us all seem to be good, through the Blindness of our Spirits, in
which we have been so sunk, that no Body has seen whither he was going, more
than we do in a very dark Night. Therefore Jesus Christ has said, That a man
Mat. 18. 3.
must be born again, and become as a little Child, else he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. He speaks to those of the present Age: For if one do not
re-enter into the Womb of the Rising Church, he cannot be saved.

The Eleventh Conference,
Shows, how a Man must be born again to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: And
that he must return to a Dependence upon God, which is the only thing that he
essentially requires of Man.

I asked her, How this New Birth could be in those who are already advanced in
Years and Learning?

She said: Sir, We must take up a Life wholly new, as if to day we were newly
born: Because all the good that we think we have done heretofore is all evil,
or at least good for this Life only: For all our good Works have still been
attended with Self-love, or Humane Respects, Mat. 6. 2, 5.
which can never be recompensed in Eternity, because we have here had their
Reward. What we do out of Self-love is recompensed by our Satisfaction; and
what we do out of Humane respects is recompensed by the complacency of Men: So
that we can never in Justice pretend to any other thing; for we are fully
satisfied in this World, according to the Pretensions or Ends we had in doing
our good Works. Though they have been covered with a pretense of the Glory of
God, or Charity to our Neighbors, yet in effect all this has been but
Vanity-Therefore he who desires to be converted, must take up Romans 6. 4.
a Life wholly new, and believe assuredly that he has never done so much as one
Action purely for the Love of God. Which we may abundantly perceive by
considering all the Sins against the Holy Ghost, and those which we commit by
another, with the Eight Beatitudes, and the other solid Virtues. Every one may
see thereby how far he is from the State of the Blessed that Jesus Christ has
marked out in the Eight Beatitudes; and if he desire to recover them, what need
he has to take up a Life wholly new, and to become as a newborn Infant, who
lets himself be governed by his Heavenly Father. Neither Years nor Learning can
hinder the resigning of our selves to God, that he may rule us as it shall
please him: For the more we are advanced in Years, the more haste we ought to
make to attain to Salvation, because we have no more Time but the small part of
our Life that remains. The Conversion of those come to Years ought not to be
delayed one Day, because their Life may be gone, and then there is no Recovery;
for after Death Heb. 9. 27.
there is no Remission. The Learned ought also to consider, that all their
Learning is nothing but Ignorance in the sight of God, which becomes often a
hindrance to his Grace; and that the Time is come, 1 Cor. 1. 19.
that he will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and abolish the prudence of the
prudent, that all may Mark 10. 15.
receive the Kingdom of Heaven as little Children.

I said to her, It was very desirable to be of the number of those true
Converts, and that I would be the first who would resign all to God as a little
Infant.

She said: Sir, No body can be entirely converted if he do not know what is
Sin, and also true Virtue. These Two Things are necessary: For otherwise one
will think, he is converted while he is yet full of Sins, and has not acquired
any solid Virtues. Therefore I have spoken so particularly to you, that you may
not abide in the darkness which surrounds all the Men of the World. There may
be yet many who desire to be converted: But few of these know their inward
Sins, and yet fewer know what is true Virtue. All these would make false
Conversions in the sight of God: For if one does not know his hidden Sins, he
cannot amend them; and if he know not what true Virtue is, he cannot put it in
practice. The ignorance of these Two Things hinder a Man from being converted
to God, or yielding himself to be governed by him. This is therefore what he
ought first of all to learn, to know the state of his own Soul, in what degree
of sin it is, and also in what degree of true Virtue. If these things were
known, there be many who would embrace the Spirit of Penitence, and resign
themselves to God as little Children: But because they know not the state of
their own Conscience, many do insensibly perish Isa. 5. 13.
not knowing their Misery. If you desire, Sir, to be resigned to God as a
Child, think that all you have done hitherto is worth nothing; and cast Psalm.
37. 5.
your self into the Arms of God, who is your Father, as a Child who cannot
speak, that he may teach you all things. He will certainly do it: For he
desires Ezekiel. 18. 23.
our Conversion. When we withdraw from him by our Sins, he suffers it, because
he will not take back the Free Will that he has once given us: For he is
unchangeable Romans 11. 29.
in all his Works: But as soon as we return to him by Penitence, he receives us
as the Father did his Prodigal Son, owns us for Luke 15. 24.
his Children, and the Heirs of his Glory. But if you resolve to adhere to your
own Wisdom, you will never receive the Holy Spirit. You must become simple as a
Child, and not use your own Will any longer, resigning and committing it wholly
into the Hands of God, giving him the Reins of your Will, that he may guide and
direct it as it shall please him; and that you may no longer abuse it, as you
have done hitherto: Which you must acknowledge with Regret: For if our Will had
been governed by God, we had never fallen into such Extremities of all Evils.

I said to her, I must acknowledge my Will had not been governed by God,
because I knew not as I do now the way how to resign my self to God.

She said: Sir, No body can be saved who knows not that he must be entirely
resigned to God: For this is the first and last Commandment that he has given
to Man: And to say better; It is the only thing that God requires of Man. If we
would absolutely depend upon God, we should fulfill all the Law and the
Prophets. This is the one thing needful. All that ever I can say, Sir, is
comprehended in THE DEPENDENCE that we ought to have upon God; for he has never
demanded any other thing of Man (nor will he so long as the World shall last)
but this Dependence, that he owes to God. It is a very small Matter that he
asks of us. It Is a great Ingratitude also Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
for us to deny this Dependence upon him; since he is the Lord and Creator of
all Things, has created us of Nothing, and gives us all that we have to enjoy
in full Liberty, provided only we still acknowledge our Dependence upon him in
all Things. This Great God could he demand less of a silly Worm of the Earth,
than the Acknowledgment of Dependence upon its God? This is so just a Thing,
that though God had never declared to Man that he desired this of him, he was
obliged always to acknowledge it; since all came truly from him* and he had
bestowed on him so many Favors and Prerogatives, which should oblige him to a
continual Gratitude, even though he had never had any thing beyond Natural
Reason: For it is said, that even Brute and Cruel Beasts have been sensible of
a Benefit received from Men all the Days of their Life; and Man endued with so
accomplished an Understanding will not acknowledge the Dependence he has upon
God, nor yield up his Will to his, even though he be so good Prove. 23. 26.
as to desire it! For if God were not an Excess of Goodness, he would rather
disdain Men of so little Worth, than permit them to unite their Will to his.
Nevertheless, he permits and desires it, yea, rejects and threatens those who
will not do it; as Jesus Christ threatened St. Peter John 3. 8.
, when he would not be washed by him. If we had but a little of Judgment, we
would entreat God, to permit not only that our Will may be united to his; but
rather, that ours may be wholly annihilated, and that he may exercise his own
over us only and absolutely.

I asked her, What she meant by saying, That the Acknowledgment of our
Dependence upon God, was the only Commandment, since God had given us so many
others?

She said: Sir, There is no Essential Commandment but this. All the rest are
Accidental. For when God created Adam, and in him all Men, he gave him Power
over all Sublunary Things Psalm. 8. 7.
, having made all the Beasts subject to him, that he might rule over all as a
Little God, without any Reservation, except that he should always acknowledge
the Dependence that he had upon his Creator: Which being done by him, he might
rule over all Things as a dependent Deity. And for a Token of this Dependence,
he forbad him to eat of the Fruit of one Tree only, permitting him to eat of
all the rest. The meaning of which was, that Man might enjoy, use, and rule
over all Things, provided always he acknowledged his Dependence on the Supreme
Deity, of whom he held all Things. And if Adam had not forgotten himself by
quitting this Dependence and desiring to depend upon himself, he should never
have received any other Command from God, nor yet any Man after him. But the
Righteousness of God obliged him to lay other Commands* on Man for the Penance
of his Disobedience. He enjoined him Genesis 3. 17, 19.
to till the Ground, and to gain his Bread with the sweat of his Face, which
was the Second Command that God gave to Man, which nevertheless was only
Accidental through the Fall of Adam, and not Essential by the Will of God, who
loved rather to see him free, without being subjected to any other Thing but
Himself alone. And his giving the Commands to Moses for the Children of Israel
was also Accidental: For if they had not fallen into so many different Sins,
which took them off from their Dependence upon God, he would never have given
them diverse Commandments: But fearing lest his People should perish through
Ignorance, he still gave them new Commands, that by the help of them they might
know their Sins and amend them; else God would never have constrained Man to
any other thing, but to acknowledge him as the Superior of all Things: For God
created him to take Prove. 8. 31.
his Delight with him in full liberty and without constraint, and was not
willing to subject him to any other Law Cant. 2. 4.
but that of Love. By which we see that all the other Commands are but
Accidentally appointed, because of the Sins that Men had committed at diverse
times, who if they would now return to this Dependence upon God, would have no
need of any other Precept or Commandment; for all the rest are only Means to
bring us to this Dependence upon God, and that we may see and discover all that
hinders us from resigning our Will to God's, and that discovering them by the
Commands, we may leave them and amend, and so may be able to return to this
Dependence which was first enjoined us as the one thing necessary for
Salvation: And is still so now as well as then.

The Twelfth Conference,
Shows, That there is one thing only to be done by us that we may be saved.

I said to her, That it was very agreeable to hear, that there was but one
thing only to be done in order to Salvation: And that I would gladly take that
short way.

She said: No, Sir, It Is true, there is but one thing only to be done that we
may be saved Luke 10* 42.
: But there are many things to be parted with, which do greatly hinder and
distract us. We neglect to do that which is necessary to attain to this
Dependence, and we do that which alienates us from it. The Penitence which God
enjoined Adam, To gain his Bread with the Sweat of his Face, is very little
regarded among Men now. Every Body would live without Labor, and they esteem
it a Happiness to have Riches that they may live in Ease. This is indeed to
thwart the Means that God has so savingly taught us. After that Adam sinned, and
all Men in him, of his own free choice he left off this Dependence upon God,
that he might become wise of himself: Thus he rendered himself miserable with
all his Posterity: Because all the Miseries that we suffer are procured by the
following our own Wills. We must not impute all our Miseries to Adam, but only
to the Sins that we our selves commit. If we had no other but the Sin of Adam,
we should need nothing but the Penance of Labor to gain our Bread, and the
enduring the Intemperance of the Elements: But our own Sins bring upon us a
Thousand other* Sufferings. If we would labor, and suffer Cold and Heat, or
other Intemperances of the said Elements, and return again to the Dependence of
our Wills upon Gods, Psalm. 81. 14, 17.
we should be very quickly restored to the Blessed State wherein Adam was
created: For our Penitence should be accomplished in this short Life, which by
the Mercy of God is much shortened; and then we should enjoy an Eternal Bliss,
which should never end: But since our Actual Self will would not depend upon
God, but upon its self, bending it self to follow its own Inclinations, it has
procured us a great Number of other Evils, which we attribute to God, or to
Adam; and if we consider them aright, we will evidently perceive that they
derive their dominion from our Self-will, and not from any other thing: For our
Diseases are ordinarily procured by our Intemperance in Eating and Drinking, or
other Sensual Excesses which we commit to satisfy our own Will; which oftimes
drives us to some State that causes us a Thousand Sorrows, or to some
Employment, or Trade that brings us into great trouble of Lawsuits, Quarrels,
Vexations, or to Poverty and other Miseries. And the Cause of all this is, that
we would not submit our Will to Gods, who would have governed us, as a good
Father does his Son, we having chosen rather to follow our own Will, and to
undergo all sort of Calamities* in this World, and run the hazard of suffering
far greater hereafter, which shall never end: For he who will not be guided by
God, can never be saved; since our own Conduct will lead us to the Abyss of all
sort of Evils* both Temporal and Eternal: Because our own Will is ignorant, and
rash, never content nor satisfied, never stopping for any sort of Evil: Even
though it discover its Miseries it does not amend them, but imputes them to
another, either to Adam, or even to God: And thus flattering our selves always
in our own Will, we persist therein even to death, which gives beginning to a
miserable Eternity: For no Body can be saved by himself; and if we do not yield
up our Will to God, from whom can we expect Salvation? It Is a great Blindness,
Sir, not to see these Truths* which are so evident, since we feel our Weakness,
and know that we have received all from God, and that we can hope for nothing
but from him. And notwithstanding of all these Considerations we will not
resign our Will to his, choosing rather to be miserable, and to perish at last
by following our own. We are unthankful to God, and cruel to our selves: For
indeed, it is a great Ingratitude to deny God the only thing he demands of us,
our own* Will* having given us all other things; and it is a great Cruelty to
our selves to withdraw our Dependence upon God, and subject our selves to so
many sorts of Evils.

I asked her, How it was possible that Men should deny the yielding up their
Will to God, since all appertains to him?

She said: Sir, All the World does this in effect, and I know not so much as
one Person upon Earth that will depend upon the Will of God: For every one will
needs follow his own Will: Neither Small nor Great, none excepted, will resign
their Will to God's, but will all depend upon their own. Is it a Wonder that I
told you formerly, that no body could be saved after the way that Men live at
present? This is an infallible Truth, which none has yet discovered because of
the Universal Darkness that is at present in the World: Every one imagines that
he will resign himself to God, while in the mean time there is no such thing:
For if this were true, we should not see Men so forward to deal in Business, or
Traffic, nor to run through Countries and Cities to heap up Money, nor to use
underhand Dealings for Offices, Places, or Benefices: For every one placing his
Dependence upon God, would labor to provide only for his Necessities and no
more, knowing well that this Life is short, and that Necessaries suffice a
Traveller, who studies not to load himself with Things superfluous or useless
for his Journey, for they would be a Burden to him. All the Cares, the Toils,
the Pursuits of Men for present Things, are so many Evidences which declare
that we will not resign our Will to God's, but that we will follow our own,
neglecting the Penitence that God has enjoined us, that we may be advanced to
Places, Honors, or Dignities, seeking to live at our own Ease, instead of
laboring to satisfy the Penitence due to our Sins. We Act quite contrary to
the Will of God; for we cannot be ignorant that he demands of us this
Submission, and this Penitence. And withal we say by Word, that we are
resigned to God, and we look on it as a thing impossible, that we should deny
him our Will! Which still discovers the more our Blindness.

I said to her, That there was truly a horrible Darkness through the whole
World; and that I my self was surrounded with it, while I believed that I would
be resigned to God, and in the mean time had many Cares yet for this present
Life.

She said: Sir, You see that your Resignation is not true, so long as your
Cares are yet for this Life. This would be a great distrust of God, if after
you were resigned to his Government, you should yet be careful for Temporal
Things. Can God, who created all Things for Man, deny him his Necessities, when
he shall be resigned to him? If he Mat. 6. 26.
feed the Birds of the Air who do not labor, shall he not feed Man when he
labors? We are full of false Persuasions, which flatter us to our Ruin. For
it is certain that he who has resolved to resign himself to God, seeks no
longer for Earthly Things, but for those which are Eternal. God makes him see
evidently, that what is here Below is nothing but Transitory, which the Servant
of God should not touch but by the by; for they are unworthy of a Soul
dedicated to God, which cares no longer for any thing but to please him. And if
you be careful for other Things, be assuredly persuaded that you are not yet
resigned to God: Because this Resignation consists in a cessation from all
things to receive God only. And the less we Act our selves, the more we
receive. There needs no more but TO CEASE AND TO RECEIVE: For all our Cares and
Vexations, or Activities for the Things of this Life, are all Hindrances which
stifle the Operations which God would make in our Soul. We must be quiet and
rest, that we may suffer the Holy Spirit alone to Act. If our Will be resigned
to God, he will Psalm. 73. 23, 24.
govern it wisely. Let us leave our Souls to his Government, and labor to
accomplish the Penitence due for our Sins, that we may have the Things needful
for the Maintenance of our Body: And then we could truly say, that we are
resigned to God, and not before. For the Offices, Cares and Business of the
World, are all Hindrances to this Resignation: And even the* so many different
Ways of Devotion that are now practiced, are all great Hindrances; since
nothing but this Resignation alone is necessary.

I said to her, That this little Word, Resignation, comprehended great Things,
that nevertheless it was the Philosophers Stone for the Discovery of Eternal
Treasures, to which I aspired.

She said: Sir, This Word, RESIGNATION TO GOD, comprehends Psalm. 7^* 25, 26.
all Things: For he who is resigned to him, knows him and loves him; he knows
also true Virtue that he may follow it, and the Falsehood of Vices that he may
avoid them: Because God gives himself to the Soul that is resigned to him, and
the Holy Spirit lives in it, and abiding in it, he replenishes it with his
Gifts to know all Things, and with his Fruits to entertain it: So that all our
Happiness depends upon the resigning our Wills to God's, and not upon many
different Things, as People imagine. That we may be restored into Favor with
God, entirely converted to him, and out of all sort of danger, there needs
nothing but this Resignation. If you are guilty Luke 15. 18.
, resign your self to God, he will immediately receive you; and convert you to
himself; and if Psalm. 18. ^, 7.
you are afraid of his Judgments, and of these dangerous Times, resign your
self to him, he will preserve and save you. There is nothing to be done but
this only, To resign our selves to God, and to continue in a Dependence upon
Him. Is it not a very Reasonable Thing that a Creature should abide in
Dependence on its Creator? Must there be Constraints and Commands to oblige it
to a Duty so just, so good, and advantageous? There is no Law, Divine, Humane,
nor Civil, that can give us a Dispensation from so just a Thing. Nevertheless,
we Rebel against all sort of Rights to adhere to our own Will, which is so
wicked and insolent, which precipitates us into so many sorts of Evils; for all
the Miseries which we feel in this Life, proceed from our Self-will: And as the
Resignation of it to the Will of God Psalm. 37. 5, 7.
is the Accomplishment of all Good, so the Possession of it is the Isa. 65. 3.
Consummation of all sort of Evil: So that he who would be converted, needs
only resign his own Will into God's Hands: In doing this he fulfils all the Law
and the Prophets; because they Teach us nothing else but the Means to attain to
this Resignation.

I said to her, That this being supposed, which was most true, That if we still
acknowledge, that we depend upon God in all things, we have no need of any
other Precept or Command, it was strange that she had taught me so many Means.

She said: Sir, I have told you of the State of the World, and of the Church,
that you may no longer trust to them by a pious implicit Faith. I have told
you also, that we are fallen into the Reign of Antichrist, fearing least you be
deceived; and also that the World is Judged, that you may not flatter your self
with false Hopes, believing that it will last yet, and so continue in sloth. I
have also shown you true Virtue, that you be not deceived by that which is so
but in appearance; having also declared to you the Sins against the Holy Ghost,
and those which we commit in another, that you may not be ignorant of any thing
that can hinder this Resignation to God: For the Ignorance of Good and Evil
would insensibly ruin us; and whereas we are fallen into the Times of
Universal Darkness, the Common Enemy might very easily deceive you, as he does
all the World, persuading you that you are resigned to God, when you live yet
entirely to your self. Therefore I have explained to you so many Things one by
one, that you might discern aright Truth from Lies; and that you might
certainly resign your self to God according to your desire. And because you can
never do good without departing from Evil Psalm. 34. 15.
, nor depart from that without knowing it, I have therefore endeavored to
discover to you the Good and Evil that Reigns at present in the World, that I
might give you the certain Marks whereby to know if you are truly resigned to
God, or not; and since the Commandments of God, and also the Law of the Gospel,
are given us to discover what hinders us to be resigned to him: That by this
means we may remove all the Hindrances of our Resignation to God: Voluntary
Poverty serving as a Mean to free our Self will from the desire of perishing
Goods; Chastity to free this Will from desiring Carnal Pleasures; and Obedience
to deliver us from the desire of fulfilling our own Will; and so of all the
other Evangelical Counsels which teach us to depart from that which hinders our
Resignation to God: Therefore I judged it necessary to declare to you all the
Things that hinder this Resignation to God, and those also which may serve as
Means to facilitate this Resignation, which is the only Essential Thing that
God Jos. 58. 13.
demands of all those who would be saved.

I asked her, If it will be enough for me, absolutely to resolve that
henceforth I will depend upon God, and no longer use my own Will in any thing.

She said: This Resolution, Sir, is a great Beginning; but it is to be feared,
that we shall not put it effectually in Execution, because of our inveterate
Evil Habits. Our Self-will having always born sway, how can we entirely subdue
it, except by the Means that Jesus Christ has pointed out to us in his Gospel,
which are as so many Steps to ascend to this Resignation? For otherwise we
might make false Suppositions, as we have done hitherto. But when we shall put
in practice the Doctrine of the Gospel, we shall thereby discover, how far we
have advanced in this Resignation to God: For if our Frailty had not needed
these Means, God would not have taken Humane Flesh to come and teach us them:
For he can do nothing that is useless. We must therefore fix here, Sir, and
receive this Doctrine of the Gospel in its plain Literal Sense, which will
teach us all things plainly to our Senses, by following of which we shall
certainly attain to this Resignation: For this is the true, the shortest, and
the most certain way. Though indeed God sent at diverse times Prophets and holy
Persons to tell Men by what Means they might recover this Resignation to God,
yet none of them has done it so perfectly as Jesus Christ did when he was upon
Earth: For he has omitted nothing, but has taught all so precisely, that Men
will never stand in need of any other Instructions: For this is the last Mercy
that God will show to Men, who must not look for any thing after the Doctrine
of Jesus Christ: And what was taught before or since, is not at all comparable
to this Doctrine of the Gospel. If we would be saved, we must embrace and
follow it; for it teaches us all the necessary Means for fulfilling the Law of
God.

The Thirteenth Conference,
Shows, That the Doctrine of Jesus Christ is the last that God will send into
the World: And that the Holy Spirit comes to give now the perfect Understanding
of it.

I asked her, How this Doctrine of the Gospel could be the last Means that God
would give to Men to bring them to Salvation, since we look yet for the Holy
Spirit, who in these last Times must teach us all Things?

She said: Sir, The Last Times began Gal. 4. 4. 1 Cor. 10. 11.
when God became Man. He brought along with him upon Earth his Last Mercy,
teaching Men by Word and Deed all that they ought to do and avoid, without
omitting any thing of all that shall be necessary for them even to the End of
the World: So that none have need of any thing else to be taught them. It is
true, we shall have the Holy Spirit John 6. 13.
in the End of these Last Times, into which we are now fallen; and he is
already born upon Earth: But he comes not to bring us new Means of Salvation,
but only John 14. 26.
to lay before us those which Jesus Christ taught us when he was in the World,
that we may clearly see John 16. 9.
how far we are now estranged from them, and to give us the Light of Truth,
that we may see the Way to return, and re-take the same Gospel-means, that we
may recover the Dependence of our Will upon that of God, which is his First and
Only Essential Command, without which no Body can be saved: For this is the
least Thing that we owe him; and if we do not fulfill it, our Ingratitude is so
great, that we cannot in Justice be saved.

I asked her, If the Holy Spirit was born in Flesh, as Jesus Christ was in his
Time? And what things he would teach us more than Jesus Christ has done?

She said: Sir, The Holy Spirit is the same 1 John 5. 7.
God with Jesus Christ, John 1. 1.
who was the Word of God, as the Holy Spirit 1 John 5. 20. compare 1 Cor. 2.
10, 11, 12.
is his Understanding. There is but One God only, but there are diverse Powers.
And as our Understanding knows more than our Mouth speaks, so the Holy Spirit
will give more Light John 16. 12, 13.
than did the Words of Jesus Christ, though all comes Joh. 16. 14, 15.
from one and the same God, and one and the same Source. What Jesus Christ said
was understood by Men only in part 1 Cor. 13. 9.
, and the same Things shall be understood in a perfect and complete Sense by
this Wisdom of the Holy Spirit. He needs not take a Body of Flesh to speak to
Men: For Jesus Christ did that sufficiently; so that he needs speak no more:
But there is need of more Understanding: For the Last Times are near their End:
And before the World end, God will give the full Understanding of all that has
been delivered in God's Name from the Beginning of the World, both by the Holy
Prophets, and by Jesus Christ and his Apostles, or other Saints his Disciples.
Nothing has been fully understood of all the Holy Scripture; for even they who
pronounced it, understood it not in its perfect Sense, but in part only: But
now that the Holy Spirit is come upon Earth to give the full Knowledge of them,
he needs not for this End a Body of Flesh; but only to give Men Spiritual
Understanding, that they may know the Powers of God, the Love he bears to Man,
the End for which he created him, and may have the knowledge of True Virtue,
and of that which is False. All these Things shall be known by the
Understanding of those Men who will receive the Light of Truth which the Holy
Spirit brings now into the World. HE IS BORN in the midst of its Universal
Darkness, in which no Body knows the Truth of any Thing, all being falsified or
not known. The Holy Spirit comes to clear this by Spiritual Notices.

I blessed my good Fortune, and the Day in which I met with this Pilgrimess; for
my Understanding received such Light by her Discourses, that I must confess my
Soul had perished without this Rencounter: I asked her, How her Words could
have such strong Operations on me?

She said: Sir, This proceeds from the Holy Spirit, who begins to visit your
Soul by his Light. Receive it with Humility of Heart, and he will enlighten you
more: For he is come to fill the Souls of all those who shall receive the
Truth. It is by the Operations that you feel that he is born in Souls. He is a
Spirit, and he works in the Spirit of all who seek and desire him. We must not
John 4. 21-24.
any longer seek for visible and material Means: For all these things are
Hindrances to him. Let us only open our Heart and Spirit to receive the Truth,
and it will teach us all Things: For nothing but Lies has undone the whole
World. The Darkness that Men are in, and their forgetfulness of God, have come
by Lying, which has seized on all the World: For none are Hos. 4. 1.
now in the Truth: The false Persuasions which they have imprinted on Men's
Hearts, have made them mistake God and the State of their own Souls. There is
therefore great reason to bless the Goodness of God, who in so miserable a Time
sends us his Holy Spirit to enlighten all those who will receive him. I
believe, Sir, you are the first; but a great Number will follow you: For as
soon as the delusion shall be discovered, the Eyes of many will be opened, and
their Heads lifted up, to return to God, abhorring their Errors, and the
Deceit of their blind Guides. They will see, that all that they have taught
them as Means of bringing them to God, have estranged them from him; and the
Sacraments and other Ceremonies of the Church, instead of procuring them the
Grace of God to love him and to acquire true Virtue, have given them rather a
Contempt of God, and a false hypocritical Virtue. This being discovered, Hos.
6. 1.
many will seek the Truth, abhorring Lying, which has put their Salvation in so
great hazard.

I asked her, If the Holy Spirit would not become visible?

She said: No, Sir; He will not be visible, but by the Operations which he will
make in Souls whom you shall see disingaged from the Earth, and cleaving to God
alone. We shall see them possess Joy, Peace, and Patience, with the other
Fruits and Gifts, which will be sure Evidences that the Holy Spirit will dwell
in their Souls, who notwithstanding shall not be seen by the Eyes of the Body
in any Material Form or Figure: For the Time is come that 1 John 4. 24.
God will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, and no longer in Figures, which
shall all cease because of the Accomplishment of all Things: And all that was
figured in the Old Law shall be accomplished in full perfection by the Holy
Spirit: For the Time is come, that all the Promises which God made to Men from
the Beginning of the World shall be fulfilled, the Alliance that God Jer. 32.
40.
has promised to make with Men shall have its perfect Accomplishment: For they
shall be his People, and he will be their God. This has not come to pass as
yet. Though Men were created to be God's People, nevertheless they did not
continue so; on the contrary, they committed so many Infidelities, that he was
obliged to destroy them by a General Deluge; and though the Children of Israel
were God's peculiar People, they forsook him notwithstanding, and gave
themselves to Idolatry. The Jews who were as precisely God's People, denied him
also and would not acknowledge him when he became Man, but reviled him and
hanged him on a Cross. And now the Christians, who ought more perfectly to be
Gods People, despise him in his Sufferings, and in his Doctrine. So that the
Alliance that God promised to make with Man, could not hitherto be
accomplished. Of necessity the Holy Spirit must come upon Earth to enlighten
Men, that they may have the Faithfulness requisite for this Alliance of God
with Men: For a Marriage cannot be complete if the Spouse be not faithful as
the Husband is.

The Fourteenth Conference,
Speaks of the Alliance that God will make with Men, and of the Coming of Jesus
Christ in Glory; and that to have a Share in it, we must of necessity resign
our Will to God, and return to a Dependence upon him.

I entreated her to tell me, How, and when, and wherein, this Alliance of God
with Men shall be made?

She said: This Will be made by the Holy Spirit, who will illuminate Souls,
make them know their Errors, and also the End for which they were created,
which is nothing less, than to be joined and united to God, who will take his
Delight with Men Prove. 8. 31.
: And they perceiving this, shall separate themselves from all Earthly
Pretensions, and resign themselves to the Will of God, desiring no longer to
use their own Wills, because they have entirely renounced them. Then shall they
Isa. 58. 11 -- 14.
have such Dispositions as will invite God down to the Earth, to Ally himself
visibly and bodily with Men by an inseparable and indissoluble Tie. This is the
End for which God clothed himself with a Humane Body, to make himself like to
Man, that the Alliance he designed to make with him might be wholly perfect and
complete, both in Body and Spirit. What God promised Genesis 17. 7.
of Old to Abraham, could never be accomplished; because Men were never
resigned to God as they ought, having still used their own Free Will without
depending upon God, This did separate and divorce them from the Alliance which
he promised them. But in this Fullness of Time, wherein we live, the Holy Spirit
is come down to teach us all Things; and whosoever shall hear him, shall enjoy
the promised Alliance: For Rev. 22. 12.
Jesus Christ will come very shortly upon the Earth in Glory, to Join and Allie
himself with all those who shall resign themselves to him. I cannot precisely
tell the Day, Sir; but that it will be toward the End of the Plagues, which
are now begun. But I can assure you that it shall be here, upon Earth Rev. 5.
10.
, where God with Men shall enjoy a perfect Contentment, which shall be Rev. 7.
15, 16, 17.
Eternal: For the Presence of God made Man will unite them with such a perfect
Love, that they can never again depart from him, though they shall still
preserve their Free Will.

I felt in my Soul great Consolation in hearing her sperk of the Alliance that
Gold would make with Man, and asked, What I should do to attain to such a
Happiness?

She said: Sir, You have nothing else to do for attaining to an Alliance with
God, but to Prove. 23. 26.
resign your own Will to him, that he may dispose of it, This is the One Thing
needful. So soon as you shall depend upon him in all things, you shall be
betroath'd in order to the promised Alliance, and therein you shall find such
Consolations as I cannot express to you. You shall then be as sure of this
promised Alliance, as at least a Maid is to marry her Betrothed, or a Man her
whom he has Betrothed, and much more: For the Promises of Men may be diverted
by diverse Accidents; but those of God are immutable, and will never change. So
soon as Man resigns himself to him, he receives him Ezck 33. 12. 16.
, and treats with him as if he had never offended him, how great a Sinner
soever he may have been. A Man must be void of Judgment, and very unthankful
for such a Goodness of God, when he will not depend upon his Creator, from
whom he has received all Things, and who in requital of so many Benefits,
demands nothing else but to acknowledge, that all he has comes from him? If he
did this, he might lawfully enjoy all Things according to his Wish. Could God
do more to Man than to let him rule over all Things, provided only that he
would always acknowledge the Dependence that he had upon his God? And on the
contrary, Could Man commit a greater Ingratitude than not to depend upon God,
who created him, who preserves him, and from whom alone he can expect
Salvation? We must have lost our Wits, and become cruel to our selves, if we
deprive our selves of so great a Happiness, only that we may enjoy our
Free Will, which often precipitates us into diverse kinds of Evils, that are
sometimes irreparable: Because he who follows his own Will can never be saved,
and the Mischief we sustain by Damnation can never be repaired Mark 8. 36, 37.
.

I said to her, Never any had taken notice of so precise a Necessity of
depending in every thing upon God for Salvation; but they thought that
whosoever died not in a mortal Sin was saved.

She said: Sir, This Ignorance, not to know that we ought to depend upon God in
all Things, is the Cause of the Ruin of all Men: Every one imagining that
nothing else is necessary for Salvation but to abstain outwardly from evil
Actions: This God did not declare to Adam when he created him for Salvation,
but he expressly testified to him that he ought always to depend upon him, and
acquiesce in his Will. What God did to Adam, he did in him to all Mankind.
Therefore it is much better to hold to the First Commandment of God, than to
amuse our selves with the Opinions of Men, who with their Studies and Notions
give assurance of Salvation without any Ground. For all that they call Mortal
or Venial Sins, are nothing else but the Hindrances which we make to this
Resignation to God. Except this, there can be no Sin: For if this Resignation
be not hindered, we are certainly saved: For Resignation in its self is
Salvation. This we cannot observe, because so many other different Things are
set before us to hinder the Knowledge of this Eternal Truth, to wit, That God
has never demanded, and never will demand in Time coming, any thing else of
Man, but the Resignation of his Will to the Will of God. And when it is said,
Thou shall not kill, steal, nor commit fornication, or other Evils, it is as
much as to say in one Word, Thou shall not follow thy own Will, but that of
God: For the abstaining from all these Evils, is nothing else but the leaving
off to follow our own Will, which incites us to do these Evils: For as soon as
we shall resign it to the Will of God, he will lead us to all sort of Good: And
these Evils are particularly forbidden us, that we may thereby perceive when we
are not resigned to God: For this Resignation delivers us from all sorts of
Evil, and by following our own Will we do certainly commit them. I wish all the
World did comprehend this Truth, That no Body can ever sin but in following his
own Will, and no Body can ever be saved but by resigning his Will to the Will
of God.

I said to her, It was most true, That to be saved we must resign our Will to
that of God; and that it was a loss that this was not taught to all Christians.

She said: Sir, The Devil has now such Power over the Minds of Men, that he
leads them wholly at his Will, and has razed out of their Memories the one
thing needful, which is to resign their own Will to that of God: And that they
may be insensible of this Forgetfulness, he has invented so many Means of
Salvation, that no Body thinks of it, nor believes it necessary to resign his
Will to that of God, imagining that it is enough for Salvation to go to Church,
to frequent the Sacraments, and to get Indulgencies. This Blindness ruins all
good Men: For none can any longer perceive that this Resignation is necessary;
and not perceiving it, they do not believe it. For this cause. No body sets
about it: For we see now the best Men are addicted to follow their own Wills in
every thing, even in Eating and Drinking, and Walking: And generally all they
do is regulated by their own Wills; even their Virtues and Devotions are
managed by their Self-will: And in the mean time they think they are in the way
of Salvation: As if God had need of our Sacrifices, or our Prayers; while he
will have nothing else but the Resignation of our Wills to his Will. This no
Body strives to do: On the contrary, every one, both Small and Great, of
whatsoever Condition, follow their own Will. Christians do even train up their
Children in the Habit of following their own Wills. In which they bring them up
to their Damnation: Because being habituated from their Childhood to follow
their own Wills, when they are grown up they can very hardly part with them;
and thus every one perishes without perceiving it. And he who declares these
Truths, is opposed by all those who are infected with this Vice, who have no
mind to part with it, persuading themselves without ground, that this
Resignation is not necessary: Thought it be most true that God demands nothing
else of us: For he has no need at all of our Works, nor of our Words, nor
Riches, nor Honor, nor any Created Thing, because he contains all in himself:
But he has chosen our Will for himself, that it being united to his own, he
might take his delight and pleasure in it. Consider a little, Sir, how far we
stray from the Designs of God, while we thus use our own Will in all Things,
without discovering the Wiles of Satan, who under good and pious pretenses
leads us at his pleasure from a Dependence upon God, and yet we do not perceive
it.

I said to her, That it was an Infatuation of Spirit, that no Body saw
precisely the necessity of this Dependence, but they imagined it was enough to
believe in the general, that God is our Creator, and that we have received all
from him.

She said: Sir, Faith without Works Jam. 2. 26.
is dead. It is not enough that we believe by way of Speculation, That we have
received all from God; but on the contrary, this belief will render us more
guilty: For to believe that God is our Creator, and that all Things appertain
to him, and notwithstanding of this Belief, to desire to rule upon Earth as
Sovereigns of our own Will, and not to submit it but by constraint to all that
God permits to befall us against our own Inclinations, this is directly opposite
to our Belief, and so is it to believe also that we received all that we have
from God, and nevertheless to use all these things according to our Appetites
and Inclinations, as all the World does. For he who has received a good
Judgment, applies it to acquire Sciences, Offices, or Dignities in this World,
forgetting that this Judgment pertains not to him, but God only gave it him
that it might be applied to know and love him; and if he apply it to any thing
else, he must render a strict account of it. Nevertheless, no Body considers
this: Every one thinks he is Master and Lord of his own Understanding, and may
dispose of it independently according to his own Will. It is the same also with
him who has Wealth; he makes himself Lord and Master of it, even as if it
belonged to him in property: He employes it in Glory, Pomp, and Vanity, or
other Pleasures, of his Body or Mind, or in the Things to which he finds
himself most inclined, as if he had created these Riches himself, and held them
of none; and while he says by Word, that he has received all from God, yet
notwithstanding he will not use them but according to his own Will: And thus by
his Deeds Tit. 1. 16.
he belies what he say; by Word: Thinking to deceive God he deceives himself,
and is his own Ruin: For while we will use our own Will in all things, we
withdraw from a Dependence upon God, which is so necessary for our Salvation.

The Fifteenth Conference,
Shows, how every thing must be used to keep us in a Dependence upon God.

I asked her, How every thing ought to be used, that we may have this entire
Dependence upon God?

She said: Sir, We must first consider for what End we were Created: And seeing
that it was to Love and Serve God,: we must apply our selves to nothing else,
except by the by in necessary Things, reserving all our Affections for him who
Created us for these Ends: And whether we have Wit, or other Talents of Body or
Mind, or Riches, Honors, and Prosperity, we must never use these Things but
for the Glory of God: Because all pertains to him, and we are but the Stewards
of them, liable to give an Account: And we ought to manage them so well, that
nothing may be used but by the Appointment and Will of God, which we ought
always to inquire into and follow, and never our own Will; for it ought still
to depend upon him who gave it. Could God demand less of us than the Dependence
of our Will on his, after he had given us our Body with all its Properties; and
our Soul with all its Faculties; and this Beautiful World, with all that is in
it, to enjoy them fully at our Wish, with Joy and Ease, demanding nothing else
for so many Gifts, Graces, and Prerogatives, but the Resigning of our Wills to
his, notwithstanding of which, Man is so ungrateful, unthankful and
unreasonable, as to deny it to his God, his Creator? This Dependence of our
Will, so small a Gift that God asks of us, should it be refused him, when we
know that all comes from him, and that his Goodness has so advantagiously
bestowed Favors on us? Truly, Sir, this Ingratitude deserves that all the
Creatures rise up against Man, to take Vengeance of the Injury he has done his
Creator, in denying him the Dependence of his Free will, and that he will
dispose of it himself. Even insensible Things are obliged by strict Justice to
avenge such an Ingratitude. Which will be very speedily done: Because the
Measure is full. All Men harden their Hearts, and stop their Ears against Gods
Demand, Of resigning their Wills to his Will: None will hearken to it any
longer. Therefore the Sentence of Universal Rods is given out, and shall not be
revoked: Because none will revoke the Resolution that every one has taken of
following their own Will in every thing, and will not depend upon God, as if we
were our own Sovereigns.

I said to her, There were yet some Persons in the World whose Wills were
resigned to that of God.

She said: Sir, I know none of them: But I do not know all the World. If there
be some yet scattered up and down the World, God will take them into his
particular Care: But the General Judgment shall not be delayed for this: The
Plagues shall increase still, even till the Consummation of all Evil; and if
they go on leisurely, it is to give Time and Leisure to Men of Good Will 2 Pet.
3. 9.
that they may be converted and repent of their Ingratitude, yiedling up Psalm.
31. 6.
to God the Free Will that he so freely gave them, to use it according to his
Will. This is now done by few or none. We hear nothing else said, but, I will
be resigned to God, while in effect all the World follow their own Will. Some
give themselves eagerly to Study, some to Trade, some to the Law, to Offices,
Benefices, and that uncessantly, till every one has obtained their Pretensions:
And we settle our selves upon Earth as an abiding City, or as if we were
created for this Miserable Life, here we build Tabernacles as if we were to
remain in them always Psalm. 49. 12-15.
, while we see our Friends and Neighbors dye in a little time; and we know
that none stays here, but every one dies in his turn, some sooner, and some
later, without knowing at what Hour our turn will come. We are born in
Miseries, in which we live and dye; without seeing any other End for our selves
but Death, which may make us sufficiently comprehend that we are not created
for this Life; but we must look for another: For God could never have had so
low an End in creating us as the the Miseries of this present Life, because in
this he should have done an ill thing: Which Wisd. 1. 13, 14.
God can never do, seeing he is the Source of all Good, from whom no Evil can
proceed. But our Self-will alone engenders all the Evils and Miseries that we
suffer: For he who beats his Brains in Study, suffers for the Self-will or
Inclination he has for Studies all the Inconveniences that are in this
Employment: For God never demanded Eccl. 12. 12. Luke 12. 11, 12.
Learning of any Body, though Men cover this with the Pretext of the Glory of
God, yet there is nothing in it for the most part but Curiosity and Vainglory,
or some Designs of making some Fortune in this World. Another by his Self-will
gives himself to Traffic, or the business of Merchandising, and will therefore
endure Cares, Watchings, Fatigues, and Labors, to get a Little Heap of Money,
or other Temporal Goods, which end with him, because he leaves them on the
Earth, from whence he took them. One will be a Priest, or a Monk; another will
Marry, or continue free: In one Word, All Men in the World study to follow
their own Wills in every thing, without being willing to yield them to God, and
notwithstanding, we think to go to Paradise while we refuse to resign our Will
to him, which we ought to do, though he had never required it of Man: It should
be offered him in Acknowledgment of so many Benefits received from our God.

I asked her, If it was not lawful for every one to choose some State or
Calling by which to gain his Bread?

She said: Yes, Sir, It is expedient that every one Labor, that he may have
his Bread; for God has appointed Labor in Penitence for our Sins: It is a Holy
and Sacred Thing to Labor, that we may fulfill the Penitence that God himself
has enjoined us. We are free also to choose some State; that of Marr^iage is
instituted by God; but a free 1 Cor. 7. 32, 34.
Condition gives more leisure for converse with God, and to work out our
Salvation, delivering us from the Cares and Vexations of the Government and
Maintenance of a Family, which do often breed us many Distractions: But to
choose humane Offices according to our Will, would prove great Hindrances to
us, and are available only for this Life, which needs 1 Timothy 6. 8.
but a little Food, and some Clothing to cover our Body, all the ^est is
superfluous, and a Burden to him that would obey God. Therefore all Places,
Offices, or Benefices, of what kind soever, are great Hindrances to Salvation,
because they respect only the Earth, and aim at nothing but the Wealth,
Honors, or Pleasures of this World, which Things do certainly withdraw us from
God 1 John 2. 15.
, and even make us often wholly to forget him by the continual Employments, and
Diversions which these Places, Offices, or Benefices, bring along with them,
which are not only undertaken, by all means sought after and desired, that
thereby we may gain our Bread; but very often that we may be raised to Honor
and Vanities, or that we may take with more Ease the Delights of the Body or of
the Mind, or also that we may heap up Temporal Wealth: All which Things do
certainly withdraw us from God. Nevertheless we see Christians now adays do
Toil, and Sweat, and Labor to obtain some Place, Office, or Benefice; and they
study all their Lifetime to pursue what is pleasant, profitable, or honorable
for them; and they believe they are Wise in so doing: As if their Happiness did
depend upon this present Life, and it were needful to make some Fortune here.
Which is a great Blindness of Mind.

I asked her, If all Places, Offices, or Benefices, were evil, since it seemed
necessary and expedient that there should be Judges to maintain Order among the
People; and also Priests, to teach what concerns Salvation?

She said: Sir, All Places, Offices, or Benefices, are good in themselves; but
the ill use that is made of them, renders them evil. If a Person should engage
in any Office of Justice, or any other Secular Station, singly with a design to
Labor to preserve the People in Peace, and to maintain Justice, and the
Innocence of those whom others would wrong, this would be a great Charity to
his Neighbor, and a great Merit and Satisfaction as to the Penitence that
every one is obliged to accomplish during this Miserable Life: Because in
taking the Cares and Labor of the Mind for a Penance, we satisfy God in
gaining our Bread by these Labors of the Mind; and besides this, we assist our
Neighbor by good Counsel, and by maintaining him in his Right, and defending
him against malicious Persons. He to whom God has given the Spirit and Capacity
of doing this, will be doubly recompensed before God, provided he do it in a
Spirit of Penitence in respect of himself, and of Charity in respect of his
Neighbor. But it is much to be regretted, that Men now regard neither of these
Ends: For if they could enjoy a good Pension due to any Office with little
Travel, this is what they would love most: They seek not the Toils of it, but
the Profits: Nor the maintaining of Policy, or Justice, but the Honor of
Ruling over the People; and if it were only the Zeal of Policy and Justice that
moved Men to engage into public Offices, no good Men could stay in them any
longer in these unhappy Times, wherein Policy, and Justice, is no longer
observed. The Laws of Government are all made for the burden of the Common
People, and for the Ease and Relief of the Great Men, and those in Authority:
And by the same Breath Justice is rurn'd in their Favor. So that Offices, good
in themselves, are become very evil, by the bad use which Men make of them now,
who obey not in any thing the Ordinances of God, which are Penitence, and
Charity to our Neighbor. But on the quite contrary, they will enjoy Isa. 22.
12, 13.
instead of suffering; and take their Pleasure and Repose, instead of doing
Penitence. If Merchants had the Spirit of Penitence, and Traded on design to
procure Work to such Neighbors as were more fit for going about some Trade or
Handicraft than to Labor the Ground, all this would be done in mutual Charity,
accomplishing their Penitence; the one by working, and the other by taking care
to send their Merchandises to the Places where they might be Retailed: But the
Intentions of these Men are far from the Designs of God: For instead of Trading
singly for their necessary Maintenance, they do it only to enrich themselves,
and to increase their Glory and Vanity: So that instead of satisfying God by
the Penitence of the Labors and Travels of our Business, by undergoing them we
but increase our Sins; and instead of exercising Charity to our Neighbor in
giving him Wages for his Entertainment, People take their greatest Advantages
from the Workman, and they give him as little as they can for his Labor. And
thus we do not accomplish Penitence, nor yet exercise Charity to our Neighbor;
but we Toil and Labor for the Goods of this Miserable Life as if we were
Created for it, though we ought only to pass through it as Travelers 1 Pet. 2.
11.
and Pilgrims. But we change all the Orders that God has established; and
instead of sighing here in the Spirit of Penitence, we desire to Rule at our
Pleasure; and instead of loving our Neighbor as our selves, we deny him
sometimes Wages for his Labor, that we may enrich our selves the more, seeking
nothing but our own Interest, without regarding the Loss or Inconveniency of
our Neighbor: A certain Evidence that Charity is dead among Christians, even
among Churchmen, who as the Fathers of Christians, and the Pastors of their
Souls, should undertake Offices and Benefices out of pure Charity, 1 Pet. 5. 1,
etc.
to Teach the Ignorant in the matter of their Salvation, and also to accomplish
their own Penitence, in Laboring and Traveling to gain Souls to God, as the
Apostles did. But instead of doing this, they seek after the Benefices that
have the greatest Revenues, and the least Toil; and instead of Laboring in the
Lord's Vineyard, they seek their Rest and Ease, doing as little Penitence as
they can to satisfy God, as every one is obliged to do for himself: For their
is neither Priest, Religious, Pope, Cardinal, Bishop, Prebend, nor any other,
of whatsoever State or Condition, who is not obliged to accomplish his
Penitence here: For all having fallen in Adam, are subject to the Penitence
that was enjoined him, which ought to be known by all Men. The Saints did
always Labor; Jesus Christ himself did so Mark 6. 3.
: His Apostles and Disciples never gave themselves Ease while they lived in
this Life of Penitence. For that great Bishop and Father of Christians, the
Apostle St. Paul says, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
that he was never chargeable to any, but gained his Bread by working with his
own Hands, besides the Travels and Labors which he did undergo 2 Cor. 11. 23.
etc.
to Teach the ignorant the Doctrine of the Gospel, performing thus Col. 1. 24.
his Penitence by his Labor, for his own Sins, and exercising Charity to his
Neighbor by the Sweat and Labor of Troublesome Voyages. Consider, Sir, how
far Men are now from observing the Ordinances of God? How every one strives to
resist them. For neither Small nor Great submits to Labor to perform his
Penitence, but all willingly Labor to gain Money, or to take their Pleasures,
or to make themselves be Honored in this Miserable World; regarding more those
Things which pass away, than those which are Eternal, or to say better,
regarding and obeying more our own Will than the Will and Ordinances of God. Is
it a Wonder if such Sins draw down the Vengeance of God upon our guilty Heads,
since no Body will undergo the Penitence that God has enjoined to all Mankind,
but every one will needs follow his own Will, and Labor to make himself happy
in this Miserable Life, which was given us to do Penitence in, and not to take
our Pleasures in it? If so many Miseries befell Men for one only Disobedience
that Adam committed, what ought we to expect for so many Crimes and Contempts
of the Ordinances of God, which we commit daily? We are astonished to see the
Beginnings of Sorrows by Wars, and also Disorders and Confusions in States, and
in the whole World, and we ought rather to be astonished at the Goodness of
God, that he endures so long the Rebellion of his Creature Man, who is come to
such a height of Ingratitude that he will no longer acknowledge, in any thing,
the Dependence that he has upon his Creator, but will Enjoy here where he
ought to Suffer, and take his Pleasures where he ought to do Penance: And yet
nevertheless, dare lift up his Head, and believe that he shall have Eternal
Life, notwithstanding of his Ingratitude, and his Disobedience to him who alone
can save him! We would make God to become unjust, if we could: For we will not
at all depend upon him, but upon our own Will: Neither will we suffer and do
Penance in this World, but rather Enjoy and Reign in it: And notwithstanding
of all these Oppositions to God, we would oblige him to save us! Which would be
against his Righteousness: Because Salvation belongs only to those who resign
their Wills to that of God, and who do and fulfill the Penance that God himself
has enjoined us. Which no Body does: And all the World say, That they shall be
Saved. In which every one deceives himself* For God will still exercise his
Exact Righteousness without respect of Persons: He cannot save those who are
not Resigned to his Will, no more than those who will not not fulfill here the
Penance which Sin has merited: Because he will still accomplish his perfect
Righteousness: Therefore Jesus Christ says, Mat. 7. 21.
, Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
but he who shall do the Will of my Father; which is no other, but that Man of
his own Free Will subject his Will to Gods Disposal, who having ordained him to
gain his Bread by the Sweat of his Face, will never change his Ordinances: For
he is unchangeable: And if Man withdraw himself from him, God in Reason and by
an Upright Judgment will reject him; since Man has no Right to deny this
Dependence upon his God: from whom he has received all Things, and himself.

I asked her, Whether our Salvation depended only upon this Resignation of our
Will to that of God?

She said: Yes, Sir, our Salvation Psalm. 31. 6.
depends solely on this Resignation of our Will to that of God: For it
comprehends all the Laws, and all sort of Virtues: Because having resigned our
Will to the Will of God, we live no Gal. 2. 20.
longer, but God lives in us, who works all his Will without opposition. He
Acts in us; He Labors in us, and satisfies Romans 8. 26.
our Penitence: So that the Soul has nothing more to do, but to receive from
God, and delight its self in the Operations which he works in it Heb. 13. 21.
; and needs not any longer seek for means of its Salvation without its self,
for it possesses the Giver thereof. The Soul that is resigned to the Will of
God, does possess all sort of Virtues, since God is pleased still to exercise
his Goodness, and to give his Graces where he finds no longer any opposition.
He Adorns the Soul with all sort of Virtues, which he Infuses in it with all
the Gifts and Fruits of the Holy Spirit: So that the Soul which is Resigned to
God, has no longer need of any Laws, or Rules, or Means; because God does
govern the same immediately and independently from all Things. To this
Dependence only our Salvation is annexed, without which we cannot obtain it:
Because this is the only Thing that God demands of Man, and he will never
demand any other thing to make him eternally happy, neither shall he ever
obtain Salvation without this Dependence: Because he who denies it to God, is
rebellious and unthankful, while he will not depend upon him from whom he holds
all that he has. If he dye in this Ingratitude, he must by straight Justice go
to Hell, since he denies God a Thing which is so lawfully due to him, as the
Dependence of a Creature upon its Creator. Nothing can ever be demanded that
is more equitable, and nothing can be more damnable than to use our Free Will
in prejudice of the Designs that God had, in creating Man Ruler over all,
provided he acknowledged his Dependence upon the Will of God. And as Adam lost
himself by quitting this Dependence, so all Men ruin themselves who do not
submit their Will to that of God: Because their Salvation depends on doing
this, and not on many other things which they teach us as necessary to
Salvrtion: All which cannot save us without this Dependence: For his Law cannot
save us, nor all our Devotions and Means, unless they bring us to this
Dependence of our Wills on the Will of God: All other Things put together
cannot save us.

I said to her, That Men were very blind in this Matter, and very far out of
the True Way: For they do not suppose, That we must have our Will resigned to
God thus independently from our own; but that to be saved it is enough, to
acknowledge, That God is Sovereign over all, and that also we keep his
Commandments.

She said: Sir, I greatly pity the Blindness of Men: Because they go astray
under false Suppositions of their Salvation. This is Faith to believe that God
is the Sovereign of all Things: But this Faith is not sufficient for Salvation:
It must be Jam. 2. 22, 24, 26.
accompanied with the Works of Faith, that according to our Belief, we may give
to God the sovereign and absolute Dominion of our Will, and that he may thereby
operate his Will in us. This Resignation is the Work of our Faith: Without this
Work we have only a dead Faith, which cannot save us, but would serve for our
greater Condemnation: For Luke 12. 47.
, He who knew his Masters Will, and did it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes. To know that God is the Sovereign of all Things, and not to yield up
our Will to be governed by him, is worse than not to know his Sovereignty:
Because this Faith and Belief obliges us to resign our selves wholly to him;
whereas the Ignorance of this Faith might in some manner excuse us, for a time,
because we are obliged to search and find out all things necessary for our
Salvation: If we be ignorant of them at one time, we must study to learn them
at another: For Ignorance does not excuse Sin. God has given us an
Understanding for no other End but to Know and Love him, and to know what is
necessary for Salvation. If we apply it to other Things we are deceived and
amused by the Enemy, who is well pleased to divert our Understandings to
Earthly Things, that we may perish through Ignorance, or by the Straying of our
Minds. He who thinks to be saved because he has not Killed, Stolen, nor
committed the other Sins contained in the Decalogue, is greatly deceived* For
these things are not 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10.
spoken but for Malefactors, who quitted a Dependence upon God to follow their
own Wills, in doing which they fell into all the Sins contained in the Ten
Commandments: Which moved the Goodness of God to give them this Decalogue, that
they might discover their Sins, and abstain from them in Time coming. For
before these Sins God never gave any other Law to Man but this of resigning his
Will to the Will of God: So that he who should abstain from committing the Sins
contained in the Decalogue, should not be saved if withal he did not* resign
his own Will to that of God: because it is not enough to depart from Evil; we
must also do Good; and having no Good but what comes from God, of necessity,
that we may do Good, we must be resigned to him, because our own Will leads us
always to Evil. By which it appears clearly, that the Resignation of our Will
to that of God is the only Mean of our Salvation; and that no Body shall ever
obtain it by any other way than by this Resignation of Will to God.

I said to her, That this being so, it had been desirable, that never any thing
else had been Taught Men: And that so many other Precepts and Means had made
them hope for Salvation without Ground.

She said: It is true, Sir, It had been better never to have been instructed in
any thing else but in the Obligation we have to resign our Will to that of God.
This was purely true, and Man could not fall into any Error by this Doctrine;
but it was also very good, that after we had quitted our Dependence God gave us
the Ten Commandments, that by their Means we might know our Faults, without the
knowledge of which we might have perished through Ignorance, as every one does
now by being ignorant That to be saved our Will must depend upon God. For every
one uses his own Will at his pleasure, without considering, that in doing this
he cannot be saved. Even so they went on in all the sorts of sins contained in
the Ten Commandments, and in the mean time believed they were resigned to God,
as we now believe we are, while we follow our own Will* These Commandments were
necessary Means to make us return to a Dependence upon God: For all those Sins
do hinder this Dependence, and do oppose the Works which God works in us. They
must be removed before God have the Dominion of our Souls, and ere he can
govern them according to his Will: Even so we must deny our own Will, if we
would obtain Salvation: For it is still opposed to the Will of God, doing its
Works either at the Will of the Devil, or else according to our natural
Inclinations. Which cannot be but evil. If they had only taught the Commands of
God as necessary Means to be resigned to him, this had been a desirable Thing:
For by showing that whosoever is resigned to God, does not Kill, nor Steal, nor
do any thing contrary to the Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth of God, they
would discover to all those who did commit such Things that they forsook their
Dependence upon God, and followed their own Wills; that the knowledge of this
might make them return to God, whom they had forsaken. But many other Means
which they have taught as necessary for Salvation, prove rather Means to hinder
it: Because many outward Devotions, the Ornaments of Churches, Images, Beads, a
great many Books and Prayers, with a Thousand other Practices which neither God
nor Jesus Christ taught, prove great Hindrances of the Resignation of our Will
to that of God: For instead of having our Spirit free to Jet God Act in it what
he shall find meet, we fill it with our own Affections, and keep our Will fixed
to some Image, Prayer, or Devotion, which pleases our Humor. And thus our Soul
not being empty, God cannot fill it. Thus we live and dye in amusing our selves
with the Hopes of Salvation without any ground: Because it ought to be founded
only upon the Resignation of our Will to that of God. That which we least think
of is the most necessary.

I said to her, Since this Resignation of our Will was the only thing needful,
we ought to fix upon it, and that neither Books, nor Study, nor any other Means
were any longer fit for attaining to Salvation; and that Man was very void of
Judgment in burthening himself with so many other things.

She said: Sir, Man is truly void of Judgment, while he amuses himself with so
many different Things, since there is but one thing necessary Luke 10. 42.
. All the rest is superfluous, and useless. There is no need of Studies, nor
Benefices, that we may resign our selves to God, nor of Honors, nor Riches,
nor Places and Dignities: For all this respects the Earth only and Humane
Accommodations. A little Aliment will serve for this short Life. Alas! why
should we vex and amuse our selves to make up a Fortune here, which must remain
on the Earth, and all Humane Delights must dye with us! Is it not a great Folly
to embroil our selves in Places, Offices, and Benefices, for so short a Time as
this Life lasts, during which we have no need of any thing, but a little Meat
and Drink, with some Clothes to cover our Body. No Body has need of any thing
else, neither King nor Pope, more than others, with all their Wealth and
Grandeurs, but this little Aliment; and whether we leave behind us at death
Land or Money, it is all the same thing. The Body rots in the Ground, and we
carry nothing away, the Rich no more than the Poor, the Noble than the Beggar.
Death levels all without any Preference. Must not a Man be very void of
Judgment to desire Goods which are a Burden to us, painful to get, troublesome
to preserve, and grievous to be parted with? What a folly does he commit who
from his Youth gives himself to the Study of Letters, or other Sciences, on
design to attain to some Office and Dignity, and when he has attained it,
reckons himself happy? As if any Happiness could be found in Miseries! And does
not discover that truly the Wealthiest and the Greatest are the most miserable,
and subject to more Cares and Vexations, to more Fatigues, and greater Accounts
to be charged on their Souls and Consciences: For he who has but a small Labor
sufficient for the maintenance of his Life, without pretending to more, is a
thousand times happier than a Rich and Great Man in this World, and has also a
far less Account to render to God: For Offices and Riches lay great Obligations
on him that possesses them: So that what we imagine to be a Happiness, brings
upon us great Mischief, robbing us of our Time, which ought to be employed only
in fulfilling our Penitence, and also exposing our Souls to many Hazards of
their Salvation; and it wholly hinders the Resignation of our Will to that of
God. For he who covets the Offices, Honors, Riches and Grandeurs of this
World, 1 John 2. 15,
cannot be resigned to God, because all these things proceed from our own Will,
seeing that of God aims at no other thing but Eternity, whereas all that is
Temporal and passes away, is opposite to it. We would laugh to see a Pilgrim
heap on his Head or Shoulders the Earth which he should only tread upon, that
he may advance in his Journey; and we think we are very wise in Loading our
selves with Gold and Silver, which should only serve us for a Footstool, and
we oppress our Understanding with Cares, Studies and so many different
Distractions; whereas we have but one thing only to care for, which is to
resign our Will to that of God, and Matthew. 6. 25, etc.
to live without Care in this Resignation of our Will to his. This is all that
God will always demand of Man, without obliging him to any other Thing: And
when we amuse our selves with so many different Things, we Act against the
Command of God, and we follow our own Will. For one will covet to become an
Attorney, Advocate, or Counselor; another to be a Merchant, Shopkeeper, or
Tradesman; one becomes a Priest, another enters into a Religious Order; another
desires to be a Prebend, Bishop, Cardinal, or Pope: And when they have attained
to all these Pretensions, they are only filled with Wind: Because all this
passes away, Psalm. 146. 3, 4. John 2. 17.
as the Vapor that vanishes in the Air: And very often when we think to take
our ease under the Favor of some great Fortune, we immediately go down into
the Grave, where Death puts an End to all our Employs, and renders all our
Pretensions vain: For by following our own Will, we can never have acquired any
thing for Heaven; and God would not be just if he should reward eternally the
Works that we do for the Earth, or with respect to the Creatures. We are
deceived if we believe it; because all that respects the Earth is recompensed
on the Earth.

The Sixteenth Conference,
Shows, How the Resignation of our Will to that of God, is a Continual Prayer;
that it supplies all particular Doctrines and Practices; and that the Gospel
directs us only to the removal of the Obstacles which hinder it, the discovery
of which is necessary.

I asked her, If it was needful to use any longer the Means of Devotion when
one is resigned to God? If it was any longer needful to Pray, to Watch, to
Fast, to go to Church, to frequent the Sacraments, to procure Indulgences, to
Honor Images, especially that of the Virgin Mary, which Devotion they tell us
is necessary for Salvation, with many other things which seem to be good?

She said: Sir, The Resignation of our Will to that of God supplies all Things;
and when we are arrived at this Resignation, we have no longer need of any
Means: Because God works then in us what pleases him; and we have no longer
need to Gal. 2. 20.
Act, but to be still and passive. Our Devotions are then without ceasing, and
we pray always when we are always resigned to God: For Prayer is nothing else
but an Elevation of the Spirit unto him, and it is elevated unto him as long as
we receive all from his Hands, and are pleased every Moment with what he
ordains. This is the continual Prayer which he demands of Man, saying, That we
Luke 18. 1.
must always pray, and not faint. He who lifts up his Heart to God only when
he is in the Church, or says his Pater Noster's, does not pray always:
Because he cannot be always in the Church, nor mutter his Prayers from Morning
till Night: But he who resigns his Will to that of God prays continually,
whether he eat, drink, walk, or take his rest: He is always by his Will united
to God, and has no need of other Means* because he is arrived at the End, where
Means would be a Hindrance to him. He still watches Cant. 5. 2. Luke 12. 35, 36.
when he is ready at all times to follow the Will of God. He sasts always.
when he never takes but what is simply necessary for him in which God directs
him. He is always in the Church when he is continually in the presence of God.
He frequents also the Sacraments as long as his Spirit converses with God, who
comprehends in himself all that is Holy or Sacred. He has the Remission and
Indulgence of all his Sins by the Resignation that he makes of his Will to that
of his God, because he can never attain to this Resignation without forsaking
all sort of Evil; and this Prove. 28. 13.
is true Repentance, which obtains the Remission of all Sins. He has no need of
Images when his Eye and his Heart is fixed upon the Will of God, which makes him
remember whatsoever is good and just; and he has no longer need of
Intercessours for his Salvation, since he is united to the Will of Him who only
can give it.

I said to her, That I saw clearly enough that all our Salvation and Happiness
did depend upon this Resignation of our Will to that of God: But that it was a
Loss that this was not taught to all the World, who believed they were sure of
their Salvation by the Means of Devotions.

She said: Sir, It is a Lamentable thing that all the World should perish for
want of knowing the Truth. Secular Persons think they are good when they Trade
and do their Business without Fraud, though they never consider that they are
sent into this World to lead a Life of Penitence, and are created to be always
united in Will to God. Churchmen or Religions Persons believe they shall be
saved, provided they go to Church and perform their customary Devotions,
without thinking that to be saved they must be resigned to the Will of God. And
thus both the one and the other perish through Ignorance, because all in
general are creared to be resigned in Will to the Will of God, depending
immediately upon him; and not on other Things: And though we are obliged to
Labor in this Life, yet this is but accidentally, and to satisfy the
Penitence due for our Sins; not that God has created us for Labor, but only
ordained it for Penitence: And instead of fulfilling it by our Labor, we
increase our Sins by the same Means by which we ought to purge them, glorying
in our Chains, and rejoicing in our Vallie of Tears: And we will Act, where we
ought only to Suffer; and Rule, where we ought to be Subject. This falls out
through our Ignorance, for we do not know the True way of Salvation, and we
imagine we shall find it by Means which divert us from it instead of bringing
us to it. They go sometimes to a Cloister to find the sure Means of Salvation,
and in the mean time all the Exercises that must be performed are often
Diversions from God: For so many outward Rules and Gestures prove great
Hindrances to the Conversation the Soul ought to have with its God; and these
Studied Devotions are often Hypocrisies. If we bow the Knee to show that we
adore and pray to God, while our Thoughts are far from him, this is pure Mat.
7. 8.
Hypocrisy: If we give Honor or do Reverence to some Image without raising
our Thoughts to that which it represents to us, this is pure Idolatry: If we
pray to God with the Lips, and the Heart is far from him, it is a Contempt of
God: If we use Mortifications of the Body, without the Spirit of Penitence, it
is the Pride of Life, for we desire to be esteemed more than others because of
our particular Pennances, when God has appointed us all in general common Ones
which would be much more for our Salvation: For he who willingly suffers Heat,
Cold, and other Incommodities of the Elements, or of our Body, does merit much
more than he who chooses Fastings, Watchings, and other things according to his
own desires: Because these things are done by our own Will, and will be
recompensed only in this World: But the Pennances that are common to all Men
are Ordained and Chosen of God for saving Penitences. In which these Penitents
do greatly deceive themselves in following their own Will, and often will not
bear patiently with a Word that contradicts their Behavior. The Blindness of
Men now may truly be bewailed; for in all Things they take Falsehood for Truth,
and the way of Damnation for that of Salvation. Which would be easy to make
appear to all the World, in case they would give Ear to it: For there is but
one only thing needful, which is, for Men to resign their Will to that of God:
But they are so preoccupied with so many different sorts of Means, which they
persuade them are good Things, that they should think they did Evil in
resigning their Will to that of God, choosing rather to submit it to a Man
subject to his Passions, having forgotten that the Holy Spirit said, Jer. 17. 5.
Woe to the Man that puts his confidence in Man. Take, Sir, this Lesson to your
self, and put not your Confidence in any but God. For Psalm. 116. 11.
all Men are Liars and cannot give Salvation to those to whom they promise it.
We have but one only Savior, who is Jesus Christ; and one only Essential
Commandment, which is, to DEPEND UPON GOD IN ALL THINGS: If Men have taught so
many different Things, and filled the World with Books to show that we must
depend upon them, do not believe them, for one thing only is needful Luke 10. 42
.

I asked her, Why she had shown me so many different things since we began our
Conferences, seeing there is one thing only needful, as I am certainly
persuaded?

She said: Sir, I never taught you any other Means of Salvation but the
Doctrine of the Gospel, which is sufficient to bring back the greatest Sinners
in the World to a Dependence upon God: Because that Doctrine teaches how to
remove all that might hinder this Resignation to God: And when it says that
Mat. 16. 24.
we must deny our selves, it tells us that we must be resigned to God; and in
saying that we must take up our Cross, it shows the Penitence that we are
obliged to perform in this World; and when we consider the whole Life of Jesus
Christ, we are thereby sufficiently taught that we must not rule in this World,
nor seek after Dignities, Offices or Traffic, nor build Cloisters or other
Edifices, nor lay up Riches here: For his whole Life and Conversation was quite
another thing, and he has not at all taught us the Customs that are observed at
present; but Goodness Mat. 11. 28.
, Humility, and Mat. 8. 20.
Poverty. These Things are the true Means to attain to this Dependence upon
God, because they remove the Hindrances of our Soul, that thereafter it may
resign it self the more easily and freely unto him. Jesus Christ has taught
that we are to forsake many Luke 14. 26, 33.
Things which prove Hindrances of this Resignation to God: For he who loves the
Riches, Honors, Pleasures and Delights of this World, cannot be resigned to
God; nor yet the Ibid.
who loves his Father, his Country, or even his own Life. By reason therefore
of the Blindness of Men, it was needful that he should manifest to them in
particular what they ought to forsake that they may be resigned to God. For if
Jesus Christ had only said simply that a Man must be resigned to God, every one
would have said or imagined, that they lived in this Resignation; because they
have not Faith but in Speculation, for they imagine they are resigned to God,
when they live in a Dependence on their own Will, or that of some Person to
whom they submit: And since Jesus Christ came to bring Light into the World, it
was necessary that he should open our Eyes by all the Means contained in his
Gospel, that he might make us see how many Obstacles we put to this DEPENDENCE.

I said to her, She had declared to me many things besides those which are
contained in the Gospel: And since Dependence only upon God was sufficient for
Salvation, I might very well have remained ignorant of the Sins of Men, the
poor Estate of the Church, the Dominion of Antichrist, with so many other
things, which do not concern my Salvation.

She said: Sir, You imagine that these Things do not concern your Salvation,
because they do not respect it directly, but indirectly. They respect it in
such a manner, as I believe it would be impossible for you to obtain it if you
were ignorant of the truth of so many dangerous Evils. You would build your
Salvation upon falfe. Suppositions of being resigned to God, when there were no
such thing; and if you have not the knowledge of Evil, you cannot avoid it, but
will be deceived to your Loss. For the Wickedness of Men is now so covered over
with Virtue, that it is hard to distinguish the one from the other. If you
perceive not that Men are deceitful, they will deceive you every Moment; and if
you believe not that they have forsaken God, you will imitate them, believing
that they do well: This pious Opinion of your Neighbor will make you follow
Evil insensibly. Thus we must not walk blindly in the matter of our Salvation:
For you have more need to discover Evil, that you may avoid it, than Good, to
imitate it: Because if your Will were resigned to God without knowing the
Wickedness of Men now, they would certainly draw you back from this Resignation
to make you take your own Will: And this under pious Pretexts: For they will
reckon you to be deceived if you do not follow their ways of Acting; and if
you be resigned to God, you will contract his Qualities of Righteousness,
Goodness, and Truth: Which Men will not at all acknowledge, but will take your
Righteousness to be Selfpreciseness; and your Goodness to be Silliness and want
of Wit; and your Truth will be reckoned Detraction as soon as by it you shall
discover their Evils: And all this they shall do so dexterously, that you shall
be puzzled to know, whether you will not do better to follow their Sentiments
than the Direction of God. Therefore it is so necessary that you know the
Wickedness of Men, that you be not deceived by it. And if I have declared to
you the poor Condition in which the Roman Church is now, I have done it more
out of Charity than to make known to you the Works of God: Because so long as
you believe that this Roman Church is the Holy Church, you will take up with a
Dependence upon Her instead of depending upon God; and will indirectly follow
the Devil, while you believe you follow God: And if I had not declared to you
that we are now in the Reign of Antichrist, you would certainly be deceived,
because he Acts his greatest Villainies under the Cloak of Holiness, and
introduces his Adherents into the most Eminent Preferments and Dignities of the
Church: That Mat. 24. 24.
he may seduce the very-Elect, if it were possible: For now more than Three
Fourths of People are bound to the Devil Rev. 13. 4.
by express Covenant. And if you be ignorant of all these Truths, by what Means
shall you avoid their Snares? As long as the Devil shall tempt you by evil
Thoughts, you will not be in danger of following his Suggestions; but when he
has on his Side, the Priests and the Religious, the Bishops and other Prelates
of the Church, you will easily let your self be governed by them, thinking that
they are guided by this Spirit of God, though in effect, by that of the Devil.
By all which Things you may sufficiently discover the need you have to be
informed of all these Evils when you desire to resign your self to God, or else
your Resignation will not last: Because Men, the Church and Antichrist, would
very shortly find the Means to draw you back, as they do almost all
well-disposed Persons, perswadeing them, that it is fit still to have a good
Opinion of our Neighbor, and that we must also depend upon the Church, and
that the Priests and the Religious are true Members of it: Though in the Sight
of God there is no such thing: For all Men together are as a Deluge of Vices,
and the Roman Church is the Babylon of Confusion, and many of her Pillars are
the Members of Antichrist. This being supposed, Sir, do you not think I had
reason to declare to you all these things in particular, that you may not be
deceived by so great an Abyss of Evils, which would be but too sufficient to
hinder you from this RESIGNATION TO THE WILL OF GOD, which is the only thing
necessary for Salvation, to which you can never attain without discovering and
removing all the Hindrances which out of great Charity I have manifested unto
you?

The Seventeenth Conference,
Is a Recapitulation of all the preceding Matters, their Scope and Use.

I thanked her greatly for the Goodness she had shown me in telling me so many
things so profitable for my Salvation, promising to observe them as much as I
can.

She said: Sir, In this Practice consists your Salvation: For it matters little
to know all the Conduct of the World, and all its Sciences and Secrets: If all
this serve not as Means to work out your Salvation, all Eccles. 12. 8, 9, 12.
is Vanity and Amusement: Even Knowledge will serve for our greater
Condemnation when we do not put in practice what we know to be good, and do not
avoid and hate what we know to be evil. I would not have enlarged in declaring
to you so many things of good and evil, if I had not observed in you a desire
to put them in practice: For to know the Essence of Virtue without practicing
it, is nothing else but vain Speculation; and to know Evil without avoiding it,
is a worse Curiosity, which fills our Understanding without any Fruit. I have
spoken You will find the Places where all these Matters are treated of by the
Index.
of true Virtue, that you may follow it rather than what is false; and also of
the Roman Church, that you may not follow her as if she were Holy. I have told
you of the Reign of Antichrist, that you may not let your self be deceived by
false Appearances of Piety: declaring to you that more than Three Fourths of
the World are in confederacy with him, that you may work out your Salvation
with Fear, and may trust your self to No body, for the most Wicked are the
greatest Hypocrites that they may deceive the better. I have told you, That we
are in the Judgment, and that the last Plagues are begun; that you may not put
off your Conversion to another time; for that which remains to us is short. I
have told you that Jesus Christ will come upon Earth to judge the Good and the
Wicked, and that he will root out all Evil, that you may aspire after that
Happiness, and may decline the Misery of those who shall be sent into Hell. I
have told you that Jesus Christ will abide upon Earth, to Reign there with all
the Just for ever: that the Expectation of this Glorious Coming may give you
Strength to bear with patience the Rods and Tribulations which must shortly
fall out, such as the like has not yet been seen. I have told you, that the
World will last for ever, and that none of the Creatures shall perish in their
Kinds: that the Hope of your Blessedness may not be founded upon imaginary
Goods, and that you may in some manner comprehend what Contentment the Souls
and Bodies of the Blessed shall have when all Malignity shall be removed from
every thing, and all the Elements and other Creatures shall serve for the
Delight of Man, who shall rule over all, being united to Jesus Christ in Body
and Soul: And this, that you may willingly despise the Delights of this present
Life, in the Hope of those of which are to come. I have told you, that the Jews
shall be converted to God, and shall be his People; and that the Catholics
shall be cast off and rejected: that you may never despise any Body, since the
Jews, the most despised of all Nations, shall be the most exalted; and of
Stones shall be made Matthew. 3. 9.
Children of Abraham; and that you may willingly quit the Maxims of the Roman
Church, which for her evil Deeds shall very shortly be rooted out. I have told
you, that Man is created for no other end but to take his delight with God:
that you may no longer seek for any thing upon Earth, and that you may despise
all Things, to enjoy this Conversation with God; having told you also, that
this present Life is only a time of Penitence, that all your Labors may be
done in this Spirit of Penitence, to which God has subjected all Men for their
Sins. In fine, I have told you, Sir, That all the Laws, the Prophets, and all
Virtues, do consist in the Resignation of our Will to that of God: that you may
not be distracted by so many other different things, but may pass your Life
joyfully under this Dependence upon God, which is the least thing we can give
to God for so many good Things we have received from him, which he permits us
to enjoy provided we will depend upon him in all Things. I have also shown you,
That so many diverse Means which the Priests, Monks, and the Religious have
taught us for working out our Salvation, are things that withdraw us from it,
by which we are seduced and deceived: For they make us depend upon Men more
than upon God: Which is an Idolatry that has infected all Christendom, in which
no Body studies any longer to resign his Will to that of God, but every one
enjoys and disposes of Things at his own Will, as if he were his own Sovereign.
One will be Great, and another Rich; one will Rule over others, and will be
Obeyed and Served; one goes in a Coach, another upon Horse: In short, Every one
will follow his Delights and Pleasures according to his own Inclination,
believing notwithstanding that they work out their Salvation, because the
Priests and Monks promise it to them. These are new Gods and new Saviors, who
have changed the Order established by God, our Father and Creator, and the
Duties which his Son Jesus came to reach us They lead us in the Way to Hell,
persuading us that it is that to Paradise: With these Persuasions every one
suffers himself to be deceived and seduced, there being none now in Christendom
who believe that they cannot be saved without resigning their Will to that of
God: This nevertheless is an Eternal Truth, that will never change let Man do
what he will: If he do not acknowledge the Dependence he has upon God in all
Things, he shall never be saved; and if he do not take up the Counsels of the
Gospel as the true Means taught by God for returning to this Dependence, he
shall never be saved: For God teaches nothing that is useless, but only Things
precisely necessary, to which all the World ought to submit, This no Body does,
for they believe Men more than God: Though the most part are Ruled by the
Devil, who gains the most part of Men to himself by the Means of these wild
Shepherds, who abandon the Flock to the Power of the Infernal Wolf to destroy
them with themselves for ever, taking them off from God to draw them to
themselves. I have told you also, That there are no longer any true Christians
upon Earth: that you may become one, and may not blindly suppose your self to
be so: For there can be no Christians, but they who obey the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ: All others are deceived in believing they are: For God does not change
upon the Changes of Men: We are now as much obliged to depend upon God, as
Adam, the First Man, was; and as much obliged to Labor the Ground as he,
though we had committed no other Sin but what he did in us: We must also now
follow the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, as the Primitive Christians did, because
this Doctrine is immutable, and will never change: Therefore he who does not
follow it is no true Christian, and cannot be saved without becoming so. No
Body should flatter himself in this Matter. We must imitate Jesus Christ, or
John. 15. 6.
perish for ever: Because, both by the Will of Adam and by our own, we are all
fallen into this Sin of Ingratitude, that we will not depend upon God: And
therefore we have need to take up the Law of the Gospel, that we may return to
a Dependence upon God, which is so just and reasonable. Though God had never
demanded it of Man, he is bound both by Divine and Humane Right to render to
God this Submission of his Will; and he would certainly do it if he were not
diverted from it by Men like himself: Because even Natural reason obliges him
to depend upon him from whom he receives all Things. This, Humane Wisdom has
diverted, having found out so many Reasons and Arguments to favor our
Self-will, that all People believe they may lawfully follow it without
offending him who has reserved it for himself. These, Sir, are all blind who
lead the blind, and both fall into the ditch Mat. 15. 14.
. See that you never be of that Crew; but believe in the Light that God
manifests unto you. I have spoken TRUTH to you, not out of an Affectation to be
believed or followed, but from a design and desire of your Salvation. All that
I have said, is necessary for you, if you will use it well: Because we cannot
Love God without knowing him, nor follow Virtue without conceiving what it is:
In like manner we cannot avoid Delusion without discovering it, nor escape the
Snares of the Devil without turning away from them. Make a good use of all
these Things, and you shall be happy both in this World and the other. I doubt
not but my way of speaking may be somewhat uneasy, to you, because it agrees
not with your Philosophy, Theology, or other Scholastic Sciences: But believe
me, I never professed any Humane Sciences: I choose rather to be ignorant of
them than know them, and if I could learn in a Quarter of an Hour all the
Learning of the Schools, I would not employ even that Little Time about them:
Because I know that Humane Learning is a great Hindrance to the Holy Spirit:
and also the Time is come that Isa. 29. 14.
God will destroy the Wisdom of the Wise, and abolish the Prudence of the
Prudent: And therefore I cannot use fine Discourses, but such only as make the
plain Truth be understood: Words and Terms may be contended about, but not the
real Meaning, which is true. I will not dispute with the Learned, because God
will overcome them very shortly by the Effects of my Words; nor will I polish
my Language, because simple Plainness pleases God more than the greatest
Eloquence, which is subject to Vanity: For he that speaks that he may talk
well, is full of Vainglory: Renouncing which, I seek nothing but plain Words
that may express my Thoughts.

I believe, Sir, you have understood me well enough, and I can tell you no more
whereby I may cooperate to your Salvation: There remains nothing but to put it
in practice. This you will do more easily in a Solitude, or Desert, than
elsewhere, because of the Corruption of Men, who prove great Hindrances to us;
and also because of the Power the Devil has now over their Minds, whereby he
may infatuate all those who are yet sound and entire. Flee therefore, Sir, to
avoid these Dangers, and be afraid lest you be diverted from your good Purpose,
and do not look back Genesis 19. 26.
like Lot's Wife, who was changed into a Pillar of Salt. Yet a little
Penitence, and then God will deliver you from it, to enter into the Joy that
shall never end, This is what I wish you, and bid you. Adieu.

I was troubled to hear that she would leave me, entreating she would not
withdraw from me, since I resolved to follow what she had taught me, which was
nothing else but the denying of my self, and a dependence upon God.

She said: Sir, It will be more for your purity to stay alone: Because I am but
a Creature as you are, and we must cleave to the Creator only without
Interruption: He will lead you at his pleasure, provided you be resigned to his
Will; you need no more Instructions from any. I have told you abundantly what
may bring you to an Union with God. To speak more would be henceforth but a
Repetition of what is already said, which would rob us both of our Time, and
that would be better employed in the Practice than in Repetitions. Leave me to
my Liberty, and take also yours. God did not create us together, He will Save
us though we be separate in Body. True Union consists in a conformity of the
Will with God, and not in particular Conferences. I must confess I have often
withdrawn from conversing with God to speak to you of so many diverse Things:
But I judged them necessary for your Salvation; and therefore they were not
uneasy to me: But now that you know the Truth of many Things, it is not
expedient to speak to you any longer. God will still teach you sufficiently,
provided you continue faithful to him. He never denied what Men ask of him for
their Salvation. You ought to have no other Designs. Let the Psalm. 46. 3, etc.
World be overturned; Let the Roman Church perish; Let the Elements be moved
against Sinners; all this cannot touch you, provided you keep firmly united to
God. Quit all Things willingly to find this Union. It matters little whether I
am with you or not: Provided you be with God, He should suffice you: For he
only can save you, and no Body else. There is always a Mixture when the
Creature cleaves to its like. I often despised those who cleave to others, even
though it was under some pious Pretext. I will not do my self what I despise in
others.

I said to her, She had promised to explain to me the 24th. Chapter of St.
Matthew: That she ought at least, to give me it before she leave me.

She said: Sir, I do not willingly fail in my Promise. Give me the Text of that
Chapter, and I will explain it Word by Word; and I wish that all sincere
Persons may see it, that they may discover that this Chapter speaks of the
present Time. Every one reads it without understanding it: Nevertheless, there
are fair Advertisements to beware of this dangerous Time in which we live at
present. These are not Tales made at pleasure, but Truths come from the Mouth
of Jesus Christ himself, which every one ought to Learn, and follow the
Counsels that he gives: They are most saving, (...) for escaping Luke 21. 36.
the Evils to come, which hang (...) our Heads. I must give it in Writing for
an eternal Memorial, that it may be observed whether all that is contained in
it shall not come to pass in our Time. Do not oppose what you shall find
contrary to your Learning, or old Impressions, because the Holy Spirit will
give the perfect Understanding of all the Holy Scriptures, which has not been
hitherto heard of: For we are fallen into the Fullness of Time. If you receive
them with Humility of Heart, you shall understand all Things perfectly. But you
must become an Infant, and cease from your own Wisdom: For God reveals (c) his
Secrets to Babes* and hides them from the Great and Wise of the Earth. You must
not control the Holy Spirit, or say, Such a Father explains this thus, or
otherwise: Because Fullness is still more than a Portion. You will find what I
shall say more clear than all that the Holy Fathers ever said: Because the Time
is come of the Accomplishment of all Things: But you must simplifie your
Understanding as a little Child, else you cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven.

I brought her the Text of the Gospel, promising entirely to submit my
Understanding as much as was possible, that I might receive the Light of the
Holy Spirit.

She said: Sir, This Submission is the Preparation required: For if you set up
for the Doctor, or for the knowing Man you will oppose the Light of the Holy
Spirit, the Source of all Wisdom. It must always be believed and acknowledged,
that he is wise^ than all the Doctors that ever were in ^he World and that we
learn more by a small ^ay of his Light than by a Hundred Years of very
assiduous Study. Therefore* reckon all 1 Cor. 8. 2.
your Learning Ignorance, and become Matthew. 18. 3. 1 Pet. 2. 2.
as a Child newly born again, that you may receive these new Notices, which
will give you more Light than all the Fathers had together: Because they never
discovered the hid Treasures Mat. 13. 44.
; for the Time was not yet come. Every one spoke of it according to his
Conceit, and not according to what it really was: For it was a Sealed Rev. 5. 1
-- 9.
Book, that none was worthy to open but Jesus Christ himself after he was put
to death and Crucified. To this very Time there is nothing in all the Holy
Scripture fulfilled but this Death, which will make way for the Wonders of God,
that have remained hid till now, and begin to be revealed to those who shall be
humble in Heart: But the Wise Isa. 29. 14.
shall perish with their Wisdom. Therefore, I exhort you, Sir, to Simplicity,
and Submission, that you may be worthy to receive the Light which breaks forth
in our Days, and to behold the Rev. 21. 2.
New Jerusalem descend from Heaven, adorned as a Bride in the Day of her
Espousals. The Alliance Ibid. v. 3.
of God with Men will then be accomplished: The Earth will then be renewed. All
Creatures will quit their Malignity, which shall be confined to the Center of
the Earth Rev. 20. 14, 15.
to torment the Bodies and Souls of all those who would not submit their Wills
to God. They shall receive Pains and Anguish according to the Measure of their
Sins, being overwhelmed with the Malignities which were caused by these Sins.

The Eighteenth Conference,
Speaks of Hell, and of the Damned, which shall be they who have followed their
own Will, which is the cause of all Evil, and that few are disposed to quit it,
that they may resign themselves to God, and receive the Divine Truth.

I asked her, If all Men who will not submit their Will to God shall be
confined to Hell?

She said: Yes, Sir, assuredly they shall: None shall escape Hell Isa. 66. 3, 4.
who have followed their own Will: And this most righteously: For God cannot
save him who withdraws from him, and who with his full Reason, and the Consent
of his Will, will independently follow his own Inclinations, as if he were
Sovereign, and without a Creator. We know well enough we cannot save our
selves, and that our Salvation depends upon God; and yet we hope to be saved,
though we have quitted our Dependence upon God, and adhere to our selves! This
is a false Persuasion which the Devil and the World set before us, to make us
insensible of our Misery. For God will never save him Psalm. 73. 27.
who will not depend upon him. If through Frailty we commit some Acts of
Independence upon God, and afterward repent of them, we may yet hope for
Pardon: But when we see that all Men live and dye in following their own Wills,
and will not leave it off, being readier to murmur against God than to yield up
their Wills to him, he must of necessity render to them according to their
Works. God made no Wisd. 1. 13, 14.
Malignity in the Elements, nor in any other Creatures, having created all good
and perfect: But Sin Romans 5. 12.
and the Selfwill of Man has brought a Malignity into all Things: And therefore
it belongs to him, as being the Work of his Hands: And if it be just to render
to each one what belongs to him, it is necessary that Man have for his Portion
Psalm. 11. 6.
the Malignity of all the Creatures to all Eternity, as being the Works of Isa.
3. 10.
his Hands, that the Fire burn him, the Water swallow him up, the Wind bluster,
the Earth be Thorns to prick him, the Dogs bite him, the Wolf devour him, the
Lion tear him, the Serpent poison him; and all the other Creatures shall spue
out their Malignity upon Man, who brought it upon them, by forsaking his
Dependence upon God.

I said to her, That upon this Supposition, all shall be damned: Because none
resign their Will to God, since every one enjoyes it as much as is possible for
them.

She replied: Sir, I have told you long ago, that Paradise was shut; and that
none did any longer enter into it: Because no Body resigns his Will to that of
God. The Maxims of the Church have so blinded Men's Spirits by so many
different ways of Salvation, that none consider the Obligation that lies on
them to resign their Wills to God. They think to be saved by going to Church,
frequenting the Sacraments, etc. though nevertheless they follow their own Will
in every Thing. This ruins all the World, and has caused the general Judgment:
For God having beheld Psalm. 14. 2, 3.
all the Earth, found not one who was resigned to him, nor so much as one that
did good: All having forsaken Psalm. 81. 12.
God to follow their own Wills. And this general Evil has caused the general
Sentence, which is irrevocable: Because there is Time no longer. If any desires
to be converted, he must make haste: For the Last Times are near their End.
They began when 1 Cor. 10. 11. 1 John 2. 18.
Jesus Christ became Man, and by Grace have continued till now, to give Man a
full Measure, and abundance of Time for his Conversion. Time is come to its
End. Yet Heb. 10. 37.
a little Suffering, and the Judgment will end, and the Wicked shall go to the
Abyss of all Evils Matthew. 25. 46.
, and the Converted to the Enjoyment of all Good, which shall never end, and
that not only spiritual but also bodily and 1 Pet. 3. 13.
material: For all the Creatures will render their Duty to Man, as soon as he
shall pay his Duty to God. They were created to serve for the Delight of Man
Genesis 1. 26.
, as he was created to serve Prove. 8. 31.
for the Delight of God: And as soon as he shall be converted, and enter into a
Dependence upon his God, Isa. 11. 6, etc.
he shall experience that the Beasts and Elements shall submit also to the Will
of Man: For for this they were all created: And if we see the Beasts and
Elements rebel against Man, this is for no other reason but because he rebels
against his God: For else all inferior Things would be entirely subject to
Man, if he were entirely subject to God, even though it were in this Miserable
Life. We have Examples of this in the Life of many Saints, who because they
resigned their Wills to God, had in this Time of Penitence Heb. 11. 34.
the Power to command the Elements, and to be familiar with the Wild Beasts.
One carried Fire without being burnt by it: Another stayed the Sun Josh. 10. 12.
: And several have tamed Wild Beasts, and commanded the Wind and Tempests of
the Sea, with so many other Wonders, playing with Serpents, and recreating
themselves with Birds which assembled by the Command of some Servants of God.
This is a certain Proof, that it is Sin only that gives all the Malignity to
every Thing; and that nothing but the Rebellion that Man has raised against his
God, renders all the Elements and other Creatures Rebels against him. If we
would from this time yield up our Will into God's Hands, and submit our selves
entirely to him, we should immediately find that all Things would subject
themselves to us without any constraint. How greatly does Man wrong himself,
when he will needs dispose of his own Will? He makes himself miserable in this
World, and far more in that to come: Whereas by being willing to depend upon
God, he has all under his Power, together with Eternal Bliss. What Infatuation
of Spirit is it, that we will not do a Thing so good, so just, and so
reasonable, as to resign our Will to that of God! If Men were taught this, as
they are other frivolous Devotions, it would be impossible that any would deny
God so profitable a Submission. But they let themselves be amused by the
Discourses of Men, who propose a Salvation, without being able to give it.
These are those false Christ's and false Prophets of whom Jesus Christ has so
often told, that we must Matthew. 24. 4, 5. 11. 24.
take heed of them, who have deceived all the World, so that none think any
longer of resigning themselves to God, or of doing saving Penitence.

I said to her, There were yet diverse Persons who desired to be resigned to
God, and also to do Penance, which cannot be avoided in this World.

She said: Sir, You take the Bark often for the Wood: For those who say they
will be resigned to God, have nothing but outward Words: For if they were truly
so, they Psalm. 37. 5. 73. 23, 24.
would be governed by God; and would no longer labor for the Earth, but only
for Heaven. Even the Labor that is necessary for the support of Life would be
done only to fulfill their Penitence appointed by God. But when we see them aim
at Places, Honors and Dignities; or Deal and Traffic to acquire Riches or
Pleasures; that one would be a Priest, another a Religious; one build
Cloisters, another Houses, as if he were to abide in them for ever: All these
Things, with a Thousand others, are infallible Evidences that God does not
govern our Will: For he could not move us to make Tabernacles here, since he
has sent us hither only to undergo a short Penitence. He could not incite us to
build what must be so quickly destroyed. Neither Jesus Christ, nor his Apostles
and Disciples built Temples or Houses, being contented with what was simply
necessary. In which the Heathens will rise up against us in the Day of
Judgment, who did so despise the shortness of this Life, that they would not
build Houses, contenting themselves with a Tub to cover them from the Injuries
of the Season: Others threw their Money into the Sea, not judging it necessary
for so short a Life, though since that Time ours is much shortened. Neither can
it be true that we are willing to do Penance, because every one avoids
Sufferings as much as he can; and to do saving Penance, it must be voluntary,
and suffered for fulfilling the Will of God: For else we may suffer much
without Meriting, as Robbers and Thieves do.

I said to her, That this ought to be preached through all the World that they
who would perish through Ignorance might hear the Truth and be converted.

She said: Sir, You may do as you please: As for me I retire: For I am not sent
to preach, but simply to declare the Truth, as I have done to you. You may have
sufficiently remarked in all my Discourses, and my Life; if there were any
Affectations or Passions which should move me to tell you these Things. I am
persuaded in the sight of God, that I have no Self-Interest in it, nor any
desire to please or displease Men, nor to affect the speaking new or mavelous
Things. No, Sir, I am not led by that Spirit, but by that of Jesus Christ, who
had such Compassion for Men, that for them he endured a bitter Passion and the
Death of the Cross: If you preach these Things to Men of good Judgment, and who
thirst after the Truth, they will gladly hear you, and yield themselves, and
return to God: For they will easily see, that here is no Flattery for any Body;
nor yet Contempt, or sensual Animosity; but pure solid Truths, which none can
resist but they who are in League with Satan, and love Lies, and resist the
Truth. Those will very hardly receive Truths that are so opposite to them; they
will induce effeminate Spirits to reject these Things as evil, perceiving that
the knowledge of these will take from their Master the Devil the Power to
deceive by Falsehood and Hypocrisy; and that he will be forced very quickly to
discover his Mischievous Reign Rev. 12. 12, 17. 13. 3, 7, 8.
: Because he shall not be able to catch Souls any longer under the color of
Piety and Holiness, as he has done hitherto. And his furious Reign shall be far
less dangerous: For so soon as he shall be known for the Devil, no Body will
follow him any longer, except they who wilfully yield up themselves to him:
Whereas at present every one follows him blindly: But so soon as his Malice
shall be discovered, he shall have no longer Power over Innocent Souls. Tell
the Truth boldly, Sir, to all good Men in Confidence: But beware of the
Adherents of the Enemy, and of those Mat. 10. 17.
who let themselves be governed by his Spirit, though they be not precisely in
Covenant with the Devil: Because these will do you much Mischief when they
think they are doing well: For they who have their Minds infatuated do serve
the Devil as well as Sorcerers themselves: The one directly, and the other
indirectly. You will still discover them by the resistance which they will make
to the Truth, for they will not so much as hear it: Because they know very well
they cannot change the Truth: They endeavor at least to reject and despise it,
that no Body may receve it. This will be the Devils last Effort. For as soon as
the Truth shall be known, it will strongly resist him, and at last will break
his Head. Observe still, Sir, the Disposition of those to whom you would
declare these Truths: And when you find opposition from them, leave off
speaking to them: For those who shall be disposed to profit by the Truth, will
give Ear to it willingly, and with Hungry Desires will search even to the
Bottom; that they may discover the Essence of it: For no good Men can resist
the Truth, nor the Things which are proposed to them, without having examined
whether they be Good or Evil: But the Wicked will resist it, before they know
it: And if they can catch a Word different from their School Terms, they will
take it in a quite contrary Sense. Therefore, Sir, do not amuse your self with
Questions and Disputes, For this would be to cast Roses before Swine: Offer
them only to those who will take pleasure to smell them, and not to these who
will cast them into the Dunghill. All good Men will feel in the Bottom of their
Souls that this cannot come from the Devil: For he is the Father of Lies; and
never incites to Self-denial, because he is too proud: Nor to the Love of God,
because he hates him: And yet less to resign our Will to that of God, for he
catches all Men by their Self-will. All my Discourses have for their Scope all
that is contrary to the Devil, who is never contrary to himself.

The Ninteenth Conference,
Shows, That the Spirit of Antichrist hinders Men from discovering the saving
Truth; and that the Heathens are more resigned to God than the Christians at
present.

I said to her, That I thought no Body in the World could resist so clear
Truths, without betraying his own Conscience: That all the Things she had told
me did speak forth themselves, and were attended with such solid Foundations
and such firm Reasons, that the Learned and Unlearned might comprehend them,
and that the Scope of all was the Glory of God and the Salvation of Souls; and
that there was nothing in them that savoured of the Earth.

She said: If we were not fallen into the Reign of Antichrist, no Body could
resist so clear Truths. All the World would feel them, and would discover his
Deceits; every one would fly to the Desert to do Penitence, bewailing his past
Life, and the Errors wherein he had lived for so long a time. But the Michief
is, that this Antichrist has so great a number of Adherents who take up his
Quarrel, and resist the Truth, that the good themselves have difficulty to
receive it: For they disfigure it, and make it pass for Lies and Heresies,
telling those who advance it, that they would seduce the People, Luke 23. 2.
as they said of Jesus Christ when he brought Light into the World, calling him
a Seducer Mat. 27. 63.
of the People, or John 8. 48.
one that had a Devil. The Power of Darkness is much encreast since the Time
that he was upon Earth, and nothing is to be looked for but Matthew. 10. 25.
Outrages from all the Devil's Adherents, In this case a Man must count it a
Happiness to suffer Matthew. 5. 11.
Persecution for Righteousness sake, and believe that there is Rev. 14. 13.
no more blessed Death than to dye a Martyr for the Truth. But he must beware
of Men Matthew. 10. 17.
, and use the Wisdom of the Serpent, and rather part with his Skin than lose
his Soul. You will find more Welcome, Sir, among the Jews and Heathens, than
among the Catholics, who condemn others to Authorize their own Customs,
despising the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, who says, Matthew. 7. 1.
Judge not, and you shall not be judged; condemn not, and you shall not be
condemned. These Catholics condemn all those who do not follow them: This is
the cause why they are judged, and condemned first to be rooted out. They
condemn so many holy Heathens, who will go before them Mat. 8. 11, 12.
in the Day of Judgment, because they were faithful to God though they had not
any Laws or Institutions to know Him: Nevertheless many resigned their Wills to
that of God, and obeyed the Truth in their Lives; whereas these Christians
follow Lies, of which the Devil John 4. 44.
is the Father; and none of them will resign themselves to God, nor take notice
of the Truth which discovers the shortness of this miserable Life, and the
certainty of one that shall be Eternal. These Heathens knew a God, to whom they
resigned themselves; and seeing the Misery of this Life, they bewailed it; they
laughed when they considered the Stupidity of Men who took pleasure in this
Life; and judged, that they ought not to be called Men, because they did not
use their Reason to discover the Truth of Things: For he who went through the
City of Athens with his Lantern, seeking for a Man in the midst of so many
Thousands as were in the Marketplace, could not be ignorant that they who were
about him were all Men: But seeing they were all occupied, in buying, and
selling, and Trading for the Earth, he could not acknowledge them to be
Reasonable Men: Because he who has Reason, ought to use it for his Eternal
Happiness, else he is nothing but a Beast: For Reason only makes a Man; without
which he does not differ from the Brute Beasts, for they are unreasonable
Animals, and Men are reasonable ones: Laying aside which, they are as much
Brutes as the Beasts. This made the Philosopher search for a Man among so great
a Number, and could not find one; because all spent their Lives in Worldly
Business, instead of employing them in the Study of the Knowledge of God, and
of the Truth, which is the same God. And they condemn those Heathens as damned,
and for my part I look upon them as SAINTS, and believe Mat. 8. 4. Romans 2. 10,
11.
they will come to Reign with Jesus Christ upon Earth to condemn the
Christians, who besides the Light of the Heathens, had Laws and Commandments
from God, with the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, which obliged them to a farther
Knowledge of God, and the Immortality of their Souls, the Shortness and Misery
of this Life, that they might despise it, and the Vanity of perishing Goods,
that they might abandon them. Nevertheless, not one of these Christians does
any of these Things.

I asked her, If it was indeed possible that not so much as one Christian
should be resigned to God, nor have the Virtues of the Heathens?

She said: Yes, Sir: This is most true, that Isa. 59. 16.
not so much as one Christian is resigned to God, nor understands true Virtue,
as much as the Heathens did: Because none apply themselves to it. Since they
became Idolaters of Men, they have left off to know God, and abondoned
themselves to the Will of their Idols, instead of the Will of God. They Preach
and Teach through all Christendom, That we must depend upon Men, whom they call
the Fathers of the Church; That we must believe and follow them, even with a
blind Obedience: In which they prefer themselves to God, who demands only of
Man that he obey him in what he shall make known to him; having given him Eyes
to discover this Beautiful Universe, Romans 1. 20.
that when he sees the Heavens, the Earth, the Sun, the Stars, and all the
Elements, with so many different Creatures so mavelous and so well ordered,
he might clearly perceive that all those Things must proceed from a God: since
Men and Nature can make nothing like them. Moreover, when Man considers himself
he discovers evidently by his Understanding, that his Soul, his Memory, his
Understanding cannot come but from a God, for no such Thing can come from
Nature; no more than his Body, since all the Industry of Men is not capable to
make so much as one Hair of our Head. This obliges us to acknowledge a God, by
so many different Operations, without being put to know God blindly, no more
than to love or follow him blindly; as these Christians say we must obey and
follow Men blindly: For when we consider all the Works of God, and observe what
he has done for us, it is impossible we should cease to love and follow such a
Benefactour. If we had but the Light of a Heathen, we would not readily yield
this blind Submission to Men: Because they are not our Creatours, nor our
Saviors; and our Dependence ought to be upon the Lord who created all Things:
But not on frail Man like our selves, who can give us nothing but Promises
without Effects; for they deceive us when they promise us Salvation, since they
cannot give it to themselves: And yet all the World believes they shall save
all Christians, of whom I know not so much as one that is in the way of
Salvation; because they neither know God, nor true Virtue; but have their
Understandings blinded by the Discourses of Men, who desire to love, and be
loved by their like; and instead of leading them to the knowledge of the true
God to love and follow him, they draw them to love themselves: And by this
blind conduct, every one runs to Perdition, while many believe that they are in
the way of Salvation. So that I might well travel through all Christendom with
a Lantern, to find out so much as one Man, as the Philosophers did through the
City of Athens: Because no Body any longer uses his Reason, to see the
Obligation that we have to depend upon the Will of God, nor yet to consider the
Misery and Shortness of this Life, nor the Vanity of transitory Things; but are
in all this as if they were void of Understanding, and follow one another
blindly, without considering any other Thing. For if Man did only use his
Reason, he would see clearly that he is obliged to depend upon his God, since
he has received all from him, and can pretend to nothing but from him: His
Natural Instinct does sufficiently incline him to this Dependence. Though they
call this a Heathen Light, this is not that it is simply Natural, but it is an
Impression that God makes on our Understanding, which leads us to know God, and
to submit our selves to him: Which if we do, we are happy in whatsoever Nation
we be: For God never demanded any other thing of Men but this Resignation to
his Will; and if he has since appointed Laws; this was but by reason of Men's
Frailty, having never formerly subjected them to any Laws but that of depending
upon him: As he would not yet, provided we would submit to him. This our
Christians do not, though they hope to be saved,

I said to her, That it troubled me much to hear that not so much as one
Christian was resigned to God.

She said: Sir, That you may not believe this blindly, recall to mind a little
the Persons whom you have held for good Men, and consider narrowly all their
Behavior, that you may see, whether they are not guided by their own Wills,
even in their pious Works; whether they are not done from their own
Inclinations? You will find that this has always been at the Helm to govern
all; and that if it were not to please our selves, many good Works would be
left undone. For my part, I have remarked this in all the Persons whom I have
known; and I never knew but one Maid This is She who wrote the Two Letters in
the 42 Testimony of the Testimony of the Truth.
who was resigned to God: Nevertheless, I have met with those who had the
greatest Reputation for Virtue, and I always perceived, that their Actions,
though good, were mingled with Self-love: Which hinders a Resignation to God:
For as long as our Self-will will bear Rule, God cannot have our Submission.
(b) Psalm. 27. 8. John 1. 9.
(c) Acts 10. 34, 35.
These are all dead Works, which shall be recompensed only in this World, and
not at all in the other. I have seen Persons given to Fasting. Watching, and
Prayer, diligent in going to Church, and in relieving the Poor, and yet
notwithstanding of this they subjected not their Wills to that of God: But
followed their own as much as they could, imagining that they did all for God,
while there was no such thing. For if God had governed their Wills, they would
have done all their Actions, both small and great, in the Righteousness,
Goodness and Truth of God: From which they were very far estranged; and if they
had been capable of it, I would have made appear to them, that their best
Actions were very blameable, and accompanied with Presumption, and
Self-satisfaction. In this many deceive themselves, and believe they are in a
State of Salvation, though they be very far from it. You must not be troubled,
Sir, to hear it said, That there is not so much as one Christian in the way of
Salvation: Since it is true, and none are resigned to God: But we ought to
bewail their Blindness, and desire and pray that they may be converted for the
Time to come, since there is Time for Repentance, and Leisure to return to God;
even to the last Moment of our Life. If I should say that all Christians are in
a State of Salvation, as all these false Prophets do, their Salvation would
certainly be desperate: Because every one would rest on such a dangerous
Estate. It were far better to tell the Truth, by declaring that they are not in
the way of Salvation, that they may strive to recover it, than to flatter them
with false Words: And it should be more acceptable to them to hear that they
are not resigned to God, if it be most true, than to hear that dreadful
Sentence, Matthew. 25. 41.
Go ye cursed into Everlasting Fire, when they should have thought to hear,
Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom: For it will be too late at
Death to return to a Dependence upon God: And it is not so now. By which you
may see, Sir, that there is more reason to be troubled when we hear them say,
that Christians are in the way of Salvation, than when they say, they are in
that of Damnation, when it is true, as it is, because of their Blindness: For
if I did not most evidently perceive this, I would not affirm such unpleasant
Things. But I should be without Charity, if I should not declare so important
Truths, while we are yet living in the Time of Penitence: For I perceive
inwardly in my Soul, that the Thoughts, Words, and Actions of Men, are not at
all directed by God: For they partake not of his Righteousness, Goodness, and
Truth; but on the contrary, they are all full of Self-interest, Selfhonour, or
Pleasures: And notwithstanding, no Body will willingly be reproved: Every one
desires to continue as he is, without knowing his Fault, and much less amending
it; covering and palliating his Miseries, and excusing them as much as he can.
So that I see no good that can be done for the Conversion of Christians; for
they trust too much to the false Persuasion of their Salvation. Therefore, I
will retire, and bid you Adieu. Not that I am displeased to be among Men, to
whom I am like; but it is because I perceive them to be Enemies of God, and
they do not desire to know it. With which my Heart is very much oppressed.

The Twentieth Conference,
Shows, That there are very few among the Christians who desire to be converted
unto God, and to return to a Dependence upon him: And treats of the necessity
of this Dependence.

I asked her, If she did not fear that she should Act against Charity to her
Neighbor, by retiring thus from their Conversation; since she might do them
great good.

She said: No Sir, I Act not against Charity to my Neighbor: Because I cannot
help him, if he will not have Help. I have had but too much Experience of this,
that Men will not change their Life, at least the Christians: For I was never
acquainted with others, to know if they are as much hardened as those who are
called Christians: For those, I say, I have done all that could be done to show
them the dangerous State in which they live; but I profited very little by it.
They love rather to see and hear fine Things: But for resigning themselves to
God, no Body will do it but by Word, which is as far from the Truth as is
Heaven from Hell. Every one says, that he will be resigned to God; while in the
mean time, no Body will deny his own Will in the least thing; we hear them
often say. I will what God wills; And the least Contradiction they meet with,
does alarm them; and those who promise them Salvation, comfort them, and
flatter them, saying, That this is to be patient, when they murmur not against
the Appointments of God, and that they must only resign themselves, and thereby
they shall merit much: As if God were obliged to Recompense their Impatience.
For to suffer Contradictions, is common and necessary, both to the Wicked and
to the Good: Because no Body can be free of them in this miserable World, where
every one must suffer, will he, nill he: But to say that we are resigned to
God, when we are only resigned by force, is a Lie; because this resignation is
a necessary thing, when we cannot hinder things to fall out against our Will.
For to be resigned to God, we must have no more Selfwill, to will this and not
to will that: For a Thing that we have resigned, we do not hold nor possess it
any longer to desire to use it. Resignation to God, is a total dependence upon
his Disposal, as well for our Soul as for our Body, and for all that concerns
us, bridling our own Will in every Thing without willing or desiring any thing
any longer, knowing well that Gods Conduct is always more perfect, than all
that we could wish for. If it rain, if it be fair, if it be hot, or cold, if we
are in Peace, or War, in Adversity or Prosperity, it matters little, provided
we be resigned to God: It is he who governs all these Things, and can never do
evil. If our Friends live or dye, what the matter, when God ordains it? Our
Life, our Death, must not be wished for nor desired by us, because we are not
capable enough to judge what is good or evil for us: And to offer to give Laws
to God, is to mock him, since he understands and knows all Things: He sees far
better than we what is good and perfect, because he is the Wisdom that cannot
be ignorant of any thing, and the Goodness that can do no evil, and who orders
all Things to a good End, so that if we were not void of Understanding, we
would not entertain a Thought of contradicting any Thing that befalls us: For
all turns to good to him Romans 8. 28.
who is resigned to God; and though we esteem it a Happiness to have good
Desires, yet it is a Thing infinitely more perfect to have no Desires, Psalm.
131. 2.
with a Dependence upon God: Because a never so little mixture with this
Dependence always hinders the Effect of the Ordinances of God, as if we would
be Tutors to him, or give out our Law for doing well. In the mean time we are
so short sighted, that we do not discern Good from Evil: So that if God should
permit that to befall us which we often ask and desire of him as Good, great
Mischiefs would have come upon us, so blind are we in the matter of our
Salvation. And yet we will not resign our Will to that of God but in Word only:
So that if I should tell Christians now adays, that they will never be saved
without resigning their Wills to that of God, they would say, that I damn all
the World: For they look on the Salvation and Damnation of Men, as if they
could Damn and Save them, whereas it is God only that can Save, and Sin only
that can Damn. Therefore by conversing with Men I will not profit them for
their Salvation.

I said to her, That God having imparted to her such Light, it ought not to
remain under a Bushel: But should be set in a Candlestick.

She said: Sir, What will it avail to set the Light upon a Candlestick, when
those who are present will shut their Eyes that they may not see it? These
Christians are so pre-occupied with their own way of Devotions, and with
seeming Virtues, that they esteem nothing else; and as soon as they shall see
the Brightness of this Light, their Eyes will be dazzled with it, and they will
even complain of the Light of it. How is it possible to show to any that which
he will not see? I have conversed among others with the most pious of the
Religious, who could not imagine that there was another way of Salvation, but a
( f) Psalm. 131. 2.
good observance of their Rules; and they thought they did a thing
well-pleasing to God, to maintain the Honor and Profit of their Order; and for
my part, I judge this to be so far from a Dependence upon God, that I think it
is the real Mean to take them off from it: For as long as we are tied to Rules,
and Studies to observe them well, it is always the Person that Acts; and the
Care of preserving the Honor and Profit of the Order, is indirectly the
seeking their own Honor and Profit: Which is not only a Vice, but also a false
Virtue that deceives them to their Ruin; and though I assure these Persons
that there is no other way of Salvation but that of resigning their Will to
God, yet they will not hear this Note, insisting always on the first Tune they
learned; and they think they are resigned to God, since they have quit the
World to enter into a Religious Order, and they apply themselves to the
observing of their Rules, they say their Offices, and obey their Superiors,
choosing rather to resign themselves to Men their Equals, than to their God,
imagining that he is served with Reverences, Bowings of the Knee, and a great
many common Prayers: Without remembering that, it is he who Jer. 17. 10.
searches the Reins, and examines the Conscience; and that all these outward
Things are nothing but Grimaces when they are not done from an abundance of
inward Sentiments; and that it is said to such Persons, Isa. 29. 1, 3.
This People worship me with their Lips, and their Heart is far from me. All
Christendom is full of this Blindness, and they believe that God is served by
outward Things* Nevertheless it is a certain Truth, That Acts 17. 25.
God has no need of material Things, but desires only Prove. 23. 26.
the consent of our Will to take his pleasure in us: Which he cannot do so long
as we will take our pleasure with the Creatures, or with any Earthly Things,
even though according to our Opinion they should be good Things: Because he is
jealous of our Heart, and will not suffer a Corrival; and he has reason: For it
appertains to him alone: Because he created it without the Interposition of any
other. Notwithstanding, Man is so unthankful that he denies him his Heart and
his Will, and would content him with Words and outward Gestures, and will not
open his Eyes to discover the Truths which would save him from Damnation. My
Heart is oppressed with Grief, Sir, to see all the World perish, and I cannot
help it, because they will not receive the Truth. I am very far from desiring
to leave my Neighbor out of disdain: But I am obliged to leave him because he
will not be converted to the Truth, and the Holy Spirit says, We ought not to
speak that which does not profit. I see the Vice of all Men clear as the Sun,
and I do not think that one can be saved in the State in which they are at
present: And yet I cannot save them by my Conversation: Because they make not a
good use of it. If I declare their Vices in particular, they are ill satisfied,
or at least, they would cover and excuse them: Which is evidence enough that
they will not amend them; and if I point out the Vices indirectly, or in
general, then no Body will take it to himself, but will excuse himself by some
Formality or Reasoning; and if any one lay them to Heart for a Time, Men and
Business do quickly banish these good Purposes: And so nothing is put in
practice: My Time is lost: And my Words are rendered useless, whereas I would
be profiting something in conversing with God. Behold these are the Causes and
Reasons why I will remain alone, not to conceal the Light: For I would have it
Lighted for all the World, and I know not a more perfect Contentment in this
Life, than the Meeting and Society of many Hearts united in Jesus Christ; as
also I know nothing more uneasy than the Conjunction of Persons of contrary
Wills: For I cannot change for them, and they will not change to follow me.
This is the Combat.

I said to her, That at least some would change to follow her, and to save
their Souls.

She said: Sir, You would be greatly astonished to see the way the World would
take to change. Every one, forsooth, would resign his Will to God, provided he
govern it according to their own Inclinations. God must accommodate himself to
them, and they will not accommodate themselves to God. Even so, many would
indeed follow me, it so be withal they may follow also their own Will. Which
cannot be done: For he who follows it, Romans 8. 8.
is the Enemy of God, and if I am his Friend, how could I dwell with those who
are his Enemies without a continual Constraint, Contradiction and Debate? All
their Actions proceeding from this Self-love would be blameable. If I do not
reprove them, I am unfaithful to God; and if I reprove them, I become their
Enemy; and withal they will not amend, but will become rather worse, applying
themselves to remark if they can find any defects in my Actions for a Revenge;
and if they do not find any, they will endeavor at least to despise my
Intentions by measuring them according to their Line, and interpreting them
according to their Sentiments. And thus they will offend God, and trouble my
Repose without any profit. Therefore I foreseeing this, would do very ill to
associate with any Body, unless I had assurance beforehand that they would
resign themselves truly to God: For else this would be to render my self a
Slave, and others miserable, without any Contentment: And as God takes his
delight and pleasure with Souls whose Wills are united to his, so he thrusts
behind him those who are not in the Unity of his Divine Will; even so ought I
to thrust away from me those who will not truly resign their Wills to that of
God; because it is a kind of Martyrdom to live together bodily being divided in
Will: As it would be a Paradise of Delights to live with Persons who have their
Wills equally resigned to that of God. Which makes the true Paradise and
perfect Contentment: For God 1 Cor. 6. 17.
and these Souls would be but one and the same Thing.

I said to her, That she ought to associate her self with sincere Persons; and
that her Company would be of great Advantage to them for attaining to this
Resignation to God.

She said: It is true, Sir, in case their Will were truly good: But all that I
remark in these Persons who would follow me and be saved, is nothing but
Wouldings, not absolute Wills. They say, they would be converted, they would
follow me, and be resigned to God; while in effect they do neither the one nor
the other before God: Because these Wouldings proceed only from their own Will.
They would be converted, being afraid of Damnation; they would follow me that
they may be saved; and resign themselves to God only in Word; or as long as the
Will of God goes along with theirs. Lo this is the good Will that I have
experienced in those who would follow me, and even at present I know no other:
For I perceive very often that they aim yet at their own Interest* Honor, or
Pleasures. So that it they were with me, I would reprove all their Actions,
none excepted: Which would be very irksome to me, and troublesome to them, yea
even insupportable. For so long as they are not truly designed to God, they
live still according to their Natural Senses, which will not suffer Reproofs;
and Nature is so Proud, that it will not acknowledge its Fault, nor suffer
disesteem, presuming to be more wise and accomplished than its equals; so that
all that I should do to these Persons, would only be to disquiet and vex them,
because they are so in love with their Vices and Imperfections, that they even
despise those that do not follow them* So that I should live in a continual
Constraint among others* for I could not speak according to my Sentiments: For
they are not capable of them; and I could not show them their Faults, because
they presume to be as wise as I, neither could I be profitable in their
Company, when they will not follow the Spirit that guides me, but every one
abounds in their own Sense* and will not submit themselves to the Truth,
without which Submission no Body can attain to this Resignation. The necessity
of this Dependence must be known, or else they will not subject themselves to
it: For if they see not the necessity of doing this, every one will believe he
is in a State of Salvation in whatsoever Condition he be; and thus every one
will insensibly perish; and my Company could not save them* And since God has
given me Liberty, wherefore should I continue a Slave to Men, when I cannot be
profitable to them for the Glory of God?

I said to her, That God was pleased to undergo the Slavery of our humane
Nature for the Salvation of his Creatures, and that she ought to be furnished
with the same Spirit that Jesus Christ had.

She said: Sir, By his Grace I am so, and I do so earnestly desire to see all
Men saved, that I would willingly dye for every one of them, if I had as many
Lives: But I am well assured that my Conversation, my Words, and my Life cannot
save them if they do not resign themselves of their own free Will to the Will
of God. Though all the Jer. 14. 11. and 15. 1.
Saints, both Angels and Men pray together, they will never procure the
Salvation of so much as one Soul, unless it resign its Will to God. For this is
a necessary Thing: The Saints may indeed pray, and the Angels solicit, and all
Men help any who has withdrawn from God to obtain this Dependence upon him: But
all this will avail him nothing if he do not of his own Free Will truly yield
up his Will to God, and deny his Self-will. Very few comprehend this:
Nevertheless, this is an Eternal Truth that will never change: For God created
Man only for this.

I said to her, That I my self did not well comprehend this Necessity of
Depending upon God; entreating that she would explain it to me.

She said: Sir, Be attentive, and consider my Discourse well: Perhaps it will
give you some Light in this Matter. Consider first that God said, Genesis 1. 26.
Let us make Man after our Image and Likeness: This was not said in vain, but
it had its full effect, and Man Genesis 1. 27.
was made after the Image and Likeness of God. Consider a little, Sir, wherein
you shall find the Likeness of God in Man? It is not in his Natural Body: For
God is a pure Spirit; and has nothing that resembles a Body: Neither can this
Likeness to God* be found in the Animal Soul of Man; because this Animal Soul
has no more than the Beasts, so far is it from resembling God; for it extends
no farther than to give Life to the Body for a certain Time; whereas the Life
of God is Eternal, without Beginning, and without End; and a Temporal Thing
cannot resemble an Eternal. Therefore this Likeness of Man to God, cannot be
found in the Animal Soul of Man, no more than in his Body: And if one would
seek for it in the Faculties of the Soul, which are the Memory, the
Understanding, the Will, we shall find that these Three Faculties have no
resemblance to God: For they are imperfect and limited: Which God cannot be:
Our Memory is very frail, and sometimes does not remember on the Morrow what we
did the preceding Day: Our Understanding is in like manner subject to great
defects, taking False Things often for True: And our Will is sometimes so
insolent, that if it were not bridled by Reason, it would often precipitate us
into irreparable Mischeifs. All which Things are in nothing like to God, since
he is without any Imperfections or Defects, perfect in all Things, and without
Bounds or Limits, whereas the Faculties of our Soul are all limited, as the
Faculties of the Souls of Beasts are, who have sometimes a better Memory than
Men: For if a Dog or a Horse be ill used in any Place, he will remember it for
a long time: They have also a Will to do, and to leave what they are naturally
inclined to, though it be bounded and limited as well as that of Man; for
neither the one nor the other can put their Will in Execution, because they
have not the power to do all that they can desire: Which God can do in all
Things. By which we see that Man is not in any of these Things like to God: For
his Understanding is not capable of comprehending any thing but what he sees,
or hears, as are the Beasts also. So that by the Faculties of the Soul of Man
we cannot perceive that he is like to God, since he has an Eternal Memory, an
unlimited Understanding, and an unchangeable Will: To which the Faculties of
the Souls of Men are not at all to be compared. Wherein then can it be said
that God has made Man like to himself? Search into it with me, Sir: You will
find that he is like to God in nothing, but in his Free Will: And as God has
this Free Power over all Things* so he gave to Man this Free Power over his own
Will, that he might dispose of it as it should please him; in this alone, he is
the Image of God* Because this Liberty is to him Eternal and Independent: As
God is Sovereign, independent from all Things: So Man is Sovereign of his own
Free Will, independent from all Things, except that he acknowledge that this
Liberty is given him of God, that he neither has nor holds it of himself: As
God has and holds all Things of himself* Otherwise, Man is a Deity by his
Free Will, for by it he can do and leave any thing: For God Romans 11. 29.
never retakes what he has once given, neither will he ever retake the
Free Will of Man; but will let them enjoy it to all Eternity, as being an
Eternal Gift: It will never end as long as God shall be God: Man shall have his
free Will, both during this Life, and also in the other in Paradise or Hell. He
shall have through all this Divine Quality of a Free Will which God gave him
when he created him. He shall not take it from him in Paradise; because this is
the only quality that Man has, whereby he is capable of being united to God,
all the rest being only bounded and natural, are not at all-capable of
approaching a supreme Deity.

The One and Twentieth Conference,
Speaks of the Free Will of Man; in which alone he is like to God: That God has
given it to Man for ever: That he has annexed to it all his future Graces: And
that never any Good nor any Evil will befall any Body, in Time or in Eternity,
but by Free Will, according as we shall yield it up or not, to a Dependence
upon and Resignation to God.

I said to her, That we had been taught, That Man had indeed Free Will when he
was created: But that by Sin it was so lost, that he could not use it any
longer to do good.

She said: Sir, Free Will shall never be diminished, but will continue always
such as it was given to the first Man in his Creation: For God can never repent
of the Works Romans 11. 29.
that he has made. If Man feel that he is unable to do good, this is not the
defect of his Free Will, which remains to him still entire; but the defect is,
that his Sins have taken from him the power to do good, by Ephesians. 4. 18.
the Blindness they have brought into his Soul, which hinders the Discovery of
the Means how to depart from evil and to do good. The Soul being blinded by its
Sin, lost the Light of Truth; and in this darkness cannot find the way to
return to good. This she attributed to the Weakness of her Free Will,
flattering her self to excuse her own Wickedness, or indirectly to accuse God
that he does not give her sufficient Grace to do well. Which is a great Calumny
against God, who never bestowed so many Graces upon any Creature as he did on
Man, having made him alone a depending Deity, because he would have one kind of
Creature with whom he might take his delight Prove. 8. 31.
: Therefore he endued him with this Divine Liberty, that his Delight might be
complete on the side of both the Lovers. This is not a small Grace which would
be sufficient to enable a Man to do well. For if all Men whatsoever would
return to a Dependence upon God* they would certainly recover the same Grace
and Liberty that Adam had before his Sin: Because God continues still in the
same Will to take his Delight with Men, that he had when he created them*
Because he never Jam. 1. 17.
changes: For he is immutable. And if Man do well, or ill, it is for himself;
but God will never deny his Graces, because he is always good, though Man be
wicked.

I admired this Discourse, That God would grant to any Man whatsoever the same
Graces that he gave to Adam in his Creation, provided he resigned his Will to
that of God, asking her how this was possible since the Curse of Sin?

She said: Sir, It ought not to be doubted. He is the same God, and we are the
same Creatures, come from Adam, and reputed as if we were he. If of our own
free choice Isa. 58. 13, 14.
we would yield up the Free Will that God has given us in our power; he would
at the same instant put us again in the state of Innocence, and would govern us
till we departed again from a Dependence on him: In which we would still be
free: Because God never keeps any Body by force, letting our Free Will still
Act as to good or evil, as we will dispose of it. For if God did Act upon us
independently from our Will, he would certainly save all Men, and would not
permit so much as one to be damned: Because he created 4 Esdr. 8. 59, 60.
them all for Salvation, and he will never take from any Body the Graces which
he gave to (z) John 6. 67.
Adam. If they abuse them it will be their Unhappiness, and their own Fault,
and not that of Grace: For it shall still be Prove. 1. 20 -- 33.
given to the good and to the wicked, even to the last Day of Judgment: God
will always be with Men by his Grace. But then the season of Grace shall be
past: Therefore will he say to the wicked, Mat. 25. 41.
Go ye C^^sed, depart from me. If he had not been with them till then, he could
not have thrust them away from him, since they would have been so from the Time
they became wicked. God should have no occasion to have thrust them from him
this Last Day, if they had been separated from* his Grace during all the time
they lived in their Sins. It is said indeed, that the Grace of God is lost by
sinning: Not that this Grace is taken from Man on Gods part; but only that Man,
of his Free Will, will not subject himself to God, but will be at his own
disposal* And by this Mean* he falls into all sort of Evils* from which he
should be delivered, if he would yield up to God this Free Will, repenting that
he himself had used it. If you please, Sir, to look into the Lives of the
Saints, you will find that many of them walked on the Waters* went over burning
Coals, for an Evidence, that God gives to those who resigns* themselves to his
Will the same Graces he gave to Adam* when he created him; and that the
Elements render their Duty to Man, when he renders his Duty to God* that the
Fire only enlightens and warms him, without blackening or burning him* Because
the Malignity that is in those Elements, as in other Things* did never cleave
to them, till Man would no longer acknowledge a DEPENDENCE upon God* All the
Elements, with the other Creatures subjected to Man, were obliged by Right of
Justice, to quit also the Dependence they had upon Man, since he had quitted
the Dependence that he had upon his God* and not to submit themselves any
longer to Man but by force, since he would not submit but by force ^^to God.
Which is a brutish Obedience* Though these new Casuists call the Resignation in
some Sufferings which befall Man, Virtue and Merit: In which there can be no
more Merit, than the giving Oats to Horses when they have rid well by Prick of
Spur: So the Man who has no other Virtue but to resign his Will to that of God
when he cannot escape Sufferings: and is forced to fall into some Misfortune*
can merit no other thing but the Temporal Repose and Quiet which his
Resignation will give him: Because it does not proceed from this that he will
depend upon God, but from the necessity he is in to suffer them by force. The
Spirits of Men are strangely blinded now; for they bring so many Means to
cleave to God, that they know not which to pitch upon as the best. One says,
the Churches and Sacraments must be frequented, and another, that the Body must
be mortified; another bids subject the Will to some Man, or enter into a
Religious Order; and a Thousand other such Things: Nevertheless, there* is but
one Thing only necessary, which is, to Resign OUR WILL to THAT OF GOD: By which
we have fulfilled all: For God having the disposal of our Will, Psalm. 73. 23,
24.
he will guide it in all that is most perfect and accomplished.

I asked her, If God could not lead our Will in things that are good without
our delivering up our selves to him, since all belongs to him, and all good
comes immediately from him?

She said: It is true, Sir, all good comes from God; and there can be no other
good but he. All the Jam. 1. 17.
good that Men can do, must come from him; but know this, that since the first
Graces which he gave Man in creating him, he will give him no other Isa. 1. 19.
but as far as Man of his Free Will shall depend upon his God, and no farther.
If he will wholly depend upon him, he shall have Graces in abundance; and if he
will only in part depend upon God, he shall still have Graces in part in
proportion to his Dependence. For Example: One will depend upon God as to his
Health; and assuredly he will suffer his Infirmities and Diseases with
Patience: Which will be the Grace he has merited by yielding up his Will to God
as to his Health: Another will submit to God as to Temporal Goods; and he shall
have the Grace of Poverty of Spirit: Another will submit to God in the Matter
of his Honor; and he shall have the Grace to suffer Contempt willing: And so
of the rest. Since God gave the first Graces to Adam, he will not increase them
to him but so far as his Free Will shall be subjected to God, and no farther:
Because he has shown the effect of his Goodness and Almighty Power toward Man
in creating him so full of Graces and Prerogatives, taking him out of Nothing,
where he could have merited nothing. God having absolute Dominion over this
Nothing, bestows on him all the Graces that he pleased, because he found no
resistance; and so he lead his Will to good, having engraven in his Soul a good
Inclination, and a reasonable Understanding to know the Dependence he had upon
God, from whom he saw he had received Being, and all Things. An Instinct to
good, and the Love of his God, were engraven in the Marrow of his Bones, These
are the Qualities that God gave Man before he was capable of resisting God: But
since he resisted so many Graces, and would retake to himself the Free Will
that God had given him, to use it independently from God, he has lost his
Graces, and obliged him not to bestow more upon him, but as far as he will
yield up his own Will to God, having by this Mean bounded the Grace of God at
his Will. Not that Man is capable of regulating or bounding the Graces of God,
who is still absolute Sovereign of all Things; but because it was his absolute
Desire to give to Man his Free Will Psalm. 110. 3.
, which alone renders him capable of being united to God: And if he had
received only a Limited Will, he would have had no Divine Quality for God to
take his Delight with him: For that Two Things may find Contentment together,
there must still be a Proportion or Sympathy between them. A Horse cannot be
contented or pleased with a piece of Iron; nor a Dog with Marble, nor a Swine
with a Precious Stone: Because all these Things are disproportioned to the
Nature of these Beasts, who cannot Love nor take Pleasure in Objects so unlike
their Natures. Even so God cannot take his Delight with any Creature of a
bounded Will, he being an infinite God, There must be in Man some infinite
Quality by which he may unite himself to God: And if he had not given him this
Will eternally Free, Man should have had nothing in him sympathetical with God,
who nevertheless would make a ( g) Deuteronomy. 30. 14.
Creature with whom he might take Prove. 8. 31.
his pleasure: Therefore he gave him this Divine and Reasonable Soul with Romans
11. 29.
an Eternal Eccl. 15. 14 -- 17.
Liberty, which shall never be taken from him, do Man what he pleases: Because
God never changes his Decrees Jam. 1. 17.
; and if he forced Man to good after he had given him this Liberty, he should
constrain that which he would have to be free, and should renverse the Order
that he had so wisely Established, and should take from Man the most Precious
Thing he had received: For laying aside this Free Will, he would be but like
the Beasts. Therefore God will never direct our Will, but when we shall yield
it up to him: though he be Almighty.

I entreated her to tell me, How our Will shall be eternal; and if we shall
even be free to do evil in Paradise, or good in Hell?

She said: No, Sir, we can never do evil in Paradise: Because there we shall
enjoy the continual Presence of God, during which we can never sin, though it
were even in this Miserable Life: As long as our Soul abides there in the
Presence of God, it can no more sin than if it had no Liberty: And if some
Saints have fallen into Sins, this has certainly been when they have strayed
from this Presence of God; and during this wandering, they might sin: Because
the Objects of Evil were yet present with them, and they resting on them, might
easily fall. But in Paradise our Spirit can no more wander, or be distracted
from God; because he shall be continually and eternally with us, sensibly and
visibly, without any interruption; neither can we be diverted by evil Objects,
because all that shall be in Paradise shall be holy; and all the Blessed shall
visibly and sensibly possess God, so that we shall see God in every one of
them. All these Things will render us impeccable; and though we shall still
have Free Will, yet it shall never be led to evil in the midst of such Good;
and God to whom we shall entirely yield it up, will straightly John 17. 21, 23.
unite it to his own, so that it can no more be led to evil than that of God
is, for it shall be ( n) Psalm. 16. 8.
united to his in so indissoluble a Bond of Love that it will be impossible to
separate it for so much as one Moment, they being no longer but one and the
same Thing. Thus shall our Free Will rule in Paradise. Even so in Hell our Will
shall never be bounded; because God having given it free; it shall eternally
persist in its Liberty: But whereas this Will would not submit to God in this
Life, but was led to evil of our own Will, and since Death, remains in the same
desire of doing evil; we continue in these desires to all Eternity, without
ever having the Will to do good: Because we are farther removed than ever from
all sorts of good Objects, but joined and attended with all sorts evils. The
continual Presence of Devils prompts our Wills continually and without
intermission to do Evil; and the Company of so great a number of damned Souls
who use their Free Will to do all manner of evil, does continually draw us to
imitate and follow them: So that having never any thought toward good, we can
never have the Will to do good, even as the Devils cannot, who have also
retained their Free Will, which serves continually to increase their Evils,
their Will being engaged to persist in doing all the evil they can: For this
cause they tempt Men so strongly that they may have them in their damnable
Company: Not that they hope the number of the Damned will ease their Pains, on
the contrary, they well know, that it will encrase them the more; but because
their Free Will is bent to evil; and this Free Will being eternal, is eternally
bent to do evil: For a free Quality, such as Free Will is, will always act in
good or evil; according to the Object toward which it bends. And their Evils
are so far from being bounded by Damnation that they increase eternally;
because of their eternal Will, which cannot be bounded. This Free Will which is
bent to evil, has given a Malignity to all the Creatures, which Malignity shall
remain also Mat. 25. 46.
eternally: Because this Malignant Free Will, being a Divine and Eternal
Quality, of necessity makes its Works eternal: So that these miserable Souls
shall have upon them all the Malignity of all the Creatures to all Eternity, as
being the Work of their Hands.

I asked her, If the Devils had also their Free Will, and if God could not
bound them?

She said: Yes, Sir, the Devils shall have their Free Will to all Eternity as
well as Men: For God Romans 11. 29.
never retracts what he has once given. The Angels were intelligent Beings
capable of being united to God, which Capacity could not be given them but by a
Divine Quality, which is that Eternal Liberty, without which they could not
have Sympathy with God: For Angels as well as Men are but simple Creatures, who
can have no proportion with their Creator: Therefore he has given both to the
one and the other of these Creatures a Divine Soul and an Eternal Free Will,
that by these Divine Qualities, they might have a Capacity of Loving an Eternal
God. Now the wretched Inclination of this Free Will resisting the Designs that
God had in blessing them so advantagiously with Divine Gifts, would needs use
this Liberty to apply it to the doing evil instead of following the good for
which this Liberty was given them. Notwithstanding, God will never retake those
Divine Qualities that he has once given them: The Divine Soul, and Eternal
Liberty, will never end: For all that is Divine is Eternal; and God cannot
bound them, because he cannot be changeable in his Gifts, nor can he take away
what he has been pleased to give. If it be Established among Men to lay no
longer claim to a Thing given, how much more ought we to hold that God lays no
claim to the Free Will of Devils and Men, to whom he voluntarily gave it. This
Gift only makes the Souls of Men and also those of Devils to be immortal: For
otherwise both the one and the other would have been reduced to nothing as soon
as they sinned; for God being the Source of all good, can never do evil, nor
give eternal Pains: But the great Blessings which he gave his Creatures in
giving them a Divine Soul and Free Will, have served the Devil for his Eternal
Misery, as they will do to wicked Men, who if they will apply this Divine
Liberty to do Evil, they shall bring upon themselves all the evil they shall
do, which will be eternal, as proceeding from their eternal Will. If Man had
had only an Animal Soul, and a Limited Will, their Evils would have ended with
themselves, as those of the Beasts do, who do evil or good by their bounded
Will, and all their Works, such as they are, do end with their Animal Soul,
which is nothing but transient and temporal, If Men had not a Divine Soul and
an Eternal Will, they would wholly do the same: For they are not in Qualities
different from the Beasts, except by their Divine Qualities, which render them
Immortal and Eternal: For since God established them in a Divine Soul and Will,
they can never end, being Eternities, as God, except that they had a Beginning,
and God was incomprehensibly without Beginning, and to all Eternity.

I asked her, If the Souls of the Blessed in Paradise could do as much good as
they would; and in like manner, if the Souls of Devils and of the Damned could
do as much evil as they would?

She said: Yes, Sir, For their Wills have no Bounds, neither the one nor the
other. Have you never heard say, that in Paradise there are infinite Goods?
That is to say, That those Free-wills which are in Paradise will never cease to
do good, even infinitely: For there can be no Barenness with God; but a
production of continual Goods, which shall never have an end: Thus the Blessed
shall produce all the Good that their Free Will shall desire. And in like
manner the Wills of Devils and Damned* Men shall produce as much Evil as their
Free Will shall desire. They shall not be able to do evil according to their
Wills to the Men yet Living on the Earth; much less to the Blessed in Heaven:
Because these can resist them by their Free Will, which is inclined to good:
The Free Will of the Good having as much power to do well, as the Free Will of
the Wicked to do evil. They are both free to do in themselves all the good and
evil that they will; but the Evil cannot take hold of the good Wills of others
no more than the good of the Good can profit the Wicked: and the evil of the
Wicked cannot hurt the Good; but in so far as both the one and the other give
the Consent of their Free Will: Which indeed may be done during this Life:
Because Man is yet in an uncertain State of Salvation or Damnation; and even to
his Last Breath his Will may be led to good and to evil. Therefore it is said,
that Mat. 11. 11.
the least in Paradise is greater than the most holy among Men; because of the
uncertainty of their Blessedness; they being still in danger of consenting to
the evil Suggestion of the Devil, or the Example of some wicked Man, being here
always in peril, for we are still encompassed with our 1 Pet. 5. 8.
Enemies, who do all the evil they please by their Free Will: But we may also
resist it by ours: For neither Devils nor any wicked Men whosoever can ever
have power over our Free Will: For it will still be left free to us, and we may
consent to or reject the Temptations of the Devil and wicked Men, they not
being able to hurt us without our Consent. We cannot hinder them to tempt us,
since they have their Liberty, and they cannot hinder us to resist them, for we
in like manner have our Free Will. But the Souls of Devils and the Damned do
certainly as much evil as they can, because they have let pass all occasions of
doing good, and cannot now have any good Will, for they have destined it to
evil: But the Souls of the Blessed cannot be molested by the Devils and wicked
Men: For their Will is absolutely destinated to good, which destination is an
opposition to all sort of Evil. So that the Luke 16. 25, 26.
good of the Blessed cannot touch the evils of the Miserable, nor these on the
other hand the goods of the Blessed: For every one has made a choice of good
and evil for Eternity; and cannot repent of it, since they are passed out of
this World. For in whatsoevr Eccles. 11. 3.
State Man shall dye, he shall abide in it: If he dye in the eternal Resolution
of good, he shall do good to all Eternity; and if he dye in the Resolution of
doing evil, he shall do evil to all Eternity. And he must look for no other
Sentence but what he has made up for himself by his own Free Will.

I said to her, That many holy Persons were sometimes abused by Devils and
wicked Men, though they had not contributed to Evil by their Free will: And it
is ordinarily said, that the Devil has no more Power than God gives him; nor
yet wicked Men.

She said: No body in the World has hitherto understood the Works of God; but
every one judges of his Works according to their short Sight: But now that we
are arrived at the Fullness of Time, Jer. 31. 24.
he will give the Knowledge of his Procedure as to Men. You shall be persuaded
of this, if you take good heed to my Discourse, and peruse a little the Holy
Fathers who spoke of the Grace of God, and of all his Works. You must confess
that the Discourses of a Child are much more clear and intelligible than all
the Doctrines of these great Men: Because the Hour is now come that all these
Things shall be fully manifested, and nothing shall be any longer hid from Men
of the Designs that God has concerning them. You tell me that many Saints have
been abused by the Devil and the Wicked, without having contributed to it by
their Free Will: Which is true: For God holding the Will of these Saints in his
Power, because they had yielded up their Free Will to God, he enclines their
Will to good or necessary Sufferings. Not that God gives the Devil, or the
Wicked, this Power to abuse his Servants, by his independent Permission, out of
his absolute Power; but he permits Job 1. 12. and 2. 6.
the Devil and the Wicked to tempt the Saints Job 1. 21. and 2. 10.
with their Consent: For they having yielded up their Free Will into Gods Hand,
he leads it always to good. And seeing that Temptations and Persecution were
good for some of the said Saints, he inclined their Will to desire them, and
willingly to suffer them: Though in the sensual part they felt some Repugnance,
the Divine Soul and Free Will were 2 Cor. 12. 10.
joyful and contented with them, seeing these Evils befell them by the Will of
God, to which theirs was united and conformable: And thus they suffered with
their Free Will: Not that God permits the Devil to do evil to follow his
Malice: For he can never consent Psalm. 5. 5. Sir. 15. 21.
to any evil; but he permits him for the purging or honoring of his Servants,
who desire with all their Heart to be purged or honored that they may be made
so much the more agreeable to God when he permits these Sufferings 2 Cor. 12. 9.
as the true Means of their Perfection: For when there is no need of them for
their Perfection, the Evils which Devils and wicked Men would do them cannot
touch them, as it has often fallen out that Poison Mark 16. 18.
, or other Mischiefs done to Saints, has done them no hurt, To show that the
Devil and the Wicked are still free on their part to do evil, without any other
Permission from God but the Freewill that he had once given them; but that the
Free Will of the good may always resist them, and hinder any from coming near
them, except it be expedient for the Glory of God, or their own Perfection:
Then, though the Soul abandoned to God should not see the evils that the Wicked
would do it, and should not formally oppose it self to them; God who still
Psalm. 33. 18. and 121. 4.
watches for the good of his true Children, will never permit any evil to befall
them, but what is expedient for them: Not that he will bound the Will of those
Malignant ones that they may not be able to do evil to the good; but he will
move the Wills of the good to withdraw from them, or to shun the Places and
Occasions where the evil may befall them, or he will give so lively a Faith,
that Poison or other Evils shall not take hold to hurt his Servants, whom he
Psalm. 17. 8.
keeps as the Apple of his Eyes. Thus it is that God carries as to us, doing
always good, and never consenting to evil, nor yet limiting the Free Will that
he gave to Angels, and Devils, and Men, both good and bad, every one shall
enjoy it to all Eternity without hindrance, either in the good or in the
wicked. Therefore on all occasions we judge amiss of the Works of God, when we
believe that he permits Eccl. 15. 21.
evil in any whosoever. This proceeds from our ignorance of the Excellency of
the free choice and the Dignity of the Free Will that God has given to Men;
imagining that he governs them as Slaves, by force, or by his absolute
Authority: Which is not at all so: For if he gave to all Creatures that are
subjected to Man, when he created them, an amiable Inclination to acquiesce in
and follow always the Will of Man, without constraint, that he might serve him
with agreeable Delight; wherefore should he not incline Man to follow the Will
of God freely and without constraint?

The Twentieth and Second Conference,
Speaks of the Disputes that are about Free Will and Predestination.

I said to her, That this Point of the Free Will of Man was debated: That all
acknowledged he was created in full Liberty; but that since his Sin he could no
longer do good without a particular Grace from God.

She said: Sir, I believe I have told you many times, that God never changes:
Whether Men sin or not, he is not therefore moved. Free Will has remained with
Men since his Sin Deuteronomy. 30. 19.
as well as before it. If he deprived not the Devils nor damned Souls of it,
why should he take it from Man since his Sin, especially since he would pardon
him, and yet take his Delight with him? Must he not after his Sin have had the
same Divine Soul and Free Will as before Psalm. 110. 3.
? For else he could never more have been led to good, nor be united to God if
this Divine Quality were taken from him or diminished. What more particular
Grace could be given him than to let him enjoy his Free Will after his Sin? A
greater Grace could not be given him than this Divine Liberty, with which he
might accomplish his Penitence, and do all other kind of good: For if his
Penitence had not been accompanied with this Free Will, it could never have
satisfied an offended God. This Divine Quality was needful to satisfy for the
Offense done to his Divinity: And without having the Liberty to do good, by
what means could he recover the Grace of God? If God had not left Man to his
Liberty to do good, never any Person would have been saved, neither Adam, nor
any others: For without this Liberty of doing good Adam could never have
repented, nor all Men who have fallen in him. For none who are born since would
have been free to do good, or to beg the Grace of God for fulfilling their
Penitence, but every one would have been bent to Evil; since they had no other
Liberty but to do evil: Of necessity they must have given themselves to evil,
since they would not have had the Liberty to do good. I am an Enemy to all
these Disputes; and would wish that all Men would submit their Judgment to the
Works of God.

I said to her, That these Disputes were not ended; but many held that God had
decreed one Mass of Elect, and another of Reprobates, and that it will fall
out so, do Men what they please.

She said: How cruel is it to hear, Sir! That God should destinate a Mass of
Reprobates! This is as if they would say, that God is wicked from the Creation
of Men; for if he were not he would not have created a Mass of Reprobates to
be miserable to all Eternity do what they will. This necessity of being damned
reflects upon God. For if he had not created them to Damnation, they could not
be miserable to all Eternity: And God could not create them for Damnation but
out of pure Malice; setting aside this, he would rather have left them in
nothing, than to create them for Reprobation. Truly, Sir, a greater Blasphemy
cannot be uttered against God than this; for it shocks all his Qualities of
Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth, which are his Eternal Qualities Psalm. 33.
4, 5. Psalm. 89. 15.
without which he can never do any thing. If he had created one part of Men for
Damnation, he should not have done a just thing; since these Reprobates did not
merit Damnation before they had a Being, and could not in Justice be Reprobated
without having deserved it. Neither could God exercise his Goodness in
determining the Damnation of any: Since this Damnation is the greatest Evil in
the World: How should he be good in doing so great evil to Men? And how should
he be true in reprobating those of whom he says, that Prove. 8. 31.
his delight is to be with them since they are the Children of Men? He must
want Judgment and Reason who believes that God created a Mass of damned. The
Superstition of Christians must have invented this blaspheming against God to
authorize their Authority, and to show that God also uses Authority over Men as
they will use it over their like: This is against Truth: For God is not
partial, nor will he ever use Passion toward any. All these Words and Disputes
are so many Names of Blasphemies, of which Rev. 17. 3.
the Whore in the Revelation is full: For I do not believe that any other Sect
or Nation says that Reprobation is determined of God.

I asked her, What I ought to believe in this Matter* that I might not
blaspheme against God?

She said: Sir, We ought to go to the Original of Man, and see in his
Beginning, how he was created. God took not two Masses of Earth to create the
one of them for Salvation, and the other for Damnation: But only one Mass of
Earth, with which he created one Man only for Salvation Wisd. 11. 25. 4 Esdr.
8. 59.
, creating in him all the Men that ever were or shall be: He created them all
in general in the State of Innocence and Salvation, and for this end gave
abundance of Graces, both Spiritual and Bodily, and that equally to all,
without exception of any; giving to all a Divine Soul and a Free Will, that
they might be capable to do all manner of good: And seeing God created all Men
in Adam, he could not have created any for Reprobation; but all for Salvation,
none excepted. This being so, as it truly is, no Body could be created for
Damnation, as they would very unreasonably make it be believed: For if some
must be necessarily Damned or Saved, they should not have Free Will: Which none
can deny: For all Men received a Divine Soul and Free Will in Adam, who was the
first of the Elect, and after him all his Posterity. For God never willed 2
Pet. 3. 9.
that any should perish, but that they Live. And seeing he wills that they
Live, how could he create them for Reprobation; since there can never be any
Contradiction in God? Never believe, Sir, that any was created for Damnation:
But if any damn themselves, it is Prove. 1. 25.
contrary to the Designs of God, and because Psalm. 81. 12, 13, 14.
they will needs use their Free Will to apply it to evil: For if they followed
the Will of God, and the good Prove. 4. 23.
Impression that he has given them, they could never damn or destroy
themselves, even though they had sinned: Because God desires not Ezekiel. 33. 11.
the Death of a Sinner, but that he should be Converted and Live. By which we
see that God does not Reprobate the Sinner more than the Just; but desires that
all should be Saved, and none Reprobated, as they Maintain. But Men now 2 Timothy
3. 2, 3, etc.
being full of Vices and Passions of Love and Hatred, without any thing of
Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth, they would fain give Authority to their
Malice by making a God Exodus 31. 1.
to go before them in the Matter of their Passions. And as they in taking
Dominon over Men, do according to their Inclinations disgrace or favor them;
they would make God as partial, as they know they are themselves, saying, that
he damns some and saves others according to his Pleasure. Which will never be.
For God is no more subject to Passions than to change. We ought always to come
to the Truth, and retake the Original and the Essence of Things, without
amusing our selves with the Discourses of Men, who say and do according to
their Advantages; and if they are not inclined to use their Freewill aright,
they would fain lay the blame on God, saying, They have not his Grace, or, They
are not of the Number of those who are predestined to his Salvation: Which
makes a great many perish through Sloth, or Negligence, saying, If they are
Elected they shall certainly be saved; and if they are Reprobated, they shall
certainly be damned, do what they will. This is contrary to the Truth. For God
did not create* Man a kind of limited Creature. And though it seems sometimes
as if God determined good or evil Fortunes, yet nevertheless it is not true.
For he will not determine against the Free Will of Man* who shall still be
capable of using it well or ill. But because our Understanding is bounded, it
can comprehend only the Accidents it sees, without discovering their Sources or
Originals. For Example: We see a Man become poor though he Labor, and is no
Prodigal. We say immediately; it is God that afflicts him by evil Fortune;
while it is for want of Foresight or Management in his Affairs.

I said to her, That it was not believed that God created Man for Damnation;
but that God Reprobated Man after his Sin, which had undone them all.

She said: Sir, You will find this absurd: For if all Men were created in Adam,
they are all Romans 5. 12.
also fallen in Adam, and consequently there could not be a Mass of
Predestined after Sin: Because all in general were Reprobated and Damned by
the same Sin of Adam: He having sinned with his Free Will, there was no longer
any thing sound in it: For if he had not given a full Consent of his Will to
Sin, none would have been Damned, because of the Imperfection of his full
Consent; as we do not commit a Mortal Sin when our Will does not give full
Consent to Evil; and no Body doubts but Adam gave the full consent of his Will
in disobeying God; and consequently he is damned, and all Men with him, none
excepted: For he could not have a divided Will, nor one part sound, and another
damned: Because there was but one Man only; and he had but one Will, in which
was included the Will of all Men that should ever arise from him. So that God
could not pitch in him upon one Mass of Reprobates, and one of Saved: Because
there was no longer Salvation in him after his Sin, nor in all other Men his
Posterity. All were reduced into this damned Mass, without any exception: And
as none could be damned before Sin, so none could be saved after it: Because in
Adam all Men in general were contained, who have still shared in his Happiness
and Miseries, his Favors and Disgraces, his Pleasures and his Penitence: All
Men being inseparably united to the will of Adam, the Father of all living.

I asked her, How it could be that some Men are damned and some saved, since
there was so strait an union between the Will of Adam and that of other Men?

She said: This comes to pass, Sir, when every Man comes to the use of Reason.
He goes out of the Power and Will of Adam, and is put into his own full
Liberty, as Adam was at his Creation, with this difference only, that Men have
in them the Malignity of Sin: Which Adam had not when he was created; but only
an Inclination to good: As to the rest, all Men in general, are put, (when they
are capable of Reason) into the same Estate wherein Adam was created, with the
same Divine Soul, wholly free and reasonable, capable of being led to good or
evil, as Adam was. But that some are saved or damned, is not by any Necessity
or Predestination; but only by every ones Free Will, who are led to good or to
evil according to Deuteronomy. 30. 19. Isa. 66. 3, 4.
the Choice they make of the one or the other: Because on Gods part, Man is
left free and ( z) Mat. 23. 37.
entire, as he was before Sin: For God never changes his Works. He has not for
sin changed any thing in the Earth, nor in the Heavens, nor in the Elements,
nor in the Beasts, nor in the other Creatures, but has continued them all such
as he created them, without any change, but Sin has brought Malignity upon each
of them, whereas before the said Sin all Things were good, Wisd. 1. 13, 14.
without any evil. Even so God has changed nothing in Man since his Sin. He
remainsentire in all his Qualities, both Bodily and Spiritual, except that by
Sin he has contracted a Malignity Genesis 8. 21.
, and an Inclination to evil: Which before he had not, but a bent and
inclination to all sort of good Behold this is the only change that Sin made in
Man, without his being necessitated to evil, far less predestined to
Damnation: Since all Men received in Adam the Pardon of this Disobedience,
having also received in him the Penitence, which was accepted for all Men in
Adam so long as a Man is unable to use his own Reason: For then he is set at
Liberty from the Power of Adam and that of his own Parents, in whose Will he
remained till then: And coming out of this, he is free to choose good and evil,
and neither God nor Men can constrain him to Salvation or Damnation: And that
any is saved or damned, can proceed from nothing but the free choice that every
one makes of following good or evil, and not at all from Predestination, as
they very unjustly do imagine: For God will never deprive Man of his Graces how
wicked soever he be, so long as he shall Live in this World. He will never take
back the Graces which he gave him in Adam. They shall be still communicated to
him, if he will make a good use of them. The Pardon which he granted to Adam,
he granted to all Men, and no Body can believe without Sin that God should
Reprobate him for the Sin of Adam: For by his Grace he forgave all Romans 11. 16.
1 Cor. 7. 14.
when he forgave Adam his Sin. He cannot retract the Remission which he then
gave to all Men, to Reprobate them upon the same account of Adams Sin: For God
never repents him of what by his Mercy he has once done, unless Man of his
Free Will come to offend God by other new Sins: Which he is free to do. All Men
were created in the State of Innocence in Adam; and all Men sinned in Adam, and
also received the Pardon of this Sin in Adam: So that all they who dye in Adam
are certainly saved by the Mercy of God upon the Pardon that he gave to Adam:
But if his Children being come to the use of Reason do of their own Free Will
turn to evil, they then fall again into Gods displeasure, and begetting
Children in the same displeasure, they are in the same Condemnation with their
Fathers, as being united with them till they come to the use of their own
Reason: For then they begin to have a Being by themselves, whereas before they
were reckoned to be one and the same thing with their Parents, because of the
Sympathy there is in the Union of the Father with the Child, whose Will he
holds in his Power, as Adam held the Will of all Men till they attain the use
of their own Reason, so that till then they may be predestined to Salvation
or Damnation by the good or ill Will of their Parents, and not by the Decree of
God, who cannot and will not destroy any Body, having certainly created and
forgiven all the World, that all might be saved, and none Reprobated: For if he
had precisely decreed some for Damnation, he should not have had so much
Righteousness in himself as what he demands of Men: For he says to them, Mat.
5. 44.
Love your Enemies, and do good to them that persecute you. This Counsel would
have had no Authority if he himself had Reprobated those who are become his
Enemies. This absolute Reprobation would not be good, but the greatest evil
that ever could be imagined: How could he command Men to do good to their
Enemies, when he himself would do so great and eternal an Evil for the Fault
they had committed against him, and that while they were yet in a state of
Penitence, as they are during this Life, where Reprobation shall never have
place, since till the very last Instant they may find Mercy and Pardon? This
Reprobation must only operate after Death, and not during this Life: Because
this is 2 Pet. 3. 9.
the Time of Penitence, in which they who shall be certainly Reprobated can
have no part; and it would be a very rigorous and unjust Thing, that God should
oblige those to Penitence whom he absolutely resolves to damn. I believe, Sir,
they confound the Times when they speak of Predestination, and take the present
for the Time to come: For at the Judgment, God will then take Two Masses, the
One of Elect, and the Other of Reprobates, who do what they will shall
assuredly be damned: Because the Time of Penitence will then be past: But
during this Life there can be no predestined Reprobates.

I told her, That well-meaning Persons did believe there was in this Life
Predestination; and that God had here Vessels of Election and Reprobation, and
both necessarily so.

She said: This is, Sir, because these Persons, though well-meaning, do not
discover the Goodness, and the Righteousness of God; and they judge only
according to the Appearance of Things, and not according to the Reality: For
God can never Reprobate any after that he has created all for Salvation; and he
cannot damn them for Adam's Sin after he has pardoned it, and Man has
undertaken the Penitence that God enjoined him on that occasion. If there were
any Reprobated for this Sin of Adam, in strict Justice Adam ought to be first
of all Reprobated, since he first committed the Sin. It Is sad to see and hear
how Men Psalm. 14. 2. and 82. 5.
mistake the Qualities of God, making him pass as unjust and evil, like
themselves. I am sorry, Sir, that I must be so prolix in this Matter, but the
Thing requires it: Because it is a most important Point that regards the Glory
of God and the Salvation of Men; and therefore I cannot speak too much of it.
Be not you more weary to hear than I am to speak of it. I have still had
strange Contradictions in my Spirit when I heard Persons of Sincerity aiming to
maintain the Truth, and yet notwithstanding very far from knowing it, and
taking the Sentiments of Men for infallible Truths, though very often they
persist in their Ignorance which is so great and so prejudicial to the
Salvation of many: For he who believes he is predestined to Salvation will
not be at the pains to procure it; and though he fall into Sins, he will not
repent of them, believing that he cannot be damned, and that he shall one Day
Repent, though it were but the Last of his Life. Consider a little, Sir, what
sloth this occasions in those well-meaning Persons, and in what hazard they put
their Salvation! For it is a Delusion to believe, that we shall be Saved by
God's Predestination, Live as we please; for God will never Save any since
Adam's Sin, but those who of their Free Will shall resign themselves to the
Will of God. Though his Goodness Saved all Men in creating them, without any
Cooperation of theirs, yet he will Save none without it, after they have their
Free-wils to make choice of good or evil. God could indeed Save them before
they made Resistance, and while he was absolute Lord of all Things: But since
he gave them this Free Will to govern themselves and so many other Things, he
cannot Save them without themselves. Therefore no Body should flatter himself
to believe that he shall be Saved if he be predestined; seeing this
Predestination can have no more place since the Sin of Adam. Every one must
Phil. 2. 12.
exercise himself to work out his Salvation: Because no Body shall obtain it
but he who of his own Free Will shall yield up Psalm. 31. 6.
into God's Hands the Free Liberty that he gave him: These are the Elect:
Because they being yielded up unto God, none can pluck John. 10. 28.
them out of his Hands, unless the Person himself should yet Heb. 10. 38.
withdraw from God: Which is almost impossible: Because God still directing
him, his Will can no more be led to evil, than that of God is, unto which it is
joined and united. The Goodness of God replenishes it with so many Graces*
Cant. 1. 4.
that it is impossible not to follow them. How could the same Goodness ordain,
that any should be Reprobated, since nothing that is evil can proceed from it?
Must not the Reprobation of Men of necessity come from their evil Will? Since
it is impossible for God to do evil, it is consequently impossible for him to
Reprobate so much as one Soul. If it be, it is still its own Fault only, and
not at all a Predestination to Damnation: Because God damns no Hos. 13. 9.
Body, not even at the Last Day of Judgment. For they who shall be then
absolute Reprobates, shall condemn Wisd. 5. 2-15.
themselves; when the Justice of God shall appear to them, their Injustice will
give Sentence against themselves, and confine ( o) Isa. 60. 3.
them to Hell as the just Merit of their Iniquities, and not at all as the
Decree of God.

I said to her, It was very probable, that God can damn no Body, since he is
all good, and can do no Evil; that notwithstanding of this, we see according to
our short Prospect of Effects as if Men were Predestined to good and evil: As
in the Conversion of St. Paul Acts 9. 3.
, and of Luke 7. 37.
Mary Magdalen; and on the contrary, in the Reprobation John 17. 12.
of Judas, and Luke 23. 39.
of the wicked Thief.

She said: Sir, These different Accidents are not considered in their Source;
but only superficially gone over, and judged according to Humane Sentiments,
which does not penetrate the Righteousness of God: St. Paul was not only a
Chosen Vessel on God's part, but also on the part of his own Free will: For
after he had the use of Reason, he was always Phil. 3. 6.
zealous of the Law of God, and it is very probable he had resigned his
Free Will to God according to his Knowledge, because all that moved him to
persecute the Christians was only a desire to maintain his Law, which he
believed was more perfect, as being given by God; and imagining that the
Christians aimed to destroy it, he would maintain it, and believe that by doing
this he greatly pleased God, who seeing this good Desire 1 Timothy 1. 13.
would needs draw him out of his Ignorance in an outward and extraordinary
manner: Because it is God's Property to abound in Grace, and to prevent Men of
good Will by such Means as whereby they may discover that he favors them.
Therefore he appeared visibly to St. Paul, by some Light, and made him blind,
asking him, wherefore he persecured him? Making him understand by these outward
Signs the State of his Soul; by the Light he shows him, that he was in
darkness; by the Blindness of his Eyes, the Blindness of his Mind, which must
be directed to some one who might make him see the Truth; and by the Question,
Wherefore he persecuted him? to show him how much he was deceived, in
Prosecuting the Christians who were the People of God. This he knew not, all
these Things fell out not because God (y) Gal. 1. 14.
had partially chosen St. Paul to be his Apostle: But because he had of his own
Free Will chosen to follow Good* and to resign himself to God. But whereas Men
see only these outward Things, they believe God acts by Passion as they do, and
that he prefers one of his Creatures to another: Which he does not at all: For
he loves them all equally, as being all his Children, and nevertheless gives
more Grace to those who are most resigned to him: And this with Reason: For a
Son who does his Fathers Pleasure, and is dedicated to his Will, is more worthy
of Favors than another who resists and despises the Will of the same Father.

Magdalen received also the Grace of Conversion though she was a Sinner: But if
we consider well her inward Disposition, we shall clearly perceive that she was
truly disposed to resign her self to God notwithstanding her Sins: For she no
sooner heard the Truth from her Saviors Mouth, but she quitted her Sins Luke
7. 38.
and bewailed them bitterly, detested her Vanities, and followed Jesus Christ
through all. How many other Persons heard the same Truth, without resolving to
follow him? A Thousand Persons followed Jesus Christ bodily, and heard the same
Words, but produced not the same Effects. This cannot come from God, who has
still the same Efficacy* But it proceeds from the Indisposition of Souls who do
not receive it effectually. And Men not being able to dive into the Interior,
imagine that this is done by God independently. In this, they are greatly
deceived: Which they shall see at the Last Day of Judgment, wherein many shall
be Saints who were despised and condemned in this World; and many others shall
be Reprobated, who here were held for Saints: Because Men regard only the
outside: But God Rev. 2. 23.
tries the Reins, and examines the Conscience, which is known to him alone.
Therefore Men ought never to judge nor dispute of the Works of God: Because
they are blind and ignorant in his Matters; and when they say that he Saved and
Reprobated some in this World, they calumniate him, and blaspheme against his
Qualities of Righteousness and Goodness.

That Judas was damned, was by his own Free Will, and not by the Decree of God,
who spoke more to him to convert him than ever he did to St. Paul or Magdalen;
and that the wicked Thief is damned, was by his obstinacy in Sin: For if he had
acknowledged his Fault, he would have been saved as well as the other.

I said to her, That no Body thought it a Blasphemy against God to say, That
none can be saved without the particular Grace of God, and that some have it,
and some have it not; and that he gives it to whom he pleases.

She said: These Terms of speaking, Sir, make nothing as to the reality of the
Thing. It may indeed be said truly, that none can be saved without the
particular Grace of God: But to say that God gives it only to whom he pleases,
and to understand thereby that he gives it to some and denies it to others with
respect of Persons, is Blasphemy: Because he bestows it always according Psalm.
111. 7, 8.
to his Righteousness, not according to his own Choice: For this is only the
way of passionate Men, to favor those for whom they have an Inclination: God
gives indeed more Grace to some than to others; but always Matthew. 25. 15.
in proportion as each one does more resign himself to his Will: For he says;
ver. 21.
Be ye faithful in little things, and I will place you over great things: To
show that he increases his Grace always according to our Fidelity. That
particular Grace which we stand in need of to be saved, was given to us all in
the Creation of Adam: For he could not create us to Salvation without enduing
with suitable Grace for it; and the Grace of raising us up again after Sin was
also given us in Adam, which we might enjoy yet provided we use the same Means
of his Penitence: And if we have sinned after him by our own Will, it shall be
forgiven us provided we take up the same Penitence, which consists, Genesis 3. 8,
etc.
in the Shame and Confusion that Adam had, in the Fear he had of God, not
daring to appear before him, and in the Accepting of the Penance of Laboring
the Ground and gaining his Bread with the Sweat of his Face. Many Men now say
they have not Grace that they might get rid of their Sins: And if they would
examine their Consciences well, they would find it is because they have no
Repentance nor Confusion for having committed them; nor yet the fear of God,
nor a desire to do Penance for them: And that they may not acknowledge so
great Faults, they say, they have not the Grace of God that they might amend.
This is to blame God for their own Wickedness. For very often they love their
Sins, and are only afraid of the Chastisements which these have deserved: So
that if God had not a Hell to chastise them, they would never forsake them, so
far would they be from desiring to do Penitence for them. And yet
notwithstanding of all this they are bold to say, that they have not the
sufficient, or effectual Grace of God, according to their conn'd Terms, upon
which they build great Disputes, which being well examined, we shall find them
to be founded only upon Words; and that the Truth is always true; and that God
gave Graces to Man in Adam but too sufficient for Salvation, and even generally
to all Men Eccl. 18. 9 -- 12. 2 Pet. 3. 9.
for obtaining the Pardon of their Sins. This being so, why should we attribute
the Loss of our Salvation, or the not amending of our Lives, to the want of
Gods Grace? Is it not a particular Grace when every one as to his own
particular has received sufficient Isa. 5. 4.
to forsake his Sin if he will, and to work out his Salvation? Whether God gave
these Graces at the Beginning, or if he gives them only at present, they are
still from the same God, the Giver of all good, as well in one Season as in
another. What needs disputing whether these Graces are given now, or if they
have continued with us since Adam? It is enough that we have them, and may
increase them by our Fidelity: For it pleases God always Mat. 5. 48.
that we be perfect, and he is more desirous Psalm. 81. 11, 14. John 16. 24.
to increase his Graces than we are willing to ask them: And if we have them
not in abundance, it is certainly because we have not sought them, or done our
endeavor to obtain them: For God on his part is always ready Matthew. 7. 7.
to open so soon as we knock at the Gate of his Mercy, which is abundant to all
those who seek it, without engaging into that foolish Persuasion, That God will
not give it but to whom he pleases; since he is not partial, but always does
good Psalm. 145. 9. Eccl. 18. 12, 13.
to all, even to his Enemies Romans 5. 6, 10.
themselves.

I said to her, That there was much Ignorance in these Disputes: That every one
maintained his own Opinion as good; and that the best believed Predestination,
because others attribute too much to the Creature.

She said: Sir, I believe that no Body has hitherto discovered the Truth as to
the Grace of God: For it cannot be true that God has predestined any to
Damnation, for the Reasons I have told you; nor yet that Man has the Power to
save himself when he pleases: Because the Habit of Sin is as another Nature,
from whence we cannot deliver our selves. Even as the Souls which are in Hell,
though they have their Free Will cannot use it in good, because they have given
loose Reins to Evil, they cannot any more have the Will to quit it; and being
tied and united to all sort of evil Objects, they cannot find the means to do
well, even though they should have the Will; Even so in proportion, those who
are yet in this Life, who would not resign themselves to God, but have followed
their own Wills, are so habituated to evil, that they cannot have the Will to
do well, but with great endeavors, and much force and violence to pull
themselves out of the occasions of their Evils: With this difference
nevertheless, that Sinners may yet in this World obtain Gods Grace, and the
Remission of their Sins: Which damned Souls can never do: Because their Sins
have brought on the Sentence of their Eternal Reprobation. Men are ignorant of
many Things through the Presumption of their Wisdom. If they would become
Children, and be converted to God, they would be far more wise. For Mat. 11. 25.
God reveals his Secrets to Little ones, and hides them from the Great and the
Wise. I wish all the Books about these Disputes were burnt, and that every one
would return into the primitive Dependence upon God, which comprehends all
Divine Sciences: For he who is resigned to God, is Psalm. 119. 99, 100.
more Learned than all the Doctors of the World.

What can be ascribed to the Creature, since it has 1 Cor. 4. 7.
nothing* that it has not received of God? There was a Time when it was not;
and when it came to be, it is God who gave it being, and all the Powers of Soul
and Body: The Instinct to do well, and the Liberty to love God come also of his
Free Gift; if the Creature has a good Thought, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
it comes from him. What can be ascribed to the Creature, since it is come of
nothing, and can do no good thing without God? If he gave it that Inclination
to good, or that good Thought when he created it, or if he gives them as yet,
is it not still the same Giver, or the same God, who works Salvation in his
Creature? Where is their place for disputing to know whether Man can save
himself, since he is nothing 2 Cor. 12. 11.
, and has nothing John 3. 27.
that he has not received? And this is an Eternal Truth; that Salvation and all
other good Hos. 13. 9.
, comes from God; and that all Evil and Damnation comes from Man; and he who is
saved Psalm. 72. 28.
cleaves to the Grace of God; and he who is damned resists it. What Argument
will they bring yet in the Dispute about Grace after so clear and convincing
Reasons? If Man may save himself when he will, it is always by the Grace of
God, who created him for Salvation, and imprinted in him this Inclination to
good, and this desire to be saved. How can they attribute any thing to the
Creature, even though it should be said, that he may save himself when he will;
since this Will was given him by God? He cannot ascribe it to himself. Whether
it was given him in his Creation, or at the Hour that he is Converted, this
should not cause so many Disputes, so little profitable either to the one or
the other Party: Because he who holds that his Salvation depends upon the
Predestination of God does certainly conceive a Sloth to Good, being persuaded
that his Salvation is decreed, do what he will; and on the contrary, he who
believes he may save himself when he pleases, would not be at much trouble to
advance in Virtue; since he believes his Salvation depends on his own Will, he
will imagine that he shall come still in time to be saved, though it should be
at the end of his Llife. And hereby these Disputes instead of bringing any good
to Souls, do cause them great Mischiefs of Sloth and Negligence as to
Salvation, and Mistakes of God: For the more we will needs know him by
Arguments, the more we sink into Darkness.

I said to her, That all the Schools then ought to be overturned, since the
Disputes which they reckon the most saving make us to mistake* God and to
neglect our Salvation.

She said: Truly, Sir, this is very desirable, that Men would abandon all their
Studies that they might resign themselves to the Will of God: since this is the
one thing necessary, upon which our Salvation depends. To what purpose is it to
make so many Books, so many Studies, so many Disputes, since all Perfection,
the Law, and Salvation, consist in the RESIGNING of our Will to that of God!
All other Things are vain or useless: For we are created for no other thing but
for ever to take our Delight with God. For what end should we amuse our selves,
with so many different Things, and fill our Minds with Studies, Sciences, and
Disputes, which are only for this transient Life, and in the mean time give
great Hindrances to the RESIGNATION that we ought to make of our Will to that
of God? For as long as Man is busied in Studies, Sciences, and Disputes, he
acts always by his own Motion: Because those who are resigned to God, do
nothing but receive from him, and while they do not affect any Sciences, Phil.
3. 7, 8.
they possess more of them than all they can Learn in the Schools, which are
always full of many Defects, because every one is always concerned in his own
Opinion, which can be only Humane, Limited, and Ignorant: And all these so
imperfect Things hinder the Light of the Holy Spirit, which only enlightens
Souls according as they are Wis. 1. 4, 5.
emptied of all Earthly Objects of which Studies and Disputes are the most
Lively to fill the Faculties of the Soul. This has occasioned the Holy Doctors
to continne in many Errors touching God's Dealings: Because the Pre-occupation
of their Studies has hindered the Light of the Holy Spirit, by which they might
discover all Things, if the disturbance of their Humane Learning had been
removed: For this hindered them from seeing the simple Purity of Divine Things,
and the one thing needful for our Salvation, which is, the RESIGNATION of our
selves to GOD.

I said to her, That at least Divines would be needful, to expound the
Scriptures to the People, and to teach them saving Truths: Since we are born in
ignorance we cannot know but what is taught us.

She said: These Doctors of the Law put to death Jesus Christ; and those who
have followed them, have taught many Errors to the People: So that I believe
if many of them had been Heathens, or brought up in unhabited Deserts, without
being instructed by any, they would have attained to a greater Knowledge of
God, than what they have acquired by the Instruction of all these Doctors, who
have often taught the Doctrines of Men, instead of that of God: And if these
Persons were not full of these Doctrines, they would certainly be at more
Liberty to resign themselves to God: So many Laws and Means which they have
taught them, are so many Ropes and Chains which withdraw them from it. For it
is certain that one who has been taught nothing, will still have a natural Bent
and Inclination to Good: Because all that is Good, is Lovely; and if he shall
apply himself never so little to consider the Works of God, he must of
necessity be brought to Love him: For he would see that all that he made, is
Good: By seeing the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and all the Heavens, he must
confess that the Author of all these Things is perfect; and looking on the
Earth, the Trees, the Plants and Elements, he must discover an incomprehensible
Divinity, who had the Skill to make all these admirable Things. Which obliges
all that are Reasonable to Love him. And when Man considers himself, and sees
the Art there is in the Fabric of his Body, in the Faculties of his Soul, in
the Subtilty of his Spirit, he must confess that there is a God the Author of
all this, to whom all Things ought to be ascribed: Because no Creature is able
to do any such thing. By all which things Psalm. 19. 1, etc.
, a Man comes more perfectly to the Knowledge of God, than by Sciences and the
Expositions of all the Doctors of the World, who have nothing but Limited
Sciences.

The Twentieth and Third Conference,
Shows, That it is by Faith only that we can be Saved, which coming from God
works still Resignation: Even among the Heathens, etc.

I said to her, That all this Knowledge of God was nothing but the Faith of a
Heathen, that it was not capable to work Salvation, that to be saved we must
have a Divine Faith.

She said: Sir, You are ignorant yet of a great many Things, For that Faith
which you call Heathen is Divine; because it comes immediately from God, who
has imprinted in the Soul of all Men this Divine Light Prove. 20. 27. John 1. 9.
that leads them to the Knowledge of the true God. This is a Grace infused
without the Concurrence of any Men, which is much more perfect then the Faith
we give to the Things they propose to be believed by us in the Roman Church,
many of which are very absurd, and neither respect the Glory of God, nor our
Salvation. They give us for an Article of Faith, That there are Three Persons
in God: Though nevertheless no Creature can comprehend what is in God, but by
his Operations which we see with our Eyes, as that he is Almighty, that he is
All* just, all Good, and True: Because all that we see he operates in us, and
in other Creatures, bear these Three Qualities: But to know if there be Three
Divine Persons in God, this surpasses our Capacity: Because God is an
incomprehensible 1 Timothy 6. 16.
Being, and was never discovered by any so as to know what there is in his
Divinity. They propose also to us many Things for Articles of Faith, which are
not of its true Essence; seeing no Body can be saved without Faith, and they
continually propose to us new Things for Articles of this Faith, which our
Forefathers never believed as such: And if we cannot have true Faith now
without believing them, it were to be feared that our Forefathers were not
Saved, since they did not believe those new Things which are now proposed to us
as Articles of Faith. They never believed that the Virgin Mary was conceived
without Original Sin; and now they would make this Belief to pass for an
Article of Faith: Though nevertheless, there is no appearance of Truth in it:
For the Virgin came out of the Mass of Adam, as all the rest of Men: And she
did also undergo the Penitence common to all the Children of Adam, having
gained her Bread by Bodily Labor, and suffered the Malignity of all the
Elements; and her Son Jesus himself shivered for Cold in the Stable of
Bethelem, showing that he was a real Man descended from Adam, subjecting
himself to the same Penitence that our First Father had received and accepted
from God in the Remission of his Sin. Why should they now lay it before us as
an Article of Faith, that the Virgin was conceived without Sin, since all
Humane Creatures which are born of Parents who live under the Dependence of
God, having accepted the Penitence that God enjoined Adam, are all born in the
Indulgence that God gave to Adam? Wherefore should there be a particular
Article of Faith for the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin; as also for the
Infallibility of the Pope; seeing all these Things have no respect to the true
Faith, which must work out our Salvation? For if the Virgins Conception was
Immaculate, or if the Pope be infallible, this makes nothing for our Salvation,
nor as to the Knowledge we ought to have of a God upon whom all Things depend.
This Light infused in my Soul, is true Faith; and the Dependence that I desire
to have upon the same God, is the Work of my Faith. What need is there to add
yet to this the believing that the Pope is infallible, since I have the same
Light of Faith, that tells me, No Man can be infallible? Since Adam created in
Innocence, and endued with all the Grace and Holiness that can be met with in
any Man, did fall, and by failing so grossly show that he was not infallible;
may not a Man who is a Sinner, fail or err? All these Faiths and Beliefs are
not divinely infused by God into our Soul, as that Faith is which makes us know
Heb. 11. 6.
a God above all Things, All good, All-just, All-mighty, but Incomprehensible.
This Faith* Sir, which you call Heathen, is the True Faith, which is able to
work Salvation in all those who in consequence of it do through Love resign
themselves to the same God.

I asked her, If she believed the Heathens would be saved, since they are not
baptized?

She said: Yes, Sir, All the Heathens who knew God by his Works, and resigned
their Will to him, shall assuredly be saved: For they had operating Faith, True
Faith, in believing that there is One Almighty God, who created the Heaven, the
Earth, and all Things, and they had the Works of Faith, when they were resigned
to the Will of the same God. Which appeared in all those who despised the
Things of this Life for that which is to come. They could not have done this
but by a Divine Light, that God infused into their Souls: Because the Brutish
Senses cannot despise the Pleasures of this Life: For they know no other; and
Nature cannot betray it self by despising what is good for it, to choose what
is evil for it. When we see one who may have Honors, Riches and Pleasures in
this Life, and who yet quits them to be despised, poor and afflicted, we may
well believe that he has the Light of Faith infused by God into his Soul:
Because neither the Devil, nor Nature would ever induce him to do such Things:
For no Body hates his own Flesh; and the Devil incites always to satisfy
Nature. And if we see one whom we call a Heathen, quit the Conversation of Men,
and retire into a Solitude, we may well believe that he has the true Light of
Faith, which makes Nature break off conversing with its like: For Society is a
most Lovely Thing: Man is a Sociable Creature above all the other Animals; and
if the Beasts are sad when they are alone, how much more must Man be so when he
Lives according to Nature, unless it be some half-broken spirit, who through
Melancholy loves rather to be alone to give the more Liberty to its Black
Humors? This is not to be found in those who despise Conversation the better
to wait on God, and to be delivered from the Troubles they have to live among
those who know not God, but offend him every Moment. (g) Mat. 12. 33. 35.
How could I believe, Sir, that these Souls so excelling in Virtue should not
be saved, even though they are not Baptized; since Baptism is only an outward
Sign of the INWARD RESIGNATION which they have made of their Will to that of
God? That God, who Jer. 17. 10.
tries the Reins, would he not save them, for not having observed this outward
Formality, which is done in the sight of Men? We have not a Political God who
has need of the Testimony of Men when he sees the Essence of Faith living in
our Inward Parts. I reckon such Heathens to be more SAINTS, than many of those
who are Canonized by the Roman Church; and wish, Sir, that you had attained to
their solid Virtues? that you had a perfect Contempt of this Life, aspiring
after another which will deliver us from so many Miseries; and also an entire
Resignation of your Will to that of God, in which alone our Salvation consists,
and not in so many sorts of Means which they set before us as necessary Things,
or a Blind Faith of Things which often respect neither God, nor our Salvation.
For though indeed it be Faith to believe that which Heb. 11. 1.
we do not see, nevertheless that is not to say that we must blindly believe
all that they would persuade us: For God has given us an Understanding to
comprehend what is comprehensible of the Works of our Faith. For Example: We
must believe in God Almighty, who created the Heaven and the Earth. We do not
so see this God in whom we believe; but nevertheless, we see evidently that
there must be an Almighty God, when we consider the Works that he has done by
his Almighty Power; and therefore our Faith is not blind, since it gives Light
to see the Works of him in whom we believe. But diverse of these Things which
they propose to us as Articles of Faith, are without any appearance of Truth,
as is, the Infallibility of the Pope.

I asked her, If one might be saved without believing all the Articles of Faith
in particular?

She said: Yes, Sir, we may be saved by the General Belief Heb. 11. 6. Psalm.
36. 6, 7, 8.
that there is one only God the Creator of all Things, provided that this
Belief beget in us the resigning of our Will to God in whom we believe: Because
in this all Things are comprehended: since by being Psalm. 16. 8. and 73. 23, 24.
resigned to God, we fulfill all the Articles of Faith, all the Commandments of
the Law, and the Evangelical Counsels. And whereas it is said that all
Christians are obliged to Learn the chief Points of our Belief, nevertheless
this is not that they must Learn this by Rote or by Words: For it is enough to
know the substance of them, that we may observe them; for this observing of
them is more than to be able to tell them by Rote; it is the same as to all the
Articles of our Faith in particular. It is of little moment that we have a
particular Belief of so many Points, if we do not observe them all in general
by the resigning of our Will to that of God. We have no need of doing any other
thing to work out our salvation; for if we had not quitted this Dependence upon
God, we should never have had the other Commandments, nor the other Articles of
Faith. Our sins alone have occasioned all these Articles, and all these
Commandments, and other Means: And sin ceasing* we should have no need of other
Laws. So that our sins alone have engendered the Law and the Articles of Faith,
which were given us only to reduce our Understanding to a DEPENDENCE upon God.
The first thing that God did to bring back Adam to this Dependence from whence
he had withdrawn himself while he would needs become wise in himself, he asks
him, Genesis 3. 9.
Adam where are thou? Not that God could be ignorant where Adam was, since he
knows all things* But it was to recall his Understanding to the Consideration of
what he had done in disobeying God, that he might consider the miserable state
to which he had brought himself while he would needs depend upon himself. The
first Precept that God gave Man, was to make him know the state of his Soul,
asking him, Where art thou? To make him re-enter into himself, and recollect
his Senses, that he might see whither he had strayed from a Dependence upon his
God, in which if he had continued, there would have been no need of asking,
where he was; since he would have been still in his presence: But since he had
withdrawn himself, it was needful that God should call him back again by asking
him, where he was. But as soon as Adam acknowledged his fault, and offered
himself to God, saying, Here am I, Lord, all confused and trembling, not daring
to appear before him, but hiding himself as a Criminal before the face of his
Judge, then God gives him the second Precept, saying, That he should Till the
Ground, and gain his Bread in the sweat of his Face. This was the Penitence
enjoined to satisfy for his sin, which being through Grace remitted to him, he
ought nevertheless to suffer some temporal Punishments; and this in Justice:
For God had not only bestowed on Man a Divine and Reasonable Soul, and a
Free Will to love him; but also many Natural and material Graces: Therefore it
was not enough for Man that God had granted him the Remission of his Trespasses
against him, in restoring him by a second Grace his Reason and his Free Will;
but he ought also to satisfy for the Natural and material Graces, which things
have not essentially the goodness of God to pardon this Injury received from
Man. God, who is good, pardons him the Offense he had committed against his
Majesty, and even makes him a garment to cover his Nakedness, that he might
lessen his Confusion, he takes care also to thrust him out of Paradise, for
fear he should come to eat of the Tree of Life, and by this means live always
miserable. All these Favors come from the Divine Goodness. But the Elements,
the Earth, and the other Creatures, not having in them this goodness, set
themselves against Man, and make him suffer, that by Penitence he might pay for
the Rebellion he had committed against their Creator. This the Justice of God
owned, by ordaining Adam to undergo the Pains that all these Earthly Creatures
should give him: Because they are justly irritated against Man, who was
constituted their Lord to whom they ought to be subject and to obey: But since
he was a Rebel against his God, they ought in like manner to rebel against him;
and being Creatures incapable of Mercy, of necessity Man must satisfy them by
a corporeal and material Penitence like unto their Nature. This was ordained by
God, by (...) Justice, from which he never departs, exercising always his
goodness in that which respects himself, and his ^ce as to all his Creatures.
Lo this is the reason why (...) Precepts to Man, only for his sins, and this
out of his great Mercy, and had it not been for this, he would have confined
Man to Hell for his first Disobedience: But his infinite Goodness has at all
times exercised Mercy; and according as he saw Man stray from him, and quit his
DEPENDENCE, he called him back still by Precepts, which were like so many
Voices that cried, Adam, where art thou? For when the Children of Israel gave
themselves to Idolatry and other sins, he gave them Ten Commandments, to let
them see, that all the Things contained in them are those which withdraw Man
from a Dependence upon his God. And afterward when he would yet stray further
from God, by covering Temporal goods, or Bodily pleasures, or by coveting the
Honors John 5. 44. and 12. 42, 43.
which Men render one to another, more than to God, he then was so good as to
take a Humane Body that he might teach us palpably that all these things did
withdraw us from a Dependence upon God, setting before us all the Evangelical
Precepts as means to return into this Dependence, wherein our Salvation
consists: For he who lives in this DEPENDENCE, fulsils all the Laws, which
cannot save us without this Dependence. For Faith alone operating can save us,
but not the Laws, which are given us only to discover our sins. Faith working
is that Heb. 11. per totum.
which makes us know God and resign our selves to him, and it contains in it in
practice all the Laws and the Articles of Faith: For he who has resigned his
Will to God, knows well where Gal. 2. 20.
he is, and will also willingly satisfy Luke 23. 41.
his just Penitence: He takes good heed also not to commit the things which are
forbidden by the Ten Commandments, and not to omit the things therein
commanded, and he punctually follows the Counsels of the Gospel; for he who is
resigned to God, cannot any longer have affection for Father, Mother, Brother,
Sister, Land, House, or any other thing; since God who holds our Will has no
need of Earthly Possessions, but requires only from us the Divine Things which
he bestowed on us, which are proportioned to his Divine Nature; he can be no
more satisfied with Temporal things than a Horse can be fed with stones, which
are not a food suitable to his Nature. In short, He who has yielded up and
resigned his Free Will to that of God, has no need of observing in particular
the Articles of Faith: Because he is restored unto the first Essential
Ordinance of God; and while he continues in this, he has need of no other
things; because God would never have demanded more of us, and even at present
Prove. 23. 26.
demands no more of those who will yield up themselves to him. Is it not sad,
Sir, that Men now are so far from this One Thing necessary, and that they are
subjected to so many several Laws by their sins? Were it not better to take
this first Liberty that God gave us, and to yield it up into his Hands, than to
subject our selves to so many Laws, and so many particular Creeds, which do
nothing but fill our Understandings, which ought only to be applied to know one
Almighty God, the Creator of all Things, and to be resigned wholly to him? For
our Understanding is not given us by God for the study of Letters, nor for
Trafficking in Business: Because God has nothing to do with all these Things,
he having created us for no other end but to take his delight with us, which
can never have its complete Joy but by the resigning of our Will to his; this
is what he requires of all Men.

I said to her, That we find it not written that God precisely demanded of Man
the Dependence of his Free Will; which he ought to do, in case it were so
necessary for Salvation.

She said: How, Sir! Would you make more reckoning of it if this were written
upon Paper, or carved on a Stone, than if it were engraven in our Deuteronomy. 30. 14.
Romans 10. 8.
Heart? Who is there in the World that has not engraven within himthe necessity
there is to depend upon God, since all know they have received their Being and
all Things from him? Is there any of never so little Reason who call in
question whether to be saved we ought necessarily to depend upon God? Because
none can give us Salvation but he only, and if we withdraw from him, and
subject our Divine Free Will unto our Passions, this is to follow our Animal
Part, which has no other Salvation but the affording us a little Beastly
Sensuality. Even Natural Reason it self may abundantly show us the need we have
of depending upon God: Because all that we are appertains to him. Can we in
good Reason deny a Person what belongs to him in property? Much less can we
deny God the Dependence that we owe him. It is true he gave us our Free Will to
use it to good or evil; but with this condition, that in case we should turn it
to evil we should suffer the Pains that our Evils engendered. And who could
ever imagine that Man should be such an Enemy to himself as to withdraw from
his Dependence upon God, upon whom depends all his Happiness, to subject
himself under the Dependence of his own Will* which is so vicious, and capable
only of rendering us miserable both in this Life and in the other? A Man must
have lost his Judgment if he do not know the Obligation he has to continue in a
Dependence upon God for his Salvation, even though God had not precisely
testified or said, That if we would be saved we must be subject to his Will;
since Reason, Justice, and Truth, do dictate to us a Thing so reasonable, and
the Brute Beasts themselves Isa. 1. 3.
teach us, to submit to their Benefactours, some of which have sometimes
acknowledged all the Days of their Life some particular Benefits received from
Men. Must God declare to them by Writ the Obligation they have to subject their
Wills to his? He abandantly testified that such was his Will when he forbad
Adam to eat of the Fruit of one Tree only, permitting him to eat of all the
rest. Must he say precisely, that he would have Man to submit his Will to his?
Nature, Reason, and Understanding were capable enough to comprehend that God
would still reserve this Dependence upon himself, reserving for an outward Sign
the Fruit of one Tree only. All the World knows well enough that God has no
need of any Fruit, and that this Prohibition was the secret Commandment that
God gave him not to withdraw from his Dependence: Even as he did not bid Adam
in express terms, reflect upon himself, and consider the Misery into which he
had plunged himself; but he says only, Adam, where art thou? These few Words
were but too sufficient to make Adam understand, that he would do well to
examine himself: Just so it was not needful that he should say in express
Words, It is my Will that you submit your Will to mine. This ought to be
understood sufficiently when he says, I forbid thee to eat of this Tree. Man
in himself had no other Fruit worthy of God, but the Disposal of his Free Will;
for all his other Things were either Humane, or Material. This Free Will alone
was Divine: The use of which ought to be reserved for God alone: Even though he
had never declared that he would have it for himself, yet Man was certainly
obliged both by Divine and Humane Right voluntarily to offer it to him.

The Twentieth and Fourth Conference,
Shows, Why Men cannot abandon themselves to a Dependence upon God.

I said to her, There was nothing more reasonable, nor more just, or perfect,
than for Man to resign his Will to that of God, asking her, why Men had
difficulty to do this?

She said: Sir, There is nothing better for Man than to resign his Will to that
of God, and we see nothing less practiced than this: Because no Body applies
his Spirit to consider this Obligation. One diverts himself by his Studies;
another by his Offices; another by his Trade: Just as if every one had been
created only for such Employs. They Rule on Earth as Little Gods, without
thinking on this DEPENDENCE; and when God shall come at the Hour of our Death,
he will deride the Men who have lived thus, as he did Adam, when he clothed
him with a garment of Skins, saying to him, Genesis 3. 22.
Behold Adam is become a God like us! Men now may indeed at Death look for the
like Reproaches: Because God has placed them in this Valley of Misery to do
Penitence; ( x) Prove. 1. 26.
and they will needs Rule and take their pleasures in it as in a Paradise,
forgetting that they ought to depend upon God, and submit their Wills to his:
And instead of doing this, they will needs govern themselves, and follow their
own Inclinations. These evil Habits make it seem difficult for Men now to
abandon their Wills to God, because they have possessed them till this present
Time: And seeing all that has Life is in a continual Motion if we live to our
Senses, we advance always in Brutishness: And if we live to the Devil, we
advance always in Malice; but if we live to God, we advance always in the
Divine Nature. The difficulty that we find to resign our Will to that of God,
proceeds certainly from this, that we are habituated not to depend on the Will
of God, and that we have debased this Divine Quality, that he has given us,
even to the Earth, or to Hell. When we leave it to the power of the Devil to
Rule over our Freewill, we then render our Divine Souls, Devils; and when we
let it be Ruled by our Brutish Passions, we then render our Divine Soul,
Beastly. What Injury does Man to himself that he will not yield up his
Free Will into Gods Hand, who would render it wholly Divine! This is the One
Thing necessary, and we do not apprehend it! Nevertheless, we cannot be saved
by any other Means, since this is the only Way that leads to Salvation, we must
of necessity retake it, or we shall all perish. We must be born again, and
re-enter into the Original State in which God created us: For he has changed
nothing in Man by Sin; no more than he has done, in the Earth, the Beasts, and
Elements, except that all these Things have contracted some Malignity in
themselves, which Man must correct by resisting his own Will, in which this
Malignity resides: For as long as we shall follow our own Will, we shall still
grow worse: Because this Malignity that is in our Will, increases according as
we follow it. By which we may evidently see that he who will not yield up his
own Will to God cannot be saved: For this Divine Quality which is in us, being
become brutish, produces all sorts of Evils; even as the Devils since they
applied their Divine Qualities to do evil, have an insatiable appetite ( z)
John 3. 3.
to Evil. But when this our Will is yielded up into Gods Hand, it is in its:
Center, and produces all sort of good: Of necessity therefore we must retake
our Judge. 8. 6.
Original, and the first essential Commandment that God gave us, which is, a
DEPENDENCE upon his Will. It is this that Jesus Christ says, Luke 13. 3.
Except you repent, you shall all perish. The trouble that we shall have to
resign our Will to God, will purge our Souls; and by this Violence we shall
possess them.

I said to her, That none had ever searched so deep into the necessity of this
Dependence upon God as she had deduced it: Which notwithstanding was so clear
and true, that no Body could doubt of it: That Man owed all to God, since he
had received all from him.

She said: Sir, The cause why they do not penetrate the necessity of this
Dependence upon God, is, the Blindness of Men, who being diverted by their
Worldly Affairs and Business, do not apply themselves to that which concerns
their Eternal Happiness; contenting themselves with this, to believe blindly
what is laid before them, that is, the Reasons and Sentiments of Men; without
searching into the Essence of the Thing, or the Truth of their Original. It is
in this that Jesus Christ said, Matthew. 15. 14.
If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. They teach in the
Roman Church a great many Laws and Commands, Counsels, Rules, Means, Cases of
Conscience, and a Thousand sorts of Inventions, to please God, which of
themselves are not capable of saving so much as one Soul: While in the mean
time all the World build their Salvation upon these Things: But they are
deceived, since nothing can obtain it but a DEPENDENCE UPON GOD; And as near as
we come to this Dependence, we come as near to our Salvation; and as far as we
are estranged from it, we are as near our Damnation. We ought not to go by Four
Ways when there is but one that is straight. The taking so many different
Methods to go to God, are only By-ways, since there is but One only that can
unite us to him. That is the DEPENDENCE of our Will upon his, all being
comprehended in it; because this is the Essence of all Good: Since nothing is
good Mat. 19. 17.
but God, no good can come but from him Jam. 1. 17.
alone, who does always well, and never ill. Nevertheless he will not act in
us any good but in so far Psalm. 81. 12 -- 15.
as our Free Will is resigned to him. He does always good where he meets with
no opposition, and he will never do it Matthew. 23. 37.
where our Will opposes it self: Because it is he who gave this Liberty to the
Soul; and he will never repent of any of the Works that he has done. If we
could speak of God as we would do of a Man, we would say, that he is very
sorry, when Man withdraws himself from him, and damns himself, but that he
cannot hinder it. Not that the Almighty Power of God does not reach all Things,
or that his Power is limited; but it is because it pleased him to give Man this
Free Will when he created him, that with it he might love him; and Man
nevertheless turns away from loving Him to love some Creatures that are
unworthy of him. This is an occasion for him to repent Genesis 6. 6.
, to speak in our Gibberish, But God can never have any kind of Repentance, or
any other Passions: Because he is Jam. 1. 17.
unchangeable, and never retracts what he Romans 11. 29.
has once done. The first and last Thing that he demands of Man is, that he
acknowledge in all things the Dependence that he has upon God; and that he so
love him, as to yield up the Free Will he gave us, into his power. Lo this is
all that God requires of Man. All the other Precepts, Counsels and Commands,
are only accessory and casual, not at all necessary for him that fulfils this
only essential Commandment, which Men now have forgot because of the Traditions
of Men, which has so filled their Spirits that no Body penetrates now into the
Essence of Virtue, and they know not wherein it consists. Which is very
deplorable.

I asked her, How it was possible that Man should come to such an Ignorance of
God, and of himself, and to such a forgetfulness of his Salvation?

She said: The Reason is, Sir, that whereas Men ought to apply their Reason and
Understanding to know the Works of God, they have applied them to Earthly
Things; and pried into the Works of God to apply them to Evil. For Example: We
see some Rod or Chastisement befall us: We immediately say; that God is angry,
and that he afflicts us. These are the Sentiments of the most pious, and they
are much better than those who ascribe this to Fortune, or Second Causes, for
there is no Solidity in this; whereas the first has some regard of God, yet
nevertheless it is so imperfect, that it is injurious to him, instead of being
honorable. For if we speak truly of God, it cannot be said that he is angry,
because he is not subject to any Passion, no more to Wrath than other Passions:
Neither does he afflict us; because no Evil or Afflictions can come from him,
as being the Source of all Good, from which no Evil can be derived: But these
Terms are used even in the Holy Scripture, to make us understand something of
God according to our Capacity: And if it were said, that any other thing than
God afflicts us, it would induce Men, being so imperfect, to Vengeance, instead
of Repentance. It is better therefore to use Terms which do rather excite us to
Virtue, as the Scripture way of speaking does wisely; but we must not infer
from this that these Terms are in effect true; but only to give us some
signification, that is less evil, of the things that we ought to understand.
And nevertheless, they insist sometimes upon certain Terms, and thereon build
Disputes, and Questions, which amuse the World, and turn them away from the
knowledge of God, and of themselves, and of Eternal Salvation, as the Debate
about the Grace of God, or Predestination has done. They found it upon this,
that God in several places of the Sacred Text has said Romans 9. etc.
; that he has elected one, and reprobated another, or that he forsook his
People, or hardened Pharaoh's Heart. These are all Terms accommodated to our
Capacity, but it does not follow that they are so really: For God Elected all
Men that were or shall be to Salvation 1 Timothy 2. 4.
, and none to Reprobation: Because God Mat. 5. 45.
does always good to all, without respect of Persons, or regard of Men's Merit
or Demerit, for he respects himself only that he may still exercise his
Goodness, from which there cannot proceed so much as the Reprobation of one
Soul: For where there is nothing but all good, there no evil can be found; and
Reprobation is the greatest Evil in the World, which never can come from God,
who is all good. And to believe that God gives his Graces only to whom he
pleases, is also to render him partial and passionate, favoring one more than
another. Which cannot be found in God, who is always just as well as always
good, and never favors any out of Preference? Though the Scripture uses these
Terms, nevertheless the Favors of God are still enlarged according as the Soul
resigns its self to his Will, and no farther: Because his Goodness is still
accompanied with Righteousness. He still abounds in Graces, and denies them to
none: If any do not feel the Operations of them, it is because he uses them
according to his own Will, applying them to evil; as is done in Nature, when
they abuse their Beauty, Health, Wealth, or Honors to offend God; who
notwithstanding does not withdraw these Natural Graces because of their Abuse,
no more than he does his Spiritual Graces; which his Goodness still bestows,
though we abuse them: For God can never cease to do well. And when it is said
that he forsakes his People, this is also but a way of speaking: Because God
never forsakes any thing, since he comprehends in himself all things. He cannot
quit or abandon any thing, no more than he can harden the Hearts of any: For
this would be to do an ill thing: But these are all Terms used in the
Scriptures that Men may not interpret to an evil Sense the Works which they see
fall out without their knowledge: For if the Text said that Men have the Grace
of God, and also their Salvation at their will; they so love themselves, that
they would not any longer acknowledge God, but would ascribe to themselves the
Power of saving themselves; which would be a greater Evil than to say, that our
Salvation depends immediately upon the Grace of God: Because this is true, but
not in the way that Men take it, when they say, that they cannot be saved
without the Grace of God, as if God had not given his Graces to all Men from
their Creation, which, whatever a Man do, will never be taken back or
retracted. If he hardens his Heart to evil, this is when he will irreconcilably
withdraw his Free Will from a Dependence upon God: Then the Justice of God cuts
short this Injustice. So that it may be indirectly said, that God hardens
Hearts, even as we would say that the Fire has burnt the Wood that was put into
it, this would be a true thing: For the Fire consumes all that is capable of
that Element; but if nothing be put into it for its Aliment, it would consume
its self, instead of consuming any other thing. Even so is it as to the Justice
of God, Isa. 27. 4.
which devours all that is opposed to it: Unjust Hearts are hardened by the
Justice of God, which like a Fire devours all that is thrown into it. When a
wicked Man has determined to run to evil, he falls into God's Justice, and his
Heart is hardened; because he has cast himself into the devouring Fire of this
Justice.

The Twentieth and Fifth Conference,
Shows, That all the Wisdom of Men is nothing but Ignorance in respect of the
Divine Light; and that God will destroy this Humane Wisdom to give place to
that of his Holy Spirit.

I said to her, That she overturned all the Wisdom of the Learned, and that
there was no more place for Study.

She said: I told you long ago, Sir, that the Time is come wherein God will
abolish the Wisdom of the Wise Isa. 29. 14.
. It Is not only the worldly Wise, or Humane Wisdom that he speaks of; for that
will perish of its self; but it is of the Wisdom of those who believe they are
wise in the Works of God, or in Theology. This Wisdom will be destroyed
through the Goodness and Mercy of God: Because many of these are Men of good
Inclinations, but they perish through Ignorance: For they maintain the
Sentiments of Men which have been given them for infallible Truths: And you may
easily perceive, Sir, that they are not such, nor founded upon the Wisdom of
God, which is always the same. If you consider those who have spoken of the
Grace and Works of God, you will find them different in Sentiments, though
diverse of them were Saints. This may be an Evidence to you that their Wisdom
was not Divine, and that their Learning has darkened the Light of Truth, which
can never change nor contradict it self in any thing: And because this Learning
is a Hindrance to the Holy Spirit who comes now to illuminate the Souls of Men
of good Will, of necessity this Learning must be destroyed in them. This the
Goodness of God will do Psalm. 8. 3.
perfecting Praise by the Mouth of Sucklings and Infants. The Wisdom of God is
our Mother, from which we ought to draw all our Substance, which Wise Men
cannot do before their Wisdom be destroyed. This the Goodness of God will do in
our Time, destroying the Wisdom of the Wise, and abolishing the Prudence of the
Prudent, and they will be asked very shortly, 1 Cor. 1. 20.
where is the Wise, the Scribe, and the Disputer of this World? For they shall
not be found any longer, since God will abolish all their Prudence and Wisdom
by the Mouth of Infants. I wish, Sir, you were the first, and that I might say
to you with the Spouse Cant. 8. 1.
Who will give me my Brother sucking the Breasts of my Mother, that I might
find him without, and might kiss him! The Wisdom of God is the Common Mother
of all those who are resigned to him. Suck its Breasts boldly, they will fill
you with Delights. And as soon as I shall find you void of all your Sciences, I
will salute you in the Unity of Divine Wisdom. Quit, Sir, all other Wisdom, and
depart from your own Wisdom and Prudence. It is an Instance of God's Goodness
that he comes to deprive you of them. Do not believe, as the Wise of the World
do, that your Happiness consists in your Wisdom. Since it must be destroyed
before you receive the Wisdom of the Holy Spirit, and you confess to me that I
overthrow the Wisdom of the Wise, and judge that it is not fit to Study any
longer, walk while this Light lasts John 12. 36.
, fearing lest you be surprised with Darkness, which is now spread through all
the World. Get out of it, for all is corrupted there. Keep your self solitary;
for the World at present is a Temporal Hell, wherein nothing is to be seen but
Objects which incite to evil. God is not any longer known nor loved there:
Nothing is to be heard there but Blasphemies: The most Holy will say that they
have not the Grace to do well, and that God has predestined whom he pleased;
that all these Decrees will come to pass do what they will; with many other
Calumnies which they utter against God: And as his Name is blasphemed in the
Eternal Hell; so is it in this World which is a Temporal Hell, where St. John
has well said in his Revelation, Rev. 17. 3.
That the Whore was full of Names of Blasphemies. And if the best do thus
blaspheme the Name of God, how much more must the Wicked do so, who deny him by
Word or Deed, by denying him their own Wills, saying, they are their own
Masters, and that they may dispose of all that belongs to them, or sometimes,
what belongs to others, when it is entrusted to them? So that he who would take
Sanctuary from the Perils of his Salvation, must retire from the World, where
Salvation is no longer to be had: For all have forsaken God, and no Body knows
him any longer: Every one having made an Idol of his own Imagination; or to say
better, Every one makes a God after his own fashion: One says, that he damns;
another, that he forsakes; another, that he permits evil; and that he rejects
many; though God can never reject any, seeing he is greater than all Things,
and comprehends all in himself, and can never do evil; and never ceases to do
good. All the Qualities of God are unknown to Men: For none possesses true
Wisdom; because none will resign their Will to his. Every one follows his own.

I said to her, That I was altogether convinced; and that I perceived very
clearly that all the Wise were greatly ignorant of the Wisdom of God; that all
Studies and Disputes were founded only upon Terms and Words, or upon the
Sentiments of Men.

She said: I bless God, Sir, that he gives you these Lights. Do not look back
any longer: For Men are deceived, and do deceive one another. They have long
ago quitted the Light of Truth; and the more they thought to find it, by
Humane Reasons or Arguments, the farther they have been removed from it:
Because the same Wisdom is needful 1 Cor. 2. 11, 12.
for understanding the Holy Scriptures that did at first dictate them; and the
Men who are wise in this World are very seldom humble 1 Cor. 8. 1.
, and God 1 Pet. 5. 5.
resists the Proud, and gives his Wisdom Matthew. 11. 25.
to the Humble and the Little Ones. Therefore the Wise continue ignorant of the
Wisdom of God, and are only Wise in themselves, and such Wisdom is 1 Cor. 3. 19.
Foolishness before God; for it is of no use for the knowledge of Eternal
Things; and the World pass will away with all its Sciences; so that all the
Wisdom of Men is nothing but Vanity Romans 1. 22.
, upon which we ought never to build our Salvation, since it is written, Jer.
17. 5.
Woe to the Man that puts his confidence in Man! Which nevertheless all Men
almost do now: For it seems, for a Man to be sure of his Salvation it is enough
to follow the Sentiment of some Author, or some Saint; though all Men may err
and fail, even though they were canonized for Saints: This is not a solid
Bottom whereupon to found our Belielf and Salvation; because there is but one
only Truth, which is God; and he who is not united to this Truth, is in Error
and Lies; and still walking in Darkness, he knows not whither he goes. Learning
has led Men into great Presumption and Pride, which estranges them from God: So
that they shall never know the Truth but by becoming Children, re-entering into
the Womb of their Mother, which is the Original and the State of their
Creation. They must re-take their first Aims if they would discover the Secrets
of God's Grace, the Power of Free Will, the Qualities of God, the Love that he
bears to Men, and the way how he Rules and governs them. Nothing of all this
has been known hitherto.

I said to her, That we had been for a long time in Error; that it was a
wonder God had permitted such Ignorance in his Church.

She said: Sir, God never permits Eccles. 15. 20.
Evil on his part; but he will not hinder Man to use his Free Will Psalm. 81.
13. Zech. 11. 12
to do evil, or good, according to his desire. If Ignorance entered into the
Church, it is not he that brought it in; because he reared it up in Light and
Divine Wisdom, which if it had followed, it could never have fallen into
Error: Because the Wisdom of God is all beautiful, and without Spot; but Men
who ought to receive and follow it, have withdrawn themselves from it, and
embraced the Spirit of Error, which has still encreast to a greater Darkness,
to such a degree, as that no Body knows now where he walks; and they take False
for Real, and Lying for Truth, and which is worse, John 3. 19.
they love their Darkness and Errors rather than Light: Though it be so
agreeable, yet nevertheless it is despised by Men now, who do so cleave to
their own Wisdom, that they despise the Truth that is presented to them,
esteeming more their acquired Sciences than the Wisdom of the Holy Spirit,
which is the only Mother that can nourish our Divine Souls, which is at present
despised by the Learned of this Age. Yea, not only despised, but even shocked
and persecuted: For it is ordinary for the Wicked to persecute those who do not
follow their Iniquities; and for Fools to despise what they understand not, or
what they cannot comprehend. The Wise of this World will never comprehend the
Wisdom of God 1 Cor. 3. 18.
till they believe themselves to be ignorant, as they truly are; and till they
shall become Children; not that they must become Fools, nor yet weak in
Judgment, as a Little Child is; but till they shall submit their Wills to God
Psalm. 131. 2.
as a Little Child submits himself to his Nurse, who takes him up, and lays him
down, and gives him his Nourishment according as she judges it to be needful,
without the Child's opposing himself thereto: And though he cry sometimes when
his Nurse handles him, yet nevertheless she ceases not to do those necessary
Things about him. Even so would God do with our Will if it were resigned to
him. But when we will needs rule it our selves, he lets us err and be ignorant
of what we are obliged to know: Because he 1 Pet. 5. 5.
resists the Proud.

The Twentieth and Sixth Conference,
Declares the necessity there is of becoming Children, that we may enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, renouncing all worldly Wisdom, and all Humane Abuses.

I asked her, How it was possible for a Man to quit all the Sciences acquired
after the manner of Men, that he may become a Child, when he is come to Age?

She said: Sir, If you do it not, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Jesus Christ Matthew. 18. 3.
tells this: And he cannot lie: But he presses this necessity of becoming a
Child by threatening that otherwise we shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; which would be the greatest evil that could befall a Man. It were better
never to be born than not to be saved: And since we cannot be saved without
becoming Children, we ought to become so at what Price soever. Would you, Sir,
esteem more the Honor of the World, or your acquired Sciences, than the
Kingdom of Heaven? This would be very lamentable; since all the Things of this
World pass away like a Bird that cleaves the Air, and leaves no Mark of its
Way: So when we shall have past through this World, nothing shall remain to us
of our Sciences and Learning, nor yet of our Honor and Reputation: All ends
with us; and if some retain still an esteem of our Wisdom, after Death we are
insensible of it. If we pleased our selves while we lived here, the suffering
for these Complacencies wait for us in the other World: And our having been
wise here is so sar from making us happy, that it is a great unhappiness to have
lost the Kingdom of Heaven by this Wisdom. Lay aside, Sir, all these Humane
Considerations, and become a Child, though you be aged. You have need to make
the more haste; for fear lest Time and Life fail you. Never advise Gal. 1. 16.
with Flesh and Blood; for they deceive and corrupt us. Let us only consult
with our Divine Soul, which is reasonable, and it will tell you, that there is
nothing better or more reasonable than to resign our Free Will to God, who gave
us it; and to submit it to his government as a Little Child: That on this our
Eternal Happiness depends; and that nothing else can save us; because without
this Dependence there is no Salvation.

I said to her, That I perceived this Truth most clearly, that there was no
Salvation without a Dependence upon God: asking, how I might now become
ignorant of the Sciences which I had heretofore acquired, since I could not
make my self not to have them?

She said: Sir, Nothing can hurt you, if all be subjected to God. You cannot be
ignorant of what you know by means of your Studies: But you can submit all
these Sciences to God, and look upon them as Ignorances, as in effect they are.
Do not apply your Mind any longer to the Study of Sciences; and believe that
they are all vain in respect of the Wisdom of God. You shall know that you are
resigned to his Will Psalm. 73. 25, 26.
when you seek no longer for any thing upon Earth, neither Learning, nor
Wisdom, nor a desire to know any other thing but what may render you well
pleasing to God. For he who is resigned to him without guile, is not moved with
any thing but what concerns his Glory: No other thing touches him. Whether he
be learned or ignorant, is all one to him. He makes use of Learning in what
respects God's Glory, and not at all to rule on the Earth: knowing well that he
who is resigned to God without Learning is as great as he who is so with much
Learning. And even (o) Eccles. 37. 17, 18.
as one may be poor in Spirit, though he possesses Riches; so he may have much
Learning, and yet for all this be simple in Spirit. When he submits all his
Learning to God, he makes use of it as seems good to him: But as long as we
think to profit by it, we are not yet become Children to enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven. And since God makes appear to you, Sir, that there is no Salvation
without this Dependence, let about it quickly, without considering whether you
have Sciences or any other thing: Because God can make all work together for
good. A Man must not regard himself; but the Will of God, who desires, that all
Men, of what condition soever, keep themselves in a Dependence upon him,
yielding up their Free-wills under his Power, without desiring to use them
themselves.

I said to her, That absolutely and irrevocably I resigned my self to God to be
a true Child; but that I found yet some difficulty to forsake the Church.

She said: Soft, soft, Sir, You must never renounce the Holy Church. Rather die
than do so: You must only renounce the Abomination which is crept into the
Roman Church now. Do you not see that she has falsified her Faith to her Lawful
Husband Jesus Christ, and that she has not continued faithful to Him. I would
be well pleased if you could show me so much as one Point that she observes of
the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, or so much as one thing that she practices which
is not directly contrary to the Life and Doctrine of her Lawful Husband, who
came down from Heaven to Earth to teach her them, both by Word and Deed: All
which Things are despised by her who ought to be his Spouse. I have often spoke
to you of her Excesses and her Adulteries. Would you yet hold her for the Holy
Church since the Devil 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
has placed his Throne in her? What Weakness of Spirit is it, to feel a
Repugnance to renounce a Thing so wicked, under frivolous Persuasions that she
is Holy? When God gave us Understanding and Reason, this was for no other end,
but to make us discern good from evil, that we might not perish blindfold: And
now you would change the Designs of God by stifling your Reason and
Understanding that you may follow evil blindly: And when you see it so plainly
evil you form some foolish Imagination that nevertheless it is good! This must
needs come from a pure Infatuation of Spirit: For even Natural Reason discovers
to us manifestly enough that the Roman Church now is not the Spouse of Jesus
Christ; because she does not follow her Husband in any thing; and two so
distant Things cannot make an Alliance. How can you have a Repugnance to quit
her who has abandoned her God? If the Beasts and insensible Creatures, and all
the Elements, did rise up against Man when he quitted his Dependence upon his
God; How should not Man, who is so reasonable, rise up against that Church, who
has quitted the Dependence upon her God because she will not depend any longer
but upon her self. One should rather have a Repugnancy to remain under her,
than to quit her: Or else we have less Resentment of the Offense that is done
our Creator than the Elements and the Beasts, or inanimate Things, who have
still resented the Wrong that was done their Creator, even at the Death of
Jesus Christ, Matthew. 27. 51.
the Rocks rent, and the Sun was darkened. Have you less affection, Sir, for
your God, than these Stones, that you do not resent the continual Injuries
which the Church does to God? It a beautiful Angel became a Devil for having
desired in his Heart to be equal to God, what shall she become who prefers her
self to the same God without desiring to give deference to him in any thing? I
do even bewail, Sir, your Blindness in this Point; and I cannot believe that
your Repugnancy proceeds from your Reasoning; but from some Habitual Concern
that you have for the Church: For if you applied your Understanding to consider
the Original of this Repugnancy, you would see clearly that it proceeds from
the pious affection that you have for the Church; but that you do not take her
where she is: For we amuse our selves in this, as in other Things, with Terms
and Expressions of Men: And when we hear them call the Roman Church, the Holy
Church, this Word begets in us an affection for her, without discovering, if it
be she of whom they speak. When they would beguile a Child, and make him afraid
of his Father, they put his Cloak and Hat upon a Stick in some obscure Place;
which the Infant perceiving, believes it is truly he; and fears and respects
him. But if he draw nearer, and take by the Cloak, he perceives easily that he
is beguiled, and that what he took for his Father, was but a Piece of Wood.
Truly, Sir, in the Darkness in which we live at present, they make us see just
the like, by covering Rome with the Cloak of the Holy Church, and muffling her
with the Head of Jesus Christ; we Fear and Reverence her, as if she were our
True Mother the Holy Church, Authorized by Jesus Christ, and his Lawful Bride:
But when we approach nearer, and lift up this Cloak, we shall see clearly, that
it is nothing but Wood, instead of Holiness, which can be of no use to us,
except to warm us in the Winter Season. Truly, Sir, we ought not to be so much
Children in what regards our Eternal Salvation. We ought not to walk blindly in
so important an Affair. If Men apply their Minds wholly to make a Stocking, or
a Shoe, why should not we apply them more to save our Souls? It is good to have
Mat. 10. 16.
the Simplicity of the Dove with respect to God: For he who is resigned to him,
ought to do nothing but let himself be guided by him as a Little Child: But we
must have the Prudence of the Serpent, to take heed of Men, who may deceive, or
be deceived: And when they say, Lo the Holy Church, we must remark narrowly, if
she be truly so, or if it be a Faggot covered with her Garment. It is for this
only that God gave us Understanding, that we might still discern true Good from
what is false, precisely in the matter of our Salvation: Because all other
Things are vain and perishing, unworthy of a serious Application of Spirit;
since it ought to apply it self only to Eternal Things, for which we were
created: And our Misery arises from this that we make more serious Enquiries to
discover the Turnings and Windings of the Affairs of the World than those of
our Salvation. In which the Scripture has reason to say, that Luke 16. 8.
the Children of this World are wiser than the Children of the Kingdom: Because
before we engage in any Place, Office or Traffic, we still search narrowly if
it is profitable ( t) 1 Cor. 10. 15.
and advantageous for us: And we would take heed not to trust to Men's Words, or
to believe blindly that a Thing is good without having first made the
Experiment of it. If we have so much Foresight in what respects the Earth, how
much more ought we to have it for that which respects Heaven? We trust our
Salvation blindly to what they tell us that the Roman Church is our Mother the
Holy Church; and we do not dive into this Affair which concerns us so much, to
know, if really she has the Quality of our true Mother, and if she be allied
with our true Father, who is unchangeable in all his Qualities, to whom this
Spouse ought to be always conformable. We must see if what they call our
Mother, has the Spirit and the Works of our Father; and if we find no Likeness
in her, we must renounce her, and hold her as a Deceiver and a Liar, unworthy
of our Affection.

The Twentieth and Seventh Conference,
Shows, The true Marks whereby to discover where the True Church is, and that
it concerns every one to examine it.

I asked her, How I might discover where my true Mother, the true Church is?
What Marks there are whereby to know her, that I may not be deceived?

She said: Sir, You shall discover her by this, that she will follow the
Footsteps of Jesus Christ, and be wholly conformable to his Doctrine. There is
but one Ephesians. 4. 15.
Church only, as there is but one only God; and there is so strait a Bond and
Alliance between God and the Church, that they are but one and the same Thing,
as it is said, that in Marriage Matthew. 19. 5.
Two are but one Flesh; so in the Alliance of God with the Church, two are but
one Spirit 1 Cor. 6. 15.
. God is the Bridegroom, and the Soul is the Bride: As it is said concerning
Adam; Genesis 2. 18.
Let us make a Companion meet for him, for it is not good that Man should be
alone. This is the Figure of what he had said before, Genesis 1. 26.
Let us make Man after our own Likeness, because it was found meet that God
should delight himself with something that was like to him. For this cause he
created the Divine and Eternal Soul, and placed it in the Body and
Understanding* of Man, that it might multiply and communicate it self: For it
is the Property of Good to be communicative. This Divine Soul being formed in
Time, must live for ever, else it should not have been Divine, nor capable of
being united and allied to God, who created it for these ends. And as Adam and
Eve ought to have been united in Heart, Body and Will; so the Soul ought to be
united in Love, Understanding, and Will with God: Not that Natural Love, nor
that Humane Understanding, no more than our bounded Will: Because all this has
no Sympathy with God, and they are but the Case wherein God has shut up this
Divine Soul, which is Free and Eternal, as God. This Divine Reason and
Free Will, make the Church by the Alliance that God makes with it, which is
much more strait than the Alliance that this Divine Soul makes with the Animal
Soul of Man, which do so nearly approach one another, that no Humane Spirit is
able to distinguish them, no more than any can distinguish the Free and
Rational Will from God himself: Because he has so straightly united them, that
John 17. 23. 1 Cor. 6. 15.
the Soul is God, and God is the Soul; as the Will of Eve was that of Adam, so
the Will of the Soul is that of God. By which you may still discover, Sir,
where the Spouse of God, or the True Church is: Because where she is to be
found, she carries still along with her the same Qualities of her Well
beloved; and when you do not find them in those* who call themselves the
Church, believe firmly that they are all Cheats: For the Spouse of God will be
always comely, and there can be no Blemish in her: Because she shall never be
parted from the Qualities of her Husband, always Just, Good, True, and
All-powerful. And when you shall see Sion, Jerusalem, Judea, or Rome, such as
you call the Church, to be fallen away from these Qualities, never believe that
she is your Mother the Holy Church. Upon these Accounts Jesus Christ has so
often Mat. 7. 15. and 24. 4, 5, 11, 24, 25.
warned you to beware of false Christ's and false Prophets: For they come to
delude and deceive many. Do not let your self be deluded, Sir: For there shall
never be but one True Church, which shall be united to God: Whosoever has not
this Unity, is not the Church; but they are Seducers of the People; who under
this Cloak of God's Spouse, do seduce many. You must lift up your Head, and
look on high, to see whence the Church took her Original; and you will perceive
that the Church is no other but the Alliance that God made with the Divine Soul
of Man, which he made his Spouse, though she was unworthy of it. He so ennobled
her that he would join himself to her, and ally with her by an indissoluble
Alliance, which can never end, for the Two Parties are Immortal, to wit, God
and the Divine Soul: But to take for the Spouse of God Persons who are no ways
in the Spirit of God, nor in Union with him, and to reverence them as the
Church, is to wrong the Honor that we owe to God. To see a Church seek the
Honors, Pleasures, and Riches of this World, and to believe that she is the
Spouse of God; is to derogate from her Divine Quality, and to ascribe the
Honor to Vice, that is due only to True Virtue. We should not thus let them
cover our Eyes as they do to those who are going to be hanged that they may not
see their doleful End. We must take off this Bandage, that we may look about
us, and learn, where the True Church is, which can save us; and not suffer our
selves to be led on blindfold to Eternal Death by Words or false Appearances;
since Truth only is capable to save us.

I said to her, That I had never yet discovered Souls united to God; and that
nevertheless I believed I was in the Church?

She said: Sir, You are deceived: For the Church is no where but in the Souls
that are united to God; no more than a Woman can be the Spouse of a Man who has
never approached her. We must not believe that the Church consists in wearing a
Garment of Purple, or Red, or Fine Linen. These are rather the Marks of the
Reprobation of the Luke 16. 19.
falsely Rich Man, who was buried in Hell, and the Scripture brings no other
cause of his Damnation than these Fashions of Apparel, and that he was Rich,
and a Feaster. If all these Things were Marks of his Damnation, why should they
be now a days the Marks of the Holy Church? God is not changeable. He cannot
now unite to himself what he then Reprobated and Condemned. No, no, Sir; the
Spouse of God will never be vain, nor proud, nor polluted with any sin. For she
Cant. 4. 7.
is all pure, Do not think that you are in the Church, when you are under
Persons who seek Riches of this World; for such Souls are Adulteresses, and
have abandoned their lawful Husband, and live in Adultery Rev. 17. 2.
with the Kings of the Earth. Which ought to make you abhor her, instead of
cleaving to her. If you have never met with Souls resigned to God, you have
never found the True Church: Because there never was any other, and never will
be hereafter. She must notwithstanding be somewhere in the World, though she
were but in one only Soul: Because the Works of God can never perish. He has
made this Alliance with the Soul of Man, and he will never retract it. There
have been in all Times some who have been his True Spouses, and resigned to
him; but at present they are very rare. Strive, Sir, so to do as that yours may
be so, and then you shall not need to seek the Church without you. For as soon
as your Will is resigned to God, he unites it to himself, and makes your Soul
his Spouse. Whether others whom you know be so or not, concerns you little: And
though all the Souls of Men were God's Spouse, if yours be not, you lose all.

I asked her, Whether God had not had a True Spouse still since the Creation of
Adam; and if the People of Israel, the Jews, or the Christians, were not his
Spouse?

She said: Sir, There have been in all Times some Souls among these People* who
were resigned to the Will of God. These in particular were the True Church; but
not all that People: Though indeed they all called themselves the People of
God, yet nevertheless they were not so: For it is said somewhere, John 8. 39.
If you were the Children of Abraham, you would do the Works of Abraham: To
show, that all God's Children are not his Church or his Spouse; but those only
who do the Works of the Spouse: That is to say, who are joined by a Resignation
of their Will to that of God. Those are the only Spouses of the same God.

This Alliance of God with Man was first of all made when Man was created. The
Soul of Adam made an Alliance with God, and became his Spouse: But being
afterward in the Earthly Paradise, the Soul of Adam, though Divine, falsified
its Faith to its Husband; and instead of taking its delight only with its God,
for whom it was created, it joined it self in affection to the Creatures, and
did eat of a Fruit of which God had forbidden him to eat. But as a good Husband
does not still put away his Wife for One Fault that she has committed; so also
God, the Fountain of all Goodness, does not cast off the Soul of his Alliance,
though she had but too much merited it. On the contrary he seeks Her, and calls
upon Her to make her return to his Friendship. He cries, Genesis 3. 9.
Adam, where art thou? As if he had said, Wherefore have thou forsaken me? He
shows him also that he loved him, by covering him with a Garment, to lessen his
Confusion^; and seeing he was ashamed and repented, God forgives him his Fault,
and enjoynes him only a short Penance, to wit, That he should be deprived of
his Presence, during this Life, during which he must labor for his Bread. But
he does not at all break the Alliance he had made with him. His Soul remains
still the Spouse of God, except that it is deprived for a certain time of its
wonted sight of Him, being restored as to other things into his Grace and
Friendship: For God will never destroy Psalm. 138. 8.
the Works that he has made: And the Alliance he made with the Soul of Man was
not broken off by his Sin: Because the Mercy of God Psalm. 145. 9.
surpasses all his other Qualities. His Justice might have condemned Man; and
his Goodness ordains him only Penitence for his Sin: In which he shows the
Excess of his Mercy and the Love he bears to Souls, leaving them all in Adam
free to be his Spouses, none excepted: For he could not forgive Adam, without
forgiving all his Posterity. Because he held the Wills of all Men in his: And
being yet but one Man only, and one Will only, he could not pardon one without
another: For neither the Body, nor Will of Adam were divided, that one part
might be pardoned, and another reprobated.

I spoke to you of this already, Sir; but it seems you did not sufficiently
conceive it. Therefore I cursorily repeat it, that I may the better show you
how God has always had a Spouse or Church: For if he had not forgiven Adam,
none could have been the Spouse of God: Because all were become his Enemies by
his sin: Which if they had continued to be, he would not have been so unjust as
to thrust Man out of the Earthly Paradise, and oblige him to so hard a
Penitence only to damn him at last, as Men now affirm, That God Reprobated some
after the Sin of Adam. If this were true, he would certainly have confined them
to Hell from the Moment of their Reprobation, instead of sending them yet into
this World to produce a perverse and reprobate Generation. God could not be
good nor just in doing this: But really cruel and partial toward those
Reprobates, who might justly murmr against him with more reason than the
Laborers Matthew. 1. 1, 15.
who received no more for the Work of a whole Day, than they who had wrought
but for One, Two or Three Hours: For they had no reason; because they received
what was due to them, and what they had agreed for; but these Reprobated have
Labored as much as those Elect, since they have all equally performed the
Penitence enjoined to Adam. And if the Father of the Family gives as much to
the Last Comers as to the First, it is not that he is partial, or that he
savours one more than another; but that he exercises his Goodness toward the
Last because they had been no sooner called to Work, of which they themselves
complain, saying, Lord, No body has employed us. So that God exercises toward
them both Goodness and Justice. But if out of the Mass of Adam he had
foreordained some Elect, and others Reprobate; he should have done against both
the one and the other of these Qualities. Which he cannot do: And the Goodness
and Mercy of God Psalm. 145. 9.
spreading themselves always over all his Works; he did assuredly Elect and
Pardon all Men in general in Adam: So that after him all they who will resign
their Free Will to his, are all his Spouses and his Church. Therefore in all
Times and in all Ages he has still had a Church upon Earth, and will have till
all Evil be at an end. Since Adam, many Souls have been resigned to the Will of
God, as he himself was after his Sin, having never more re-taken their own
Free Will, but left it still to be governed by God, subjecting themselves
voluntarily to the Penitence that was enjoined him. These have been the Church
and the Spouses of God. Adam, Eve, and their Children until they had the use of
their Reason, were the First Church; and afterward Abel, Enoch, Noah, and
others who in like manner resigned their Will to God were at that Time the
Second Church; and thus going on from Time to Time, this Church has always
continued, either of many Souls united to the Will of God, or of few. This
makes nothing to the first Design, that God had to Ally himself with the Soul
of Man. It is still his Spouse though there were but one Soul only, as there
was but one when Adam was created alone. This Number of many only makes those
Blessed who are of the Number: For God on his part, takes as much delight with
one Soul only that is resigned to Him as He would do with a Hundred Millions:
For there is nothing to do with Quantity when the Business is about Quality. If
an Hundred Millions of Souls are resigned to God, they make altogether but one
only Church, which could consist as well in one Soul only, as in this great
Number: Because the Spouse of God John 17. 21, 23.
is One: And as in Nature a Man may have as much Contentment in Marrying a Wife
who is Little and Tender, as one that is Big and Lumpish: Without comparison
God is as much Honored, though there were but one Soul only in the World that
were resigned to him, as if all Men in general were so; who only can receive
themselves the Honor of their Happiness, every one for his own particular: For
nothing can (n) Cant. 6. 9.
be taken away nor added as to God, who is and comprehends all Things. His
Alliance that he has made with the Soul of Man, is not increased or diminished
by the great or small Body of his Church. He will still have his Spouse, with
whom he will take his delight in the kind that he created, which was but one
Man alone. She shall still be preserved as the Rose among Thorns. How wicked
soever the World may become his Church will still remain there in her kind. The
Church will always have her Beauty and her Qualities, as much in one Soul alone
as in an Hundred Millions, which altogether would make 2 Cor. 2. 6. 17, 18.
but one, no more than if there were but one alone. After this manner God in
all Ages has had his Church upon Earth: But in how many Souls it consisted, is
known only to God. The People of Israel were called the People of God, among
whom there were assuredly Souls resigned unto him. These made up the Church in
their Time, and no others. Even so among the Jewish People, and also the
Catholics. The Church of God has always been among them, since Gods Alliance
with Man could never fail: But to believe that all that Mass of People who
called themselves the People of God were the Church, is to deceive our selves:
Because there never will be any other but the Souls which of their Free Will do
resign themselves to the Will of God. All others are only Carnal and Material
Churches.

I said to her, That we strayed much, and greatly erred, in believing that all
who are called the People of God do make up the Church, and that at present she
consisted of Christendom, which Jesus Christ authorized, and said, that Matthew.
16. 19.
what she did on Earth, should be done in Heaven.

She said: Sir, Men are blind, and walk where they see nothing. I believe that
the Spouse of God resides among Christian People, though it were no more but in
one Soul alone: But to believe that this Church consists of that great Number
of Persons who are called Christians, is greatly to deceive our selves: Because
of them God may say truly, Jer. 2. 13.
My People have forsaken me: Which appears by the whole Behavior of these
Christians now, who live wholly as if there were no God, every one being so
wedded to his own Will, as if it had only been given him to satisfy himself;
and using the Authority that God gave his Church as if they were Sovereigns and
independent upon him. All which things are inconsistent with the Spouse of God,
which moves not but by the Motion of her Husband, of whom she knows she holds
all things, and she never ascribes any thing to her self. How should this Mass
of Christians compose the Church, since among them we do not observe almost any
who will resign their Wills to the Will of God? And those who make their Profit
of the Authority that Jesus Christ gave his Church are Robbers, and take what
belongs to another: For when Jesus Christ said: Whatsoever you shall do here on
Earth I will do in Heaven, He spoke to his Spouse, and not to his Enemies, as
those Persons are who cleave to their own Wills, who do very impertinently
usurp the Title of the Church, or Spouse of God: For his True Spouse is in
nothing contrary to her Husband: Being united by a Holy and Divine Will: So
that they cannot disclaim one another, and therefore what she shall do on Earth
shall be done also in Heaven, by their Unity of Wills, which are still
conformable: Though this Will be wrapped up in the Spirit and Body of the Spouse
which is yet on Earth, it is nevertheless united to that of her Husband which
is in Heaven: And therefore what the one does, the other approves: Because one
and the same thing cannot be against it self.

I said to her: That this Quality of Union of Will to that of God, was a Divine
Thing, and invisible to Bodily Eyes; asking her, how I might discover and know
the True Church and Spouse of God?

She said: Sir, You will perceive it sufficiently, even by the Eyes of the
Body, if you seriously apply your Spirit to discover her Qualities: For St.
John in his Revelation paints out all her Qualities, under the Figure of a
Woman who sits in the Sun, and has the Moon under her Feet, and upon her Head
Twelve Stars. This Woman is the True Church, and the only Spouse of God. She is
first seated in the Sun, that is, that the Spouse of God reposes always in the
Light of Truth, and never turns aside from it; that she does not walk therein
as a Passenger, but sits in it as in her Place of Repose. Secondly, that she
has the Moon under her Feet: That is, that all Things that are mutable and
changeable as the Moon, such are the Goods, the Riches, the Honors and
Pleasures of this World, are all trod under feet by the Church or Spouse of
God. Thirdly, That she bears on her Head Twelve Stars: These are the Twelve
Fruits of the Holy Spirit, with which the Spouse of God is still inseparably
adorned, because the Spirit of God where he resides is never barren: There he
always brings forth his Fruits, and there also he still bestows his Gifts. By
which, Sir, you may sufficiently discover in what Soul the Church resides. If
you do not find all this Furniture, never believe blindly that the Church is in
those who do not possess these Qualities or Conditions, which are the True
Marks of the Church, without which you can never own that she is the True
Spouse of God: For these Marks are inseparable from Her; and where you shall
not find them, you must immediately desist from believing that you have found
the Church: Because there can be nothing but Delusion where they say she is
without these Qualities: For she never goes without them. And therefore be not
amused, though they say to you, This is the Church here, or there. Do not
believe it; no more than if they said to you, Matthew. 24. 23.
Lo here is Christ, or there; go not out: For where ever He is, He operates all
these Virtues with which you see the Woman in the Revelation is adorned.

I said to her, That if all these Qualities were required in the Spouse of God,
I must ingenuously declare, that I do not know the Church: Because I know no
Body who has these Qualities of the Woman in the Revelation; and that the Roman
Church was directly opposite thereto.

She said: Sir, So far as you see the Roman Church opposite to them, so far you
see her removed from being the Spouse of God, which never goes Psalm. 45. 10,
14, 15.
without these Ornaments. She is always true, and these Romanists are in many
Lies. They often condemn Saints for Heretics: And if they knew me, I should be
in the same condemnation. For they cannot endure the Truth that reproves them;
but they would continue to Rule as the Spouse of God, though they have quitted
the Truth, saying; What they bind and loose, shall be so done in Heaven: Even
as if they had continued the Spouse of God, and united to his Will! From which
they are far removed: For they have nothing before their Eyes but their own
Glory. They are also very far from having the Moon under their Feet: For Honor
pleases them; and they wear it rather on their Head, than tread it under Feet;
and they delight in Pleasures, of which they will not deprive themselves; as
far as they can possess them, they will not put them under their Feet; no more
than Riches, which they carry rather in their Hearts than make them their
Footstool. By which you may assuredly judge that the Church of God cannot
reside there; but the Whore, who has falsified her Faith to her Lawful Husband:
For while she bears the Name of the Church, she lives in continual Adulteries,
which she knows how to cover so well with Things lawful and permitted, that it
seems to all who have no good Judgment, that these Whoredoms are Virtues. Must
not one have lost his Judgment if he have a Repugnance to quit this Infamous
Strumpet, who has for so long time bygone wallowed in all sort of Filthiness
under the color of Holiness, and of the Spouse of God, without having
discovered her Infamies, which would be so manifest to all the World if they
had removed that Bandage of blind Obedience which has so closely shut their
Eyes? If you know none, Sir, who has the Qualities of the Woman in the
Revelation, you may say in truth that you do not know the Church; and pray to
God that he may let you know Her.

The Twenty Eight and Last Conference,
Teaches that all the Laws, as well that of Nature, as that of Moses, and of
the Gospel, are only true Means to attain to a Dependence of our Will upon that
of God: That this is the old Leaven which the Woman took and put into three
Measures of Meal which are these Three Laws given by God in diverse Times, which
Jesus Christ compares in his Parable to Three Measures of Meal, and that a
Woman now takes this Old Leaven of Dependence upon God to put it into these
Three Laws, that it may leaven the whole Lump, and make Bread of it for the
Nourishment of Gods Children.

I asked her, How I should behave my self, since I knew not the Church, which I
ought to follow and love?

She said: Sir, The Gospel is your Mother; because it proceeded from the Wisdom
of God, this is what you ought to follow, without seeking for an imaginary
Church among Men, The Word of God is the Nourishment of our Soul: The Doctrine
of Jesus Christ is the Rule that we must follow to become the Spouse of God.
This is the Seed that begets that Spouse. Do not search Cant. 3. 2, 3.
through the Streets or Corners of the City for your Wellbeloved; for you will
be beaten by the Soldiers that stand there. Enter into this Closet and
Doctrine of the Gospel; and there you will find the Nourishment of your Soul,
and the Means of abandoning your self to God to be his True Spouse, and his
Holy Church, which is the same thing. The Spouse of God is the Church, and the
Church is the Spouse of God; and nothing can be it but they who have abandoned
their Free Will to the Will of God. Therefore I conjure you never to tie your
self to any other Thing: For God still forms his Spouses by 1 Pet. 1. 22.
his Word. When Adam offended, he re-called him by his Word; which being by him
heard and followed, he thereby returned into a Dependence upon God. And all the
World having shaken off their Dependence upon God, he preserved Noah and his
Family therein by his Word; which being heard and followed, they were saved
from the Waters of the Deluge: And the Children of Israel who heard this Word,
and followed it, escaped the being drowned in the Red Sea: And those among the
Jews who heard the Words of Jesus Christ became his Spouses: Whom we also may
imitate: Because the same Word is left us in Writing, and we may become the
Church, or Spouse of God, if we will hear and follow it. We need not turn here
or there; but rather take the Thing in its Source, and see the Obligation we
have of being resigned to God; and having through our Perverseness quitted this
SELFRESIGNATION, the Means of recovering it are marked out in the Gospel, which
Jesus Christ has brought us upon Earth. It is this, Sir, that you must follow.

I said to her, That Jesus Christ in his Gospel had not directly taught this
Dependence of our Will upon that of God, as she deduced it.

She said: That Jesus Christ had no other Scope in all his Doctrines but to
bring back the Soul of Man into that Dependence upon God, from whence he had
turned away; and that if he taught any other Thing it was only to discover to
Men the Things they had done, or might do in Time coming, which hindered this
Dependence: For otherwise, He would never have taught any other Thing, but that
we ought directly to subject our Will to that of God: But seeing He found Men
so far from this Dependence; and that they were distracted from it by so many
different Means, it was necessary that He should let them see in particular the
Things that withdrew them from this Dependence upon God: For they had Lorded it
with their own Wills, therefore he tells them, that Luke 14. 26.
they who do not deny themselves cannot be his Disciples, that no Body might
flatter himself in believing he might be saved though he should follow his own
Will: And seeing that every one set their Affections upon the perishing Goods
of this World, he says to them, Matthew. 19. 21.
Sell all that you have, and follow me: Because he knew no Body could be
resigned to God while their Affections were set on Earthly Things: Because the
Love of God is incompatible with the Love of Riches. And seeing that Men had
such Natural Affections toward Father and Mother, Sisters, or Brethren, or
Lands and Houses, he says, Matthew. 19. 29.
He that quits all these things for my Name, shall have a hundred fold and Life
everlasting: To make us understand, that he who should abandon all these
things, would be well disposed to resign himself to the Will of God, which
Self-resignation would assuredly give him Life Eternal. Thus of all the other
Evangelical Counsels. They were taught for no other end but to discover to Man
all these Things which might remove him from this SELF-RESIGNATION. For if it
had not been necessary to make known all these Things in particular by which
Man was entirely withdrawn from God; He himself would not have come upon the
Earth; but would have caused tell by some Prophet in few Words, That to be
saved Man must resign his Will to that of God; as he had often spoke in this
manner in past Times by the Mouth of his Prophets. But the Compassion of God
was so abundant toward the Misery of Sinners that He resolves to become Man
Himself, that he might palpably teach him all he must do and avoid to attain to
this RESIGNATION of our Will to that of God, which was the only Thing
essentially necessary: For all the Commands of God, all the Prophets, and the
Doctrine of the Gospel, are no other thing but Voices which cry, That to be
saved we must resign our Will to that of God, though by accident they teach the
particular Means to attain to this Self-Resignation. I advise you, Sir, to take
up in their plain Literal Sense these Counsels of the Gospel, which will
certainly make you attain to this so much desired Dependence upon God; for they
are given only to serve as most profitable Means to bring us to this End.
Remember always that this is the First and Only Commandment that God gave us,
and the only End for which we are created: For if we have not resigned our Will
to the Will of God, we can never be his Spouses, nor take our delight with him:
Because our Self-will does always resist His, and can never enter in a perfect
Union, since it only aims at and respects the Earth; and the Will of God only
tends to and aims at Eternal Things. There can never be a Sympathy and
Resemblance between Two so distant Objects, as Time and Eternity are. By which
you may see, Sir, that all the Doctrine of Jesus, with all the other Laws, have
no other Scope, but to make Men return to a Dependence upon God, after they
have turned away from it. And though Jesus Christ does not say directly that to
be saved we must thus depend upon God; yet He says it indirectly by His Words
and Works: since they show what we must do and avoid to attain to this
Dependence, which is the only Essential Commandment.

I said to her, It was very desirable that all the Men of the World should hear
this Lesson, That to be saved we need only resign our Free Will to God: That it
were good to lay aside all these other Means of Salvation, Precepts and Laws,
even that of the Gospel.

She said: It were very good, Sir, that all the World knew that only Dependence
upon God is necessary to Salvation; that no Body might any longer take the
Means for the End: But to lay aside all Laws, and even that of the Gospel, is
not at all advisable: Because God did not give them unprofitably; but as True
Means that lead to this Dependence. Make a little Experiment on your self, Sir,
to see if you can come to this Dependence without any Means. I fear greatly you
should come too short to leap so far all at one Leap. If you do it effectually,
in a good time: you have no need of other Things; but you must take good heed,
that you be not deceived: Because we are ordinarily inclined to believe well of
our selves. One will sometimes think he is resigned to God when yet he has
still some Earthly Affection. For this cause it is better to make a Trial of
it: For you cannot tell if your Affections be set upon your Parents, Friends,
Land, House, Wealth, if you cannot quit them without Trouble. This would be as
a Touchstone if you feel your Heart so disingaged from all these Things, that
you can willingly lose them: For in effect, when a Soul is truly resigned unto
God, all these Things are a Burden to it, and become often a Hindrance; and in
his Heart he wishes to be delivered from them, if such were the Will of God:
But so long as he does not truly feel these Dispositions in the Bottom of his
Soul, it were better for him to embrace every one of the Evangelical Counsels,
and to force himself to practice them: Not as the End; but as the true Means
that lead to the End. If we understood aright the Commandments of God, the
First of all is, To love God with all our Heart. This LOVE is that necessary
DEPENDENCE, to which we will not submit but by this Love. For to Depend, to
Love, and to Adore God, or to be Resigned to Him, is all the same Thing. We can
never resign our selves to God, without loving and esteeming Him, and also we
cannot love and adore Him without resigning our selves to Him, since He desires
it: For we willingly give our selves to Him whom we love and honor. So that
the observing the Commandments of God does certainly lead us to this
Self-Resignation, as the Counsels of the Gospel do also; for he that denies
himself and all that he possesses, must of necessity depend upon God: Because
our Heart cannot be without loving something; and if we no longer love any
Created Thing, we shall certainly love our Creator, and if we love Him, we
shall voluntarily resign our selves unto Him. So that he who observes the
Commands of God and the Evangelical Law, is certainly resigned to the Will of
God; and he who lives in this Self-Resignation, does assuredly observe the
Commandments of God, and the Doctrine of the Gospel, even though he should not
Cull them out in particular, and should not fix precisely upon each of them.
But the Misery of Men now is, that they neither do the one nor the other. They
do not observe the Commandment of loving God with all their Heart, nor yet the
Evangelical Counsels. And in the mean time they are all ready to raise Quarrels
and Disputes about this Word Dependence, because it is not precisely set down
in the Scripture: As if our Salvation depended upon Words and Terms, and not
upon the Essence of the Thing, which in it self comprehends all the Terms that
can signify it: For when it is said that our Will must be subjected and depend
upon that of God, it is as much as if they said, that we must observe the
Commandments of God, and also the Counsels of the Gospel: Because both of these
consist in the Resignation of our Will to God. But Men are so degenerate in
this Age, that they are inclined more to dispute than to discover the Essence
of that which is necessary for their Salvation. If this were not the
Unhappiness of Men now, no Body would call in question whether Man ought to
resign his Will to that of God if he desire to be saved: Because there is
nothing more reasonable, nor better, nor more just, than that a Creature resign
himself to the Will of its Creator, and depend upon him from whom it has
received All.

I said to her, That there was no debate to be made about so certain Truths:
That every one ought to submit their Judgment to this Dependence upon God,
which assuredly was necessary in all Ages and under all Laws.

She said: Sir, Man has nothing in him that is worthy of God but his Divine
Soul, which consists in Reason, and Free Will: And if we do not yield it up to
the Will of God, what is it that we can offer or give Him? He has no need of
Gold, or Silver or Land, or Flesh, or any Thing that is Natural: Because his
Being is wholly Divine. He could not therefore demand any other thing of Man
but this Reason and Free Will: As in effect he has not demanded, and will not
demand any other thing. When he said in his Commandments, that we must not
Kill, nor Steal, and so forth, this was only to draw Man from his Self-love,
which led him to all these Things: And when He taught so particularly by the
Gospel what we ought to do and avoid, it was because Man followed his own Will
in so many diverse things: It was needful to point out to him every particular
wherein he went astray, and that for this End only, that he might return to
this Dependence upon the Will of God: For otherwise, many Things that Man had
were not evil in themselves, as Father, Mother, Brother, Sisters, Lands,
Houses, Riches; all which Things might be very well possessed, if there were a
Dependence of his Will upon that of God. For God did not forbid them by the Ten
Commandments; because Men were not then so absolutely Masters of their own
Wills as they became since, for they are not satisfied now to use and follow
their own Wills during some Passion of Anger, or Swearing, or the like; but
they follow them in all Things, loving Father, Mother, and the rest, out of
pure Self-love: For if this were not Self-love, Jesus Christ would draw no Body
from it: since he says, That we ought to love our Neighbor as our selves: And
several other times he exhorts, that we John 13. 34.
love one another: By which it appears evidently that he would only hinder us
from following our Self-will in all these Things: because all sorts of Sins
consist in the following our own Wills; as all Virtue consists in resigning our
Will to that of God. These are the Two Things which can Save and Damn us:
Though they be explained all at length by the Doctrine of the Gospel, yet they
are all abridged by the resigning of our own Will to God; or by the following
our own Will. In this all Good and Evil does consist: Of which we are free to
make a Choice, and to follow the one or the other. For there is no Salvation
without resigning our Will to God, and no Damnation without following our own
Will. Let them grow old in Study, and turn over all the Books of the World, and
let them treasure up all the Sciences, they can never find a Truth more clear,
than, That all Virtues and Salvation consist in the Resignation of our Will to
that of God; and that, All Sins and Damnation consist in following our own
Will. This is an Eternal. Truth which will never change. Every one should lay
it to Heart because it concerns him: For it is a general Rule, that respects
every one, Rich, Poor, Learned, Ignorant. Let us Work, and Fast, and Pray, and
do all that we can; if withal we follow our own Will, assuredly we shall be
damned: And on the other hand, Let us take rest, and Eat, and Drink, and do
every other thing in a Dependence upon the Will of God, we shall certainly be
saved: For God has nothing to do with the Offerings of Metals, but that of our
Free Will, which he has reserved for himself: Of which he gave a Figure by the
forbidding Adam to eat of One Tree only; Jesus Christ gave us this Conclusion
also when after so many Instructions he said, John 6. 38.
I came not to do mine own Will, but the Will of him that sent me. If Jesus
Christ himself, who was the Word of God, lays down his own Will, and says that
he came not into this World to follow it, but that of his Father; what then
ought to be done and said by the Reasonable Creature who desires to save its
Soul, since it is the Will of God that it should be saved? Nevertheless it will
not be saved without this Self-RESIGNATION.

I said to her, That I wished from the Bottom of my Soul, that never any Body
had taught any other thing but the Dependence that we owe to God; since in
truth all is comprehended in it.

She said: Sir, I hope your Wish shall very shortly be accomplished, because
Jesus Christ promised it by a Parable where it is said: Matthew. 13. 33.
That the Kingdom of Heaven is like to Leaven which a Woman took, and put into
Three Measures of Meal till the whole was leavened. And because now we are not
far from the Kingdom of Heaven, God makes us to understand all that he said in
former Times by Parables, for then the Time was not come to make these Things
be manifestly understood, because the World who then lived did not see the
Things signified by all these Parables. But at present, we are arrived at the
end 1 Cor. 10. 11.
of the Last Times, and Jer. 31. 24.
shall see the Things fulfilled which are uttered by Similitudes. He says
first, That the Kingdom of Heaven is like to Leaven, which a Woman took; as if
he had said, The Kingdom of Heaven will be proclaimed by a Woman, who taking
the Old, the First and only Essential Commandment OF RESIGNING OUR WILL to that
of God, she will put it in the Law of Nature, and in the Written *Law, and in
the Evangelical Law; which are the Three Measures of Meal; and that God sent
his Word, these Three several Times, to serve for Bread and Nourishment to our
Souls. And it seems this Word, though sent after different ways, has not been
converted into Bread; because so few have nourished their Souls by it; and this
Food has remained in the Meal even till now. Very few resigned themselves to
God, during the Law of Nature; since at the Time of the Deluge, Noah only with
his Family were saved, and only 1 Pet. 3. 20.
Eight Persons of all the World escaped the Flood. And in the Written Law how
few also were abandoned to God? Since Moses so suddenly broke Exodus 32. 19.
the Stone because he saw that few would observe the Commandments which were
written in it. And in the Gospel-Law, how few have followed the Word of God?
Twelve Apostles: Among whom one forsook it to go hang himself; and some
Disciples, among whom diverse John 6. 66.
also abandoned Jesus Christ. So that this Divine Word has served for
Nourishment for few Persons. But in the Fullness of Time in which we enter at
present, this Divine Word shall have its full Isa. 55. 10, 11.
effect, and the Holy Spirit Joel 2. 28.
shall be poured out upon all Flesh, Young and Old, Great and Small, so that
all shall Prophecy, and speak Languages, and do more Wonders Isa. 35.
than Moses did with all the Ancient Prophets, who altogether were but 1 Cor.
10. 6. and 2 Cor. 3. 7, 11. Heb. 10. 1.
Figures of the Things figured which we shall see very shortly come to pass,
which will be more perfect than all that the Apostles and their Disciples did,
yea even Jesus Christ himself; because we are arrived at the Fullness of Time,
of which the Apostles says, 1 Cor. 13. 10, 12.
That they shall understand and prophecy in full perfection. What they only
did in part, shall be in Fullness and Accomplishment; because then Jer. 31. 3,
4. Zach. 13. 8, 9.
all Men in general who shall remain on the Earth shall subject their Wills to
that of God, who will govern Isa. 33. 2. Zach. 14. 9.
them according to his pleasure and without the contradiction of their own
Wills. Then there will be no longer need of Jer. 31. 34. Rev. 21. 22.
Laws, no more Constraint, no more Commands, no more Churches of Stone, no more
Sacraments, no more Prayers, no more Desires and Aspirations, because the Souls
of all Men shall be filled with the Will of God, and shall have nothing more to
ask Him by Prayer, nor have any more need of the Sacraments to obtain his
Graces, which are all contained in the Accomplishment of his Will, which will
operate in them without having need to go to Church, their Soul being the True
Temple where the Will of God ( r) 1 Cor. 13. 9.
( s) Joh. 14. 12.
resides, which has no need of Law or Commandment, the Will of God being a Law
to it self, by Pure Love, without any constraint. Lo this is the Estate of
Blessed Souls who shall enter into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. This Matthew. 13.
44.
is that Hidden Treasure of the Kingdom of Heaven, and he that discovers it
ought to sell all that he has to obtain it. It is to be bought very easily.
There is no need of being Rich or of Noble Blood: No need of Learning many
Languages, nor of passing the Degrees of the Schools and Universities: No need
to enter into Cloisters of strict Observance, nor to crush the Body with hard
Discipline, Watchings, Fastings and other Bodily Mortifications: No need to
learn to Read, Write, or any other Curious Art: Nor yet is there need of
perusing so many Spiritual Books with which the World is now full, which Teach
so many Methods of Perfection, so many Steps to ascend to Virtue, so many Means
to find God. No, Sir, all these Things are not necessary; because there is but
ONE THING ONLY so, which is, TO RESIGN OUR WILL TO THE WILL OF GOD. Lo this is
the Leaven that leavens the whole Lump of the Law of Nature, that of the Jews
and that of the Gospel: Because this Subjection of our Will to God comprehends
all in it, and gives us an Entry into the Kingdom of Heaven. Lo this is all I
have to say to you, and bid you Adieu for ever, Remaining your very
Affectionate in a Dependence on the Will of God.

At Macklin Sept. 15. 1667. ANTHOINETTE BOVRIGNON.

Luke xxj. 5. I will give you a Mouth and Wisdom which they who shall rise up
against you shall not be able to gainsay nor resist. Chap. x. 18. I beheld
Satan falling from Heaven as Lightning.
THE END Of the Third and Last Part of The LIGHT of the World.
The TABLE of the Conferences of the Third Part of the LIGHT OF THE WORLD.
I. Conf. SHOWS, That God never demanded any other thing of Man but the
Dependence of his Will upon that of God; and that all the other Laws are given
him by accident, and to discover to him his Sins. page 1 II. Of Free Will: That
it is the only thing that represents in Man the Infinity and Liberty of God;
and that this is the greatest Gift that God gave to Man, that he might love him
freely and infinitely. Which is the greatest Perfection in Grace, and is
Typified by that of Marriage in Nature. p. 8 III. Speaks of the Perfection and
Abuse of Marriage. p. 15 IV. Of the Blindness of Men, who amuse themselves with
the outward Things which are delivered them without informing themselves of the
Truth it self in its depth, being charmed and detained with the fear of
displeasing those who are in Vogue. p. 19 V. Of the Destruction of Christendom.
p. 24 VI. Shows the Marks by which it appears the World is judged, and that
Antichrist Reigns at present. p. 29 VII. Shows that Jesus Christ will come in
Glory, else he would not be the SAVIOR OF THE WORLD, as he is; and there would
be no just Recompense of the Good and of the Wicked. p. 39 VIII. Shows, That M.
ANTHOINETTE BOURIGNON is sent from God to declare the Truth to Men. p. 44 IX.
Speaks of the Sins that we commit in another; And that to declare the Truth of
Evil is no sin. p. 51 X. Shows what Souls shall be blessed, and explains the
Eight Beatitudes. p. 61 XI. Shows, How we must be born again to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; and that we must return to a Dependence upon God, which is
the only thing that He does essentially require of Man. p. 67 XII. Shows that
to be Saved there is One only thing to be done. p. 72 XIII. Shows, That the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ is the Last that God will send into the World, and
that the Holy Spirit comes now to give the perfect understanding of it. p. 79
XIV. Speaks of the Alliance that God will make with Men, and of the Coming of
Jesus Christ in Glory, and that to have a share in it we must necessarily
Resign our Will to God, and re-enter into a Dependence upon him. p. 83 XV.
Shows how we must make use of all things to keep us in a Dependence upon God.
p. 88 XVI. Shows how the Resignation of our Will to that of God is a continual
Prayer; that it supplies all particular Doctrines and Exercises, and that the
Gospel directs us only how to remove the Obstacles that hinder it, the
discovery of which is necessary. p. 102 XVII. Is a Recapitulation of all the
foregoing Matters, their Scope, and Use. p. 108 XVIII. Speaks of Hell and of
the Damned, which will be they who shall have followed their own Will, which
is the cause of all Evil; and that few were disposed to quit it that they may
Resign themselves to God, and receive the Divine Truth. p. 116 XIX. Shows that
the Spirit of ANTICHRIST hinders Men from discovering the saving Truth, and
that Heathens are more Resigned to God than Christians at present. p. 122 XX.
Shows that very few among the Christians will be converted unto God, and return
to a Dependence upon him; and treats of the necessity of this Dependence. p.
128 XXI. Speaks of the Free Will of Man, in which alone he is like to God. That
God gave it Man for ever; that he annexed thereto all his future Graces; and
that never any Good or any Evil will befall any Person in Time, or through
Eternity, but by their Free Will, according as they will yield it up or not
into a Dependence upon and Resignation unto God. p. 137 XXII. Speaks of the
Disputes that are concerning Free Will and Predestination. p. 149 XXIII. Says,
That it is by Faith only that we can be saved; which coming from God is still
operating by Self-Resignation, even among the Heathens. p. 166 XXIV. Shows why
Men cannot resign themselves to a Dependence upon God. p. 175 XXV. Shows that
all the Wisdom of Men is nothing but Ignorance, in respect of the Divine
Light; and that God will destroy this Humane Wisdom to make way for that of his
Holy Spirit. p. 181 XXVI. Shows the necessity of becoming Children that we may
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, renouncing all worldly Wisdom, and all
Humane Impostures. p. 186 XXVII. Shows the True Marks whereby to discover where
the True Church is, and that it concerns every one to examine it. p. 191
XXVIII. Shows that all the Laws, as well that of Nature, as that of Moses, and
of the Gospel, are nothing but True Means to arrive at this Dependence of our
Will upon that of God: That this is the old Leaven which the Woman took and
put into the Three Measures of Meal, which are those Three Laws given by God at
several Times, which Jesus Christ in his Parable compares to Three Measures of
Meal; and that now a Woman takes this old Leaven of Dependence upon God to put
it into these Three Laws, that the whole Lump may be leavened, and Bread made
of it for the Nourishment of God's Children. p. 202
FINIS.

