Latham Spaw IN LANCASHIRE, With some remarkable CASES and CURES Effected by
IT; Together with A farther Account of It; As may conduce to the PUBLIC
ADVANTAGE With Ease and little Expense.

LONDON, Printed for ROBERT CLAVEL, in Cross Keys Court in Little Britain. 1672.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHARLES Earl of DERBY, LORD LIEUTENANT Of the County
Palatines of Cheshire and Lancashire, Chamberlain of CHESTER, AND LORD of MAN,
and the ISLES, etc.
My Lord,
SPrings tend not more naturally to the Ocean, than this Treatise to your
Lordship, The rise and Original of it.

What I have collected, the faults excepted, has been much out of your own
Observations, writ in a Style, your Lordship must pardon, that it may live.

When I first visited your Spaw, I approacht its Avenues with some prejudice,
being not convinced of the Efficacy of Waters (though I have observed some, and
read of more) in comparison of a well ordered Method in Physic, which I still
favor: Though in pertinacious obstructions, and diseases, that must be long
hewing down, native to those Parts through which the waters may pass, incline
much to their use, especially if Patients (nauseating variety of Medicines) can
comply with These, as more natural and obvious to their Constitutions.

And here by the way, I cannot approve of such fictitious waters, as some by a
pretended skill, in opposition to natural Spaws, say they can apt to this or
that distemper. No, I am not convinct that Art (though in some great Masters of
it, it may arise to a wonderful Excellency) can yet ever so deliciously compose
medicines as to equal the refined Spirits, which God and Nature has with so
much Curiosity mixed in the Bowels of the Earth.

A truth Fallopius seems to deny, hac ratione ductus, quod ob eorum soliditatem
(speaking of concrete Minerals) nihil ab iis abradi possit; which Julius Caesar
Claudinus in his ingressu ad infirmos (p. 373.) clearly confutes, as well from
their first as their second qualities; with whom our Learned Jorden in his
discourse of Baths, and mineral waters ( p. 63.) agrees, that before Minerals
have their full Consistence, whilst they are in solutis principiis, as earth,
juice, or vapors (afterward indeed they will need some Medium, or Corrosive
to unite them with the water) they may be communicated with water, non qua
Talia sunt (to enforce Claudius his words) secundum suam substantiam, sed per
soluta sua Principia, terras (scil.) succos and vapores.

And hence I account the waters of Israel better than Abanah and Pharpar Rivers
of Damascus; God having on Those bestowed a Blessing, He denied these, his hand
having more immediately in those divinely tempered, what Art in these can but
grossly imitate.

And* yet I do not deny that from the Family of Minerals, many powerful and
Noble medicines may, and are daily by Art framed to eradicate distempers; in
which particular none certainly was ever happier than our Learned Willis, the
Atlas and strength of Physical improvements, which being mixed with common
water, as a Vehicle to carry them off, may effect good Cures, so Alcoholiz'd;
But not with like facility, and so little Disgust as your Lordships and other
Spaws pro^^^e: The Abuse of which have many times profaned their use: So that
they, who would effectually drink of Spaws, must also consult judicially about
the manner, there being (as the Lord Verulam excellently observes) many
Medicines which by themselves would do no Cures, but being orderly applied
produce great ones, Not. Hist. p. 16.

And here I would not be mistook, as if by a judicial consulting of the manner
of drinking these Spaws I insinuate such a necessity of advising always with
Physicians, as no Dose could effectually be took without them: No, that were to
supply the defect of practice by the Commendation of the Spaw, to foment
Distempers, and then allay them: An Artifice too mean, and dis-ingenuous,
however so specious and practicable.

I know the Poor (for whose Relief these Spaws seem providentially to be found)
may resort hither beneficially on small preparations, having robust bodies,
natures which with a little help, can work out potent Diseases; And the Rich
(coming advised by their Physicians) may likewise receive infinite good,
according to the qualifications prefac't) unless extraordinary symptoms arise,
which in some measure too, they may be prepared for; That water being weak, and
poorly impregnate, if not inficiously, which ever and anon requires medicines
to actuate its virtues, or to remove bad effects.

I know, Medicinal Springs were never more pretended to than of late; Nor shall
I deny such their content, Qui ipsos inflatis buccis orbi commendant.

That which I have more to add, as to your Lordships Spaw, is only, that I
believe Time, the Mother of Experience will commend it to Posterity, especially
whilst your Charity Accommodates the Poor, as your Example animates others.

I mention not Time, as if the experience of 20 years in the general, as well
as four years particular observation, were not sufficient to evidence the
Virtues of your Lordships Spaw; But that a greater Concourse to it may (without
the nicety of any) set a larger Seal on its power and energy.

More might be insisted on, but I fear I have trespast too long on your
Lordships Patience, a virtue I would not further wound.

Long may you Live, the Glory of your Family! Your Countries Preservation! and
your Sovereigns Repose, and Confidence! That at length, though late, you may be
Crowned with Martyrs, and the immarcible Reward of Loyalty, and a good
Conscience! I am,

My LORD, Your Lordships most obliged and humble Servant E. Borlase.

LATHAM SPAW; How it is situated, what Conveniences may be there had for
Strangers, whence it proceeds, its virtues, and some account of the Cures
wrought by it.
IN the Manor of Latham in Lancashire, within a quarter of a mile of
Latham-House (the ancient and Magnificent Seat of the Earls of Derby, which too
sharply bears the Character of her Lords Loyalty, and the Miseries of more than
a Civil War) is a notable Medicinal Well, commonly called Maudlen Well, in the
Tenancy of Thomas Hulmes of Slade, named the West-head, erecting its Spring
much higher than the Road adjacent to Ormeskirke, the Noble burying place of
the Stanlies, Earls of Derby.

The happy effects of which Well I having observed the last Summer, attending
the Commands of the Right Honorable the Earl of Derby and his Lady there, who
have equally (with many in their numerous Family) received much benefit thence;
I cannot, without injury to the public, but obey his Lordship in this brief
but just account, though it be more suitable to my Inclinations to indulge my
Retiredness than to expose it.

This Spaw (by the Care and Nobleness of the Earl of Derby and his Lady
mutually assistant to the health of their Neighbors) is walled in with a good
free stone, and defended from the violence of weather with a well ordered and
decent* covering, set on a necessary, though no curious Fabric of wood,
ordered more to secure it from rain, than the Rays and power of the Sun, which
have still a sufficient influence upon it; whence this Spaw being entire, it
preserves (without the affronts of accidents) its own pureness and efficacy,
issuing forth its stream (through a well paved Channel) into the Road where the
neighborhood and common people (who are alike free, coming at seasonable
hours) drink of it there, and convert much of the water (running into the Road)
to their necessary uses of washing, brewing, and the like with no little
advantage; it being observed that the people thereabouts are of healthier
Constitutions, and not so subject to the Epidemical distemper of this year,
which has so miserably infected most places; though I will not say (as Abheers
of the German Spaw) that vix annosiores homines sub nostro Coelo, quam Spadanos
inveneris, it is sufficient they have not like Distempers at present as
elsewhere.

The Water (in its descent beating on the pavement) dies it with a rusty iron
color, one Argument of what it is impregnant with.

Not far from the Spaw there are many able Tenants sufficient to receive the
best Persons with all Accommodations and respective conveniences.

The Spaw is set about with Trees which yield a pleasant shade, and there are
two competent Seats about it for the Patients repose, and Attendants.

Adjoining to it, there is a large field (of late repurchased by the Earl of
Derby for the freer access of all comers thither) by nature cast into such
order, as men and women may have a full convenience for their walks and
evacuations, without trespassing on eithers modesty, and that with diversity of
Entertainment too, there being shrubs, plants, and young trees of sundry sorts
and uses.

A fathom scarce sounds the bottom, where there is laid a large Millstone,
through the hole of which the Spring forces its passage, casting up (within a
foot of the surface) a clear silver sand, mixed with such variety of little thin
Cockle-shells, and some Periwinkles curiously filed by the penetrable quality
of the vitriol, as the finest glass is not more perspicuous, more smooth, that
were a Microscope set to enlarge their minute bodies, what figures, what
improvement, what objects might thence captivate the eye? more and no less I am
persuaded than Mr. Hook in his Book has improved to admiration, evincing (as
Dr. Power in his Preface to his Experimental Philosophy has it) the dull world
how curiously the minutest things are wrought, and with what signatures of
Divine Providence they are inrich't, which (as it is excellently observed in
the Beauty of Providence) does not daily fall under our sense and observation:
And yet none of these, or any of the sand ever mixes with the stream, though it
issues (through a large hole in the side of the Cistern) with a current flux
bubling in several places at once, and is of that strength, that if one try the
deepness of it with a stick, it immediately buoys it up.

Some (from the Cockleshells and Periwinkles found in this water) conjecture,
that this Spaw may be fed by subterraneous veins from the Sea, whose shore is
commonly stored with such shells; nor is the opinion wholly to be exploded,
though the earth (in its matrice) may also have such a plastic virtue, as
(from its prolifick ferment actuated by the Sun) it may produce such shells,
which, as the case stands, is hard to determine.

Mr. Childrey in his Britannia Baconica (a good piece) page 75. mentions Cockle
shells, and Periwinkles found at Alderley near Severn in Glocestershire; but so
as he rather allows them attempts of Nature failing in her workmanship for want
of fit matter, than such in reality, which those we speak of are in figure and
other similitudes exceeding like, though very minute, and without the least
substance found in them; though in a Close hard by, there are like shells which
have full fishes in them; Ours (as Mr. Childrey's) are not found near the
surface of the Earth, but in the body of the sand cast up by the force of the
Spring.

This Spaw (by its Effects and the separation of its parts) seems impregnate
with Vitriol and some Alum out of Iron, and not in the least saturated with
any ill quality.

That Alum is an Ingredient, not the main Principle, nothing discommends the
Spaw; As by Forestus and others we shall hereafter more fully evidence and
clear.

And here before I proceed, I must (from all whom I have discoursed with)
insert, that if this Spaw proves slow, in getting off with some, it is but with
a few, and that through their want of advice first, whose distempers have such
a nicety of complications as may (in prudence) require advice, (which I think
ought regularly to be taken by such. Ne forte aqua noxios humores incurrens,
eos secum rapiat, inventamque obstructionem augeat, as Abheers observes) or if
it comes off slow, it is through the irregularities of others in taking the
water too late in the day, and dining too early and plentifully after,
indulging besides a more than ordinary freedom; Yet none ever complained that
it prejudiced them in the least.

I have heard that Dr. Spratling (a Person worthily respected in Lancashire,
for his Endowments, though somewhat morose and cloudy) commended this Spaw to
Mrs. Fleetwood of Penwerden, and others, as singularly good.

And this Testimony I have from a Reverend Prelate, one of the most ingenuous
and intimate Sons of the inmost Recesses of Nature, that He has a very good
Opinion of this Spaw, though he drank but one morning of it: In which opinion
is Dr. Pope, one of the Council of the Royal Society; And Dr. Howorth of
Manchester (my honored friend) a Person whose desert intitles him to no mean
Credit, writes to me, That he lately viewed and drank of the Latham Spaw, and
perceived it to be as deeply impregnate with the tincture of the Iron and
Vitriol Minerals as any water in Lancashire, or the Yorkshire Spaw: adding
further, That the greatest Test now must be from Those, that by experience make
further discovery of its usefulness and benefit it affords, which he believes
may answer the hopes and expectation he has of it.

And old Spaw drinkers, of which I met some at this Spaw, told me cheerfully,
that a less quantity effected their business than at Tunbridg, Epsom, Barnet,
and other Spaws, of which (in an ingenious Persons Case here following) you
will have a notable proof, which cannot but be an excellent Quality,
considering thereby that the Hypochonders are less stretched, Obstructions are
more powerfully opened, the filth of the stomach impacted in its folds and
wrinckles is sooner fetched off, especially if an easy vomit of Sa^ vitrioli
albi, which as well astringendi vi, strengthens as evacuates the stomach in
robust and obstinate bodies, precedes, and the membranous Parts (by the
speedier coming off of the water) are easier relieved, especially if this Spaw
be a little acuated (as I have advised some) with Salt of Vitriol, or Steel, or
Cakes of Cream of Tartar, the German way prepared, freely bestowed by the
Countess of Derby, who obliges (by her great indulgence) her Neighbors thereby.

There is an Ingenuous Person, one of a quick and through apprehension, who
coming (more out of a complacency than complaint) to this Spaw, drank of it
with others some days successively, but seldom more than three pints at a
time, yet made within an hour and an half two Chamber-pots full of Urine; which
clearly demonstrates its celerity and virtue. And that he might not be without
a blessing (though the healthfulness of his Constitution knew not what he might
desire) he yet found much gravel, to which his Parents are addicted, evacuated
by it, and himself freed of an Ebullition of blood, which Critically (about
Midsummer) had expressed its virulency in small pimples, for some late years,
with much offense.

This Spaw I have thoroughly tried as to the turning its color with the powder
of galls, oak leaves, the boiling it with milk, the bearing of soap, which (as
the Lord Bacon observes, Not. Hist. p. 87.) hungry water will not admit of,
such kills the unctious nature of the soap. As likewise I have tried other
experiments (frequent in the like Case) and I find few Spaws, if any sooner
answer all their Tests than this. Less than a grain of the shavings of Gall
will immediately tincture a considerable glass full of the water, first purple,
then inky. Nay, I have experienced that after some of this Spaw had been kept
seven weeks in a bottle, it yielded to the Gall a full color, though indeed,
it putrifies soon, being out of its body, which argues highly the fineness of
its Spirits, they being thin and aerial, and is an evincing token of its
virtue, in the Judgment of the Lord Verulam, Paulus Aegineta, Oribasius and
others.

And that I might be yet fuller informed (desiring to lay no Fucus on a
withered face) I caused three pints of this water (after it had been carried
seven miles) to be distilled in a Lamp Still, excellently performed by my Lords
Apothecary in the House: The first four or five spoonfuls of which so distilled,
I turned (as I had done the rest from the Well) with a little Gall, though what
was afterward distilled never altered in the least, notwithstanding how much
Gall soever I put in, but remained insipid and clear.

I put also into a glass of Spaw water, at the Spring a few drops of the
volatile Spirit of Hartshorn, which made a white separation, with a strong
scent, not of the faetor of the Hartshorn, but the Spaw, as if it had drawn
all its Spirits into a narrower compass, which a few drops of the oil of Tartar
reduced to its clearness and scent.

The scent of this Spaw is not loathsome, somewhat it is like ink, more (in my
apprehension) like the Seashore when the Tide's gone out, brackish and subtle.

Further, I exactly weighed a glass of fresh Spring Water with as much to a
drop, as we could measure it, of Spaw water, which in three ounces (so much the
glass contained of Spring Water) the Spaw water came short of the Spring Water
a full half ounce, which demonstrates the levity of its parts, and the subtilty
of its Spirits, which in the opinion of the Lord Verulam (Not. Hist. page 86.)
makes much for the better: Though I must confess too with Heurnius, that
Learned and entire Physician on Hippocrates his Aphorisms 26. l. 5. Non lance
semper aestimanda est aqua, sed si non gravis sit Hypochondrio, verum si ea
subito pervadat, nec ibi cunctando putrescat, is the best quality, which I have
already manifested are extant in our Spaw.

This Spaw has a bluish Cream, or skin which swims upon the water after it
has stood a very little while, Instar iridis, vel caudae pavonis in aquae
superficie, to use Hadrianus a Mynsichts expression in his Anima Vitrioli, a
medicine of admirable use, as this Spaw, (for this reason) may be in many of
the like Cases, especially when obstructions are the original of such
distempers.

I know coal waters, and others which are not without some ill quality (as
standing Lakes and the like) have the same colored scum, but not from the like
Principle, the one being from putrification, This the innate virtue of the
Minerals.

Abheers (who in concerns of this nature leaves nothing unsearcht) believes
this various colored fat, or skin in the superficies of the Spaw to be liquid
Amber, though others think it Sulphur: But whether from the one or the other,
certainly much virtue is specified by it, both being ingredients active and
effectual.

This Spaw works several ways, most by Urine, often by Urine and stools,
sometimes by Vomits, but least free that way, unless the stomach be before foul
and nauseous.

The Spaw at first drinking, is exceeding cold; to avoid the inconveniences of
which falling suddenly on the stomach, a sensible part and the bowels, I
advise, as is usual in the like case, Fennel seeds, Coriander seeds, Lemmon or
Orange pills, Angelica roots, or roots of Enula Campana candied, to be taken
with it, which brings off the water gratefully: And if some few drops of that
Noble and generous Medicine Elixar proprietatis be taken in a draught of the
water now and then, I am persuaded it may further its excellency, as the Earl
of Derby fully experienced when he took the water in reference to an
indisposition on his stomach, which this Spaw has happily removed, begetting
besides an excellent appetite.

Some ( Claud. p. 382. not without Authority) admit of a spoonful of Salt in
their first Cup, ut facultatem intestinorum irritent, ac alvum subducant, which
in robust bodies replete with gross humors, I shall not forbid according to
Avicen and Mesue cited by Dr. Jerden, p. 130. though it is too severe, and
harsh for finer contextures, having such tenuity of parts as may fret the guts
and bowels.

In the weaker and finest bodies Manna may be sufficient, Rhubarb with Cream of
Tartar, or Tartarum vitriolatum, or my Deobstructive powder, which I have
observed has done singularly well.

Some have been for drinking this Spaw warm (as they were they say the first
Examples of that course at other Spaws) the stomach being apt to suffer by the
contraction the water may make on the nerves through its active quality, the
nerves enduring no cold, in pursuance of the Lord Verulams advice for warm
drinks, (Hist. Life and death p 214) which may be in some constitutions more
proper at meals than in a course of Physic, and I believe his Lordship means
so, for so drunk in a course of Physic it makes it more nauseous, diminishes
its spirits, renders it less penetrable, and gives it another quality, though
in weak bodies the water with good effect may be taken warm, yet if such who
desire to take it so would either drink it in their bed, or go to bed soon
after they have drunk their dose (as with some is usual at other Spaws) all
inconveniences of its chilness would be easily prevented, especially if the
former rules of taking some gentle Correctives with the water were faithfully
observed, or a little white wine drunk with it, Ut si vestigium aliquod
frigiditatis ventriculo ab illis communicatum fuerit, ab his deleatur. Claud.
p. 390. For though this water (as Abheers observes of his Spaw, p. 102.) Actu
est humida, potentia potenter exsiccat and calefacit, sicque ventriculi, and
Cerebri vitia emendat. And that it affects the stomach by its coldness with no
ill effects, is evident from the appetite it raises in all that take it,
signally remarkable even to the repairing of some appetites prostrate before,
constringendo enim ventriculi orificium excitat suctionem, as Hollerius in his
praxis, p. 456. observes from our supreme Master, when he calls cold water
(...) Vorax.

The Right Honorable the Countess of Derby when she first began to drink of
this Spaw (three or four years since) was forced to take Cardamum seeds with
it, now a few Fennel seeds, sometimes without any thing, the Spaw passes off
with much ease and benefit.

Exercise (whilst the Spaw is in drinking) is most necessary: light walking is
good, but in that the body is apter thence to sweat, than distribute the water,
the matter of which is much spent by sweat, especially if the motion be
violent, whereby the strength being drawn into a narrow room, the Spirits
become more sharp, and predatory, I commend riding, shooting, bowling, or what
may make the water more easily descend, and enlarge its distribution; and if
some easy exercise to warm the bowels be had before one drink the water, I
conceive it may make way for the water to proceed with less prejudice.

What diet (in this case) is most necessary, is very obvious, viz. meats of
easy digestion, all fruits of the season must be avoided; early rising, going
to dinner when the waters are come off, and soon supping is most requisite; yea
Lipsius his advice to Lessius from the Spaw in his Epistles is excellent, vix
quandocunque venietis coenulam vobis paratam apud me scitote ex legibus
spadanis, tenuem frugalem cum fame dimissuram: so is a cheerful spirit,
moderate exercise, and all temperance, and the body by Art, if the water
effects it not, is constantly to be kept open.

In what Cures this Spaw has been most happy I shall in brief run over some;
Time, which matures all, and my leisure, (at present somewhat disturbed) being
to enlarge further as there is occasion.

In facilitating the passage of the stone and gravel, and abstersing its sordes
and minera, I find it very successful.

One Cropper in the Manor of Latham has (for these twenty years) found, (as
to the stone and gravel) much benefit by this Spaw in great violence and
extremity.

Major Henry Nowell Deputy Governor of the Isle of Man, drinking of this Spaw,
found (as I am informed) infinite relief by it, voiding thereupon much Gravel
and many stones.

John Lingley a poor man, miserably afflicted with a continued pain about his
reins, and his bladder, especially when he would make water, drank freely
(after he had been gently purged) of this Spaw, by which he immediately found
such ease, that the membrum virile (swelling priapismi instar, constantly
before when he endeavored to make water) grew orderly, and he voyded the next
morning a stone with two discoverable branches.

A Gentleman of a fair Estate, and an Ancient Family nigh to, and in Leverpool
(one of the most increasing and flourishing Sea-Towns now in England) having,
but ineffectually, long experienced the ablest advice in London for an Ulcer in
his right Kidney, at length repaired to this Spaw, of which for some days
(indeed too few to make a through Cure) he drank freely, and with that effect,
as ever since he is restored to such a competency of health and strength, as he
travels in his new Chariot with ease, and walks without the least disturbance,
who for some years before could not stir without stooping and much pain.

Strange success it has had on most sturdy obstructions, and Annual pains.

Richard Dinton (at present Coachman to the Earl of Derby) was long held with
an excessive pain about his stomach, flushing heats in his head, and a
streightness at times about his heart. Several months successively (for two
days together in a month, and no more) he had an intermitting Tertian, with a
regular Type, and a sharp stitch in his right side; for which he tried much
means, but in vain; At length he drank freely of this Spaw, taking some days a
little Rhubarb and salt with it (the Medicine is of the Lord Bacons
approbation, Hist. of Life and Death, p. 218.) and is now in good health.

A Gentlewoman of good note washing her knees and hams morning and evening with
this Water (she drank of it too) eased her self thereby of infinite pains and
aches in those parts.

Here I must insert a Case of great importance, Elizabeth Holden Wife to one of
the Keepers of Latham Park, a woman of good years, and grave, having for a long
time suffered under intolerable pains about her stomach, back, and belly,
principally toward the Matrix, and in her groins: And fearing by the bigness
of her belly, that she might fall into a Dropsy, drank orderly of this Spaw,
being tired out with variety of Churlish Medicines before. After a day or two,
the Spaw wrought so effectually with her, as first it mitigated her pains, then
lessened her belly, and at length, Oh numen Aquarum! It brought away such
Bladders, as many of them equaled a pigeons egg, which being broke, with some
noise, yielded a spoonful of limpid liquor somewhat jellying: Before the
voiding of which, pains, not unlike Throws, pressed her in her belly, groins,
and lower parts. I had (by the favor of the Earl of Derby) one of those
Bladders, the last I think, she ever voided, sent to me, whose outward Tunicle
was not unlike a Swines bladder, but without Fibers or veins; within it was
smooth, and had adhering to its sides a slimy bluish jelly substance. Upon
discourse with her, of which afterward she assured me, that she had not voided
less (since she took notice of them) then two hundred, each with pain and
trouble, though the last with least. What to think of these I am somewhat
uncertain; That there are Monsters in Physic, as in Nature, is no late
Exclamation. Ludovicus Nonnius, a learned Physician of Antwerp, in an Epistle
to the most ingenious Beverovicius of Dordrecht, inserted in his Treatise De
Calculo, writes that as in the Yard Caruncles may be generated, which enclose
Urine, so the like substance may be bred in the body of the bladder: And
Zacutus Lusitanus, that admirable observer of especial Cases, p. 184. gives an
excellent evidence, that multa monstrosa in vesica innasci, and membranae
nerveae Globi crystalli forms, incredibilis quantitas pituitae, and alia mira
quae intus corercita deinde excernuntur cum urina. Nor is Sennertus, that
Learned and excellent man less observing in his Chapter, de vermibus and aliis
praeter naturam in vesica natis. And none of our books, treating of
preternatural accidents, but are plentifully stored with strange productions
from the womb; Concessions much strengthening our present Case though they
clear not the reason of it: Nor do I believe the reason is easily found out.

Multa tegit sacro involucro Natura. Though till I am better convinced, I must
suppose these Bladders voided by our Patient to be bred in her bladder, if
there, or in her womb, as Aposthumes, of which there are great varieties
arising from choice of matter, as Sennertus well observes, disseminated through
the whole body, some of them enclosed in a proper tunicle, receiving form and
matter from the place they are generated in. I have been lately assured by a
Person worthy to be credited, that having had some years since, discourse with
an Eminent Physician in these parts, whose infirmities generally tied him to
his Chamber, he was then told by him that he once had a Patient, a Gentlewoman
of good quality, who on her Urine had a fat scum with various colors in it,
under which swam many Bladders, the bigness of a large pins head, very clear,
which being broke afforded a slimy water, which he conceived were the effects
of some Apostumated matter in the Reins, and not improbable, so various is
Nature in the discharge of her burden. But that which sways most, next to what
may be imputed to the irregularities of the womb, is the opinion of a Learned
Physician, whose deserts challenge more than is paid to his years and merits.
He conceives these Bladders come from the Mesentery, and are the involucra and
Cystes of Scrophulous Tumors generated there, there being, as Vigo maintains,
the focus and seminary of the Scrophula expelled thence, as Schenckins observes
of other evacuations, per ductus occultos; and hence Forestus in his Treatise
of Chirurgical observations ( lib. 3 p. 259. in 8o) from Arnoldus observes,
that Aquae minerales aluminosae non solum infernos hos strumosos, ac pituitosos
abscessus, sed externos quoque and summa corporis occupantes imminuunt, ac
discutiunt; from whence this Patient received so much benefit: But to our
intent.

The Colic seldom here misses of a Cure; Holmes who had lately the ground in
Lease, gives an excellent Testimony of this, as others whilst I was on the
place.

Since, Mr. William Blackbourn of Billings, a young Gentleman, having some
sharp heats breaking forth in his body, went the last Autumn to Holywell, in
hopes the coldness of that Well (certainly a clear and fresh one) would have
relieved him; But washing there, returned notwithstanding with the same heats
increast, and some days after had the Colic so extremely, as it tormented him
much; Whereupon coming to this Spaw, he drank plentifully of it, and was that
day cured of his Colic, and mended immediately of his itch.

This Spaw has wrought good effects on long obstructions, of which something
has been took notice of in Dintons Case.

The Countess of Derby being sensible of a more than ordinary indisposition on
her right Hypochonder, applied her self, two years since, to the drinking of
this Spaw; The Spaws in Germany, (those of Ardenne, as that of Wilong in the
Territories of the Lantgrave of Hesse, famous for the Duchess of Longaveile,
Sister to the Duke of Conde, proving afterward with Child) having been no
strangers to her Palate and observations, which encouraged that Excellent and
discerning Person to hope well of her own Spaw at Latham, in taste and trial not
unlike. Upon drinking of which she found so notable an improvement of her
health, languid and impaired before, that her appetite returned, the rawness
and crudity of her stomach before mentioned, wore off, her flushings and heats
grew less, and her Liver (till then stretched immoveably to her ribs) grew loose
and pliable, and all upon drinking this water, this admirable vehicle imbibed
with such active qualities as wasting the pertinacious humors, adhering to the
Parenchyma, and vessels, before rebellious to ordinary solutives, and
medicines, restored her Ladyship to the excellent health she now enjoys.

The Lady Colchesters Gentlewoman complaining, through a long indisposition, of
much pain inher head, and stomach, with a strange averseness to meat, and a
vomiting afterward, drank orderly (after some small preparations) of this
Spaw, and in few days grew well, and so continues.

In old Aches, and inward and outward Sores, this Spaw is of good effect.

Thomas Holmes of Slade, about 50 years old, having been troubled several years
last past with a pain about his Midriff, which though not altogether, yet in
great measure hindered his daily Labor, contracted by a strain, lifting a great
weight near 20 years since, the last May began to drink of this Spaw (not
constantly and regularly, but as he thought fit, and business permitted him) in
quantity about two quarts at a time, and is now not only freed of his pains,
but can daily do more work than he could possibly reach to for some years
before.

His Servant also, about Christmas was twelvemonth got a strain in his back,
lifting more than he could well master, which disinabled him much; In June last
he drank of this Spaw, for the most part, twice a day for some weeks, whereby
he is now lusty and follows his labor close, without the least sense of his
former Complaints.

Henry Maudesley (within the Manor of Latham) being in very great pain at his
heart, in his thighs, legs, feet, and head (you must accept of his own
expressions) for which he had tried what help Boulton and the Country afforded
(Eminent men in some places) but in vain, came, or rather, with much ado,
crawled to Latham Spaw, with a strong confidence, where in the morning, he
drank thereof freely, and getting a bottle, carried it full home of the same
water, and drank of it when he went to bed; Next morning he found himself
(amazed at the Deliverance) in a very good Condition, and both his thighs
broken out with pimples, out of which issued much water, whereupon he
immediately grew perfectly well, and so continues.

Alexander Parr, one of the Keepers of Latham Park, on a bruise, vomited much
blood, and thereupon grew weak, and short-winded, but drinking of this Spaw
recovered strength, grew hearty, and spat no more blood.

Thomas Aiscough, one of an athletick constitution, upwards of 50. every winter
(for some years last past) being troubled with a severe Cough, together with a
shortness of breath, complaining withal of such exquisite pains in his
shoulders and over his breasts, as the anguish of them would sometimes cloud his
Reason. Quibus etsi non tollitur lumen illud, ut sic dicam, mentis: tamen
interdum offuscatur, and velut nubecula serenitatem ejus subducunt; to make use
of dear Lipsius his words to Prunius, then his pains would descend to his
stomach, where they would be more tolerable, and afterward settle, with much
virulency, in his thighs, having in their walk pained his hips, so as to turn
them black, and in the end determine in his great toes, with blisters pouring
forth (for some weeks) freely thick and putrid matter, as Herc. Sax. p. 288.
observes in the like Case, Humors descended, ad pedes, in quibus fiunt
tubercula and sic solent solvere abscessus: for the Cure of which he had much
advice, but finding it ineffectual, resorted to this Spaw, which after due
preparations by bleeding, vomits, purges, and an orderly diet, which of himself
he was not much inclined to, wrought so powerfully on him, every way, as he
found exceeding Relief thereby, and is now returned to the Isle of Man, (where
he usually lives) with much Comfort, and satisfaction: Though such a habit of
Distempers will necessarily need, Spring and Fall, some evacuation more than
natural.

Monsieur Pelate, Gentleman of the Horse to the Countess of Derby, one well
verst in Chemistry, and a sober person, who in his own Country had often
visited the Waters of Bourbon, and the most reputed Spaws, acknowledges This,
in its kind, to be nothing inferior to any of them; It having effected a most
signal Cure on him, who, being much indisposed, and stiff in his Limbs,
inclinable, as he suspected to a Palsy (a Scorbutic one I conjecture) drank
orderly of this Spaw, and within a short time recovered his Limbs, with a
constant good habit of body, before much indisposed, and obstructed through a
sedentary life in his more retired years. The last Summer he went to Holywel,
and with others bathed himself there. Upon which ensued a great indisposition
on his Limbs, and his whole body; The Spring being too cold and piercing
(though it must be owned, for its Rise and Purity, one of the excellentest of
that nature) as it discomposed him much, so much as he has expressed his
resentment ingeniously, fecit indignatio versus: since he has recovered his
health by drinking again This Spaw.

John Thorp of Chester, 16 years old, having been for several years, if not
since his birth, exceeding scrophulous in his face, arms, body and legs, so
violent there, as to have eight bones at once took thence, underwent all usual
means for his recovery, but finding little good thence the year 1669. the
humor broke forth very violently in his arm, thighs and back, in his back so
violently as it ran extremely distempering his whole body, sufficient indeed,
and more than sufficient to make him an object of great Charity; which the Earl
of Derby considering, ordered (about the midst of July last,) that he should be
brought with much Care to This Spaw from Chester, of which he drank freely, it
agreeing (after two or three days) excellently with him, working by stools,
and urine, very kindly, so kindly as after six weeks stay there, observing an
orderly Course, both as to Physic and diet, his Ulcers mended to admiration
without any other application whatsoever, than the Spaw water; His pains,
before intolerable, vanished, his strength (near exoluted) increast, and his
mind (dejected through the loathsomeness of his distemper) grew serene, so that
at this day he stands a Miracle of Restoration, being able to walk cheerfully,
that lately could not move without anguish, and complaints, though I suspect
(unless the next Spaw season perfect his recovery) his distemper, through its
violence has so impoverisht Nature, that he will at length fall under his
Complaints, through the decay of some Parts, (without the recovery of which)
Nature cannot well subsist, though at present, exceedingly relieved.

John Stephen of Newgate in Holland near Latham, 20 years old, having (near the
vertebrae of the loins, within somewhat more than an inch of the back bone,
upon the first of the spurious ribs) a great Tumor which for six months was
gathering to suppuration, but could not be brought to it, notwithstanding the
most usual effectual pultises, cataplasms, and plasters, till by the advice of
a Country woman, a Colts Secundine, which was stretched (according to their
Custom) on a board, and by pieces applied to the Tumor so ripened, and easily
brake it, as at the first running it yielded some quarts of laudable Quittor,
The next dressing almost as much, and every day after, for four weeks, the
Aposteme wetted three or four napkins each dressing, not unlike to what
Herculius Saxonius observes, p. 288. of one he opened, qui excernebatur pus
album eo die ad libras octo, and sequentibus diebus ultra december libras; which
comes the nearest I read of to our Patient, who being thereby brought very low,
and finding no benefit by what he had been advised to for his recovery, He with
much difficulty repaired to Latham Spaw, where (after he had took a dose of the
Apozeme prescribed for the former Scrophulous Patient, he drank orderly of that
Spaw; As Her. Sax. in the former Chapt. advises in curatione ulceris post
abstersionem: utiliter enim, says he, administrantur omnes Aquae Thermales, and
intemperie calida convenient frigidae, in minus calida aluminosae, nam
exsiccant and mutant intemperiem parts, as Forestus in his Chyrurgical
Observations p. 329. also advises, by which the Patient in few days gathered
strength, with such a stomach, as his sores (he had two) ran kindly, grew
sweet, and by the Fistula injection, which the Countess of Derby (excellent in
those things) ordered, out of her Charity and knowledge, is now in such a
Condition, as he can without pain ride, nay go many miles, who before could
scarce hold up his back one step, and might easily have the wound healed, if
there were not more danger Lupum auribus tenere; Some Recidiva's remaining,
which (for fear the vertebrae of the back should be foul, or the Cartilage, and
the Tendons of the joints be thereby impaired, the Aposteme being long in
gathering) I cannot yet but indulge Doctor Reads Caution, not to heal the
Orifice too soon. Before he came to the Spaw, oftentimes the Orifice in his
side would be shut up, upon which he would breath extreme short, and spit up
exceeding bitter matter in great quantity, ready to suffocate him (the matter
being translated to his Lungs) which, after drinking a day or two of the Spaw,
turned it is Course to the Wound, never reversing it is order since: So happy
has this Spaw been to this poor neighbor.

Some in Dropsies have repaired happily to this Spaw.

The Lord Strange's Nurse, a Woman of a full body, cheerful, and of a wholesome
Complexion, being exceedingly swolen in her belly, thighs and legs, nay almost
all over, afflicted too with violent pains in her head, and a troublesome
Asthma, seriously betook her self to drink of this Spaw, and without any
considerable preparation; which, in few months cured her Dropsy, remedied her
headache, and freed her, as it has done some others lately, of her Asthma,
that at this time she enjoys much health.

I know a Divine about 40 years old, a graceful Preacher, and Reverend, much
afflicted with the Scurvy, and many of its languishing symptoms, besides
miserable swollen legs, who drinking of this Spaw but a few days, returned home
infinitely eased of his Complaints, and cured of his swollen legs.

In the Worms, nothing proves more effectual. The Housekeepers Wife of
Cross-Hall (a sweet Retirement of the Earl of Derbys) maintains it, that one of
her Children being very ill, and as she thought at the point of Death, and she
her self too, at that time, indisposed and ill, drank both of this Spaw brought
to them in a bottle, by James Holmes the Husband, and immediately they both
grew well. The Mother thereupon voiding two, and the Daughter three worms
Indeed the Neighborhood, as I am informed, drinks it often upon that score,
and with much benefit.

Mistress Elizabeth Nowel, being troubled with the Palpitation of the Heart from
the womb, and Spleen, drank some days of this Spaw, and found not relief only,
but (for ought I yet hear) a Cure.

In Women's Diseases, viz obstructions of the womb, Critical evacuations,
hysterical fits, etc. the whites with all the symptoms arising thence, the Spaw
produces excellent effects, too apparent here to insist on, that through the
whole, glance only at some Cures; As also in loosenesses, bloody fluxes, fluxes
of the Liver, This Spaw effects considerable Cures, and that not so much as
some suppose, by a restringent, and thickning quality condensing the
prodigality of Humors preying on Nature, thereby disabled to act in her own
vigor, as by an opening, and discussing virtue, precipitating the Morbifick
Cause of these and the like fluxes, whereby Nature (being rid of her
superfluities) she recovers her pristine strength, as Abheers p. 24.
excellently well observes to this effect.

The same may be affirmed of the Gonorrhea, and all the diseases incident
thereto: Of which you may take two Examples, One of a young man about 29 years,
who having run through a Course of Physic, not less terrible than the Disease,
drinking of this water, was speedily cured of a notable Flux of Blood in the
frenum with its consequents.

The other was of a man about 30. who having a Consumption in his back, drank
freely of this Spaw, and in few days gathered strength, such as (if a Quartan,
which has seized on him this winter, do not again impair his strength
exceedingly) may restore him to a healthful Condition.

I may here likewise mention one (related to him that looks to the Well) who
having spent much in the Cure of a dysentery, was by his friends advised to
come from Manchester, where he lived, and lack't not advice of Learned and
eminent men, to drink of this Spaw, which he did, and in a short time returned
cured.

Nor is it any wonder that this Spaw impregnate with sufficient virtue, should
have such an effect on the Diseases last mentioned, since (as Sennertus
observes of the taking of the Aquae Thermales, in the Dysentery, the reason of
which Cure is also pregnant for the rest) That cum una opera pluribus scopis
satisfaciant, acres (scil.) humores diluant, and deturbent, sordes ulcerum
detergant and ulcera ipsa egregie consolident, so my Author in his Chapter De
dysenteria, p. 329. 4o which, as a Conclusion to this hasty Discourse, is not
impertinent to insert: And though I might now add more, each day during its
season, raising up some passage worthy an Observation; Yet with the shutting up
of the Spaw in Winter, we will also leave the rest to flourish with this
Spring, If what we have writ, we judge not more than sufficient.

FINIS.
Memoriae Sacrum ILLUSTRISSIMI Paris Conjugum, Viri quidem Nobilissimi D. D.
CAROLI Comitis DERBIAE, Et Junctae Illi Lectissimae Foeminae D. Dorotheae
Helenae, Operam Conferentium ut Aquae Acidulae Lathamenses, Omnium visui obviae
and usui expositae essent.

Anno a FONT saliente plus minus XLXX. Era Christi MDCLXXII.
A further Account of LATHAMSPAW, as IT may conduce to the public Advantage,
with ease and little Expense, under the favor of the ILLUSTRIOUS PERSONS, the
Proprietors of IT, whose Charity exposes IT to All, as their Countenance gives
Life and encouragement to IT.
MAny having been encouraged by the success, which They and their Friends have
found on their Repair to Latham-Spaw, to enquire further after its Effects, and
the Times and Customs to be observed there; (too cursorily glanced at in the
first Treatise of this Subject) I cannot, but in order to the approaching
Season, so far yield to the Importunity of Truth, and the public benefit; as
briefly to affirm what the most knowing and ingenious testify, that the
Excellency of that Water far excelled the attempt of its Praise and Virtue:
though it being remote from the Business of the Nation, the Access to it may
not be so universal, as is observed in other Places weaker impregnated with the
Minerals, Iron, Vitriol, and Sulphur. Nor were the Effects more visible on the
Plebean, than the Patrician, as hereafter may be more particularly expressed;
though some circumstances in their Cases, are more remarkable, than a short
time may well comprehend; to which at present (intending few Notes only, not a
Tract) I am narrowly confined. Hence for their clearer Information, who shall
repair thither, for the opening of Obstructions, either of the Liver, Spleen,
or Mesentery, the Inn of slow Fevers, and other contumacious Effects; freeing
the Uriters of Gravel, Stone, or Phlegm, restoring the Appetite, clearing the
Vessels of the Gall and curing the Diseases incident thereunto, also the
suppression of Urine, painfulness, etc. the rectifying the Womb, furthering
Conception, menstrual Evacuations, and rectifying other Infirmities of Women;
dissipating Hypocondrick Vapors, or Melancholy, removing old Pains, Scorbutic
affections, with its prodigal and virulent Progeny, Dropsies, Asthmas, Morphew,
distempers of the Reins, Worms, Relics and proper Fuels of intermitting
Fevers; healing old Sores, sore Mouths, inflamed Eyes, inveterate Dysenteries,
Laskes, and Fluxes, with many Diseases lodging in the Channels, through which
the water passes. I shall add some Directions, observing (to the Profanation
of this great Blessing) how irreligiously, how brutishly most flock thither,
(as to other Spaws) without discrimination, or rules to be bounded by in their
Drinking; as if the Water were a Spell, not a Medicine: whereas the influence
even of the Pleiades, and Orion, have not their natural Effects, but as the
Bodies (they work on) are capacitated to imbibe their Energie.

In pursuance of which, so grateful to the most illustrious Indulgers of this
Spaw, whose Interest is never so well advanced as in the Community of Good, I
shall set down some Canons which (observed) may make the Waters (influenced
from above) truly healing and beneficial; not here only, but where ever the
like are drunk, so as these Rules may prove a general Benefit summed up in a
narrow Room: In publishing of which, I comply rather with their Charity,
(diffusive as their virtues) then seek my Ease or Repose.

First, as to the Time, though some are of opinion, Waters may be drunk in
winter as being stronger then: Yet the Air being then cold, the Pores are more
condensed, whence the passages are not so relax; and commonly one is driest in
the Summer months, so more inclined to drink freely, a good Expedient to carry
them off readily; in which respects, I conceive the fittest Time to repair
hither, is, from the end of May to August, inclusively. Some (so the
constitution of the Season disswades not) commend August most, though generally
then the first Rains begin, and that (according to the Proverb) discovers the
Poverty of Nobility: The Trees thence forward casting their Livery, whence
People clothing themselves warmer imply Waters (afterward) are ill Visitors
of the inward parts: But this Circumstance may be ore-rul'd according to the
seasonableness of the year, no maxim being truer than that, Change of Seasons
principally begets Diseases. Certainly the hottest Season, and clearest Air,
are fittest Times to drink Waters in: the Air (a vehicle by which Diseases are
conveyed to us) being much indisposed by the contrary, consequently Waters, and
we by them, in case Wind, Rain, or Air prove unwholsom; Yet I have known Those,
whom the strongest Medicines could not move, the Waters (though in Winter) have
wrought on effectually; but such Patients are not sufficient to make the Rule
general.

Secondly, let such (as would drink these Waters) advise with their Physician,
whether the Cause (for which they would apply themselves hither) be probable to
be relieved here: Siloe was not for all; since Luxury, complicate Diseases have
flown in upon us. Nothing is so sovereign which (in some respect) may not be
attended with an inconvenience, though I havebeen so strict, in my observation
of this Water, that I cannot charge the least Ill upon it; Who were fit to
drink it; Who have took it orderly, that have not been spent with Age, or whose
Heat or Vital parts have not been asleep.

Thirdly, having rightly discovered the Disease (for one may emulate another,
and yet is not to be cured by the same means) let them carefully pursue Rules,
drink orderly, and keep within the compass of a sober Diet.

Rules consist first in Purging, either by Vomit, or Stools, of which more in
the larger Treatise on this Subject, it being impossible to apt Medicines to
every ones Necessities, though (in general) the Nauseous may help their
Stomachs by Hiera Picra, in Pills, from half a Dram to a Dram, or take it
in its Species, with Syrup of Wormwood, and strengthen their Stomach afterward
with Zedoary, Galinga, China-Ginger, sweet Calamus Roots candied, and the like.
The costive may do well to take Diacassia cum Manna an ounce, Cremor Tartar a
scruple, made into a Bolus the night before, or some of the lenitive
Electuaries with a little Hiera Picra, which by morning may relax the belly. 2.
Let the Patient drink the Water early, on an empty Stomach, and walk, jump,
ride, swing the Arms, shoot at Butts, or exercise gently after, also a little
before; the better to relax the Passages, and excite natural Heat: weak Persons
may drink them in their bed, some what warm, but never too much at once, least
driving obstructive Matter into the Uriters, the Waters find not a current
flux; or (the Stomach being overcharged) the Patient be forced to vomit: not
that a Vomit the first or second day may be inconvenient, though the Custom of
it may effeminate the Stomach, and divert the Course more natural and intended.
Hence I disallow drinking in the afternoon, unless a Cup or two, four or five
hours after Dinner, that the Chylus diluted may be the better distributed; but
then I am against such as would sleep upon it, for that (as some well observe)
the Water lying longer in the Stomach, than at other times, and gathering Heat,
it sends up Vapors apt to oppress the Brain. 3. After the Water begins to come
off kindly, the Patient may drink thin Veal or Mutton Broth altered with
Asparagus, Fenel, Parsley roots and the like, with Tops of young Wheat,
Succory, Chervil, and seasonable Herbs, the better to warm the Stomach and open
the passages. 4. Dine not till the Water be come off: A little White or Rhenish
Wine (in a glass or two of the Water) furthers that; sometimes a Pipe of
Tobacco, also Elecampane or Angelica Roots candied, Orange Pills, Tablets of
Aromaticum Rosa^um, and the like, mentioned under the first head (strengthening
the Stomach) help concoction, then which nothing can bring off the waters
sooner. 5. As one ascends by degrees to his Dose, (which is impossible to
assign positively to any, for that the Water works not alike with All) so let
him descend gradually; and if he will not admit of other Physic, let him, at
least, take a Glister in conclusion, that (what the waters have thrown into the
Bowels) it may cleanse and relieve; Else after evacuations, (sometimes
Torments) may ensue very prejudicial: indeed Glisters (and those of the Spaw
Water) may (in case of Costiveness, or obstinate obstructions) be of excellent
use through the whole course. 6. Feed on meats easy of Disgestion, such as may
rather satisfy than whet the Appetite; The Belly's cheaply fed: especially
avoid the crude Fruits of the Season, viz. Cherries, Cucumbers, Millons, Pease,
Peaches, or what may raise the least satiety; the fertile Parent of diverse
complicate inexplicable Diseases. 7. Spend the vacant time in gentle exercise,
as before is specified, also in Mirth, and good Company, that together with the
Body, the mind may be relieved. 8. Get convenient sleep in the nights, rarely
in the day, unless the Patient be very weak, and that sleep may be taken with
Advice; and in case you sweat kindly in the night, check not favorable Dews;
although such I am against, in the Act of Drinking; for that it spends much of
that matter which is more natural to come away by Urine, so, infeebling the
Spirits, it much indisposeth the Patient. 9. Less then fourteen or twenty days
(a respect being ever had to the habit of the Patient, and his strength) cannot
well serve to run the Course in: In the strict observance whereof, some times
Headache, Maziness, and the like (by reason of vapors) affect the Patient. In
others the pains of the Hemorrhoids prove offensive: And the Waters get off
difficultly with others. All which may thus probably be remedied.

First, the Patient (having been seasonably purged) may take a Tablet of Sugar
of Roses, preserved Quinces, or the like, mentioned in the first Head under the
Rules to be observed, which, gratifying the Brain, repells the grosness of the
vapors.

Secondly, the Hemorrhoids may be prevented by a Glister (in a little quantity
the better to retain it) of common Oil, or Oil of Violets and Butter, injected
a convenient space before the Patient drinks the Water; or make an Ointment of
Oil of Violets, Mucillage of Psylly seeds; and a little Wax, wherewith (as also
with Oil of Eggs, well beaten with the yolk of an Egg) the Part may be well
anointed.

Thirdly, as to the difficult coming off of the Water, sharp Glysters may be
excellent, yet in respect there is some doubt of those as not sufficiently
reaching the Parts most burdened, Caesar Claudinus his Bolus Sylvius, his
Electuarium Hydragogum, a neat compounded Medicine, or the deobstructive Powder
mentioned in the first Treatise, page 27. may do well in a draught of white
Wine early in the morning. Nay the same Powder taken (sometimes from a Dram
to a Dram and a half with the water) may be a ready means to bring it off, or
to prepare the Body at first, as has been long experienced: Though if the Body
still proves obstinate, its better to desist, then force Nature to what she
will not readily yield to. And yet I have found, nor are others without the
same Notion, that where these, or the like waters come not off readily, they
often spend themselves (even some months after) in beneficial sweats, or large
salivations, nay (not seldom) in great quantities of Urine; that it has amazed
some, where the treasures of these Waters should be so long deposited without
further prejudice, which (as observations very important) I could not but
insert, that where the Waters are slow, hopes may not be cold. Some complain of
sharpness of Urine, after drinking the Waters, though Others are certainly
cured (even of this complaint) by their orderly government herein; to remedy
which, Emulsions of the greater cold Seeds, white Poppy Seed, and Almonds
sweetened with Sugar of Pearl, Syrup or Sugar of Althea, may contribute much:
though I have long experienced, that a draught of Florid Wine well defecated
has not had less happy effects on this complaint, than it has found in the
Dysury, or Strangurie, proceeding from cold Indistempers fomented by
refrigerating accidents; Of which, and the other Heads I might say more, the
Field being spacious, but so these Rules (with the rational deductions that may
favorably be gathered thence) may be well observed, I see not why brevity to
the Reader as well as to my self may not be an advantage. Farewell.

CAstalios Latices decantavere Poetae,
At Lathamensis tutior haustus Aquae.
Men's vatum Lymphata furit, corpusque tabescit*
Ast hinc men's sano Corpore sana viget.
Printed in the Year 1672.


