A Looking-Glass Discovering to all People what IMAGE they BEAR.

By which the True Jew is known from the false, and the Christian in nature,
from him that is so in name only. Likewise all people in some measure may know
what spirit they are of; and whether they are the Children of God, or of the
Devil. With directions for such as live in Error, how they may leave their
Error, and know the Truth which leads out of Error, by which People are made
free from sin, which they run into, and live in, by following the spirit of
Error. With a few words to Informers, who make it their work to Inform against
their Neighbors, for meeting together peaceably in the fear of the Lord, to
Worship him, as he requires.
By a Follower of him, who says, if you continue in my Word, then are you my
Disciples indeed, And ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you
free, John 8.31, 32.

Edward Bourne.

Printed in the Year 1671.

A Looking-Glass FOR All People to See Themselves, whether they be what they
ought to be, and do as they ought to do, or otherwise.
ALthough much has been Written, and Spoken, to turn Peoples minds, to the
Light of Christ in them; to the end that all may do what they ought, in all
things, and be what they ought toward God; yet but few have received the
Report thereof, though by obeying this Light, which is that which leads to keep
a Conscience void of offense toward God and Men, true happiness is attained
unto; and contrariwise the neglect hereof, is the cause of Peoples ruin, and
Eternal Misery. But notwitstanding, whether People will hear or forbear, I know
none on whom such a Work as this is laid, by the Lord God, can neglect the
same, but we must be Transgressors our selves in this respect. And therefore to
keep my Conscience pure toward God, I thus proceed.

You that live in sin, you know you should not live so, and that which gives
you this knowledge, is the Grace of God, which has appeared unto you, by which,
as in a Glass, you may see your selves; by which the Drunkard, Tit. 2.11, 12.
sees he should not be Drunk; and the Liar, he should not lie; and the Envious
Man, he should not live in Envy; and he that Persecutes his Neighbor, whose
Works are better then his, and for that cause, all these are doing what they
should not do, as they themselves (many of them) in their Prayers to God do
confess. And these, though they do that which they know they should not do, and
leave undone, that which they know they should not leave undone, yet would they
have the Lord to have Mercy on them; although their daily practice is thus to
Transgress. They acknowledge they have Transgressed against Gods Holy Law, and
too much followed the Devices and desires of their own hearts, etc. And this is
their manner from the beginning of the year, to the end thereof: But (Mark) you
that are such, can you believe that God will show Mercy to you, only on this
your Confession? Are you so foolish, and unwise, as so to believe? If you do,
certainly you will find it otherwise in the end: Then your folly will appear,
though at the present you may account your selves wise, and understanding, and
them foolish who are truly wise: But I must tell you, to be truly wise, is to
fear the Lord, and to keep his Commandments, though you may not account it so.

Object. But some may say, What are the Commandments, of God that we are to
keep?

Answ. These, Thou shall love the Lord God with all thy heart, Deu. 10.1. Luke,
10.27, 28.
and thy Neighbor as thy self, and whatsoever thou see by the grace of God
that has appeared to thee, thou ought to do it, and it will be thy
Transgression to neglect the same; therefore do not deceive your selves with
such a persuasion any longer, if you do you will show much folly, and
indiscretion therein, for God will not be mocked with such lip Service. This I
am bold in the fear of God to assure you of, you may draw near him with your
Lip's, but your Hearts are far from him, whilst it is only thus; You must not
only confess your faults to God, but must also forsake them, if Mercy with him
you would find: And this is the Word of God unto you. Let the Wicked Man
forsake his way, and the unrighteous Man his thoughts, and let him return unto
the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will
abundantly Pardon him, Isa. 55.7.

You pray that God would deliver you from all Envy, and Malice, and from all
uncharitableness, and from all the works of the Devil: But if you were
delivered from all these abominations, happy would you be; then God who
delivers his People from all these would be your God. But your Teachers many
of them are Envious themselves; and uncharitable themselves, etc. Therefore it
may be you are the more imboldened to commit all these Abominations: But if
you, and your Teachers, would take heed to the Grace of God that brings
Salvation, that thereby you may be guided, you would know the Lord God to be
your Teacher, who teaches his People to profit; and so be delivered from all
these Abominations, and all the works of the Devil, and then we should not
suffer by you as we do; for the Truth being your Guide, and Teacher, you will
give us the same liberty to Worship God, that you would have your selves, and
so do as you would be done by in this, and in all things; and so hereby you
will do what you ought to do, and be what you ought to be toward God; and not
before, viz. you cannot do, nor be, as you ought till you be guided by the
Truth, which leads to meekness, and lowlyness, by which God will direct you in
all your ways; then shall you be far from oppression, and violence, and spoil
will be (as it may be said) banished from your Habitations, that spirit which
leads to unrighteousness not being harkened unto, but the Voice of the Lord God
obeyed, and his Council stood in.

Object. But some may say, you direct us to the Light within, that by taking
heed unto it, we may forsake that which God requires us to forsake, and do what
we ought to do, that so we may be what we ought to be toward him. You also
will acknowledge that that which m^^es to unrighteousness, and unholiness, is
within; And seeing that it is so, that both these are within, how shall they be
known, and distinguished the one, from the other? How shall that be rejected
and forsaken, that ought so to be? And that followed and obeyed, that ought to
be followed and obeyed? Especially because that Principle which leads to
unrighteousness, sometimes appears like that which moves unto Righteousness.
How shall we distinguish between the one, and the other, and follow that which
we ought to follow, and avoid the contrary, in such a difficult case as this?
etc.

Answ. It Is true, that both these are within, The heart of Man is deceitful,
and desperately wicked, etc. as the Scriptures testifies: But the Lord by his
Light in the heart discovers this to his Creature which he has made, and is
the Work of his Hands, and by it he being therein hearkened unto, and obeyed,
helps the Creature from running into the Snare which the Enemy of the Soul
would (by enticing) draw him into, and so though there is that within People
that would Entice, and lead them into Sin; yet is there also that within which
shows the Creature the Evil thereof, and does discover from whence it does
proceed, and being harkened unto, as it ought, and obeyed, does preserve the
Creature thereby out of Temptations; and so hereby God does deliver his
Creature (Man) whom he has formed, out of the snares of the Devil, who goes
about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: And though he does
appear like an Angel of Light, as he is mentioned in 2 Cor. 11.14. yet by the
True Light he is discovered, which Light leads to fear the Lord, and do his
will, and his snares are avoided, that Light and Truth being followed, and
obeyed, which makes a discovery of him; and so hereby the Lord preserves his
Creature, which he has made by his own mighty Power, to his own Praise, and
the Creatures joy and Comfort. Glory be given to God on high forever.

And so it is by a dilligent taking heed to that which is pure of God within,
that this comes to be known, and witnessed, and it is by this the Soul comes to
live, which was dead; hereby the quickening Power of God is known, which
quickens, and makes alive to him, they who are dead to him by reason of their
Trespasses, and Sins, by inclining their Ears, and hearkening dilligently to
that which is pure of God in themselves, that they may be guided thereby only;
and so hereby such are led to repent, and Sin no more; and so becomes Followers
of Christ, who said to the Woman taken in Adultery, Sin no more, etc. And so
that blessed state comes to be known, which is without Sin, etc.

Object. But some may say this is strange Doctrine, if we mean a state without
Sin in this World; what can People be freed from their Sins, while they be on
this side the Grave? do not tell us so, our Teachers have told us, that such a
state is not to be expected while we are in this World: It Is true we ought not
to Sin but to strive against it, but we shall never be delivered from it while
we are here; it is Erroneous thus to hold, etc.

Answ. If People do not know a freedom from Sin here in this World: Where then?
What ground is there for them to believe That they shall attain to such a state
hereafter? Seeing it is said there is no Repentance in the Grave; and as Death
leaves, Judgment finds; and no unclean thing can enter the Kingdom of God: If
People must not be cleansed here, I would know where they shall? It Is gross to
hold that there is a Purgatory after Death for Peoples Souls to depart into,
when they shall leave this World where their Sins shall be purged away; and if
there be no such Place, as I suppose you will not grant there is (except you
are Popishly affected) then let not such plead for a never being made free from
Sin while they are here; if ye do well consider it, will it not be best for you
to grant that there is a Purgatory, where sin is to be purged away afterward,
if you would live in Sin Term of Life? But Sin is to be Purged away here, you
must know Christ to free you from your Sins while you are here, else Woe will be
to you, if you put it off till hereafter.

Christ came to save his People from their Sins and to destroy the works of the
Devil, which is Sin: Mat. 1.21.
And who does not know this Work wrought in them by Christ, they cannot so
properly call him their Savior; For how is he a Savior to such who are not
saved by him, from their Sins? Christ taught Perfection here; the Apostles and
Saints knew a being made free from Sin, while they were in this World; and
their Labor, and Work, was that they might present every Man Perfect in Christ
Jesus. See Mat. 5.48. Romans 6.15. Col. 1.28.

Therefore such as Teach and hold otherwise are contrary to Christ, and
contrary to his Ministers, then judge whose Ministers they be, for the
Ministers of Christ they cannot be said to be; who teach contrary to him; and
therefore are they to be turned away from, and not to be believed.

So while that Spirit Rules in the Heart, which leads to Sin, there is not room
for Truth, but Sin is lived in, the Spirit of Truth not being obeyed, which
frees from Sin; and so while it is thus, such cannot be said to be the Servants
of Righteousness, see Romans 6.20. And so while People follow such, they give
their Money for that which is not Bread; and their Labor for that which
satisfies nor, see Isa. 55.2. Therefore turn your minds to the Light of Christ
in you, that you may know the Lord to be your Teacher; who teaches his People
to profit; so will you be taught of him, and in Righteousness will you be
established; so hereby you will know him your Teacher, who says, Whosoever
will, let him take the Water of Life freely, see Revel. 22.17.

So here I give you a mark, whereby you shall know the Ministers of Christ,
from others, the Ministers of Christ they gave freely as they have freely
received, according to the Commandment of Christ, Mat. 10.8. The Ministers of
Antichrist preach for Hire, and filthy lucre, and seek for their gain from
their Quarters, like the false Prophets, and like those mentioned in the
Scriptures, prepare war against them that puts not into their Mouths. Mic.
3.5. And whether William Ley, Priest of Nicholass Parish in Worcester, did not
like them, for his Belly, on the account of his Easter reckonings (as he calls
it) Cast into, and Keep Robert Smith, and Edward Bourne of that Parish in
Prison; And would not make it appear to them it was his Right, according to the
Law of God; which he ought to have done; weigh these things with the Truth in
your selves, which weighs and measures things aright, and give judgment herein
accordingly: The Balance of the Sanctuary hereby you will know, which weighs
things aright; here you will know that within, which the outward was a Figure
of; and consider whether they be the Ministers of Christ, that love to be
called Master, Mat. 23.6, 7.
and love Salutations in the Markets, and the Chiefest Places in the
Assemblies, and the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, seeing Christ forbad it, and
cried woe to such? and whether such as these do not run and the Lord never sent
them, who are so contrary to the Ministers of Righteousness? They would have
money for Bread, and Wine, at Easter (so called) which they call the Sacrament,
although the People never receive it: But whether it be Equal and Just in them
to desire Money from People for naught? Let they that shall read this consider;
did not the Apostle and Servant of the Lord say, That they did not eat any Man's
Bread for naught; And they would not make the Gospel chargable, etc? I would
know wherein these are followers of those who would have others to follow them,
as they followed Christ; For my part I do not know wherein in one particular;
But they may be said to be followers of them who were contrary to Christ Jesus
in many particulars: They take and give that which they call the Lords Supper
before and after Dinner; and so do contrary to the Institution therein; For
Christ took the Cup after Supper and Blessed it, and gave to his Disciples, as
you may see, Luke 22 20. And though we cannot touch, nor taste, nor handle with
them, in those things which are to perish in the using, after the Doctrines and
Traditions of Men; yet the Supper of the Lord we own, and do witness the
Substance of what was figured forth thereby, Glory be given to him who is Holy,
and lives for evermore.

These and their followers who are taught by them say; it is true we ought not
to Sin; but to strive against it: But we shall never be delivered from Sin,
while we are in this Life, etc. Now what hopes is there for People to overcome
the Enemy of their Souls, if the case stands thus? If They do not follow such
Teachers, they can be but the Devils Captives; and if they do so, they must so
continue it seems; For he that lives in Sin serves the Devil, and so is his
Captive; For so they must continue it seems, while they be here, and that is so
long as they can be followed; then sure they cannot be the servants of
Righteousness, whilst they obey the spirit of Unrighteousness.

The promise of that life that is Eternal is to him that overcomes, and not to
him that does not. He that is made a Conqueror; and more through Christ, he
overcomes: But how will any prevail while they follow such as say it can never
be in this Life? Was it not in this Life the Apostles were made more then
Conquerours through Christ? This I would know. see Romans 8.37.

You that follow such Teachers, did not your godfathers, and godmothers (so
called) promise, and vow, for you in Baptism, that when you came to Age, you
should forsake the Devil, and all his Works, etc? And what do your Teachers
tell you now the contrary? saying; It can never be in this Life, but you must
always live in Sin till you come to your Graves. Now Sin is the Work of the
Devil, and if People must always, when they be here, live in Sin; then, How can
it be said, it being so, that they have forsaken the Devil and all his Works?
Consider what confusion is here; and be awakened unto Righteousness, that fruit
may be brought forth by you unto God, who will not be mocked with your
Lip-service, in calling Christ Lord, and yet doing contrary to what he
Commands; who said to his Disciples, Be Perfect as your Father which is in
Heaven is Perfect: So to draw near to God with your Lips will not serve your
turn, or make you acceptable unto him: But you must draw near with your Hearts
also, and do well, and as you ought, or else all your good sayings will be in
vain, and to no purpose. The Apostle James said, So say, and So do, see Jam.
2.12. And Christ says, Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, that shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: But he that does the will of my Father, etc.
Therefore see to it, you that shall come to read these lines. I charge you in
the presence of the Lord, that you be found doing his Holy Will, that you may
bring forth fruit unto him; lest he cut you down as fruitless Trees, and cast
ye into the fire.

So these things before mentioned being considered, it will appear that it is
not erroneous to hold, that a freedom from Sin is to be attained unto here in
this Life; but that it is erroneous, and Devilish, to Teach, and Hold, the
contrary. And if it be erroneous to hold that we should live without Sin, then
it was erroneous in our godfathers, and godmothers, (so called) to promise,
and vow, on our behalfs, that when we came to Age, we should forsake the Devil,
and all his Works, etc. Which if we do, certainly we must cease from Sin, and
not live any longer therein; for while Sin is lived in, the Devil and all his
Works cannot be said to be forsaken; because Sin is the Work of the Devil,
which Christ came to destroy; and so it is those who can truly and properly
call Christ their Savior, who witnesses that he has saved them from their
Sins, which is the cause of the wrath, and displeasure of the Almighty; so the
true Followers of Christ, the true Disciples of Christ, they know and can
declare it to the praise and honor of the most high God; that it is Jesus who
has saved them from the wrath to come, see 1 These. 1.10.

So who would be, as they ought to be, and do as they ought to do, must abstain
from every thing, which the holy Light of Christ in them makes appear in them
to be evil, and follow this good and holy Light only, that by it they may be
led into all truth, by which the God of truth is known, and come to, which who
comes to, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him, and they who do refuse to be guided by the Light of Jesus
Christ in them, which is that which God has appointed all People to be guided
by; it is them that do otherwise then they ought to do, and be not what God
requires them to be; such were those the Apostle James spoke of, forgetful
hearers of the Word, who neglected to do it, Jam. 1.23, 24.
whom he compared to a natural man, who beholds his face in a Glass, and
straitway forgets what manner of man he is; so what is the difference between
such as refuse to hear the voice of truth, that they may do it, and those who
are forgetful hearers, who are negligent in doing according to the Word, that
they have heard? this I shall leave to such as shall read these lines, to give
righteous judgment therein.

Now it is to be considered, what it is to be a True Jew.
ABraham was a true Jew, and all his Posterity, they were and are called Jews;
but all were not true Jews, nor are so, who came of the Loins of Abraham, but
those who were, and are, guided by the Spirit of Truth, as Abraham was, such
are the Children of the Promise, who are accounted for the seed of Abraham;
Abraham he kept the Commandments of the Lord, and they are the true Jews, who
do like Abraham herein; the Lord said of him, hat he will command his Children,
and his Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do
justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham, that which he has
spoken of him, see Genesis 18.19. he said they shall keep the Way of the Lord,
etc. Now what is it to keep the Way of the Lord, but to be led and guided by
the Spirit of the Lord, as Abraham was? and they who are led by this; It Is they
I do affirm to be the true Jews, and not others, viz. Not such as walk
contrary to it, and do rebel against it; the Apostle said, He is not a Jew, who
is one outward; neither is that Circumcision, that is outward in the flesh; but
he is a Jew which is one inward and Circumcision is that of the Heart, in the
Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God, Romans
2.28, 29. Now they who are led by the Spirit of God, at this time, as Abraham
was led by the Spirit of God then, to the Circumcision that was outward in the
flesh, so are such now led to the Circumcision within, of which the outward was
a Figure; So that which God requires of People, is that they do as he makes
manifest unto them, they ought by the measure of his own Spirit which he have
given them to profit withal, and leads them unto by his Spirit; Now if they do
what the Servants of God did, as is Recorded in the Scriptures, if they be not
led thereunto, as they were by his holy Spirit; he may say unto them who has
required this at your hands? This is the Comforter which Christ said to his
Disciples he would send, which should lead them into all truth; and blessed are
they who do walk according to this Rule, viz. Who are led and guided, by the
holy Spirit of the Lord God in what they do, and not they who do gainsay and
resist it: See what became of Dathan and Abiram, Corah's Company, who gainsaid
this holy Spirit; they were swallowed up of the Earth: Moses who was guided by
the Spirit of the Lord God, prayed the Children of Israel to depart from the
Tents of those wicked Men, and to touch nothing that was theirs, lest they
should be consumed in all their Sins.

Now let they who shall read these lines consider, whether there be not too
great a Multitude, that do resist this holy Spirit now, not regarding how God
did punish such before, though these things were written for their admonition,
there are too many whose Sin are like Sodom, and Gomorab, whom God over threw:
And though this sore judgment was written, with many more, that befell the
disobedient, and rebellious, that they who should come after them, should not
do as they did; yet what small regard do they take of the same? Well, though
the Lord God be slow to wrath, and of great kindness, and do suffer long, and
bear long; yet his longsuffering will come to an end, and his great kindness
will come to an end with such, if they do not turn to him, and amend their
ways, and their doings while his Spirit strives with them, when that ceases to
strive with them, and the things that belongs to their peace comes to be hid
from their Eyes; then they may wish they had never been born, when their misery
comes upon them; this was the state of the miserable Jews after God had long
strove with them, over whom Christ took up a lamentation; see and seriously
consider, Mat. 23.37. And do not deceive, your selves by persuading your selves
it shall go well with you, though you follow your sinful Lusts, and Pleasures,
and the imaginations of your own foolish Hearts; do you think, you whose
Mouths are fuil of Cursing, and Swearing, and Bitterness, and live in
Drunkeness, and Whoredom, and are Envious, and Persecutors of the Righteous and
Just, that Dathan, and Abi^^^m, whom the Earth swallowed up, and the Sodomites;
whom God overthrew, were greater Sinners; I tell you nay, but except you
repent, you shall, as Christ said likewise Perish.

Object. But some may say, Are there any now, that we are to departs from their
Tents? And to touch nothing of theirs, lest we be consumed in all their Sins;
if there be, Who are they? or What be they? That we may beware of them.

Answ. There are such now, whose Tents are to be departed from, or dwellings:
They are those, who have sold themselves to do wickedly, whose life is in Sin,
and do make it a sport to transgress against the Lord, by breaking his holy and
Righteous Laws, who serve other gods then the Lord God, who made the World, and
all things therein, contrary to his holy Command: who follow after
Covetousness, contrary to his holy Command, who are Murderers, Adulterers, and
Swearers; Exodus 20.3.
contrary to his holy Commandments, and are Haters of that which is good, and
Persecutors of the Righteous, contrary to his holy will and appointment, and do
not as they would be done unto, and so are contrary to Christ, who gave this
Commandment: Now such as are found in these things, and do live in these
things, and in whatsoever by the Light of Christ in them, they see to be evil,
it is they whose Tents are to be departed from, and nothing of their's is to be
touched; none of their Sins must People love to live in, lest they be consumed
in the same: Therefore be warned in the fear of the Lord to depart from such,
and touch nothing that is their's, do not Sin like them in any of these things,
lest you be consumed therein; So to be a true Jew, is to be guided by the
Spirit of Truth, us was Abraham the Jew, the Father of the Faithful.

And now let it be considered, what it is to be a True Christian.
IT is said in the holy Scriptures, that all are not Israel, that are called
Israel. So I say, though there are many that are called Christians, yet there
are none of these true Christians, but who are guided by the Spirit of Christ
Jesus, who said Learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly in heart, and you shall
find rest unto your Souls. So it is them who are guided by the Spirit of Christ,
which leads to meekness, and lowliness of heart, that are the true Christians;
and not those who are biting, and devouring on another, who live in Pride, and
High-mindedness; Nor those who are fighting one with the other, and Slaying one
another, and Persecuting one another about Religion, and Church Worship; these
are not the true Christians; these are guided by Cains Spirit who slew his
righteous Brother Abel, because his Brothers Works were better them his; These
have the Name, but are out of the Nature: They want the Nature of true
Christians, and so are like them who said, They were Jews: But did lie, see
Revel. 3.9.

The true Christians are guided by Christ's Spirit, which leads them to love
one another, and their Enemies also; and to bless such as curse them, and not
to overcome evil with the same, but to overcome it with that which is of a
contrary Nature to it; namely, that which is good; and not to swear at all, but
to spoke the truth (without swearing) in obedience to Christ Jesus, who says
Swear not at all, but their Yea is Yea, and their Nay is Nay, without an Oath,
as Christ teaches, so they are such, as hear his sayings, and do them, and so
differ greatly from them, who call Christ Lord, and yet do not the things which
he says; and so the true Christians are subject to Christ Jesus in doing
whatsoever he commands them, the Spirit to Christ is that which they be led and
guided by, that holy Spirit which calls to follow peace, and holiness with all
men, without which no man shall see the Lord, though he be called by the best
name, and do profess never so much of Christianity. Thus, in shore, I have
showed what it is to be a true Christian.

Object. But it is commonly objected, that things can never be well in Church,
or State, which People who are contrary the one to the other in their Worship,
may have liberty to Worship God in their particular manners, every particular
sort of People, viz. The Papists, The Episcopal men, Those called Baptists, and
those called Quakers, etc. Which must all have liberty to follow that which
they think best; This cannot do well, say They: We shall never do well, until
all are brought to one Uniformity in their Worship, etc.

Answ. Can you do better herein, then the Apostle and Servant of Christ Jesus
councelled in such Cases as these? Who said, Let every Man be fully persuaded
in his own Mind in what he does; For whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin; Now as
the Papist would have liberty to Worship God in that Way which he judges best,
so the same liberty he would have, must he give to another. The Episcopal Man
must do the same, and so the rest: And lay aside all Forcing, and Compelling,
and Persecuting about these things, and who are in the right Way, let them make
it appear by their Meekness, and Gentleness, and Patience, etc. And so let them
by their sound Doctrine, and good Conversation, convince them that are contrary
minded if they can; so long as all these are peaceable, and do nothing that
tends to the disturbance of the Common Wealth, nor to the injury of any Person,
but do only Worship God as they judge they ought: What shall Men take on them
to judge in such cases, and to Punish in such cases, if such err in their
Worship, seeing it belongs to God to judge, and Punish for the same? Now if Men
take this upon them, do not they do what they ought not; seeing the thing
belongs to God, and not to Man to do thus? If any err herein, they ought to be
admonished, that they may desist from their error, and close which the Truth,
by which they see their error. Christ said who is to be heard in all things, If
thy Brother offend tell him between him and thee, if he hears thee thou have
gaind thy Brother, see Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. if he do not hear, take one or two
more with thee; if he do not hear them, then tell the Church; if he do not hear
the Church, then let him be as the Heathen, or the Publican; he does not say,
Persecute him, Burn him for a Heretic, but let him be as the Heathen, or the
Publican.

Further, Christ speaking of false Prophets, said, Believe them not; But did
not bid his Followers to Persecute, and Destroy them. And further, consider
Christ's Parable concerning the Tares, which the Enemy sowed while Men slept,
and what the Householder said to his Servant thereupon that informed him of the
same, see Mat. 13.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Which plainly shows, that such
should be left to God, who err in point of Religion, and Church Worship, to be
judged by him for the same, who is the judge of all the Earth, and will do
right.

So let all have liberty to Worship God as they are persuaded in their own
Minds they ought, and not be barred therefrom, so long as they be peaceable,
and do nothing that tends to the disturbance of the Common Wealth, or injury of
any Person, viz. Whilst these things cannot be justly charged upon them, and
this is Gospel liberty; and till this be given, viz. Liberty of Conscience in
things relateing to the Worship of God, it cannot be well, in Church nor state.
Now if any err herein not willingy, but do it because they judge they ought,
and are sincere herein toward God, doubtless God will when he sees it best for
such, discover their error to them, and lead them therefrom, and guide them in
the right Way by his own Spirit, which does not, nor cannot err; so here is no
liberty desired for People to live in drunkenness, or in stealing from any, or
to offer violence to any Person, etc. if any do after this manner, let them be
restrained, and punished, as God by his holy Laws has appointed, which answers
that of God in all Peoples Consciences.

Here is showed, how People may know what spirit they are of; whether they be
the Children of the Most High God, or the Children of the Devil, etc.
THis must be by what is brought forth by them, for by the Fruit is the Tree to
be known, whether it be good, or otherwise; For a good Tree, says Christ,
Brings forth good Fruit, But an evil Tree evil Fruit, etc. So by what is
brought forth may it be known, or judged, of what spirit People are, or by what
spirit they are led, and guided. Now the Children of God are led by his Spirit;
also the Children of the Devil, are led by the spirit of the Devil. The fruits
of the Spirit of the Lord are these, viz. Love, Joy, Peace, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Gal. 5.22, 23. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
Meekness, Temperance, etc. And the fruits of the spirit of the Devil, or the
Works of the flesh are these, viz. swearing upon any occasion whatsoever, when
People know by that of God in their Consciences they should not swear at all;
Drunkenness, Lying, Fornication, Envy, Malice, Persecution, Fraud,
Dissimulation, (Idolatry) or any thing else that a Man may set up in his Mind,
and love more then the Truth; whether it be Covetousness, or whatsoever it be;
for all these are Idolatry, and all these are evil fruits: So who are in these
things, they cannot be said to please God, nor to be of God, who is the Author
of all good; in this said John, The Children of God are manifested, and the
Children of the Devil; whosoever is born of God does not commit Sin, etc. And
further, he says, Whosoever does not Righteousness is not of God, see 1 John
3.9, 10. etc. Christ, said to the Jews, who were doing the Works of the Devil,
(when they said God was their Father) said he, If God was your Father you would
love me; because I proceeded and came forth from him; but said he, You are of
your Father the Devil, and his Works you will do, who was a Liar, and a
Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth, etc. These were
Betrayers, and Murderers of the Just, and holy One, and yet took on them to be
the Children of God, calling him their Father, but made it appear that the
Devil was their Father, by doing the Works of the Devil, which was to murder,
and betray the Righteous; and these said, that Abraham was their Father, but
were far from his Works: So like them, many that are called Christians, that
have the name, but are out of the nature of true Christians, they oppress the
Righteous, and perseture the Righteous, who are the true followers of Christ,
and pertakers of his Nature, and betrays, and murders them, and yet would be
counted holy and true Christians, when it is quite contrary; for such are
altogether, and wholly against Christ, and so are followers of Antichrist, who
oppresses and gainsayeth Christ, and not the Followers of Christ Jesus; and
these would be accounted according to holy Church, and Members of holy Church;
But whether they be, let that of God in all consciences judge. So away with
these, who say they are Christians, and would be accounted truly so, but are
otherwise.

But the true followers of Christ Jesus, have the Testimony in themselves, that
they please God, as Enoch had, who walked with God in his Generation. Now these
false Christians that have the name, but are out of the nature of true
Christians, they want this Testimony, For that of God in their consciences
condemns them for walking contrary to it; for if they did according to it, they
would bring forth fruit unto God, which whilst they disobey the just, by acting
contrary to that of God in their consciences, they are far from, but are
heaping up unto themselves Wrath, against the Day of Wrath; so though they take
upon them to be true Christians, yet do they want the Testimony of Truth in
their Consciences, to assure them that it is so, as the Apostle who was a true
follower of Christ, and those who are such have, who said, We know we are of
God, and the whole World lies in Wickedness, and we know that the Son of God is
come, and has given us an understanding, whereby we know him that is true;
this is true God, and Eternal Life, see John 5.6, 20. Which the true Christians
know, and are witnesses of Glory, and Praise, and Honor, be given to the most
high God who is holy, and lives for ever: So by what is brought forth may it be
known what spirit People are of, or by what spirit they are led and gu^d^d; and
so whose Children they are, whether they are the Children of God, or the
Children of the Devil; the Children of God do like him, who is righteous, holy
and Just; and the Children of the Devil, are like their father the Devil, who
was a Liar, and a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth, and
so like him dwell in darkness, and have their habitation there, and not in the
Light of the Lord; For how can they dwell in the Light whilst they are contrary
to it, and will not come to it to be guided thereby? whosoever thou art, that
shall read these lines, be serious in the consideration thereof, that it may
tend to thy good, and not to thy harm.

Directions for such as live in Error, how they may leave their Error; and know
the Truth, which leads out of Error; by which People are made free from sin,
which they run into and live in, by following the Spirit of Error.
SO it is the spirit of error, this spirit of the Devil, which too many are
guided by, who will not come to that which shows them their error, that they
may be led therefrom, unto God; You will not come to me said Christ to the
unbelieving Jews, that you might have Life: Now it is by following Christ, that
error is seen, and the spirit of error shunned, and avoided; so who are in
error, and sees your error, to that which lets you see your error, which is the
Light Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal, do I in the fear of God direct
your minds, that by taking dilligent heed unto it, you may be led therefrom,
unto God, who is holy, and lives for ever. So hereby you will know Truth, the
Spirit of Truth, which makes free, to free you from your Sins, and Christ you
will witness to be the Savior of your Souls, who saves from Sin, and gives
power over Sin, and him who is the Author thereof, viz. the Devil, so you will
be no longer in bondage to the Devil, the Auther of Sin, nor a Slave to your
own corruptions; but may to the praise of the most high God, declare to others
what God has done for your Souls, to your great joy and satisfaction.

So who can receive the report herein given of the Truth, and in other Writings
that are given forth therefrom, let them; that we may not complain as Isaiah
did, who said, Lord, Who has believed our report, etc. see Isai. 53.1. And
consider of the same, and what Christ spoke by way of comparison, of that
Generation amongst whom he was, before he suffered, see Mat. 11.16, 17, 18, 19,
20. etc. The Lord give the Reader an understanding herein, and a Heart to do
accordingly.

A few Words to Informers, who make it their Work to inform against their
Neighbors, for Meeting together peaceably in the Fear of the Lord, to Worship
him as he requires.
COnsider what you are doing; do you do the will of God herein? or is it
otherwise? viz. do you do it because you hate that which is good, and be at
enmity against those whose Works are better then yours are? Consider if it be
your minds, and your purposes not to amend, wherein you have need to amend your
ways, and your doings, that you may be what you ought, both in respect to God,
and all People, doing to all People wherein you have to do with them, as you
would be done by your selves: I say, If the case stands thus with you; whether
your Sin will not be the less, if you do nothing to the injury of them, who
desire to Worship God according to his holy will, who is a Spirit, and must be
Worshipped in the Spirit, and in the Truth; and be toward him, and all People,
wherein they shall be concerned with them, as they ought, and as God requires
them to be. Certainly if you can refrain your selves from being injurious to
such, your Sin will be the less, and you may expect to receive comfort from God
in that respect, who is just and holy, and will reward all according to their
Works: You may do well to consider the fearful end of some mentioned in the
Scriptures, who made it their business to Inform against the Righteous, who
fell into the Snares they had laid for the Righteous, as Hammon, who informed
against Mordecai the Jew, and those who informed against Daniel, and take
warning thereby, see Esther 7.10. etc. and Daniel 6.24. Surely, Friends, if you
shall think to increase your Riches thereby, and to be the more prosperous
because thereof; certainly you will find it otherwise, such doing will not tend
to your good, but harm; they will bring a Curse upon you, and not a Blessing;
For God will set himself against you, for his People's sakes, who have no
helper in the Earth, and plead their Cause with you to your great overthrow,
and destruction, except you repent of such doings before it be to late, and do
no more after the same manner again; But if you will not take warning, but are
resolved to go on in these things, in opposition against God, and his People;
for so may your doings be justly said to be, then will you find the Lords Power
stronger then yours, and him greater in might and strength then you all, to
subdue you, and lay you low, for rising and lifting your selves up against his
Heritage; and in the mean time, we shall with his help bear what we may suffer
by you with patience, and not resist in a way of hostility, but stand still to
see the Salvation of God: So remember you were thus far cautioned, and warned
to have a care what you do touching things of this nature.

And be it known, that we do not Meet in pretense to Worship God, with an
intent to Plot, and contrive Insurrections, for this we detest and abhor; but
peaceably to exhort; and stir up one another pure minds unto that which is
good, that the Lord may be glorified by us, and we built upon the Foundation
that God has laid in Sion, which is Elect and Precious, the Rock of Ages, and
of Generations, the chief Cornerstone, of which Building is Christ Jesus,
which none can know, and witness, but by taking heed to that good thing in
them, which did never consent to Sin; but did ever testify against it, and
reprove and condemn for it, which calls unto all to follow peace and holiness
with all People, without which, whatever People do profess, they cannot see God.

And therefore you that are evil Workers, to that in you which lets you see the
evil of your Ways, to that take heed, that thereby you may be led therefrom
unto God, that your hearts may be purified, and made clean, and you washed from
your Sins, and from your filthiness with Christ's Blood, that you may appear
spotless before the Throne of God and the Lamb, that his Name may be in your
foreheads, and you blessed with seeing and living in his presence, where there
is joy unspeakable and glorious.

Thus have I finished this Work, which, who can receive it let them; and if
they receive any profit thereby, let them give Glory to God: Now whether any
shall hear, or forbear to hear it, I am satisfied that I have done my Duty
herein. To God alone be all Honor and Glory Given, even as it is due from me,
and all his everywhere, for evermore. Amen.

Worcester Cit^ Prison, where I have long suffered Imprisonment for
Righteousness sake, sometimes with many of my dear Friends, and sometimes
alone; and yet I am not alone, for the mighty God is with me, to uphold me in
my Sufferings; who makes things easy, which otherwise would be hard. The 10th
of the 11th Month, 1670. E. B.

Postscript.
WOuld God that all that do account themselves the Ministers of Christ, were
really so; then would they not be like the false Prophets, mentioned in the
Scriptures, as many of them be; who did preach for Hire, and divine for Money,
and sought for their Gain from their Quarters, and prepared War against them
that put not into their Mouths, Micah 3.5. nor like them that Christ cried Woe
against, Who loved to be called of men Masters, and loved the chiefest Places
in the Assemblies, etc. see Mat. 23. Neither would (...) be like the false
Teachers, mentioned by the Apostle, that taught for filthy Lucre, and through
Covetousness made Merchandise of people, see 2 Pet. 2.3. etc. and be serious in
the consideration thereof. But I would have them like his Ministers whom they
take upon them to be, viz. The Ministers of Christ Jesus, who preached freely,
as they had freely received, and labored to keep the Gospel without charge;
and used not their Power, but denied themselves of what they might lawfully
have done, that they might cut off occasion from them that desired it; and to
be Followers of Christ Jesus, taking him for their Example and Pattern in all
things; walking in all Lowliness, and Meekness, and Gentleness, and Patience,
as he did: See how the Servant of the Lord is to be quallified, 2 Timothy 2.24.
etc. So when they appear thus, we may believe they are the Ministers of Christ,
and have the Gospel to preach; but not before: I would they might own the Grace
of God to teach them, that they may be thus. And they that say they are
Christian Magistrates, I desire they may make it appear, by forbearing to
persecute and imprison him in his Members: What? shall Christians persecute
Christians? If they that are persecuted are Blarneless in the sight of God, for
which they suffer, their Persecutors cannot be so, in causing them to suffer:
Let this be considered, as it ought in the Fear of God, by such. It is said in
the Revelations, The Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, see Revel. 2.10.
So it does concern such to see that they do not the Devil's work herein, lest
Iniquity be laid to their Charge for the same; if it went ill with them that
did not visit Christ in Prison, can it go well (think ye) with them that casts
him in? who are guilty herein the Lord forgive them. So the Magistrate, if he
would not bear the Sword in vain, must be a Terror to the Evil-doer, and a
Praise to them that do Well; for, for this end was he empowered to Govern by
the Lord, and not to do contrary: So, in few words, the Magistrate is to rule
and govern as he should be ruled and governed by the Lord God, that he may
answer the end of the Lord therein, by doing that which is right in his sight;
otherwise, he provokes the Lord against himself, who is the Judge of all the
Earth, and will do right in the Cause of the Poor, and in the Cause of the
Oppressed, etc. whose Ear is open to hear their Cry; and when the measure of
their Sufferings is filled up, then does his own Arm bring Salvation: So it is
by continuing in the Faith and Patience that Victory is obtained over the
Beast, and over his Image, over his Mark, and over the number of his Name. So
the Lord keep his Suffering People every where, in believing in him, and
patiently to submit unto his holy Will; that thereby we may prevail against the
Enemy of our Souls, in our selves, and in others, in all his Besetments, Amen.

The Sufferings of the People of God called Quakers in Worcestershire have been
much, by Imprisonment, and otherwise sometimes, some of them for some years
past: And there are some in Prison now, who have suffered as Prisoners many
years: And some have suffered, though not many much loss of their Goods, and by
Imprisonment, since the late Act came forth; in all which we can, and do
Rejoice, it being for the Testimony of our pure Consciences, and not for any
Evil we have done; an Account of whose Sufferings may be given more at large
hereafter, if God shall make way for the same.

Edward Bourn.

THE END.

