A DISCOURSE ON THE HISTORY Of the whole WORLD, Dedicated to his Royal Highness
the Dauphin.

AND Explicating the Continuance of Religion with the Changes of States and
Empires; from the Creation till the Reign of Charles the Great.

Written Originally in French by JAMES BENIGN BOSSVET, sometimes Bishop of
Condom, and now of Meaux, Counselor of State to the most Christian King,
heretofore Tutor to the Dauphin, and now Chief Almoner to the Dauphiness.

Faithfully Englished.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Turner at the Lamb in High-Hollorn, MDCLXXXVI.

TO THE Dauphin. The General Design of this Work.
THough History were little significant to other Men, yet it ought to be read
by Princes. There is no better way to discover to them the various effects and
consequences of Passions and Interests, Times and Conjunctures, good and evil
Councils. Histories are only composed and made up of such actions as they are
engaged in, and in them every thing seems to be done for their Use. If
experience be necessary for them to obtain that prudence which may enable them
to Reign well, there can be nothing of greater advantage to their instruction,
than to join to the examples of former Ages, their own daily experiences:
Whereas otherwise they most an end learn only to judge of the dangerous affairs
that occur to them, at the expense of both their own Subjects and Glory. But by
this Relief of History, without hazarding any thing, they inform their
judgments by past Events. When they see even into the most secret Vices of
Princes, notwithstanding all the deceitful Flatteries given them in their
Lives, exposed to the Eyes of all Men, they blush at the vain Joys and
Pleasures, which such adulation raises in them, and sensibly find that there
can be no true honor, but where there is a just merit.

Besides it would be a shame, I do not say to a Prince alone, but in general to
any Man of sense and worth, to be ignorant of humane kind, and of the memorable
Changes that have happened in the World, through all the Succession of Time. If
we do not learn from History how to distinguish Times, we shall represent Men
under the Law of Nature, or under the Written Law, to be such as are under the
Evangelick Law; we shall speak of Persians conquered by Alexander, as of those
victorius Persians under Cyrus; we shall make Greece as free in the time of
Philip, as in that of Themistocles, or Miltiades; the Roman People as fierce
under the Emperors as under the Consuls; the Church in as great Tranquillity
under Dioclesian, as under Constantine; and France laboring under the
Convulsions of their Civil Wars in the time of Charles the Ninth, and Henry the
Third, as puissant as in the time of Lewis the Fourteenth, which, being
reunited under so great a Monarch, by it self triumphs over almost all Europe.

Now, Sir, it was to avoid these inconveniences, that you have read so many
Histories both Ancient and Modern. It was requisite in the first place to make
you acquainted with the Sacred Pages, and therein to read the History of the
People of God, which serves as a good Foundation to Religion. Nor have you been
suffered to be ignorant in the Greek, or Roman History; and which was most
important to you, you have been carefully instructed in the History of this
great Kingdom, which you are obliged to render happy. But lest these Histories,
and those you are yet to learn, should work any confusion in your mind, there
is nothing more necessary, than distinctly to represent to you, but as
contractedly as we can, all the whole Series of Ages.

This way of Universal History is, in regard to the Histories of every Country
and People, what a general Mapp is to the particular ones. In the latter you
see only the whole description one Kingdom, or Province by it self; but in the
Universal Mapp you learn how to situate those parts of the World in the whole:
You see what Paris, or the Isle of France is in the Kingdom, what the Kingdom
is in Europe, and what Europe is in the Universe.

So likewise particular Histories represent to you what things have happened to
such or such a People, with all their Circumstances: but to understand the
whole clearly, you must know what relation every History can have to others,
which is done by such a way as this is, in short, where at one glance of your
Eye, as it were, you may see all the order of time.

Such an Abridgment, Sir, gives you a very great sight. You see all precedent
Ages laid, as I may say, before you in a few hours: You see how Empires have
succeeded one the other, and how Religion in i^s different Estates has equally
balanced and supported it self, even from the beginning of the World to this
present time.

It Is the effect of these two things, I mean, that of Religion, and that of
Empires, which ought to be deeply imprinted in your memory; and as Religion and
Political Government are the two hinges on which all humane Affairs do turn, to
see what concerns these things in a small abridged Volume, and to discover by
this means the exact order and event thereof, is to comprehend in his thoughts
whatsoever is great and glorious among Men, and to hold, as I may say, the
thread of all the Affairs of the World.

And as, when you look upon an Universal Map, you may presently go off from
your own native Country, and from the place which bounds you, and run through all
the habitable Earth with all its Seas and Countries, which may give a great
entertainment to your thoughts: so by looking upon such a Chronological
Abridgment, you may go away from the narrow confinements of your own time, and
extend your self into all Ages.

But as, to help ones memory in the knowledge of places, we must keep in our
minds certain chief Towns and Cities, round which we are to place all the rest,
according to their several distances; so in the order of Ages we must remember
certain Times Memorable for some great event and action, to which we are to
bring all the other.

This we call an Epoch, from a Greek word that signifies to pause upon,
because we stay our selves there to consider, as at a place of rest, whatsoever
has happened both before and since, and by that means do avoid the
Anachronisms, that is to say, that sort of Error which makes the confusion of
time.

We must first fix but upon a small number of Epocha's, such as, in the times
of ancient History, are Adam, or the Creation; Noah, or the Deluge; the calling
of Abraham, or the beginning of God's Alliance with Man; Moses, or the written
Laws; the taking of Troy; Solomon, or the building of the Temple; Romulus, or
the founding of Rome; Cyrus, or the People of God delivered from the Captivity
Babylon; Scipio, or Carthage overcome; the nativity of our blessed Savior;
Constantine, or the peace of the Church; Charlemaine, or the Establishment of
the new Empire.

I make this Establishment of the new Empire under Charlemaine, as the end of
the ancient History, because it is there that you will find the ancient Roman
Empire wholly to conclude and end. And therefore I stay and fix you at so
considerable a point of the Universal History. The continuance shall be
presented to you in a Second Part, which I design shall bring you to the Age,
which the Immortal actions of your Father make illustrious, and to which, the
ardour you show of following so great an Example, makes us, yet to hope a new
luster may be added.

The Design of this first Discourse is divided into Three Parts.

After this general Explication of the design of this Work, I find there are
three things necessary for me to do, to draw all the profit I hope for from it.

First of all, I must attend you through all the Epocha's which I have laid down,
and if you please to observe with me in this Brevity the principal Events which
I shall fix to every one of them, I shall habituate your mind to put these
Events in their place, without any other regard than to the order of Time. But
as my main design is to make you observe in this efflux of time, that of
Religion, and that of great Empires: After I have showed you, according to the
course of years, how these things have gone on together, I shall particularly
betake my self with some necessary reflections, to consider first of those
which give us to understand the perpetual duration of Religion, and then come
to the other which discover to us the causes of the great Changes and
Revolutions which have happened in Empires.

After this is done, you will find that what part of ancient History soever you
read, all will turn to profit and advantage. There will not any action or
matter pass you, but you will perceive the effects of it. You will admire the
Consequences of the Councils of God in the Affairs of Religion: You will also
see the chain of humane Affairs, and by that will know with how much of
reflection and prudent foresight they ought to be governed.

THE FIRST PART OF THE DISCOURSE.
Epoch. ^dam, or ^e Creati^
THE First Epoch will immediately present you with a most wonderful Sight. God,
who created the Heavens and the Earth by the Word of his Power, Age of World.
and made Man after his own Image. It is with this, Moses begins, the most
ancient of Historians, the most sublime of Philosophers, and the wisest of
Legislators.

He makes this the Foundation as well of Years before J. C. ^004
his History, as of his Doctrine, and Laws. Eden, whose Memory is conserved in
the Golden Age of the Poets; the Divine Precept given to our first Parents; the
Malice of the Tempting Spirit, and his Appearance under the Form of a Serpent;
the Fall of Adam and Eve, most dismal to all their Posterity; the first Man
justly punished in all his Children, and Mankind cursed by God; the first
Promise of Redemption, and the future Victory of Men over the Devil who had
destroyed them.

Genesis v. 3.4.
The Earth began to fill, and Crimes increased. Cain, the firstborn of Adam and
Eve, showed to the early World the first Tragical Action; and Virtue began then
to be persecuted by Vice. There appeared the contrary Tempers of the two
Brothers; the Innocence of Abel, his Pastoral Life, and his acceptable
Sacrifices; those of Cain rejected, his Avarice, Impiety, Parricide, and
Jealousy, the Parent of Murders; the Punishment of that Crime; the Conscience
of the Parricide disturbed with continual Fears; the first Town built by this
wicked Man, who fought out for himself an Asylum against the Hatred and Horror
of Mankind; the Invention of Arts by his Children; the Tyranny of Passions, and
the prodigious Malignity of Man's Heart always carried out to Evil; the
Posterity of Seth faithful to God, notwithstanding this Depravation: Enoch
miraculously taken Noah; their Impenitence, and their Obduracy Noah and his
Family preserved for the repairing of Mankind.

This is what fell out in 1656 Years. Such is the Beginning of all Histories,
in which is manifested the Almightiness, Wisdom, and Goodness of God; the happy
Innocence under his Protection; his Justice in revenging Crimes; and at the
same time his Patience, and waiting to be gracious, in staying for the
Conversion of Sinners; the Greatness and Dignity of Man in his first
Institution; Genesis ii. ^5. iii. 17, ^8, 19. iv. ^. (...) Ib. iv. 2.
the Genius of Mankind since it was corrupted; the Nature of Jealousy, and the
secret Causes of Violences and Wars, Ib. iii. 21. ^cros. Chald. Hist. Chald.
Hie^on. Egypt. ^hoen.
that is to say, all the Foundations of Religion and Morality.

With Mankind Noah preserved the Arts, as well those which served for the
Subsistence of Humane Life, and which Men knew from their first being, as those
they had since invented. Those first Arts which Men learned ab origin, and
apparently from their Creator, are ^ist. Mnas. Nic. Da^asc. l. 96. Abyd. de
Med. and Assyr.
Agriculture, the Ap. Jos. Antiq. l. 1. ^. 4. and l. 1. ^ont. Apion, and Eusebius.
L. IX.
Pastoral Art, that Praep. Ev. ^. 11, 12. Plut. opusc. Pl^sne So^ert. terr. an
^^quat. Lucian. de (...) Sir.
of Clothing themselves, and it may be too that of Building, and making
Lodgings for their Security. And we do not see the beginning of these Arts in
the East, in those Places whither Mankind is since scattered.

The Tradition of the Universal Deluge has gone through all the Earth. The Ark
in which Noah and his Family were preserved has been ever celebrated in the
East, and chiefly in those Places where it staid after the Flood. There are
diverse other Circumstances of this most excellent History taken particular
notice of in the Annals and Traditions of the Ancient People: all the
Particularities of Time, and every thing else concurring as much as possibly
can be expected in so remote and distant an Antiquity.

II. Epoch. Noah, or the Deluge. 2. Age of the World.
After the Flood is observable the shortning of Man's Life, and a change and
alteration of the way of Living, and a New Nourishment substituted in stead of
the Noah only viva voce, the Confusion of Babel, the first Noah's three Sons,
and the first Distribution of Lands.

The Memory of the three first Authors of Nations and People is preserved among
Men. Japhet, who Peopled the greatest part of the West, continues there in
great veneration under the Name of Japhet. Cham and his Son Canaan have been no
less known among the Egyptians and Phoenicians; and the Remembrance of Shem
has been always held Sacred among the Hebrews, who came from him.

A little after this first Division of Mankind, Nimrod, a Wild Man, became by
his violent Humor the first of Conquerors; and this was the Origin of all
Conquests. He established his Kingdom in Babylon, Genesis x. 9, 10, 18.
in the same Place where the Tower was begun, and had been carried up to a
strange height, but yet it seems not up to that stature the Vanity of Man
intended or desired it. Round about it, much-what at the same time, Niniveh was
built, and some other ancient Kingdoms settled. They were but small in those
first and early Times, and there was even in Egypt it self Four Dynasties or
Principalities; that of Thebes, that of Tine, that of Memphis, and that of
Tanis, which was the Chief of Lower Egypt. To much about this time may be
referred the beginning of the Laws and Policies of the Egyptians, that of
their Pyramids which remain to this day, and that of the Astronomical
Observations of as well those People, Chaldeans. We may likewise Chaldeans (for
they were without dispute the first Observers of the Stars) gave in Babylon to
Callisthenes for Aristotle. Porphyr. ap. Simp. l. ii. de Caelo.


Every thing begins: There is no ancient History wherein there appears, not
only in these first times, but a long time after, some manifest Vestigia of the
newness of the World. We see Laws were to be made and established, Manners to
be amended, and Empires to be formed. Mankind coming out by degrees from
Ignorance; Experience instructs them, and Arts are either invented or
perfected. Accordingly as Men multiplied, the Land was populated, and
Inhabitants came to live nearer to one another. Mountains and Precipices were
passed over; Rivers crossed, and at last the Seas; and Men established new
Habitations. The Earth, which in the Beginning was but a wild Forest, now took
another Form; the grub'd-up Trees gave way to Fields, Pasturages, Hamlets,
Buroughs, and at length to Cities. They began then to have the Art and Cunning
of taking some kind of Beasts, of tarning others, and bringing them up to
Labor and Service. At first they were used to engage and fight with wild
Beasts. The first Heroes made themselves signal in these sort of Exercises.
Genesis x. 9.
This gave occasion to the inventing of Arms, which afterward Men turned one
against another: Nimrod, the first Warrior and first Conqueror, is called in
Scripture a mighty Hunter. But Man's Skill lay not only in Beasts, he knew also
how to bring up Plants, and ripen Fruits. He likewise reduced Metals to his
use, and by degrees made them serviceable to all Mankind. And as it was but
natural, that time should invent and find out a great many things, so likewise
time made several other things be forgot, at least to most Men. Those first
Arts which Noah had preserved, and which are always kept up in some Countries,
where ^ver there is a first Establishment of Mankind, that is to say, in new
Plantations, are lost proportionably, as they are distant from that Country.
For either they must be learned over again with time, or else those who had
preserved them, must carry them over to those others. Wherefore we see all
things, to come from Lands that have been always inhabited, where the Grounds
and Foundations of Arts remain in their Perfection, and there also is to be
learned every day things very considerable. The Knowledge of God, and the
Remembrance of the Creation was preserved there; but it did daily degenerate,
and grew weaker and weaker. The Ancient Traditions were either quite forgot, or
at least obscure and dim: The Fables and Stories that have succeeded them,
retained only the gross Ideas of them: False Deities multiplied and became more
numerous, and that gave occasion to the calling of Abraham.

III. Epoch. The Call of Abraham. 3. Age of the World.
Four hundred twenty six Years after the Deluge, as every Body walked after
their own ways, and never were mindful of that God that made them, this great
Creator, to hinder the Progress of so abominable a Abraham was elected to be
the Father of the Faithful: God called him in the Land of Canaan, where he
resolved to establish his Worship, and to settle the Children of that blessed
Patriarch whom he said he would multiply as the Stars of Heaven, and as the
Sand on the Seashore. To the promise that he made of giving this Land to his
posterity, he joined another far more great and illustrious, and that was that
mighty blessing, which was to extend to all the people of the World in Jesus
Christ coming forth from his offspring. Heb. vii. 1. 2, 3, etc.
This was that Jesus Christ whom Abraham honored, in the Person of the great
High Priest Melchisedeck, unto whom he gave the tent of the Spoils, which he
had got, returning from the slaughter of Kings, and by whom he was blessed. In
the midst of these vast Riches, and of a Power commensurate to that of Kings,
Abraham still kept to his old ways and customs, he ever led a plain, simple,
and pastoral Life, which yet had its due Magnificence, and the Patriarch made
it principally appear in his generous Hospitality to all People. Heaven

In his time Inachus, the most ancient of all Kings known by the Grecians,
founded the Kingdom of Argos. After Abraham, there was Isaac his Son, and Jacob
Grandson, the Imitators and followers of his Faith and Simplicity in the same
pastoral Life. God did also to them reiterate the same Promises he had made to
Abraham their Father, Isaac blessed Jacob, to the prejudice as well as grief of
Esau his elder Brother; and deceived in appearance, in effect and reality he
executes the Counsels and Determinations of God. Jacob, whom God protected, was
in all things to be preferred to Esau. An Angel, with whom he mysteriously
fought, gave unto him the Name of Israel, from whence his Posterity were called
Israelites. From his Loins came the Twelve Patriarchs, Fathers to the Twelve
Tribes of the Hebrew People; among others Levi, from whence issued the
Ministers of Sacred things; Judah, from whom came CHRIST, the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords; and Joseph, whom Jacob loved above all the rest of his
Children. In him were made manifest some new Secrets of Providence: But above
all things was seen the Innocence and Wisdom of young Joseph, who was always an
utter Enemy to Wickedness and Vice, and careful to repress and hinder it in his
Brethren; his Mysterious and Prophetic Dreams; his Brethren jealous, and
Jealousy twice the Pharaoh's Dreams; Genius elevated and fitted for his Place;
and God's Protection, which made him to Rule Lower Egypt: By this means here
was the Safety of his Father Jacob and his Family. This Family, cherished by
God, was thus settled and established in that part of Egypt whereof Tanis was
the Capital, and of which the Kings took Pharaoh. Jacob dies, and a Judah the
time of the Messiah's coming into the World, who was to proceed from his Race.
This Patriarch's Household became a very great People in a little time; and this
prodigious increase and multiplying raised the Egyptians Jealousy: The
Hebrews are unjustly hated, and without any pity persecuted: God raises up
Moses their Nilus, and made him fall into the Hands of Pharaoh's Daughter: She
brought him up as her own Child, and instructed him in all the Wisdom of the
Egyptians. At that time the People of Egypt settled themselves in several
Places of Greece. The Cecrops brought out of Egypt Athens, and where he
established with the Laws of his Country, the Gods that were to be worshipped
there. Marm. Arund. seu Era At.
A little after happened the Deucalion-Flood in Thessaly, confounded by the
Greeks with the Universal Deluge. Hellen the Son of Deucalion reigned in Phtie,
a Country in Thessaly, and gave his Name to Greece. The People, which before
were called Greeks, ever since have born the Name of Helleneses, though the
Latins have called them by their old Name. Moreover, about this time Cadmus the
Son of Agenor transported into Greece a Colony of Phoenicians, and founded the
City of Thebes in Boeotia. The Syrian and Phoenician Gods came along with him
into Greece. In the mean while Moses grew up in years, and about the Fortieth
Egypt; and touched with the Wickedness of his Brethren the Israelites, to
appease and moderate them, he ventured his own Life. But these Men were so far
from receiving any Benefit by his Zeal and Courage, that they exposed him to
the Fury of Pharaoh, who was resolved on his Ruin. Moses flies out of Egypt
into Arabia, to the Land of Midian, where his Virtue, which was always ready to
relieve the Oppressed, made him find a safe Retreat. Jethro his Father-in-Law,
when he saw in the Desert a Burning Bush, and heard the Voice of the God of his
Fathers, who sent him back into Egypt, to bring forth his Brethren the
Children of Israel out of Captivity. There appeared the Humility, Courage, and
Miracles of that Divine Legislator; the Hardness of Pharaoh's Heart, and the
terrible Plagues which God sent upon him; the Passover, and the next day the
Passing over the Red Sea: Pharaoh and the Egyptians drowned in those Waters,
and the absolute Deliverance of the Israelites.

IV. Epoch. Moses, or the Written Law.
The Time of the Written Law now begins. It was given to Moses Four hundred and
thirty years after the Calling of Abraham, Eight hundred fifty six years after
the Flood, and the same year that the Hebrew Egypt. This Date is Moses unto
Jesus Christ. All this Time is called the Time of the Written Law, to
distinguish it from the precedent Time, which is called the Time of the Law of
Nature, wherein Men had only for their Guide and Rule of Governance, Natural
Reason, and the Traditions of their Ancestors. God then having freed his People
from the Tyranny of the Egyptians, and brought them into the Land where he
designed to be served and worshipped; before ever he established it there, he
proposed to him the Law according to which he was to live. He wrote with his
own Hand upon two Tables of Stone, which he delivered to Moses upon the top of
Mount Sinai, the Foundation of this Law, that is to say, the Decalogue, or the
Ten Commandments, which contain the First Principles how God is to be
worshipped, and Humane Society preserved. He dictated to the same Moses the
other Precepts, by which he established the Tabernacle, Heh. ix. 9, 23.
the Figure of Future Time; the Ark, wherein God discovered himself to be
present by his Oracles, and in which the Tables of the Law were kept; the
Advancement of Aaron the Brother of Moses; the High Priest, the Ceremonies of
their Consecration, and the Form of their mysterious Habits; the Priests
Functions, the Sons of Aaron; those of the Levites, with the other Observances
of Religion; and that which is most beautiful and decent, the Rules of good
Manners, the Policy and Government of his chosen People, of whom he would be
himself the Legislator. This is what is observable in the Epoch of the Written
Law. Afterward, we see the Journey continued in the Wilderness; the Revolts,
the Idolatries, the Punishments and Consolations of the People of God, whom
this Almighty Legislator reduced by these means by degrees: the Anointing of
Eleazor Aaron: the Zeal of Phineas the Son of Eleazor, and the Priesthood
secured to his Posterity by a particular Promise. During this time the
Egyptians continued the Establishment of their Colonies in diverse Places,
chiefly in Greece, where Danaus the A^gyptian was made King of Argos, and
dispossessed the Ancient Kings that came Inachus. Toward the end of the
Israelites Moses. But he dies, and leaves to the Israelites their whole
History, which he had carefully digested from the beginning of the World even
to the time of his Death. This History is continued by the command of Josuah,
and his Successors. This afterward was divided into several Books; and hence
it is that we have the Book of Josuah, the Book of Judges, and the Four Books
of Kings. The History which Moses wrote, and in which all the Law was included,
was also divided into Five Books, which are called the Pentateuch, and which
are the Ground of Religion. After the Death of that Man of God, we read of the
Wars of Josuah, Holy Land, Othoniel the Son Kenaz, the Brother of Caleb, who
delivered him from the Tyranny of Chausan-Rishathaim King of Mesopotamia; and
Eighty years after That, of Ehud the Son of Gera, Eglon King of Moab. About
this Pelops the Phrygian, the Son of Tantalus, reigned in Peloponnesus, and
called that famous Country by his Name. Bell the King of the Chaldeans received
from those People Divine Honors. The ungrateful, Israelites fall again into
Servitude. Jabin King of Chanaan subjecteth Deborah the Prophetess who Baruc
the Son of Ahinoam, overcame Sisera the General of Gideon that mighty Man of
Valor, even without fighting pursues and overcomes the Medianites. Abimelech
his Son usurped the Jephtha Gentiles. Herod. l. 1. c. 26.
For, according to Herodotus his Account, which seems to be the most exact,
Rome, Genesis x. 11.
and from the time of Deborah, Ninus the Son of Bell, and the Foundation of the
first Empire of the Assyrians. The Court was established at Nineveh, an Ancient
City, and then pretty Famous; but it was made more Splendid and Glorious by
Ninus. Those who ascribe 1300 years to the first Assyrians, have their
Foundation from the Ancientness of the City: and Herodotus, who allows them but
500, speaks only of the Empires Duration since its beginning under Ninus the
Son of Bell to extend it self into the Upper Asia. A little after, and in that
Conqueror's Reign, Jos. xix. 20. Joseph. Antiq. 8.2.
we are to fix the Foundation, or the Renewal of the ancient City of Tire,
whose Navigation, and whose Colonies rendered it so Abimelech's Hercules the Son
of Amphitryon, and those of Theseus King of Athens, who made but one great City
of the twelve Towns of Cecrops, and instituted a better Form of Government
among the Atheninians. During Jephtha's time, whilst Semiramis, who came from
Ninus, and was the Governess of Ninyas, enlarged the Assyrian Empire by her
Victories. The Famous City of Troy, already taken once by the Greeks under
Laomedon its third King, was Greeks, under Priam the Son of Laomedon, after a
Siege of ten years.

V. Epoch. The Taking of Troy. The fourth Age of the World.
This Epoch of the Ruin of Troy, which happened about the year 308. after the
Departure out of Egypt, and 1164 years after the Deluge, is very considerable,
as well because of the Importance of so great an Greece and Italy; as because
that every thing may be brought to this Date which was most remarkable in those
called the Fabulous, or H^roick Times; the Fabulous, by reason of the Fables in
which the Histories of those Times are wrapped, and Heroic, by reason of those
whom the Poets have called the Sons of the Gods, and Heroes. Their Lives were
not far from this Overthrow: For in the time of Laomedon the Father of Priam,
were all the Heroes of the Golden Fleece, Jason, Hercules, Orpheus, Castor and
Pollux, and all the others that are known to you; and in the time of Priam
likewise, during the last Siege of Troy, there were Achilles, Agamemnon,
Menelaus, Ulysses, Hector, Sar^edon the Son of Jupiter, Aeneas the Son of
Venus, whom the Romans acknowledged for their Founder, and several others, from
whom the most Illustrious Families, and even whole Nations boast that they
descend. This Epoch therefore is proper to recollect whatsoever the Fabulous
Times had that was most certain, and most eminent. But what is seen in the
Sacred History, is in all Points most remarkable; Samson, Eli Samuel Saul, the
first King of Gods People, his Victories, his presumption to Sacrifice without
the Priests; his Disobedience pitifully excused under the pretense of Religion;
his Reprobation, his fatal Fall. About this time Codrus King of Athens gave up
himself to death for the safety of his People, and by his Death they got the
Victory. His Sons Medon and Nileus dispute for the Kingdom. Upon this occasion
the Athenians abolish all Regality, and declare that Jupiter was their only
King. They created Governors, or perpetual Presidents; but they were subject
to render an account of their Administration. These Magistrates were called
Archontes. Medon, the Son of Codrus, was the first who exercised this
Magistracy; and it continued a long while in his Family. The Athenians extended
their Colonies into that part of Lesser Asia which was called Ionia. The
Aeolick Colonies were set up much-what about the same time, and all the Lesser
Asia was filled with Greek Towns.

Saul came David, that admirable Goliath, and of all the Enemies of the People
of God; a great King, a great Conqueror, and a great Prophet, worthy to sing
out the Praises and wonderful Works of his great Creator: in a word, a Man
after God's Solomon, Wise, Just, Peaceful, whose Hands

VI. Epoch. Solomon, or the Temple finished. 5. Age of the World.
This was about the year 3000. of the World, the year 488. since the Departure
out of Egypt, and, to adjust the Times of Sacred History with those of the
Profane, 180 years after the taking of Troy, 250 years before the Founding of
Rome, and 1000 years before Jesus Christ, when Solomon Solomon, which ended in
shameful Weaknesses. He gave up himself to the Love of Women, which debased his
Mind, made his Heart grow wavering, so that at last his Piety degenerated into
Idolatry. God though justly provoked, yet spares him for the sake of David his
Servant; however he would not suffer his Ingratitude utterly to go unpunished:
he divides his Kingdom after his death, under his Son Rehoboam. The Brutish
Pride of that young Prince causes Ten of his Jeroboam Judah, he forbids them
going to Sacrifice at the Temple of Jerusalem, and he sets up his Golden
Calves, to which he ascribes the Name of the God of Israel, that so the
Innovation might appear less strange. The same Reason made him retain the Law
of Moses, which he interpreted according to his own Will and Pleasure: but
almost all the Polity of it he caused to be observed, as well the Civil as
Religious; so that the Pentateuch remained still in veneration among the
separated Tribes.

Thus was the Kingdom of Israel set up against the Kingdom of Judah. In that of
Israel Impiety and Idolatry reigned and triumphed. But Religion, though it was
several times clouded in that of Judah, yet it was always preserved there.
About this Egypt were very powerful. Thebes. It is believed that Sesostris,
that famous Conqueror of the Egyptians, is that Sesac King of Egypt, whom God
made use of to chastise the Impiety of Rehoboam. In the Reign of Abijah the Son
of Rehoboam is observable that great and mighty Victory, which the Piety of
that Prince gained him over the Schismatical Tribes. H^s Son Asa, whose Piety
is commended Amri King of Israel built Samaria,

This Time is followed with the admirable Reign of Jehosaphat, wherein
flourished Piety, Justice, Navigation, and the Military Art. Whilst he appeared
in the Kingdom of Judah another David, Ahab and his Wife Jezabel, who then
reigned in Israel, joined to Jeroboam's Idolatry all the Impieties Gentiles.
They perished both of Naboth, whom they had caused to be slain, because he had
refused, as the Law of Moses required, to sell them the Fee of his Paternal
Inheritance. Their Sentence was pronounced by the Mouth of the Prophet Elijah.
Ahab was kille^ some time after, notwithstanding all Carthage, which Dido, w^o
was come from Tire, built in a Place, after the Example of Tire, which was very
convenient for Traffic, as it was likewise for becoming Mistress of the Sea.
It is somewhat hard to assign the Time when it formed it self into a Republic;
but the mixing of the Tyrians and Africans made it become equally Warlike and
Trafficking. The ancient H^s^orians, who place its Origin before the Ruin of
Troy, seem to fancy that Dido rather enlarged and fortified it, than that ever
Judah. Athaliah the Daughter of Ahab and Jezabel carried Impiety along with her
into the House of Jehosaphat. Jehoram, the Son of so pious a Prince, chose
rather to imitate his Father-in-Law than his own Father. Israelites, whom he
would now reca^l to Repentance. They sa^, without ever being converted, the
Wonders of Elijah and Elisha, who prophesied during the Reign of Ahab, M^rr^.
A^^na.
and five of his Successors. At this time H^mer flourished; as Hesiod had done
Thirty years before. The Ancient Manners and Customs which they represent to
us, and the Vestigia that they still keep, with much Grandeur, and with the
ancient Simplicity, does not a little serve to let us understand the
Antiquities that are a great deal more remote, and the Divine Simplicity Judah
and Israel. Jezab^l was thrown down out of a Tower-window by the command of
Jehu, who valued not the painting her Face, and tyring her Head, but fulfilled
the Word of the Lord, in causing his Horses to tread her under their Feet. He
killed Jehoram King of Israel, the Son of Ahab: even all the House of Ahab was
destroyed; and it wanted but a little of drawing that of the Kings of Judah
into its own Ruin. King Ahazia the Son of Joram King of Judah and of Athaliah,
was slain in Samaria with his Brethren, as an Ally and Friend to the Children
of Ahab. As soon as this News was brought to Jerusalem, Athaliah resolved to
cut off all that remained of the Seed-Royal, without sparing her own Children,
and so to reign and govern by the loss of her own. Only Jehoash the Son of
Ahaziah, a Child that then hung at the Breast, was stole away from her Fury by
Jehosheba his Aunt. Jehosheba the Sister of Ahaziah, and Wife of Jehoiada the
High Priest, hid him in the House of the Lord, and saved that only precious
Remainder of the House of David. Athaliah, who thought him dead with the rest,
lived without fear. Plat. de Rep^^ (...) Arist. ^olit. l. 2. c. 9.
Lycurgus prescribed Laws to the Lacedaemonians. He is rebuked for having made
them all Martial, after the Example of Minos, whose Institutions he had
followed; and for having but little provided for the Women's Modesty: for, that
so he might make all his Men Soldiers, he obliged them to a very laborious and
temperate Life. Nothing was stirring in Judah against Athaliah, and therefore
she thought her self established during a six years Reign: But God raised her
up an Jehoiada made him known to some of the Rulers over Hundreds, with the
Captains of the Guard and the Royal Army, whom he had carefully managed; and
being assisted with the Priests, he anointed the young King in the Temple.
Easily were the People persuaded to acknowledge the Heir of Dav^d, and of
Jehosaphat. At the noise whereof Athaliah ran to dissipate the Conspiracy; but
being forced without the Ranges of the Temple, she there received the Reward of
her Crimes. As long as Jehoiada lived, Joash reigns well, keeping to the Law
of Moses. After the Death of this holy Man of God, corrupted by the Flatteries
of his Courtiers, he falls in with them to downright Idolatry. The High Priest
Zacharias, the Son of Jehoiada, was resolved Jehoash, without ever being
mindful of what he owed to his Father, caused him to be stoned. But Vengeance
followed close at the heels of Jehoash being beaten Syrians, and fallen into
contempt, was assassinated by his own Subjects; and Amaziah his Son, a better
Man than himself, was set upon the Throne.

Israel being wasted and Syria, and by Civil Wars, reassumed its Forces under
Jeroboam II. who was more pious than his Predecessors. Hoziah, otherwise called
Azariah, the Son of Amaziah, also governed the Kingdom of Judah with no less
Honor and Glory. This is that Hoziah that was smitten with Leprosy, Moses;
and Jotham his Son, who was afterward his Successor, did wisely govern the
Kingdom. Under the Reign of Hoziah, the Holy Prophets, the Chief of whom at
that time were Hosea and Isaiah, began to publish their Prophecies in Writing,
and in particular Books, the Originals of which they deposited in the Temple,
to serve as a Monument to Posterity. The Lesser Prophecies which were given
only viva voce, were, as was usual, registered in the Rolls of the Temple, with
the History of the time. The Hercules, and Olympiades, by which the Grecians
counted their Years. Abo^^ this time ended that which Varro calls the Fabulous,
because the profane Histories then were full of confusion and falsities, and
the Historical times began, wherein the affairs of the World were reported with
more exactness and fidelity. The first Olympiad is marked out by the victory of
Corebus. They were renewed every five years, and after four years Revolution.
There in the Assembly of all Greece, at Pisa first, and afterward at Elida,
those famous Combats were celebrated, where the Conquerors were crowned with
incredible Applauses. The Exercises likewise were in great honor, and Greece
every day became more strong, and more cultivated. Italy as yet was almost all
over savage. The Latin Kings of Aeneas's Race reigned at Alba. Phul was King of
Assyria. 'Twas believed he was the Father of Sardanapalus, called according to
the Eastern Custom Sardan Pull, that is to say, Sardan the Son of Phul. 'Twas
also thought, that this Phul, or Pull, had been King ^ineveh, who joined with
his People in Jonas. That Prince, invited by the Confusions of the Kingdom of
Israel, went to invade it; but being come to an Agreement with Manahem, he
established him in the Throne that he went to Usurp by Violence, and received
by way of acknowledgment, the Tribute of a thousand Talents. Under his Son
Sardanapalus, and after Alcmaeon the last perpetual Archon of the Athenians,
that People whom his humor led insensibly to affect a popular Estate, lessened
the Power of their Magistrates, and in ten years wholly overthrew the
Archontick Administration. The first of this way was Charops. Romulus and Remus
sprung from the ancient Kings of Alba, by their Mother Ilia, re-established in
the Kingdom of Alba their Grandfather Numitor, of which his Brother Amilius had
dispossessed him; and presently after they founded Rome, whilst Jotham Reigned in
Judah.

VII. Epoch. Romulus, or Rome founded.
That City, which was to be the Mistress of the World, and in futurity the chief
Seat of the Romish Religion, was founded toward the end of the third year of
the sixth Troy, from whence the Romans believed their Ancestors to be sprung,
and 753 years before Jesus Christ. Romulus being bred up hardly with Shepherds,
and always Rome's Birth, through the effeminate Luxury of Sardanapalus,
happened the Fall of the first Empire of the Assyrians. The Medes, a warlike
People, animated by the Discourses of Arbaces their Governor, set an Example
to all his Subjects of contemning and scorning him: All were up in a general
revolt against him, and at length he perished in his chief City, where he saw
himself constrained to fling himself into the Fire with his Concubines, his
Eunuchs, and his Riches. Out of the Ruins of this Empire, were seen to come
three great Kingdoms. Arbaces, or Orbaces, whom some call Pharnaces, freed the
Medes, who after a very long Anarchy, had three most puissant Kings. Moreover,
presently after Sardanapalus there appeared a second Kingdom of the Assyrians,
Nineveh was the chief City, Babylon. These two last Kingdoms are not unknown to
profane Authors, and are much celebrated in the sacred History. The second
Kingdom of Nineveh is founded by Tilgath, of Tiglath the Son of Phalaser called
for this reason Tiglathphalesar, to whom was also given the name of Ninus the
younger. Baladan, whom the Greeks called Belasis, established the Kingdom of
Babylon, which is known by the name of Nabonassar. From thence the Era of
Nabonassar, famous with Ptolomy, and the ancient Astronomers, who reckoned
their years by the Reign of that Prince. It is fit to explain here the
signification of this word Era, which is a number of Years began at a certain
point of Time, which some extraordinary Accident makes remarkable. Wicked Ahaz
King of Judah, oppressed Rezin King of Syria, and by Pekah the Son of Remaliah
King of Israel, instead of having recourse to God who stirred him up those
Enemies to punish him, called Tiglathphalesar the first King of Assyria or
Nineveh, who brought the Kingdom of Israel to its last extremity, and utterly
destroyed that of Syria, and at the same time he ravaged that of Judah which
had desired his Assistance. Thus the Kings of Assyria took Israel, which
Salmanasser the Son and Successor of Tilgath Pilneser utterly destroyed. Osee,
King of Israel, relied upon the succor of Sabacon, otherwise called Sua, or
Sou^, King of Aethiopia, who had invaded Egypt. But that mighty Conqueror
could not get it out of the hands of Salmanassar. The ten Tribes, with whom the
Worship of God was quite worn off, were transported to Nineveh, and being
dispersed among the Gentiles, they so lost themselves there, that no farther
tracing of them can be discovered. There remained some of them, who were mixed
among the Jews, and made a small part of the Kingdom Judah. At this time
happened the Romulus. He was always fighting, and always victorious; but in the
midst of his Wars, he notwithstanding laid the Foundation of Religion and Laws.
A Numa his Successor a good opportunity to finish that Work. He formed Romans.
In his time the Colonies that came from Corinth, and several other Towns of
Greece, founded Syracuse in Sicily, Crotona, Tarentum, and perhaps some other
Towns in that part of Italy, to which the most ancient Greek Colonies, which
were spread over all the Country, had already given the name of Great Greece.
In the mean time Hezekiah, the most Pious, and the justest of all the Kings
David, reigned in Judah. Sennacherib, the Son and Successor of Salmanassar,
Jerusalem with a vast and prodigious Army; which was in one night destroyed by
the Hand of an Angel, which went out, and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians,
an hundred fourscore and five Thousand. Hezekiah being delivered in so
wonderful a manner, served God with all his People more faithfully than ever.
But Manasseh, the ungrateful forgot their God, and so disorders and calamities
were multiplied Athenians, and they began to elect annual Archontes or
Governors, the first of whom was Creon. Whilst wickedness increased in the
Kingdom of Judah, the Power of the Kings of Assyria, which were to be their
avengers, grew daily stronger under Esarhaddon Sennacherib. He reunited the
Babylon to that of Nineveh, and equalled in Great Asia, the Power of the
Assyrians. 2 Kings xvii. 24. 1 Esd. iv. 2.
In his Reign, the Cuthians, Assyria, since called Samaritans, were placed in
the City of Samaria, instead of the Children of Israel. These joined to that of
Idolatry, the Worship of God, and obtained of Esarhaddon, an Israelitish
Priest, who taught them the manner of the God of the Land, that is, to observe
the Law of Moses. God resolving not to have his Name utterly abolished, in a
Land that he had given to his People, he left there his Law as an earnest and
testimony. 2 Kings xvii. 27, 28, etc.
But their Priest gave them only the Books of Moses, which the revolted ten
Tribes had retained, during the time of their Schism. The Scriptures composed
by the Prophets, who sacrificed in the Temple, were by them detested; and
therefore the Samaritans have received no other than the Pentateuch even down
to this day.

Whilst Esarhaddon and the Assyrians so firmly were settling themselves in
greater Asia, the Medes likewise began to be considerable. Dejoces their first
King, named Arphaxad in Scripture, founded the Great City Ecbatana, and laid
the Foundations of a great Empire. They had set him on the Throne to reward his
virtues, and to put an end to the disorders, which Anarchy had caused among
them. Conducted by so great a King, Herod. l. 1. c. 27.
they supported themselves against their Neighbors, but they did not enlarge
their Rome daily grew, but it was weakly. Under Tullus Hostilius the Third
Horatii and the Curatii, Alba was conquered and ruined: Its Citizens
incorporated in that victorious Ville did mightily greaten and fortify it.
Romulus was the first who took that way to make it more flourishing, where he
received the Sabins, and other vanquished People. And they forgot their
Overthrow, and became most Faithful and Affectionate Subjects. Rome in
extending it is Conquests regulated it is Militia, and it was under Tullus
Hostilius, that it began to learn that Noble Discipline, which made it to be at
last the Egyyt weakened by its long Divisions, was re-established under
Psammeticus. That Prince, who owed his Safety to the Ionians and Carians,
established them in Egypt then shut to Strangers. About this time the
Egyptians began to commerce with the Greeks, and since that time also the
History of Egypt down to the mingling of pompous Fables by the Artifice of the
Priests, began, as Herodotus tells us, Herod. l. 2. c. 95.
to have some certainty. In the mean time the Kings of Assyria became more and
more terrible to all the East. Saosduchin, the Son of Esarhaddon, called
Nebuchadonosor in the Book of Judith, in battle array defeated Arphaxad, King
the Medes. Euphrates, and ravaged all as far as Judah. The Jews had provoked
God, and given themselves up to Idolatry, after the Example of Manass^h; but
they had repented with that Prince, and God took them into his Protection. The
Conquests of Nebuchodonosor and Holofernes his General were upon a sudden
stopped by the hand of a Woman. Dejoces, although he was beaten by the Assyrians,
left his Kingdom in a condition of growing greater under his Successors. Whilst
Phraortes his Son, and Cyagorus the Son of Phraortes subdued Persia, and pushed
on their Conquests to lesser Asia, even to the borders of Halys, Judah Amon,
the Son of Manasseh; and Josiah the Son of Amon, wise and prudent from his
Childhood, endeavored to repair the Disorders that were caused by the
wickedness and impiety of his Predecessor-Kings. Rome, when Ancus Martius was
King, brought some Latins under it is subjection and government, and continuing
to make Citizens of her Enemies, she shut them up within her Walls. The
Veienses, already weakened by Romulus, Ancus pushed on his Ostia at the Mouth
of the River Tyber. At this time the Kingdom of Babylon was invaded by
Nabopolassar. That Traitor, whom Chinaladan, otherwise called Sarac, had made
General of his Armies against Cyagorus King of the Medes, joined himself with
Astyages the Son of Cyagorus; took Chinaladan in Nineveh, destroyed that great
City, so long a time the Mistress of the East, and set himself upon the Throne
of his Master. Under this ambitious Prince Babylon grew in Pride and
haughtiness. Judah, whose Impiety waxed more Josiah for some small time by his
great humility suspended the punishment, which his people had deserved; but the
evil increased under his Childrens Reign. Nebuchadonosor Nebuchadonosor,
succeeded him. This Babylon threatened to bring all the Land into subjection and
vassalage. His Menaces had soon their effect upon the People of God. Jerusalem
was left wholely to this proud and mighty Conqueror, who took it three times.
The first at the beginning of his Reign, and in the fourth year of the Reign of
Joachim, from whence begins the 70 years of Babylon's Captivity, taken notice
of by the Prophet Jeremiah; the second under Jechonias, or Joachin the Son of
Joachim; Jer. xxv. 11, 12. c. xxix. 10.
and the last under Ze^ekiah, when the City was utterly destroyed, the Temple
burnt, and the King Babylon with Serajah the Ezekiel and Daniel, with them also
are reckoned the Three Children whom Nebuchadnezzar could not make to worship
his Golden Image, nor consume by his Fiery Furnace. Greece was flourishing, and
its Seven Wise Men made thems^^ves illustrious. Jerusalem, one of the Sev^^
prescribed Laws to the Athenians, and established Liberty Phocians of Ionia
Marseilles. Tarquin the Ancient King of Rome, after he had conquered a part of
Tuscany, and adorned the City of Rome with his Pompous and Magnificent Works,
finished his Reign. In his time the Gauls, led on by Bellovesus, possessed in
Italy all the Suburbs round about Po, whilst that Seg^vesus his Brother,
Germany another swarm of the Nation. Servius Tullius, Tarquin's successor,
established the Census, or the List of Citizens that were distributed into
certain Classes, whereby that great City was regulated and ordered as a private
Family. Nebuchadnezzar beautifyed Babylon, which was mightily enriched by the
Spoils of Jerusalem, and the Eastern Country: But it did not enjoy them long:
For that King who had illustrated it with such magnificence, when he was dying,
saw the approaching ruin of that famous City. His Son Evilmerodac, Neriglissor
Abyd. apud Eusebius. l. 9. Praep. Ev. c. ult.
who usurped the Kingdom. Pisistratus also in Athens usurped the Sovereign
Authority, which he understood very well how to keep for thirty years amidst
several vicissitudes, and afterward left it to his Children. Neriglissor could
not bear with the power of the Medes, which grew very great in the East, and
therefore declared war against them. Whilst Astyages the Son of Cyagorus I. was
preparing to resist him, he dyed, and left the War to be maintained by his Son
Cyagorus II. called in Daniel, Darius the Mede. He appointed for the General of
his Army, Cyr^s the Son of Mandana his Sister, and of Cambyses King of Persia,
who was subject to the Empire of the Medes. The Reputation of Cyrus, which had
been signalized in diverse Wars under Astyages his Grandfather, reunited most
of the Eastern Kings under the Standards of Cyagorus. He Croesus King of Lydia,
Babylon; and extended Syria, but also very far in the lesser Asia. At last he
marches Babylon, takes it, and submits it to Cyagorus his Uncle, who being no
less affected with his Fidelity than his great Exploits, gave him his only
Daughter and Heiress in Cyagorus, Daniel already honored under the precedent
Reigns with several Visions from Heaven, in which he saw pass before him in
such plain and manifest Figures so many Kings and Empires, learnt by a New
Revelation, those Seventy famous Weeks, by which, the Time of Jesus Christ, and
the Destiny of the Jewish People are explained. It was the Weeks of Years, and
contained 490 Years; and this way of computation was ordinary and familiar
among the Jews, who observed the Seventh Year, as well as the Seventh Day with
a Religious repose. Cyagorus dyed, Cambyses the Father of Cyrus; and this great
Man, who succeeded them, joined the Kingdom of Persia, till then obscure, unto
the Kingdom of the Medes so mightily greatn'd by its Conquests. Thus was He the
quiet and peaceable Master of all the East, and founded the greatest Empire
that ever was in the World. But that which is most remarkable for the
continuance of our Epochas, is, that this great Conqueror in the first Year of
his Reign, gave his Decree for the Re-establishing of the Temple of God in
Jerusalem, and the Jews in Judea.

Here we ought a little to make a stop, because it is the most entangled place
of all the Ancient Chronology, by reason of the difficulty in conciliating the
Profane History with the Sacred. No question but your Highness has already
observed, that this account I have given you of Cyrus is much different from
what you have read of him in Justin that he speaks nothing of the second
Kingdom of the Assyrians, nor of those famous Kings of Assyria and Babylon, so
memorable in the Sacred History; and in short, this Relation of mine is very
incongruous to that which is reported by the Author of the three first
Monarchies; of that of the Assyrians, ended in the Person of Sardanapal^s; that
of the Medes ended in Astyages, the Grandfather of Cyrus, and this of the
Persians began by Cyrus, and destroyed by Alexander.

Your Highness may be pleased to add to Justin, Diodorus, with most of the
Greek and Latin Authors whose Writings are yet extant, who give you these
Histories after quite another manner than this I have followed.

As to what belongs to Cyrus, Hieron in Dan.
the Profane Authors are in no agreement among themselves about his History;
but I thought it best to follow rather Xenophon with St. Jerome, than Ctesias a
fabulous Author, whom most of the Grecians have copied, and written after, as
Justin and the Latins have followed the Grecians; and I have preferred him even
to Herodotus himself, though he is a most excellent and judicious Reporter. And
that which has determined me to this choice, is, that Xenophon's History the
most probable and likely in it self, has also this great advantage, that it is
the most conformable to the Scriptures, which, by reason of its antiquity, and
the Relation of the Jewish Affairs to those of the Eastern People, deserves to
be esteemed beyond all the other Greek Histories, though one did not know that it
had been dictated by the Holy Spirit.

Plat. in Tim.
As to the three first Monarchies, what most of the Greek Authors have written
of them, seems very doubtful to the Sages of Greece. Plato in general shows us,
that under the name of Egyptian Priests, the Greeks were extremely ignorant of
Antiquities: and Aristotle has ranged among the fabulous Reporters, Arist.
^olit. v. 10.
those that have written of the Assyrians.

The Greeks have written very negligently, and because they had a mind to
please and divert by their Historical relating of their Antiquities, Greece
which was ever very curious about them; they have taken up Reports upon
confused and dark Memorandums, and so satisfied themselves with putting them
into an agreeable and delightful order, without being at any great pains or
care to search whether they were true, or not.

And certainly, the way which was commonly taken to rank the three first
Monarchies is most apparently fabulous. For after the downfall of the Empire of
Assyria under Sardanapalus, next appear the Medes, and after them the Persians;
as if the Medes had been Successors to the mighty Power of the Assyrians, and
the Persians had established themselves upon the ruin of the Medes.

Whereas, on the contrary, it is most certain, that when Arbaces abandoned the
Medes against Sardanapalus, he did only deliver them, without any submitting of
the Assyrian Empire to them. Herodotus, Herod. l. 1. c. 26, 27.
followed herein by the most approved Chronologers, mentions nothing of their
first King Dejoces, until 50. years after their revolt; and it is the more to
be credited, because of the concurrent Testimony both of this great Historian
and of Xenophon (not to trouble you now with any others) that during the time
that is allotted to the Empire of the Medes, Herod. 1. Xenoph. Cyrop. ^, vi,
etc.
there were in Assyria such mighty puissant Kings, as all the East stood in awe
of, and it was Cyrus that crushed the Empire by his taking of Babylon.

If therefore the generality of the Greeks and Latins that have followed them,
make no mention of those Babylonian Kings; if they have given no place to that
great Kingdom among the first Monarchies, whose continuance and after-accidents
they relate; in a word, if we can scarce find any thing in all their works of
those famous Kings Tiglath-Pilesar, Salmanasar, Sennacherib, Nebuchadnezzar,
and several others so renowned in Scripture, and in the Eastern Histories, we
may then surely attribute it, either to the Ignorance of the Greeks, who were
more Eloquent in their Reports, than studious and industrious in their
Searches, or else to the loss we have had of what was more exact and faithful
in their Histories.

Indeed Herodotus had promised a particular History of the Assyrians, Herod. l.
1. c. 28, 47.
which we have not, either by our sad misfortune of its being lost, or of his
not having had time to do it, and we cannot imagine that ever so judicious and
Historian would have forgotten the Kings Herod. l. 2. c. 91.
of the second Empire of the Assyrians, especially since even Sennacherib, who
was one of them, we find mentioned in the Books that we now have of this great
Author, as being King both of the Assyrians and Arabians.

tSrabo, li^. 15.
Strabo, who lived in the time of Augustus, reports what Megastenes, an Ancient
Author, near the time of Alexander, had left in Writing concerning the mighty
Conquests of Nebuchadnezzar King of the Chaldees, whom he makes to run through
Europe, enter into Spain, and extend his Arms as far as the Colonies of
Hercules. Aelian calls Tilgamus King of Assyria, Aelian. li^. 12. Hist. Anim.
c. 21.
that is to say, Tilgath, or Tiglath, which we find in the Holy Scriptures; and
in Ptolomy we meet with an Enumeration of the Princes of great Empires, among
whom there is a long succession of the Kings of Assyria, who were unknown to
the Greeks, and whom it is easy to reconcile to the Sacred Hystory.

If I would bring in the Accounts of the Syrian Annals, Berosus, Abydenus,
Nicolas of Damascus; Joseph. Antiq. l. 9. ult. and 10. c. 11. l. 1. cont. Ap.
Eusebius. Prap. Ev. 9.
I could be too tedious even for a long-winded Reader. Josephus and Eusebius of
Caesarea have preserved the precious fragments of all those Authors, and indeed
of an infinite many more, which they had entire and perfect in those times,
whose Testimony is a confirmation to us of what we read in the Holy Scripture
concerning the Eastern Antiquities, and especially concerning the Assyrian
Histories.

As to the Monarchy of the Medes, which has the second Preference among the
great Empires by most of the profane Historians, as separated from the Empire
of Persia, certain it is, that the Scripture ever unites them both together.
And your Highness sees, that besides the Authority of the sacred pages, the
bare order of Matters of Fact, shows us, that it is that we are still to look
at.

The Medes before Cyrus, though they were very powerful and considerable, yet
were much lessened by the greatness of the Kings of Babylon. But Cyrus having
Conquered their Kingdom by the collected Forces both of Medes and Persians, of
which he afterward became the Master, by a Legitimate Succession, as we have
observed from Zenophon; it seems most probable, that the great Empire, of which
he was the Founder, as it ought indeed, did take his Name to both Nations, so
that That of the Medes and Persians are but one and the same thing, though the
glory of Cyrus made the name of the Persians to be the more prevailing.

It may be also thought, that before the War of Babylon, the Kings of the
Medes having extended their Conquests to the Greek Colonies in lesser Asia,
were by that means famous among the Greeks, who attributed the Empire of
greater Asia to them, because they were only acquainted with them of all the
Kings of the East. And yet the Kings of Nineveh and Babylon, who were greater
and more puissant, but more unknown to the Greeks, have been near quite
forgotten in those B^oks that are remaining to us concerning the Grecian
Histories; and all the time from Sardanapalus down to Cyrus, have been only
given to the Medes.

And therefore we need not to trouble our heads so much in reconciling as to
this point the profane to the sacred History. For as to what respects the
first Kingdom of the Assyrians, the Scripture gives us but a very slight touch
by the Bye, and neither mentions Ninus, who was the Founder of that Empire,
nor, excepting Phul, any other of its Successors: because their History was no
way interfering with that of the People of God. As for the second Kingdom of
the Assyrians, most of the Greeks are either quite ignorant of them, or else
because they have not thoroughly known them as they ought, they have confounded
them with the former.

When therefore those of the Greek Authors s^all be objected to us, who,
according to their own Caprice and Fancy, range the three first Monarchies, and
make the Medes Successors to the ancient Empire of Assyria, without speaking a
word concerning what the Scripture seems to be so strong in; there is only this
answer to be made, that they were unacquainted with this part of the History;
and they are no less contrary to the more curious, and best informed Authors of
their own Nation, than they are to the Holy Scriptures.

And that which in one word answers all the difficulty; the sacred Authors, who
are nearer to the times and places of the Eastern Kingdoms, writing moreover
the History of a People, whose affairs were so intermixed with those of these
great Empires, though they had no other advantage besides this, it were enough
to put the Greeks and Latins to Silence, who followed them.

But if, notwithstanding, the obstinacy should go on still to maintain this
celebrated order of the three first Monarchies, and that to keep entirely to
the Medes the second rank which is ascribed to them, any are wilfully resolved
to make the Kings of Babylon subject to them, in affirming still that after an
hundred Years Subjection, these at last should deliver themselves by a Revolt;
yet in some manner it does save the C^ntinuance of the sacred History; but it
does very little agree with the best profane Historians, to whom the sacred
History is more favorable in that it ever unites the Empire of the Medes to
that of the Persians.

There is yet remaining to be discovered one of the Causes of the obscurity and
darkness of these ancient Histories. And it is this, that as the Eastern Kings
took up several names, or if you please, several titles, which in some length
of time they espoused as their own Name, and which the People either
translated, or pronounced variously, according to the several particular Idioms
of each respective Language; Those so ancient Histories, whereof there is left
now but a very few good Memorials, are by this means become in all Probability
so very dark and imperfect. The confusion of names has no doubt contributed
very much both to the things as well as persons of them; and from hence
proceeds our Trouble, rightly to situate in the Greek History those Kings, who
have had the Name of Ahasuerus, as much unheard of to the Greeks, as it was
well known to the Eastern Countries.

Who would indeed believe that Cyagorus was the same name as Ahasuerus, made
up of the word Ky, that is to say, Sir, or Lord, and from the word Axare, which
manifestly returns to Axuerus, or Assuerus, and so Ahasuerus? Three or Four
Princes have gone under this Name, though they had others besides. If we do not
know that Nebuchodonozor, Nebucodrosor, and Nebocolassar were only one and the
same Name, or the Name of but one Person, it would be difficult for us to
believe it; and yet the thing is most certain. Sargon is Sennacherib; Ozias is
Azarias; Sedechias is Mathanias, Joachas is also called Sellum. Asarhaddon,
which is indifferently pronounced Esarhaddon, 2 Esdr. iv. 2, 10.
or Asarhaddon, is called Asenephar by those of Cutha: and by an odd bizar kind
of unaccountableness, of which we can find no ground, or Origin; Sardanapalus
is by the Greeks called Tonos Concoleros. We could present you with a long List
of Eastern Persons, to whom in Histories several different Names have been
given; but it is sufficient in general to understand this custom. It is not
unknown to the Latins, among whom Titles and Adoptions have multiplied Names in
so many kinds. Thus the Title of Augustus, and that of Africanus became the
Sir-Names of Caesar Octavianus and the Scipio's; and in like manner the Neros
have been Caesar's. The thing is not to be doubted, and a longer discussion of a
matter so apparently manifest, would be needless to you.

I will not now offer to trouble your Highness any further with the knotty
difficulties of Chronology, which are as little necessary as useful for you.
This was of too great importance not to be cleared up in this place; and after
we have said what we think is sufficient for our purpose, we will return to the
train of our Epochas.

It was then 218 years after the foundation of Rome, 536 years before Jesus
Christ, VIII. Epoch. Cyrus, or the Jews reestablished 6. Age of the World.
after the 70 years of Babylons Captivity, and the same year that Cyrus founded
the Persian Empire; That this Prince, elected by God, to be the deliverer of
his People, and the restorer of his Temple, set about this great work.
Forthwith after the publication of his Decree, Zerubabel, accompanied with
Jesus Jose^ec, the High Priest, brought Samaritans being jealous of their
Israel, 1 Esdr. iv. 2.3.
though they joined with it their Idolatries to their own false Gods, yet they
besought Zerubabel to give them leave to assist him in the Building of that
Temple. But the Children of Judah who detested their corrupted Worship,
rejected their Proposition. The provoked Samaritans therefore crossed and
perplexed their Design by all the ways of Artifice and Violence imaginable.
About the same time, Servius Tullius, after he had agrandized the City of Rome,
was contriving in his Head, how to reduce it to a Commonwealth. But Tarquin,
his Son-in-Law. This Tyrant invaded the Kingdom, and for a long series of time
exercised all manner of Cruelties and Outrages. In the mean while the Persian
Empire was growing up: Besides those vast Provinces of the greater Asia, all
the greater Continent of the Lesser Asia, became obedient to Syrians and
Arabians were subjected; Egypt, which was so jealous of its own Laws, yet
received theirs. This Cambyses, the Son of Cyrus. But that fierce Man did not
long survive his Brother Smerdis, whom an ambiguous Dream caused privately to
be put to Death. The Mage, or chief Smerdis ruled for some time under the name
of Smerdis, the Brother of Cambyses; but this Darius the Son of Hystaspes,
Herod. l. 4. c. 159.
who in his Inscriptions styled himself the Best, and the handsomest of all
Men. There are many remarkable things that make us know him to be the Ahasuerus
spoken of in the Book of Hester, though some there are of another Opinion. At the
beginning of his Reign, 1 Esdr. v.vi.
the Temple was finished, after several interruptions occasioned by the
Samaritans. There was an irreconcilable hatred between two People, so that
nothing was more opposite than Jerusalem and Samaria. It was in the Darius,
when the Liberty of Rome Athens, and the great Glory of Greece began. Hermodius
and Aristogiton, Athenians, rescued their Country from Hipparchus the Son of
Pisistratus, and are killed by his Guards. Hippias the Brother of Hipparchus
endeavors, but in vain, to support himself: for he is repulsed: The Tyranny of
the Pisistratus's is absolutely extinguished: The rescued Athenians erect
Statues to their Saviors, and re-establish the popular State. Hippias throws
himself into the Arms of Darius, whom he already found disposed to attempt the
Conquest of Greece, so that all his hope was in his Protection. At the same
time when he was repulsed, Rome also was delivered of her Tyrants. Tarquin the
Proud by his violent Outrages had made Sextus Lucretia ravished made her to
become her own Murdress: her Blood, together with the harangues of Brutus,
animated and inspirited the Romans. The Kings were banished, and the Consulary
Empire was established according to the model and projection of Servius
Tullius; but it was soon weakened by the Jealousies of the People. For in the
very first Consulate, P. Valerius the Consul, memorable for his Victories,
became suspected by his Citizens; so that to please and satisfy them, he was
obliged to establish the Law of Appeals to the People from the Senate and
Consuls in all causes wherein the punishing of a Citizen was concerned. The
expelled Tarquins found Defenders; for the Neighboring Kings looked upon their
Banishment as an injury done to all Crowned Heads in general; Porsenna, King of
the Clusians, Etruria, took up Arms against Rome. And being now reduced to its
last extremity, and almost conquered and taken, it received its Salvation from
Horatius Cocles. The Romans did prodigious things to secure their dear beloved
Liberty, and Scevola a young Citizen, burnt off that Hand which had not reached
Porsenna. Clelia, a young Lady, made that Prince astonished at her Courage and
Bravery; and Porsenna left Rome in Peace, and the Tarquins remained now without
any hopes of Hippias, for whom Dari^s declared, Persia was up in his Favor and
Athens had a great threatening Darius was making his Preparations for it, Rome,
which was so well fortified against Strangers, had even like to have been
destroyed within it self: Jealousy began to reinforce and take head again,
among the Patricians and the People: and the Consulary Power, although it had
been already moderated by the Law of P. Valerius, did yet seem somewhat too
great to that People, who were now grown very fearful of their Liberty; so that
he retreated to Mount Aventin^; and the Counsels which were violent, were
likewise unsuccessful: The People could not be reduced, but by the peaceable
Remonstrances of Menenius Agrippa: and they were forced to find out a sweetning
kind of temperament, and to give to the People, Tribunes that might be able to
defend them against the Consuls. The Law which established this new sort of
Magistracy, was called the sacred Law, and hence was the rise and origin of
the Tribunes of the People. Darius had at last declared against Greece. His
Son-in-Law, Mardonius, after he had gone through Asia, thought to overthrow the
Grecians with the number of Miltiades defeated that Marathon, with ten thousand
Athenians. Rome grew victorious over all her Enemies round about, and seemed to
be apprehensive of none but those within her own Bowels. Coriolanus a zealous
Patrician, and the greatest of his Captains, notwithstanding all his Services,
being banished, by the popular Faction, conspired the destruction of his
Country, Volsci against her, reduced her Greece did not long enjoy the repose
which the Battle of Marathon had given it: Persia, and Darius; Xerxes his Son
and Successor, and the Grandson of Cyrus by his Mother Atossa, assaulted the
Grecians with eleven hundred thousand Fighting Men, (some stick not to say
seventeen hundred Thousand) not to reckon his Forces at Sea of twelve Hundred
great Ships. But Leonidas, King of Sparta, who had no more than three hundred
Men, slew of them twenty thousand, at the Straights of Thermopylae, and fell
with his own. By the Counsels of Themistocles the Athenian, the Sea-forces of
Xerxes were the Salamina. Hellespont in fear; and a year after, his Land-Army
which was commanded by Mardonius, was utterly hewed to pieces near Platea, by
Pausanias King of Lacedemonia, and by Aristides the Athenian, surnamed the
Just. The Battle began in the Morning; and by the Evening of that memorable
Day, the Grecians of Ionia, who had shook off the Persian Yoke, killed of them
Thirty thousand in the Battle of Mycala, under the Conduct and Command of
Leotychides. That General, to put courage into his Soldiers, told them, That
Mardonius was now overcome in Greece. The News proved true, either by a
prodigious effect of Fame, or rather by a happy accident; and all the Greeks of
the Lesser Asia were restored to their Liberty. This Nation every where got
very considerable advantages; and a little before, the Carthaginians, then
mighty powerful and great, were beaten in Sicily, where they were going to
extend their Dominions at the instance and importunity of the Persians.
However, notwithstanding all this bad success, they would not leave off their
new designs upon an Island which was so commodious to secure them the Empire of
the Sea, which their Commonwealth greatly desired. Greece had it then, but she
only regarded the East, and the Persians. But Pausanias came to set free the
Isle of Cyprus from their Yoke, Xerxes promised him all things: the Traitor was
betrayed by him whom most he loved, and his infamous Xerxes was killed by
Artabanus his Captain of the Guards, Arist. Polit. v. 10.
whether that perfidious wretch designed to possess the Throne of his Master,
or that he seared the severities of a Prince, whose cruel Orders he had not so
punctually executed. Artaxerxes, who had formerly been his Son, began his
Kingdom and Government, and not long Themistocles a Letter, Greece. He very
well understood what esteem he ought to have for so great and renowned a
Captain, and therefore made a 1 Esdr. vii, viii.
It was this brave and magnanimous Prince that was the Protector of the Jewish
People, and in his twentieth year, which is memorable by his glorious Deeds, he
permitted Nehemiah to re-establish Jerusalem with her Artaxerxes did differ
from that of Cyrus; for Cyrus's only was in respect to the Temple, 2 Esdr. ii.
1.
This of Artaxerxes was made for the whole City. From this Decree, foreseen by
Daniel, and set down in his Prophecy, the Four hundred and ninety Years of his
Weeks begin. This important date has very solid foundations. The Banishment of
Themistocles is placed in Eusebius his Chronology, as in the last year of the
Seventy six. The Olympiad, which comes back to the Two hundred and eighty of
Rome. The other Chronologists put it a little lower: but the difference is very
little, and the Circumstances of time do much assure the Date of Eusebius. They
are likewise pretty agreeing with Thucydides, a most exact Historian; Thucyd.
l. 1.
and that grave Author, almost a Contemporary, as well as a fellow Citizen of
Themistocles, makes him to write his Letter about the beginning of Artaxerxes
his Reign. Cornel. Nep. in Themisto.
Cornelius Nepos, an Ancient and Judicious, as well as an Elegant Author, will
not have us question this Date, after the Authority of Thucydides: and it is so
much a stronger Argument, because another more Ancient Author than Thucydides
was, agrees with him. It Is Charon of Lampsacus cited by Plutarch; Plut. in Them.
and Plutarch adds himself, That the Annals, this is to say, those of Persia,
concur with those two Authors. But however he does not follow them, though he
gives us no reason for it; and those Historians who begin the Reign of
Artaxerxes eight or nine years later, agree neither in time, nor are they of so
great an Authority. Therefore, beyond all dispute, we ought to reckon the
beginning of it toward the end of the seventy six Olympiad, and near the 280
year of Rome, and so the twentieth year of this Prince will come to be about
the end of the eighty first Olympiad, and near the 300 year of Rome. Whereas
those, who, to conciliate Authors, reject this, and make the beginning of
Artaxerxes his Reign to fall out lower, are forced to conjecture, that his
Father had at least associated him to the Kingdom when Themistocles wrote his
Letter: but which way soever it be, our account is secure. This Foundation
being settled and granted, the rest of the Account is easy to be made, and the
Consequence will render it plain and evident. After Artaxerxes had made his
Decree, The Jews labored mightily to rebuild their City and the Walls thereof
as Daniel had prophesied. Dan. ix. 25 Nehem. ii. 17, 18, 19.
Nehemiah managed and ordered the work with a great deal of Prudence and
Courage in defiance to all the oppositions of the Samaritans, Arabians, and the
Ammonites. The People sat about the Work, and Eliashib the High Priest
encouraged them by his Example. In the mean while the new Magistrates which
were set over the People of Rome, increased the Divisions of that City; and
Rome brought under a Monarchy did want those Laws which were necessary for the
good Constitution of a Commonweal. The Reputation of Greece, which had made
her self more famous by her Government than Romans to Greece, and especially
into those of Athens, which were more agreeable to the State of their next Year
after, under the Name of the Decemviri, digested and set down the Laws of the
Twelve Tables, which are the Roman Law. Appius Clodius, one of the Decemviri,
and by the Murder of Virginia, whom her Father had rather have slain with his
own Hand, than have abandoned her to be a Sacrifice to the Passion and Lust of
Appius. The Blood of this Second Lucretia awakened the Romans, so that the
Decemviri were quite thrust out. But whilst the Laws were framing under these
ten Magistrates, Esdras, a Doctor of the Law, and Nehemiah the Governor of the
Jewish People newly re-established in Judah, were reforming the Abuses, and
bringing in the Law of Moses, so that they began to be observed in the first
place. One of the main points of their Reformation was to oblige all the
People, 2 Esdr. xiii. Deuteronomy. xxiii. 3.
and particularly the Priests, to leave their strange Wives, whom they had
married contrary to the express Letter of the Law. Esdras put the Holy Books in
order, and made a very exact review of them, and collected the Ancient Memoires
of the Jews, to compile out of them the two Books of Paralipomena, or
Chronicles, to which he added the History of his own Time, which Nehemiah
finished. By those Books is that long and tedious History, which Moses had
begun, ended; and which the following Authors continued without interruption
till the re-building of Jerusalem. The rest of the Sacred History is not writ
in the same train. Whilst Esdras and Nehemiah were making the last part of this
great Work, Herodotus, whom the Profane Authors call the Father of History it
self, began to write. So that the last Authors of the Holy History met with the
first Author of the Greek History; and when this began, That of the Jews, only
to take it from Abraham, already had made up five Ages. Herodotus never thought
to speak of the Jews in that History he has left us; and the Greeks would not
inform themselves of any, but such People whom War, Commerce, or a great Fame
had made notorious and considerable. Judah, that with great difficulty began to
raise it self from the Ashes of its Ruin, never in the least attracted their
regards. And it was in this miserable and calamitous time that the Hebrew
Language ceased to be common. During the Captivity, and afterward by the
commerce that happened between them and the Chaldeans, the Jews learned the
Chaldee Tongue, which very much bordered upon their own, and had almost the
same Idiom and Genius. This reason induced them to change the ancient Figure of
Hebrew Letters, and so they writ Hebrew in the Chaldee Characters which were
most in use among them, and easier to be made. This alteration was almost
insensible between the two Neighboring Languages, whose Letters were of the
same value and efficacy, only differing somewhat in their formation. From that
time the Holy Scripture was only to be found among the Jews in the Chaldee
Letters; But the Samaritans still kept their old way of Writing. Their
Posterity have persevered in the same Custom, even down to our days, and by
that means have preserved the Pentateuch, which they call the Samaritan, in
ancient Hebrew Characters, such as they found them in Medals, and in all the
Monuments of past Ages.

The Jews lived very peaceably and quietly under the Authority of Artaxerxes.
That Prince being forced by Cymon the Son of Miltiades, General of the
Athenians, to make a shameful peace, utterly despaired of overcoming the Greeks
by force, and so only thought of making his advantage by their feuds and
divisions. There happened very great Convulsions between the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians. Those two people, being jealous each of other, shared all
Greece. Pericles an Athenian began the Peloponnesian Theramenes, Thrasybulus
Alcibiades, Athenians, made themselves famous and considerable. Brasydas and
Mindarus, Lacedaemonians, dyed there in fighting for their Country. This War
lasted seven and twenty years, and ended to the advantage of the Lacedaemonians,
who had brought on their side Darius, surnamed the Bastard, the Son and
Successor of Artaxerxes. Lysander, General of the Lacedaemonians Athens, anc
changed it is Government. But Persia soon was sensible that it had made the
Lacedaemonians too powerful, and therefore the Persians upheld the young Cyrus
in his Revolt against Artaxerxes Mnemon, because of Darius. This young Person,
being delivered both from prison and death by his Mother Parysatis, resolves
upon revenge, gains the Noblemen to him by his infinitely obliging carriage,
traverses Asia the less, and goes and offers battle to the King his Brother,
even in the heart of his Empire, wounds him with his own hand, and believing
himself too soon a Conqueror, he perished by his own rashness. The ten thousand
Greeks that served him, make that astonishing retreat, where at last commanded
Xenophon that great Philosopher, and great Captain, who has written the
History of it. The Lacedaemonians continued their attacques Persian Empire,
which Agesilaus the Sparta made to tremble in the lesser Asia; but the
Divisions of Greece called him back into his own Country. About this time the
City of the Veji, which almost equalled the glory of Rome, after a ten years
siege, and a great many good Successes, was taken by the Romans under the
Conduct of Camillus. His generosity gained him yet another Conquest. Falisci,
whom he besieged, rendered Rome would not conquer by Treacheries, nor take
advantages from the perfidiousness of a wretch, that turned the Obedience of an
innocent Age into such an Abuse. A little after, the Gauls Senonians came into
Italy, and besieged Clusium, Romans lost against them the famous Camillus whom
they had banished. Polyb. l. 1. c. 6. l. 2. c. 18, 22.
The Gauls continued seven months Masters of Rome, and being called away by
other affairs, they drew off, but it was not without carrying away with them
good store of Greece, Epaminondas a Theban made himself signal by his equity,
moderation and temper, as much as by his Victories. It was observed he held
this for a constant Rule, never to tell a Lie, so much as in jest. His Actions
became dazzling and illustrious in the last years of Mnemon, and in the first of
Ochus. Under this so great a Captain, the Thebans were victorious, and the
Power of Lacedemonia abated, Macedonian Philip, the Father of Alexander the
Great. And notwithstanding all the oppositions of Ochus and Arses his Son,
Kings of Persia, and the greater difficulties still which the Eloquence of
Demosthenes, that mighty Defender of Liberty, raised against him in Athens; the
victorious Prince for twenty years together kept all Greece in Cheronea,
Athenians and their Allies, gave him a most absolute Power. At this famous
Field, whilst he was breaking the Athenians, he had the joy and happiness to
see Alexander at eighteen years of age rushing in upon the Theban Troops, and
among others, upon that which they called The Sacred Troop of Friends, which
they looked on as Invincible. Thus being Master of Greece, and supported by a
Son of such great hopes, his Designs must needs be high, and he resolved on
nothing less than the absolute Ruin of the Persians, against whom he had
declared himself Generalissmo. But this was reserved for Alexander: For in
Philip was assassinated by Pausanias, Bagoas the same year killed Arses King of
Persia, and caused Darius the Son of Arsames, surnamed Codomannus, to succeed
him in the Kingdom. He deserves bv his Valor to be ranked, according to the
(otherwise) most probable Opinion, which gives him his Extraction from the
Royal Family. So that there were two Courageous and Magnanimous Kings began
their Reigns together, Darius the Son of Arsames, and Alexander the Son of
Philip. They looked upon each other with Eyes of Jealousy, and they seem as
born to dispute the Empire of the World betwixt them. But Alexander resolved to
strengthen himself well, before he would engage with his Rival. He revenged the
Death of his Father, reduced those Rebellious People that Greeks that vainly
attempted to shake off their Yoke; and ruined Thebes, where he spared none but
the House and descendant Issue of Pindarus, whose Odes were the Admiration of
Greece. Mighty and Victorious, Greeks, against Darius, whom he overthrew in
three several Babylon and Susa, destroys Persepolis, Persia, pushes on his
Conquests as far as Indies, and at last returns to die at Babylon,

In his time Manasses, the Brother of Jaddus Jews. He had married the Daughter
of Sanballat the Samaritan, whom Darius had made a Nobleman of that Country.
Rather than he would repudiate that beautiful Stranger, to which the Council of
Jerusalem, and his Brother Jaddus would fain have obliged him, he embraced the
Schism of the Samaritans. And several of the Jews, to shun the like Censures,
joined themselves to him. He was resolved at that time to build a Temple near
Samaria, upon Mount Gerizim, which the Samaritans believed was blessed, and so to
make himself the High Priest of it. His Father-in-Law, a most intimate Friend
of Darius, assured him of this Prince's Protection, and the effect and
Consequence was so much the more favorable to him; for Alexander raised
himself, Sanballat deserted Tire. Thus he obtained whatsoever he desired, the
Temple of Gerizim was built, and the Ambition of Manasses was satisfied. The
Jews in the mean time, being ever faithful to the Persians, refused to give
Alexander the succor he demanded of them. He went to Jerusalem, full of
Resolution to take his Revenge; but his Mind was altered when he beheld the
High Priest coming out to meet him, with the other Priests that offered
Sacrifices, all clothed with their proper Vestments for Ceremony, and in
Procession before the People in White. They showed to him the Prophecies that
foretold his Victories, out of Daniel. So that he granted to the Jews all their
Requests, and they kept with him the same Fidelity as they had always done
before to the Kings of Persia.

In the midst of these his Conquest, Rome Samnites, Papyrius Cursor, the most
famous of her Generals. After the Death of Alexander, his Empire was divided.
Perdiccas, Ptolomee the Son of Lagus, Antigonus, Sileu^us, Lysimachus,
Antipater, and his Son Cassan^e^; in a word, all his Captains that Alexander,
his Brother, seen but Fields of Blood, and dreadful Revolutions. In the midst
of so many disorders, several of the People of lesser Asia, and thereabouts
freed themselves, and formed the Kingdoms of Pontus, Bithynia, and Pergamus.
The Goodness of the Country made them afterward Rich and Powerful. Armenia
likewise at the same time shook off the Macedonian Yoke, and became a very
great Kingdom. The two Mithridates's, Father and Son, founded that of
Cappadocia. Egypt, Ptolomee, the Son of Lagus, from whence came the Lagides,
and that of Asia or Syria, founded by Seleucus, from whence proceeded the
Seleucides. This latter comprised, besides Syria, those vast and rich Provinces
of higher Asia, which made up the Persian Empire: so all the East owned Greece,
and learned the Language of it. Nay, even Greece it self fell under oppression
by the Captains of Alexander. And Macedonia, his ancient Kingdom, which gave
Laws as well as Masters to the East, was left a Prey to the first Comer.
Cassander's Children drive each the other out of that Kingdom. Pyrrhus, King of
Epirus, who had possessed one part of it, was driven out Demetrius Poliorcetes
the Son of Antigonus, Lysimachus, and Lysimachus by Seleucus, Ptolomee
Ceraunus, driven out of Egypt Ptolomee the first killed like That perfidious
Man had no sooner invaded Macedonia, but he was attacqued Gauls, and was slain
in a Fight he had with them. During these troubles in East, They came into
lesser Asia, led on by their King Brennus, and settled themselves Gallo-Greece,
or Galatia, called so from their own Name, from whence they went to Macedonia,
which they ravaged, and so made all Greece to tremble. But their Army was
destroyed in the Sacrilegious attempts on the Temple of Delphos. This Nation
was active, and yet in every thing Delphos, the Gauls of Italy, whose continual
Polyb. l. 2. 20.
and frequent Victories had made them the dread and terror of the Romans, were
animated against them by the Samnites, the Brutians, and Etrurians. At first
they returned back with a new Victory, but the Glory of it was quickly sullied
by slaying the Ambassadors. The Romans being enraged, marched against them,
defeated them, entered into their Territories, Gauls of the East had been driven
out of Greece, Antigonus Gonatas, Demetrius Poliorceters, who Greece, but very
unquietly, without any difficulty invaded Macedonia. Pyrrhus was otherwise
engaged Italy, whither he was called by the Tarentines. The Battle which the
Romans came to get over them and the Samnites, afforded them only this
Ressource, Romans those Py^rhus his Elephants affrighted them; but the
Fabricius made the Romans soon see that Pyrrhus was not unconquerable. The
Pyrrhus rendered to the Consul all his Prisoners without a Ransom, saying, It
became him to make War with the Sword, and not with Money; and Fabricius sent
back to the King, his treacherous Physician, who had offered to poison his
Master for him. About these times Religion, and the Jewish Nation began to
appear among the Greeks. Those People being civilly treated by the Kings of
Syria, lived in tranquillity and Peace according to their Laws. Antiochus the
God, Grandson of Seleucus, sent them up and down into the lesser Asia, Joseph.
Ant. 12.3.
from whence they got themselves into Greece, and every where enjoyed the same
Rights, Privileges, and Liberty, as the other Citizens. Ptolomee the Son of
Lagus, had already settled them in Egypt. Ptolomee Philadelphus, their Greek,
and then came out that excellent Version, called the Septuagint Version. This
was done by those Learned old Men, whom Eleazer the High Priest sent to the
King, who desired them. Some would have only had the five Books of Moses
translated, Joseph. l. 1. Antiq. c. 1. l. 12. c. 2.
and the rest of the sacred Books might afterward be turned into Greek for the
use of the Jews that were scattered all over Egypt and Greece, and who had
forgot not only their own ancient Language, which was the Hebrew, but also the
Chaldee, which the Captivity had taught them. They made themselves a Greek
Mixture, which they called the Hellenistick Tongue: The Septuagint, and all the
New Testament is written in this Tongue. And during this dispersion of the
Jews, their Temple was made famous over all the Land, and all the Kings of the
East presented there their offerings. The West was intent on the War Rome, and
Pyrrhus. In short, this King Curious, and so went back to Epirus. But he was not
there long at quiet, but he resolved to make Macedonia recompense him for the
ill successes Italy. Antigonus Gonatus Thessalonica, and forced to leave to
Pyrrhus all the rest of the Kingdom. Pyrrhus was making War upon the
Lacedaemonians, and those of Argos. The two hostile Kings were brought into
Argos at one and the same time, by two contrary Caballs, and at two several
Gates. There was a mighty Combat in that City: and a certain Mother who saw her
Son pursued by Pyrrhus, whom he had wounded, knocked that Prince on the Head
with a Stone. Antigonus, thus being defeated of his Enemy, reenters Macedonia,
who, after some changes and Revolutions, was at Peace with his Family. The
Confederacy of the Achaians kept him from growing Great. It was the last
Rampire of the Grecian Liberty, and it was that which produced the last Heroes
of it with Aratus, and Philopoemen. The Tarentines, whom Pyrrhus fed with
hopes, called in the Carthaginians after his Death. But that succor did them
very little good; for they were beaten with the Brutians and the Samnites their
Allies. These, after seventy and two years continual Wars, were forced to
submit to the Roman Yoke. Tarentum followed at the heels, and the Neighboring
People could not hold out, and so all the ancient People of Italy were
subjugated. The Gauls often beaten, durst not stir. Polyb. lib. 1, 2.1.
And after 480 Years Warring, the Romans saw themselves Masters of Italy, and
began to consider the affairs abroad: They were not a little jealous of the
Carthaginians, who were grown very powerful in their Neighborhood, by the
Conquests they had made in Sicily, from whence they were coming to fall upon
them, and Italy, in the Relief of the Tarentines. The Republic of Carthage had
two sides of the Mediteranean Sea. Besides that of Africa, which she almost
entirely possessed, she extended her self toward Spain, by the Straights.
Being thus Mistress of the Sea, and of Commerce, she had invaded the Isles of
Corsa and Sardinia. Sicily could scarce defend it self, and Italy was too
nearly threatened, not to be concerned with some apprehension. From thence
proceeded the Punic Wars, notwithstanding the Treaties The first taught the
Romans to fight at Sea, and they were presently Masters of an Art, which before
they knew little, or nothing Duilius, who was the Regulus Africa, where he was
forced to fight with that Prodigious Serpent, which obliged him to employ all
his Army against it. But every thing yielded; and Carthage, being reduced
Xantippus the Laced^monian. The Roman General is beaten, and taken; but his
Prison renders him more great and illustrious than his Victories. For being
upon his Parole sent back to treat about the exchange of Prisoners, he told the
Senate the conditions, which was all hopes and Grace to them that would
voluntarily surrender themselves; and so returned to a most certain Death. Two
dreadful Shipwracks forced the Romans to leave their new Empire of the Sea to
the Carthaginians. And the Victory hung a long while in dubious suspense
between the two People, and the Romans were just upon the point of yielding:
Lutatius concluded the War. Carthage was obliged to pay Tribute, and to quit
with Sicily all the Isles that were between Sicily and Italy. The Romans got
that Island entirely, saving only what Hieron King of Syracusa, their Ally,
kept of it. After the War was ended, the Carthaginians thought now only of
Destruction by the rising of their Army. They had, according to their Custom,
made it up of Strangers, who revolted to them for their pay. Polyb. lib i. c.
62.63. lib. ii. ^. 1.
Their cruel and severe Government forced them to join to those mutinous
Troops, almost all the Cities of the Empire, and Carthage being closely
besieged, had utterly been lost, if it had not been for Hamilcar, surnamed
Barcas. He alone maintained the Poly. lib. i. 79. ^3. ^3.
which they got over the Rebels. But it cost them Sarainia, which the Revolt of
their Garrison opened to the Romans. And for fear of engaging with them in a
new War, Carthage was forced to surrender up that Island, which was of such
importance; and also to enlarge her Tribute, she designed in Spain to
re-establish her Empire, which had been so much shaken by this Revolt: Hamilcar
went into that Province with his Son Hannibal of but Romans. Asdrubal his Ally
was made his Father's Successor; who governed his Province with a great deal of
Prudence, and in it built New Carthage, which kept Spain under Subjection. The
Roman: were taken up in the War against Teuta, Queen of Illyria, who exercised
Piracy unpunished over all the Coast. Flushed with the Spoil she made upon the
Greeks, and those of ^^ir s, she despised the Romans, and slew their
Ambassador: But she was soon taken down: for the Romans left her but a very
small part of Illyria, and got from her the Isle of Corsmi^on, Greece, by a
solemn Embassage, and this was the first time that they acknowledged their
Power there. Polyb. lib. ii. 12.22.
The great Successes of As^^r d^al made them wonderful jealous; but the Gauls
of Italy kept them from m^^ling with the affairs of Spain. Li. ^^l. lib. 21.
They continued quiet five and forty Years. And the Youth that were bred up in
that time, never thought of past l^stes, but began again to m^^ace (...).

The Romans, that they might with security attack such turbulem Neighbors,
made themselves sure of the Carthaginians. The Treaty was concluded with
Asd^u^al, who promised not to pass beyond the Heber. Romans and Ga^^s went
suriously on on both sides: The Tra^salsims joined with the ^isalsin s; and all
were beaten. Con^olitanus, one of the King of the ^a^ls, was taken in the
fight: A^^r^estus, another Kin^, was his own Murderer: the Victorious R^mans
at the first time passed the River Po, being resolved to take from the Gauls at
the adjacent places to that River, of which, for so many Ages since, they had
been in possession: Victory was their attendant wheresoever they went: Milan
was taken; and almost all the Country was brought into subjection. About that
time Asdrubal died; and Hanibal, though he was not five and twenty years old,
was put in his Spain, without any respect to Terms. Rome then hearkened to the
complaints Sagonius, her Ally. And the Roman Ambassadors went to Carthage. The
re-established Carthaginians were now no longer in a humor of yielding. Sicily
ravished out of their Hands, Sardinia unjustly forced from them, and Tribute
enhanced, stuck shrewdly in their St^machs. So that the Faction which would
have Hannibal abandoned, proved very weak. That General designed to have at
all. By secret Embassies they were assured ot the Gauls of Italy, who being not
longer able to attempt any thing by their own Forces, took this opportunity to
relieve themselves. Hannibal traverses all Heber, the Pyrenees, all Gallia
Transalpine, the Alps, and upon a sudden falls upon Italy. The Gauls neglected
not to fortify their Army, and made Rome was Sicily sides with the Hieronymus
King of Syracusa Romans; almost Italy abandons them; and the last Ressource of
that Republic seemed to give up it self in Spain with the two Scipio's. Amidst
these extremities, Rome was indebted for her Salvation to three great Men. The
constancy of Fabiua Maximus, who putting himself above Popular Rumors, made
War by retreating, and was a Rampire to his Country. Marcellus, who Nola, and
took Syracusa, Rome, which admired those two wonderful Persons, thought they
saw in the young Scipio something more strange and surprising. The astonishing
successes of his Counsels confirmed the Opinion they had of him, that he came
of Race Divine, and conversed with the Gods. At twenty four years of Age he
engaged to go into Spain, where his Father Carthage, as if he had been Roman
side: The Carthaginians yield up Spain to him; at his coming into Africa, Kings
because his Homagers: Carthage it self trembled in her turn, and saw her Arms
defeated: Victorious Hami^al after sixteen years is in vain called back, and
cannot defend his Country: F^r Scipio gives Laws unto it: The Africanus is his
recompense: so Romans having conquered the Gauls and Africans law themselves
then beyond further apprehension, and fought afterward secure without hazard.

Punick War, Years of Rome. 5^4.
Theodotus Governor of Bactria headed a thousand Cities against Antiochus,
surnamed the God, the Son of Antiochus Soter, King of Syria. Almost all the
East followed this Example. The Pa^thia^s revolted under the Conduct o^ A^aces,
who was Chief of the House of the A^^^^id^, and ^ounder of an Empire, which, by
degrees extended i^se^^ into al^ the upper Asia.

-- The Kings of Syria, and those of Egypt, f^^shed one against the other,
meditated on ^^^hin^ but m^tual ruin, either by force, o^ fraud. Damas^s, and
hi^ T^rritory, whi^^ was called Coelo-Syria, and which was a Confine to the two
Kingdoms, was the S^bj^^t of their Wars; and the Affairs of Asia were
absolutely distinct and separate from those of E rope.

During all those sad times, Philosophy flourished in Greece; the Sect of the
Italian Philosophers, and that of the Eniques, filled it with great Men, among
whom there were mixed several extravagant Persons, to whom Critical Greece
would no^ vouch^^^e to ^ive the name ^f Philosoph^rs. In the time of ^^r^s and
Ca^^^^s^^, Pythagoras (...) the It l ck Sect in the Upper Greece, a^^ about
Naples. And very ^^ar the same (...) Th^^es the Miles^an fo^med that of the
^^i^^e ^r^m th^n^^ proceeded th se great (...), He^aclitu^, D^m^crit ^,
Empe^^cles, P^^^^ni^^^, Ana^^goras, who, a little (...) the P^lop^^^sian War,
discovered the World t^ be made by an Eternal Spi^^^. S^^r t s in a short time
after reduced P^iloso^hy to the study of good manners, and was the Father of
Moral Philosophy; Plato, his Disciple, chief of the Academy; Aristotle Plato's
Dis^iple, and Master of Al^xander, chief of the P ripatetick; under the
Successors of Alexander, Z^n^ surnamed Citian, from a Town in the Isle of
Cyprus, where he was born, chief of the Stoics; and Epicurus the Athenian,
chief of those Philosophers that bear his name; if likewise we may count those
Philsophers who openly deny a Providence, and who, being ignorant what duty
was, defined Virtue by Pleasure. We may also reckon among the greatest
Philosophers Hippocrates the Father of Physic, who was eminently famous
amongst others in those happy times of Greece. The Romans had at the same time
another sort of Philosophy, which did not consist in Disputes, nor in
Discourses, but in Frugality, in Poverty, in the labors of a Country life;
and in those of War, wherein they made their Glory to consist; in that of their
Country, and of the Roman Name: which made them at last the Masters both of
Italy and Carthage.

IX. Epoch. Scipio, or Carthage conqu^^ed.
In the Year 552. from the Foundation of Rome, about 250 Years after the
Foundation of the Persian Monarchy, and 202 Years before Jesus Christ, Carthage
was made subject to the Romans. Hannibal never Flaminius, King of Macedonia, an
Ally of the Car^haginians, was overcome; the Kings of Macedonia brought to
great straits; and Greece freed from their Yoke. The Romans attempted to
destroy H^^^nibal, whom they found to be still feared, notwithstanding his
losses. That Great Captain forced to East against them, and brought their Asia.
By his powerful Arguments Antioch^s, surnamed the Great King of Syria, became
Jealous of their Forces, and made War with them, but, in doing so, he followed
not the Counsels of Hannibal, who had engaged him in it. Beaten both by Sea and
Land, he received the Law which the Consul Lucius Scipio, the Brother of Scipio
Africanus, imposed upon him, and he was shut up in Mount Taurus. Hannibal fled
for refuge to Prusias Bythinia, escaped the Romans by Poison. They are feared
by all People, and will not suffer any other Power besides their own. Kings
were obliged to give them their Children, as Hostages of their Faith.
Antiochus, since called the Illustrious or Epiphanius, the second Son of
Antiochus, the great King of Syria, continued a long while at Rome in that
Quality, but about the Seleucus Philopater, Romans would have in his Room
Demetrius the Kings Son, then about ten years of Sele^cus died; and Antiochus
usurped the Kingdom over his Nephew. The Romans were taken up in the affairs of
the Macedonians, where Perseus was troubling his Neighbors, and would no
longer keep to those Conditions that were imposed upon King Philip his Father.

Then began the Persecutions of Gods People. Antiochus, the Mighty, reigned
Mosaic Law, and indeed Roman Power kept Egypt. They entered into a War with
Perseus, who, Paulus Aemilius, he was forced to fling himself into his Arms.
Gentius King of Illyria his Ally, being utterly routed in thirty days by the
Praetor Anicius, had just then met with the same Fate. The Kingdom of
Macedonia, which had continued for seven hundred years, and for near two
hundred of them had not only given Masters to Greece, but also to all the East,
was now no more than a bare Roman Province. The outrageous Furies of Antiochus
daily incr^ased against the Jews. Then appeared the Resistance of Mattathias
Phineas, Judas the Maccabee his Son, notwithstanding the infinite number of his
Enemies; the Advance of the Family Asmonians, or Maccabees; the new Judas, and
the Greatness of the Priesthood re-established; the Death of Antiochus suitable
to his Impiety and his Pride; his pretended Coversion during his last Sickness,
and the fierceness of Divine Vengeance upon that I solent King. His Son
Antiochus Eupator, though much under Age, succeeded him, under the Guardianship
of Lysias his Governor. During this his Minority, Demetrius Soter, who was
under Hostage at Rome, thought he might have been able to re-establish himself;
but he could not obtain of the Senate to be sent back into his own Kingdom: The
^^man Polity rather chose to have a young Infant. Under this Antiochus the
Persecution of the Jews, and the Judas the Macca^ee continued. Syria. Demetrius
escapes from Rome, is acknow edged by the People, and the young Antiochus is
slain with Lysias his Tutor. But the Jews are n^ better tr^ated under Demerius,
than they were under his Pred^cessors: He takes the same Course; his Generals
are beaten by Judas the Maccabee; and the Hand of the proud Nicanor, whose
Temple he had so often threatened, is joined with Ju^as overwhelmed Jonathan
succeeded to his Charge, and supported his Reputation. Being reduced to
extremity, his Courage left him not. The Romans overjoyed in their humbling of
the Kings of Syria, granted to the Jews their Protection; and the Alliance
which Judas had sent to demand of him, was granted; but yet it was without any
S^ccour: But the Glory of the Roman Name was however a considerable Support to
the afflicted People. The Troubles of Syria dai^y grew greater and greater.
Alexander Balasus, who boasted himself to be the Son Antiochus, was set upon
Antiochus his Party. The Kings of Egypt, who were the perpetual Enemies of
S^ria, interessed themselves in those Divisions, to make their own Advantages
Ptolomee Philometor upheld Balasus. The War was bloody. Demetrius Soter was
slain in it, and to revenge his Death left none but two young Princes, a great
deal under his Age, Demetrius Nicator, and Antiochus Sidetes. So that the
Usurper continued in peace, and the King of Egypt gave him his Daughter
Cleopotra in Marriage. Balasus, who thought himself above all things, plunged
himself into Debaucheries, and brought thereby upon himself the Phil^m^tor
judged that famous Cause which the Samaritans had with the Jews. 2. Maccab. vi.
2. Jos. Ant. xii. 7.
Those Schismatics who were ever opposite to God's peculiar People, did not
fail to join with their Enemies; and to Antiochus their Persecutor, Gerazim to
Jupiter Hospitalis. Notwithstanding this Profanation, these wicked Wretches
desisted not from maintaining sometime after, at Alexandria, before Ptolomeus
Philometer, that That Temple ought to be preferred to that of Jerusalem. The
Parties disputed in the Presence of the King, and both of them to the hazard of
their Lives engaged to justify their Pretensions by the Terms of the Law of
Moses. The Jews gained their Cause, Josph. Ant. lib. 13. c. 6. Ibid.
and the Samaritans were punished with Death according to their Covenant. The
same King permitted Onias, of the Sacerdotal Race, to build in Egypt the
Temple of Heliopolis, after the Model of that of Jerusalem: An Enterprise
condemned by all the Jewish Council, and adjudged contrary to the Law. In the
mean while Carthage began to stir again, being very uneasy in bearing with the
Laws which Scipio Africanus had imposed upon her. The Romans resolved on no
less than her total Overthrow, and therefore to that end was the third Punick
War undertaken. Demetrius Nicator now having Balasus was troubled: Philometor
declared against him, because Balasus would not let him take his Kingdom: The
Ambitious Cleopatra his Queen left him to marry his Enemy, and he was slain at
last by the hand of one of his own Creatures, after the loss of a Battle.
Philometer dyed a few days after the Wounds he received in it, and Syria was
delivered of two Enemies. At the same time were two great Cities seen to fall.
Carthage was taken, and reduced to Ashes by Scipio Aemylianus, who by that
Victory confirmed the Name of Africanus to his Posterity, and showed himself
the worthy Inheritor of the Great Scipio his Grandfather. Corinth had the same
Destiny, and the Republique of Achaia was destroyed with it. The Consul Mummius
did utterly ruin that City, the most voluptuous, and the most beautiful of all
Greece. He transported to Rome their incomparable Statues, without ever knowing
the Value of them. The Romans being ignorant of the Arts of Greece, contented
tnemselves with the knowledge of War, Polity, and Agriculture. During the
Troubles of Syria the Jews fortifyed themselves: Jonathan saw himself sought
after by both Parties, and Victorious Nicator treated him as a Brother: He was
quickly requited for Jews all in a Body Jonathan was overwhelmed with Honors;
but when the King thought himself most secure, he took up also the Designs of
his Ancestors, and the Jews were as bad tormented as before. The Troubles of
Syria began again: Diodotus surnamed Tryphon, raised up a Son Balasus, whom he
called Antiochus the God, and made himself his Tut r during his Infancy. The
Demetrius flushed the People; all Syria was as it were on fire. Jonathan knew
how to take Advantage of this Conjuncture, and renewed the Alliance with the
Romans. Every thing was prosperous to him, when Tryphon by a breach of Promise
caused him to be slain with his Children. His Brother Simon, the most prudent
and happy of the Mac^abees, succeeded him: and the Romans favored him, as they
did his Predecessors. Typhon was not less unfaithful to his Pupil Anti^chus,
than he had been to Jonathan. He caused that Child to be made away by the
means of the Physicians, under pretense of having him to be cut of the Stone,
which he had nothing of, and so made himself Master of one part of the Kingdom.
Simon joined himself with Demetrius Nicator, the Legitimate King; and after he
had obtained of him the Freedom of his Country; he maintained and kept it by
Arms against the Rebel Tryphon. Syrians were driven out of the Citadel which
they kept in Jerusalem, and a while after out of all the places of Judea. Thus
the Jews being freed from the Yoke of the Gentiles by the Valor of Simon, they
yielded the Kingly Rights to him and to his Family; Demetrius, and Nicator
consented to that new Establishment. There began the new Kingdom of God's
People, and the Principality of the Asmonians ever joined to the Sovereign
Priesthood. About this time the Parthian Empire extended it self over the
Bactrians and Indians, by the Mithridates the valiantest of all Arsacidae.
Whilst He was advancing toward Euphrates, Demetrus Nicator, called by the
People of that Country, which Mithridates had newly brought into Subjection,
was in hopes of reducing the Parthians to Obedience, whom the Syrians had
always treated as Rebels. He was happy in several Victories; and near to retun
into Syria to give Tryphon his absolute Overthrow there, but unluckily sell
into a Snare, which one of Mithrid^tes his Generals had laid for him; and so he
became a Prisoner to the Parthians. Tryphon, who then thought himself safe by
the Calamity of that Prince, found, of a sudden, that he Demetrius their
legitimate King, they submitted themselves to his Wife Cleopatra, and to his
Children: But however they were obliged to look out for one that might be a
Guardian and Defender to those Princes, being yet but young and under Age. That
Care did naturally belong to Anti^ch^s Sidetes, the Brother of Demetrius:
Cleopatra made him to be owned throughout all the Kingdom: she also went
further: Phraates, the Brother and Successor of Mithridates, treated Nicator as
a King, and gave him his Daughter Ro^og^na in Marriage. And in hatred to this
Rival, Cleopatra, from whom she took away the Crown with her Husband, married
Antiochus Sidettes, and was resolved to Reign, tho by all the Crimes
imaginable. The new King set Tryphon: Simon joined with him in Antiochus, now
Master of the Kingdom, soon forgot the Services that Simon had done him in that
War, and caused him to be killed. Whilst he was collecting, against the Jews,
all the Forces of Syria, Johannes Hyrcanus, the Son of Simon, succeeded to the
Pontificat of his Father, and all the People yielded to him: He sustained the
Siege in Jerusalem with a great deal of Valor, and the War which Antiochus was
designing against the Parthians, for the Delivery of his Captive Brother, made
him agree with the Jews upon very easy and supportable Terms. At the same time
that this Peace was concluding; the Romans, who began to grow mighty rich, met
with Enemies that were not a little to be feared in the vast Multitude of their
Slaves. E^nus, a Slave, got them to make their first Insurrection in Sicily;
and to reduce them, no less than the Rome was employed. A Attalus King of
Pergamus, who by his last Will made the Roman People his Heir, put the City
into an unhappy Division. The Troubles of the Gracchi began. The Seditious
Tribunalship of Tiberius Gracchus, one of the primier Cit^zens of Rome, became
his Destruction: For the whole Senate killed him by the hand of Scipio Nasica,
and they saw no other means whereby to prevent the dangerous distribution of
Money, wherewith that Eloquent Tribune flattered the People. Scipio Aemilianus
re-established the Military Discipline, and that great Man, who had destroyed
Carthage, ruined Numantia in Spain, the second Terror of the Romans. The
Parthians found themselves Sidetes: His Troops, though they were corrupted by a
prodigious Luxury, yet had most surprising Successes. Johannes Hy^canus, who
had attended him with his Jews in that War, made there his Valor signally
Famous, and the Jewish Religion to be had in regard, stopped a little, to give
himself the leisure to celebrate the ^^ur ^e ^^^e.
Sabbath Day. Every one submitted, and P^raates saw his Empire reduced to its
ancient Bounds and Limits: But yet he was so far from despa^ring at these
disastrous Circumstances, that he verily believed his Prisoner would be a means
to set 'em right again, and enable him to invade Sy^ia. Whilst things were in
this p^sture, Demetriis met with a very odd Adventure and Fate. He was several
times released, and as often retained, according to the Ascendant of his Father
in Laws Hopes and Fears: At last a happy Moment, wherein Phraates found no
other Refource than in the Divertion which he resolved to make in Syria by his
means, set him at absolute. Liberty. At this Crisis there was a new turn Years
before J. C. ^3^.
of things: Si^et^s, who could no longer Phraates seek to overtake ^emetrius,
that time was past, and the Prince was got into his Kingdom. His Wife
Cleopatra, who was resolved to reign, did soon return with him, and Ro^oguna
was as soon forgot. Hy^^n^^s made use of his time: He took Sic^em from the
Samaritans, and utte^ly destroyed the Temple of ^erazim, two hundred Years
after is had been built by Sanballat. Its Ruin hindered not the Samaritans from
continuing their Worship upon that Mountain, and the two People remained
irreconcilable. The Year after all Idumea, united by the Victories of Hyrcanus
Judea, received Moses's Law with Circumcision. The Romans continued their
Protection to Hyrcanus, and caused a Surrender of the Towns to him, which the
Syrians had dispossessed him of. The Pride and the Violences of Demetrius left
not Syria long in Repose. The Egypt gave them a King. Alexander Zebina, the
Son of Balas. was beaten, and Cleopatra, who thought to Reign more absolutely
under her Children, than under her Husband, caused Seleucus, who would needs
Reign in spite Antiochus, called Grypus, had defeated the Rebels, and was
returned Victorious: Cleopatra presented to him in Ceremony the poisoned Cup,
which her Son, being advertised of her pernicious Designs, made her to drink.
At her Death she left an eternal Seed of Divisions among her Children, which
she had had by the two Brothers, Demetrius Nicator, and Antiochus Sidetes.
Syria thus in Convulsions was not long in Condition to trouble the Jews. took
Samaria, though he Samaritans. Five Years after he dyed: Judea continued quiet
under her two Children Aristobulus and Alexander Janeus, who both Reigned one
after the other, without any Disturbance Syria. The Romans left West. During
the Demetrius Nicator, and of Zebina, they began to extend themselves beyond
the Alps, and Sextius a Conqueror of the Gauls, Salii, established in the
Town of Aix a Colony, which bears its Name to this day. The Gauls defended
themselves but ill. Fabius subdued the Allobroges, and all the Neighboring
People: And the same Grypus made his Mother to drink Gallia Narbonesus was
reduced to a Province, Roman Province. Thus the Roman Empire was greatned, and
by little and little possessed it self of all Lands and Seas of the known World:
Yet the Face of the Commonwealth did not look so fair and beautiful abroad by
her Conquests, but that it was full out as much disfigured by the outrageous
Ambition of her Citizens, and hy her civil and intestine Wars. The most
Illustrious of the Romans became the most Pernicious to the public Weal. The
two Gracchi, by their Flatteries to the People, began the Divisions, which
never ended but with the Republic. Caius the Brother of Tiberius could not
endure the Thoughts that they had caused so great a Man to be killed in so sad
and tragical a Manner: And being animated with Revenge, by the Motions which he
fancied, the Ghost of Tiberius inspired him with, he put all the Citizens into
Arms one against another; and just upon the Point of destroying all, he was cut
off by a Death, resembling that he was resolved to revenge. Money did all
things at Rome. Jugurtha Numidia, stained with the Murder Marius, Sicily, and
their second Revolt cost the Romans as much Blood as the first. Marius beat the
Teutons, the Cymbrians, and the other People of the North, who got themselves
into Gallia, and Italy. The Victories he obtained Metellus, who opposed it, was
yet notwithstanding forced to give way to Time, and the Divisions Saturnus,
Rome protected Cappadocia against Mithridates Pontu^, and so great an Enemy
Roman Forces with Greece, Italy continually engaged in Arms, by so many Wars
kept up either against the Romans, or with them, did put their Empire into
great Danger by an universal Revolt. Rome at the same time felt her self torn
by the Fury of Marius and Sylla, one of whom had made both the South and North
to tremble, and the other was the Conqueror Greece and Asia. Sylla, Surnamed
and seq.
was too much so against his Country, which his Tyrannical Dictatorship
Sertorius, a zealous Associate Marius, cantoned himself in Spain, and
Mithridates. Against so great a Captain, Force was in Vain; and Pompey could no
ways reduce that Party, but by sowing the Seeds of Division among them: So that
there was not a Man, even down to Spartacus the Gladiator, but who thought he
might aspire to the Command Mithridates was to Lucullus. The War of the
Gladiators became a Dread to the Roman Power: Crassus could hardly end it, and
he was forced to send against them Pompey the Great. Lucullus got the better
East. The Romans past the Eu^hrates. But their Invincible General against the
Enemy, could not keep his own Soldiers within their Duty. Mithridates, who,
though often beaten, yet never lost his Courage, rallied; and the Happiness of
Pompey seemed necessary to determine that War. Syria even to Hercules his
Pillars, when he was sent against Mithridates. His Glory seemed then to be
raised to the height. He brought that Valiant Armenia Iberia Albania, which
sustained him, Syria torn by his Factions, Judea, or the Division of the
Asmonians, did not leave to Hyrcanus II. Son of Alexander Janneus but a Shadow
of Power, and at last all the East: But he had not had wherewithal to triumph
over so many Enemies, without the Consul Cicero, who saved the City from the
Fire which Catiline, followed with most of the greatest Roman Nobless, prepared
for it. That terrible Party was ruined by the Eloquence of Cicero, rather than
by the Arms of C. Antigonus his Colleague. The Liberty of the People of Rome was
in no greater Security. Pompey Reigned in the Senate, and his great Name made
him absolute Master Julius Caesar, by subduing the Gauls, and seq.
brought to his Country the most advantageous Conquest that ever it had had. So
great a Service put him into a Condition of Establishing his Dominion in his
Country. He was resolved first to equal, and then to out-doe Pompey. The
immense Riches of Crassus made him believe that he might share the Glory of
those two great Men, as he did share their Authority. He rashly engaged in the
War against the Parthians, which was fatal to himself, and Arsacidae proving
Romans, and the insatiable Avarice of their General. But the Shame of the Roman
Name was not the worst Effect of the Defeat of Crassus. His Power
counterballanced that of Pompey and Caesar, whom he kept united notwithstanding
all their Aversion. By his Death, the League which hold them was broken. The
Pharsalia by a bloody Battle: Caesar being Conqueror, appeared presently Europe,
in Egypt, in Asia, Mauritania, in Spain, Victor on all sides; Rome, and Brutus
and Cassius thought Rome fell again into the Hands of Mark Antony, Lepidus, and
young Caesar Octavianus, Petit Neven.
Grandson to Julius Caesar, and his Son by Adoption, three insupportable
Tyrants, of whom the Triumvirate, and the Proscriptions do to this day C^sar
guarded Italy, and of a sudden changing his former Cruelties into Mildness and
Gentleness, he made them believe he was induced to it by his Colleagues. The
Remains Brutus and Cassius. Antony and Caesar, after Lepidus, turned themselves
Rome was put to Sea. Caesar gained the Actiack Battle: The Egyptian and Eastern
Forces, which Antony brought along with him dissipated and scattered: He
abandoned by all his Friends, and at last by Cleopatra, Herod the Idumean, who
owed him all things, was forced Judea, which the weakness of old Hyrcanus had
caused to be absolutely lost to the Asmonians. All things gave way to Cesar's
Fortune: Alexandria opened her Gates to him: Egypt became a Roman Province:
Cleopatra, who thought she should not be able to preserve herself, was her own
self-Murtherer after Anthony: Rome stretches out her Arms to Caesar, who
remained, under the Name of Augustus, and under the Title of Emperor, sole
Master of the whole Empire: He subdued near the Pyrenees the revolted
Canta^rians and Asturians: desired Peace of him; the Parthians sent him back
the Standards Crassus, with all the Roman Indians sought his Alliance: Rhetians
Grisons, whom their very Mountains Pannonia paid their Acknowledgments to him:
Germany dreaded him, and Veser received his Laws. Victorious thus both by Sea
and Land, he shuts up the Temple of Janus. All the World

AND now we are come to those times, X. Epoch. The Birth of Jesus Christ. 7,
and last Age of the World.
so much desired by our Fathers, of the Advent of the Messiah. That name
signifies the Christ, or the Lord's Anointed; and Jesus Christ deserves it in a
threefold Respect, viz. as a Prophet, as a Priest, Years of J. C.
and as a King. It is not fully agreed, the precise year of his coming into the
World, but this is assented to, that his true Birth does some years precede our
common Era, or account, which yet nevertheless we follow with all others, for
a greater Ease and Convenience. But without any further dispute about the year
of our Lord and Savior's Birth, let it be sufficient, that we know it happened
about the Year 4000. of the World. Some attribute it to a little before, there
are others will have it a little after, and others again will needs have this
to be the precise Year; and there are others that make as much uncertainty
about the Years of the World, as about this of the Birth of our Lord. But
whenever it was, it is sure 'twas much about this time, 1000. Years after the
Dedication of the Temple, and the 754 year of Rome, that Jesus Christ, the Son
of God in Eternity, the Son of Abraham and David in time was born of a Virgin.
This of all is the most considerable Epoch, not only for the importance of so
great an Event, but also because it is that from whence there are many Ages
that Christians begin to count their Years. It has this likewise remarkable in
it, that it agrees within a very little with the time when Rome returned to the
State of Monarchy, under the peaceable Empire of Augustus. All the Arts
flourished in his time, and the Latin Poetry was brought to its last Perfection
by Virgil and Horace, whom that Prince did not only excite by his Kindnesses
and Liberalities, but likewise by giving them a free and easy access to his
Presence. The Birth of Jesus Christ was quickly attended with the Death of
Herod. His Kingdom was divided between Romans.

Augustus ended his Reign with great honor and glory. Tiberius, whom he had
adopted, succeeded him without any repulse or contradiction, and the Empire was
acknowledged to be hereditary in the Family of the Caesar's. Rome had much to
suffer from the cruel Politiques of Tiberius; but the rest of the Empire was
quiet enough. Germanicus, Nephew to Tiberius, appeased the Rebellious Armies,
refused the Empire, Arminius, extended his Conquests even to the Elbe; and
having got to himself the Love of those People, the Jealousy of his barbarous
Uncle caused him to be taken off either by Chagrin.
Melancholy Tiberius, St. John Baptist There began with the seventy weeks of
Daniel, the Preaching of Jesus Christ. This last Week was the most important,
and the most observable. Daniel had divided it from the rest, as the Week or
Alliance was to be confirmed, Daniel iv. 37.
and in the midst of which the ancient Sacrifices were to lose their efficacy
and virtue. It may be called the week of Mysteries. Jesus Christ established
his Mission and his Doctrine then by innumerable Miracles, and at last by his
Death. It Daniel's last Week, and this great Week was in this manner justly cut
in the midst by his Death.

Thus it is easy to make up the Computation of the VVeeks, or rather it is
already made up. There remains nothing now but to add to the 453 Years, which
we shall find from the 300th. year of Rome, and the twentieth of Artaxerxes
down to the beginning of the common Era, the thirty Years of that Era, which
we see comes down to the fifteenth year of Tiberius, and to the Baptism of our
Lord: These two Sums will make up 483 years; the seven Years still remain to
complete the 490. The fourth, which makes the middle, is that in which Jesus
Christ died: and all that Daniel has prophesied, is visibly shut up within the
prescribed term. There is no extraordinary necessity for such an exact
punctilio of Justness, and nothing obliges us to take in this extreme rigor
the Middle observed by Daniel. The most difficult will content themselves in
finding it, in what point soever it be, between the two Extremities: what I say
is, that so those who shall think they have good reason to place either a
little higher, or a little lower, the beginning of Artaxerxes, or the death of
our Lord, might not rack and torment themselves in their calculation, and that
those who would endeavor to embarass and perplex a thing that is clear, with
tricks of Chronology, might be delivered from their unprofitable and
impertinent subtilties.

Matthew. 25.45. Phleg. 13. Olymp. Thal. Hist. 3. Tertullian Apol. 21. Orig. 2.
cont. Cells. and Tr. 35. in Matthew. Eusebius. and Hieron. in Chron. Jul. Afric. Ibid.
The Darkness which covered the whole face of the earth at noonday, and at the
instant when Jesus Christ was crucified, is taken for an ordinary Eclipse by
the Pagan Authors, who have made their remarks upon that memorable Event. But
the first Christians, that spoke of it to the Romans, as of a Prodigy taken
notice of, not only by their Authors, but also by the public Registers, have
shown, that neither at the time of the full Moon, when Jesus Christ dyed, nor
in all the year when this Eclipse was observed, was it possible for any to fall
out, but what must be supernatural. We have the very words of Phlegon, Adrian's
Freed-man, cited at a time when his Book was every where public and extant, as
well as the Syriac Histories of Thallus who followed him; and the fourth year
of the 202. Olympiad observed in the Annals of Phlegon, is that of the death of
our Lord.

To accomplish the Mysteries, Jesus Christ arose from his Grave on the Third
day; he appeared to his Disciples; he ascended up into to heaven in their
presence; he sent them down the Holy Spirit; the Church is formed; Persecution
begins; St. Stephen is stoned; St. Paul is converted. A little after Tiberius
dies. Calig^la his Grandson, and Son by adoption, Jerusalem. Cher^as frees the
world from this Monster Claudius reigns notwithstanding his Stupidity. He is
dishonored by Messalina Agrippina, Germanicus. Acts 15.50.
The Apostles keep the Council of Jerusalem, where St. Peter speaks first as he
does every where else. The converted Gentiles are there freed from the
Ceremonies of the Law. The Sentence of it is pronounced in the name of the Holy
Ghost, and the Church of St. Paul, Acts ^6.4.
and St. Barnabas carry the Decree of the Council to the Churches, and teach
the faithful to submit to them. Such was the way of the first Council. The
stupid Emperor disinherits his Son Britannicus, and adopts Nero the Son of
Agrippina. In requital she poisons this too Corbulo got all the Honor of that
Reign by Parthians Armenians. Nero at the same time began etc.
This was the first He caused St. Peter and St. Paul to dye at Rome. But as at
the same time he persecuted Rome, and in Rome it self, by dreadful and terrible
combats Galba, Otho and Vitellius perished in them: The afflicted Empire came a
little to it self under Vespasian, and enjoyed some rest. But the Jews were put
to extremities. Jerusalem was taken and burnt. Titus, the Son and Successor of
Vespasian gave to the world but a Nero was seen to be revived in the Person of
Domitian. The John coming out of hot boiling Oil, was banished into the Isle of
Patmos, where he wrote his Revelations. A little after he wrote his Gospel, at
about 90 years of Age, and joined the Quality of an Evangelist to that of being
both Then the Persecution was most universal and bloody; and so the hatred of
the Infidels still resolute to destroy the Church, still grew on from time to
time to new furies and outrages. And it was by these Renewals of their
violences and cruelties, that the Ecclesiastical Writers counted the ten
Persecutions under the ten Emperors. Yet under such long and tedious Sufferings
did not the Christians ever make the least Sedition. Among all the faithful,
the Bishops still had the most vigorous assaults. Among all the Churches, the
Church of Rome was persecuted with the most of violence; and Thirty Popes
confirmed by their blood the Gospel which they taught to all the Earth.
Domitian is killed: The Empire begins to respire and breath again under Nerva.
His great age did not permit Trajan for his Successor. The Empire Dacii, and
Decebalus their Parthians a King and made Rome. Oh happy Man, whom Drunkenness
and his infamous Loves, such deplorable vices in so great a Prince, never To
these advantageous times for the Commonweal succeeded those of Adrian, equally
compounded of good and bad. This Prince kept up the Military Discipline, lived
himself a military Life, and with abundance of frugality, supported the
Provinces, made the Arts to flourish, and Greece which was Barbarians were
Jerusalem, to which he gave his Aelia happened to it: but he banished the Jews
out of it, who were always rebellious to the Empire; and those being obstinate
found him an unrelenting Avenger. By his Antinous, Antoninus Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus had taught him, that the saving of one single Citizen was much to be
preferred to the defeating and getting the victory over a Parthians and the
Marcomanni felt the valor of Marcus Aurelius. The latter were somewhat
Germans, whom this Emperor had just subdued a little before his death. By the
virtue of the Antoninus's, that name became the delight of the Romans. And the
Glory of so indear'd a Name was not effaced, either by the softness and
effeminacy of Iucius Verus, Brother to Marcus Aurelius, and his Colleague in the
Empire, or by the Brutalities of Commodus his Son, and Successor. This latter
unworthy to be the Offspring of such a Father, forgot both the Instructions
and Examples of him; the Senate and the People abhorred him; his most fawning
and assiduous Pertinax, a vigorous Asserter of the Military Discipline, saw him
sacrificed to the fury of licentious Soldiers, that but a little before had
raised him, whether he would or no, to the Sovereign Power. The Empire being
put to an Outcry by the Army, soon found a Purchaser. The Lawyer Didius
Julianus adventured upon that bold bargain, though it cost him his Life;
Severus Africanus made him to be killed, Pertinax, passed from East to Syria,
in Gaul and in Great Britain. etc.
The hasty Conqueror equaled Caesar by his Victories; but he did not imitate
Bassian, or Caracalla, Alexander, Geta, an En^ (...) as well as himself, even
in the bosom (...) ^^lia, their common Mother, spent his Lif^ in Cruelty and
Slaughters, and at length drew upon himself a Tragical Death. Sever^s had got
for him the heart of the Soldiers and Antoninus, but he knew not how to keep up
that honor. The Syrian Heliogabalus, or rather Alagabalus his Son, or at least
reputed for such (though the Name of Antoninus had at first procured him the
hearts of the Soldiers, and the victory over Macrinus) soon after by his
Infamies became the horror of Mankind, and Alexander Severus, the Son of
Mameus, his Kinsman and Successor, lived too little a while for the happiness
of the world. He complained that he was more put to it to keep his Soldiers in
good order, than he was to conquer his Enemies. Artaxerxes the Persian slew his
Master Artabanus, the last King of the Parthians, and re-established the Empire
of the Persians in the East.

About these times the Church, as yet but in its Minority, Tertull. adv. Jud.
7. Apolog. 37.
run over the whole Earth, and not only in the East, where it took its first
Rise, that is to say, Palestine, Syria, Egypt, lesser Asia, and Greece; but
also in the West, besides Italy, the several Nations of the Gauls, all the
Spanish Provinces, Africa, Germany, Great Britain, in those Places, that were
impenetrable to the Roman Arms; and also out of the Empire, Armenia, Persia,
the Indies, the greatest Barbarians, the Sarmatians, the Dacians, the
Scythians, the Moors, the Getulians, and even to the most unknown Islands. The
Blood of the Martyrs rendered it fruitful. Under Trajan, Saint Ignatius the
Bishop Antiochus was exposed to wild Beasts. Marcus Aurelius unhappily
prepossessed with the Calumnies wherewith Christianity was charged, caused to
be put to Death Saint Justin the Philosopher, and the Apologist Polycarpus,
Bishop of Smyrna, St. John's Disciple, about fourscore Years of Age, was
condemned to the Flames under the same Prince. The holy Martyrs of Lion and
Vienna suffered unheard of Punishments, following the Example of St. Photin
their Bishop, of ninety Gallican Church filled all the World with its Fame and
Glory. Ireneus the Disciple of St. Polycarpus, and St. Photin's Successor,
imitated his Predeccessor, and dyed a Martyr under Severus, with a great Number
of the Fideles) Faithful of his Church; sometimes the Marcus Aurelius suffered
in Germany, there was a Christian Legion obtained such a Shower as was enough
to quench the Thirst of all his Army, and it was so followed with Thunder, that
it frightened all his Enemies. The name of Thunderstriking was given, or rather
confirmed to that Legion by this Miracle. The Emperor was so concerned at it,
that he writ to the Senate in Favor of the Christians. At last the Southsayers
Persuasions were to attribute to their Gods, and to their Prayers, a Miracle
which the Heathens never thought so much as to desire. Other Causes suspended
or slackened the Persecution for a little while; but Superstition, a Vice,
which Marcus Aurelius had not the Power to resist, the common Hatred, and the
Calumnies that were cast upon the Christians, quickly prevailed again. The Fury
and Rage of the Heathens was re-kindled, and the whole Empire did as it were
swim in the Blood of Martyrs. Still their Doctrine went on and attended their
Sufferings. In Severus his time, and some while after, Tertullian Priest of
Carthage, illuminated the Church by his Writings, defended it by a most
admirable Apologism, and left it at last, being blinded by an haughty Severity,
and seduced by the Visions of the false Prophet Montanus. Some time, but not
long after, Clemens Alexandrinus endeavored to pull up the Antiquities of
Heathenism by the Roots, that so he might utterly put an end to them. Origin,
the Son of the Holy Martyr Leonidas, made himself famous throughout all the
Church, even from his most tender Years, and taught great Truths, though they
were mixed with several Errors. The Philosopher Ammonius joined the Platonic
Philosophy to Religion, and gained to himself the Respect of the Heathens. In
the mean while the Valentinians, the Gnostics, and the other impious Sects,
set up their false Traditions against the Gospel: Iren. lib. iii. 1. 2, 3. De
prasc. adv. Har. c. 36.
St. Ireneus opposed the Tradition and the Authority of the Apostolic Churches
to theirs, especially that of Rome, founded upon the Apostles St. Peter, and
St. Paul. Tertullian did the same. The Church is not shaken, neither by
Heresies, nor by Schisms, nor by the Fall of our most eminent Doctors. The
Holiness of her Conduct is so clear and perspicuous, that she forces even her
Enemies to break forth into Praises of her.

The Affairs of the Empire are imbroyled Alexander, the Tyrant Maximinus that
had killed him, made himself Master, though he was of Gothic Race. The Senate
set up four Emperors against him, who died all within less than two Years.
Among them Gordians, the Father and Son, Roman People. The Gordian their Son,
although he was extremely young, yet showed the Wisdom of a gained Experience,
and defended with great Difficulty against the Persians, the Empire weakened by
those manifold Divisions. He had regained from them several very important
Places. But Philip Arabius killed Sapor King of Persia. He was the first of the
Romans that had by Treaty parted with any Lands of the Empire. It Is said He
embraced the Christian Religion, and at such a time, when on the sudden he had
got the better, and indeed he was favorable to the Christians. In hatred to
this Emperor, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 39.
Decius, who slew him, renewed the Persecution with more of Violence than ever.
The Church increased on all sides, principally among Gauls, and the Empire
soon lost Decius, Greg. Tur. l. 1. Hist. franc. 28.
who with great Resolution and Vigor Gallus and Volusian went Emilius was but
just seen as it were: The Sovereign Power was given to Valerianus, and that
Venerable old Man ascended to it through all the Dignities. He was only Cruel
to the Christians. Under Stephen, and St. Cyprian Carthage, notwithstanding all
their Disputes, which yet broke not off their Correspondence, received both of
them the same Crown. St. Cyprian's Error, which rejected Baptism, given by the
Heretics, neither hurt him, nor the Church. The Tradition of the Holy See
supported it self by its own Force against the specious Arguments, and against
the Authority of so great a Man, although there were other very great Men that
defended the same Doctrine. Another Dispute did more Mischief. Sabellius Eusebius.
Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 6.
and St. Denis, Bishop of Alexandria, discovered to Pope Sixtus II. the Errors
of this arch-Heretick. This Pope Stephen, his Predecessor: He was beheaded, and
left a very great Contest to be maintained by his Deacon St. Laurence. Then was
it that the Barbarians began to appear. Burguignions, and the other People of
Germany, the Goths formerly called the Geti, and other People that inhabited
toward the Euxine Sea, and beyond the Danube, came into Europe: The East was
invaded by the Scythians, Asiaticks, and the Persians. These overcame
Valerianus, whom they afterward took by a piece of Treachery, and after they
had let him linger out his Life in a painful Slavery, they flayed him, to make
his torn-off-Skin serve them for a Monument of their Victory. Gallian his Son
and Colleague, quite lost all Odenat King of Palmyra, an ancient City, whose
Founder was Solomon, was the most illustrious of them all. He rescued the
Eastern Provinces from the Hands of the Barbarians, and made himself be owned
and dreaded. His Wife Zenobia marched with him at the head of the Armies, which
she commanded singly after his Death, and rendered her self Famous over all
that part of the World for having joined Chastity to Beauty, and Wisdom and
Knowledge to Valor. Claudius II. Aurelianus after him re-established the Goths,
with the Germans, by their signal Victories, Zenobia was keeping to her
Children the Conquests of their Father. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. 7. c. 27. and seq.
Athan. ad Solit. Theod. l. 2. haer. fab. 8. Niceph. lib. 6. c. 27.
This Princess was leaning much to Judaism. To gain her absolutely, Paul of
Samosates Bishop of Antiochus, a vain and a restless Man, taught his Judaical
Opinion concerning the Pers^n of Jesus Christ, whom he made to be but a mere
Man. After a long Dissimulation of this so new a Doctrine, he was convinced,
and condemned to the Council of Antiochus. The Queen Zenohia maintained the War
against Aurelianus, who thought it no disdain to him to triumph over a Woman,
so eminently famous as she was. Amidst his perpetual Combats, he knew how to
make his Soldiers keep the Roman Discipline, and he showed, that in following
the ancient Orders, and the ancient Frugality, great Arms might be managed
both within and without, Hist. Aug A^^rel. c. 7. Flor. c. 2. Prob. c. 11, 12.
firm. etc. c. 13.
with very little Charge to the Empire. The Francks began then to make
themselves considerable, and to be somewhat feared. It was a Combination of the
German People who dwelt along the Rhine. Their Name shows that they were united
through a Love to their Liberty. Aurelianus had beaten them, being distinct and
by themselves, and kept them in fear, being Emperor. But such a Prince as he
was, made himself to be hated Aurelianus; and so the Senate reestablished tn
its ancient Right, chose Tacitus. This new Prince was venerable by his Age, by
his Virtue; but he became odious by the Violences of a Kinsman, to whom he gave
the Command of the Army, and he died with him in a Sedition the sixth Month of
his Reign. Thus his Elevation made only way to precipitate the Course of his
Life. His Brother Florianus pretended Florianus was killed, and Probus forced
by the Soldiers to receive the Empire, although he threatened that he would
make them live in order. Every thing yielded to so great a Captain: The Germans
and the Francks, who attempted to enter into the Gauls, were driven back; and
in the East, as well as the West, all the Barbarians did homage to the Roman
Arms. This Warrior, so much dreaded, yet aspired Carus, who was no less zealous
than he for the Discipline. This valiant Barbarians, to whom the Death of
Probus had given Courage. He went into the East, to fight the Persians, with
Numerian his second Son, and set against the Enemies of the North side his
eldest Son Carinus, whom he nominated Caesar. That was the highest Dignity next
to his own, and the nearest Step to come to the Empire: All the East trembled
before Carus: Mesopotamia submits to him: The divided Persians were not able to
resist him. So that whilst all things yielded to him, Heaven strikes him with a
Thunderclap. By too much weeping for the loss of this Father, Numerian had
even like to have lost his Eyes. But what will not the desire of reigning
prompt Aper kills him: But Dioclesian revenged his Death, and at last came to
the Empire, which, with Carinus awakened himself, notwithstanding his
Effeminacy, and beat Dioclesian; but in pursuing those that fled, he was slain
by one of his own Servant, whose Wife he had abused. Thus the Empire was, as it
were, at once rid of the most violent and the most dissolute of all Men.
Dioclesian governed vigorously, but yet with such a Maximian Emperor with him,
but yet nevertheless he knew how to keep to himself Caesar. Constantius
Chlorus, and Galerius, were raised to this high Honor. The four Princes did
scarce bear up the Burden of so many Wars. Dioclesian fled from Rome, which he
found to be too free, and established himself at Nicomedia, where he made
himself to be adored after the Eastern manner. In the mean time the Persians
being overcome by Galerius, left great Provinces and more Kingdoms to the
Romans. After Galerius would no longer be subject, and disdained the Name of
Caesar. He began to fright Maximian. A grievous and a long Sickness had brought
down the haughty Spirit of Dioclesian, Eusebius. Hist. l. 8.13. Orat. Constable. ad
Sanct. cat. 25. Lact. de mort. persec. c. 17.18.
and Galerius, although he was his Son-in-Law, forced him to abondon the
Empire. It was neccessary for Maximian to follow his Example. Thus the Empire
came to be managed between Constantius Chlorus, and Galerius; and two new
Cesars, Severus and Maximin, were created in their Placcs by the Emperors, who
deposed themselves. The Gauls, Spain, and Great Britain were happy, but it was
but for a very little while, under Constanius Chlorus, an Enemy to Exactions,
and therefore being accused for ruining the Treasury, he showed that he had
immense Treasures in the Affections of his Subjects. The rest of the Empire
suffered much under so many Emperors and Cesars. Officers grew numerous with
the Princes: Expenses and Exactions were infinite. Young Constantine, Lact.
ibid. 24.
the Son of Constantius Chlorus, made himself famous: But he found himself in
the hands of Galerius. Every day that Emperor being jealous of his growing
Glory, exposed him to new Perils. He was in a way of Sport to fight with wild
Beats; but yet they wre not so much to be feared as Galerius. Constantine
getting safe out of his Hands, found his Father just expiring. About that
Maxentius the Son of Maximian, and Galerius his Son-in-Law, made himself
Emperor, notwithstanding the Opposition of his Father-in-Law, and Intestine
Divisions were accumulated to the other Evils of State. The Image of
Constantine, who was now come to be his Father's Successor, being carried
according to the old Custom to Rome, was there rejected by the Orders of
Maxentius. Lact. de mort. perfec. c. 26, 27.
The Reception of Images was the usual manner of acknowledging new Princes. On
all sides Preparations were made for War. Caesar Severus, whom Galerius sent
against Maxentius, made him even in Rome to tremble. To be a comfort Maximian.
The ambitious old Man quitted his retreat, whither to his great Grief he was
gone, and in vain did labor to force Dioclesian, his Colleague, out of the
Garden which he had cultivated at Salone. At the Name of Maximian the Emperor,
the Soldiers of Severus the second time abandoned him. The old Emperor caused
him to be killed; and at the same time to fortify himself against Galerius; he
gave his Daughter Fausta to Constantine in Marriage. Lact. ibid. 28, 29, 30,
31, 32.
Galerius also stood in need of a Support after the death of Severus; which
made him resolve to name Licinius Emperor; but that choice did grievously vex
Maximin, who being in the Quality of a Caesar, thought himself nearer to the
supreme Honor. There was nothing could persuade him to submit himself to
Licinius, so that he became independent in the East. There was scarce any thing
remaining to Galerius but Illyria, whither he had made his Retreat, after he
had been driven out of Italy. The rest of the West was obedient to Maximian, to
his Son Maxentius, and to his Son-in-Law Constantine. But he would no longer
have his Sons to be his Companions in the Empire, but strangers. He endeavored
to banish his Son Maxentius from Rome, who banished himself from thence. And
Constantine, that received him among the Gauls, found him no less perfidious.
After diverse Maximian made one (and it was the last) Conspiracy, in which he
thought he had engaged his Daughter Fausta against her Husband: but she
deceived him; and Maximian, who did really believe he had killed Constantine,
when he had only killed the Eunuch, whom she had caused to lie in his Bed, was
forced in his own defense to be a felo de se. Here was a new War kindled, Lact.
ib. 42. 43.
Maxentius, under pretense of revenging his Father, declared against
Constantine, who was marching with his Troops to Rome. At the same time he
caused the Status of Maximian to be thrown down: Those of Dioclesian, which
were joined to them, had the same Fate. The Repose of Dioclesian was disturbed
at this contempt, and he died a little while after, as much through Vexation as
through old Age.

About this time Rome, always an Enemy to Christianity, made the last effort to
stifle it quite, and he did indeed establish it. Eusebius. 8. Hist. Eccl. 16. de
vit. Constant. l. 57. Lact. de mort. persec. 9. and seq.
Galerius taken notice of by the Historians for the Author of the last
Persecution, two years before he had obliged Dioclesian to leave the Empire,
forced him to make that bloody Edict, which commanded the Christians to be
persecuted more violently than ever. Maximian who hated them, and had never
left tormenting them, stirred up the Magistrates Maximin and Galerius. Every
day new Punishments were invented. The modesty of the Christian Virgins were
no less assaulted than their Faith. They sought for the Bibles with an
extraordinary care, that so they might blot out the memory of them; and the
Christians durst not have them in their houses, nor indeed read them. Thus
after three hundred Years of Persecution, the hatred of the Persecutors became
more sharp and rigorous. The Christians wearied them by their Patience. The
People affected with the holiness of their Lives, turned Converts in great
numbers. Galerius depsaired of ever being able to quash them utterly. Being
struck with Antiochus his Death, and with as false a Repentance. Maximin
continued the Persecution; but Constantine the

XI. Epoch. Constantine, or the Peace of the Church.
THis celebrated Declaration of Constantine happened to be in the 312. year of
our Lord. Whilst he was besieging Maxentius in Rome, a flaming Cross was seen
in the Air by all the People, with an Inscription that promised him the
Victory: He had it also confirmed to him by a Dream. The next day he got that
memorable Battle which defeated Rome of a Tyrant, and the Church of a
Persecutor. The Roman People, and of all the Empire. A little after Maximin was
conquered by Lycinius, who came to an Accommodation with Constantine, and he
agreed on much like the same Terms with Galerius. Peace was given to the
Church. Constantine loaded it with honors and munificences. Success and
victory attended him every where, and the Barbarians were repressed both by
him, and by his Children. In the mean while Licinius breaks with him, and so
renews the Persecution. But being beaten both by Sea and Land, he was forced to
leave the Empire, and at last he lost his Life. About this time Constantine
assembled at Nice in Bythinia the first General Council, where Arius, that was
an utter Enemy to the Divinity of Christ, and there they made the Creed, where
the Consubstantiality of the Father and the Son was established. The Priests of
the Roman Church sent by Pope St. Sylvester preceded all the Bishops of that
Assembly; and an Ancient Greek Author mentions among the Legates of the Holy
See, Gel. Cyric. Hist. Conc. Nic. lib. ii. 6. 27.
the Famous Osi^s Bishop of Cordoua, who was President of that Council.
Constantine took his Seat there, and received their Decisions as an Oracle from
Heaven. The Arians concealed their Errors, and by their dissimulations
recovered his good Favor. Whilst that his valor kept the Empire in Sovereign
Tranquillity, Fausta his Wife Crispus the Son of Constantine, but by another
marriage, being accused by this his Stepmother, for offering to violate her,
had the misfortune was to find his Father inflexible. But his death was quickly
revenged. Fausta convicted was suffocated in the Bath. But Constantine, though
he was dishonored by the malice of his Wife, yet at the same time received a
great deal of Honor, by the Piety of his Mother. She discovered among the
Ruins of the Old Jerusalem the True Cross that has been so fruitful in working
of Miracles. The Holy Sepulcher was likewise found. The New City of Jerusalem
which Adrian had caused to be built. The place where our Savior of the World
was born, and all the other holy Places were adorned with stately Temples by
Helena and Constantine. Four Bysantium, which he called Constantinople, and
made it to be the second Seat of the Empire. The peaceable Church under
Constantine was miserably afflicted in Persia. An infinite number of Sapor, and
to bring him over to Christianity. Constantine's Protection gave to the
persecuted Christians a very favorable retreat. Constantine, Constantius and
Constans. But that Agreement was quickly troubled. Constantine dyed in the War
he had with his Brother Constance for the Limits of the Constantius and
Constance were not much longer united. Constance held the Nicene Faith, which
Constantius opposed. Then the Church admired the long and wonderful Sufferings
of St. Athanasius the Patriarch of Alexandria, and the defender of the Nicene
Council. Being driven from his See by Constantius, Soc. Hist. Eccl. ii. 15.
Sozom. iii. 8.
he was canonically re-invested by Pope St. Julius the first, whose Decree
Constance ratifyed and confirmed. That good Prince lived not long. The Tyrant
Magnentius traitorously killed him; but Constantius, he killed Valenti^s the
Arrian Bishop secretly being advertised Constantius that the Tyrant's Army was
upon it is flight, and made the weak Emperor to believe that this he knew by
Revelation. Upon this false Report Constantius delivers himself to the Arrians.
The Orthodox Bishops are banished from their Sees; the whole Church is filled
with confusion and trouble; the constancy of Pop Liberius is overcome by the
vexations of the exile; torments force the Aged Osius Rimini so strong at
first, no longer could hold out, but yields by surprise and violence: Nothing
is done according to order and method. The Emperor's Authority is now the only
Law: But the Arrians who did all by that means, could not agree amongst
themselves, but were every day changing their Creed: That of Nice continued:
St. Athanasius, and St. Hilary Bishop of Poictiers, it is chief Defenders made
themselves famous over all the Earth, whilst the Emperor Constantius was so
wholly taken up about the affairs of Arianism, that he was carel^ss and
negligent of those of the Empire, the Persians got very considerable
Advantages. The Germans and the Francs attempted on all Gauls. Julian, one of
the Emper^rs Kinsmen hindered them and beat them. The Emperor himself defeated
the Samatu, and went against the Persians. There began the Revolt of Julian
against the Emperor, his Apostasy, the Death of Constantius, the Reign of
Julian, his equitable Persia, where he had too rashly and precipitately engaged
himself. Jovianus his Successor, a zealous Christian sound things very sad and
desperate, and only lived to conclude a shameful Valentinian made War like a
mighty Captain he brought up his Son Gratianus to it very young, kept up the
Military Discipline, beat the Barbanians, fortified the Fronners of the Empire,
and protected the Nicene Faith in the West. Valentius his Brother, whom he made
his Colleague, persecuted it in the East; and not being able to gain over, nor
to crush St. Basil, and St. Gregory of Nazianzen, he despaired of ever being
able to conquer it. There were some Arrians that joined new Errors to the
ancient. D^gmata and precepts of their Sect. Ae^^us an Arrian Priest, is taken
notice of in the Writings of the Fathers, as the Author of a new Heresy,
Epiph. har. 75. Aug. haer. 53.
for having equalized the Priesthood to the Episcopacy; and for adjudging the
Prayers and Oblations which the whole Church used to put up for the Dead, to be
unavailable and insignificant. A third Error of this Grand Heretic, was his
reckoning among the Servitudes of the Law, the keeping of certain appointed
Fasts, and for this being of opinion, that Fasts should be always free and
voluntary. He lived when St. Epiphanius made himself so famous by his History
of Heresies, where he among the rest is refuted. St. Martin Tours, and he
filled all the World with the noise of his Holiness and his Miracles, during
his life, and after his death Valentinian dyed, after a most fierce and violent
Harangue which he made to the Enemies of the Empire; his passionate Impetuosity
which made him so much feared by others, proved fatal to himself. His Successor
Gratianus without any Invidiousness of the exaltation of his young Brother
Valentinian II. who was made Emperor though he was but nine years of age. His
Mother Justina, the Protectress of the Arrians, had the Government during his
Minority. There Goths against Valentius; that Prince forsaking the Persians to
repress the Rebels Gratianus running to him after he had got a signal Victory
over the Germans. Valentius, resolving to conquer singly, hastened the fight,
where he was killed near to Adrianople; the Goths being victorious, burn him in
a Town whither he had retired. Gratianus being oppressed with the weight of
Affairs associated the Great Theodosius to the Empire, and left the East to his
Conduct. The Goths are overcome; Barbarians are kept in awe; and that which
Theodosius looked upon as no less, the Macedonian Heretics, who denied the
Divinity of the Holy Ghost, were condemned Constantinople. And now there was
only the Greek Church: the consent of all the West, and of Pope Damasus, made
him to call the Second General Council. Whilst Theodosius governed with so much
Power and Success, Gratianus who Maximus. The Church and the Empire bewailed
Gauls, and seemed to be satisfied in that division. The Empress Justina under
her Son's Name set forth Proclamations in favor of Arrianism. St. Ambrose
Bishop of Milan opposed it with his holy Doctrine, Prayers and Patience; and
knew that by such Arms he should not only preserve to the Church the Basiliques.
Royal Palaces, which the Heretics would fain have possessed, but also that he
should bring over the young Emperor to him. In the mean while Maximus was in
action, and Justina found nothing more faithful than the Bishop whom she
treated notwithstanding as a Rebel: She sent him to the Tyrant, whom his
Discourses could not bend. The young Valentinian is forced to betake himself to
flight with his Mother. Maximus is Master at Rome, where he sets up again the
Sacrifices unto false Gods in complaisance for the Senate, as yet almost all
Pagan. After he had got possession of all Theodosius, aided by the Franks
overcame him in Pannonia, besieged him in Aquileia, and suffered him to be
killed by his Soldiers. And now being absolute Master of both Empires, he gave
that of the West to Valentinian, tho he did not enjoy it very long. That young
Prince raised and degraded Arbogastus too fast, who was a Captain of the
Franks, valiant, disinterested, and one that by all manner of crimes was able
Eugenius, who was only good at Discourse, and killed Valentinian, who would no
longer have the proud Frank for his Master. That detestable Fact was committed
near Vienna in the Country of the Gauls. St. Ambrose, whom the young Emperor
had sent for to receive Baptism from his hand, lamented his loss, and had very
good hopes of his Salvation. His death not long remain unpunished. A very
manifest Miracle gave to Theodosius the Eugenius, and over the false Gods,
whose worship he had anew set up. Eugenius was taken, and must be sacrificed to
the Public Vengeance, that so the Rebellion might be quashed by his death. The
fierce and resolute Arbogastus became his own Murderer, rather than he would
seek to the clemency of the Conqueror, which all the other Rebels came to
embrace. Theodosius now sole Emperor was the joy and admiration of all the
Universe. He confirmed Religion; put to silence Heretics; abolished the corrupt
and impure Sacrifice of the Heathen; corrected vicious effeminacies, and
Ambrose, the famous Doctor of the Church, who reproved him for his passion, the
only Vice of that great Prince. Though always victorious, yet he never made War,
but when forced to it by necessity. He made the People happy, Jerome, the
Priest, being retired into the sacred solitary of Bethlehem, put himself to
vast labor and pains to explain the Scriptures, read all the Interpreters of
them, searched into all Histories both Sacred and Profane, which might give him
any Light, and out of the Original Hebrew composed that Version of the Bible
which the Church in general has received under the name of Vulgar. The Empire
which seemed to be invincible under Theodosius, changed on the sudden under
his two Sons. Arcadius had the East, and Honorius the West; both of them
governed by their Ministers, they made their Power to serve their own
particular Interests. Eufinus and Eutropius successively favored by Arcadius,
and each as wicked Eudoxa made him to persecute S. John the Patriarch of
Constantinople, and the Light of the East. Pope S. Innocentius, and all the
West, kept up that great Bishop against Theophilus, the Patriarch of
Alexandria, and Minister of the Empress's cruelties. The West was troubled with
the Inundation of the Barbarians. Radagasus a Goth and Heathen ravaged Italy.
etc.
The Vandals a Gothic and Arrian Nation, seized on one part of Gallia, and so
spread themselves in Spain. Alaricus King of the Visigoths an Arrian People
forced Honorius to resign those great Provinces to him, which were already
possessed by the Vandals. Stilicon, ^mbarassed with so many Barbarians, beat
them, managed them, held secret Intelligences, and broke with them, sacrificed
all to his Interest, and notwithstanding kept the Empire, which he was resolved
to usurp. In the mean Arcadius dyed, and thought the East so stripped of good
Subjects, that he left his Son Theodosius of about eight years old, to the
Guardianship of Isdegerdus King of Persia. But Pulcheria, the young Emperor's
Sister, did believe she was capable of very great Affairs. The Empire of
Theodosius upheld it self by the prudence and piety of this Princess. That of
Honorius seemed to be near its last ruin; He caused Stilicon to be put to
death, and then knew not where to fill the place with so great and able a
Minister. The Constantine, the absolute loss of Gallia and Spain, the taking
and sacking of Rome by the Arms of Allaricus, and the Visigoths were the
attendances upon Stilicon's death. Ataulphus, more furious than Alaricus
pillaged Rome anew, and resolved on nothing less than utterly abolishing the
Roman name: But for the happiness of the Empire, he took Placidia, the Sister
of the Emperor. Goths treated with the Romans, Spain, and reserved Gauls the
Provinces which drew toward the Pyrenees. Their King Vallia wisely managed
those great designs. Spain showed her constancy; and her Faith changed not
under the domination of the Arians. In the mean while the Burgundians, a German
People were got all about the Rhine, from whe^^ by degrees they gained that
Country that still bears their Name. The Franks did not forget themselves;
being resolved to Gallia to them, they raised Pharamond the Son of Marcomir to
the Regality; and the Monarchy of France, being the most Ancient and Noble of
any in the World, began under him. The Honorius dyed without any Issue, and
left the Empire to it self without providing for it. Theodosius named Emperor
his Cousin Valentinian III. Son of Placidia and Constance her Second Husband,
and put him during his Minority under the Tutelage of his Mother, to whom he
gave the Title of Empress. In those times Celestius and Pelagius denied
Original Sin, and the Grace Africa condemned them. The Popes, St. Innocentius
and St. Zozimus, whom Pope St. Celestin followed afterward, authorized the
condemnation, and extended it through all the Universe. St. Austin confounded
those dangerous Heretics, and gave a Light to all the Church by his admirable
Writings. The same Father seconded by St. Prosper his Disciple, stopped the
mouths of the Demi-Pelagians, who attributed the beginning of Justification and
Faith to the peculiar power of Free Will. An Age so unhappy to the Empire, and
wherein so many Heresies sprang up, yet was not unhappy to Christianity. No
trouble shockt it, no heresy corrupted it. The Church, fruitful in great men,
confounded all their Errors. After the Persecutions, God was pleased to make
the Glory of his Martyrs to shine forth conspicuously: all Histories and all
Writings are full of the Miracles which their implored Succor and their
honored Tombs and Sepulchers wrought all the earth over. Vigilantius who
opposed and Hier. cont. Vigil. Genesis Deser. Ecc.
refuted by St. Jerome, was alone without a Follower. The Christian Faith
gathered Strength, and enlargement every day. But the Western Empire could no
longer hold out. Being attacqued by so many Enemies, it was also weakened by
the Jealousies of its Generals. Aetius, Boniface the Count of Africa became
suspected by Placidia. The Count being ill-treated caused Genseric and the
Vandals, whom the Gauls had driven away to come out of Spain, and repented his
calling of them, when it was too late. Africa was taken from the Empire. The
Church suffered very great evils by the violence and cruelty of the Arians, and
saw a World of Heresies rose up: Nestorius, the Patriarch of Constantinople
divided the Person of Jesus Christ; and twenty years after, Eutyches the Abbot
confounded the two Natures of them. St. Cyril the Patriarch Alexandria opposed
Nestorius, who was condemned by Pope St. Celestin. The third General Council of
Ephesus, in execution of this Sentence, deposed Nestorius, and confirmed
Celestin, whom the Part. 2. Conc. Ephesians. act. 1. Sent. Depos. Nestor.
The holy Virgin was acknowledged for the Mother of God, and the Doctrine of St.
Cyril was celebrated throughout the earth; Theodosius, after some
Embarassments, submitted himself to the Council, and banished Nestorius;
Eutyches, who could not otherwise combat this Heresy, than by running himself
into another excess, Leo the Great condemned him, and wholely refuted him by a
Letter which was greatly revered General Council of Chalcedon, where this Great
Pope held the first place as well by his Learning, as by the Authority of his
See, anathematized Eutyches, and Dioscorus the Patriarch of Alexandria his
Protector. The Council's Letter to S. Leo showed that that Pope presided there
by his Legates, as the head over its Members. The Emperor Marcian was himself
present at this great Assembly, Relat. S. Syn. calc. ad Leo. Conc. Part. 3.
following the Example of Constantine, and received the Decisions of it with
the same Respect. A little before Pulcheria had advanced him to the Empire by
marrying him. She was owned as Empress after the death of her Brother, who left
never a Son. But it was necessary for the Empire to have a Master, and the
Virtue of Marcian procured him that Honor. During the time of these two
Councils, Theodoret, Bishop of Cyr made himself famous; and his Doctrine was
without spot, if the violent Writings which he published against St. Cyrill,
had not too much needed Illustrations. He gave them sincerely, and was reckoned
among the Orthodox Bishops. The Gauls began to acknowledge the Francs. Aetius
had defended them against Pharamond, and against Clodion the Hairy: But
Meroveus was more happy, and made there a more solid Establishment, near about
the same time as the English Saxons got the possession of Great Britain. They
gave their Name to it, and found there several Royalties. In the mean time the
Huns, a People of Pannonia, desolated all the World with an immense Army, under
the Conduct of Attila their King, the most dreadful and terrible of all Men.
Aetius, who got the better of him in Gallia, could not prevent his ravaging of
Italy. The Isles of the Adriatic Sea served as a Retreat to Venice raised it
self up out of the midst of the Waters. Pope St. Leo, who was more puissant
than Aetius, and the Roman Armies, made that barbarous King and Heathen to
respect him, and saved Rome from being pillaged: But it was quickly after
exposed by the Debauches of its Emperor Valentinian. Maximus, Aetius, the only
Bullwark of the Empire, to be put to death. Maximus, the Author of this Murder,
stirs up Aetius his Friends to revenge it, and so the Emperor came to be
killed. By these Steps he got to the Throne, and forces the Empress Eudoxia,
the Daughter of Theodosius the Younger, to marry him. To deliver herself out of
his Hands, she was not afraid to run into those of Genseric. Rome now became a
Prey to Barbary; It was only S. Leo that prevented all there from being put to
Fire and Sword: The People tore Maximus to pieces, and only received that sad
Consolation in all their Miseries. All is out of Order in the West, several
Emperors are set up there, and pulled down again almost at one and the same
time. Majorianus made himself the most Considerable. Avitus very scurvily
preserved his Reputation, and saved himself by a Bishopric. The Gauls were no
longer to be defended against Merovius, nor against Childerick his Son. But the
latter had like Gauls. The Eastern Leo the Thracian, 's Successor, and under
Zeno, Leo's. Son-in-Law and Successor. The Revolt of Basiliscus, which was soon
quasht, gave but a short disturbance to this Empire: But the Western Empire
went to decay irrecoverably. Augustus, who was called Augustulus, the Son of
Orestes, was the last Emperor owned at Rome, and immediately after he was
deposed by Odoacres King of the Heruleans. These were People come from the
Euxine Sea, whose Government was but of a short duration. In the East, the
Emperor Zeno attempted to signalize himself in an unheard of manner. He was the
first of all the Emperors who concerned himself in regulating the Questions of
Faith. Whilst the Demi-Eutychians opposed the Council of Chalcedon, he
published against the Council his Henotick, that is to say, his Decree of Union
detested by the Catholics, and condemned by Pope Felix the III. The Heruleans
Rome by Theodorick King of the Ostrogoths, that is to Eastern Goths, who
founded the Kingdom of Italy, and left, though an Arian, a pretty free Exercise
to the Catholic Religion. The Emperor Anastasius was some trouble to it in the
East. He followed the Zeno his Predecessor, and heartened Italy was all
obedient to Theodorick. Odoacres pressed into Ravenna, endeavored to save
himself by a Treaty, which Theodorick did not at all regard, and the Heruleans
were forced to resign up all. Theodorick, besides Italy, did likewise keep
Provence. In his time St. Bennet, being in Italy, retired into a Desert, East
do pay to that of St. Basil. The Romans completed the Ruin of the Gauls by the
Victories of Clovis the Son of Chilperick. Germans the Battle of Tolbiac, by
the Vow he made of embracing the Christian Religion, to which his Wife Clotilda
never ceased her Persuasions. She was of the House of the Kings of Bu^gundy,
and a most Catholic Zelot, though her Family and Nation were Arrian. Clovis
instructed by St. Vaast, was baptized at Reims, with his Franks, by St. Remy
Bishop of that ancient Metropolis. Of all the Princes of the most Christian to
be derived to all his Successors. By the Battle in which with his own Hand he
killed Alarick King of the Visigoths, Tholo^se and Aquitain were joined to his
Kingdom. But the Victory of the Ostrogoths Pyrenees, and the end of his Reign
defaced somewhat the Glory of his great beginnings. His four Sons divided the
Kingdom, Anastasius dyed Justin, of mean Extract, but a Man of parts, and a
great Catholic, was made Emperor by the Senate. He and all his People submitted
to the Decrees of Pope St. Hormisdas, and so put an end to the Troubles of the
Eastern Churches. In his time B^etius, a Man famous for his Learning, as well
as his Birth, Symmachus his Father-in-Law, both advanced to the highest Offices
of Government, were sacrificed to the Jealousy of Theodorick, who groundlessly
suspected them for conspiring against the State. The King being afterward
troubled in his mind for this bloody Fact he had done, thought he saw the Head
of Symmachus in a Dish, which was brought up to his Table, and soon after dyed.
Amalasonta his Daughter, Mother of Al^ricus, who succeeded to the Kingdom by
the death of his Grandfather, was hindered by the Goths from bringing up this
young Prince in the Instructions which his Birth both challenged and deserved;
and being forced to abandon him to Persons of his own Age, she foresaw his
Ruin, without being able to do any thing to prevent it. The Year after Justin
dyed, after he had associated to the Empire his Nephew Justinian, whose long
Reign is celebrated by the Labors of Tribonianus, the compiler of the Roman
Law, and by the Exploits of Belisarius, and Narses. Those two famous Persians,
defeated the Ostrogoths and the Vandals; and rendered to Africa, Italy, and
Rome; but France increased. After a long War Childebert and Clothaire, the Sons
of Clovis, conquered the Kingdom of Burg^ndy, and at the same time sacrificed
to their Ambition the younger Sons of their Brother Clodomir, whose Kingdom
they divided between themselves. Some time after, and whilst Belisarius was so
vigorously attacking the Ostrogoths, what they had in the Country of the
Gauls, was left to the French. France extended it self then a good way beyond
the Rhine; but the Partages of Princes, which made up so many Kingdoms, kept it
from being reunited under one and the same Dominion. Its chief parts were
Neustria, that is to say Western France; and Austrasia, Eastern France. The
same year that Rome was re-taken by Narses, Justinian caused the fifth general
Council to be held at Constantinople, which confirmed those that went before
it, and condemned some Writings that seemed favorable to Nestorius. That is
what we call the three Chapters, because of the three Authors long since dead,
whereof they then treated. It condemn the Memory and the Writings of Theodorus
Bishop of Mopsueste, a Letter of Ibas Bishop of Edessa, and among Theodoret his
Writings, those he had drawn up against St. Cyrill. The Books of Origin which
pestered all the East for one whole Age, were also reprobated. This Council
which began with but ill designs, yet had a happy Conclusion, and was received
by the Holy See, which at first had opposed it. Narses, who had taken Italy
from the Goths, defended it against the French, and obtained an absolute
Victory over Bucelin General of the Troops of Austrasia. Yet notwithstanding
all these Advantages. Italy did not long remain under the Government of
Emperors. Under Justin II. Nephew of Justinian, and Narses, the Kingdom of
Lombardy was founded by Alboun: He took Milan and Pavia; Rome and Ravenna were
scarce safe from his Hands, and the Lombards put the Romans to extreme
sufferings Rome was but poorly assisted Scythia, the Saracens, a People of
Arabia, and the Persians more than all the other grievously tormented on all
sides in the East. Justin, who only believed himself and his Passions, was
always beaten by the Persians, and by their King Chosroes. His resentment of so
many Losses put him into a Sophia governed the Empire. This unhappy Prince too
late recovered into his good Senses, and confessed, as he was dying, the Malice
of his Flatterers. After him, Tiberius II. whom he had named Emperor, repressed
the Enemies, comforted the People, and enriched Mauritius the Cappadocian,
General of his Armies, broke the heart of the proud Chosroes. Those were
recompensed by the Empire which Tiberius gave him at his death with his
Daughter Constantina. At that time the Ambitious Fredegunda, Wife to King
Chilperick the first, put all France into a Combustion; and engaged all the
French King in most bloody and cruel Wars: In the midst of the Miseries of
Italy, and whilst Rome was visited with a most Gregory the Great was advanced,
maugre all his resistance, to the Sea of St. Peter: That great Pope stayed the
Plague by his devout Prayers, instructed Emperors, and did absolutely make a
just Obedience to be paid to them; comforted Africa, and fortified it;
confirmed in Spain the Visigoths converted from Arianisme, and Ricardes the
Catholic, who was just got in again into the Bosom of the Church; converted
England, reformed the Discipline in France, whose Kings being always Orthodox,
he exalted above all Kings in the World. He overcame the Lombards; saved Rome
and Italy, which the Emperors could give no assistance to, suppressed the
growing Pride of the Patriarchs of Constantinople; illuminated the Church by
his Doctrine; governed both the East and the West with as much resolution as
humility; and gave unto the World a perfect Model of Ecclesiastical Government.
The History of the Church has nothing more glorious than the Monk St. Austin's
Kent with forty of his Companions, Beda l. 1.
who going before the Holy Cross and the Image of the Great King our Lord Jesus
Christ, made solemn Vows for the conversion of England. S. Gregory, who had
sent them, instructed them by Letters truly Apostolical, Greg. lib. 9. Ep. 58.
ind. 4.
and taught S. Austin to tremble amidst the continual Miracles, which God
wrought by his Ministry. Bertha a Princess of France brought King Edhilbert her
Husband over to Christianity. The Kings of France and Queen Brunehault
protected the new Mission. The Bishops of France did also engage in this Work,
and it was they who by the Order of Du Paga consecrated St. Austin. The Supply
which St. Gregory sent to the new Bishop, was productive of new English Church
assumed its Mauritius having tried the fidelity of the Holy Pontiff, was
corrected by his advice, and received from him that commendation so worthy of a
Christian Prince, as the Heretics durst not open their mouths in his time.
However that pious Emperor was guilty of a great Fault. A Romans were destroyed
by the hands of the Barbarians, for want of being ransomed by a Crown per head.
Immediately afterward the good Emperor testified his remorse; and he poured
out a Prayer to God to punish him in this World rather than in the other; and
then was the revolt Phocas, who before his eyes cut the throats of all his
Family; Mauritius being the last that was killed, amidst all this sad Scene of
calamities was heard to say nothing but only that verse of the Psalmist, Psalm.
119.
I know, O Lord, that thy Judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness
have afflicted me. Phocas being advanced to the Empire by so horrid and
Heraclius proclaimed Emperor by the African Army, marched against him. Then
Phocas found, that oft-times debauches do more ruin Princes than Cruelties, and
Photin whose Wife he had vitiated, betrayed him to Heraclius, who caused him to
be killed. France a while after beheld a much Brunchault being delivered up to
Clothaire II. was sacrificed to the ambition of that Prince; her Memory was
quite effaced, and her virtue so much extolled by Pope S. Gregory, was scarce
able to be defended. The Empire in the mean time was desolate without a
Governor. The King of Persia Chosroes II. under pretense of revenging
Mauritius, had attempted to destroy Phocas. He pushed on his Conquests under
Heraclius. There was seen the Emperor beaten, and the true Cross carried away H
raclius five times a Conqueror; Persia overrun Romans, Chosroes killed by his
Son, and the Holy Cross re-taken. Whilst the Power of the Persians was so
sharply repressed, a worse mischief rose up both against the Empire, and indeed
against all Christianity. Mahomet set himself up for a Prophet among the
Saracens: He was driven out from Mecha by his own People, with his Flight
commenced that memorable Hegyra, from whence Mahometans compute their Years.
This false Prophet gave his Conquests for all the sign of his mission. In nine
years he brought all Arabia under Subjection, either on their own accord, or by
force, and laid the Foundations of the Empire of the Caliphi. To these
Monothelites, who, through an almost inconceivable Blindness, in owning two
Natures in our Lord and Savior, would own that there was but one Will in him.
Man, according to their Doctrine, had nothing of Will in him, and there was
nothing in Jesus Christ, but the sole Will of the Word. These Heretics
concealed their Venom under ambiguous terms: A false Love of Peace made them
propose that there should be no speaking either of one or of two Wills. By
these Artifices they imposed upon Pope Honorius the First, who entered with
them into a very dangerous Menage, and consented to that Silence, whereby the
Lie and the Truth were both equally suppressed. And for the complement of all
Afflictions, some time after the Emperor Heraclius undertook Ecthesis, or
favorable Explication to the Monothelites; but the Artifices of the Heretics
were at length discovered. Pope John IV. condemned the Ecthesis. Constance, the
Grandchild of Heraclius, maintained the Edict of his Grandfather by his own,
called the Type. The Theodoret opposed that Martyn I. assembled the Council of
Lateran, where he sentenced the Type, and the Chiefs of the Monothelites to the
Anathema. St. Maximus, celebrated over all the East for his Piety and his
Learning, leaves the Court, which was infected with this new Heresy, openly
reproves the Emperors, who had dared so to pronounce upon the Questions of
Faith, and suffers a world of Afflictions for the Catholic English Church,
strengthened by the industrious Cares of the Popes, Boniface V. and Honorius,
grew very famous over all the World. Miracles abounded there with the Virtues,
as in the times of the Apostles; and nothing was more splendid than the Edwin,
with all his Oswald served as an Interpreter to the Preachers of the Gospel;
and renowned by his Conquests, he preferred the Glory of being a Christian to
Mercians were converted by the King of Northumberland Oswin: Their Neighbors
and their Successors, followed their Steps; and their good Works were infinite.
Every thing went to wrack in the East, whilst the Emperors were destroying each
other in Disputes about Religion, and Saracens run Syria and Palestine; the
Holy City was subjected Persia lay open to their Power by its Divisions, so
that they took that great Kingdom without any Resistance. They entered into
Africa, in a posture of Cyprus paid them Obedience; and in less than thirty
years they joined all these Conquests to those of Mahomet. Italy, always
unfortunate and forsaken, groaned under the Arms of the Lombards. Constance
despairing of his ever driving them out, was resolved to ravage what he could
no longer defend, and was more cruel than the Lombards themselves. He came not
to Rome but to pillage the Treasures of it; the Churches escaped not free from
him: He ruined Sardinia and Sicily; and made himself odious to all the World,
and at last fell by the Hands of his own Servants. Under Constantine Pogonat,
that is to say, Saracens possessed themselves Cilicia and Lycia. Constantinople
Bulgari, People that came from the mouth of Volga, joined with all those potent
Enemies wherewith the Empire was infested, and got themselves Masters of that
part of Thrace, called since Bulgaria, which was the Ancient Mysia. The English
Church was the Mother that brought forth new Churches; and St. Wilfrid Bishop
of York, being expelled from his See, converted Frieseland. The whole Church
received a new Light by the sixth general Council of Alsted. Chron.
Constantinople, where Pope St. Agatho presided by his Legates, and explained
the Alexandria, four Patriarchs of Constantinople, that is to say, all the
Authors of the Sect of the Monothelites; without sparing Pope Honorius himself,
who had abetted and countenanced them. After the Death of Agatho, which
happened during that Council, Pope St. Leo II. confirmed their Decisions, and
received all their Anathema's. Constantine Pogonat, an imitator of the great
Constantine, and of Marcian, entered into the Council, after their Example; and
as he paid them the same Submissions, they honored him with the same Titles of
Orthodox, Religious, and peaceful Emperor, and the Restorer of Religion. His
Son Justinian II. succeeded to him then an Infant. From his time the Faith
increased, and spread it self gloriously toward the North. Kylian sent by Pope
Conon, preached the Franconia. In the time of Pope Sergius, Ceadwalla, one of
the Kings of England, came in Person to acknowledge it was from the Roman Church
that the Faith came into his Isle; and after he had received Baptism by the
Hands of the Pope, he dyed even according as he himself had wished. The House
of Clovis was fallen into a most deplorable Weakness: Frequent Minorities had
degenerated the Princes into such softnesses as they could not get out of when
they were come to age: From thence proceeded a long Succession of droaning
Kings, that only knew how to be content with the Name of King, and delegated
all their Power to the great Ministers of the Crown. Under this Title Pepin
Heristel governed all, Vigibert, the Faith was established in Frieseland, which
France had then just added to her Conquests. St. Swibert, St. Willebord, and
other Apostolic Men, spread abroad the Gospel in the neighboring Provinces.
In the mean while the Minority of Justinian was happily got over; the Victories
of Leontius had brought down the Saracens, and re-established the Glory of the
Empire in the East. But that Tiberius, named Absimarus, who himself did not
long continue. Justinian re-established, was ungrateful to his Friends, and in
taking Revenge of his Enemies, he raised himself up those that were more to be
feared, for they killed him. The Images of Philippicus, his Successor, were
Rome, because he was a Favourer of the Monothelites, and a declared Enemy to
the sixth general Council. At Constantinople they chose Anastasius II. a
Philippicus his Eyes. At that time the Debauches of King Rodericus, or
Rodrigue, caused Spain to be delivered up to the Moors: So they called the
Saracens of Africa. Count Julian, to be revenged for his Daughter, whom
Rodrigue had abused, called those Infidels. They came with vast Troops. That
King was ruined, Spain submitted, and the Empire of the Goths was brought to an
end by it. The Church of Spain was then put upon a new Proof and Trial: But as
it had preserved it self under the Arians, the Mahometans could not prevail
over it. They left it at first with Liberty enough; but in the following Ages
it endured great Combats; and Chastity had its Martyrs, as well as Faith, under
the Tyranny of a Nation as brutal as it was infidel. The Emperor Anastasius
continued not long. The Army forced Theodosius III. to take up the Purple. He
was put upon fighting, the new Emperor got the day, and poor Anastasius was
clapped into a Monastery. The Moors being Masters of Spain, hoped e're long to
enlarge themselves beyond the Pyrenees: But Charles Martel destined to suppress
them, was raised in France, and had succeeded, though a Bastard, to the Power of
his Father Pepin Heristel, who left Austrasia to his House as a piece of
sovereign Principality, and the Command in Neustria by the charge of Grand
Minister of the Crown. Charles reunited all by his valor. The Affairs of the
East were embroyled. Leo Isaurien, Prefect of the East, did not own Theodosius,
who, without Resistance, quitted the Empire, which he had not accepted of, but
as it had been forced upon him; and retired to Ephesus: he spent the rest of
his time about things that were truly great. The Saracens received several
cruel Shocks during the Empire of Leo. They shamefully raised the Siege at
Constantinople. Pelagius, who was cantoned in the Mountains of Asturia, with
the remains of those that were resolute among the Goths, after a signalized
Victory, set up a new Kingdom in opposition to those Infidels, whereby one day
they were to be driven out of Spain. Notwithstanding all the Efforts, and the
vast Army of Alderames their General, Charles Martel gained over them the
famous Battle of Toures. There were killed there an infinite number of those
Abderames himself abode there upon the place. This Victory was attended with
other Advantages, by which Charles put a stop to the Moors, and extended the
Kingdom even to the Pyrenees. Then the Gauls scarce enjoyed any thing which was
not in Obedience to the French; and all acknowledged Charles Martel. Powerful
in Peace and in War, and absolute Master of the Kingdom, he reigned under
several Kings, with whom he fought, and whom he conquered at his Pleasure, but
yet he durst never take upon him that great Title. The Jealousy of the French
Lords would have been thus deceived. The Religion was established in Germany.
The Priest St. Boniface Gregory II. who had sent him thither. The Empire was at
that time pretty quiet: But Leo began a trouble in it, which lasted long before
it ended. He attempted to pull down, as Idols, the Images Jesus Christ, and of
his Saints. But though he could not come up to the Sentiments of St. Germane,
Patriarch of Constantinople, he acted with his Authority, and after a Decree of
the Senate, they saw him presently breaking an Image of our Savior which was
set up on the great Porch of the Church of Constantinople. This began the
Violences of the Iconoclasts, that is to say, of the breakers of Images. Other
Images which the Emperors, the Bishops, and all the Faithful had erected since
the Peace of the Church both in public and in private places, went likewise
all to wrack. This Spectacle set the People into Motion. The Statues of the
Emperor were broke down in several places. He looked upon himself as being
affronted in his Person; and he was reproached for committing the like Affront
upon Jesus Christ, and his Saints; and that by his own Confession, the Injury
done to the Image, reflected upon the Original: Italy still went further; the
Impiety of the Emperor was the occasion that the common Taxes and Assessments
were refused. Luitprand King of the Lombards, made use of the same Pretense to
take Ravenna, the Residence of the Exarchs. So they called the Governors whom
the Emperors sent into Italy. Pope Gregory II. opposed the pulling down of
Images; but at the same time he opposed the Enemies of the Empire, and
endeavored to retain the People with the Lombards, and the Emperor executed
his Decree against Images more fiercely than ever. But the famous John of Damas
declared to him that in matters of Religion, he knew no Decrees but those of
the Church, and he suffered much. The Emperor removed from his Seat the
Patriarch St. Germane, who died in Exile being ninety years of Age. A little
while after the Lombards Rome to suffer, they were only kept in by the
Authority of Charles Martel, whose Assistance Pope Gregory II. had implored.
The new Kingdom of Spain, called at first the Kingdom of Oriedo, grew greater
by the Victories, and the Conduct of Alphonsus Son-in-Law to Pelagius, who,
following the Example of Recaredes, from whom he was Leo died, and left the
Empire, as well as the Church, in a great Fermentation. Artabaces Praetor of
Armenia, caused himself to be proclaimed Emperor instead of Constantine
Copronimus the Son of Leo, and set up Images again. After the death of Charles
Martel, Luitprand threatened Rome anew: The Exarch of Ravenna was in danger, and
Italy owed its Safety to the Prudence of Pope Zachary. Constantine being East,
thought only of setting Artabazus, took Constantinople, and filled it with
instances of his Revenge. The two Sons of Charles Martel, Carlomane and Pepin,
had succeeded to the Power of their Father; but Carlomane disgusted with the
Age, in the midst of his Greatness and his Victories embraced a monastic Life.
By this means his Brother Pepin reunited all the Power into his own Person. He
knew how to keep it by a great desert, and formed his Design to raise himself
Childerick the most miserable of all Princes, opened him the way to it, and
added to the quality of a lumpish Tool that of Madman. The French being sick of
their dull heavy Princes, and accustomed so long to the House of Charles
Martel, ever abounding with great Men, were only troubled at the Oath they had
taken to Childerick. Upon the Answer of Pope Zachary, they thought themselves
free, and so much the more disengaged from the Oaths they had taken to their
King, as that he and his Predecessors seemed for these two Hundred Years to
have renounced all Right to command over them, in intailing as it were the
whole Power of ruling to the office of the great Minister of the Palace. So
that Pepin was set up on the Throne, and the Name of King was annexed to the
Authority. Stephen III. found in the new King the same Zeal that Charles Martel
had testified for the Holy See against the Lombards. After he had in vain
implored the Assistance of the Emperor, he threw himself French. The King
received him in France with respect, and would be consecrated and crowned with
his Hand. At the same time he passed the Alps, delivered Rome, and the Exarchy
of Ravenna, and reduced Astolphus King of the Lombards to an equitable Peace.
In the mean while the Emperor made work with the Images. Conc. Nic. 11. act. 6.
To strengthen himself with the Ecclesiastic Authority, he assembled a
numerous Council at Constantinople. However there was not seen, as was wont,
Ibid. defin. Pseudosyn. C. P.
to appear either the Legates of the Holy See, or the Bishops, or the Legates
of the other Patriarchal Sees. In that Council they did not only condemn, as
Idolatrous, all Honor paid to Images in remembrance of their Originals, but
also the very Sculptures and Pictures of them, as of detestable Arts. It was
the Opinion of the Saracens, whose Councels, it was said, Leo had followed,
when he broke down the Images. But yet there appeared nothing against Relics.
The Council of Copronymus did not forbid Honor to be paid to them, Ibid.
Pseudosyn. C. P. Can. 9. and 11.
and he thundered out his Anathemaes against those who refused to have recourse
to the Prayers of the Holy Virgin and of Saints. The Catholics persecuted for
the Honor they gave to Images, answered the Emperor that they had rather
endure all manner of Extremities, than not honor Jesus Christ even in his
Shadow. In the mean time Pepin repassed the Alps, and chastised the Infidel
Astolphus for denying to execute the Treaty of Peace. The Church of Rome never
received a more noble Gift than that which the Pious Prince then made her. He
gave her the Towns Lombards, and laughed at Copronymus who re-demanded them, he
that could, however, never defend them. Since that time the Emperors were very
slenderly acknowledged in Rome; they became there contemptible by their
weakness, and odious by their Errors. Pepin was looked upon there as the
Protector of the People and of the Church of Rome. This Quality seemed as
hereditary to his House, and to the Kings of France. Charlemain the Son of
Pepin maintained it with a Courage Adrian had recourse to him against Didier
King of the Lombards, who had taken several Cities, Italy. Charlemain passed
the Alps. Every thing bowed; Dydier was delivered; the Lombard Kings, Enemies
both of Rome and of Popes, were destroyed; Charlemain made himself to be
crowned King of Italy, and took upon him the Title of King of the French and of
the Lombards. At the same time he exercised in Rome the same sovereign
Authority in the Quality of a Patricius, and confirmed to the Holy See the
Donations of the King his Father. The Emperors with great Difficulty resisted
the Bulgari, and vainly supported the dispossessed Lombards against Charlemain.
The Quarrel of Images still was kept on Foot. Leo IV. Son of Copronymus, seemed
at first to be pretty quiet, but he renewed the Persecution Irene his Mother.
Then things began to appear with a new Face. Paul the Patriarch of
Constantinople declared toward the latter end of his Life, that he had opposed
Images against his Conscience, and retired into a Monastery, where, in the
presence of the Empress he deplored the Mischief of the Church of
Constantinople separated from the four Patriarchal Sees, and proposed to her
the Celebration of an universal Council, as the only Remedy proper for the
healing of so dangerous a Distemper. Tarassus his Successor maintained that the
Question had not been judged orderly, because it began by a Decree of the
Emperor, and that a Council held against all due form had followed; whereas in
matters of Religion, it belongs to the Council to begin, and then the Emperors
to strengthen the Judgment of the Church. Grounded upon this Reason, he
accepted of the Patriarchate, Conc. Nic. 2. Act. 7.
but upon condition Constantinople, and continued at Nice. The Pope sent his
Legates thither: The Council of the Iconoclasts was condemned: They are
detested a Persons, who, led by the Example of the Saracens, accused the
Christians of Idolatry. It was decreed that Images should be worshipped in
Remembrance, and for the Love of those whom they represented, which is called
in the Council, a relative Worship, and an honorary Adoration and Salutation,
opposed to the supreme worship and Adoration of Latria, or entire Subjection,
which the Council reserved to God alone. Besides the Legates of the Holy See,
and the presence of the Patriarch of Constantinople, there appeared there the
Legates of other Patriarchal Sees, which were then oppressed by the Infidels.
Some disputed their Mission with them; but that which was not at all contested,
was, that far from disavowing them; all the Sees accepted of the Council
without showing any Contradiction, and it was received by all the Church. The
French encompassed with Idolaters, or new Christians, whose Ideas they were
afraid to meddle with, and on the other hand, being harrassed with the
equivocal Term of Adoration, hesitated a long while. Amongst all the Images
they would only pay an Honor to that of the Cross, absolutely different from
the Figures which the Heathen believed were full of the Divinity. They kept,
however, in an honorable place, and also in their Churches, the other Images,
and hated the Iconoclasts. What other Difference there was, it made no Schism.
The French owned at last that the Nicene Fathers required to Images but the
same kind of Worship, all Proportions observed, as they themselves paid to
Relics, to the Book of the Gospel, and to the Cross; and that Council was
honored by all professing Christianity under the Name of the seventh general
Council. Thus have we seen the seven general Councils, which the East and the
West, the Greek and the Latin Churches received with an equal Reverence. The
Emperors convoked those great Assemblies by the Sovereign Authority they had
over all the Bishops, or at least over the Chief, on whom the rest depended,
and who were then Subject of the Empire. The public Carriages were provided by
the Order of the Princes. They assembled the Councils in the East, where they
made their Residence, and they commonly sent thither their Commissaries to keep
the Peace. The Bishops so assembled, brought with them the Authority of the
Holy Ghost, and the Tradition of the Churches. From the beginning of
Christianity there were three principal Sees, which had the precedence of all
others; that of Rome, that of Alexandria, and that of Antioch. Conc. Nic. Can.
7. Conc. C. P. 1. Can. 3. Conc. Chalced. Can. 21.
The Nicene Council allowed the Bishop of the Holy City to have the first
place. The second, and the fourth Council raised the Sea of Constantinople, and
would have that the second. So that there were five Sees, which afterward were
called Patriarchal. The Precedence was given to them in the Council. Among
those Sees, the Sea of Rome was always looked on as the first, and the Council
of Nice regulated the others upon that. Conc. Nic. Can. 6.
There were also Metropolitan Bishops, who were the Chiefs of the Provinces,
and who went before the other Bishops. It was very late ere they began to be
called Archbishops; but their Authority was never the less. When the Council
was formed, the Holy Scriptures were propounded; the Passages of the ancient
Fathers, Witnesses of Tradition, were read: It was Tradition which interpreted
Scripture: They believed its true Sense was that which the past Ages had owned
it to be, and none thought they ought to explain it otherwise. Those who
refused to submit to the Decisions of the Council, were cursed with the
Anathema. After they had explained the Faith, they regulated the Ecclesiastical
Discipline, and made Canons, that is to say, the Rules of the Church. They
thought the Faith did never change, and though the Discipline might receive
several Changes according to difference of Times and Places, yet as much as
possibly we can we ought to labor after a perfect imitation of Antiquity. But
the Popes were only there by their Legates in the first general Councils; but
they did however expressly approve of the Doctrine, and there was but one Faith
in the Church.

Constantine and Irene religiously executed Alphonso Spain. The perpetual
Continence of that Prince, deservedly conferred on him that famous Surname, and
rend'red him worthy to release Spain from that infamous Tax of a hundred Maids,
which his Uncle Mauregate had granted to the Moors. Seventy thousand of those
Infidels slain in a Battle, with Mugait their General, signalized the Valor of
Alphonsus. Constantine did also endeavor to make himself famous against the
Bulgari; but the Success did by no means answer his Expectations. He at last
brought down all Irene's Power, and being unable to govern himself, as much as
to suffer the Empire of another, he repudiated his Wife Maria, to marry
Theodote who Constantine fell by her Artifices. She gained the People again to
her by lessening their Taxes, and brought the Monks and the Clergy into her
Interest by a show of a visible Piety. At length she was proclaimed sole
Empress. The Romans scorned her Government, and so went over to Charlemagne,
who subdued the Saxons, repressed the Saracens, destroyed the Heresies,
protected the Popes, drew over the Infidel Nations to Christianity,
re-established the Sciences, and Ecclesiastical Discipline, assembled famous
Councils, wherein his profound Learning was admired, and the effects of his
Piety and Justice was not only felt in France and Italy; but it extended it
self into Spain, England, and Germany; and indeed where not?

To conclude, in the DCCC. XII. Epoeha. Charlemagne, Or the re-establishment of
the new Empire.
Year of our Lord, that great Protector of Rome, and of Italy, or to speak more
properly, of all the Church, and of all Christendom, was chosen Emperor by the
Romans, without his ever dreaming of it, and Crowned by Pope Leo III. who had
engaged the People of Rome to that Choice, became the Founder of the New
Empire, and of the temporal Greatness of the Holy See.

The End of the first Part.
TO THE Dauphin.
YOUR Highness sees the twelve Epocha's which I have followed in this
Abridgment: I have chained to each of them the principal matters that are
dependent thereon. You may now without any great difficulty dispose of,
according to the order of Time, the great accidents of the Ancient History, and
range them (as I may so speak) each under its proper Standard.

I have not in this Abstract forgot that celebrated distinction which the
Chronologists make of the continuance of the World in 7. Ages. The beginning of
every one of them serves us for an Epoch: If I have mixed any others with them,
it is that so things may be more distinct, and that the order of time may be
opened to You with less confusion.

When I speak to You of the order of Time, I do not pretend, My Lord, that You
should scrupulously charge Your memory with all the dates; much less that You
should concern Your self with all the nice disputes of the Chronologists, where
most an end they differ but in a very few years. There is no question but that
this contentious Chronology which scrupulously is taken up about those small
matters has its use; but that is not Your object, and is of very little
service to enlighten the mind of a great Prince. I would not be too refined
upon this discussion of Time, but in the calculations I have already made, I
have still followed that which has appeared to me the most probable, without
troubling my self to be Guarranty for it.

In the supputation of years which is made since the time of the Creation down
to Abraham, we had best join with the LXX. which makes the World older, whereas
the Hebrew makes it younger by many Ages: Although the Authority of the
Original Hebrew seems as if it ought to carry it, yet it is a thing so
indifferent in it self, that the Church, which has with St. Jerome, followed
the supputation of the Hebrew in our Vulgar Translation, has left that of the
LXX. in its Martyrology. In effect, what matter is it for History either to
diminish, or to multiply void Age, where also there is nothing to give an
account of? Is it not enough that the times, where the dates are important,
have their fixed Characters, and the distribution of them be supported on
certain foundations? And though even in those times there should be a dispute
about some years, it should scarce ever make us perplexed and uneasy. As for
instance, if we should put it some years sooner or later when Rome was founded,
or our blessed Savior born, You must own that such a diversity makes nothing
to the course of Histories, nor to the accomplishing of the Councils of God.
You must be careful to shun the Anachronisms which ruffle and embroyl the order
of Affairs, and leave the others to the disputes of the Learned.

I will not further oppress Your memory with the account of the Olympiads, though
the Grecians, who make use of that, render them very necessary for the fixing
of Times. It is fit You should know it, that You may, when there is occasion,
have recourse to it: But it will be sufficient to keep to the dates which I
propose to You, as being the mos^ simple, and the most followed, which are
those of the World to Rome, those from Rome to Jesus Christ, and those from
Jesus Christ to all succeeding Generations.

But the true design of this Abridgment is not to explain to You the order of
Time, though it be absolutely necessary in the reading of all Histories, and in
showing how they relate to one another. I have told You, My Lord, That my
principal Object is to make you consider in the order of time, the course of
the people of God, and that of great Empires.

These two things roll together in this great Movement of Ages, where they
have, as I may say, one and the same course. But it is needful, to understand
them truly, to detach them sometimes one from the other, and to consider
whatsoever has relation to each of them.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS DISCOURSE.
ABove all, Religion, and the course of the people of God, considered in this
manner, is the greatest, and most useful of all the objects that can be
proposed to men. It is pretty to have before our Eyes the different States of
God's People under the Law of Nature, and under the Patriarchs; The Course of
Religion. I. The Creation, and the first Times.
under Moses, and the Written Law; under David, and the Prophets; since the
Return of the Captivity until Jesus Christ; and in sum, under Jesus Christ
himself, that is to say, under the Law of Grace, and under the Gospel; in the
Ages which waited for the Advent of the Messiah, and in thos^ in which he
appeared; in those where the Worship of God was confined to one Angle People,
and in those were conformable to the ancient Prophecies, it was spread abroad
over all the face of the Earth; in those, at last, wherein Mankind still
clogged with Infirmities, and gross Ideas, has had need to be supported by
Temporal Rewards and Punishments, and in those wherein the Faithful, that are
the most instructed, ought now only to live by Faith, setting to minds upon
Celestial good things, which will yield them Eternal pleasure and satisfaction,
and suffering, through the hopes at last of coming to enjoy them, all the evils
and miseries of this World which can exercise their Patience.

Certainly, my Lord, nothing can come into the heart of man to conceive more
worthy of God, than that he should first of all choose to himself a people,
which should be a most manifest Example of his Eternal Providence; a people
whose good or evil depends on Piety, and whose condition bears evidence to the
Wisdom and Justice of him who governs them. Here it was where God began, and
this he fully discovered in the people of the Jews. But after he had by so many
sensible manifestations established this immutable foundation, whereby he alone
after the pleasure of his own Will did manage all the events of the present
life, it was time to exalt men to higher thoughts, and to send Jesus Christ, to
whom it was reserved to discover to a new people collected out of all the
people of the World, the Secrets and Mysteries of a life to come.

You may easily follow the History of these two sorts of people, and observe,
as Jesus Christ does, the Union of them both, since that whether looked for or
given, it was ever the Consolation and the Hope of the Sons of God.

Thus then Religion was always uniform, or rather always the same from the
beginning of the World; they always acknowledged the same One God, as the
Author, and the same Jesus Christ, as the Savior of Mankind.

Thus You will see there was nothing more ancient among men than the Religion
which You profess, and it is not without reason that your Ancestors have
accounted it their greatest glory to be the Protectors of it.

What Testimony is this of its truth, to see that in the times wherein the
profane Histories have nothing in them but what is fabulous, or, at most,
things that are confused, and half forgotten, the Holy Scripture, that is to
say, (without controversy) the most ancient Book in the World, brings us back
by so many curious but precise accidents, and by the same thread of things, to
their true principle, that is to say, to God, the Maker of all things; and does
point out to us so distinctly the Creation of the Universe, that of man in
particular, the happiness of his first Estate, the causes of his miseries and
frailties; the Corruption of the World, and the Deluge; the beginning of Arts,
and those of Nations; the distribution of Countries: in a word, the propagation
of Mankind, and other matters of the same importance, whereof humane Histories
speak but confusedly, and oblige us elsewhere to seek for the certain sources
of them.

And if the Antiquity of Religion gives it so much Authority, its continued
course without interruption, and without alteration for so many successive
Ages, and notwithstanding all its manifold surprising obstacles, does
manifestly discover to us, that it is the hand of God alone that sustains it.

What is there more mavelous than to behold it always subsisting upon the
same foundations of the beginnings of the World, and neither the Idolatry and
Impiety which surround it on every side, nor the Tyrants that have persecuted
it, nor the Heretics and Infidels who have endeavored to corrupt it, nor the
Cowardly that have betrayed it, nor the unworthy Schismatics who have
dishonored it by their Crimes; nor, to conclude, the length of time, which
alone was sufficient to wear away all humane things; neither of these, I say,
have been capable, not only not to extinguish, but so much as to alter it.

If we now shall consider what Idea this Religion, for whose Antiquity we have
so great a Reverence, gives us of its object, that is to say, of the first
Being, we shall confess that it is superior to all humane apprehensions, and
deserving to be regarded as coming from God himself.

That God whom the Hebrews and the Christians have always served and worshipped,
has nothing in common with those Divinities full of Imperfection, and even of
Vice, which the rest of the World adored. Our God is One, Infinite, Perfect,
only worthy to revenge Wickedness and Vice, and to Crown Virtue, because that
He alone is Holiness it self.

He is infinitely above that first Cause, and of that first Mover, which the
Philosophers of old have acknowledged, but yet have not adored. Those of them
that have been the most remote, have proposed to us one God, who finding a
matter Eternal, and existing by it self as well as He, has put it into frame,
and fashioned it as a common Artificer, constrained in his work by that matter,
and by those dispositions which he did not make, without ever being able to
comprehend, that if the matter were of it self, it could not stay to have its
perfection from a strange hand, and that if God be infinite and perfect, he
has not to do whatsoever he pleases, but only of himself, and of his
omnipotent Will. But the God of our Fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of
whom Moses has delivered wonders to us, has not only ranged this World, but
he has done it all entire in its matter, and in its form. Before he had given
it a Being, nothing had it but himself. He is represented to us as that God
that made all things, and that by his word, as well because he did all by the
most excellent reason, as because he did it without the least of difficulty,
and that to make such a most glorious work as this World, he was only at the
expense of one word, that is to say, it cost him no more than his bare will and
pleasure.

And to follow the History of the Creation, since we have begun it, Moses has
taught us, That that mighty Architect, to whom things cost so little, was
pleased to make them at several times, and by returns from thence where he had
before given over, and to create the World in six days, to show that he acted
not through an impulse of necessity, or through a blind impetuosity, as some
Philosophers have vainly imagined. The Sun emits at once (without any reserve)
the power of all its rays; but God, who acts by intelligence, and with a
Sovereign liberty applies his Virtue and Power to what he pleases, and just to
so much too as he pleases: And as in making the World by his word, he
discovers that nothing can trouble or withold him, by making it at several
resumptions, it is sufficiently plain and evident to us that he is the Master
of his Matter, of his Action, of all his Enterprises, and that he has not in
any of his proceedings any other Rule but his Will, which is always right by it
self.

This Conduct of Almighty God does likewise show to us, that every thing comes
immediately out of his hand. The People and the Philosophers who have believed
that the Earth mingled with Water, and assisted (forsooth) with the warm beams
of the Sun, had produced of it self, through its own fecundity, Plants and
Animals, were most grossly mistaken. The Scriptures have made us to understand
that the Elements are barren, if the word of God makes 'em not fruitful.
Neither the Earth, nor the Water, nor the Air would ever have had Plants, or
Animals, which we now see in them, if God, who had made and prepared the matter
of them, had not also formed them by Almighty Will, and had not given to every
thing the proper Seeds whereby to multiply in all the succeeding Ages.

Those who see the Plants to take their birth and their increase by the heat of
the Sun, might think that that is the Creator of them: but the Scripture has
plainly made it out to us, that the Earth was clothed with Grass, and all sorts
of Plants, before ever the Sun was made; that so we might be satisfied that on
God alone was all dependence.

It pleased that great Workmaster to create Light, before he had put it into
the form which he has given it in the Sun and the Stars, because he would
inform and convince us, that these great and magnificent Luminaries, which we
would so willingly make Divinities, had by themselves neither that curious and
shining Matter, whereof they are now composed, nor that admirable form to which
we see them now reduced.

In a word, the account of the Creation, such as Moses has given us of it,
discovers to us that great Mystery of the true Philosophy, that in God alone
resides absolute Fullness and Power. Happy, Wise, Almighty, alone sufficient in
himself, he acts without necessity as he acts without need, never straightened nor
constrained, nor puzzled with his matter wherewith he does whatsoever he will,
because he has by his alone Will given to it the foundation of its Being. By
this Sovereign right he turns it, he fashions it, he moves it without pain or
uneasiness, all things depend immediately on him, and according to the order
established in Nature, one thing depends on another: for instance, the birth
and increase of Plants, on the heat of the Sun, it is because that that same
God who has made all the parts of the Universe, was pleased to link them one
to another, and so to make his Wisdom the more conspicuous and visible by that
mavelous train of Causes.

But whatsoever the Holy Scripture teaches us about the Creation of the World,
it is nothing comparatively to what it says concerning Man.

Hitherto God had done every thing by his Command: Genesis 1.
Let there be light; Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and
let it divide the waters from the waters; and let the waters be gathered
together unto one place, and let the dry land appear, and let it bring forth
grass; and let there be lights in the firmament of Heaven, to divide the day
from the night; let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that
has life; and let the Earth bring forth the living creature after his kind:
But when he comes to make man, Moses gives him then a new Language, Let us make
man, says he, in our Image, after our lik ness. It is no longer that imperious
and commanding word; it is a word more mild, but yet no whit less powerful and
efficacious. God held a Council within himself; He excites himself, as it were,
to show us that the work he was going then to make, exceeded all the other part
of the Creation, which he had already finished.

Let us make man. God speaks within himself; he speaks to some one who does as
himself; to some some one whose Creature and Image man is; he speaks to another
that is his second self; he speaks to him by whom all things were made, to him
who says in the Gospel, John 5. v. 19.
Whatsoever the Father does, these also does the Son likewise. In speaking to
his Son, or with his Son, he speaks at the same time with the Holy Ghost,
All-complying, Equal, and Coeternal one to the other.

It Is an unheard of thing in all the language of the Sacred Scriptures, that
any other than God should speak of himself in the plural number; let us make.
God himself in the Scripture speaks thus but two or three times, and this
extraordinary language began to appear when he was engaged in making Man.

When God changes his way of speaking, and in some sort of conduct too, it is
not to be supposed that he changes in himself; but he demonstrates to us that
he is going to begin, according to his Eternal Council, a new order of things.

Thus Man, so highly exalted above all other Creatures, whose Generation Moses
has described to us, is formed in a manner as altogether new, and different
from them. The Trinity begins to declare it self, in the making a reasonable
Creature, whose Intellectual Operations are an imperfect Image of those Eternal
Operations, by which God is fruitful in himself.

The word of Council which God makes use of, points to us, that the Creature
which was going to be made, was the only One here below capable of acting by
Council and Intelligence. All the rest is no less extraordinary. Hitherto we
have not seen in the History of Genesis, the finger of God applied to a
corruptible matter. To frame and fashion Man's Body, He himself takes up some
of the dust of the ground, Genesis 2. v. 7.
and that dust being managed by such a hand, receives the most beautiful form
that ever yet was seen in the World.

This particular attention, which was visible in God, when he made Man, shows
us that he has a particular regard for him, though otherwise every thing is
conducted immediately by his infinite Wisdom.

But the manner how he formed the Soul, is still much more mavelous and
astonishing; he derives not that from Matter; he inspires it from on high; it
is the breath of life which proceeds from himself.

When he created the Beasts, he said, Let the waters bring forth ab^ndantly
every moving Creature; Genesis 1.20.24.
and in this manner he created the Sea Monsters, and every living and moving
Soul which was to fill the Waters: He says also, Let the Earth bring forth the
living Creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the
Earth after his kind.

Thus had those living Souls of a brutal and bestial Life their Being, to which
God gives for all their Actions nothing but Motions dependent on the Body. God
takes them out of the Womb of the Waters and of the Earth; but this Soul, whose
Life ought to be an Imitation of his own, which was to live as himself, by
Reason and Intelligence; which was to be united to him in Contemplation and in
Love, and which for this reason was to be made after his own Image and
Likeness: This Soul, I say, was incapable of being derived from matter. God in
making matter can easily form a beautiful and curious Body; but in whatsoever
sort he turns and fashions it, he will never find his Image and Resemblance in
it. The Soul, made after his Image, and which can be happy in possessing him,
must be produced by a new Creation; it must come from above, and this is that
breath of life, Genesis 2.7.
which God breathed from his own Mouth.

Let us always remember that Moses speaks to carnal Men by sensible Images of
the most pure and intellectual Truths. But let us not imagine that God breaths
after the manner of Animals; let us not suppose our Souls to be a subtle Air,
nor a flitting Vapor. The Breath which God inspires, and which bears in it self
the Image of himself, is neither Air nor Vapor. Let us not believe that our
Souls are a portion of the divine. Nature, as some Philosophers have vainly
dreamed. God is not a Whole to be divided. Though there should be parts in God,
yet they should not be made. For the Creator, the uncreated Being should not be
composed of Creatures. The Soul is made, and so made, that it is no part of the
divine Nature, but only a thing made after the Image and Resemblance of the
divine Nature, a thing which is always to be united to him that formed it; this
is what is understood by that divine Breath, it represents to us that Spirit of
Life.

Thus you see how Man was formed. God also out of him formed a Companion that
he designed to give him. All Mankind is born by one single Marriage, that so
how dispersed and multiplied soever they have been, they may be for ever one
single and the same Family.

Our first Parents thus formed, were placed in that delicious Garden, which was
called Paradise. God was only obliged to himself for rendering his Image happy.

He gave to Man a precept, to make him sensible that he had a Master; a precept
joined to a thing that was sensible, because Man was made with Senses: A
Precept that was easy, because he would have his Life as commodious as it
should be innocent.

But Man kept not this Command though it was of so easy an Observance; he
hearkens to the tempting Spirit, and he hearkens to himself also, instead of
fixing his attention on God only: So that his Ruin was inevitable: But here we
must consider it in its original State as well as in its after-circumstances.

God in the beginning had made his Angels, Spirits pure and separate from all
matter. He that made nothing but what was good, had created them all in
Holiness, and they might have secured their Felicity, by giving themselves up
voluntarily to their Creator. But whatsoever is derived out of nothing is
defective. One part of these Angels suffered themselves to be seduced by their
own self-Love. Unhappy Creatures, who would be pleased in themselves, and not
in God. They lost in a Moment all that He had given them. Strange effect of
Sin! Those Holy Creatures of Light became Spirits of Darkness: They ceased any
longer to have any Light in them but what turned it self into malicious
Craftiness. An Envious Malignity possessed them in the room of their former
Lovingness and Charity: Their natural Greatness was nothing but Pride: Their
Felicity was changed into that consolation of getting to themselves Companions
in their Misery, and their most delightful Exercises were to be miserably
employed in tempting Men. The most perfect of them all, who had also been the
most proud, found himself the greatest evil doer, as he was the most miserable:
Man, Psalm. 8.5.
whom God had made but little lower than the Angels, in uniting him to a Body,
became a Spirit so perfect as if he had been an Object of Jealousy; he was
resolved to ensnare him in his Rebellion, afterward to envelop him in his
Ruin. We will take notice how he speaks to him, and search into the bottom of
his Artifices. He addresses himself to Eve, as to the weaker Vessel; but in the
person of Eve he speaks to her Husband as well as to her, Genesis 3.1.
Why has God made you this severe Prohibition? If he has made you reasonable,
you ought to know the reason of all things: This Fruit is not Poison; neither
shall you die. Genesis 3.4.
Thus that revolted Spirit began with her. She then argued upon the Command,
and her Obedien^e began to stagger; You shall be as Gods, free and independent,
happy in your selves, wise by your selves; Genesis 3.5.
knowing good and evil; nothing shall be impenetrable to you. By ^hese
Artifices of persuasion, did this wicked Spirit set up himself against the
order of the Creator, and made himself superior to the Rule. Eve being half
brought over, wishfully looked upon the Fruit, whose Beauty promised a pleasant
taste: Considering that God had united in-Man Soul and Body, she thought that
in favor to Man, he might also have given to Plants supernatural Virtues, and
intellectual gifts to sensible Objects. After she had eaten of that Fruit which
was so pleasant to the Eye, and so much to be desired to make one wise, v. 6.
she presented some of it to her Husband, and 'twas a very dangerous assault
upon him. Example and Complaisance fortified the Temptation; he was beguiled
into the Sentiments of the Tempter, being so well seconded; a deceitful
Curiosity, a flattering thought of Pride, the secret Pleasure of acting by
himself, and according to the pulse of his own Inclinations, drew him in, and
miserably was he cheated: He resolved to make a dangerous trial of his Liberty,
and he tasted, with the Fruit forbidden him, the fatal Sweetness and Pleasure
of contenting his Fancy: The Senses too mingled their attractions to this new
Charm; he follows them; he submits himself to them, and he who before was the
Master of, is now become a Captive to them.

At the same time he finds a change in every thing. The Earth no longer smiles
upon him as before; it will yield nothing but by an industrious Labor: The
Heaven is without that Serenity of Air; the Beasts which were all subject to
him, even the most odious and most w^ld, and pleased him with an innocent
Divertisement, now appear to him in dreadful Forms. God who had made all things
for his Happiness, in a moment turned all things to his miserable punishment.
He was become a Torment to himself, he that before so much loved himself. The
Rebellion of his Senses makes him see somewhat in himself (he knows not what)
that is very vile and despicable. It Is now no longer that first work of the
Creator, wherein every thing was beautiful; Sin has formed a new work which he
would fain conceal, if possible. Man could no longer support his Shame, but
wished he had been able to cover it even with his own Eyes. But God was still
much more unsupportable to him. That great God who had made him after his own
Image and Likeness, and who had endued him with Understanding as a necessary
relief to his Mind, was pleased to discover himself to him under a sensible
Form. Ibid. 8.
He sought out the most recluse places of the Garden to hide himself from him,
who before was all his Joy and all his Happiness. His Conscience accuses him
before ever God speaks a word, and his miserable frivolous Excuses do but serve
the more absolutely to confound him. He must die; the remedy of an immortal
State is taken away from him, and a most dreadful Death, which is that of the
Soul, is typisyed to him by that Corporeal to which he is condemned.

And behold here was our Sentence pronounced inclusively in his. God, who had
resolved to reward his Obedience in all his descendent Posterity, as soon as he
had revolted and fell from him, condemns him, and strikes him, not only in his
own Person, but likewise in all his Seed, as in the most quick and tenderest
part of himself: We were all accursed in our first Parent; our Birth is
depraved and corrupted in its very Source.

We shall not here examine those terrible Rules of the divine Justice, by which
the whole Race of Mankind was accursed in its first Original. Let us adore the
Judgments of God, who regards all men as one single man in him from whom he
would have all men to proceed. Let us also look upon our selves, as degraded in
our rebellious Father, as for ever made miserable by the Sentence which
condemned him, as being banished with him, and excluded out of Paradise, where
we might have all been born.

The Rules of humane Justice may help us a little to enter into the
profoundness of the divine Justice, whereof they are but a Shadow, but they
cannot discover to us the depth of that Abyss. Let us believe that the Justice,
as well as the Mercy of God, will not be measured by the poor scantling Rules
of Men, and that the Effects of them both are much more extensive, and much
more secret.

But though the Severities of God upon Mankind are dreadful and terrible to us,
yet let us admire how presently he turns our Eyes to an Object far more
pleasant and delightful. Under the Figure of the Serpent, whose crooked
turnings and creepings on its Belly, were a lively Image of the dangerous
Insinuations, and deceitful Artifices of the evil Spirit, God shows to our
Mother Eve her Enemy conquered, Genesis 3.14, 15.
and discovers to her that blessed Seed by which her Conqueror shall have his
bruised Head, that is to say, shall see his Pride taken down, and his Empire
destroyed over the whole Earth.

That blessed Seed was Jesus Christ, the Son of a Virgin; that Jesus Christ in
whom the alone Adam had not sinned, because he was to come from Adam in a
Divine manner, conceived not by Man, but by the Holy Ghost.

But before we were to have this Savior given us, Mankind was obliged to know,
through a long Experience, the need there was of such a Help and Succor. Man
was therefore left to himself, his Inclinations were vitiated, his Riots
excessive, and Iniquity spread it self over all the Earth.

Then did God set himself to execute his Vengeance upon them, and he was
resolved it should be such an one as the Memory of Man should never forget: It
was that of the universal Deluge, the remembrance of which does effectually
still continue in all Nations, as well as that of their Wickedness which
brought it.

Let not Men henceforward think that the World was of it self, and that what
has been, shall always be as of it self. God, who made all things, and by whom
all things subsist, w^ going to drown both Man and Beast, that is to say, he
was going to destroy the fairest part of the Creation.

There was no need of any but himself, to destroy what he had made by a word of
his Mouth; but he found it most worthy of himself to make his Creatures serve
as an Instrument to his Vengeance, and he therefore calls the Waters to commit
their Violences on the Earth, which was already full of Wickedness.

However he found one Man just among them. God, before he saved him from the
Deluge of the Waters, had preserved him, by his Grace, from the Deluge of
Iniquity. His Family was reserved to re-people the Earth, which was then but an
immense Solitude. By the provident Care of that righteous Man, God saved the
Animals, that so Man might understand that they were made for him, and
subjected to his Empire by their Creator.

The World seemed to have a new Frame again, and the Earth came once more from
the Bosom of the Waters; but in this Renovation, there remains an eternal
Impression of the Divine Justice. Unto the Deluge all Nature was more strong
and vigorous: By that vast quantity of Waters which God sent upon the Earth,
and by the long abode it made there, the Sapp, which was enclosed in it, was
altered, the Air, full of an excessive Humidity, fortified the principles and
seeds of Corruption; and the first Constitution of the Universe finding it self
weak and languishing, Man's Life, which held out to almost a thousand years,
began to diminish by little and little; neither Herbs nor Fruits had any longer
their first Strength and Efficacy, and therefore Man was to have given him a
more substantial Nourishment in the Flesh of Beasts.

Thus by degrees the remains of the first Institution began to wear off and to
be effaced; and changed Nature advertised Man that God was no more the same for
him, since he had been so highly provoked by his manifold and great
Transgressions.

Now that extreme long Life of the first Men, Maneth. Beros. Hestiae. Nic.
Damas. and al. apud Joseph. ant. l. 4. Hesiod. Op. and al.
observed in the Annals of the People of God, has not been unknown to other
People, and their ancient Traditions have preserved the Memory of them. Death
which now came on, made Men to feel a more ready Vengeance: And as they still
every day did more and more plunge themselves in Wickedness, it was just that
they should be also, as I may so speak, every day more and more overwhelmed in
their Punishments.

The bare change of their Diet might demonstrate to them how much their estate
was impaired, since that in being grown weaker, they became at the same time
more voracious and more sanguinary.

Before the time of the Deluge, the Food which Men lived on without violence in
the Fruits that fell of themselves, and in the Herbs which also withered so
quickly, was doubtless some remains of the first Innocence, and of the Pleasure
to which we were formed. But now, to feed us, we must shed Blood,
notwithstanding the Horror wherewith it naturally shocks us: And all the
Delicacies we now use about our Tables, can scarcely conceal from us the
nauseous Carcasses which we are forced to eat to satisfy us.

And yet this is but the least part of our Miseries. Our already shortened Lives
are still more abridged by the Violences committed on one another. Man, who in
the Infancy of Time was seen to be very tender of the Lives of Beasts, by a
vicious custom, makes nothing now of taking away the Life of his own
Resemblance, and fellow Creature. It was in vain that God forbad the shedding
of Blood presently after the Deluge; Genesis 9.4, 5.
in vain, to save some Vestigia of the first sweetness of our Nature, by
permitting us to eat of the Flesh of Beasts: in vain, I say, did he reserve the
Blood thereof. Murders are multiplied without measure. It Is true, Genesis 4.8.
before the Deluge Cain had sacrificed his Brother to his Jealousy. Lamech, who
came from the Loins of Cain, Ibid. 23.
committed the second Murder: and one may very well believe there were several
others after those two damnable Examples. But Wars were not yet found out. It
was after the Deluge that those Ravagers of Provinces appeared, who were called
Conquerors, who being pushed on by the Glory of commanding, have slain so much
innocent Blood. Accursed Nimrod, the Offspring, as accursed Cham by his
Father, Genesis 10.9.
began to make War, merely to establish an Empire to himself. Since then
Ambition tramples on the Lives of Men, without any Bounds; they are come to
that pass now, as to kill one another in cool Blood without any Hatred: The
perfection of Honor, and the bravest of all Arts, has been for the Sparks to
boast they have killed their Men.

Such were the beginnings of the World, as the History of Moses represents them
to us: Beginnings, happy at first, but afterward full of infinite Evils and
Mischiefs, in relation to that God who made all things, always admirable; such,
in fine, as we conceive in revolving them in our Minds, by considering the
Universe, and Mankind, always under the hand of the Creator, brought out of
nothing by his Word, preserved by his Goodness, governed by his Wisdom,
punished by his Justice, delivered by his Mercy, and always subject to his
Power.

The World is no such thing as the Philosophers apprehended, formed, according
to some, by a fortuitous Concourse of first Bodies, or which, according to the
wisest of them, has fitted its Matter to its Author, who by consequence
depends not on it, neither in the ground of his being, nor in his first Estate,
and who ties it up to certain Laws which he himself cannot violate.

Moses, and our ancient Fathers, from whom Moses has recollected the
Traditions, give us other Thoughts. The God, whom he has shown unto us, has
far another kind of Power: He can do, and undo, what, and howsoever, he
pleases: He prescribes Laws to Nature, and destroys them again when ere it
pleases him.

If, to make himself known in times, when the Gross of Mankind had forgot him,
he has wrought astonishing Miracles, and has forced Nature to start from its
most constant Laws, he thereby still has continued to show, that he was the
absolute Master of them, and that his Will is the only Chain that preserves the
Order of the World.

It Is exactly what Men had forgot: The stability of so curious an Order, served
now to persuade them that that Order had been always, and that he was from
himself; whereby they were induced to adore either the World in general, or the
Stars, the Elements, and in short, all those great Bodies which compose it. God
therefore has testified to Mankind a Goodness worthy of himself, in reversing
upon some most extraordinary and particular Occasions, that Order, which not
only had little effect upon them, because they were used to them, but which
brought them (so far were they deluded by their Blindness) to imagine there was
an Eternity and Independence in somewhat besides God.

The History of the People of God, at^ested by its own Course, and by the
Religion, as well of those who have writ of it, as of those who have preserved
it with so much care, has kept, as in a faithful Register, the Memory of those
Miracles, and by that means gives us the true Idea of the supreme Empire of
God, the Almighty Master of his Creatures, either to hold them in subjection to
those general Laws which he has established, or to give them others from them,
when he judges it necessary, by some surprising stroke to awaken and rouse up
sleeping Mankind.

This is the God whom Moses has declared to us in his Writings, as the only
one whom we ought to serve; this is the God whom the Patriarchs worshipped
before Moses; in one word, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, to whom
our Father Abraham was willing to sacrifice his only Son, whose High Priest was
Melchisedech, the Type of Jesus Christ, to whom our Father Noah sacrificed when
he came out of the Ark, whom Righteous Abel acknowledged in his offering to him
that which was most dear and precious to him, whom Seth (given to Adam in the
room of his slain Abel) made known to his Children, being called also the Sons
of God; whom Adam himself had shown to his Posterity, as that great Being, out
of whose Hands he had been so lately come, and who alone could put an end to
the Calamities of his wretched Posterity.

Most excellent Philosophy that, which gives us such pure Ideas of the Author
of our Being! Admirable Tradition, which preserves to us the Remembrance of his
so magnificent Works! How holy have the People of God been, since that by an
uninterrupted Course from the beginning of the World even down to our days,
they have all along preserved so holy a Tradition and Philosophy.

II. Abraham, and the Patriarchy.
Now, as the People of God, under the Patriarch Abraham, took up a more
regulated Form, it is, my Lord necessary, to stay you a while upon the
Contemplation of that great Man.

He was born about three hundred and fifty years after the Deluge, at a time
when Man's Life, though reduced to much straiter Limits, was yet very long.
Noah was but newly dead, Shem his eldest Son was then living, and Abraham might
with him pass almost all his Life.

Represent then to your self the World as New, and also, if I may be admitted
to say so, all wet still with the Waters of the Deluge, when Men so near to the
beginning of things, only needed to know the Unity of God, and the Service
which was due to him from Tradition, which was preserved from Adam, and from
Noah. A Tradition, besides, so conformable to the illuminations of Reason, as
it seemed that a Truth so clear and important might never be clouded, nor
forgotten by Mankind. Such was the first Estate of Religion, which continued
down to Abraham, where to know the Greatness of God, Men were only to consult
their Reason and their Memory.

But Reason was weak and corrupted, and proportionably as Men were at further
distance from the beginning of things, they confounded the Ideas which they had
received from their Ancestors. The stupid and ill-instructed Youth, would no
longer believe their old decrepit Grandfathers, whom they scarcely knew after
so many Generations; and humane Sense grown brutish, could then no longer
raise it self up to intellectual things, and Men resolving only to worship what
they could see, Idolatry thus spread it self over all the Face of the Earth.

The Spirit that had deceived the first Man, tasted then all the Fruit of his
Seduction, and beheld the entire effect of that Word, You shall be as Gods.
From the moment that he spoke it, he designed to confound in Man the Idea of
God with that of the Creature, and to divide a Name, whose Majesty consists in
being incommunicable. His Project succeeded. Men buried in Flesh and Blood, had
however retained an obscure Idea of the divine Power, which kept it self up by
its own Force and Energy; but yet, which was so confused with the Images that
came into their own Heads and Fancies, that it made them to fall down and
worship every thing wherein appeared any Activity or any Power. Thus the Sun
and the Stars, which are seen at so vast a distance, the Fire and the Elements,
whose Effects were so universal, were the first Objects of the public
Adoration. Great Kings and mighty Conquerors, who could do any thing they
pleased on the Earth, the Authors of Inventions, which were profitable to
humane Life, had soon after divine Honors paid to them. 15^.
Men were at the pains of submitting themselves to their Senses; their Senses
decided all things, and in spite of their Reason made all the Gods which they
worshipped here below.

How distant then did man appear from his first Institution, Abraham, in whose
Family he resolved to establish his Worship, and preserve the ancient Faith, as
well of the Creation of the World, as of the particular Providence with which
humane things are governed.

Abraham has always been celebrated in the East, and it was not only the
Hebrews that looked on him as their Father. The Idumeans boasted of their
Extract from him. Ishmael the Son of Abraham is known among the Arabians as the
Parent from whom they came. Genesis 16.17. Genesis 17.25. Joseph. Ant. l. 13.
Circumcision still is used among them as the mark of their Original, and they
have received it at all times, not only on the eighth day, after the manner of
the Jews, but at thirteen years of Age, as the Scripture informs us it was
given to their Father Ishmael; a Custom which continues still among the
Mahometans. There are other Arabian People who yet remember Abraham and Ketura,
Alex. Polyb. apud Joseph, ant. l. 16.
and they are the same that the Scripture makes to come from that Marriage.
That Patriarch was a Chaldean, and those People famous for their Astronomical
Observations, have reckoned Abraham for one of their most learned Observators.
Beros. Hecar. Eup. Alex. Polyb. and al. apud Joseph. ant. l. 8. and Eus. praep.
Ev. 9.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. and 13.11. Nic. Damas. lib. 4. Hist. univ. in
excerpt. Vales. p. 491. and ap. Jos. ant. l. 8. and Eus. praep. Ev. 9.16. Genesis
13. etc.
The Historians of Syria have made him King of Damascus, though a Stranger, and
come from the Borders of Babylon, and they report that he left the Kingdom of
Damascus, to settle himself in the Country of the Canaanites, since called
Judea. But it will be best for us to observe what the sacred History relates to
us of this great Man. We have seen that Abraham followed that way of living
which was led by his Ancestors, before that all the World was reduced into
Kingdoms. He reigned in his Family, with which he embraced the pastoral Life,
so much renowned for its simplicity and Innocence; rich in his Flocks, in his
Slaves, and in his Silver; but without Lands and Demeans; and yet he lived in a
strange Kingdom, but was respected, and independent as a Prince. His Piety and
his Uprightness, protected by God, attracted that respect to him. He treated as
an Equal with Kings, who sought his Alliance, and it was from thence came that
ancient Opinion, that he made himself a King. But though his life was simple and
peaceable, yet understood he the Arts of War, but then it was only to defend
his oppressed Allies. Genesis 14.
He defended them, and revenged them by a most signal Victory: He restored to
them all their Riches re-taken from their Enemies, without reserving any thing
but the Tithe, which he offered up to God, and the Quota which belonged to the
Auxiliary Troops which he had brought along with him to the Battle. But after
so great a service, he refused the Presents of the Kings with an unparalled
Magnanimity, and could not endure that any man should boast he had enriched
Abraham. He would be indebted to none but to his God, who had protected him,
and whom he solely followed with a most perfect Faith and Obedience.

Guided by that Faith, he had forsaken his Native Country, to come to a Land
which God had shown him. God who had called him, and made him worthy of his
Alliance, Articled it upon these Conditions.

He declared to him that he would be his God, Genesis 12.17.
and the God of his Posterity, that is to say, he would be their Protector, and
that they should serve him as the only God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth.

He promised him a Land ('it was that of Canaan) to serve for a fixed habitation
to his Posterity, Ibid.
and for a place for his Religion.

He had no Children, and his Wife Sarah was barren. God swore to him by
Himself, and by his Eternal Veracity, Genesis 12.2.1^.4, 5.17.19.
that from him, and from his Wife should come a Race, that for number should
equal the Stars in the Firmament, and the Sand on the Seashore.

But the most remarkable Article of all of the Divine Promise was this, All the
People should presently fall into Idolatry. God promised to this Holy
Patriarch, that in him, and in his Seed should all those blind Nations that had
forgotten their Creator, be blessed, that is to say, re-called to the knowledge
of him, Genesis 12.3.18.18.
wherein the true Benediction is to be found.

By that promise was Abraham made the Father of all the faithful, and his
Posterity was chosen to be the source from whence the Blessing was to go upon
all the Earth.

In that Promise was included the Advent of the Messiah so often foretold to
our Fathers, but always foretold as Him who was to be the Savior of all the
Gentiles, and of all the people of the World.

Thus that blessed Branch, promised to Eve, became also the Branch and Cion of
Abraham.

This was the foundation of the Covenant; and these the Conditions of it. Genesis
17.
Abraham received the sign of it in Circumcision, a Ceremony whose proper
effect was to show that that Holy Man belonged to God, with all his Family.

Abraham was childless when God began to bless his Race: And God left him for
several years without giving him any: Afterward he had Ishmael, who was to be
the Father of a great People, Genesis 12.15.2.16.3, 4, 17.20.21.13.
but not of that chosen People so much promised to Abraham. The Father of the
chosen People was to proceed from him, and from his wife Sarah, Genesis 21.2.
who then was barren. At length when Ishmael was thirteen years old, came this
so much desired Son; he was called Isaac, that is to say, Laughter, a Son of
Joy, a Son of Miracle, a Son of Promise, who showed by his Birth, that the true
Children of God are born of Grace.

He, this Child of blessing, was grown to some considerle statute, and of an
age from which his Father might hope to have other Children of him, when of a
sudden God commands him to offer him up as a Sacrifice. Genesis 22.


To what a trial is Faith exposed! Abraham carrys Isaac to the Mountain which
God had shown him, and he went to sacrifice that Son in whom alone God promised
to make him the Father both of his People, and of the Messiah. Isaac presented
his naked Bosom to the Sword, which his Father held out ready to strike him.
God being satisfied with the obedience both of Father and Son, demanded no
further of them. After those two great Men had given to the World so lively and
fair an Image of the voluntary Oblation of Jesus Christ, and in their Souls had
tasted if the bitternesses of his Cross, they were esteemed truly worthy of
being his Ancestors. Genesis 22.28.
Abraham's faithfulness made God confirm to him all his promises, and blessed
anew, not only his Family, but also in his Family all the Nations of the World.

In effect, he continued his protection to Isaac his Son, and to Jacob his
Grandchild. They were his imitators, and adhered as he did, to the Ancient
Faith, to the Ancient manner of living, which was the Pastoral; to the Ancient
Government of Mankind, where every Father of a Family was a Prince in his own
House.

Thus in the Changes and Revolutions continually made among Men, the Holy
Antiquity revived in the Religion, and in the conduct of Abraham, and of his
Children.

God did also repeat to Isaac, and to Jacob the same Promises which he had made
to Abraham; Genesis 25.11.26.4.28.14.
and as he called himself the God Abraham, so he took upon him the name of the
God of Isaac, and of the God of Jacob.

Under his protection those three great Men began to dwell in the Land of
Caanan, but as strangers, and without possessing there a foot of ground, until
the Famine brought Jacob into Egypt, where his Children being multiplied
became soon after a great People, Acts 7.5.
as God had promised him.

But though this People, whom God made to be born in his Covenant, were to be
enlarged by Generation, and that the Blessing was to follow the Blood, yet this
great God failed not mark out to them the Election of his Grace: For after he
had chosen Abraham from among the Nations, out of the Children of Abraham he
chose Isaac, and from the two Twins of Isaac he chose Jacob, to whom afterward
he gave the name of Israel.

Jacob had twelve Sons, who were the twelve Patriarchs, heads of the twelve
Tribes. All were entered into the Covenant; but Judah was chosen from amidst all
his Brethren to be the Father of the Kings of Israel, and the Father of the
Messiah, so much promised to his Ancestors.

The time was come that the ten Tribes being cut off from the People of God for
their Infidelity, the Posterity of Abrah^m lost its Ancient Blessing, that is
to say, the Religion, the Land of Canaan, and the hopes of the Messiah, but
only in the Tribe of Judah, which was to give the name to the rest of the
Israelites, who were called Jews, and to all the Country, which was called
Judea.

Thus the Divine Election appeared still even in that carnal people, which was
to be preserved by ordinary propagation.

Genesis 49.10.
Jacob in his Spirit saw the Mystery of this Election just before he dyed, when
his Sons stood round about his Bed to receive the blessing of so good a Father.
God discovered to him the Estate of the twelve Tribes, when they should be come
to the promised Land; he reveals it to them in a few words, and those few words
include innumerable Meysteries.

Though all that he spoke of Judah's Brethren be expressed with an
extraordinary magnificence, and shows the man transported out of himself by the
Spirit of God, when he comes to Judah, he is carried out yet higher: Judah,
says he, thou art He whom thy Brethren shall praise: Genesis 49.8, 9, 10.
thine hand shall be on the neck of thine Enemies; thy Fathers Children shall
bow down before Thee. Judah is a Lions Whelp: From the prey, my Son, thou art
gone up: He stooped down, he couched as a Lion, and as an old Lion, who shall
rouse him up? The Scepter (that is to say, the Authority) shall not depart from
Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come: and unto him
shall the gathering of the people be.

The rest of the Prophecy is about the Country which the Tribe of Judah shall
posses in the Holy Land. But the last words, as we have seen them, (howsoever
we take them) signifies nothing but him who was to be the Ambassador of God,
the Minister and Interpreter of his Will, the Accomplishment of his Promises,
and the King of the new People, that is to say, the Messiah, or the Anointed of
the Lord.

Jacob speaks expressly to none but to Judah, from whom that Messiah was to
come: In the destiny of Judah alone he comprehends the destiny of all the
Nation, which after its dispersion was to see the rest of the other Tribes
reunited under the Standards of Judah.

All the Terms of the Prophecy are clear: there is only the word Scepter, which
the common use of out Tongue might make us take for the only Royalty; whereas
in the Sacred Language it signifies in general, Power, Authourity, and
Magistracy. That use of the word Scepter runs through all the pages of the
Scripture: It plainly appears also in the Prophecy of Jacob, and the Patriarch
means, that in the days of the Messiah all Authority shall be put to an end in
the House of Judah, which imports the total ruin of a State.

Thus the times of the Messiah are noted out to us here by a double change. By
the former, the Kingdom of Judah and of the Jews is threatened with its last
ruin: By the latter, there was a new Kingdom to be set up, not of one single
People, but of all People, over whom the Messiah was to be the head and hope.

In the Style of Holy Writ, the Jews are called in the singular number, and by
way of eminence, Isa. 65. etc. Romans 10.21. Isa. 2.2, 3.49.6.18.51.4, 5.
The People, or the people of God: And when we find it used the plural, those
who are versed in the Scriptures, understand the other people, who, we see also
are promised to the Messiah in the Prophecy of Jacob.

This great Prophecy comprehends in a few words all the History of the Jewish
People, and of Christ our Savior, who was promised to them. It points out to
us all the course of the people of God, and it effectually continues to this
day.

Therefore I pretend not to make a Commentary of it to You; there is no need
for You to have one, since by barely observing their course, You will easily
see the sense of the Oracle unvailed of it self, and that the very events
themselves will be their own Interpreters.

After Jacob's death, III. Moses, the written Law, and the bringing of the
People into the promised Land.
the People of God abode in Egypt, unto the time of the Mission of Moses, that
is to say, about two hundred years.

So that it was four hundred and thirty years before God gave his people the
Land which he had promised them.

He was resolved to accustom his Elect to rely upon his Promise, being assured
that it should be fulfilled either sooner or later, and always at the exact
time appointed by his Eternal Providence.

The Iniquities of the Amorites, both whose Land and Spoils he was resolved to
bestow on them, were not yet full, as he declared to Abraham, Genesis 15.16.
so as he knew they would be when he should deliver them to that hard and
unpitiable vengeance, which he would bring upon than by the hands of his chosen
People.

There was time to be given for this People to multiply, that so they might be
able to fill the Land which was designed them, and to possess it by force, Ibid.
in rooting out those Inhabitants who were accursed by God.

He was willing to have them undergo in Egypt a hard and insupportable
Captivity, that so being delivered by unheard of Prodigies, they might be in
love with their Rescuer, and eternally celebrate his Mercies.

This was the order of the Councils of God, so as himself has revealed them to
us, to teach us to fear him, to adore him, to love him, and to wait with Faith
and Patience.

The time being come, he hearkens to the cries of his People, who were cruelly
afflicted by the Egyptians, and he sends Moses to deliver his Children from
thdr Tyranny.

He makes himself known to that great Man, more than ever yet he had done to
any Man living. He appears to him in a manner equally magnificent and
comforting: he declares to him that He is that He is. All that is before him is
but a shadow. I am, Exodus 3.14.
says he, that I am. Being and Perfection belongs to me alone. He takes up a
new Name, which designates Being and Life in him as in their Source, and it is
that great name of God, Terrible, Mysterious, and Incommunicable, by which he
will for the time to come be served.

I will not in retail give you an account of the Plagues of Egypt, nor of the
hardness of Pharaoh's heart, nor of the passing over the red Sea, not of the
Smoke, nor Lightnings, the Trumpet sounding, and the dreadful Thundering and
Noise that the People heard on Mount Sinai. God there engraved with his own
hand upon two Tables of Stone the fundamental Precepts of Religion and Society.
He dictated the rest to Moses with a loud Voice. To preserve this Law in its
strength and vigor he was ordered to convene a venerable Assembly of seventy
Elders, Exodus 24.1. Numb. 11.16.
who were to be called the Senate of the People of God, and the perpetual
Council of the Nation. God made his public appearance, and caused his Law to
published in his presence with an astonishing demonstration of his Majesty and
Power.

Till then God had given nothing by writing, which might serve as a Rule for
Mankind. The Children of Abraham only had Circumcision, and the Ceremonies that
accompanied it, for a Token of the Covenant which God has contracted with that
Elect Race. They were separated by that sign from the other People, who
worshipped false Gods: Now they kept themselves in the Covenant of God by the
remembrance they had of the Promises made to their Fathers, and they were known
as a People who served the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob. God was so
strangely forgotten, that it was necessary to make him discernable by the name
of those who had been his worshippers, and of whom he was also the declared
Protector.

This great God was resolved no longer to leave to the hare memory of Mankind
the Mystery of Religion, and of his Covenant. It was time to give stronger bars
to Idolatry, which overwhelmed the World, and was even like to extinguish the
remains of natural Light in Men.

Ignorance and blindness was most prodigiously increased since Abraham's time.
In his time, and a little after, the knowledge of God extended it self into
Palestine and Egypt, Genesis 14.18, 19.
Melchisedeck King of Salem was the Priest of the most High God, possessor of
Heaven and Earth. Abimelech King of Gerar, and his Successor of the same name,
feared God, swore in his Name, and admired his Power. The Threatenings of that
great God were dreadful to Pharaoh King of Egypt, Genesis 21.22, 23.26.28, 29.
Genesis 12.17, 18. Exodus 5.1.23.9.1. etc, Exodus 8.26.
But in the time of Moses, those Nations were perverted. The true God was no
longer known in Egypt as the God of all the People of the World, but as The God
of the Hebrews. They then worshipped Beasts, and even creeping things of the
Earth. Every thing was God, excepting God himself, and the World which God had
made for the manifestation of his Power, seemed now to be become a Temple of
Idols. Mankind stragled so far as to adore its very Vices, and its Passions,
and there is nothing to be wondered at in all this. There was no Power more
Inevitable and Tyrannical than their own. Man accustomed to believe every thing
divine that was powerful, as he felt himself dragged on to a vice by a force
that was invincible, he easily thought that that same force was somewhat out of
himself, and so presently made a God of it! 'Twas thence that unchaste Love had
so many Altars erected to it, and some impurities which are horrible even to
name, Levit. 20.23.
began to be mixed with their Sacrifices.

Cruelty got into them too at the same time: Guilty Man, who was troubled at
the sense of his own wickedness, and looked on God as his Enemy, supposed he
could no ways better appease and reconcile him than by extraordinary
Sacrifices. He must shed Man's Blood an mix it with that of Beasts: a blind
fear pushed on Fathers to immolate their own Children, and to burn them to
their Gods instead of Incense. Those Sacrifices were common in the times of
Moses, and were but one part of those horrid Iniquities of the Amorites, whose
vengeance God does commit to the Children of Israel.

But they were not only peculiar to those people. It Is known, Herod. l. 2.
Caes. de bell. Gall. 6. Diod. l. 1.5. Plin. l. 30. Athen. l. 13. Proph. de abst.
l. 2. Jorn. de ^eb. Get. etc.
that among all the people of the world, not excepting one, Men have sacrificed
their own resemblances; and there had been no place on the Earth, where those
sad and frightful Divinities were not worshipped, whose implacable hatred to
Mankind did not require of them such Sacrifices.

Amidst so great an Ignorance, Man came to fall down and worship even the work
of his own hands. He believed himself able to shut up the Divine Spirit in his
Statues, and so miserably had he forgot 'twas God that made him, that he
thought in his turn he was able to make a God. Who could believe it, if
Experience did not show us that so stupid and brutish an Error was not only the
most universal, but also the most riveted and incorrigible among men? Thus it
must be confessed, to the confusion of Mankind, that the first of Truths, that
which the world preaches, that whose Impression is the most powerful, was the
most remote from men's ^ight. The Tradition which preserved it in their minds,
though it was clear enough, and sufficiently present, if we would have been
attentive to it, was just ready to vanish and be gone. Prodigious Fables, and
such also as were as full of Impiety as Extravagance, took their place. The
time was come where Truth but ill kept in the memory of men, could no longer
keep it self with being written, and God having besides resolved to form his
people to Virtue by Laws more express, and in a greater number, he was pleased
at the same time to give them in writing.

Moses was summoned to this work. That great Man recollected the History of
past Ages; That of Adam that of Noah, that of Abraham, that of Isaac, that of
Jacob; that of Joseph, or rather that of God himself, and of his admirable
Works.

He was not to search far for the tradition of his Ancestors. He was born a
hundred Years after the Death of Jacob. The old Men of his time might have
conversed several Years with that Holy Patriarch: The memory of Joseph, and the
Miracles which God had wrought by that great Minister of the Kings of Egypt
were yet fresh in their Minds. The Lives of three or four Men reached up even
to Noah, who had seen the Sons of Adam, and, as I may so say, had touched the
beginning of time and things.

Thus the ancient traditions of Mankind, and those of the Family of Abraham
were not hard to be collected; the Memory of them was still alive; and we need
not wonder if Moses in his Genesis speaks of things that happened in the first
Ages, as things certain, whose memorable Monuments are still to be seen both in
the neighboring People, and in the Land of Canaan.

In the time when Abraham, Isaac and Jacob inhabited that Land, they had in
several places erected the monuments of things which had happened to them.
There is yet shown there the places where the lived, the Wells they had dug and
sunk in those dry and sterile Countries to find their Families and their Flocks
Water; the Mountains whereon they Sacrificed to Almighty God, and where he
manifested himself to them; the Stones which they had laid on Heaps to serve as
a memorial to Posterity; the Tombs wherein their blessed Ashes are deposited:
The memory of those great Men were fresh, not only in all the Country, but
likewise in all the East, where many of those famous Nations have still
remembered that they have come from their Race.

So when the Hebrews entered into the promised Land, every place there did
celebrate their Ancestors; both the Towns and the Mountains, and the very
Stones themselves did there speak of those mavelous Men, and of those
astonishing Visions, by which God had confirmed them in the ancient and true
belief.

Those who are ever so little conversant in Antiquities, do know how curious
the first times were, to erect and to preserve such Monuments, and how
industriously careful Posterity has been since to retain the occasions of their
setting of them up. 'Twas one of the ways of their writing History; the Stones
have since been better fashioned and polished; and Statues have succeeded after
Pillars to great and solid Masses, which the first times erected.

It Is also very rational to believe that in the lineage, wherein was preserved
the knowledge of God, were also preserved by writing the remembrances of ancient
times. For Men have never been without that care. At least this is most
certain, that they made Songs, which the Fathers taught their Children; Songs
which were sung at their Festivals and in their Assemblies, gave a perpetuity
to the remembrance of the most remarkable actions of the past Ages.

From hence came Poetry, which was afterward changed into various forms and
modes, the most ancient whereof is still preserved in Odes, and those heroic
ways, used by all the Ancients, and still to this day by those People who have
not the use of Letters, in Praising God and great Men.

The style of those Songs is bold, extraordinary, natural always in what it is
fit, to represent Nature in all its Transports, which for that reason is forced
by the most lively and impetuous Sallies, disengaged from these ordinary Bonds
that are requisite in an united Discourse, confined besides to just Numbers and
Cadences, which advances their force, surprises the Ear, seizes the
Imagination, gives an Emotion to the Heart, and with more ease imprints it self
in the Memory.

Among all the People of the World, none have so much used these kind of Songs
as have the People of God. Moses takes notice of a great many of them, which he
denotes by the first Verses, because the People knew the rest. Numb. xxi. v.
14.17.18.27 etc. Exodus xv. 1.
He himself has made two of this Nature. The first is his Song for their
triumphant passing over the Red Sea, and the Enemies of the People of God, some
already drowned, the rest half conquered by the dread and terror of it. By the
second, Deuteronomy. xxxii. v. 1.
Moses confounds the Peoples ingratitude, by setting forth Gods Mercy^ and
Vengeance. Following Ages imitated him. 'Twas God and his mavelous Works were
the Subject of those Odes which they composed; God himself inspired them, and
it was only to the People of God that Poetry came truly by Enthusiasm.

Jacob declared in that mystical Language the Oracles which contained the
Destiny of his twelve Sons, that so every Tribe might the more easily keep in
Mind what particularly related to it, and learn to praise him, who was no less
magnificent in his Predictions than faithful in performing them.

Thus you see the means made use of by God to preserve, even down to Moses, the
remembrance of past transactions. That great Man instructed by all those means,
and raised upon high by the Holy Ghost, has written the Works of God with an
exactness and simplicity which attracts belief and admiration, not only to
himself, but even to Almighty God.

He has joined to past actions, which contained the original and ancient
Traditions of the People of God, the wonders which God actually wrought for
their deliverance. Of that he produces to the Israelites no other Witnesses
than their own Eyes. Moses tells them not of things which were done in
impenetrable retreats, and in profound Caves; he speaks not in the Air; he
particularizes and circumstantiates every thing, as a Man that fears not to be
caught in an untruth. He grounds all their Laws, and their whole Republic on
the wonders which they themselves have seen. Those wonders were nothing else
but Nature changed all on a sudden on different occasions for their
deliverance, and the punishment of their Enemies; the Sea divided it self in
two, the Earth opened herself, heavenly Food, abundance of Water gushing out of
Rocks, by a stroke of the Rod, and the Heaven which gave them a visible sign to
direct their March, and such like Miracles which they themselves had seen for
forty Years.

The People of Israel were no more intelligent, nor more subtle than other
People, who being given up to their Senses, could not have any conceptions of
an Invisible God. On the contrary, they were stupid and rebellious as much, if
not more than any other People. But that invisible God in his nature, made
himself so sensible by his continual Miracles, and Moses inculcated them with
so much force, that at length that sensual People were overcome by the pure
Idea of a God who made all things by his word, of a God who who was only
Spirit, Reason, and Intelligence.

So that, whilst Idolatry, so mightily increased since Abraham's time, was
spread over all the Face of the Earth, the only Posterity of that Patriarch was
free from it. Their Enemies bore that Testimony of them; and the People, where
the truth of Tradition was not yet utterly abolished and worn out, declared
with astonishment, that there was not seen an Idol in Jacob, neither any
superstitious Presages, nor Divinations, nor Witchcrafts; but they were a
People who trusted in the Lord their God, whose Power was invincible.

To fix and imprint in their minds the Unity of God, and the perfect Uniformity
which he requires in his worship, Moses often repeats, that in the promised
Land this only God would choose out a place, in which alone the Feasts and
Sacrifices, Numb. xii. xiv, xv, xvi, xvii, etc.
and all the public Service should be performed. Whilst they were waiting for
this desired place, during the time the People wandered in the wilderness,
Moses built the Tabernacle, the Temple which was carried about, where the
Children of Israel offered up their Prayers to God, who had made heaven and
earth, and who did not disdain (with reverence may I say it) to travel with
them and to be their Guide.

Upon this Principle of Religion, upon this Sacred Foundation was built all the
Law; a Law holy, just, beneficent, honest, wise, provident, and simple, which
bound the Society of men among themselves by the holy Society of Man with God.

To this Holy Institution he added Majestical Ceremonies, Feasts that recalled
to mind the Remembrances of the Miracles, whereby the People of Israel had been
delivered; Deuteronomy. xxvii. xxviii. etc.
and what no other Legislator ever durst do, particular Assurances that all
things should be prosperous with them so long as they lived in subjection to
the Law: whereas their Disobedience should be pursued with a manifest and
inevitable vengeance. He must needs be very much assured by God to be able to
give such a Foundation to his Laws, and the event has justified that Moses had
not spoke of his own head.

As to the numerous observances which he laid upon the Hebrews, though now they
seem superfluous to us, they were in those days requisite and necessary to
separate the people of God from the rest of Mankind, and served as a Barrier to
Idolatry, lest it should bewitch and ensnare the people of God into Compliances
with their ways of worship.

To maintain the Religion and all the Traditions of the People of God among the
twelve Tribes, one Tribe was chosen to which God gives in share with the Tithes
and Oblations, the care of Sacred things. Levi and his Children are themselves
consecrated to God as the Tenth of all his People. In Levi Aaron is chosen to
be the High Priest, and the Priesthood is made hereditary in his Family.

Thus the Altars had their Ministers; the Law her particular Defenders; and the
course of the People of God is justified by the Succession of its Priests, who
came without I^terruption from Aaron the first of them all.

But what was still more lovely in this Law, was that it prepared the way for a
Law more August and Noble, less clogged with Ceremonies, and more fruitful in
Divine Virtues.

Moses, to keep the People in expectation of that Law, confirmed to them the
coming of that great Prophet who was to proceed from Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18.
The Lord thy God, says he, will raise up unto thee, a Prophet from the midst
of Thee, of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him Ye shall hearken. That Prophet
like unto Moses, a Legislator as he was, who could he be unless the Messiah,
whose Doctrine was one day to influence and sanctify all the World?

And there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.10.
whom the Lord knew face to face, and who gave Laws to his People. So even unto
the time of the Messiah, the People in all times and under all difficulties,
rested themselves only upon Moses. As Rome paid Reverence to the Laws of
Romulus, Numa, and the twelve Tables; as Athens had recourse to those of Solon;
as Lacedemonia preserved and respected those of Lycurgus; So the Hebrews were
continually alleging those of Moses. Now the Legislator had so well adjusted
all things in it, that never was there an occasion to change any thing.
Wherefore the Body of the Jewish Law is not a Recollection of diverse Laws made
at several times and upon different occasions. Moses being illuminated by the
Spirit of God, had foreseen all things. We do see none of the Ordinances of
David, or of Solomon, or of Jehosaphat, or of Hezekiah, though they were all
very zealous for Justice; The good Princes only observed the Law of Moses, 1
Kings 2.3. Deuteronomy. 4.2.12.32.
and were contented to recommend the observance of it to their Successors.
Either to add to it, or to diminish one Tittle from it, was an attempt which
the People looked upon with horror. There was a continual need of the Law to
regulate not only their Feasts, their Sacrifices, and their Ceremonies, but
also all their other public and private Actions, Judgments, Concracts,
Marriages, Successions, Funerals, the very form of their Clothes, and in
general whatsoever respected manners. There was no other Book wherein the
Precepts of good living were studied. They were to examine and meditate on it
night day, and to remember the Sentences, and to have them always before their
Eyes. That the Children learnt to read: The only Rule of Education which was
given to their Parents to teach them, and to inculcate into them, and to make
them observe that holy Law which alone was able to make them wise from their
Childhood. So likewise was it to be in the hands of all the World. Besides the
constant daily readily which every one was obliged to in private, there was a
public reading of it at the end of every Seven years, Deuteronomy. 31.10. 2 Esdras
8.17, 18.
in the Solemnity of the year of Release, and it was as a new publication at
the Feast of Tabernacles, where all the People were assembled for eight days.
Moses caused the Original of Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 31.26.
which was an abstract of the whole Law, to be put in the side of the Ark of
the Covenant. But for fear lest in futurity of time it might be altered by the
malice or negligence of men. Besides the Copies which ran among the People,
there were made Authentic Precedents, which being carefully reviewed and kept
by the Priests and Levites, were esteemed as Originals and Records. The Kings
for Moses had wisely foreseen that these People would at last have Kings as
well as other Nations) The Kings, I say, were obliged by an express law in
Deuteronomy to receive from the hands of the Priests and Levites one of these
Precedents which were so religiously corrected, Deuteronomy. 17.18.
that they might transcribe and read it all their lives. The Precedents thus
reviewed by public Authority, were held by all People in singular Veneration:
they looked on them as being immediately derived from the hands of Moses, as
pure and entire as God had dictated them to him. An ancient Volume of this
severe and religious Correction having been found in the House of the Lord, 2
Kings 22.8. etc. 2 Chronicles. 34.14. etc.
in the Reign of Josiah, and peradventure was that very Original which Moses
had caused to be put in the side of the Ark of the Covenant, stirred up the
Piety of that holy King, and thereby was the occasion of bringing that People
to Repentance. The great effects which all along the public reading of that
Law wrought are innumerable. In a word, it was a perfect Book, which being
joined by Moses to the History of the People of God, it taught them their
Origin their Religion, Polity, Manners, Philosophy, and whatsoever conduced to
the regulation of Life, whatsoever united and formed Society, the good and the
bad Examples; The Reward of the one, and the rigorous Punishments which had
attended the other.

By that admirable Discipline, a People brought out of Slavery and Bondage, and
kept forty years in the Wilderness, came all fitted to the Land which they were
to possess. Moses brings them to the Entrance, and being informed of his
approaching end, he commits the remains of what was yet to be done to Joshua.
Deuteronomy. 31.14. etc.
But before he dyed, he composed that long and most excellent Song which begins
with these words. Give ear, O ye Heavens, Deuteronomy. 32.1.
and I will speak; and hear, O Earth, the words of my mouth. In that Silence of
all nature, he speaks first to the People with a sorce that was inimitable, and
foreseeing their Infidelities; he discovers to them the dreadfulness of it. All
of a sudden he goes out of himself, as if he found all Humane Discourse below
so great a Subject; he reports what God says, and it makes him speak with so
much elevation and so much sweetness, that we know not which inspired him most,
whether Fear and Confusion, or Love and Confidence.

All the People learnt by heart that Divine Song by the order of God, Deuteronomy.
31.19, 22.
and of Moses. That great Man after that died content, as a Man that had forgot
nothing which might preserve in the Memory of his People the Benefits and
Precepts of God. He leaves his Children in the midst of their Citizens without
any distinction, and without any extraordinary establishment. He has been
admired not only by his People, but by all the People of the World, and never
had any Legislator so great a name as He among all Mankind. It Is believed that
he writ the Book of Job. The Sublimity of the Thoughts, and the Majesty of the
Style, make that History worthy of Moses. For fear lest the Hebrews should be
puffed up by attributing the Grace of God to themselves alone; it was necessary
to make them to understand that that great God had his chosen ones, even in the
Race of Esau. And what Doctrine was more important? and what more profitable
Consolation could Moses give to the People afflicted in the Wilderness, than
that of the Patience of Job, who, being delivered into the hands of Satan, to
be exercised by all manner of Miseries, saw himself deprived of his Wealth, his
Children, and all the Comforts of this World; presently after, struck with a
horrible Disease, and moved within by the Temptation of Blasphemy and Despair*
yet he, remaining firm and resolute in his Integrity, made it evident, that a
faithful devout Soul, supported by the Divine Relief, in the midst of the
fiercest and most frightful Trials, and in spite of all the blackest thoughts
which the Evil Spirit could suggest to it, knew not only how to maintain an
invincible Trust and Confidence, Job 13.15.14.14.15.16.21.19.25. etc.
but also to raise up it self by his own greatest Afflictions to the highest
Contemplation, and to acknowledge in the Sufferings it endures with the Vanity
and Nothingness of Man, the Supreme Empire of God; and his Infinite Wisdom. Job
instructs us in. To keep up the Character of Time here is seen the Faith of the
holy Man crowned by Temporal Prosperities; but yet the People of God are hereby
taught to know what is the virtue of Sufferings, and to have a fore-taste of
the Grace which was one day to be fastened to the Cross.

Moses had tasted it when he preferred the Sufferings and Ignominy which he was
to undergo with the People of God, to the Delicacies and Abundance in the House
of the King of Egypt. From that time God made him to taste of the Reproaches of
Jesus Christ. He tasted them also again in his precipitated Flight, and in his
Exile of forty years. Heb. 11.24, 25, 26.
But he drunk even to the bottom of Christ his Cup, when being chosen to save
that People, Numb. 14.10. etc.
he was forced to undergo their continual Revoltings, wherein he ran the hazard
of his life. He learnt what it would cost him to save the People of God, and
showed at a distance what a higher deliverance 'twas one day to cost the
Savior of the World.

That great Man had not so much as the consolation of entering into the
promised Land: he only saw it from the top of a Mountain, Numb. 20.12,
13.27.14. Deuteronomy. 32.50, 51.
and was not ashamed to confess that he was excluded from it by a sin, which
though it seemed but little, yet deserved to be punished so severely in a man
whose Grace was so particularly eminent. Moses served for an example to the
severe Jealousy of God, and to the Judgments which he executed with so
terrible an exactness on those whom his Bounty and Kindness obliged to a more
perfect Fidelity.

But still a higher Mystery is shown us in this Exclusion of Moses. That wise
Legislator, who by so many Miracles did only lead the Children of God in the
Neighborhood of their Land, serves himself to us for an Evidence, Heb. 7.19.
that his Law made nothing perfect, and that without being able to give us the
accomplishment of the Promises, it makes us only (as it were) to salute them at
a distance, or leads us at most but to the gate of our Inheritance. It was a
Joshua, a Jesus, for it was the true name of Joshua, who by that name, and by
his office represented the Savior of the World: it was that Man so much below
Moses in all things, and superior only to him by his name; it was He, I say,
who was to bring the People of God into the holy Land.

By the Victories of that great Man, before whom Jordan was driven back, the
Walls of Jericho fell down of themselves, and the Sun stood still in the midst
of Heaven; God established his Children in the Land of Canaan, out of which by
the same means he drove the abominable People. By the hatred which his faithful
ones had against them, he inspired them with an extreme indignation of their
wickedness and impiety, and the punishment which was inflicted by their
Ministry, filled them themselves with fear of the Divine Justice, of which they
executed the Decrees. One part of those People whom Joshua drove out ot their
Land, Procop. lib. 2. de bell. Vand.
went and planted themselves in Africa, where was found a long time after in an
ancient Inscription, the Monument of their Flight, and the Victories of Joshua.
After those miraculous Victories had put the Israelites in the possession of
the greatest part of the Land which was promised to their Fathers; Joshua, and
Eleazar the High Priest, Jos. 13, 14. and seq. Numb. 26.53.34.17. Jos. 14, 15.
with the Heads of the twelve Tribes, divided it among them according to the
Law of Moses, and assigned to the Tribe Judah time the first and the greatest
Lot. From the time of Moses, it was set above the others in Number, in Courage,
and in Dignity. Joshua dyed, and the People continued the Conquest of the Holy
Land. God would have the Tribe of Judah to march at the Head, Numb.
2.3.9.7.12.10.14. 1 Chronicles. 5.2. Judge 1.1, 2.4.8.
and declared that he had delivered the Country into their hands. In fine, it
overcame die Canaanites, and took Jerusalem, which was to be the holy City, and
the capital City of the People of God: it was the ancient Salem, where
Melchisedek had reigned in Abraham's time; Melchisedek, that King of
Righteousness, Heb. 7.2.
(for that is the meaning of his Name) and at the same time too, King of Peace,
for that is King of Salem; whom Abraham had owned for the greatest High Priest
in the World, as if Jerusalem had then been destined for a holy City, and the
head of Religion. That City was at first given to the Children of Benjamin,
who, being weak and few in number, could not drive out the Jebusites the
ancient Inhabitants of Jerusalem, but they dwelt among them. Judge. 1.21.
Under the Judges the People of God were variously treated, according as they
did well or ill. After the death of the old men who had seen Miracles from the
hand of God, the remembrance of those mighty Works decayed, and the universal
inclination and bent of Mankind warped the People to Idolatry. As often as they
fell into it, they were punished; and as often as they repented, they were
delivered. The Faith of Providence, and the Truth of the Promise, and the
Threatenings of Moses, was confirmed more and more in the hearts of the true
Believers. But God prepared also greater Examples of them. The People demanded
a King, and God gave them Saul: quickly reproved for his sins: he at last
resolved to establish a Royal Family, from which e Messiah should come, and he
chose it in Judah. David, 1 Samuel 16.11.12. etc.
a young Shepherd sprung out of that Tribe, the youngest of the Sons of Jesse,
whose merit neither his Father, nor his Family knew, but yet whom God found to
be after his own heart, was anointed by Samuel in Bethlehem, which was his own
Country.

Here the People of God, IV. David, the Kings and the Prophets.
to take up a Form more August and Magnificent, the Kingdom was settled in the
House of David. That House began by two Kings of different Characters, but both
were admirable. David a warlike and conquering Prince subdued the Enemies of
the People of God, whose Arms were dreaded over all the East; and Solomon
famous for his Wisdom both at home and abroad, made that People happy by a
profound Peace. But the Progress of Religion does here require some particular
Remarks upon the Lives of those two great King^

David reigned at first over Judah, mighty and victorious, and afterward he
was owned over all Israel. 2 Samuel 5.6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Chronicles. 11.6, 7, 8. 1 Chronicles
2.16.
He took from the Jeb^sites the strong Hold of Zion, which was the Citadel of
Jerusalem. Being Master of that Fortress, he established there, by the order of
God, the Sea of the Kingdom and that of Relig^on; and there he lived: He built
round about it, and called it The City of David; Joab his Sister's built the
rest of the City; and Jerusalem took up a new form. Those of Judah possessed
all the Country, and Benjamin being few in number, dwelt together with them.

The Ark of the Covenant built by Moses, where God dwells between the
Cherubims, and where the two Tables of the Decalogue were kept, had then no
fixed place. David brought it in Triumph, 2 Samuel 6.2, 16, 17. etc.
with shouting and with the sound of the Trumpet, into Zion, which he had
conquered by the Almighty help of God, that so God might reign in Zion, and
that he might be acknowledged there as the Protectors of David, 1 Chro.
16.39.21.29.
of Jerusalem, and of all the Kingdom. But the Tabernacle wherein the People
had worshipped God in the Wilderness, was yet, at Gibeon; and there it was
where they offered their Sacrifices upon the Altar which Moses had built. It
was but in expectation that there would be a Temple, where the Altar should be
reunited with the Ark, and where should be performed all the Service. When
David had conquered all his Enemies, and had extended his Victories even to
Euphrates; being at quiet, and a mighty Conqueror, he at all his thought upon
the establishing of the Divine Worship, and on the same Mountain where Abraham
went to Sacrifice his only Son, 2 Samuel 8.11. 1 Chronicles. 18. 2 Samuel 24.25. 1 Chronicles. 21.22. and seq. Jos. ant. 7.10.
and was stopped by the hand of an Angel, he designed by the appointment of
God, the place of the Temple.

He said down all his Designs; he amassed mighty no^ and precious Materials for
it; he dedicated all the Spoils of his conquered Kings and People to it. But
that Temple which was so designed by the Conqueror, was not to be built but by
his Son and Successor, the peaceable Solomon. He built it after the Model of
the Tabernacle. The Altar of the Holocausts, 1 Kings 6,7, 8. 2 Chronicles. 3, 4, 5,
6, 7.
the Altar of Incense, the golden Candlestick, the Tables of Show Bread, and
all the other consecrated Movables of the Temple, were taken from the like
Pieces which Moses had caused to be made in the Wilderness. Solomon only added
magnificence and grandeur to them. The Ark which the Man of God had built was
placed in the Holy of Holys, a place i^^cessible, a Symbol of the impe^^^rable
Majesty of God, and of Heaven, forbidden to Men until Jesus Christ had opened
them an Entrance into it by the shedding of his ^tood. On the Day of the
Dedication of the Temple, God appeared there in his Majesty. He chose that
place, to establish his Name and his Worship there. He forbad them there to
Sacrifice in any other place. The unity of God was demonstrated of the Unity of
his Temple Jerusalem became a holy City, the image of the Church (...) God was
to inhabit, as in his true Temple, and of Heaven, where he will make us
eternally happy by the manifestation of his glory.

After that Solomon had built the Temple, he built also the Palace of the
Kings, the Architecture of which was worthy so great a Prince. His
Country House, which was called The Forest of Lebanon, 1 Kings 7.2. and 10.
was equally magnificent and delicate. The Palace which he made for the Queen
was a new Ornament to Jerusalem. Every thing was great and splendid in those
Buildings; The Potches, the Galleries, the Walks, the King's Throne, and the
Tribunal where he sat to judge, Cedar was the only Wood he made use of in all
those costly Works. All things shined there of Gold and rich Stones. The
Citizens and the Strangers admired the Majesty's of the Kings of Israel. The
rest was correspondent to this Magnificence; 1 Kings 10. 2 Chronicles. 8, 9.
The Towns, the Arsenals, the Horses, the Chariots, the Prince's Guard, the
Commerce, the Navigation, and the good Order with a profound Peace, had made
Jerusalem the richest City of the East. The Kingdom was at rest and abounded
with all things; every thing there represented the heavenly glory: In the Wars
of David were seen the wearisome Toils by which they were to deserve it; and in
the reign of Solomon how peaceable and quiet the Enjoyment of it was.

But the raising of these two great Kings, and of the Royal Family, was
the effect of a particular Election. David himself celebrates the Marvel of it
in these words: 1 Chronicles. 28.4. and 5.
The Lord God of Israel chose (...) before all the House of my Father to be
King over Israel for ever: for he has chosen Judah to be the Ruler; and of the
House of Judah, the House of my Father; and among the Sons of my Father he
liked me, to make me King over all Israel; and he said to me, Solomon thy Son
shall build my House and my Courts: for I have chosen hi^ to be my Son, and I
will be his Father.

This Divine Election had a higher object than what at first appeared. That
Messiah so often promised as the Son of Abraham, was also to be the Son of
David, and of all the Kings of Judah. It was upon the prospect of the Messiah,
and of his Eternal Reign, that God promised to David that his Throne should be
maintained for ever. Solomon chosen to be his Successor was designated to
represent the Person of the Messiah. Wherefore God says of him, 2 Samuel 7.14.
I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son: a thing which he never said with
that energy and force, of any King, nor of any Man.

Also in the time of David, 1 Chronicles. 22.10.
and under the Kings his Sons, the Mystery of the Messiah was declared more
than ever by the wonderful Prophecies which were clearer than the Sum at
Noonday.

David perceived it afar off, and sung of it in his Psalms with a grandcur that
nothing will ever be equal to it. Oft-times he only thought of celebrating the
glory of his Son Solomon; and of a sudden being transported beyond himself, and
carried far away, Matthew. 6.29.12.42. Psalm. 72.5.11.17.
he saw him who was greater than Solomon both in glory and wisdom. The Messiah
appeared to him sitting upon a Throne more lasting than the Moon. He saw at his
feet all the Nations overcome, and blessed in him, agreeable to the Promise
made to Abraham. He raised his sight higher still, and said (...) saw him in
the light of his Saints, Psalm. 110.
and before the Morning, coming from all Eternity out of the Bosom of his
Father, the Eternal High Priest, and without a Successor, neither succeeding
himself to any One, created extraordinarily, not according to the order of
A^r^^, but after the order of Melchised^^, a new order which the Law knew
nothing of. He beheld him sitting on the right hand of God, and seeing from the
highest Heavens his Enemies his Footstool. He is astonished at so great and
wonderful a Spectacle, and ravished with the glory of his Son, he calls him,
His Lord.

He saw him God, that God had anointed him to make him over all the Earth,
Psalm. 45.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. etc.
by his Meekness, Truth, and Righteousness. He was in Spirit assisting to the
Council of God, and heard from the very Mouth of the Ete^nal Father that Word
which he addressed to his only Son, Psalm. 2.7, 8.
This day have I begotten Thee, whereto God joined the Promise of a perpetual
Empire. Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession. Thou shall break them with
a rod of Ir^n, th^^ shall dash them in pieces like a P^tter'^ Vessel. Why do
the Heathen rage, and the People imagine a vain thing, the Kings of the Earth
set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and
against his anointed, saying, Let us break their B^nds asunder, and cast away
their Cords from us. He that sits in the Heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall
have them in derisi^n for their foolish Projects, and in spite of all their
ridiculous opposition, he will establish the Empire of his Christ. Be wise
therefore, Psalm. 2.10.
O ye Kings, be instructed ye J^dges of the Earth. He establishes him upon
themselves, and they must be the first Subjects of that Christ, whose Yoke they
would have so fain shook off. And though the Kingdom of that great Messiah be
often foretold in the Scriptures under the most pompous and magnificent Idea's,
yet God did not hide from David the Igonominies of that blessed Fruit of his
Loin^. This Instruction was necessary for the People of God. If that People, as
yet but weak, had need of being drawn on by Temporal Promises, yet it was not
f^t to let them only have regard to these Humane things as their utmost and
most sovereign Felicity, and as their only Recompense: wherefore God shows them
afar off that Messiah so much promised, and so much desired, the Model of
Perfection; the Object of their Complaisances and Delight swallowed up with
Grief. The Cross appeared to David as the true Throne of that new King. He saw
his hands and his feet pierced, and that all his bones might be told, Psalm.
22.16, 17, 18, 19.
they looked and stared upon him, being most barbarously hung by all the weight
of his Body, his Garments parted among them, and how they cast lots upon his
Vesture, giving him gall and vinegar to drink, his Enemies gnashing their Teeth
at him, and glutting themselves with his Blood. And at the same time too he saw
the glorious effects of his Humiliations. All the ends of the World shall
remember the Lord, which they had for so many Ages forgot, and the Poor shall
come the first to the Table of the Messiah, and afterward they that be fat
upon Earth shall worship and bless him; He presiding in the great and numerous
Church, that is to say, in the Assembly of the converted Nations, and declaring
his righteousness unto a People that shall be born, that he has done this.
David, who saw these things, confessed in the seeing of them, that the Kingdom
of his Son was not of this World. He made no wonder of it, for he knew this
World was transient and passed away; and a Prince that was always so humble
upon the Throne, saw very well that a Throne was not a Good on which all his
hopes were to be terminated.

The other Prophets have no less seen the Mystery of the Messiah. There is
nothing that is great or glorious but they have said of his Reign. ^ic. 5.2.
One sees Bethlehem the least among the thousands of Judah, made famous by his
Birth, and at the same time raised up higher, he sees another Birth, whose
goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting, from the Bosom of his
Father: Another sees the Virginity of his Mother, Isaiah 7.14.6.9.
Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his Name
Emmanuel, a God with us shall come from this Virginal Womb, and a Child whose
Name shall be called Wonderful, he calls God. He beholds him entering into his
Temple, the other sees him glorious in his Grave, where Death was overcome.
Mal. 3.1. Isai. 11.10.53.9. Zach. 11.12, 13.
In publishing thus his Greatnesses, they do not forget to declare his
Reproaches too. They have seen him sold to the People at a price, and knew the
number as well as the service of the thirty pieces of Silver for which he was
bought. At the same time that they beheld him great and exalted, they saw him
likewise despised and rejected of men, Isai. 59.13.
a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, and as the offscouring of the
World, as well as the wonder of it, both by his low as well as his high estate;
the meanest of Mankind, Ibid. 4.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
that had born our Griefs, being wounded for our Transgressions; he was our
most merciful Benefactor, and yet we despised him; he was bruised for our
Iniquities, and yet with his stripes we were to be healed, he was treated like
a Malefactor, brought to his punishment with the wicked, and delivered himself
up like a Lamb, that was Innocent, without a murmur to his death, a long
Posterity by that means was to be born of him, Dan. 9.26.
and vengeance shall come upon all the incredulous People. To the end that
nothing might be wanting to the Prophecy, they have foretold the very years
even to his coming, and unless one resolves to be obstinately blind, it is
impossible now to be ignorant of it.

And not only the Prophets saw Jesus Christ, but they were also the Type and
Figure of him, and represented his Mysteries, especially that of the Cross.
Almost all of them suffered Persecution for Righteousness sake, and have
represented to us in their Sufferings the persecuted Innocence and Truth in our
Blessed Lord. Elijah and Elisha, how were they continually threatened? How often
was Isaiah made the scorn and derision both of the People and the Kings, who at
last, as the positive Tradition of the Jews affirm, sacrificed him to their
Fury? Zachariah the Son of Jehoiadah was stoned: Ezekiel was always under
Affliction; the Calamities of Jeremiah were continual and inexplicable: Daniel
was seen twice in the midst of the Den of Lions: Not one of them but who were
contradicted, opposed, and ill treated; and they all discover to us by their
Example, that if the weakness of the ancient People in the general required to
be supported by Temporal Blessings, yet notwithstanding the strong ones of
Israel, and the men of an extraordinary Sanctity were then fed with the Bread
of Affliction, and drank beforehand for their Sanctification, of the Cup that
was prepared for the Son of God; A Cup so much the more full of Bitterness, as
the Person of Jesus Christ was more Sacred and Holy.

But that which the Prophets saw most clearly, and which they also declared in
the most magnificent terms, was the blessing bestowed upon the Gentiles by the
Messiah. That Root of Jesse, and of David, appeared to the holy Prophet Isaiah,
Isai. 40.10.
as an Ensign given of God to the People, to whom the Gentiles should seek. The
Man of grief, whose stripes were to be our healing, was chosen to wash the
Gentiles by a holy sprinkling, Ibid. 52.15.
which they acknowledged in his Blood and in Baptism. Kings seized with an
awful respect in his Presence, should shut their Mouths, and ^e silent, For
that which had not been told them shall they see, and that which they had not
heard, shall they consider. Isa. 55.4.5.
He was given for a Witness to the People, a Leader and Commander to the
Gentiles. Under him, a Nation unknown, shall be joined to the People of God,
and the Gentiles should run unto him on all sides. Ibid. 62.1, 2.
He was the Righteousness of Zion that should go forth as Brightness, and the
Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns. And the Gentiles should see his
Righteousness, and all Kings his Glory, who was so celebrated in the Prophecies
of Zion.

But yet let us see him better described, Isai. 42.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and with a more particular Character. A Man of an admirable sweetness and
temper, especially being the Elect in whom Gods Soul delighted, should bring
forth Judgment to the Gentiles, the Isles should wait for his Law. Thus the
Hebrews called Europe, and the distant Countries. He shall not cry, nor lift
up, n^r cause his voice to be heard in the Street: Scarce shall they hear him,
he will be so meek and quiet. A bruised Reed shall he not break, and the
smoking Flax shall he not quench. So far will he be from confounding the Weak
and the Sinners, that his charitable Voice will call them, and his gracious
Hand will sustain them. He will open the eyes of the Blind, and bring out the
Prisoners from the Prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the
Prisonhouse. His power shall be equal to his goodness: Esai. 42.7.
His essential Character is to join together Bounty and Kindness with efficacy:
And this is the reason why that so still voice shall in a moment go from one
end of the Earth to the other, and without stirring up the least Sedition among
Men, it will excite all the Earth. He is neither violent nor impetuous, and he,
who was hardly known when in Judea, shall not be only the Foundation of the
Peoples Covenant, but also the Light of all the Gentiles. Ibid. 6.
Under his admirable Reign, the Assyrians and the Egyptians shall be no longer
but one and the same People of God with the Israelites. Blessed be Egypt my
People, and Assyria the work of my Hands, Esai. 10.25.
and Israel mine Inheritance. All shall become Israel, Ibid. 60.1, 2.3, 4,
11.61.1, 2.3, 11.62.1, 2.65.1, 2, 15, 16.66.19, 20, 21. Malach. 3.10. Psalm.
110.2.
all shall become holy. Jerusalem is no more particular private City: It is the
Image of a new Society, where all the People are gathered together: Europe,
Africa, and Asia, received Preachers in whom God had put his Sign, that they
might discover his Glory to the Gentiles. The Elect, till then, called by the
Name of Israel, shall be called by a new Name, which shall signify the
fulfilling of the Promises, and an happy Amen. The Priests and the Levites, who
till then came from Aaron shall (for the time to come) come from the midst of
the Heathens, that is, the Gentiles. A new Sacrifice more pure and agreeable
than the old, shall be substituted in its place, and then shall be known the
reason why David had consecrated a High Priest of a new Order. The Just shall
descend from Heaven as the Dew, the Earth shall bring forth her But, and it
shall be the Savior with whom Righteousness shall be seen to arise. Heaven and
Earth shall join to bring forth, as by a common Delivery, him that shall be
both Heavenly and Earthly together: New Ideas of Virtues shall appear in the
World in his Examples, and in his Doctrine; and the Grace which he will shed
abroad, will imprint them in their Hearts. Every thing will be changed by his
coming, and God has sworn by himself, and the word is gone out of his Mouth in
Righteousness, and shall not return, Isai. 45.23.
that unto him every knee shall how, and every tongue shall swear, and
acknowledge his sovereign Power.

This is one part of the mavelous things which God has shown to the
Prophets, under the Kings, the Sons of David, and to David before all others.
All have written beforehand the History of the Son of God, who was also to be
made the Son of Abraham and of David. And thus every thing has fell out in the
Order of the divine Counsels. This Messiah shown afar off, as the Son of
Abraham, is yet shown more near as the Son of David. An eternal Empire is
promised to him: The Knowledge of God is spread abroad throughout the World, is
set to us as the certain sign, and as the fruit of his coming. The Conversion
of the Gentiles, and the Blessing of all the People of the World, so long since
promised to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, is anew confirmed, and all the
People of God lived in that expectation.

In the mean time God governed them after a most admirable manner. He made a
new Covenant with David, and obliged himself to protect him, and the Kings his
Successors, if they would walk in the Commandments which he had given them by
Moses; 2 Samuel 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. 1 King. 9.4, 5. 2 Chronicles. 7.17. etc. 2 Samuel 11,
12, etc.
if not, he pronounced against them very severe Punishments. David, who had
forgot himself for a little while, was the first who felt them; but having
somewhat recovered himself by his unfeigned Repentance, he has a confluence of
Wealth poured upon him, and is proposed as the model of an accomplished King.
The Throne is established in his House. 1. Kings 11.
Whilst Solomon walked in the Steps of his Father's Piety, he was happy; but in
his old Age he was drawn aside, and God who spared him for the Love of his
Servant David, declared he would punish him in the person of his Son. Thus he
lets Parents to know, that according to the secret Decree of his Judgments, he
makes their Punishments to continu^ after their Death, and he keeps them in
submission to his Laws by that Interest, which is the dearest that is, the
Interest of their Family. In the Execution of his Decrees, the foolishly
wilful Rehoboam is given up to an extravagant Council; his Kingdom is
lessened, and ten of the tribes revolt from him. 1 Kings 12.16, 17, etc.
Whilst those ten Rebellious and Schismatic Tribes were departed from their
God and their King, the Children of Judah, who were faithful to God, and to
David whom he had chosen, continued in the Covenant and in the Faith of
Abraham. The Levites and the Tribe of Benjamin joined with them; the Kingdom of
the People of God, subsisted by their union under the name of the Kingdom of
Judah; and the Law of Moses was strictly observed. In spite of the lamentable
Idolatries and Corruption of the ten separated Tribes, God remembered his
Covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob, his Law was not quite
extinct amidst those rebellious People; he was continually calling them back to
Repentance by innumerable Miracles, and by the constant warnings he sent them
by his Prophets. Hardened in their Wickedness at such a rate, he could no longer
bear with them, 2 Kings 17.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, etc.
but he drove them out of the Land of Promise, without hopes of ever suffering
them to settle there again.

The History also of Tobit happened at the same time, and during the beginnings
of the Captivity of the Israelites, it discovers to us the Conduct of the Elect
of God, who still remained in the separated Tribes. That Holy Man, Tob. 1.5, 6,
7. etc.
dwelling among them before the Captivity, knew not only how to keep himself
Pure from the Idolatries of his Brethren, but also how to put the Law in
Practice, and to worship God publicly in the Temple of Jerusalem, without ever
being drawn aside by their ill examples, or persuaded to a Compliance through
servile fear. Id. 19, 20, 21.
When he was a Captive, and persecuted at Nineveh, he and his Family still
retained their Piety; and that admirable manner, with which both he and his Son
Tobias had their Faith rewarded, even here upon Earth, shows, that
notwithstanding Captivity and Persecution, God had secret ways of making his
Servants sensible of the Blessings of the Law, in raising them evermore by the
afflictions they were to suffer, to higher and more exalted thoughts. By the
Examples of Tobit, and his Holy Admonitions, those of Israel were stirred up to
acknowledge, at least under the Rod, the hand of God which chastised them; but
yet they almost all continued in obstinacy: those of Judah, so far were they
from taking warning by Israel's Chastisements, that they followed their ill
examples. God did not cease admonishing them by his Prophets, whom he sent one
after another, rising up betimes, and sending them, as he says himself, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. Jer. 25.15.29.19.35.15.
to show his Paternal care and tenderness. But being wearied with their
Ingratitude, he was moved against them, and threatened to deal with them, as he
had done with their rebellious Brethren.

There is nothing more observable in the History of the People of God, than
this Ministry of the Prophets. They beheld men separated from the rest of the
People by a retired Life, and by a particular Habit: they had Habitations where
they were seen to live in a kind of Community, 1 Samuel 28.14. 1 Kings 19.19.
Isai. 20.2. Zach. 13.5.
under a Superior whom God had given them. Their poor and penitent life was
the very figure of Mortification, which was to be pronounced under the Gospel.
God communicated himself to them in a particular manner, and made that
wonderful Communication appear to all the People; 1 Samuel 10.10.19.19, 26. 1
Kings 18. 2 Kings 11.3, 15, 18, 19.25. 2 Kings 4.10.38.6.1, 2.
but it never was so conspicuous, as in the times of that disorder wherein
Idolatry had gone very near to abolish the Law of God. During those unhappy
times the Prophets proclaimed on all sides loudly, both by Preaching and
writings, the threatenings of Almighty God, and the Testimony they bore to his
Truth. The writings they composed were in the Hands of all the People, and
carefully kept in perpetual remembrance to future Ages. Those People who
continued faithful to God, joined with them; and we see also part in Israel,
where Idolatry so much prevailed, Exodus 17.14. Isa. 30.8.34.16. Jer.
22.30.26.2.12.36.15. 2 Chronicles. 36.22, 23. 1 Esd. 1.1. Dan. 9.3. 2 Kings
4.23.21.16.
yet those that were faithful did with the Prophets celebrate the Sabbaths, and
the Feasts established by the Law of Moses. 'Twas those that encouraged the
good People to continue firm in the Covenant. Many of them suffered Death; and
we have seen that after their example in the worst of times, that is to say, in
the very Reign of Manasseh, a world of Believers to lay down their Lives for
the Truth, so that it has never been one moment without a Testimony.

Thus the Society of the People of God subsisted always, the Prophets continued
in it: a great number of the Faithful persisted boldly in the Law of God with
them, and with the Priests, the Levites, Ezekiel 54.15.
the Sons of Zadoc, who, as Ezekiel says, kept the Charge of God's Sanctuary,
when the Children of Israel went astray from him.

And yet, notwithstanding the Prophets, nor the faithful Priests, nor the
People joined with them in the observance of the Law, that Idolatry which had
destroyed Israel, did oft-times lead away even in Judah it self, both the
Princes and the People. Though the Kings had forgotten the God of their Fathers,
yet he a long time bore with their Iniquities for the sake of his Servant
David, who was always present to his Eyes. When the Kings the Children of David
followed the good Examples of their Father, God wrought wondrous Miracles for
them: but when they degenerated, they felt the invincible Strength of his Arm,
which was very heavy upon them. The Kings of Egypt, the Kings of Syria, and
especially the Kings of Assyria and Babylon served as the Instruments of his
Vengeance. Impiety grew more and more, and God raised up in the East a King
more proud, and to be feared than all that ever had been heard of before: 'twas
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, the most terrible of all Conquerors. Jerem. 25,
etc. Ezekiel. 26.7, 8. etc. 2 Kings 24.1,2. 2 Chronicles. 36.6.7.
He was shown long before both to the People and to their Kings as the Avenger
that was designed to punish them. He approaches, and fear and dread do march
before him. At once takes Jerusalem, and transports part of its Inhabitants
unto Babylon. But neither those who remained in the City, nor th^se who were
carried away Captive; though the one were forewarned by Jeremiah, and the other
by Ezekiel, showed any marks of Repentance. They preferred to those Holy
Prophets, Jer. 14.14.
the Prophets that proph^sied Lies, whom God never sent, nor never commanded,
nor spak^ to, but they prophesied unto them a false vision and divination, and
a thing of naught, and the Deceit of their Heart, and flattered them in their
Wickednesses. The Revenger returned into Judea, and the voke of Jerusalem was
laid more heavy upon them; but yet the People were not utterly destroyed. At
last their Iniquities being arrived to the full height; 2 Kings 25.6.7. etc.
pride increased with their weakness; and Nebuchadnezzar, with the Captain of
his Guard, burns the Temple of the Lord, and the King's Palace, and turns all
the City into Ashes.

God spared not his Sanctuary; that beautiful. Temple, the Ornament of the
World, (which would have been eternal, if the Children of Israel had persevered
in their Piety) was consumed, and lay with the common Rubbish of the rest of
the City, by the Fire of the Assyrians. 'Twas in vain, the lying words which
the Jews made use of, Jer. 7.4.5.
The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, is in
the midst of us; as if that Sacred Temple would of it self protect them. God
had resolved to let them see that he was not fixed to a building of Stone, but
he would have his habitation in the Hearts of Believers. So he destroyed the
Temple of Jerusalem, and delivered the Treasure of it to the Spoil: so that
abundance of costly rich Vessels consecrated to holy Uses by the Piety of
former Kings, was now abandoned and given up to One that was Impious.

But the fall of God's People was to be for the Instruction of all the World.
We see in the person of that wicked King, though he was victorious, what we ought
to expect from Conquerours, and what they are. For the most part they are but
Instruments of the Divine Vengeance, God executes his Judgments by them, and
afterward he executes his Justice upon them. Nebuchadnezzar i^vested with a
Divine Power, and by that Ministry become invincible, punishes all the Enemies
of the People of God. He ravages the Idumeans, the Ammonites, and the Moabites;
he overthrows the Kings of Syria: Egypt, under whose Power Judea had oftentimes
groaned, was the Prey of that proud King, and became Tributary to him: his
Power was no less fatal to Judea it self, which would not turn unto the Lord,
though he gave them so long a space of Repentance. Every thing fell every thing
was destroyed by the Divine Justice, and Nebuchadnezzar was made the Minister
of it: but we shall see him fall in his turn; and God who made use of the hand
of that Prince to chastise his Children, and to vanquish his Enemies, reserves
him to fall by his own Almighty Arm.

He has not left his Children ignorant of the destiny of that King who
punished them; and of that Empire of the Chaldees under which they were led
captive. For fear lest they should be surprised at the glory of the Wicked, and
of their proud Reign, the Prophets have sufficiently told them of their short
continuance. Isaiah, who saw the glory of Nebuchadnezzar, and his mad pride
long before he was born, Isai. 13, 14, 21, 45, 46, 47, 48.
has foretold his sudden fall, together with that of the Empire. Babylon was
scarce any thing, when that Prophet saw its Power, and a little while after,
its Ruin. Thus the Revolutions of the Cities and Kingdoms which tormented the
People of God, or gained advantage by their destruction, were written in his
Prophecies. Those Oracles were followed with a hasty Execution; and the Jews,
though so severely punished, yet saw to fall before them, or with them, or
quickly after (according to the Predictions of their Prophets) not only
Samaria, Idumea, Gaza, Ascalon, Damascus, the Cities of the Ammonites and the
Moabites, their perpetual Enemies; but the chiefest of the great Empires, Tire
the Mistress of the Sea, Tanais, Memphis, Thebes with its hundred Gates and all
the Riches of its Sesostri^, Nineveh also the Seat of the Kings of Assyria,
their cruel Persecutors, and the proud and mighty Babylon, victorious over all
the rest, and rich with their Spoils.

It Is true, Jerusalem by her sins was destroyed at the same time: but yet God
did not leave her without hope. Isaiah, Isai. 44, 45.
who had foretold her Ruin, had likewise seen her glorious re-establishment,
and had also named him Cyrus, who was to be her deliverer, though it was two
hundred years before he was born. Jeremiah, Jer. 25.11, 12. etc. 29.10.
whose Predictions had been so exactly particular in pointing out that
ungrateful People's certain destruction, had promised them a most sure Return
after they had endured seventy years Captivity. During all that time those
vanquished People were respected by the Prophets: and those Captives foretold
both the Kings and the People their terrible Destinies. Nebuchadnezzar, who
would fain be worshipped, Dan. 11.46, 47 4.1. and 26.
himself worships Daniel, being astonished at the Divine Secrets which he had
discovered to him; he understood from him the Decree that was gone out against
him, and which was soon after executed upon him. That victorious Prince
triumphed in Babylon, the City whereof he made the greatest, strongest, and
most beautiful that ever the eye of the Sun beheld. 'Twas there that God heard
him thundering out his pride. Though he is happy, and invulnerable, if I may be
allowed the phrase, at the head of his Armies, and throughout all the course of
his Conquests, yet he was to fall in his own House according to the Oracle of
Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 31.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. etc.
Whilst he was standing in admiration of his greatness, and the beauty of
Babylon, and raising himself above Humanity, Dan. 4.30, 31.
saying, Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the House of the
Kingdom by the might of my Power, and for the honor of my Majesty? God strikes
him, deprives him of his understanding, drives him from men, and gives him his
dwelling with the Beasts of the Field. Ibid. 34.
At the time assigned by Daniel, his understanding returned unto him, and he
blessed the most High, and praised, and honored him who lives for ever, whose
Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and whose Kingdom is from Generation to
Generation, in acknowledgment of his Almighty Power; but his Successors
received no benefit by his Example. The Affairs of Babylon were embroyled, and
the time set forth by the Prophecies for the re-establishing of Judah happened
amidst all those Troubles. Cyrus appeared at the Head of the Medes and
Persians; all things yield and bow to that dreadful Conqueror. Herod. li^. 1.
Xenoph. l. 2, 3. ^5^. ^ali^. Jer. 41.46. (...). l. 7. ^ad^g.
He made but slow advances to the Chaldeans, and besides his march was often
interrupted. The news of his coming was spread from one end of the Earth to the
other, as Jeremiah had foretold: at last it was determined. Babylon, which was
often threatened by the Prophets, and always proud and impenitent, at last came
to see her Conqueror whom she despises. Her Riches, her high Walls, her People
that were not to be numbered, Ibid.
her prodigious Extent (which included a very great Country, as all the
Ancients do testify) and her infinite Provisions do swell her up with pride.
Having felt a very long and sharp Siege without any great Inconvenience, she
made a scorn and derision of her Enemies, and at the Intrenchment which Cyrus
made round about her: Nothing was heard in her but Feasts and Rejoycings. The
King Belshazzar, who was Nebuchadnezzar's Grandchild, and as proud as he too,
but not so full of address, Dan. 5.1. etc.
made a great Feast to a thousand of his Lords, and drank Wine before the
thousand. That Feast was celebrated with unheard of Excesses. Belhazzar sent
for the Golden and Silver Vessels which Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the
Temple of Jerusalem, and so intermixes Profaneness with his Luxury. The wrath
of God thereupon was declared; and at the same time came forth fingers of a
man's hand, Ibid. 5.
and wrote over against the Candlestick upon the plaster of the Wall of the
King's Palace, where the Feast was celebrated, terrible words; and the King saw
the part of the hand that wrote. Daniel interprets the meaning of it; and that
Prophet who had foretold the direful fall of the Grandfather, makes also the
Grandchild to see the Thunderclap that was coming to fall upon him for his
overthrow. In the execution of God's Decree, Cyrus on a sudden makes an onset
on Babylon. Euphrates being turned off into the Trenches which he had so long
before prepared, discovers to him its vast Channel, through which unforeseen
passage he makes his Entry, Isai. 13.17.21.2.45, 46, 47.
and so that proud Babylon, as the Prophets had foretold, was delivered as a
prey to the Medes, and to the Persians, and to Cyrus. So perished with her the
Kingdom of the Chaldeans, which had destroyed so many other Kingdoms, Jer.
50.23.
so was the Hammer of the whole Earth cut asunder, and broken. Jeremiah had
plainly foretold it. The Lord breaks the Rod wherewith he had broken to
pieces so many Nations. Isaiah foresaw it. The People, accustomed to the Yoke
of the Chaldean Kings, Jer. 51.20.
saw it themselves when they were under the Yoke. Art thou also, say they,
Isai. 14.10, 13, 14.
become weak as we? art thou become like unto us? Thou that said in thy
heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of
God, I will ascend above the heights of the Clouds, I will be like the most
High. What the same Isaiah had likewise declared, saying, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen, That great Babylon, Id. 21.9.
and all her graven Images are broken to the ground. Bell boweth down, and
Nebo, her great God, from whence Kings do take their names, stoopeth, and is
fallen upon the ground: Id. 46.1.
for the Persians, their Enemies, the worshippes of the Sun, would not suffer
their Idols, nor their Kings whom they had made Gods. But how did that Babylon
perish? even just as the Prophets had foretold. Jer. 50.38.51.36.
A drought is upon her Waters, and they shall be dried up, for it is the Land
of Graven Images, and they are mad upon their Idols, as was the prediction of
Jeremiah, Jer. 50.24.51.39, 57.
to give way to her Conqueror, I have laid a snare for thee, and thou art also
taken, O Babylon, and thou wast not aware. And in their heat I will make their
Feasts, and I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a
perpetual sleep, and not make, says the Lord. And again, I will make drunk her
Princes, and her Wisemen, her Captains, and her Rulers, and her mighty Men;
and they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, says the King, whose
name is the Lord of Hosts. Isa. 13.15, 16, 17, 18.
Every one that is found shall be thrust through, and every one that is joined
unto them shall fall by the Sword: for the Medes, her Conquerours, as Isaiah
says, shall not regard Silver, and as for Gold, they shall not delight in it:
but Vengeance, for to give their Hatred a full satisfaction by the loss of a
cruel People, whose Pride made them the Enemy of all the People of the World.
Jer. 50.35, 36, 37, 42.
A Sword is upon the Chaldeans, and upon the Inhabitants of Babylon, and upon
her Princes, and upon her Wisemen. A Sword is upon the Liars, and they shall
dote; a Sword is upon her mighty Men, and they shall be dismayed. A Sword is
upon their Horses, and upon their Chariots, and upon all the mingled People
that are in the midst of her, and they shall become as Women: a Sword is upon
her Treasures, and they shall be robbed. They shall hold the Bow and the Lance:
they are cruel, and will not show mercy: their voice shall roar like the Sea,
and they sall ride upon Horses, every one put in array; like a man to the
Battle, against Thee, O Daughter of Babylon. And says Jeremiah, One Post shall
run to meet another, Jer. 51.31.
and one Messenger to meet another, to show the King of Babylon that his City
is taken at one end. So Jeremiah had observed. Stand now with thine
Enchantments, and with the multitude of thy Sorceries, wherein thou have
labored from thy youth; if so be thou shall be able to profit, if so be thou
may prevail. Isai. 47.12, 13, 14, 15.
Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy Counsels: let now the Astrologers,
the Star-gazers, the monthly Prognosticators stand up, and save thee from these
things that shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as stubble, the fire
shall burn them, they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame:
there shall not be a Coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it. Thus shall
they be unto thee, with whom thou have labored, even thy Merchants from thy
youth, they shall wander every one to his quarter: Jer. 50.36. Isa. 48.20. Ier.
50.8, 28.51.6, 11, 49, etc.
none shall save thee. And both Isaiah and Jeremiah, as with one consent,
declare the same thing. In that miserable slaughter, the Jews being advertised
long before, shall alone escape the Sword of the mighty Conqueror. Cyrus being
by that Conquest become Master of all the East, confessed there was somewhat in
that People (so often vanquished) of Divinity, though he could not understand it.
Ravished with the Oracles that had foretold his Victories, he confessed he owed
his Empire to the God of Heaven, 2 Chronicles. 36.23. 1 Esdr. 1.2.
whom the Jews worshipped, and he signalizes the first year of his Reign by the
re-establishment both of his Temple and People.

Who can but admire here the Providence of God so manifestly declared upon the
Jews and the Chaldeans, upon Jerusalem and Babylon? God was resolved to punish
them both; and that so they might not be ignorant that it was He alone who did
it, he was pleased to foretell it by a hundred Prophecies. Jerusalem and
Babylon, both threatened at the same time, and by the same Prophets, fall one
after another according to the appointed time. But God does here discover the
great Mystery of the two Chastisements he makes use of: the one is of Rigor
upon the Chaldeans, the other is that of a Father upon the Jews who were his
Children. The Pride of the Chaldeans (it was the Character of that Nation, and
the very spirit and pulse of all that Empire) was brought down beyond the
possibility of a retrieve. Jer. 50.31, 32. Isai. 13.19, 20, 21, 22.
And the most proud shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise him up: and I
will kindle a fire in his Cities, and it shall devour all ro^nd about him, says
Jeremiah, and the Prophet Isaiah before him, That Babylon, the glory of
Kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees excellency, shall be as when God overthrew
Sodom and Gomorrha; it shall nev^r be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in
from Generation to Generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch Tent there,
neither shall the Shepherds make their Fold there. But wild Beasts of the
Desert shall lie there, and their Houses shall be full of doleful Creatures,
and Owls shall dwell there, and Satyrs shall dance there; and the wild Beasts
of the Islands shall cry in their desolate Houses, and Dragons in their
pleasant Places: and her time is a n^ar to come, and her days shall not be
prolonged. But it was not so to the Jews: God chastised them as disobedient
Children, whom he would turn to their Duty by the Affliction, and afterward
being touched by their penitent Tears, he would forget their Crimes. Fear thou
not, Jer. 46.28.
O Jacob my Servant, says the Lord, for I am with thee, for I will make a full
end of all the Nations whither I have driven thee, but I will not make a full
end of thee, but correct thee in measure, yet will I not leave thee wholly
unpunished. Wherefore Babylon, for ever taken away from the Chaldeans, was
delivered to another People; and Jerusalem, being re-established by a very
mavelous Change, beheld her Children from all parts returning to her.

It was Zerubbabel, of the Tribe of Juda, and of the Blood of the Kings, who
brought them back from Captivity. Those of Juda came in Multitudes. The ten
dispersed Tribes were lost among the Gentiles, saving only those who under the
name of Juda, and being reunited under its Standards, came again into the Land
of their Fathers.

In the mean time the Altar was set up again, the Temple rebuilt, the Walls of
Jerusalem repaired. The Jealousy of the neighboring People was suppressed by
the Kings of Persia, who were become the Protectors of the People of God. The
High Priest re-entered into his former Exercise, with all the other Priests who
proved their Descents by the public Registers: The others were rejected
Esdras, a Priest himself, and Doctor of the Law, and Nehemiah the Governor,
reformed all the Abuses which the Captivity had brought in, 1 Esdr. 2.
and caused the Law to be observed in its Purity. The People bewailed, with
them, the Transgressions which had brought down upon them those severe and
dreadful Punishments, and confess that Moses had foretold them of them. 2 Esdr.
1.8.9.
They do all together read in the Sacred Oracles, the Threatenings of the Man of
God; they likewise saw the fullfilling of them upon themselves. The Oracle of
Jeremiah, and the so much promised Return after the Seventy Years of Captivity,
both astonish them, and comfort them; they adore the Judgments of God, and
being reconciled to him, they live in Peace and Quiet.

God who brings all things to pass in his own due time, had chosen this, to
cause his extraordinary ways to cease, that is to say, the Prophecies, in his
People sufficiently instructed for the future. He rested about five hundred
Years, even to the days of the Messiah. God gave to the Majesty of his Son, his
Prophets to be silent for all that time, to keep his People in expectation of
him who was to be the fulfilling of all their Oracles.

But toward the end of those times, in which God had resolved to put an end to
Prophecies, he seemed to be willing to shed abroad all his Illuminations, and
to reveal all the Councels of his Providence; so clearly did he express the
Secrets of the Times to come.

During the Captivity, and especially toward the time of its expiring, Daniel,
reverenced for his Piety, even by Infidel Kings, and employed for his Prudence
in the greatest and most important Affairs of their Estate, Dan. 2.3, 5, 8.
saw in order at diverse times, and under different Figures and Resemblances,
four Monarchies under which the Israelites were to live. He takes notice of
them by their proper Characters. Ibid. 2.7, 8, 10, 11.
The Empire of a Grecian King is seen to pass away like a Torrent: It was that
of Alexander. By its fall he beheld another Empire set up, less than the
former, and much weakened by its Divisions. This was that of his Successors,
among whom there were four pointed out in the Prophecy; Antipater, Seleucus,
Ptolomy, and Antigonus, are visibly designed. It Is affirmed by the History that
they were more powerful than the others, Ibid. 7.6, 8, 21, 22.
and only their Power should go to their Children. He foresaw their Wars, Ibid.
11.6.
their Jealousies, and their broken Agreements; the continuance and the
Ambition of the Kings of Syria; Dan. 2.44, 45, 7.13, 14, 27.
the Pride, and the other Signs which evidently pointed out the illustrious
Antiochus, the implacable Enemy of the People of God: The shortness of his
Reign, and the sudden Punishment of his Excesses. He beheld at last toward the
end, and as it were, in the Bosom of those Monarchies, the Kingdom of the Son
of Man. At this name you presently do acknowledge Jesus Christ; but this Kingdom
of the Son of Man is also called the Kingdom of the Saints of the most High.
All the People paid Submission to that great and peaceable Kingdom, Eternity is
promised to it, and he was to be the only one, whose Power should not go over
to another Empire. And there was given him Dominion and Glory, and a Kingdom,
that all People, Nations in Languages should serve him: his Dominions is an
everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away; and his Kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed.

When that Son of Man should come, that Christ who was so much desired, and how
he should accomplish the Work committed to him, that is to say, the Redemption
of Mankind, God manifestly discovers it to Daniel, whilst he was taken up about
the Captivity of his People in Babylon, and about the Seventy Years which God
was resolved to determine upon the People, Dan. 9.23, etc.
and upon the Holy City, to finish the Transgression, etc. In the midst of his
Supplications which he made for the Deliverance of his Brethren, he is on a
sudden raised up to more transcendent Mysteries. He sees another Number of
Years, and another Deliverance of much greater Importance. Instead of the
Seventy Years foretold by Jeremiah, he sees Seventy Weeks, to commence from the
time of the Decree given by Artaxerxes of old, in the twentieth year of his
Reign, Ibid. 24.
for the Re-building the City of Jerusalem. There is pointed out in particular
Words, at the end of those Weeks, that they were to make an end of Sins, and to
make reconciliation for Iniquity, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness,
and to seal up the Vision and Prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy. The Christ
was to make his Charge, and to appear as the Conductor of the People after
sixty nine Weeks. Ib. 25, 26, 27.
After sixty nine Weeks (for the Prophet repeats it again) The Christ is to be
put to death, he is to suffer a violent Death; he shall be cut off, but not for
himself, he shall be sacrificed to fulfill the Mysteries. One Week is pointed
out amongst the rest, and it is the last, and the seventieth, wherein Christ is
to be Sacrificed, wherei^ he shall confirm the Covenant with many for one Week,
and in the midst of the Week he shall cause the Sacrifice and the Oblation to
cease; without doubt, by the death of Christ, for it is after the death of
Christ that this Change is pointed out to us. There was nothing more to be seen
but Horror and Confusion; the Ruin of the Holy City, and the Sanctuary; a
People and a Captain who comes to destroy all; the Abomination in the Temple;
the last and irremediable Desolation of an ungrateful People toward their
Savior. We have seen that these Weeks being reduced into Weeks of Years,
according as the manner of the Scripture is, make four hundred and ninety
Years, and bring us exactly from the twentieth year of Artaxerxes to the last
week; a week full of Mysteries, where the sacrificed and ever-blessed Jesus
puts an end by his Death to the Sacrifices of the Law, and accomplishes the
Figures and Representations of them.

The Learned differ in their Computations to make that time exactly agree. That
which I have proposed to you is without any Trouble. It Is so far from making
the Historical Course of the Kings of Persia obscure, that it clears it up;
though there should be nothing in it more surprising, admit some Uncertainty
should be found in the Dates of those Princes, eight or nine years at most,
which might be disputed in an account of four hundred and ninety Years, will
never make any extraordinary Question. But what need we discourse further of
it? God has removed the Difficulty, if there was any, by a Decision that
cannot be replied to. A manifest event puts us above all the nice Punctualities
of the Chronolog^sts; and the total Subversion of the Jews, which so closely
followed the Death of our Lord, is sufficient to convince the most wilfully
blind, that the Prophecy is accomplished.

There remains nothing more now, but to observe to you one Circumstance of it.
Daniel discovers a new Mystery to us. The Oracle of Jacob had told us that the
Kingdom of Juda was to cease at the coming of the Messiah: But it does not say
that that Death should be the cause of the Downfall of that Kingdom. God
revealed that most necessary Secret to Daniel, and he declared to him, as you
see, that the Ruin of the Jews should be the Consequence of the death of
Christ, and of their Ingratitude. If you observe the place, the Course of
Events will quickly make you an excellent Commentary.

You see what God showed to the Prophet Daniel a little before the Conquests of
Carus, and the Re-building of the Temple. In the time of the building of it, he
raised up the Prophets Haggai and Zachariah: And presently after he sent
Malachi, who was to conclude the Prophecies of the ancient People.

What was it that Zachariah did not see? One could almost say that the very
Book of God's Decrees was laid open to that Prophet, and that there he read the
whole History of the People of God from the time of the Captivity.

The Persecutions of the Kings of Syria, and the Wars which they made upon
Judah, are all of them discovered to him in their very particulars. Zach. 14.1,
2, 3, 4, etc.
He saw Jerusalem taken, and sacked; a dreadful Pillage, and infinite
Disorders; the Peoples Flight into the Desert, uncertain of their Condition,
whether Life or Death; and at the very Vigil of its last Desolation, there
does, all of a sudden, a new Light appear to him. The Enemies are vanquished;
the Idols are thrown down in all the Holy Land. There is nothing but Peace and
Plenty seen both in City and Country, and the Temple is revered in all the East.

One remarkable Circumstance of those Wars is revealed to the Prophet; and that
is, that Jerusalem shall be betrayed by her own Children, Zach. 14.13, 14, and.
and that among her Enemies there shall a great many Jews be found.

Sometimes he sees a long Succession of Prosperity: Judah is full of Strength;
the Kingdoms that oppressed it, are humbled; the Neighbors that were
continually tormenting it, P^^l. 9.10.6. Z^^^. 9.1.2.3 ^.^.6 7 8.
are punished; some are converted, and incorporated into the People of God. The
Prophet sees that People blessed with divine Favors, amongst which he relates
to them the Triumph as modest as it was glorious, Rejoice greatly, O Daughter
of Zion, Ibid. 9.
shout, O Daughter of Jerusalem; behold thy King comes unto thee: He is just,
and having Salvation, lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt, the Foal
of an Ass.

After he had recounted their Prosperities, he sums up from the beginning all
the course of their Afflictions. He sees all of a sudden Fire in the Temple,
all the Country in desolation with the capital City; Murders, Violences, Zach.
11.1, 2, etc.
and a King who countenances and encourages them. But God has pity on his
forsaken People; he becomes himself their Shepherd, and his Protection sustains
them. At length he kindles civil Wars amongst them, Ibid. 11.8, 9.
and the Face of things looks dismal. The time of that Change is designed by a
certain Character, and three Princes degraded in one Month, denote the
beginning of their Troubles.

In the midst of these Calamities there appears yet another, greater than all
the rest. A while after those Divisions, and at the time of their Ruin, God is
prized at thirty pieces of Silver by his ungrateful People, and the Prophet
sees all, Ibid. 12, 13, etc
even to the Potters field, about which that Money was employed. From that time
arise great Disorders among the Shepherds of the People; at last they become
Blind, and their Power is destroyed. What shall I say of the mavelous Vision
of Zacharia, who sees the Shepherd smitten, and the Sheep scattered? What shall
I say of the regard which the People had for the God whom they have pierced,
Zach. 13.7.12.10.
and of their mourning for him as one mourns for his only Son, and of their
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his Firstborn? Zacharia
saw all these things; but that sight which is still greater, is the promise of
God's Presence and Love. He that touches you touches the Apple of mine Eye.
Zach. 2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Sing and rejoice, O Daughter of Zion; for lo, I come, and I will dwell in the
midst of thee, says the Lord, and many Nations shall be joined to the Lord in
that day, and shall be my People: and I will dwell in the midst of Thee, etc.

Haggai says less things, but what he says is very surprising. Whilst the
second Temple was building, and the old men, who had seen the Glories of the
first, were weeping and lamenting, in comparing the Poorness of this last
Building with the Magnificence of the other, the Prophet, who sees farther,
publishes the Glory of the second Temple, Hag. 2.7, 8, 9.
and prefers it to the first. I will shake all Nations, and the desire of all
Nations shall come, and I will fill this House with Glory, says the Lord of
Hosts. The Glory of this latter shall be greater than of the former, says the
Lord of Hosts. He explains from whence shall come the Glory of this new House,
in this, that the desire of all Nations shall come. That Messiah, who was
promised two thousand years before, and from the beginning of the World, as the
Savior of the Gentiles, shall appear in this new Temple. Peace shall be
establis ^ there; all the astonished World shall bear Witness of the coming of
this their Redeemer; there was but a little while to wait, and the times
assigned for this waiting are in their last period.

At length the Temple was finished; the Sacrifices were offered in it: But the
Covetous Jews profaned it, and brought thither that which was torn, and the
law, and the sick, so that the Offering was defective. Malachi, who reproved
them for it, was raised to a higher Consideration; and upon the occasion of the
unclean Sacrifices of the Jews, he sees an Offering always pure, and never
sullied, which shall be presented to God, Mal. 2.11, 13.
no more so as it was in the Temple of Jerusal^m heretofore, but from the
rising of the Sun even to the going down of the same; no more by the Jews, but
by the Gentiles, among whom he prophesied that the name of God should be great.

He sees also, like Haggai, the Glory of the second Temple, and the Messiah who
honors it with his Presence: But he sees at the same time that the Messiah is
the God to whom that Temple is dedicated. Behold, Mal. 3.1.
I will send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord
whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his Temple; ev^n the Messenger of the
Covenant, whom ye delight in; behold he shall come, says the Lord of Hosts.

A Messenger is an Envoy: But behold here is an Envoy of a very wonderful
Dignity; an Envoy who has a Temple; an Envoy who is no less than God, and who
enters into the Temple as into his own House; an Envoy in whom all the People
delight, who comes to make a new Covenant, and who for that reason is called
the Messenger of the Covenant.

'Twas therefore in the second Temple that God sent from God was to appear:
Mal. 3.1.4.5, 6.
But another Messenger comes before him to prepare his way for him. There we
see the Messiah preceded by his Forerunner. The Character of that Forerunner
is also discovered to the Prophet. That was to be a new Elijah, remarkable for
his Holiness, for the Austerity of his Life, for his Authority, and for his
Zeal.

Thus the last Prophet of the ancient People, shows the first Prophet who was
to come after him, that is to say, that Elijah, the Forerunner of the Lord who
was to appear. Until that time the People of God were to expect no more
Prophets: The Law of Moses was to be sufficient for them, and therefore does
Malachi shut up all with these words, Remember ye the Law of Moses my Servant,
which I commanded unto him in Horeb. for all Israel, Mal. 4.4, 6, 6.
with the Statutes and Judgments. Behold I will send you Elijah the Prophet,
and he shall turn the Heart of the Fathers to the Children, who will show to
them what they are to expect.

To this Law of Moses God had joined the Prophets, who had spoken in
conformity; and the History of the People of God made by the same Prophets, in
which were confirmed, by visible experiences, the Promises and Threatenings of
the Law. Every thing was very carefully and distinctly writ; every thing
digested by the order of particular times; and this was what God left for the
Instruction of his People, when he caused the Prophecies to cease.

Those Instructions wrought a wondrous change in the Manners of the
Israelites. V. The Times of the second Temple.
They had no more need of either Apparitions, or manifest Predictions, nor of
those unheard of Prodigies which God wrought so often for their Deliverance and
Salvation. The Testimonies they had already received satisfied them, and their
Incredulity, not only convinced by the event of things, but also so frequently
punished, had at last rendered them tractable and orderly.

Wherefore from that time they were no more seen to return to Idolatry, to
which they were so strangely inclined before. They were mightily ashamed that
they had rejected the God of their Fathers. They were ever mindful of
Nebuchadnezzar, and their own Ruin so often foretold in all its circumstances,
and which had always fallen upon 'em sooner than they believed it would. They
no less stood in admiration of their re-establishment wrought contrary to all
appearance at the time, and by him who had been pointed out to them. They never
beheld the second Temple but they remembered what was the reason for which the
first was destroyed, and how this had been rebuilt: thus they confirmed
themselves in the Faith of their Scriptures to which every circumstance of
their Condition bore witness.

There was no more seen amongst them any false Prophets. They were absolutely
driven off from the inclination they formerly had to believe them, and from
that affection too they did bear then to Idolatry. Zach^riah had prophesied by
one and the same Oracle, that those two things should happen to them. His
Prophecy had a most plain and manifest accomplishment. Z^^^. 13.2, 3, 4, 5.
And it shall come to pass, says the Lord of Hosts, that I will cut off the
names of the Idols out of the Land: and also I will cause the Prophets, and the
unclean Spirit to pass out of the Land. And it shall come to pass that when any
shall yet prophesy, then his Father and his Mother that begat him, shall say
unto him, Thou shall not live; for thou speak lies in the name of the Lord:
and his Father and his Mother that begat him shall thrust him through when he
prophesies. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Prophets shall be
ashamed every one of his Vision, when he has prophesied: neither shall they
wear a rough Garment to deceive. The false Prophets shall cease under the
second Temple: the People disabused of their former Error shall no longer
hearken to them. Is^i. 41.11, 12, 13.4^ 18, 19.49 ^8, 19, 2^, 21.52.1, 2, 7.54,
55, etc. 6^.15.16, etc. Ez^k. ^6.38.11, 12 13, 14. Jer. 46.27.
The true Prophets of God were read and read again without ceasing: there was
no need of any Comment; for the things which happened every day in the
execution of their Prophecies were but the too faithful Interpreters of them.

All their Prophets had effectually promised them a most profound Peace. They
read also with joy the curious Descriptions which both Isaiah and Ezekiel made
of those happy Times which should follow the Captivity of Babylon. All the
Ruins are repaired, the Cities and the Villages are magnificently rebuilt, the
People are innumerable, the Enemies are defeated, Plenty and Abundance are in
their Cities and in their Fields; There is seen Joy, Rest, and Quietness, and
at last all the Fruits of a sweet and lasting Peace. God promises to keep his
People in a durable and perfect Tranquillity. They enjoyed it under the Kings
of Persia. As long as that Empire lasted, the favorable Decrees of Cyrus, who
was the founder thereof, secured the repose of the Jews. Though they had been
threatened with their final Ruin under Ahasuerus, howsoever it was, God being
moved by their tears, on a sudden changed the heart of that King, and drew on a
most remarkable Vengeance on Haman their mortal Enemy. Esth. 4, 5, 7, 8, 9.
Excepting that very Conjuncture, which was quickly over, they were always
without fear. Instructed by their Prophets to be obedient to Kings, to whom God
had submitted them, their Fidelity was inviolable. Jer. 27.12, 17.40.9.
So likewise were they evermore kindly treated. By the favor of a very small
Tax which they paid to their Sovereigns, who were their Protectors rather than
their Masters, they lived after their own Laws: The Sacerdotal Power was
absolutely preserved, The Chief Priests conducted the People: The public
Council established first by Moses, had all its Authority; and they exercised
among themselves the power of Life and Death, and no Body meddled with them
about it. The Kings did so ordain it. The mine of the Persian, Empire brought
no change to their Affairs. Alexander respected their Temple, admired their
Prophecies, and increased their Privileges. Joseph. ant. 11.8.2. Cont. Ap.
They suffered a little under their first Successors. Ptolomy, the Son of
Lagus, surprised Jerusalem, and brought from thence into Egypt a hundred
thousand Captives: But he soon left off his hatred to them. He himself made
them Citizens of Alexandria, the Capital City of his Kingdom; or rather he
confirmed to them the right which Alexander had already invested them with; and
not finding any in all his Empire more faithful than the Jews, he filled his
Armies with them, and conferred upon them the most important Places and Offices
of Trust. If the Lagides regarded them, Id. ant. 12.3.2. Cont. Ap.
yet they were better treated by the Seleucides, under whose Empire they lived.
Seleucus Nicanor, chief of that Family, established them in Antioch; And
Antiochus the God, his Grandson, having caused them to be received in all the
Cities of the Lesser Asia, we have seen them spread themselves over all Greece,
living there according to their Law, and enjoying there the same Rights as the
other Citizens, as they did in Alexandria and Antioch. In the mean while their
Law was turned into Greek by the care of Ptolomeus Philadelphus King of Egypt.
Joseph. Praef. ant. and lib. 12. 2. and 2. Cont. Ap.
The Jewish Religion was known among the Gentiles, the Temple of Jerusalem was
enriched by the Gifts of both Kings and People: the Jews lived in Peace and in
Liberty under the power of the Kings of Syria, and they never had been sensible
of such a Tranquillity under their own Kings.

It seemed as if it would have been eternal, but that they themselves did break
it by their own Dissentions. For no less than three hundred years did they
enjoy that Peace so much foretold by their Prophets, when Ambition, and the
Jealousies which were spread amongst them were going to destroy them. Some of
the most powerful of them betrayed their People for a Complement and piece of
Flattery to the Kings; they would fain make themselves famous after the manner
of the Grecians, 1 Maccab. 1.12, 13, etc. 2 Maccab. 3, 4.1. etc. 14, 15, 16.
etc.
and preferred that vain Pomp to the solid Glory which the observance of the
Laws of their Ancestors would have given them among their Citizens. They
celebrated Places as the Gentiles did. That Novelty dazzled the Eyes of the
People, and Idolatry clothed with that splendor and magnificence, appeared
very lovely to a great many Jews. To these Changes were supe^added the Disputes
for the Sovereign Priesthood, which was the principal Dignity of the Nation.
Those that were ambitious stuck to the Interests of the Kings of Syria, hoping
by that means to obtain it, and so that Sacred Dignity was the reward of the
Flattery of those Court Minions. Private Piques and Jealousies too did
precipitately bring on, as is very usual, great Calamities upon all People.
Antiochus the illustrious King of Syria, Dan. 7.8, 11, 24, 25.8.9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 23, 24, 25. Polyb. l. 26. and 31. in excerp. and ap. Ath. l. 10.
was projecting how to cut off that distracted People, and so to make himself
Master of their Wealth. That Prince appeared then with all the Characters which
Daniel had described him in; Ambitious, Covetous, full of intrigue, cruel,
insolent, wicked, furious, puffed up with his Victories, and afterward,
enraged at his losses. He enters into Jerusalem in a posture of attempting all
things: the Factions of the Jews, and not his own Forces, harden him to it: and
Daniel had so foreseen it. He exercises unheard of Cruelties: his Pride
transports him to the last and most violent Excesses, and he vomits forth
Blasphemies against the most High, as the same Prophet had foretold. In the
executing of those Prophecies, and because of the sins of the People, power is
given unto him against the perpetual Sacrifice. He profaned the Temple of God;
which had been reverenced by the Kings his Ancestors; he pillaged it, and by
the Riches he found there, 1 Macc. 1.43.46, 57. etc. 2 Macc. 6.1, 2.
he repaired his own decayed sunk Exchequer. Under the pretext of bringing into
conformity the Manners of his Subjects, and effectually to satiate his Avarice
in pillaging all Judea, he commanded the Jews to worship the same Gods with the
Greeks: above all, he would have them to pay adoration to Jupiter Olympius,
whose Idol he had set up in the very Temple: and being far more wicked than
Nebuchadnezzar, he labors to destroy the Holy Feasts, the Law of Moses, the
Sacrifices, the Religion, and indeed all the People. But that Prince his
Successes had their just Limits set out by the Prophecies. Mattathias opposed
his Violences, and reunited the holy People. Judas Maccabeus his Son, with a
handful of persons, performed brave and unheard of Exploits, and purified the
Temple of God three years and a half after its Profanation, as Daniel had
foretold. Dan. 7.25.12.7, 11. Joseph. prol. lib. de bell. Jud. and lib.
1.1.6.11. Isai. 63. 1 Macc. 4.15.5.3.26, 28, 36, 54. Dan. 8.14.26. 1 Macc.
6.2.9.
He pursued the Idumeans and all the other Gentiles who had joined themselves
to Antiochus; and having taken their best Places from them, he returned
victorious and humble, just as Isaiah had seen him, singing forth the Praises
of God who had delivered into his hands the Enemies of his People, and his
Garments were still red with their blood. He continued his Victories,
notwithstanding the prodigious great Armies of the Captains of Antiochus.
Daniel had given that wicked King but six years to torment the People of God;
and behold just at the prefixed stated term he acquainted Ecbatane with the
Heroic Deeds of Judas. He fell into a profound Melancholy, and dyed, as the
holy Prophet had foretold, miserable, but not by the hand of Man, after he had
acknowledged, though it was too late, the Power of the God of Israel.

I need not tell you in what manner his Successors pursued the War against
Judea, nor say any thing of the death of Judas its Deliverer, nor of the
Victories of his two Brethren, Jonathan and Simon, successively Highpriests,
whose Valor re-established the ancient Glory of the People of God. Those three
great Men saw the Kings of Syria, and all the neighboring People conspired
against them; and what was most deplorable of all, was, that they saw at
several times those of Judah it self armed against their own Country, and
against Jerusalem: An unheard of thing till then, but expressly taken notice of
by the Prophets. In the midst of so many Calamities, the Confidence they had in
God made them undaunted and invincible. The People were always happy under
their Conduct; Zach. 14.4. 1 Macc. 1.12.9.11.20, 21, 22.16. 2 Macc. 4.22, 23,
etc.
and at last in Simon's time, being freed from the Yoke of the Gentiles, they
submitted themselves unto him and his Children, by and with the Consent of the
Kings of Syria.

But the Act by which the People of God transferred all the public Power to
Simon, and granted to him all the Royal Prerogative, 1 Macc. 14.41.
is remarkable. It Is thus expressed, That the Jews and the Priests were well
pleased that Simon should be their Governor and High Priest for ever, until
there should arise a faithful Prophet.

The People used from the beginning to a Theocracy, or divine Government, and
knowing that since the time of David's being set upon the Throne by the order
and appointment of God, the Soveragain Power belonged to his House, to whom it
was to be at last surrend'red at the time of the Messiah, puts expressly this
Restriction to the Power which he had given to his Highpriests, and continued
to live under them in the hopes and expectation of that Christ which had been
so often promised.

Thus did that Kingdom, which was absolutely free, make use of its Prerogative,
and provided for its Government. The Posterity of Jacob, by the Tribe of Judah,
and by the rest who were ranged under its Standards, preserved themselves like
a Body of a State, and independently and quietly enjoyed the Land which had
been assigned to them.

By virtue of the Peoples Decree which we now have been speaking of, John
Hyrcan, the Son of Simon, succeeded to his Father. Under him the Jews grew very
great by their considerable Conquests. They subdued Samaria (as Jeremiah and
Ezekiel had foretold) they conquered the Idumeans, the Philistines, Ezekiel. 16.55,
56, 58, 61. Jer. 31.5. 1 Macc. 10.30. Joseph. ant. 13.8, 17, 18. Zach. 9.1, 2,
etc.
the Ammonites, who were their perpetual Enemies, and those People embraced
their Religion (as Zachariah had observed.) At length, in spite of all the
Hatred and Jealousy of the People, who were round about them, under the
Authority of their Highpriests, who afterward became their Kings, they
founded the new Kingdom of the Asmoneans, or the Mascabees, more large and
extensive than ever, excepting only the times of David and Solomon.

Thus you see in what manner the People of God subsisted always amidst all this
variety of Changes; and that People who were sometimes chastised, and again
sometimes comforted under their Afflictions and Grievances, by the different
Treatments they received according as they deserved, bears a sufficient public
Testimony to that Providence which governs the World.

But in what Condition soever they were, they lived still in the expectation of
the Messiah, which was in the fullness of time to come, wherein they looked for
new Graces, and much greater than any of those they had yet received; and there
are none but see that this Faith of the Messiah, and of his Miracles, which
continues still to this day among the Jews, is descended to them from their
Patriarchs and their Prophets, from the beginning of their Nation. Joseph. 1.
cont. Apion.
For in that long succession of Years, where they themselves did confess that,
by a Council of Providence, there was not any other Prophet risen up among
them, and that God made them no new Predictions, nor new Promises; this Faith
of the Messiah which was to come, was more sprightly, active, and vigorous than
ever. It was found so firmly established, when the second Temple was built,
that there was no need of a Prophet to confirm the People in it. They were
supported by the Faith of the ancient Prophecies, which they had seen so
exactly fullfilled before their Eyes, in so many chief Points: The ^est, from
that time, never was in the least questioned by them, and it was not at all
difficult for them to believe that God, who was so faithful in every thing,
should not also accomplish in its due time that which concerned the Messiah,
that is to say, the very main of all his Promises, and the Ground and
Foundation of all the rest.

In effect, all their History, all that daily happened to them, was but (as it
were) one perpetual opening Scene of those Oracles which the Holy Ghost had
left with them. Being so settled again in their Land after the Captivity, they
enjoyed for three hundred years a most profound Peace; if their Temple was
reverenced, and their Religion honored over all the East; if at last their
Peace was ruffled and shaken by their Dissentions; if that proud King of Syria
made unheard of attempts to destroy them; if he sometime prevailed, if he were
a little after punished; if the Jewish Religion, and all the People of God were
restored with a more mavelous glory than ever before, and the Kingdom of
Judah grew greater toward the end of the time by new Conquests: you have seen
all this was no more than what was found written in their Prophets. Yes, every
thing was particularly taken notice of there, even to the time that the
Persecutions were to last; even to the places where the Battles were to be
fought, and even to the Lands which were to be conquered.

I have in the gross related something to you of those Prophecies: the
Particulars would be matter of a longer Discourse. I will here only give you
the first Tincture of those important Truths, which is so much the more
acknowledged as we shall enter forward into the Particulars. I shall only
observe here that the Prophecies of the People of God have had, during all
those times, Porph. de Abst. lib. 4. Id. Porphyr. and Jul. apud Cyr. l. 5. and
6. in Jul.
so plain and manifest an accomplishment, that since, when the Heathen
themselves, when a Porphyrius, when a Julian the Apostate, otherwise Enemies of
the Sacred Scriptures, would at any time give Example of Prophetic
Predictions, they have been forced to seek them among the Jews.

And I may also tell you for a truth, that if during five hundred years the
People of God were without a Prophet, all the estate of those times was
prophetical: The work of God went on, and the ways were preparing insensibly
for the full accomplishment of those ancient Oracles.

The Return from the Captivity of Babylon was only a shadow of the Liberty both
more great and more necessary, which the Messiah was to bring to men that were
Captives unto sin. The People dispersed in several places in Upper Asia, in
Lesser Asia, in Egypt, and even in Greece, began to make the Name and the Glory
of the God of Israel shine forth more conspicuously among the Gentiles. The
Scriptures, which were one day to be the Light of the World, were put into the
most known Language of the World: their Antiquity is confessed. Whilst the
Temple was had in reverence, and the Scriptures given to the Gentiles, God
shows some representation to their future Conversion, and lays a great way off
the foundations of it.

What also happened among the Grecians was a kind of preparation to the
knowledge and understanding of the Truth. Their Philosophers confessed that the
World was governed by a God far different from those whom the common sort of
People worshipped, and whom they also served with the common People. The Greek
Histories believe that this excellent Philosophy came from the East, and from
those places where the Jews had been dispersed: but from whence soever it came,
a Truth so important spread among the Gentiles, however it was opposed, and how
ill soever it was followed, even by those who taught it, began again to awaken
Mankind, and by way of anticipation furnished them with certain Proofs, who
were one day to deliver them from their Ignorance.

As always the Conversion of the Gentiles was a work reserved for the Messiah,
and the proper Character of his coming, Error and Impiety prevailed every
where. The most illuminated and wisest Nations, the Chaldeans, the Egyptians,
the Phoenicians, the Greeks, the Romans, were the most ignorant and the most
blind concerning Religion: so true is it that we are to be advanced to it by a
particular Grace, and by a Wisdom more than Humane. Who should presume to
relate the Ceremonies of the Immortal Gods, and their impure Mysteries? their
Loves, their Cruelties, their Jealousies, and all their other Excesses were the
Subject of their Feasts, their Sacrifices, and the Hymns which were sang to
them, and of the Pictures which were consecrated in their Temples. So that
wickedness was worshipped, and confessed as necessary to the Service of the
Gods. The gravest of their Philosophers forbad drinking to Excess, Plato de
Leg. 6.
unless it were in the Feasts of Bacchus, and to the honor of the Gods.
Another, Aristot. 7. Politic.
after he had severely condemned all immodest Pictures, yet excepted those of
the Gods who would be honored by those Infamies. We cannot read but with
astonishment, what honors they were obliged to pay to Venus, and the
prostitutions they framed for worshipping her. Greece, as learned and as wise
as she was, had yet received those abominable Rites and Mysteries. Barach 6.10,
42, 43. Herod. lib. 1. Strabo, lib. 1^. Athen. lib. 13.
In the most important Emergencies both private Persons, and the Republic too
vowed Courtisans to Venus, and Greece never blushed to attribute her safety to
the Intercessions which they made to their fair Goddess. After the defeat of
Xerxes, and his formidable Armies, there was a Table set up in the Temple,
where were inserted their Vows, and their Processions, with this Inscription of
Simonides the famous Poet; These have prayed to the Goddess Venus, who for
their sakes has saved Greece.

If Love be to be adored, it ought at least to be that which is honest; but
here it was not so. Solon (who could believe, and indeed who could expect from
so great a name so great a reproach? Solon, I say) set up at Athens the Temple
of Venus the Prostitute, Ibid.
or of illicite Love. All Greece was full of Temples Consecrated to that Deity,
and Conjugal Love had not one erected in all the Country.

But yet they abominated Adultery both in Men and Women: Conjugal Society was
held Sacred among them. But when they applied themselves to Religion, they
seemed as if they were possessed with a strange Spirit, and their Natural Light
forsook 'em.

The Roman Gravity treated Religion with no more seriousness, since it
consecrated to the honor of the Gods the Impurities of the Theater, and the
bloody Spectacles of the Gladiators, that is to say, whatsoever could be
imagined that was most corrupt and barbarous.

But I know not if the ridiculous Follies which were mingled in their Religion,
were not also more pernicious to them, for it made them very contemptible. Can
any respect which is due to Divine things be kept up, amidst the Impertinencies
of (as we say) old Wives Tales, the Representation or Remembrance whereof makes
up so great a part of the Divine Worship? All the Public Service was nothing
else but a continual Profanation, or rather a Derision of the Name of God; and
there must needs be some Power that is an Enemy to that Sacred Name, which
having undertook to revile it, should push on men to make use of it in such
contemptible things, and even to make riot of it upon such unworthy Subjects.

It Is true, the Philosophers at last were brought to confess that there was
another God than those which the common People worshipped; but then they durst
not publicly avow it. On the contrary, Xenoph. mem. l. 1. Pl. de leg. 5.
Socrates laid it down for a Maxim, That every one ought to follow the Religion
of his Country. Plato, his Disciple, who saw Greece, and all the Countries of
the World filled with a mad and scandalous Worship, forbore not to settle as a
Foundation of his Commonwealth, That one ought never to change any thing in
Religion which one finds established, and a man must be lost to all common
Sense that ever thinks to do it. Such grave Philosophers, who have otherwise
said such excellent things about the Divine Nature, yet durst never presume to
contradict the Public Error, and have despaired of ever being able to conquer
it. Apol. Socr. apud Pl^ton. and Xenophon. Ep. 2. ad Dionys.
When Socrates was accused for denying the Gods whom the People adored, he
defended himself from it, as from a Crime: and Plato, in speaking of the God
that had formed the World, says, That it is hard to find him, and that it is
forbid to declare him to the People. He protests that he never speaks of him
but in the dark, for fear of exposing so great a Truth to Mockery.

In what an Abyss of blindness was Mankind, who was not able to comprehend the
least Idea of the true God? Athens, the most learned and knowing of all the
Cities in Greece, Diog. Laert. l. 2. Soc. 3. Plat. Id. lib. 2. Stilp.
took those for Atheists who spoke of things Intellectual; and that is one of
the reasons for which Socrates was condemned. If any of the Philosophers should
offer to teach, That the Statues were not Gods, as the common People
apprehended them, they saw themselves forced to retract it; and besides, after
that they were banished for their Impiety by the Sentence of the Areopagus. All
the Earth was bewitched with the same Error: for the Truth durst not then
appear. That great God, the Creator of the World, had neither a Temple, nor any
worship paid him, but in Jerusalem. When the Gentiles sent thither their
Offerings, they gave no other honor to the God of Israel, but to join him with
the other Gods. Only Judea knew his holy and severe Jealousy, and knew
consequently that to divide Religion between him and the other Gods, was to
destroy it.

And yet toward the latter end, the Jews themselves who confessed him, and who
were the Guardians of Religion, began; so much do men labor always to weaken
Truth, not only to forget the God of their Fathers, but to mingle in their
Religion strange Superstitions which were unworthy of him. Joseph. Antiq. 13.9.
Under the Reign of the Asmoneans, and from the time of Jonathan, the Sect of
the Pharisees began among the Jews. Ibid. 18.
At the first they gained a mighty Credit by the Purity of their Doctrines;
considering likewise their Conduct was meek and gentle, though very regular, and
they lived among themselves in an extreme Union. The Rewards and Punishments of
a future Life which they zealously asserted, brought them very great honor. At
last Ambition got in amongst them. They had a mind to govern, Id. lib. 2. de
Bell. Jud. 7.
and indeed they ascribed to themselves an absolute Power over the People: they
made themselves the Arbiters of Learning and Religion, which they insensibly
turned to superstitious Practices, advantageous for their Interest, and the
Dominion they would fain have set up over men's Consciences; and the true life
and spirit of the Law was almost lost.

To these Evils another was added much greater to wit, Pride and Presumption;
but such a Presumption as endeavored to attribute to themselves the Gift of
God. The Jews accustomed to his Benefits, and having been so many Ages since
illuminated with his knowledge, forgot that his bounty alone had separated them
from all other People, and so looked on his Grace as a Debt. A chosen Race, and
always blessed for two thousand years, they judged themselves only to be worthy
to know God, and believed themselves to be of a different Species from other
Men whom they saw deprived of his knowledge. Upon this ground, they looked on
the Gentiles with a disdain that was insupportable. To be come from Abraham
according to the Flesh, seemed to them such a Distinction as raised them
naturally above all others; and being puffed up with so fine an Original, they
reckoned themselves Saints by Nature, and not by Grace: An Error which
continues still among them. These were the Pharisees, who, seeking to glorify
themselves by their own Light, and by the exact observance of the Ceremonies of
the Law, brought in this Opinion toward the latter end of the times. As they
only thought of distinguishing themselves from other men, they multiplied
outward Ceremonies and Practices without any measure, and they gave out all
their fanciful Notions, how contrary soever they were to the Law of God, as
Authentic Traditions.

Although those Sentiments had not by any Public Decree passed into the
Dogma's of the Synagogue, yet they insensibly instilled them into the People,
which made them unquiet, turbulent, and seditions. At last the Divisions, which
were to be according to their Prophets the beginning of their ruin and
downfall, broke out upon occasion of the Disorders that happened in the House of
the Asmoneans. There were scarce sixty years unto Jesus Christ, Zach. 11.6, 7,
8. etc.
when Hyrcan and Aristo^ulus the Sons of Alexander Janneus fell out about the
Priesthood, to which the Royalty was annexed. Here was the fatal Moment which
the History takes notice of as the first cause of the Destruction of the Jews.
Joseph. ant. 14.8.20.8.1. Bell. Jud. 4.5. Appian. bell. Sir. Mithrid. and Live.
lib. 5. Zach. 11.8.
Pompey, whom the two Brothers called to regulate them, subjected them both, at
the same time when he dispossessed Antiochus, Surnamed the Asiatick, the last
King of Syria. Those three Princes degraded together, and as it were, at one
effort, were the Signal of the Destruction so exactly described by the Prophet
Zachariah. It Is certain by the History, that that change of the Affairs of
Syria and Judea was made at the same time by Pompey, when after he had ended
the War with Mithridates, ready to return to Rome, he adjusted the Affairs of
the East. The Prophet only observed what made toward the Ruin of the Jews,
who, of the two Brothers whom they had seen Kings, saw, the one a Prisoner
serving at Pompey's Triumph, and the other (the weak Hyrcan) from whom the same
Pompey took, together with the Diadem, a great part of his Dominion, keeping
only a vain Title of Authority, which likewise he lost quickly after. 'Twas
then that the Jews were made the Tributaries of the Romans; and the Ruin of
Syria brought on theirs, because that great Kingdom reduced into a Province in
their Neighborhood, augmented so much the Roman Power there, that there was
Safety but only in obeying them. The Governors of Syria made continual
Attempts on Judea: The Romans made themselves absolute Masters of them, and
weakened their Government in several things. By them at last the Kingdom of
Juda. passed out of the Hands of the Asmoneans, to whom it had been subject,
into those of Herod a stranger, and an Idumean. The cruel and ambitious Polity
of that King, who only in show professed the Jewish Religion, changed soon the
Maxims of the ancient Government. The Jews were no longer Masters of their Fate
under the vast Empire of the Persians, and the first Seleucides, where they
lived only in an undisturbed Peace. Herod, who holds them in almost an absolute
Slavery to his Power, embroils all things, confounds, after his own Humor, the
Succession of the Highpriests; weakens the Pontificate which he makes
Arbitrary; enervates the Authority of the Council of the Nation, which can no
longer do any thing: All the public Power goes through the Hands of Herod, and
of the Romans, whose Slave he is, and he shakes the Foundations of the Jewish
Commonwealth.

The Pharisees, and the People who only hearkened to their Opinions, bore this
Condition very impatiently. The more they thought themselves oppressed with the
Yoke of the Gentiles, the greater Hatred and Disdain they had for them. They
would no longer have a Messiah who should not be a Warrior, and dreadful to the
Powers that captivated them. Thus, forgetting so many Prophecies, which so
plainly and expressly spoke of their being humbled, they had no long Eyes nor
Ears but for those which proclaimed Triumphs to them, though very different
from such as they wished.

In the declension of the Religion, VI. Jesus Christ, and his Doctrine.
and the Affairs of the Jews, at the end of King Herod's Reign, and then when
the Pharisees were bringing in so many Abuses, Jesus Christ was sent upon the
Earth to re-establish the Kingdom in the House of David, after a more exalted
manner than ever the carnal Jews understood it, and to preach that Doctrine and
good Tidings of Salvation which God was resolved all the World should be
acquainted with. This wonderful Son, whom Isaiah calls the mighty God, Isai.
9.6.
the everlasting Father, and the Prince of Peace, was born of a Virgin at
Bethlehem, and there he came to own the first Original of his Race: Conceived
by the Holy Ghost, holy by his Birth, being alone worthy to repair the
wickedness of ours, he was called Jesus, Matthew. 1.21.
because he was to save us from our Sins. Immediately after his Birth, a new
Star, a Type of that Light he was to bring to the Gentiles, was seen in the
East, and brought to our Savior thus an Infant, the First Fruits of the
converted Gentiles. A little after, that Lord, so much desired, came to his
holy Temple, where Simeon sees him, not only the Glory of the Poeple Israel,
Luke 2.32.
but also as a Light to lighten the Gentiles. When the time of preaching his
Gospel drew near, St. John the Baptist, who was to prepare the Way before him,
called all Sinners to Repentance, and made the whole Desert to ring again with
his Cries, whilst he spent the first Years of his Life in it with an Innocence
equal to the greatness of his Austerity. The People, who for five hundred Years
had been without any Prophets, acknowledged this new Elijah, and were ready to
take him for the Savior of the World, so great and extraordinary did his
Holiness appear to be: But then he himself did show unto the People him whose
Shoes latchet he was not worthy to unloose. John 1.27.
At length, Jesus Christ began to preach his Gospel, and to reveal what he had
seen from all Eternity in the Bosom of his Father. He lays the Foundation of
his Church by the calling of twelve Sinners, Matt. 10.2. Mark 3.16. Luke 6.14.
Act. 1.13. Matt. 16.18.
and he puts St. Peter at the head of them, with so opened and declared a
Prerogative, that the Evangelists, who in their numbering up of their Apostles,
do not observe any certain Order, yet do all agree in this one thing, of naming
St. Peter before all the others, as being the first and chief of them. Jesus
Christ goes through all Judea, which he fills with his Kindnesses; healing of
the Sick, being merciful to Sinners, whose true Physician he shows himself to
be by the access he gives them to himself, making Men to feel an Authority, and
yet a pleasing Meekness, as never yet appeared in any but in his Person. He
declares high Mysteries; but he confirms them by as great Miracles: He commands
great Virtues; but at the same time he gives great Illuminations of them, great
Examples, and great Graces. It Is by that also that he appears full of Grace and
Truth, ^ohn 1.14, 15, 16.
and that we have all received of his Fullness.

All things are sustained in his Person; his Life, his Doctrine, his Miracles.
The same Truth shines there throughout: Every thing concurs to make him seem
the Master of Mankind, and the Model of all Perfection.

He alone, living in the midst of his Enemies, and in the sight of all the
World, was able to say, without fear of being caught in an Untruth, John.
8.26.12.29.
Which of you will convince me of Sin? And again, I am the Light of the World;
my Meat is to do the Will of him that sent me, and to finish his Work; and he
that sent me, is with me: the Father has not left me alone: for I always do
those things that please him.

His Miracles are of a peculiar Order, and of a new Character. They are not
Signs in the Heaven, Matt. 16.1.
such as the Jews desired him that he would show them. He wrought them almost
all upon the Men themselves, healing their Infirmities. All those Miracles were
more the Instances of his Goodness than of his Power, and did not so much
surprise the Beholders, as they touched them at the bottom of their Hearts. He
did them with Authority: The Devils and the Diseases obeyed him: At his Word,
those who were born blind, received their Sight; the Dead were raised from
their Graves, and Sins were pardoned. The principle of all this was in himself:
They ran from the Source: I find, says he, there is Virtue gone out of me:
Luke 6.19.8.46.
And there never was any that wrought either such great Miracles as he did, or
so many, even almost on all that came to him: And yet for all that, he promises
that his Disciples shall do greater Works in his Name; so fruitful and
inexhaustible was that Virtue he had in himself. John 14 12.


Who cannot but admire the Condescension with which he tempers the excellency
of his Doctrine? It is Milk for Babes, and yet too at the same time it is Meat
for the Strong. He is seen full of the Secrets of God, but he is not seen to be
astonished at it, as other men were to whom God communicated himself: he speaks
naturally of them, as one that was born in that Mystery and Glory; John 3.34.
and what God had given him without measure, he distributed ( viz. the Spirit)
with measure, that so our weakness might be able to bear it.

Although he was sent in general to all the World, yet at first he addressed
himself only to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel, to which indeed he was
principally sent: But he prepared the way for the Conversion of the Samaritans
and Gentiles. A Woman of Samaria acknowledges him for THE CHRIST whom her
Nation waited for, John 4.21, 25.
as well as that of the Jews, and she learns of him the mystery of the new
Worship, which should be no longer fixed to any one certain place. A Woman of
Canaan, and an Idolatress, if I may be permitted so to say, although she was
reprehended, forces from him by a passionate violence the healing of her
Daughter. Matthew. 15.22, 23, 24. etc. Matt. 8.10, 11.
He confesses that in several places the Children of Abraham were to be found
among the Gentiles, and he speaks of his Doctrine as being preached before,
contradicted, and received by all the Earth. The World had never seen any thing
like it, and his Apostles were astonished at it. He conceals not from his own
the sad Trials through which they should pass. He discovers to them the
Violences and the Seduction that would be made use of against them, the
Persecutions, the false Doctrines, the false Brethren, and the Wars both within
and without, and the Faith that was to be purified, by all those Trials;
toward the last days, the weakening of that Faith, and the coldness of Charity
among his Disciples, but yet in the midst of all those Perils, nothing, not
even the Gates of Hell should be able to prevail against the Church and the
Truth. Matthew. 16.18.


Here you see now a new manner of Conduct, and a new face and order of things:
there is no more promising of Temporal Rewards to the Children of God: Jesus
Christ shows unto them a future Life, and keeping them in suspense upon that
Expectation, he teaches them to draw off their Minds from all these lower
sensible Enjoyments. The Cross, and patience under it, was to be the portion of
tneir Cup here upon Earth, and Heaven was proposed to them as before, to be
taken by violence. Jesus Christ, Matthew. 11.12.
who showed to men this new way, was the first to enter in at it. He preached
pure Truths, which amazed the dull and ignorant, and yet the almost only men
that were proud and supercilious: He discovers the latent pride and hypocrisy
of the Pharisees and Doctors of the Law, who corrupted it by their false and
strained Interpretations. In the midst of those Reproaches he honors their
Ministry, and Moses's Seat wherein the Scribes and Pharisees did sit. Matthew.
23.2.
He was often in the Temple, and made the Holiness of that place to be
respected, and sent the Lepers whom he healed unto the Priests. Thereby he
taught men how they ought to repress and correct abuses, without ever being
prejudiced at the Ministry established by God himself, and showed that the Body
of the Synagogue subsisted, notwithstanding the Corruption of some of its
private Members. But it did apparently incline to ruin. The Highpriests, and
the Pharisees stirred up the People of the Jews against Christ, for their
Religion was almost quite turned into Superstition. They could not endure the
Savior of the World who called them to substantial, though difficult Practices.
The most holy and the best of all men, nay even holiness and goodness it self,
became the most envied and the most hated. But that did not discourage him, for
he ceased not doing good to his Citizens: but he saw their ingratitude; he
foretold their punishment even weeping, and denounced to Jerusalem her hasty
destruction. He also prophesied that the Jews, who were Enemies to the Truth
which he declared, should be delivered up to Error, and become the Mockery of
the false Prophets. In the mean time the jealousy of the Pharisees and the
Priests brings him to a most infamous and accursed death: his Disciples forsake
him; one of them betrays him; the first and the most zealous of all den^es him
thrice. Being accused before the Council, he honors even to the last the
Ministry of the Priests, and answers the High Priest particularly to the
Questions he interrogated him in a Judicial way. But the hour was come, that
the Synagogue was to be reproved. The High Priest and all the Council condemn
Jesus Christ, because he called himself The Christ, the Son of God. He was
delivered up to Pontius Pilate the Roman President: his Innocence was confessed
by his Judge, whom yet Polity and Interest made to act against the convictions
of his own Conscience: The just One is condemned to death: the greatest of all
Crimes gives place to the most perfect Obedience that ever was: Jesus, the
Master of his own life, and of all things else, gives up himself voluntarily to
the fury of the wicked Multitude, and offers the Sacrifice which was to be the
expiation of Mankind. On the Cross he sees in the Prophecies what yet remained
to be done: and he fulfils it, and then says, It is finished. At that word,
every thing in the World was changed: the Law ceased, John 19.30.
the Types were over, its Sacrifices were abolished by a more perfect Oblation.
That done, Jesus Christ expires with a loud groan: all Nature was moved: the
Centurion, who watched him, being greatly astonished at such a Death, cried out
and said, Matthew. 27.50, 54.
Truly this was the Son of God; and those that had beheld it returned to their
own homes smiting their Breasts. On the third day he arose again from the dead;
appeared to his Disciples who had forsaken him, and who could by no means
believe his Resurrection. They saw him, spoke with him, touched and handled
him, and were convinced. To confirm the Faith of his Resurrection, he showed
himself at diverse times, and in diverse circumstances. His Disciples saw him in
private, and likewise saw him all together: He appeared to above five hundred
Brethren at once. 1 Cor. 15.6.
An Apostle who wrote of it, assures us that the greater part were then alive
at the writing of his Epistle. Jesus Christ being risen, gives to his Apostles
what time they required thoroughly to consider of him, and after he had put
himself into their hands all the ways they could desire, so that not the least
scruple of a Doubt could possibly remain in them, he commanded them to bear
witness of what they had seen, of what they had heard, and of what their hands
had handled. And that none might doubt of the credit of their Evidence, any
more than of their Persuasion, he obliged them to seal their Testimony with
their Blood. Thus their preaching was not to be shaken; the foundation of it
was a positive fact, unanimously attested by those that saw it. Their sincerity
was justified by the strongest proof and trial imaginable, which was that of
torments, and of death it self. Those were the Instructions which the Apostles
received. Upon that foundation did twelve Fishermen undertake to convert all
the World, which they saw so set against the Laws that they were commissionated
to prescribe to them, and the Truths they had to declare. They were ordered to
begin at Jerusalem, Luke 24.47.
and from thence to scatter themselves throughout all the Earth, Acts 1.8.
Matthew. 28.19, 20.
instructing all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Jesus Christ promises them to be with them always,
even to the end of the World; and by that very word assures them of the
perpetual Continuance of the Ecclesiastical Ministry. And when he had said
that, he ascends into Heaven in their sight.

The Promises were accomplished: the Prophecies had then their Scene fully
opened. The Gentiles were called to the Knowledge of God by the Command of
Jesus Christ that was risen from the dead: a new Ceremony was instituted for
the Regeneration of the new People; and the Faithful are taught that the true
God, the God of Israel, that one and indivisible God to whom they are
consecrated in Baptism, is together in himself Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

There are then propounded to us the incomprehensible Depths of the Divine
Being, and the ineffable Greatness of his Unity, and the infinite Riches of
that Nature, more fruitful yet within than without, able to communicate himself
without any manner of Division to three equal Persons.

There are explained the Mysteries which were folded, and as it were sealed up
in the ancient Writings. We understand the meaning of that saying, Genesis 1.26.
Let us make Man in our Image; and tne Trinity set forth in Man's Creation, is
expressly declared in his Regeneration.

We learn by it what that Wisdom was, which was conceived before all times in
the Bosom of God, as Solomon speaks: Prove. 8.22.23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
That Wisdom, which made up all his Delight; and by which all his Works were
made. We know who he was that David saw in the Psalm. 110.3.
Beauties of Holiness, from the Womb of the Morning; and the New Testament
informs us that it was the Word, the inward Word of God, and his eternal
Thought, who is always in his Bosom, and by whom all things were made. By that
we can answer that mysterious Question which is put to us in the Proverbs:
Prove. 30.4.
W^o has ascended up into Heaven, or descended? Who has gathered the Wind in
his Fists? Who has bound the Waters in a Garment? Who has established all the
ends of the Earth? What is his Name, and what is his Son's Name, if thou can
tell? For we know that that so mysterious and so hidden name of God, is the
name of the Father understood in that profound Sense which made him to be
conceived from all Eternity, the Father of a Son equal to himself, and that the
Name of his Son is the name of the Word; the Word which he begot eternally in
the Contemplation of himself, which is the perfect expression of his Truth, his
Image, his only Son, being the brightness of his Glory, Heb. 1.3.
and the express Image of his Person.

With the Father and the Son we know also the Holy Ghost, the Love of both, and
their eternal Union. 'Twas that Spirit which made the Prophets, and which was
in them to discover to them the Councils of God, and the Secrets of Futurity;
the Spirit of whom it is written, Isai. 48.16.
The Lord God and his Spirit has sent me, which is distinguished from the
Lord, and which is also the Lord himself, since that he sent the Prophets, and
discovered to them things to come. That Spirit which spoke to the Prophets, and
which spoke by the Prophets was united to the Father and the Son, and
interposed with them in the Consecration of the new Man.

Thus the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, one single God in three Persons,
shown more darkly to our Fathers, was clearly revealed in the new Covenant.
Being instructed in so high a Mystery, and astonished at its incomprehensible
Depth, we cover our Faces before God with the Cherubims whom Isaiah saw, and
with them we adore him who is Holy, holy, holy, the Lord of Hosts, Isai. 6.3.
whose Glory is the fullness of the whole Earth.

It belonged to the only Son, John 1.18.
who was in the Bosom of his Father, and who without ever coming from thence,
came down to us; to him, I say, it belonged fully to discover to us those
admirable Secrets of the Divine Nature, which Moses and the Prophets had but
lightly touched upon.

It belonged to him to make us understand, how it was, that the Messiah
promised as a Man who was to save all men, was at the same time shown as God in
the singular Number, and absolutely after the same manner as the Creator
himself was shown to us; and this is also that which he has done, in teaching
us, that though he was the Son of Abraham, John 8.58.
yet he was before ever Abraham was born, and that he came down from Heaven,
and that he always is in Heaven: Id. 3.13.
that he was God, the Son of God; and yet he was Man, the Son of Man; the true
Emanuel; God with us: in a word, the Word made Flesh, uniting in his Person
Humane Nature with the Divine, that so he might reconcile all things unto
himself.

Thus are revealed to us the two great and principal Mysteries, that of the
Trinity, and that of the Incarnation. But he who has revealed them to us,
makes us to find the Image thereof in our selves, that so they might be always
present to us, and that we might acknowledge the Dignity of our Nature.

In short, if we would impose Silence on our Senses, and would for a little
while look into our selves, into the bottom of our Souls, that is to say, into
that part where the truth comes to be understood, we should find there some
Image of the Trinity we adore. The thought which we feel to spring up as the
Bud of our Mind, as the Son of our Understanding, gives us some Idea of the Son
of God eternally conceived in the mind of the heavenly Father. Wherefore that
Son of God assumes the name of Word, to make us understand that he sprang up in
the Bosom of the Father, Greg. Naz. Orat. 26. Aug. de Trin. 9.4. etc. and in
Johan. Evang. Tr. 1. etc. de Civ. 11.26, 27, 28.
not as Bodies do, but as that inward Word arises in our Mind, which we feel in
it when we contemplate on the Truth.

But the fruitfulness of our Mind is not terminated on that inward Word, that
intellectual Thought, that image of Truth which is formed in us. We love both
that inward Word, and the Mind in which it arises, and in that love we feel
somewhat in us which we value as highly as our very mind and thought, which is
the Fruit of both, which unites them; an^ is united to them, and which makes up
but one Life with us.

So far as there can be found any relation between God and Man; so far, I say,
is produced in God the eternal Love which comes from the Fat^er who thinks, and
from the Son who is his Thought, to make up with him and his Thought one and
the same nature equally happy and perfect.

In a word, God is perfect, and his Word the living Image of an infinite Truth,
is no less perfect than him; and his Love, which, proceeding from the
inexhaustible Fountain of Good, has all the fullness of it, cannot but have an
infinite Perfection: And since that we have no other Idea of God but that of
Perfection, each of those three things considered apart, deserves to be called
God: But beause those three things do necessarily agree with one and the same
Nature, those three things therefore make up but one God.

We ought then to have no unequal nor separate Conceptions of this Adorable
Trinity; and how incomprehensible soever the Equality be, our Soul, if we will
but hearken to it, will tell us something of it.

It is, and when it knows perfectly what it is, its Intelligence corresponds to
the truth of its being: Aug. loc. citat.
And when it loves its being with its understanding as much as it deserves to
be beloved, its Love equals the perfection of both. Those three things are
never divided, the one is confined by other, and the third by both: We
understand that we are, and that we love, and we love to be, and to understand.
Who can deny it, if he understand himself? and not only is not one of those
better than another, but three altogether are not better than is one of them by
it self, since that each of them do bind the whole, do conclude the whole, and
that in those three consists the Felicity and Dignity of the reasonable Nature.
Thus is the Trinity which we worship, and to which we are consecrated by our
Baptism; thus, I say, and infinitely more is it perfect, unseparable, one in
its Essence, and in short, equal in every sense.

But we our selves, who are the Image of the Trinity, we, in another respect,
are also the Image of the Incarnation.

A Soul of a spiritual and incorruptible Nature, has a corruptible Body which
is united to it: Aug. Ep. 3. ad Volusc. c. 3. de Civ. 10.29. Cyr. Ep. ad.
Valerian. p. 3. Con^. Ephesians. etc. Symb. Ath. etc.
And from the Union of them both results a Whole, which is Man, Mind and Body
together, incorruptible, intelligent, and purely brutish. These Attributes
agree with the whole, by relation to each of its two parts; So the divine Word,
whose Virtue sustains the whole, by relation to each of its two parts; so the
divine Word, whose Virtue sustains the whole, is united in a particular manner,
or rather it becomes himself, by a perfect Union, that Jesus Christ the Son of
Mary, that which makes him to be the Son of God and Man both together, begotten
from all Eternity, and yet begotten in time, always living in the Bosom of his
Father, and yet dead upon the Cross for our Salvation.

But where God finds himself mixed, Comparisons drawn from humane things are
never but imperfect. Our Soul is not before our Body, and something fails it
when ever it is separated from it. The Word perfect in it self from all
Eternity, is only united to our Nature for its Honor. That Soul which presides
over the Body, and makes several Changes in it, it self suffers from it in its
turn. If the Body be moved at the command, and according to the Will of the
Soul, the Soul is troubled, the Soul is afflicted, and influenced a thousand
ways, either tormenting or pleasing, according to the Dispositions of the Body;
so that as the Soul raises up the Body to it self in the governing part, so it
is cast down below it by what it suffers from the Body. But in Jesus Christ,
the word presides over all, it keeps all under its Dominion. So Man is raised,
and the Word is not cast down by any thing: Immutable and unalterable it rules
and governs Nature which is united to it in all things throughout.

From thence it comes, that in Jesus Christ, Man, absolutely submissive to the
inward direction of the Word which raises it up to it self, has only divine
Thoughts and Motions. All that he thinks, all that he wills, all that he says,
all that he conceals within, all that he shows outwardly, is animated and
inspired by the Word, led by the Word, worthy of Word, that is to say, worthy
of Reason it self, of Wisdom it self, and of Truth it self. Wherefore every
thing is Light in Jesus Christ: His Conduct is a Rule; his Miracles are
Instructions, his Words are Spirit and Life.

It is not given to all to understand these sublime Truths, nor perfectly to
see in himself that mavelous Image of divine things, which St. Austin and the
other Fathers have thought so certain. Our Senses govern us too much, and our
Imagination which will be concerned in all our Thoughts, does not suffer us
always to stay upon so pure a Light. We do not know our selves; we are ignorant
what vast Riches we constantly carry about with us, because we search not to
the bottom of our Natures; and only the most inwardly discerning Eyes can
perceive them. But as little as we do pry into that Secret, and observe in our
selves the Image of the two Mysteries, which make up the Foundation of our
Faith, that is sufficient to raise us up above all, and nothing of Mortality
can affect us any more.

Also Jesus Christ calls us to an immortal Glory, and it is the Fruit of the
Faith we have for the Mysteries.

That God-Man, that incarnate Truth and Wisdom, which makes us to believe such
great things upon its single Authority, promises to us the clear and happy
Vision of it in Eternity, as the certain Recompense of our Faith.

In this way, is the Mission of Jesus Christ infinitely advanced above that of
Moses.

Moses was sent to rouse up sensual and brutish Men by temporal Rewards. Since
that they were become all Body and all Flesh, it was necessary for him at first
to captivate them by their Senses, and by that means to inculcate into them the
Knowledge of God, and the horror of Idolatry, to which Mankind had so prodigious
an Inclination.

That was the Ministry of Moses: But to inspire Man with more exalted Thoughts,
and by a full Evidence to convince him of the Dignity, Immortality, and eternal
Happiness of his Soul, this was reserved to be the Work of Jesus Christ.

In the times of Ignorance, that is to say, those which were before our blessed
Saviors days, what the Soul knew of its Dignity and Immortality, led it for
the most part to Error. The worshipping of dead Men did almost make up all
their Idolatry: Almost all Men sacrificed to the Manes, that is, to the Souls
of the Dead. Those ancient Errors do discover to us indeed how great was the
ancient Belief of the Souls Immortality, and shows us that we ought to place it
among the first Traditions of Mankind. But Man who spoiled all things, had
strangely abused it, since the Soul carried him out to sacrifice to the Dead.
Nay they went at last to that excess, as to sacrifice living Men to them; they
killed their Slaves, and even their Women, to make them go and serve them in
the other World. The Gauls did so with many other People: And the Indians,
observed by the Heathen Authors among the first Defenders of the Souls
Immortality; Cas. de hell. Gall. 6.
have also been the first Introducers of those abominable Murders in the World,
under the pretense of Religion. The same Indians used to kill themselves to
forward the Happiness of the future Life; and that deplorable Blindness
continues still to this day among those People; so dangerous is it to teach the
Truth in any other way or manner than what God has instituted, and clearly to
explain to Man all that he is before he knew God perfectly.

'Twas the want of knowing God, which made most of the Philosophers not to
believe the Immortality of the Soul, without believing it at the same time a
Portion of the Divinity, nay a Divinity it self, an eternal Being, uncreated as
well as incorruptible, and which had neither beginning not end. What shall I
say of those who believed the Transmigration of Souls; who made them skip from
Heaven to Earth, and then from Earth to Heaven again; from Beasts into Men, and
from Men into Beasts; from Happiness to Misery, and from Misery to Happiness;
and those Revolutions never to have any end, nor any certain order? How sadly
was the Divine Justice, Providence, and Goodness, darkened amidst so many
fuliginous Errors! And how necessary was it to know God, and the Rules of his
Wisdom, before he knows the Soul, and its immortal Nature!

Wherefore the Law of Moses gave only to Man the first Notion of the nature of
the Soul, and its Felicity. We saw the Soul at first made by the Power of God,
as well as the rest of the Creatures; but with this particular Character and
Distinction, that it was made after his Image, and by his Breath; that it might
understand to whom it was obliged by its being, and also that it might never
fancy it self to be of the same nature with the Body, not formed by its order
and concurrence. But the Consequences of this Doctrine, and the Marvels of the
future Life, were not then universally unfolded; This great Light and Discovery
was not to be till the coming of the Messiah.

God had scattered some few Sparks of it in the Old Testament. Solomon said,
that the Dust should return to the Earth as it was; Eccles. 12.7.
and the Spirit shall return to God who gave it. The Patriarchs, and the
Prophets lived in that Hope, and Daniel had foretold that there should a time
come, Dan. 12.1, 2, 4.
that those who slept in the Dust of the Earth, should awake; some to
everlarting Life; and some to shame and everlasting Contempt. But at the same
time that those things were revealed to him, he was commanded to seal up the
Book, even to the time of the End, to let us understand that the full discovery
of these Truths was reserved for another Season, and another Age.

But though the Jews had in their Scriptures some Promises of eternal
Happiness, and that toward the time of the Messiah's coming, in which they
were to be declared, they spoke much more of them, as appears by the Books of
Wisdom, and the Maccabees; yet however, this Truth gained so little Reputation
among the ancient People, that the Saducees, without ever knowing it, not only
were admitted into the Synagogue, but also were advanced to the Priesthood. It
was one of the Characters of the new People, to lay down as a Foundation of
Religion, the faith of a future Life, and that was to be the Fruit of the
coming of the Messiah.

Wherefore not being satisfied with telling us, that a Life eternally happy was
reserved for the Children of God, he has told us wherein it consists. The
happy Life is to be with him in the glory of God his Father; John 17.
the Life of happiness is to see the glory which he has in the bosom of the
Father from the beginning of the World: the Life of happiness is, that Jesus
Christ is in us in his Members, and that the eternal Love which the Father has
for his Son, extends it self to us, he fills us full of the same Gifts: In a
word, the Life of happiness is to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
he has sent; but to know him in that manner which we call a clear sight, 1
Cor. 13.9, 12. 2 ^p. 3.2.
face to face, the sight which reforms in us, and perfects there the Image of
God, that according as St. John says, We shall be like unto him, because we
shall see him as he is.

That sight shall be followed with an Immense Love, and unexpressible Joy, and
a Triump that shall have no end. Rev. 7.12.19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
An eternal Alleluja, and an eternal Amen shall be heard to resound through all
the heavenly Jerusalem, and all Calamities shall be done away, and all Desires
shall be satisfied, there shall be nothing else to do, but to sing, Salvation,
and Glory, and Honor and Power unto the Lord our God, and to fall down and
worship him who sits on the Throne for ever and ever.

With these new Rewards, it was but ne^essary that Jesus Christ should propose
to us new Ideas of Virtue; more perfect and purified Practices. The End of
Religion, the Soul of Virtues, and the Abridgment of the Law, is Charity. But
until Jesus Christ was come into the World, we may say, that the perfection,
and the effects of that Virtue were not thoroughly known. It was truly and
properly our blessed Savior that taught us to place our Satisfaction in God
alone. To set up the Kingdom of Charity, and to reveal to us all the Duties of
it, he lays before us the Love of God, even to the hating of our selves, and
continually persecuting that Principle of Corruption which we all carry about
with us in our hearts. He propounds to us the Love of our Neighbor, even to
the extending that beneficent Inclination to all men, including therein even
those that hate and persecute us: he proposes to us the moderating of our
sensual Desires, even to the absolute cutting off our own Members, that is to
say, that which gives us the most lively and sensible impressions: He proposes
also to us submission to the Will of God, even to the rejoicing at the
Sufferings he lays upon us; as also Humility, and that too to the loving of
Reproaches for God's sake, and to the believing that no Indignities, how
injurious soever, can make us so vile in the eyes of men, as we truly are in
God's sight by our shameful and abominable sins. Upon this foundation of
Charity it is, that all the conditions of Humane Life are perfected. It is by
that, that Marriage is reduced to its primitive form: the Conjugal Affection is
now no more divided; so holy a Society is only terminated by Death; and
Children do not now see their Mothers cast out for entertaining of a Step-dame
in their places. Celibacy is set forth as an Imitation of the life of Angels,
which is wholly and entirely taken with God, and with the chaste delights of his
Love. Superiors do learn that they are the Servants of others, and devoted to
their Good; and Inferiors do acknowledge the wise order of God in their lawful
Powers, although they abuse their Authority: this very thought sweetens to us
the hardships of Subjection, and under the most troublesome Masters Obedience
is not at all troublesome to the true Christian.

To these Precepts he superadds Councils of eminent perfection; to renounce all
pleasures; to live in the Body as if we without the Body; to forsake all
things; to give all we have to the Poor, that we may possess nothing but God;
to live upon a little, yea almost upon nothing; and to expect that little too
from Divine Providence.

But that Law which is most proper to the Gospel, is that of bearing his Cross.
The Cross is the true Trial of Faith, the true Foundation of Hope, the perfect
purifier of Charity; in a word, the true way to Heaven. Jesus Christ dyed on
the Cross; he bore his Cross all the while he lived; it is by the Cross that he
would have us to follow him, and he has promised to reward it with Eternal
Life. The first to whom he particularly made this Promise of Everlasting Rest,
was a Companion of his Cross: This day, says he, Luke 22.48.
thou shall be with me in Paradise. Immediately after his Expiration on the
Cross, the Veil which covered the Sanctuary was rent from the top to the
bottom, and the Heaven was opened to holy Souls. It was after he came from the
Cross, and from the horrors of his Punishment, that he appeared to his
Apostles, glorious, and a Conqueror over Death, that they might thereby learn
and understand that it was by the Cross they were to enter into his Glory, and
that he would show no other way to his Children.

Thus in the Person of Jesus Christ was given to the World the lively Image of
an accomplished Virtue, who had nothing, nor did expect nothing here in this
World; who received from men only continual Persecutions, yet he never ceased
doing of them good, and for all that on whom his very kindnesses brought the
worst of punishments. Jesus Christ dyed without finding any Gratitude in those
whom he obliged, nor Fidelity from his Friends, nor Equity in his Judges. His
Innocence, although it was acknowledged, did not save him; his Father himself,
in whom alone he had put his trust and hope, withdrew all the Marks of his
Protection: the Just is delivered up to his Enemies, and he dyed forsaken both
of God and Men.

But every good and holy man will see, that in those his greatest Extremities,
he neither stood in need of any Humane Consolation, nor even any visible and
sensible Sign of the Divine Succor: for it was God he only loved, and in whom
he only trusted, and he was sure that He thought on him, though there were not
any outward signs of it, and that an everlasting Happiness was reserved for him.

Soc. apud Plat. Dial. 11. de Rep.
The wisest of the Philosophers, in his researches after an Idea of Virtue,
found out, that as of all wicked men, he would be the most flagitious, who knew
how most artificially to hide his Malice, that he might be taken for a good
man, and by that means enjoy all the credit that Virtue was able to give him:
so the most virtuous man without doubt was he, whose perfective Virtue gained
him the envy and jealousy of all men, so that he had only the integrity of his
own unreproveable Conscience on his side, though he saw himself exposed to all
manner of Injuries, even to be nailed on the Cross, his Virtue not being able
to afford him that poor Succor of freeing him from such a Punishment.
Certainly God did put this mavelous Idea of Virtue in the mind of a
Philosopher, to render it effective in the Person of his Son, and to show that
the Just man had another Glory, another Repose, and in a word another Happiness
than he could have here upon Earth.

To make clear this truth, and to show it fulfilled so visibly in himself at
the expense of his own Life, was the greatest work that a man could do; and God
found it so great, that he reserved it for this so much promised Messiah, for
this Man whom he made the same Person with his only Son.

Indeed what greater thing could be reserved for a God that was to come down
upon the Earth? and what could he do here more worthy of himself, than to show
Virtue in all its purity, and the eternal Happiness to which we are led by
those Sufferings which this World looks on as the most grievous and reproachful?

But if we will consider what yet there was of a higher and more perfective
Excellency in the Mystery of the Cross, what Human Understanding can fathom it?
There are discovered to us such Virtues as none but the God-Man could practice.
Who else could, like him, put himself in the stead of all the old Sacrifices,
and abolish them in substituting to them a Victime of infinite Dignity and
Merit, and to order for the future that none besides himself should be offered
up to God? such was the act of Religion, that Jesus Christ performed on the
Cross. The Eternal Father, could he find either among Men, or Angels, an
Obedience equal to that which his Well-beloved Son paid him, as when nothing
was able to take his Life out of his hands, he voluntarily laid it down to
please him? What shall I say of the perfect Union of all his Desires with the
Divine Will, and of the Love whereby God was in him, 2 Cor. 5.19.
reconciling the World unto himself. In that incomprehensible Union he embraced
all Mankind, he pacified Heaven and Earth, he plunged himself with an immense
ardour into that Deluge of Blood with which he was to be baptized with all his
faithful Followers, Luke 12.50.
and he made to come out of his Wounds the fire of Divine Love which was to
burn up all the Earth. But that which passes all understanding is, to behold
the Justice used by that God-Man, who was suffered to be condemned by the
World, to the end that the World might remain eternally condemned through the
enormous Iniquity of that Judgment. John 12.31.
Now is the Judgment of this World; now shall the Prince of this World be cast
out, as our Savior Christ himself declares. Hell, which had undone the World,
was now going to destroy him: in attacking the Innocent, it will be forced to
remit the Guilty whom it held Captive: the miserable Obligation whereby we were
delivered up to the Rebellious Angels was cancelled: And you being dead in your
sins, Coloss. 2.13, 14, 15.
and the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened together with him,
having forgiven you all trespasses, blotting out the handwriting of
Ordinances, that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of
the way, nailing it to his Cross: and having spoiled Principalities, and
Powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it. Hell being
spoiled and defeated, groaned; the Cross was a place of triumph and rejoicing
to our Savior, and the Powers that were Enemies, tremblingly followed the
Chariot of the Conqueror. But a greater Triumph yet was laid before our Eyes;
the Divine Justice was it self vanquished; the Sinner, who was due to it as its
Victime, was snatched out of its hands. He found a Surety was able to pay for
him an infinite price. Jesus Christ was eternally united to the Elect for whom
he gave himself; they became his Members and his Body: the Eternal Father could
no longer look upon them but in him their Head: therefore he likewise extended
toward them the infinite Love which he had for his Son. 'Twas this Son himself
that begged it of him: he would not be separated from those men whom he had
bought and redeemed with his most precious Blood. Father, I will, that they
also whom thou have given me, John 17.24, 25, 26.
be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me;
for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the World. O righteous Father, the
World has not known thee, but I have known thee, and these have known that
thou have sent me. And I have declared unto them thy Name, and will declare it,
that the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them: they
shall be filled with my Spirit; they shall enjoy my glory; they shall partake
with me, Rev. 3.21.
even to the sitting on my Throne.

After so great a Benefit, what can there be more than Cries of Joy and Thanks
whereby to be able to express our Acknowledgments? O miracles, Justin. Epist.
ad Diognet.
cries out a great Philosopher and a great Martyr! O incomprehensible
exchanged, and surprising artifice of the Divine Wisdom! One single One is
smitten, and all are delivered. God smites his Innocent Son for the sake of
Guilty men, and he pardons Guilty men for the sake of his Innocent Son. The
Just paid what he never owed, and acquits the Sinners of their debt; for what
could better cover our Sins, than his Righteousness? What better way could the
Rebellion of Servants be expiated, than by the obedience of the Son? The
iniquity of many is hid in one just One, and the justice of One alone makes it
that many are justified. What then are we not to pretend to? God commends has
love toward us, Romans 5.8, 9.
in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. Much more then being
now justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. All was
for us by Jesus Christ; Grace, holiness, life, glory, blessedness: the Kingdom
of the Son of God is our Inheritance, there is nothing above us, provided only
that we do not degenerate and make our selves vile.

Whilst Jesus Christ was filling up our desires, and surpassing our hopes, he
finished the work of God which was begun under the Patriarchs, and in the Law
of Moses.

Then God resolved to make himself known by sensible Experiences: he showed
himself very magnificent in Temporal Promises, good in heaping upon his
Children such Blessings as flattered the Senses, powerful in delivering them
from the hands of their Enemies, faithful in leading them into the Land of
Promise to their Fathers, just by the Rewards and Punishments which he openly
sent them according to their works.

All his mavelous Works prepared the way for the Truths which Jesus Christ
came to teach. If God be so good as to bestow on us what is agreeable to our
Senses, how much rather shall he give unto us what is agreeable to our Souls
which were made after his own Image? If he be so tender and beneficent toward
his Children, shall he shut up his love and his bounty in those few years which
make up our life? Will he give to those whom he loves only a shadow of
Felicity, a fertile Land in Corn and Oil? Will there not be a heavenly Country
wherein he will abundantly recompense us with true and everlasting good things?

There will be one without all peradventure, and Jesus Christ will come to show
it us. For indeed the Almighty would do works very unworthy of himself, if all
his magnificence should terminate in Grandeurs that were only exposed to our
weak and infirm Senses. Whatsoever is not eternal, is neither correspondent to
the Majesty of an Eternal God, nor does it answer the hopes of man, to whom he
has made known his eternity; and that unchangeable fidelity which he bears to
his Servants will never have an Object proportionable to it, until it be
extended to something that is immortally permanent.

Therefore will Jesus Christ at last come and open the Heavens to us, to
disocover there to our Faith that abiding City, Heb. 11.8.9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16.
which has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God, where we are to be
gathered together after this life. He shows us, that if God make Eternal to be
one of his Titles, the Name of the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, it
is because those holy men are always living before him. Matthew. 22.32. Luke
20.38.
For God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. It is below him to do
only as men, accompany his friends to the Grave, without giving them any hope
beyond; and it would be (if I may speak with reverence) reproachable for him to
call himself with so much of force and energy the God of Abraham, if he had not
founded in the Heavens an Eternal City, wherein Abraham and his Children may be
happy throughout all Generations.

It Is thus therefore that these Truths of a Futurity were unfolded to us by
Jesus Christ. Heb. 11.14, 15, 16.
He showed them to us, even under the Law. the true Land of Promise was the
heavenly Kingdom. 'Twas that blessed Country that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
desired. Palestine did not deserve to be the Boundary of their fervent Vows,
nor to be the sole object of so long an expectation of our Fathers.

Egypt, from whence we were to come out, the Wilderness through which we were
to pass, Babylon, whose Prison-walls we were to break to enter, or to return
into our Country, that was this World with all its delights and vanities; for
here it was that we were truly Captives, and Pilgrims, led astray by Sin, and
Concupiscence; we were to shake off this Yoke to find in Jerusalem, and in the
City of our God true liberty, and an House or Sanctuary not made with hands, 2
Cor. 5.1.
eternal in the Heavens, where the Glory of the God of Israel should be
manifested to us.

By this Doctrine of Jesus Christ the Mystery of God was laid open to us, the
Law was all Spiritual, its Promises were introductive of those of the Gospel,
and served as a Foundation to them. One and the same light was visible
throughout: it arose under the Patriarchs; under Moses and the Prophets it
increased; Jesus Christ who was greater than the Patriarchs, who came with more
Authority than Moses, and who was more illuminated than all the Prophets,
discovered this unto us in his fullness.

To this Christ, to this God-Man, to this Man who held upon Earth, as St.
Austin speaks, the place of The Truth, and discovers it to be personally
resident amongst us; to him, I say, it was reserved to show us all Truth, that
is to say, so much of the Mysteries, of the Virtues, and of the Rewards, as God
had designed for those whom he really loved.

These were the Grandeurs which the Jews ought to have looked for in their
Messiah. There is nothing so great and glorious, as to carry in it self, and to
discover unto men Truth in its fullness and perfection, which seeds them and
directs them, and clears up their eyes so as to make 'em capable of seeing God.

Now in this time when the Truth was to be discovered to men with that fullness,
it was also commanded to be promulged throughout all the Earth, and at all
times. God gave to Moses but one single People, and one determined time: but
all Ages, and all the People of the World, were given to Jesus Christ: he has
his Elect every where, and his Church extensive as the Universe shall never
leave off her bringing them forth; Go, says he, therefore, and teach all
Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, Matthew. 28.19, 20.
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things,
whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end
of the World. Amen.

VII. The Descent of the Holy Ghost: the Establishment of the Church: The
Judgments of God on the Jews, and on the Gentiles.
To disperse into all Places, and in all Ages, such eminent Truths, and to put
such pure and admirable Practices in force amidst such Corruption, there was
need of a Virtue more than Humane. Wherefore Jesus Christ promised to send the
Holy Ghost to fortify his Apostles, and eternally to inspire and invigorate
the Body of the Church.

This power of the Holy Ghost, to declare it self the more, was to appear in
weakness. Behold, I send, says Jesus Christ to his Apostles, Luke 24.49.
the promise of my Father upon you, that is to say, the Holy Ghost: in the mean
time, tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem, be quiet, do not concern your self
about any thing, until ye be endued with power from on high.

And to show their submission and conformity to that Order, they continued shut
up for forty days: at the prefixed time the Holy Ghost descended; Acts 2.3.
cloven Tongues, like as of fire, falling upon the Disciples of our blessed
Savior, do show the efficacy of their preaching; and so being filled with the
Holy Ghost, Id. 4.
they began to speak as the Spirit gave them utterance; the Apostles bore
witness of Jesus Christ; they were all ready to suffer for the Testimony, that
they had seen him rise from the dead. Miracles followed upon their preaching:
At two of St. Peter's Sermons eight thousand Jews were converted, and bewailing
their Error and Blindness, they were w^shed in the Blood which they had spilt.

Thus was the Church founded in Jerusalem, and amongst the Jews, and
notwithstanding the perverse incredulity of the Gross of the Nation, yet the
Disciples of Jesus Christ made known unto the World a Charity, a Power, but
tempered with so much sweetness and condescension, as never had been seen in
any Society before. Persecution arose; the Faith increased; the Children of God
began more and more to aspire toward Heaven: the Jews, by their obstinate and
inveterate Malice, drew upon themselves the just Vengeance of God, and hastened
on them the sad Calamities and Desolation wherewith they had been threatened;
their Estates and their Affairs grew worse and worse. Whilst God was setting
apart a great number of them whom he placed among his Elect, St. Peter was sent
to baptize Cornelius a Roman Centurion. He learned first of all by a Heavenly
Vision, and afterward by Experience, that the Gentiles were called to the
Knowledge of God. Jesus Christ, who was willing to have them converted, speaks
from on high to St. Paul, who was to be their Doctor; and by a Miracle till
then unheard of, from a Persecutor he is made not only a Defender, but a
zealous Preacher of the Faith: The profound Secret of the Calling of the
Gentiles by the Reprobation of the ungrateful Jews, who were still made more
and more unworthy of the Gospel, was discovered to him. St. Paul reached forth
his hands to the Geniiles; and treated upon those important Questions with a
wonderful force and power, that Christ should suffer, Acts 26.23.
and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead, and should
show unto the People, and to the Gentiles: He proved the Affirmative by Moses,
and the Prophets, and called Idolaters to the Knowledge of God, in the Name of
Jesus Christ that was risen. They were converted by Multitudes. St. Paul showed
that their Calling was an effect of Grace, which made no distinction betwixt
either Jew or Gentile. Fury and Jealousy transported the Jews, so as they laid
terrible Plots against St. Paul, being chiefly incensed that he preached up the
Gentiles, and brought them to the true God: At last he was delivered to the
Romans, as they had before delivered up Jesus Christ to them. All the Empire
was in commotion against the rising Church, and Nero, the Persecutor of all
Mankind, was the first Persecutor of the Faithful. That Tyrant put both St.
Peter and St. Paul to death. Rome was consecrated by their Blood; and the
Martyrdom of St. Peter, chief of the Apostles, established in the Capital City
of the Empire the Principal See of Religion. In the mean time, the time drew on
when the Divine Vengeance was to fall upon the Impenitent Jews; Disorders grew
up amongst them; a false Zeal blinded them, and made them odious to all men;
their false Prophets infatuated them by the Prom^ses of an imaginary Kingdom.
Thus being seduced by their deceitful tricks and artifices, they could no
longer endure any legitimate Empire, and so they were unlimited in their
attempts. God gave them up to a reprobate Sense. They revolted against the
Romans who overthrew them. Titus himself that destroyed them, confessed he only
lent his hand to that God that was provoked against them. Adrian made a full
end of them. Philost. vit. Apoll. Tyan. lib. 6. Joseph de bell. Jud. lib. 7.16.
They were cut off with all the marks of the Divine Vengeance: driven out of
their own Land, and made Slaves to all the World; they no longer had either
Temple, or Altar, or Sacrifice, or Country; and there was seen in Judah not so
much as a form of People.

But God had notwithstanding provided for the Eternity of his Government: The
Eyes of the Gentiles were opened, and they were united in Spirit to the
converted Jews. By that means they were joined to the Race and Stock of
Abraham, and became his Children by Faith, and so inherited the promises which
had been made to him. A new People were formed, and the new Sacrifice so much
celebrated by the Prophets, began to be offered throughout all the World.

Thus was that ancient Oracle or Jacob fulfilled to a tittle: Judah from the
beginning was multiplied more than all his Brethren; and having always kept a
certain Pre-eminence, he at last received the Kingdom as Hereditary to him.
Afterward the People of God were reduced to his single Race, and shut up in
his Tribe, they were called by his Name. In Judah were continued that great
People, who were promised to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; in him the other
promises were perpetuated, the worship of God, the Temple, the Sacrifices, the
possession of the promised Land, which was only called Judah. Notwithstanding
all their several States, the Jews continued always in a body of a regulated
People and Kingdom, making use of their Laws. There were always seen to arise
either Kings, or Magistrates and Judges, even till the Advent of the Messiah;
he came, and the Kingdom of Judah quickly fell to ruin. It was utterly
destroyed, and the Jewish People were driven without hope from the Land of
their Fathers. The Messiah was the expectation of the Nations, and he reigned
over a new People.

But to keep the Succession and the Perpetuity, it was necessary to have this
new people engrafted, as I may so say, upon the former, and as St. Paul speaks,
if thou being a wild Olive tree were grafted in amongst then, Romans 11.17.
and with them partakest of the root and fatn^^s of the Olive Tree. So it
happened that the Church, which was first established among the Jews, at length
received the Gentiles to make up one and the same Tree with them, one and the
same Body, one and the same People, and to make them partakers of her Graces
and Promises.

What happened after that to the incredulous Jews under Vespatian and Titres,
has no relation to the Progress of the People of God It was a chastising of
the Rebels, who by their infidelity against the Seed which was promised to
Abraham and David, were no more Jews, nor the Sons of Abraham, but according to
the Flesh; for they renounced the Promise by which the Nations were to be
blessed.

Thus that last and dreadful desolation of the Jews was no more a
transmigration, like that of Babylon; it was not a suspension of the
Government, and of the Estate of the People of God, nor of the solemn service
of Religion, the new People already formed and continued with the old in Jesus
Christ, were not transported; they extended and spread themselves without
interruption from Jerusalem, where they were first to arise, even to the utmost
parts of the Earth. The Gentiles joined to the Jews became thenceforward the
real Jews, the true Kingdom of Judah set in opposition to that Schismatical
Israel which was cut off from the People of God, the true Kingdom of David, by
the Obedience they paid to the Laws, and to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son
of David.

After the Establishment of that new Kingdom, it is not to be wondered at, if
all things went to wrack in Judea. The second Temple signified no longer any
thing, since that the Messiah had fulfilled in it what was foretold by the
Prophets. That Temple had had the glory which was promised to it, when the
desire of all Nations was come. The visible Jerusalem had done what was
remaining to be accomplished, since the Church had its Birth there, and that
from thence it daily spread forth its Branches over all the Earth. Judea was of
no longer Service either to God, or to Religion, no more than were the Jews,
and it was just, that in punishing the hardness of their hearts, their ruins
should be dispersed over the face of the Earth.

'Twas what was to happen to them in the time of the Messiah occording to
Jacob, to Daniel, Hosea 3, 4, 5. Isai. 49.20, 21 Romans 11.11, 12, etc.
to Zachariah, and to all their Prophets: but as they were to return one day to
that Messiah of whom they were ignorant, and that the God of Abraham had not as
yet exhausted his Mercies to the faithless race of that Patriarch, he found a
way, whereof in the whole World there was but that one example, to preserve the
Jews, though banished their Country, and lying under their desolation, longer by
far than did those People who had conquered them. There is not now seen any
remainders either of the ancient Assyrians, or the ancient Medes, or the
ancient Persians, or the ancient Greeks, or even the ancient Romans. The
Footsteps of them are lost, and they are confounded among other People. The
Jews, who were the Prey of those ancient Nations, so much spoken of in
Histories, have outlived them, and God in preserving them, keeps us in
expectation of what he will be pleased to do hereafter in his own due time,
with the unhappy remainders of a People that were formerly so dear in his
Favor. In the mean time their hardness serves for the Salvation of the
Gentiles, and gives them this advantage to find in unsuspected hands the
Scriptures which foretold Jesus Christ, and his mysteries. Among other things,
we find in those Scriptures, Isai. 6.42, 43, 55. Dan. 9. Mat 13. Jo. 12. Act.
28. Romans 11. etc.
both the blindness and the unhappiness of the Jews, who yet notwithstanding
keep them so carefully. Thus their Reproach contributes to our benefit: their
Infidelity makes up one of the Foundations of our Faith; they teach us to fear
God, and are an eternal Spectacle to us of the Judgments which he executes upon
his rebellious ungrateful Children, that so we might learn not to glory in
those graces bestowed on our Fathers.

A Mystery so mavelous and so advantageous to the instruction of Mankind,
deserves very well to be considered. But we want no Humane Discourse to make us
understand it. The Holy Ghost has taken care to explain it to us by the mouth
of St. Paul, Romans 11.1, 2. etc.
and I beseech you hearken to what that Apostle has written of it to the
Romans.

After he had spoken of the small number of the Jews who had received the
Gospel, and of the blindness of the rest, he falls into a profound
consideration to think what that People ought to be who were honored with so
many favors, and at last he discovers to us the benefit we should reap by
their fall, and the fruits which their Conversion should one day produce. The
Jews, have they stumbled, says he, that they should fall? Romans 11.11, 12.
God forbid. But rather through their fall Salvation is come unto the Gentiles,
for to provoke them to Jealousy. To make them look into themselves. Now if the
fall of them be the riches of the World, of the Gentiles who were in such great
numbers converted, how much more their fullness? for if the casting away of them
be the reconciling of the World, what shall the receiving of them be, but life
from the dead? for if the first fruit be holy, the lump is also holy; and if
the root be holy, so are the branches. And if some of the branches be broken
off, and thou being a wild Olive Tree were graffed in amongst them, and with
them partakest of the root and fatness of the Olive Tree, boast not against the
branches: but if thou boast, thou bear not the root, but the root thee. Thou will say then, the branches were broken off, that I might be graffed in. Well:
because of Unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by faith. Be not
high-minded, but fear. For if God spared not the natural Branches, take heed
lest he also spare not Thee.

Who would not tremble at the hearing of these words of the Apostle? Are w^
able to stand unshaken at the dreadful Vengeance that has been for so many Ages
so remarkably severe upon the Jews, when St. Paul assures us, and that from God
himself, that our Ingratitude will bring upon us too no less a Punishment? But
let us hear out the whole of this great Mystery. The Apostle continues his
Address to the converted Gentiles. Behold therefore the goodness and severity
of God: on them which fell, severity: but toward thee, goodness, if thou
continue in his goodness: otherwise thou also shall be cut off. And they also,
if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be graffed in: for God is able to
graff them in again. For if thou were cut out of the Olive Tree which is wild
by Nature, and were graffed contrary to Nature into a good Olive Tree: Id. 22,
23, 24.
how much shall these which be the natural Branches, be graffed into their own
Olive Tree? Here the Apostle seems to be transported beyond what he was at
first a speaking, and entering into the depths of the Counsels of God, he thus
pursues his Discourse. For I would not, Brethren, Id. 25, 26, 27.
that ye should be ignorant of his Mystery, (lest ye should be wise in your own
conceits) that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of
the Gentiles be come in. And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written,
there shall come out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness
from Jacob. Isa. 59.20.
For this is my Covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins.

That passage of Isaiah, which St. Paul cites here, according to the
Septuagint, which he used to follow, because their Version was known all over
the World, comes up more strongly in the Original; For the Prophet foretold
there before all things, the Conversion of the Gentiles by those words: So
shall they fear the name of the Lord from the West, Isai. 59.19, 20, 21.
and his glory from the rising of the Sun. Afterward under the Type and Figure
of a rapid flood driven by an impetuous wind, Isaiah saw afar off the
Persecutions which should make the Church increase. At length the Holy Ghost
told him what should happen to the Jews, and declared to him, That the Redeemer
shall come out of Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob. As
for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord; My Spirit that is upon
thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the mouth of thy Seeds
seed, says the Lord, from henceforth, and for ever.

He has made it plain therefore, that after the Conversion of the Gentiles,
the Redeemer which Zion had mistaken, and the Children of Jacob had rejected,
should turn again to them, blot out their sins, and should restore unto them
the understanding of the Prophecies, which they should have utterly lost for a
long time, to go down successively, and from hand to hand through all
Posterity, never to be forgotten.

Thus should the Jews one day return, and so as never to go astray again; but
they should not return until after the East and the West, that is to say, all
the World, should be filled with the fear and the knowledge of God.

The Holy Ghost made St. Paul see, that that happy return of the Jews should be
the effect of that Love which God had had for their Fathers; wherefore he thus
concludes his Discourse: As concerning the Gospel, says he, which we now preach
to you, they, the Jews, are enemies for your sake: if God has cast them away,
it has been, O Gentiles, that he might call you: but as touching the Election,
by which they were chosen from the time of the Covenant which was made and
sworn to Abraham they are beloved for the Fathers sake: For the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance. For as ye in times past have not
believed God, yet have now obtained mercy through their unbelief, God having
been pleased to choose you in their stead, Even so have these also, the Jews,
now not believed, that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy; for God
has concl^ded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all, and
that so they might all confess the need they have of his grace and mercy. O the
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable
are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! For who has known the mind
of the Lord; or who has been his Counselor? or who has first given to him,
and it shall be recompensed to him again? for of him, and through him, and to
him are all things: to whom be glory for ever, Amen.

This is what St. Paul has said concerning the Election of the Jews, their
Fall, their Return, and at last concerning the Conversion of the Gentiles, who
were called to fill up their place, and to bring them back in the fullness of
time to the blessing that was promised to their Fathers, that is to say, to
that Christ whom they had denied. This great Apostle has discovered to us the
Grace which goes from one People to another to keep them all in fear lest they
should lose it; and has also manifested its invincible force and power, in
that after it had converted Idolaters, it should reserve it self for its last
work, the convincing the Jews of their hardness and contumacious perfidiousness.

By this profound Counsel of God the Jews remain still among all Nations,
whither they were dispersed and carried captive: but they remain likewise with
the branded Character of their Reprobation, being visibly fallen by their
Infidelity of the Promises which were made to their Fathers, banished from the
Land of Promise, having not any Land to cultivate, but are Slaves in all
Countries wherever they are, without honor without liberty, and without any
form of being a People.

They fell into this deplorable estate eight and thirty years after they had
crucified Jesus Christ, and after they had, in persecuting his Disciples,
misspent the time which had been given them to come to the knowledge of
themselves. But whilst the ancient People were under a state of Reprobation for
their Infidelity, the new People were daily increasing among the Gentiles: the
Covenant formerly made with Abraham reached, according to the Promise, to all
the People of the World that had forgot God: the Christian Church called all
men to her, and being in tranquillity for several Ages, amid^t unheard of
Persecutions, she plainly convinced them that they were not to expect their
happiness here in this World.

This was the most worthy Fruit of the knowledge of God, and the effect of that
great Blessing which the World was to look for by Jesus Christ. It was still
daily more and more hung up in every Family, and all People were to have it:
Men opened their eyes more and more, confessing the blindness into which they
had been plunged by Idolatry; and notwithstanding all the Rom^^ Power,
Christians were seen, without revolting, without making any disturbance, and
only by patient suffering all sorts of Inhumanities, to make a new World as it
were, in dispersing themselves throughout the Unverse.

The unheard of suddenness with which that great Change was made, was a visible
Miracle. Jesus Christ had foretold that his Gospel should soon be preached over
all the Earth: and that Wonder was to fall out presently after his Death, and
he had said, that after he was lifted up from the Earth, John 8.28.12.32.
that is to say, after they had nailed him to the Cross, he would draw all men
unto him. His Apostles had not yet finished their course, but St. Paul said
then to the Romans, that he thanked God through Jesus Christ, Romans 1.8.
that their Faith was spoken of throughout the whole World. He told the
Colossians, Coll. 1.5, 6, 23.
that the Gospel was heard and preached to every Creature under Heaven, that he
was made a Minister of it, and that it brought forth fruit, and was come to all
the World. A Positive Tradition has instructed us that St. Thomas carried it
to the Indies, Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 25.
and the rest of them to the other distant Regions of the Earth. But there is
no need to have recourse to Histories for the confirmation of this Truth: the
effect declares it; and it is sufficiently seen with what reason St. Paul
applies that passage of the Psalmist to the Apostles. The words of the Psalmist
are these, Psalm. 19.4.
viz. Their line is gone out through all the Earth, and their words to the end
of the World: in them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun: and the Apostles
words are, Have they not heard? Romans 10.18.
yes verily, their sound went into all the Earth, and their words unto the ends
of the World. Under their Disciples, there was scarce any nook of habitable
Land, how remote or unknown soever, but the Gospel one way or other was brought
thither. A hundred years after the death of Christ, St. Justin then reckoned
among the Faithful a great part of the wild and savage Nations, J^^^. Apol. 2.
and Adv. Tryph.
even to those vagabond People that wandered up and down, and had no fixed
places of abode to dwell in. And it was no vain amplification of the matter,
but a manifest and notorious fact, that he openly declared in the presence of
Emperors, and in the face of all the World. St. Ireneus comes a little after
him, Iren. 1, 2, 3.
and we see then the Number of the Churches which he gave was considerably
increased. Their agreement was admirable: what was believed among the Gauls, in
Spain, and Germany, was likewise believed in Egypt, and in the East, and as
there was but one and the same Sun in all the World, so was there seen in all
the Church, from one end of the World unto the other, but one and the same
Light of Truth.

If we advance but a very little further, we shall stand amazed at the progress
it made. In the midst of the third Age, Tertull. adv. Jud. 7. Ap. 37. Orig. tr.
28. in Matt. hom. 4. in Ez^ch.
Tertullian and Origin make us see in the Church whole Countries and People
which but a little before were not to be admitted into it. Those whom Origin
excepted against, who were most remote from the known World, were a while after
approved of by Arno^ius. Arn. l. 2.
What could the World have seen that it should so readily surrender it self to
Jesus Christ? If it had been Miracles, God had visibly concerned himself in
that work; and if it could possibly be that it had seen none, would not this
have been a new Miracle, greater and more incredible than those which would not
be believed, Aug. 21. de Civ. 22.5.
of having converted the World without a Miracle, of having instructed so many
ignorant Persons in such exalted Mysteries, and inspired so many learned Ones
with such an humble Submission, as also of having convinced the Incredulous of
so many things incredible.

But the Miracle of Miracles, if I may so speak, is this, that with the belief
of the Mysteries, the most eminent Virtues, and the most difficult and painful
Practices were exercised almost all the World over. The Disciples of Jesus
Christ followed him in his most rugged ways. To suffer all for the Truth, was a
common thing with his Children; and to be Imitators of their dear and blessed
Savior, they ran to their Torments with more zeal and eagerness than others
did to their greatest Pleasures and Delights. Innumerable are the Examples of
the Rich, who have in a manner beggered themselves to supply the Necessities of
the Poor; and so likewise of the Poor who have preferred penury and want to
Riches; of Virgins who have here upon Earth imitated the life of Angels; and of
the charitable Pastors and Shepherds who became all things to all men, and
always were ready to give to their Flock not only their Vigils and their
Labors, but to lay down their very Lives for their sakes. What shall I say
concerning Repentance and Mortification? the very Judges never executed their
Sentences more severely upon Criminals, than the penitent Sinners have
inflicted Punishments on their own selves. Nay more, the most Innoc^nt have
with an incredible Severity punished in themselves that prodigious inclination
which is in us all to sin. The life of St. John Baptist, which seemed so much
to astonish the Jews, was usual among the Faithful: Deserts have been populated
with his Imitators: and there were in those days so many that sought out places
of Retirement, that the most perfect of them have been forced to find out
Retreats of a more profound Solitude to perform the Austerities of their Piety
and Devotion; so much did they shun the World, and so delightful was the life
of Contemplation to them.

These were the precious Fruits the Gospel was to be productive of. The Church
abounded no less in Examples than in her Precepts, and her Doctrine appeared
holy, by the infinite Number of her Saints. God Almighty, who knew that the
most generous and eminent Virtues would arise from Sufferings, founded her by
Martyrdom, and kept her for three hundred years in that Condition, without
giving her one moments quiet or repose. After that he had by so long an
Experience fully shown that he stood in no need of any Humane Succor, nor of
the Powers upon Earth to establish his Church, he then called Emperors into
it, and made of the Great Constantine a declared Protector of Christianity.
From that time Kings have run from all parts into the Church; and all that was
writ in the Prophecies concerning its future glory, has been accomplished in
the sight of all the Earth.

And if she has been Invincible against the Efforts without, she has been no
less so against all intestine Divisions. Those Heresies so often foretold by
Jesus Christ and his Apostles, have come to pass, and the Faith that was
persecuted by the Emperors, did at the same time suffer a more dangerous
Persecution from the Heretics. But that Persecution was never more violent
than in the time that the Heathen Persecution was seen to cease. Then Hell made
its utmost Efforts to destroy by it self that Church which the Assaults of its
declared Enemies had strengthened and confirmed. Scarce did she begin to
respire by the Peace which Constantine gave her, but behold Arrius, that
unhappy Priest, raised her up greater Troubles than ever she had suffered
before. Constantius the Son of Constantine, seduced by the Arrians, whose
Dogmata he authorized, tormented the Catholics on all sides, became a new
Persecutor of Christianity, and was so much the more formidable, as that under
the Name of Jesus Christ he made war with Jesus Christ himself. For the
Complement of all her Miseries, the Church thus divided falls into the hands of
Julian the Apostate, who labored all he could to destroy Christianity, and
found no better way than to foment Factions wherewith it was torn. To him
succeeded a Valens as much an Arrian as Constantius, but more violent. Other
Emperors protected other Heresies with as equal heat and fury. The Church
learnt by all these Experiences, that she was likely to suffer no less under
Christian Emperors than she had done under those that were Infidel, and that
she was to shed her Blood not only for the defense of all the Body of her
Doctrine, but of every particular Article of it. Indeed, there was not any but
what she saw assaulted by her own Children. A thousand Sects and Heresies that
had come out of her Bosom were risen up against her. But if, according as Jesus
Christ had foretold, she saw them rise against her, she likewise saw them fall
before her according to his Promises, though they were oft-times supported by
Emperors and Kings. Her true Sons, as St. Paul says, were known by this proof;
Truth, the more it was confessed, was thereby so much the more confirmed, and
the Church remained, like the Building whose Foundation was on a Rock, unshaken.

VIII. Particular Reflections upon the punishment of the Jews, and upon the
Predictions of Jesus Christ, who had taken notice of it.
Whilst I have been endeavoring to show you in an uninterrupted thread of
Discourse the Progress of the Counsels of God, in the Perpetuity of his
People, I have hastily passed over many things which deserved very profound
Reflections. Let me now have your permission to return again to them, that I
may not leave you in a loss of such great and important matters.

And first, I would beg of your Highness to consider with a more particular
attention, the fall of the Jews, all the Circumstances whereof bear Testimony
to the Gospel. Those Circumstances are unfolded to us by Infidel Authors, by
Jews, and by Heathens, who without understanding the course of the Counsels
and Decrees of God, have reported to us the weighty matters of Fact, by which
he was pleased to declare it.

We have Josephus, a Jewish Author, a very faithful Historian, and well versed
in the affairs of his Nation, the Antiquities of which, he has illustrated by
an admirable Work. He has written the last War, whereby it was destroyed,
after he had been present at all, and had himself served his Country in it with
a very considerable Command.

The Jews do also furnish us with other very ancient Authors, whose Testimonies
you will see. They have ancient Commentaries upon the Books of the Scripture,
and among others, the Chaldee Paraphrases which they Print with their Bibles.
They have their Book called the Talmud, that is to say, Doctrine, which they
have as high a reverence for, as for the Scripture it self. It Is a Collection
of the Treatises and Sentences of their ancient Masters; and though the parts
whereof that great work is composed, be not all of the same antiquity, yet the
last Authors who are cited there, lived in the first Ages of the Church. There,
among a multitude of impertinent Stories which seem for the most part to begin
after the time of our Blessed Savior, we find very fair remains of the ancient
Traditions of the Jewish People, and Proofs sufficient to convince them.

And first of all it is certain by the Confession of the Jews themselves, that
the Divine Vengeance was never more terribly, nor more manifestly declared,
than it was in their last desolation.

'Twas a positive tradition attested in their Talmud, and confirmed by all the
Rabbis, that forty Years before the Destruction of Jer^salem, which came
pretty near to the time of the Death of Jesus Christ, there were continually
seen in the Temple strange things. Every day some new Prodigies appeared there,
R. Johan. the Son of Zachai. Tr. de fest expiat.
so that one day a famous Rabbi cried out: O Temple, O Temple, what is that
which moves thee, and why art thou afraid of thy self?

What was more observable than that frightful noise which was heard by the
Priests in the Sanctuary, on the day of Pentecost, and that audible voice that
came from the inmost part of that sacred place, which said, Let us depart
hence, let us depart hence? The Holy Angels which were the Protectors of the
Temple did loudly declare that they were leaving it, because that God, who had
made his abode in it for so many Ages, had then reprobated it.

Josephus and Tacitus have also recounted that Prodigy to us. It was only
perceived by the Priests. But there was another Prodigy which startled the Eyes
of all People; and never had any other People seen the like before. Joseph lib.
6. de bell. Jud. c. 12. Tacit. Hist. lib. 5. c. 13.
Four years before the War was declared, a Countryman, says Josephus, cried
out, A voice is gone out from the East, a voice is gone out from the West, a
voice is gone on from the four Winds; a voice against Jerusalem and the Temple;
a voice against Men and Women that are newly Married: a voice against all this
People. And from that time neither Night nor Day did he leave crying, Woe, Woe to
Jerusalem. He redoubled his Cries on Feast-days. Not any other word was heard
to come out of his Mouth: Those who complained of him, those who cursed him,
those who gave him meat, never heard any thing else come from him, beside that
terrible voice, Woe, woe to Jerusalem. He was taken, interrogated, and condemned
to be scourged by the Magistrates; to every demand, and at every blow, he
answered, without complaining, Woe to Jerusalem. Being let go as a Madman, he
run up and down all the Country, continually repeating that heavy Prophecy. And
so he held on crying for seven years, and his voice never waxed hoarse nor
weary. Till at the time of the last Siege of Jerusalem, he shut himself up in
the City, and upon the Walls thereof with a loud Voice, he uncessantly cried
out, Woe, Woe to the City, woe to the Temple, woe to all the People; and lastly
he added, Woe also to my self, which words were no sooner uttered, but a Stone
slung out of an Engine, carried him away.

Might not one almost say, may it please your Highness, that the divine
Vengeance became visible in that Man, who only subsisted to pronounce its
Decrees, that it had filled him with its Power, that so he might equal the
Calamities of the People by his Cries; and that at last he should be destroyed
by an effect of that Vengeance, which he had for so long a time before
declared, to make it thereby the more sensible and the more present, when he
was to be not only the Prophet and the witness of it, but also to fall a
Sacrifice to it.

That Prophet of the woes of Jerusalem was called Jesus, and was the Son of
Anan^s. It seems, the Name of Jesus, a Name of Salvation and Peace, was turned
to the Jews, who despised it in the person of our Savior, to a fatal presage;
and those ungrateful wretches having rejected one JESUS, who preached up to
them grace, mercy and life, God sent them another JESUS, who was only to
pronounce to them woes irrecoverable and remediless, and the inevitable decree
of their approaching Ruin.

Let us search a little farther into the Judgments of God, under the Conduct of
the Scriptures. Jerusalem and the Temple thereof were twice destroyed; once by
Nebuchadnezzer, and the other time by Titu^. But in each of those times, the
Justice of God was made manifest by the same ways, though it was more
conspicuous in the latter.

For the better understanding the order of the Counsels of God, let us first
lay down this Truth so often established in the sacred Oracles; that one of the
most terrible effects of Divine Vengeance, is when in the Punishment of our
precedent Sins, it delivers us up to a reprobate Mind, so as that we are deaf
to all wise and w^olesome Admonitions, blind to the ways of Salvation, which
are shown to us, ready to believe every thing that ruins us, provided it does
but flatter us, and bold and daring to undertake any thing without ever
measuring our own Strength with that of our Enemies whom we provoke.

Thus Jerusalem and its Princes were destroyed the first time under the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon. Weak, and always beaten by that victorious
King, they often found they made but vain Efforts against him, and were obliged
to swear Fidelity to him. The Prophet Jeremiah declared to them from God, that
God himself had delivered them up to that Prince, and there was no Safety for
them but in submitting to the Yoke. He told to Zedekiah King of Juda, and to
all his People, saying, I spoke also to Zedekiah King of Juda according to all
these Words, saying, 2 Chronicles. 36.12.13. Jer. 27.12, 17.
Bring your Necks under the Yoke of the King of Babylon, and serve him, and his
People, and live, for why will ye die, wherefore should this City be laid
waste? But they believed not his Word. Whilst Nebuchadnezzar kept them strait
shut up by the prodigious Intrenchments he had made round about the City, they
suffered themselves to be deceived and bewitched by their false Prophets, who
puffed up their Minds with imaginary Victories, and told them in the Name of
the Lord, although the Lord had not sent them: Jer. 28.2, 3. 2 Kings 25.
I have broken the Yoke of the King of Babylon, within two full Years will I
bring again into this place a^l the Vessels of the Lords House, that
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon took away from this place, and carried them to
Babylon. The People being seduced by these Promises, suffered Famine, and the
hard^st Extremities imaginable, and attempted so much by their audacious
Madness, that there was no room left to show them Mercy. The City was
overthrown, the Temple was consumed by Fire, and all things were destroyed.

With these Marks the Jews confessed that the Hand of God was upon them. But
that the divine Vengeance might be as plain and manifest to them in the last
Destruction of Jerusalem, as it had been in the former, there was seen in them
both, the same Seduction, the same Temerity, and the same Hardness and Obduracy.

Though their Rebellion had brought upon them the Roman Arms, and they had rashly
shook off a Yoke under which all the World then bowed, Titus would not destroy
it: But on the contrary, he made them several offers of Pardon, not only at the
beginning of the War, but also then, when they could no longer escape his Hand.
He had already raised round about Jerusalem, a long and vast Wall fortified
with Towers and Redoubts as strong as the City it self, when he sent to them
Josephus their fellow Citizen, one of their Captains, one of their Priests who
had been taken in that War in the defense of his Country. What did he not say
to them to move them to accept of Caesar's Terms? What powerful Arguments did
he make use of to invite them to return to their Obedience? He made them see
that both Heaven and Earth conspired against them; and their Ruin, if they
resisted, was inevitable, and that their absolute Safety was in the Mercy and
Clemency of Titus. Save, said he to them, the Holy City, save your selves; save
this Temple, Joseph. 7. de bell. Jud. c. 4.
the Wonder of the World, which the Romans pay Reverence to, and which Titus
will not see destroyed but with Regret and Sorrow. But what way was there to
save People that were so obstinate on their own Ruin? Being led away by their
false Prophets, they would not hearken to such wise and salutary Discourses.
They were reduced to Extremity: Famine destroyed greater Numbers of them than
the Sword, and Mothers slew, and then dressed and eat up their own Children.
Titus touched with their sad Calamities, called his Gods to witness, that he
was not the cause of their Ruin. During these miserable Times they still gave
Faith to the false Predictions which promised them the Empire of the World. Nay
more, the City was taken; the Fire was already blasing on all sides: And yet
those mad People still believed their false Prophets who assured them that the
Day of Salvation was come, that so they might still resist, and there be no
hopes of Mercy left for them. In fine, they were all massacred, the City was
utterly overthrown, and saving some Remains of Towers which Titus reserved to
serve as a Monument to Posterity, there was not one Stone left upon another.

Your Highness sees then that the same Vengeance broke out now upon Jerusalem,
as did befall it under Zedekiah. Titus was no less sent by God than
Nebuchadnezzar: The Jews were destroyed in the same manner. There was seen in
Jerusalem the same Rebellion, the same Famine, the same Extremities, the same
ways of Salvation opened, the same Seduction, the same Obduracy, the same Fall,
and in a word, that every Circumstance was like the other: The second Temple
was burnt under Titus the same Month, and the same day of it, as the first was
under Nebuchadnezz^r: Ibid. c. 9, 10.
Every thing was remarkable, and the People could not doubt but that the
Vengeance was from Heaven.

However there is between these two Destructions of Jerusalem, and of the Jews
very memorable Differences, but which all tend to make us see in this latter, a
Justice more declared and rigorous. Nebuchad^^zzar commanded that Fire should
be set to the Temple; Titus forgot no Arguments to save it, though his
Counselors represented to him, that so long as it should stand, the Jews, who
were resolved to destroy them i^ they could, would never leave off their
Rebellions. But the fatal Day was come, which was the tenth of August, which
had once before seen the Temple of Solomon burnt down to the Ground.
Notwithstanding all the Prohibitions of Titus openly declared before the Romans
and the Jews and notwithstanding the natural Inclination of the Soldiers to
pillage rather than to consume so much Wealth and Riches, a Soldier moved, as
Josephus says, with some divine Fury, was lifted up by his Fellows to a Window
with a flaming Firebrand in his Hand, and cast it into the golden Gate, and so
presently set fire on the Temple. Titus at the News hereof runs in have,
commanding his Soldiers to quench the growing Flames, but it took hold of all
in an Instant, and so that admirable Building was burnt to Ashes.

Now if the Jews hardness of Heart under King Zedekiah was the most terrible
effect, and the most sure Sign of the Divine Vengeance, what shall we say of
the Blindness which was so apparent in the time of Titus? In the first Ruin of
Jerusalem the Jews did take part, and joined one with another: in the latter,
Jerusalem being besieged by the Romans was torn to pieces by three Factions,
Enemies. If the Hatred they all had against the Romans went out even to Fury;
they were no less bloody and cruel against one another; the Battles without
were less expensive of Jewish Blood than those that were within: Presently
after the Assaults maintained against the Stranger, the Citizens fell together
by the Ears among themselves. Violence and Thievery was every where prevailing
in the City. It was destroyed, and became but an open Field of dead Bodies, and
the Chiefs of the several Factions disputed only for the Empire of it. Was not
this a Representation of Hell, where the Damned do no less hate one another
than they hate the Devils that are their common Enemies, and where every place
is full of Pride, Confusion, and Rage?

Your Highness must confess then that the Justice which God brought on the Jews
by Nebuchadnezzar was but a Shadow of that whereof Titus was the Minister. What
City ever saw destroyed eleven hundred thousand Men in seven Months time, and
in one only Siege? And yet this the Jews beheld in the last Siege of Jerusalem.
The Chaldeans had never made them suffer the like: Their Captivity under the
Chaldeans lasted but seventy Years; but it is sixteen hundred Years since they
were made Slaves all over the World, and as yet they do not find any mitigation
of their Slavery.

It is not to be wondered at, if Victorious Titus, after the taking of
Jerusalem, would not receive the Congratulations of the neighboring People,
nor the Crowns which they sent him in honor of his Conquest. So many memorable
Circumstances, the Wrath of God, which was so manifest, and his Hand which he
then saw was present, kept him in a profound Astonishment, and that made him
say what you have already heard, that he was not the Conqueror, he was only a
weak Instrument of the Divine Vengeance.

But he knew not all the Mystery of it: The Hour was not yet come that the
Emperors were to confess Jesus Christ. It was the time of the Humiliations and
Persecutions of the Church. Wherefore Titus, though he was illuminated enough to
understand that Juda was destroyed by a manifest effect of God's Justice, yet
he did not know what the Crime was that made God resolved so terribly to punish
her. But it was the greatest of all Crimes, a Crime till then unheard of, that
is to say the Deicide, which also brought down such a Vengeance as never before
the World had seen any Example of.

But if we will a little open our eyes, and consider the course of things, we
shall see that neither that Sin of the Jews, nor their Punishment, could be
concealed from us.

Let us remember only what Jesus Christ had foretold them. He had prophesied
the absolute destruction of Jerusalem, and of the Temple: when he said, Matthew.
24.1, 2. Mark 13.1, 2. Luke 21.5, 6.
Verily I say unto you, there shall not be left here one stone upon another,
that shall not be thrown down.

He had foretold the manner how that ungrateful City should be besieged, and
that dreadful Circumvallation which should begirt it: he likewise foretold the
dismal Famine which was to fall upon her Citizens, and had not forgot to speak
of the false Prophets, by whom they should be seduced. He had admonished the
Jews that the time of their Misery was nigh at hand: he had given certain
particular signs which were to point out the precise moment of it: he unfolded
to them the long Chain of their Sins, which would draw upon them so heavy and
woeful a Punishment. In a word, he had related the whole History of the Siege,
and of the Desolation of Jerusalem.

Your Highness may likewise be pleased to observe, that he made them these
Predictions but a little before his Passion, that so they might the better
understand the cause of all their Miseries. His Passion was very near when he
told them, Behold, Matthew. 23.3^, 35, 36, 37.
I send unto yo^ Prophets, and Wisemen, and Scribes, and some of them ye shall
kill and crucify, and some of them shall you scourge in your Synagogues, and
persecute them from City to City: That upon you may come all the righteous
blood shed upon the Earth, from the blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of
Zacharias, Son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the Temple and the Alt^r:
Verily I say unto yo^, all these things shall come upon this Generation. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them who are
sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children together, even as
a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not? behold, your
House is left un^o you desolate.

Thus you have the History of the Jews. They persecuted their Messiah, both in
his own Person, and in that of his Disciples and Followers: they stirred up all
the World against his Disciples, and would not let them enjoy any quiet in any
City: they armed the Romans and Emperors against the growing Church: they
stoned St. Stephen, killed the two S. Jameses, whose holiness made them become
venerable even among themselves, sacrificed St. Peter and St. Paul by the Sword
and by the hands of the Gentiles. So that they must needs be destroyed; for so
much Blood mixed with that of the Prophets whom they had massacred, cried aloud
to Heaven for vengeance: Their Houses and their City was to be desolate; their
destruction should be no less than their Crime: Jesus Christ advertised them of
it: the time was very nigh: Matthew. 24.34. Mark 13 30. Luke 19.42.
that Generation should not pass, till all these things were fulfilled; that is
to say, that those men who were then alive should be Witnesses of it.

But let us go on, and hear out the rest of our blessed Savior's Prophecies to
them. As he was making his Entrance into Jerusal^m some days before his
Crucifixion, being touched with a sense of the Calamities which his Death would
bring upon that wretched City, he beheld it with sorrowful and weeping eyes;
Ah, said he, Thou unhappy City, if thou had known, even thou, Luke 19.41, 42
at least in this thy day, which is yet given thee for repentance, the things
which belong unto thy Peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. For the days
shall come upon thee, that thine Enemies shall cast a Trench about thee, and
compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and shall lay thee even
with the ground, and thy Children within thee; and they shall not leave in thee
one stone upon another, because thou know not the time of thy Visitation.

This was a plain and sufficient setting forth both of the manner of the Siege,
and of the last effects of Wrath and Vengeance: But Jesus could not yet go to
his Cross without declaring to Jerusalem the heavy Punishment that was one day
to fall on her for that unworthy Treatment he had received among them. As he
went to Mount Calvarie, bearing his Cross on his Shoulders, There followed him
a great Company of People, and of Women, who also bewailed and lamented him; he
stood still, and turning about to them, he breaks forth into these passionate
Expressions, Daughters of Jerusalem, Luke 23.27, 28, 29.
weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your Children: For behold,
the days are coming, in the which they shall say, Blessed are the Barren, and
the Wombs that never bare, and the Paps which never gave suck. Thee shall they
begin to say to the Mountains, fall on us, and to the Hills, cover us. For if
they do these things in a green Tree, what shall be done in the dry? If the
Innocent, if the Just must suffer so severe a Punishment, what may then the
Guilty expect?

Did Jeremiah ever more bitterly deplore the destruction of the Jews? what more
powerful and efficacious words could our Savior speak to make them understand
their Misery and Despair, and that horrible Famine, so fatal to the Children,
so fatal to their Mothers, who should behold their Breasts dried up, and they
to have nothing left them but their Tears to feed their crying staring Children
with, and then who at last should be forced themselves to eat up the Fruit of
their Wombs to abate the extremity of their own Hunger.

IX. Two memorable Predictions of our blessed Savior are explained, and their
accomplishment justified by History.
These were the Predictions he openly declared to all the People. Those he gave
in private to his Disciples deserve a more particular attention still. They are
comprised in that long and admirable Discourse where he joins together the
Ruin of Jerusalem with that of the Universe. That Unity was mysterious, and
this the design of it.

Jerusalem, that happy City which our Lord had chosen, as long as it kept in
the Covenant, and in the Faith of the Promises, was the Type of the Church, and
the Figure of Heaven, where God discovers himself to his Children. That is the
reason we oft-times see the Prophets to join in the Thread of the same
Discourse, Matthew. 24. Mark 13. Luke 21.
what respects Jerusalem to that which regards the Church and the Celestial
Glory. It Is one of the Secrets of the Prophecies, and one of the Keys which
opens the Understanding of them: But Jerusalem, as it was reprobate and
ungrateful toward her Savior, was to be the Type and Image of Hell. Her
perfidious Citizens were to represent the damned; and the terrible Judgment
which Jesus Christ was to execute upon them, was to be the Figure of that which
he was to bring on all the World when he should come at the end of all things
in his glorious Majesty to judge the quick and the dead. It Is the way of the
Scripture, and one of the methods it makes use of for the imprinting of
Mysteries into our minds, to mingle for our Instruction Types and Truth
together. Thus our Lord has intermingled the History of desolated Jerusalem
with that of the end of the World; and this has been plainly visible in all our
Discourse of it.

But however, let us not imagine that these things were so confounded that we
could not discern what belonged to each of them. Jesus Christ has distinguished
them by certain Characters, which I could easily make out if there were any
question about them. But I will content my self with giving you to understand
what relates to the Desolation of Jerusalem and the Jews.

The Apostles (for it was then at the time of the Passion) being got together
round about their Master, showed him the Temple, and the delicacy of the
Buildings: they admired the Stones thereof, Matthew. 24.1, 2. Mark 13.1 2. Luke
21.5, 6.
their disposition, their Beauty, and their strength; and he said to them, See
you these great and goodly Buildings? verily I say unto you, there shall not be
left here one Stone upon another. Being astonished at his words, they asked him
when would come the time of so terrible a Destruction; and he, who would have
them by no means surprised in Jerusalem when it should be sacked, (for he had a
mind there should be in the sacking of that City a Type and Image of the last
Separation of the Good from the Bad) began to relate to them all the sad
Calamities, as they were to fall out one upon the heels of the other.

Matthew. 24.7. Mark 13.3. Luke 21.8, 9.
First, he observes to them that there should be Plagues, Famines, and
Earthquakes in diverse places; and the Histories do bear testimony, that those
things had never been more frequent nor more remarkable than they were during
those times. He added, that there should be all the World over, Troubles,
rumors of Wars, bloody and dreadful Wars, for Nation should rise against
Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom; and all the Earth should be in an uproar
and confusion. Could he better represent to us the last years of Nero, when all
the Roman Empire, that is to say all the World, so quiet and peaceful since the
Victory of Augustus, and under the power of the Emperors, began to be shaken,
and the Gauls, the Spaniards, and all the Kingdoms of which the Empire was made
up, were in tumult all of a sudden; four Emperors to rise up almost at the
same punctuality of time against Nero, and each against the other; the
Pretorian Cohorts, the Armies of Syria, Germany, and all the others that were
dispersed both in the East and West, to shock and traverse one another under
the Conduct of their Emperors from one end of the World to the other to decide
their quarrels by bloody Battles? All these things were to come to pass, said
the Son of God, but the end would not be yet. The Jews should suffer like the
rest in that Universal Commotion of the World; but there should come upon them
quickly after more particular Calamities, and th^se to be but the beginning of
Sorrows too.

He adds, that his Church which had been evermore afflicted from its f^rst
establishment, should see Persecution kindling against her, Matthew. 24.9. Mark
13.9. Luke 21.12.
more terrible and violent than ever yet it had been. You saw that Nero in his
last years attempted the destruction of the Christians, and caused St. Peter
and St. Paul to be put to death. That Persecution which was stirred up by the
Jealousies and Violences of the Jews hastened their Ruin, but it did not as
yet point out the particular time.

The coming of false Christ's and false Prophets seemed to be a nearer step to
their last ruin: for the ordinary destiny of those who refused to lend an Ear
to the Truth, was to be drawn on to their ruin by the deceiving Prophets.
Jesus Christ did not hide this from his Apostles, that this should be the
Calamity that should befall the Jews; for he said, that many false Prophets
should rise, and should deceive many, Matthew. 24.11.23, 24. Mark 13.22, 23. Luke
21.8.
they should show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible)
they should deceive the very Elect. But take you heed, behold I have foretold
you all things.

It ought not to be said that this was an easy thing for any one to divine
that knew the humor and complexion of the Nation: for to the contrary I have
shown, that the Jews being wearied by these Seducers, who had so often been the
cause of their ruin, and especially of Zedekiah, were so thoroughly disabused
at last, that they left off further hearkening to them. For above five hundred
years not a false Prophet was to be seen in Israel. But Hell it self, which
gave them inspiration, raised them up again at the coming of Jesus Christ, and
God who restrained those deceiving Spirits according to his own wise pleasure,
did then let loose the Reins, that so he might send at that very time that
Punishment on the Jews, and that Trial to his faithful Ones. Never did there
appear so many false Prophets as then presently after the death of our Savior,
especially about the time of the Jewish War, and under the Re^gn of Nero who
began it. Joseph. of the Antiquity of the Jews, lib. 20. cap. 6.
Josephus tells us there were a world of those Impostors, who persuaded the
common People to follow them into the Desert by their vain Enchantments and
tricks of Magic, promising them a sudden and a miraculous deliverance.
Therefore for this very reason was it that the Desert is pointed at in the
Predictions of our Lord, as one of the places where those false Saviors and
Deliverers should hide themselves, who afterward you have seen so to bewitch
the Common People to their utter ruin and destruction. You need not doubt but
that the Name of Christ, Matthew. 24.16.
without which there was no perfect Deliverance to be expected by the Jews, was
made use of in those imaginary and delusory Promises, and you will see in what
follows enough to convince you of it.

Judea was not the only Province which was exposed to those Illusions. They
were common throughout all the Empire. There was no time wherein all the
Historians discover to us a greater number of those Impostors, who made their
brags of foretelling things to come, and so deceived the People by their
Enchantments. Simon the Magician, Ely^as the Sorcerer, Apollonius Tyan^^s, and
an infinite number of other Magicians, described both in the Sacred and
Profane Histories, rose up in that Age, wherein Hell seemed to lay out its
last Efforts to support its shaken Empire. Wherefore Jesus Christ observed at
that time, chiefly among the Jews, there would be that prodigious number of
false Prophets. Who will please narrowly to consider his words, will see that
they were to be multiplied both before and after the destruction of Jerusalem,
but still it was to be about that time; and that then the Seduction being
strengthened by false Miracles and false Doctrines, should be so subtle and so
powerful, as if it were possible, even the very Elect should be deceived by
them.

I do not say but that at the end of the World, there is to be somewhat like
this, and that which will prove more dangerous, for we have already taken
notice that what was to befall Jerusalem, was a manifest Type of those last
Times: But this is certain that Jesus Christ gave that Seduction to us, as one
of the most sensible Effects of the Wrath of God upon the Jews, and as one sign
of their Ruin. The Event has justified his Prophecy: Every thing was here
attested by irreproachable Evidences. We read the prediction of their Errors in
the Gospel: We have seen the accomplishment of them in their Histories, and
especially in that of Josephus.

After that Jesus Christ had foretold those things, from the design he had to
deliver those that were his from the Miseries wherewith Jerusalem was
threatened, he came to those nearer Signs that should quickly be followed with
the last Desolation of that City.

God does not always give to his Elect such marks. In those terrible
Chastisements which make whole Nations to be astonished at his Power, he
oft-times strikes the Righteous with the Guilty: For he has better ways to
separate and divide them than those that are obvious to our Senses. The same
Blow that breaks the Chafe, separates the good Grain: Aug. 1. de Civit. D^^.
c. 8.
Gold is tried in the same Fire wherein the Chafe is consumed; and under the
same Punishments by which the Wicked are cut off, the Faithful are purified.
But in the Destruction of Jerusalem, that so the Image of the last Judgment
might be the more lively expressed, and the divine Vengeance be more remarkable
on the Unbelievers; he would not have the Jews who had received the Gospel, be
confounded with the others; and therefore our blessed Savior gave his
Disciples certain Signs by which they might know when it should be time for
them to get out of that reprobated City. He grounded himself, according as his
manner was, upon the ancient Prophecies, of which he was both the Interpreter
and the End; and reflecting on the Place where the last Ruin of Jerusalem was
so clearly shown to Daniel; he says thus, Matt. 24.15. Mark 13.14.
When ye therefore shall see the Abomination of Desolation, spoken of by Daniel
the Prophet, stand in the holy Place (whosoever reads, let him understand.) or as
it is in St. Mark, standing where it ought not; then let them that be in Judea,
flee to the Mountains. St. Luke relates the same thing in other Words: And when
ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with Armies, Luke 21.20, 21.
then know that the Desolation thereof is nigh. Then let them that be in Judea,
flee to the Mountains.

One Evangelist explains another, and in comparing those Passages together, it
is easy to understand that that Abomination foretold by Daniel was the same
thing with the Armies round about Jerusalem. Orig. tr. 29. in Matt. Aug. Ep.
80. ad Hesych.
The holy Fathers have thus understood it, and the Reason convinces us of it.

The Word Abomination, as the holy Language uses it, signifies an Idol; and who
does not know that the Roman Armies bore in their Ensigns the Images of their
Gods, and of their Caesar's, who were had in greater Reverence than all their
Gods? Those Ensigns were to the Soldiers an Object of worship; and because
Idols, according to God's Decrees, were never to appear in the holy Land, the
Roman Ensigns were banished from thence. Also we see in Histories, that whilst
among the Romans there remained any, though never so little Consideration for the
Jews, the Roman Ensigns were never seen in Judea. Therefore it was that
Vitellius, when he went into that Province to carry the War into Arabia, caused
his Troops to march without any Colors; for the Jewish Religion was at that
time had in Reverence, Joseph. l. 18. c. 7.
and they would not force that People to endure things that were so contrary to
their Law. But in the time of the last Jewish War, it is very much to be
believed that the Romans did not any whit spare a People whom they were
resolved utterly to destroy. So that when Jerusalem was besieged, it was
surrounded with as many Idols as there were Roman Ensigns in the Army, and the
Abomination did never appear so great, standing where it ought not, that is to
say, in the holy Land, and round about the Temple.

Was this then, may some say, that great Sign that Jesus Christ was to give?
Was it then high time to fly when Titus besieged Jerusalem, and when he so
closely bl^cked up the Avenues, that there was no place left for them to make
their escape at? This was the Marvel of the Prophecy. Jeru^alem was besieged
twice in those times: The first by Cestius the Governor of Syria, in the sixty
eighth Year of our Savior; the second, by Titus four Years after, that is to
say, in the Year seventy two. Joseph. 2. de be^. Jud. c. 23, 24. Ibid. l. 6, 7.
In the last Siege there was no possible Means of saving themselves, Titus made
that War with so much heat and violence; he surprised all the Nation, being
then in Jerusalem celebrating the Feast of Tabernacles, and not one made their
escape; and that formidable Circumvallation which he made round the City, put
its Inhabitants out of all manner of Hopes. But there was no such thing in the
Siege of Cestius, who was encamped fifty Furlongs, that is to say, six Miles
from Jerusalem. His Army was dispersed all round it, but without making any
Intrenchments, Joseph. lib. 2. c. 23, 24.
and he managed the War so negligently, that he slipped the Opportunity of taking
the City, though their Terror, Seditions, and even their Intelligences opened the
Gates to him. At that time, so far was their Retreat from being impossible,
Joseph. Ibid.
that the History expressly takes notice that many of the Jews did retire into
the Towers, and other Places of Safety and Defense. Then it was that they ought
to have made their Flight: That was the Signal which the Son of God gave to his
own People. So likewise did he most exactly distinguish the two Sieges: The one
was, When their Enemies should cast a Tren h about them and compass them round,
Luke 19.23.21.20, 21.
and keep them in on every side; then nothing but Death was to be expected by
those who should be shut up in the City: The other was, when it should be only
compassed with Armies, and rather Invested than really Besieged, then was it
that they were to flee, and retire unto the Mountains.

The Christians obeyed the Command of the^r Messiah. Though there were many
Thousands of them both in Jerusalem and in Judea, we do not read either in
Josephus, Eusebius. 3. Hist. Ec^les. c. 5. Epiph. Haer. 7. Nazar. and lib. de
pon^. and mensur.
or in the other Histories, that one of them was found in the City when it was
taken. On the contrary, it is positively affirmed in the E^clesiastical
Histories, and in all the Monuments of our Ancestors, that they did withdraw
into a little City called Pella, in a mountainous Country, near to the Desert,
toward the Confines of Judea and Arabia.

We may be by that satisfied how exactly they were forewarned of it; and there
is nothing more remarkable than that separation of the incredulous Jews from
those Jews who were converted to Christianity; the one remaining in Jerusalem
to undergo the Punishment of their Infidelity, and the others being retired, as
Lot was from Sodom, to a small City, where with trembling they considered of
the Effects of the divine Vengeance, from which Almighty God had been pleased
to rescue and preserve them.

Besides the Predictions of Jesus Christ, there were likewise several others
from many of his Disciples; and among the rest those of St. Peter and St. Paul.
As they were d^agging to their Deaths, those two faithful Witnesses of Jesus
Christ's being risen, they declared openly to the Jews who should deliver them
to the Gentiles, their approaching Ruin: telling them, That Jerusalem was
utterly to be destroyed, Lact. divin. Instit. l. 4. c. 21.
that they should dye with Famine and Despair; that they should be for ever
banished from the Land of their Fathers, and sent into Captivity through all the
World; that the time was nigh at Hand, and all those Miseries should come upon
them for having with so many cruel Reproaches insulted over the well-beloved
Son of God, who had declared himself to them by so many Miracles.

Pious Antiquity has preserved to us this Prediction of the Apostles, which was
to be attended with so close and sudden an Accomplishment, St. Peter had given
them several others, either from a particular Inspiration, Phleg. l. 13, 14.
Chron. apud Orig. l. 2. cont. Cells.
or from his explaining the Words of his Master: And Phlegon, a Heathen Author,
whose Testimony Origin produces, has written, that all this Apostle had
foretold, was to a tittle accomplished upon them.

So that nothing befell the Jews but what was before hand prophesied of them.
The Cause of their Ruin is clearly painted out to us in the Contempt they cast
upon Jesus Christ and his Disciples. The time of Grace was past, and their
Destruction was inevi^able.

Your Highness may see therefore that it was in vain for Titus to attempt to
save Jerusalem and the Temple. The Decree was gone out from on high, there was
not to be one Stone left upon another. And if one Roman Emperor vainly
attempted to hinder the Ruin of the Temple, another Roman Emperor did yet more
vainly attempt to rebuild it. Julian the Apostate, after he had declared War
against Jesus Christ, thought himself powerful enough to frustrate his
Predictions. In the design he had of raising up on all sides Enemies to the
Christians, he stooped so low as to seek to the Jews, who were the Refuse and
Off-scowring of the World. He excited them to build their Temple; he gave them
vast sums of Money, and assisted them with all the Power of the Empire. But
hearken to the event, and you will find how God confounded the proud Princes.
The holy Fathers, and the Ecclesiastical Historians, do with one common consent
report it, and justify it by Monuments which remain still from their time. But
the matter ought to be attested by Heathens themselves. Amm. Marcel. l. 23.
init.
Ammianus Marcellinus, a Gentile in his Religion, and a zealous defender of
Julian, has recorded it in these Terms, Whilst Alipius, being assisted by the
Governor of the Province, was advancing the Work with all the Might he could,
terrible Globes of Fire broke forth from the very Foundations which they before
had shaken by violent Assaults; the Workmen, who several times essayed to begin
the Work anew, were many times burnt; the place became inaccessible, and so the
undertaking fell.

The Ecclesiastical Authors, who are more exact in representing so memorable an
Event, do join with that of the Earth, the Fire of Heaven too. But after all,
the Word of Jesus Christ abides firm and sure. St. John Chrysostom cries out:
Orat. in Judaeos.
He has built his Church on the Rock, nothing shall be able to overthrow it;
the Temple nothing shall be able to build up again: None can pull down what God
erects, nor can any build up again, what God pulls down.

Let us now make an end of our Discourse on Jerusalem and the Temple, and cast
our Eyes a little on the People themselves, heretofore the living Temple of the
Lord of Hosts, and now the Object of his ^^arred. The Jews are more levelled
than their Temple and their City. The Spirit of Truth is no longer among them;
Prophecy is quite at an end with them; the Promises on which the stress of
their Hopes depends, are vanished; all things are topsy turvy with that People,
and there is not one Stone left upon another.

And do but observe how far they are delivered up to Error, Jesus Christ told
it them, I am come in my Fathers Name, John 5.43.
and ye receive me not; if another shall come in his own Name, him ye will
receive. From that time, the Spirit of Seduction has been so predominant among
them, that they are ready still, at every moment, to let themselves be carried
away by it. It was not enough that the false Prophets should deliver Jerusalem
into the Hands of Titus; the Jews were not as yet banished Judea, and the Love
they had for Jerusalem, had obliged several of them to choose their Place of
Abode among its Ruins. Behold a false Christ arose up, who was absolutely to
complete their Destruction. Fifty Years after the taking of Jerusalem, in the
Age of the Death of our Lord, the famous Barchochebas, a Robber, a wicked
Wretch, because his Name signified the Son of the Star, impiously called
himself the Star of Jacob foretold in the Book of Numbers, and pretended he was
the Christ. Akibas, Numb. 24.17. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. 4.6, 8.
a Man of greatest Authority among the Rabbi's, after whose Example all those
whom the Jews call their Sages, came over to his Party, though the Impostor gave
than no other sign of his Mission, but that Akibas told them the Christ could
not be very far off. The Jews revolted throughout all the Roman Empire, under
the Conduct of Barchochebas, ^alm. Hier. de jeju^. ^5 in ver. Comm. sup. Lam.
Jerem. Maimonid. li. de jur. Reg. c. 12.
who promised them the Empire of the World. Adrian killed six hundred thousand
of them: The Yoke of those miserable Wretches was very heavy, and they were for
ever banished Judea.

Who is there but sees that the Spirit of Seduction had seized their hearts?
Because they received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12.
for that cause God sent them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie,
that they all might be damned who believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. There is no Imposture so gross but what deceives them. In our
days an Impostor called himself Christ in the East; and all the Jews began to
run in Flocks about him: we have seen them in Italy, in Holland, in Germany,
and at Metz, ready to leave all for the sake of following him. They imagined
already that they were becoming the Masters of the World, when they learnt that
their Christ was made a Turk, and had forsook the Law of Moses.

We need not to wonder if they be fallen into such Dispersions, X. The Progress
of the Jewish Errors, and the manner how they explain the Prophecies.
nor if the Tempest has scattered them, after they had forsaken their own way.
That way was pointed out to them in their Prophecies, especially in those which
designated the time of our Savior Christ. But they let slip those precious
Opportunities without any whit benefitting themselves by them; wherefore we
have seen them afterward given up to believe a lie, and they never knew since
what course to take.

Give me leave a little to recount to you the course and progress of their
Errors, and all the Methods they have taken to sink themselves into this Abyss.
The ways by which we come to wander, tend always to the broad Road; and by
considering where our wandering has begun, we may more securely go on in the
right way.

Your Highness has seen, that two Prophecies have set forth to the Jews the
time of Christ's coming, that of Jacob, and that of Daniel. They both did
foretell the ruin of the Kingdom of Judah at the time of our Savior's Advent.
But Daniel revealed how that a total Destruction should come upon that Kingdom
after the death of Christ: and Jacob said plainly, that in the Declension of
the Kingdom of Judah, that Christ which should then come should be the
Expectation of the People; that is to say, that he should be the Deliverer of
them, and that he should erect to himself a new Kingdom, not only framed out of
one single People, but out of all the People of the World. The words of the
Prophecy can admit of no other sense, and it was the constant positive
Tradition of the Jews that they were thus to understand it.

From thence that Opinion which was spread abroad by the ancient Rabbis, and
which is yet to be seen in their Talmud, Gem. tr. Sanhed. c. 11.
that at the time that Christ was to come, there should be no more Magistracy:
so that there was nothing more necessary to make them know the time of their
Messiah, than only to observe when they were falling into that woeful Condition.

In fine, they had begun well, and if they had not had their minds prepossessed
with the worldly Grandeurs which they hoped to find in their Messiah, and which
they thought to have a share of under his Empire, they could never have been
mistaken in Jesus Christ. The Foundation they had laid was certain: for as soon
as the Tyranny of the first Herod, and the change of the Jewish Commonwealth
which happened in his time, had discovered to them the punctuality of the
Declension set forth in the Prophecy, they doubted not but that Christ was
coming, and they should see that new Kingdom in which all People were to be
reunited.

One thing which they took notice of, was, that the power of life and death was
taken from them. Talm. Hierosol. tr. Sanhed. Dan. 13.
That was a great change, since they had ever enjoyed that great privilege
till then, to what Dominion soever they were subjected, nay, even in Babylon
during their Captivity. The History of Susanna plain enough shows that, and it
was a most certain Tradition among them. The Kings of Persia, who
re-established them, 1 Esdr. 7.23, 24, 25, 26.
left them that power by an express Decree, which has been already observed in
its proper place; and we have also seen that the first Seleucides had rather
enlarged than straightened their Privileges. I need not here to repeat any thing
of the Reign of the Maccabees, where they were not only enfranchised, but
became mighty and formidable to their Enemies. Pompey, who weakened them, as we
have already likewise seen, being content with the Tribute he had laid upon
them, and with putting them in such a condition that the People of Rome might
dispose of them upon occasion, left them their Prince, with all his
Jurisdiction. It is sufficiently known that they received such usage from the
Romans; and that they never meddled with their Government among themselves in
those Countries where they suffered them to have their Natural Kings.

In fine, the Jews were resolved to lose that power they had of life and death,
but forty years before the Destruction of the second Temple; and it is to be
questioned whether this was not the first Herod that ever attempted to make
this breach on their Liberty. For since, Joseph. ant. 14. 17.
as well to be revenged of the Sanhedrim, where he had himself been obliged to
appear before he was made King, as afterward to gain over to himself the
absolute Authority, he had attacqued that Assembly which was as the Senate
founded by Moses, and the perpetual Council of the Nation, that exercised the
Supreme Jurisdiction; by little and little that great Body lost its power, and
but very little of it did remain at the time when Christ came into the World.
Aff^irs grew worse and worse under Herod's Sons, when the Kingdom of Archelaus,
whereof Jerusalem was the Capital City, being reduced into a Roman Province,
was governed by Presidents whom the Emperors sent thither. In that wretched
and pitiable estate the Jews had so small a share of the power of life and
death, that to get Jesus Christ to be put to death, whom notwithstanding they
were resolved to crucify whatsoever it should cost them, they were fain to
have recourse to Pilate, and that weak Governor having told them that they
should judge him to Death by their own Law, they presently answered him, that
it was not lawful for them to put any man to death. John 18, 31. Acts 12.1, 2,
3.
And so likewise by the hands of Herod they caused St. James, the Brother of
St. John, to be beheaded, and clapped St. Peter into Prison. When they had
resolved on the death of St. Paul, they delivered him into the hands of the
Romans, as they had already done Jesus Christ; Acts 24.
and the Sacrilegious Vow of their false Zelots, who had sworn neither to eat
or drink before they had killed that holy Apostle, sufficiently discovered that
they were sensible they had lost their power of taking away his life in a
Judicial Course of Proceeding. If they stoned indeed St. Stephen, that was done
tumultuously by the Rabble, and by an effect of those Seditious Transports
which the Romans could not always suppress in those who called themselves at
that time the Devout. Acts 7.57, 58.
This is held for certain then, as well by those Histories, as by the consent
of the Jews, and by the posture of their Affairs, that toward the time of our
Savior, and especially in that when he began the Exercise of his Ministry,
they absolutely lost their Temporal Authority. They could not behold that their
loss, without remembering that ancient Oracle of Jacob, which had foretold them,
that in the time of the Messiah there should be no longer among them either
Power, Authority, or Magistracy. One of their most ancient Authors takes notice
of it, and it is but reason in him to acknowledge that the Scepter was not then
in Judah, nor any Authority among the Heads of the People, seeing that the
public Power was taken from them, Tract. voc. magn. Genesis seu com. in Genesis
and the Sanhedrim being degraded, the Members of that great Body were no more
looked on as Judges, but as bare simple Doctors. Therefore according to their
own reckoning, it was much about the time that Christ was to appear. And as
they saw then that certain Sign of this new King's coming to be very near at
hand, whose Empire was to extend it self over all People, they did effectually
believe that he would appear. The noise thereof spread it self round about, and
all the East were fully persuaded that it would not be long before they saw
come out of Judah those who should Reign over all the Earth.

Tacitus and Suetonius report this Story as being established by a positive
Opinion, and by an ancient Oracle which was found in the Sacred Books of the
Jews. Suet. Vespas. Tacit. l. 5. hist. c. 13. Joseph. de bell. Jud. 7.12.
Hegisip. de Excid. Jer. v. 44.
Josephus relates that Prophecy in the same terms, and says as they did, that
it was found in the holy Scriptures. The Authority of those Books, whose
Predictions were seen so visibly accomplished in so many Instances, was very
great in all the Eastern Country; and the Jews more attentive than any other in
observing the several Conjunctures which were chiefly written for their
Instruction, acknowledged the time of the Messiah which Jacob had pointed out
in their declension. Thus the Reflections they made upon their Condition were
very just; and without being deceived about the time of Christ's Advent, they
confessed he was to come just in that very point of time he did. But, O the
weakness of Humane Understanding, and the Vanity which is the inevitable Source
of Blindness! the Humility of their Savior concealed from those proud Souls
the true Grandeurs which they were to look for in their Messiah. They would
have had him to have been a King like to the other Kings of this World; which
was the reason that the Flatterers of the first Herod, dazzled with the
Greatness and Magnif^cence of that Prince, who, as much a Tyrant as he was, yet
forgot not to enrich Judea, Epiph. lib. 1. haer. 20. Herodian.
said that he himself was that King so much promised. 'Twas that also which
gave way to the Sect of the Herodians, by whom he was so much spoken of in the
Gospel, and whom the Heathen confessed; Matthew. 22.16. Mark 3.6.12.13. Pers. and
Vet. Schol. Sat. v. 11. 180. Joseph. de bell. Jud. 3.14.
for Persius and his Scho^iast informs us, that even in the time of Nero, the
Birth of King Herod was celebra^ed by his Followers with the same Solemnity as
the Sabbath. Josephus stumbles into the like Error. That Man, being instructed,
as he says himself, in the holy Books of the Prophets, and himself a Priest as
his Parents ^ere, acknowledged that indeed the coming of that King, so much
prom^sed by Jacob, exactly agreed with the time of Herod, where he shows us
himself with that industrious care a manifest beginning of the ruin of the
Jews: but as he saw nothing in his own Nation which filled up those ambitious
Ideas that it had conceived of its Christ; he went on somewhat further before
the time of the Prophecy, Lib. 3. de bell. Jud. 14.7.12.
and applying himself to Vespasian, he assured that the Oracle of the Scripture
signified that Prince the delared Emperor in Judea.

Thus did he wrest the holy Scriptures to authorize his Flattery; and being
miserably blind, he bestowed upon Strangers the hopes of Jacob and Judah; he
sought in Vespasian the Son of Abraham and of David; and to an Idolatrous
Prince attributed the Title of him whose light was to draw off the Gentiles
from Idolatry.

That conjuncture of time favored it much. But whilst he was attributing to
Vespasian what Jacob had spoken of Christ, the Zealots who defended Jerusalem,
attributed it to themselves. And it was upon that only Foundation that they
promised themselves the Empire of the World, Joseph. de bell. Jud. lib. 7.
as Josephus relates it; more reasonable than himself, in that a^ least they
went not out of the Nation (...) seek for the accomplishment of the Promis^^
made to their Forefathers.

How blind were they to that great advantage which the preaching of the Gospel
th^^ made among the Gentiles, and to that n^^ Empire which Jesus Christ was
setting up over all the Earth? What was more glorious and beautiful than an
Empire in which Piety was to reign, the true God to triumph over Idolatry,
Eternal Life to be published and declared to Infidel Nations, and was not even
the Empire of the Caesar's a piece of pompous vanity in comparison with this?
But however that Empire seemed not illustrious enough to charm the Eyes of the
World.

How ought we to be disabused from these earthly Grandeurs before we can come
to any true knowledge of Jesus Christ! the Jews understood the time: the Jews
saw the People called to the God of Abraham according to Jacob's Prophecy by
Jesus Christ and his Disciples; and yet for all that they mistook even that
Jesus who was signalized to them by so many signs. And although throughout the
whole course of his life, and after his death, he confirmed his Mission by so
many extraordinary Miracles, yet those besotted and infatuated Wretches
rejected him, because they could see nothing in him but a solid Grandeur which
was void of all that splendid Decoration which strikes the Senses, and because
he seemed rather come to condemn than to reward their vain Ambition.

And yet however, forced by the Conjunctures and Circumstances of time, in
spite of their blindness and obduracy, they sometimes seemed to vail to their
Prepossessions. Every thing at the time of our Lord was so exactly fitted to
the Manifestation of the Messiah, that they were in great suspicion lest St.
John the Baptist might be he. Luke 3.15. 1 John 19.20.
His manner of life, which was austere, extraordinary, and very surprising,
touched them sensibly; and though the Grandeurs of the World was wanting, yet
they appeared at first as if they were willing to be satisfied with the luster
of so amazing and prodigious a life. The simple and common life of our Jesus
Christ was offensive to those gross, as well as proud Spirits, who were only
capable of being taken by their Senses, and who otherwise being far enough from
a sincere Conversion, would admire nothing but what they looked on as
inimitable. So that St. John the Baptist, who they thought deserved to be the
Christ, was not believed when he declared to them the true Christ: and Jesus
Christ, whom they must have imitated as soon as they had believed on him,
appeared to the Jews too humble and meek for them to follow him.

But yet the Impression that was made upon them, that Christ must appear about
that time, was so strong and powerful, that they could not wear it off for
almost a whole Age. They thought the fulfilling of the Prophecies might have a
certain extent; and was not still wholly determined to a precise particular
point of time; so that for almost an hundred years they talked of nothing but
of false Christ's that got themselves to be followed, and of false Prophets who
declared them. The foregoing had never seen any thing like it; and the Jews
made no such brags of the Name of Christ, neither when Judas Maccabeus gained
so many Victories over their Tyrant, nor when his Brother Simon freed them from
the Yoke o^ the Gentiles, nor yet when the first Hyr^^ got so many Conquests.
The time, and the other signs did not then agree to it, and it was only in that
Age of Jesus Christ that they began to speak of all those Messiahs. The
Samaritans, who read the Prophecy of Jacob in the Pentateuch, made themselves
Christ's as well as the Jews, and a little after Jesus Christ they called to
mind their Dosithe^. Orig. Tract. 27. in Matt. Tom. 14. in Joh. 1. cant. Cells.
Iren. 1. 20, 21. (...). John 4.25.
Simon the Magician of the same Country, boasted also that he was the Son of
God, and Menander his Disciple called himself the Savior of the World. Whilst
Christ was living and amongst them the Samaritans believed the Messiah was near
coming: so generally was it expected in the Nation, and among all those who
read the ancient Oracle of Jacob, that Christ was to appear in those days.

When the time was so past that there was no further expectation of him, and
that the Jews had seen by Experience that all the Messiahs whom they had
followed, were so far from delivering them from their Evils, that they had but
the more emerged them in 'em; it was then a good while e're was seen among them
any more new Messiahs; and Barchochebas was the last whom they owned as such in
those first and early times of Christianity. But the old Impression could not
yet utterly be done away. In stead of believing that Christ had appeared, as
they had done in the time of Adrian; under the Antonines his Successors, they
thought upon ^his, to say that Christ was in the World, ^ho' he did not then
make himself visible, because he tarried for the Prophet Elias, who was to come
to consecrate him. This was a common Discourse amongst them in the ^ime of St.
Justin; Just in. adv. Tryph.
and we also find in their Talmud the Doctrine of one of their ancientest
Masters, who said, that Christ was come according as he was declared in the
Prophets; R. Juda filius Levi. Gem. San. 11.
but he kept himself secret somewhere at Rome among the poor Mendicants.

But such an Opinion as this (so wild and extravagant) could not sink into
their minds; therefore the Jews, being at last forced to confess that the
Messiah was not come in the time they had reason to expect him according to
their ancient Prophecies, fell into another extreme as bad as the former. But a
little more, and they had renounced their Messiah who failed them in time; and
several of them followed a famous Rabbi, R. Hillel. Ibid. Is. Abran. de C.
fidei.
whose words are likewise found preserved in the Talmud. He seeing how far the
time of his coming was gone and past, concluded, That the Israelites were to
look for their Messiah no longer, because he had been given to them in the
Person of Ezekiah.

Indeed this Opinion too was so far from obtaining amongst them, that they did
quite detest it. But as they could not tell what further to make of the times
pointed out to them by the Prophecies, and knew not which way in the world to
extricate themselves from this Labyrinth, they then made an Article of Faith of
this which we read in the Talmud, Gem. San. c. 11. Moses Maimon. in Epit. Talm.
Is. Abran. de cap. fidei.
All the times which were designated for the coming of the Messiah were past;
and with an universal consent they cried out, Cursed be those who reckon the
times of the Messiah: Just as we see in a Tempest that has driven the Vessel
far off from the way it was steering, the Pilot is mad and desperate when
forced to forsake his Compass, and submit himself to the pleasure of the
outrageous winds and waves that carry him where they list.

From that time all their endeavors have been to elude the Prophecies in which
the time of Christ was set out to them: they mattered not how they o'rethrew
all the Traditions of their Forefathers, provided they could but deprive the
Christians of those admirable Prophecies; and they went at last so far as to
say, that that of Jacob did not respect Christ.

But their ancient Books betray them. That Prophecy is understood of the
Messiah in the Talmud, Gem. Tr. Saned. c. 11. Paraph. Onkelos. Johanan. and
Jero ol. v. Polyg. Ang.
and the manner as we explain it is found in their Paraphrases, that is to say
in those Commentaries that are the most Authentic, and the most valued among
them.

We find in them in express words, that the House and Kingdom of Judah, to
which all the Posterity of Jacob, and all the People of Israel, were one day to
be reduced, would continually bring forth Judges and Magistrates, until the
coming of the Messiah, under whom a Kingdom should be formed, made up of all
People.

This was the Testimony that their most famous and most received Doctors gave
also to the Jews the first times of Christianity. The ancient Tradition which
was so firmly established, could not be abolished all at once; and though the
Jews had not applied the Prophecy of Jacob unto Jesus Christ, yet they durst
not deny that it did belong to the Messiah. They arrived not to that height and
excess till a long while after; and when they have been pressed by the
Christians at any time, they hive still found their own Tradition to be against
them.

As for Daniel's Prophecy, wherein the coming of Christ was confined within the
term of 490 years, counting from the twentieth year of Artaxerxes Longimanus:
As that term came down to the end of the fourth Millenary of the World; so was
it a most ancient Opinion among the Jews, that the Messiah should appear toward
the end of that fourth Millenary, and about two thousand years after Abraham.
One Elias, whose name was great among the Jews, although it be not the Prophet,
had so declared before the Birth of Jesus Christ; and the Tradition of it is
preserved in the Book of the Talmud. Genesis Tr. San. c. 11.
You have seen this term accomplished in the coming of our Lord, for he did
indeed appear about two thousand years after Abraham, and toward the four
thousand of the World. However the Jews did not know him; and being frustrated
of their expectation, they said that their Sins had kept off the Messiah who
was to come. But yet our Dates are ascertained by their own confession, and it
is a very great blindness to make a term which God has so particularly set
forh i^ Dani^l to depend on Men.

And this is likewise (...) great Perplexity to them to consider that that
Prophet should make the time of Christ to go before that of the Ruin of
Jerusalem; so that that latter Period being accomplished, that which preceded
it must needs be so to.

Antiq. 1^. c. ult. de Bell. Jud. 7. 4.
Josephus is here most mightily deceived. He justly reckoned the Weeks which
were to be followed with the Desolation of the Jewish People; and seeing them
accomplished in the time when Titus laid Siege before Jerusalem, he questioned
not but the very moment of the Destruction of that City was then come. But he
never considered that that Desolation was to be preceded by the Coming of
Christ and of his Death; so that he understood but half the Prophecy.

The Jews that came after him would fain have supplied this Defect. They have
forged to us an Agrippa descended from Herod, whom the Romans, they said, did
put to death a little before the Destruction of Jerusalem: And they would needs
have that Agrippa, Christ by his Title of King, to be the Christ which is
spoken of in Daniel: a new Proof of their Blindness indeed! For besides that
that Agrippa could neither be the Just, nor the Saint of Saints, nor the end of
the Prophecies, so as the Christ whom Daniel describes in that place was to be;
besides that the Murder of that Agrippa, whereof the Jews were innocent, could
not be the cause of their Desolation; as the Death of Daniel's Death was to be;
which here the Jews say was a Fable. Agrippa descended from Herod, was ever a
Party of the Romans, ever civilly treated by their Emperors, Joseph. l. 7. de
bell. Jud Jus. Tiber. Biblioth. Phot. cod. 33.
and reigned in a Canton of Judea long after the taking of Jerusalem, as
Josephus, and oter Contemporaries do testify.

Thus every thing which they Jews invented to elude die Prophecies, served only
to confound them. They themselves did not believe those Fictions, they were so
gross, and their best Defense was in that Law they enacted, not to reckon any
longer the days of the Messiah. By that means they wilfully shut their Eyes
against the Truth, and renounced those Prophecies in which the holy Ghost
himself has computed the Years: But whilst they renounced them, they fulfilled
them, and showed the Truth of what they said both as to their Blindness and
their Fall.

Let them answer the Prophecies as they would; the Desolation which they
foretold came upon them just at the appointed time; the Event was of more
Efficacy and Force than all their Subtilties; and if Christ did not come just
upon that fatal Conjuncture, the Prophets in whom they trusted very much
^eceived them.

And for the Complement of their Conviction, please to observe two
Circumstances which accompained their Fall, and the Advent of the Savior of
the World: The one is, that the Succession of the Highpriests which was
perpetual and unalterable since Aaron, then came to an end: The other, that the
Distinction of the Tribes and Families allways kept up till that time, was then
no more by their own Confession.

That Distinction was necessary till the coming of Messiah. From Levi were to
be born the Ministers of sacred Things: From Aaron were to come the Priests and
the Pontifs: From Juda the Messiah himself. If the distinction of Families had
not continued till the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the coming of Christ, the
Jewish Sacrifices would have ceased before the time, and David had been
frustrated of the Glory of being known for the Father of the Messiah. Was the
Messiah come? Was the new Priesthood, according to the Order of Melchizedech
begun in his Person? And the new Kingdom, which was not of this World, did that
too appear? Then was there no longer need of Aaron, nor of Levi, nor of Juda,
nor of David, nor of their Families. Aaron was no more necessary then, when the
Sacrifices were to cease as Daniel had foretold. The House of David and Juda
had accomplished their purpose when that the Christ of God was come out from
thence: Dan. 9.27.
And as if the Jew; themselves had renounced their own Hopes, they particularly
at that time forgot the Succession of Families, until then so carefully and so
religiously kept up.

Let us not omit one of the Signs of the Messiah's coming, and peradventure the
chiefest, if we can tell how to understand it aright, though it be to the Scandal
as well as Horror of the Jews. It Is the Remission of Sins declared in the name
of a suffering Savior, Dan. 9.26, 27.
of a Savior humble and obedient even to the Death. Daniel had observed among
his Weeks, the mysterious Week which here we take notice of, wherein Christ was
to be sacrificed, wherein the Covenant was to be confirmed by his Death, and
the ancient Sacrifices were to lose their Power and Virtue. Let us join Isaiah
to Dan^el, and there we shall find all the depth of that so great a Mystery, we
shall see there the Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief, Isai. 53.3, 5.
who was wounded for our Transgressions, bruised for our Iniquities: The
Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his Stripes we were healed.
Open your Eyes, ye Incredulous, and look about you, is it not true that the
Remission of Sins was preached to you in the Name of Jesus Christ Crucified?
Was ever so great a Mystery thoroughly considered? Did ever any other than Jesus
Christ, either before, or after him, loudly proclaim that he was come to wash
away Sins by his Blood? Should he have an express Order to be Crucified only to
acquire a vain and empty Honor, and to fulfill in himself so bloody a
Prophecy? It Is duty here to be silent, and adore a Doctrine that is in the
Gospel, which could not so much as enter into any Man's Conception, if it had
not been true.

The Jews are extremely perplexed and put to it in this point: They find in
their Scriptures too many Passages describing the Humiliations of their
Messiah. What then will become of those that speak of his Glory and Triumphs?
Why their natural Resolution is, that he will come to his Triumphs by the
Victories he gains, and to Glory by his Sufferings. What an incredible thing is
this! the Jews had rather have two Messiah's: We see in their Talmud, Tr.
Succa. and Comm. sive parraph. sup. Cant. c. 7. v. 3.
and other Books of like Antiquity, that they look for a suffering Messiah, and
a Messiah full of Glory; the one dead and risen; the other always happy, and
always a Conqueror: The one, to whom all the Passages do agree that relate to
his weakness; the other, to whom all those agree, which speak of his Greatness;
the one indeed makes him the Son of Joseph, for they could not deny him one of
the Characters of Jesus Christ who was the reputed Son of Joseph; and the other
the Son of David; without ever being willing to consider or allow what that
Messiah the Son of David was to do, according as the Royal Prophet had
foreshewn, drink of the Brook the way, before he should lift up his Head; Ps.
110. v. ult.
that is to say, he should be afflicted before he triumphed, as the very Son of
David says himself, O Fools, and slow of Heart to believe all that the Prophets
have spoken? Luke 24. v. 25, 26.
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and so to enter into his Glory?

But, if we do understand that great Passage of the Messiah, wherein Isaiah
does so lively represent to us the Man of Sorrows, wounded for our
Transgressions, Isai. 53.
and br^ised for our Iniquities, and disfigured as one that was Leprous, we are
likewise justified in this Explication as well as in all the other, by the
ancient Tradition of the Jews; and in spite of all their Preventions, the
Chapter so often cited in their Talmud teaches us that that Leper who should be
stricken for the Transgression of the People, Gem. Tr. Sanhed. l. 11. Ibid.
should be the Messiah. The Afflictions which the Messiah should feel for our
Sins are celebrated in the same place, and in several other of the Jewish
Writings. They often speak of his Entrance as humble as it was glorious, which
he was to make in Jerusalem when riding upon an Ass, and that famous Prophecy
of Zachariah was applied to him. What reason to have the Jews to complain?
Every thing was pointed out to them in express Terms among their Prophets;
their ancient Tradition had preserved the natural Explication of those admired
Prophecies; and there was nothing more just than that Reproach which the
Savior of the World made to them saving, O ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the
Face of the Sky, Matt. 16.2, 3, 4. Luke 12.56.
but can ye not discern the Signs of the Times? For ye say, when it is Evening,
it will be fair Weather, for the Sky is red; and in the Morning, it will be
foul Weather to day, for the Sky is red and lowering. Therefore we may very
well conclude that the Jews had all the reason in the World to confess, that
all the signs and times of the coming of the Messiah were past. Juda was no
longer a Kingdom, nor indeed a people: Other People acknowledged the Messiah
which was to be sent; Jesus Christ was shown to the Gentiles: At that sign they
had recourse to the God of Abraham, and the Blessing of that Patriarch was of
equal extent with the Earth. The Man of Sorrows was preached, and the Remission
of Sins was declared by his Death. All the Weeks were run out; the Desolation
of the People, and of the Sanctuary, a just Punishment of Christ's Death, had
its last Accomplishment; in fine, Christ appeared with all the Characters which
was then acknowledged by the Tradition of the Jews, and therefore there was no
excuse for their Incredulity.

Also we see since that time indisputable Marks of their Reprobation. After
Christ's Ascension they only more and more plunged themselves in Ignorance and
Misery, from whence the verv Extremity of their Afflictions and Calamities, and
the Shame of having been so often begulled into Error will deliver them, or
rather the Goodness of God, when the time, settled by his Providence for the
Correction of their Ingratitude, and the tameing of their Pride, shall be
fulfilled.

In the mean while they remain the Scorn and Derision of the People, as well as
the Object of their Aversion; and so long a Captivity as they have been under
has not given them a Sense of coming to themselves, though it ought to be
sufficient to convince them. Hier. Ep. ad Dar. Tom. 3. Epist.
For truly, as St. Jerome says to them: What look you for, O incredulous Jew?
You have been guilty of many Crimes during the times of the Judges; Your
Idolatry has enslaved you to all the Neighbor Nations, but God has had great
Compassion for you, and has not failed sending of Saviors to you. You have
multiplied your Idolatries under the Kings; and yet the Abominations into which
you fell under Ahaz and Manasseh have not been punished but by Seventy Years of
Captivity. Cyrus came, and restored you your Country, your Temple; and your
Sacrifices: At the last, you were o'rewhelmed by Vespasian and Titus fifty
Years after, Adrian completed your Destruction, and it is now four hundred
Years that you have lain under Oppression. Thus spoke St. Jerome; the Argument
has been strengthened since, for twelve hundred Years have been added to the
Desolation of the Jewish People. We will therefore tell them instead of four
hundred Years, that sixteen Ages have seen their Captivity to continue, without
ever having their Yoke any whit lighter. What have you done, O ungrateful
People? Slaves in all Countries, and to all Princes, you do not serve strange
Gods. How has God, who chose you, now forgot you, and what are become of his
ancient Mercies? What Crime, what Attempt, even greater than Idolatry, makes
you feel a Punishment which never yet before did all your grievous Idolatries
bring down upon you? Are you silent? Cannot you understand what makes God
inexorable to you? Matt. 27.25, 26. John 19.15, 21.
Remember those Words of your Forefathers, his Blood be on us, and on our
Children: And so likewise, that we have no King but Caesar. The Messiah will
not be your King; keep therefore to what you have chosen; continue Slaves to
Caesar, and to Kings, until the Fullness of the Gentiles be accomplished, and at
last all Israel be saved.

XI. Particular Reflections on the Conversion of the Gentiles. The profound
Councils of God, which resolved to convert them by the Cross of Jesus Christ.
The Arguing of St. Paul upon this manner of their Conversion.
THIS Conversion of the Gentiles was the second thing which was to come to pass
at the time of the Messiah, and the most assured sign of his coming. We have
seen how the Prophets had clearly foretold it, and their Promise was verified
in the times of our Lord. It Is certain that then only, and neither sooner nor
later, what the Philosophers never durst attempt; what the Prophets, nor the
Jewish People when they were the most protected and the most Faithful could
not do, that twelve Preachers sent by Jesus Christ, and the Witnesses of his
Resurrection, accomplished. So that the Conversion of the World was to be
neither the Work of Philosophers, nor of Prophets, but it was reserved alone to
Christ, and was the Fruit of his Cross.

Indeed it was necessary that this Christ and his Apostles should come out of
the Jews, and that the preaching of the Gospel should begin at Jerusalem.
Isaiah 2.2.
It shall come to pass in the l^st Days, that the Mountain of the Lords House
shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above
the Hills; and all Nations shall flow unto it, as Isaiah elegantly expresses
it: That was the Christian Church. Ibid. 2.
And many People shall go and say come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of
the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his Ways,
and we will walk in his Paths: Ibid. 17, 18.
The Lord alone shall be exalted in that day, and the Idols he shall utterly
abolish. But Isaiah, who saw those things, saw also at the same time that that
Law which to judge among the Nations, Ibid. 3, 4.
and to rebuke many People, was to come out of Zion, and the Word of the Lord
from Jerusalem. Which made our Savior say, John 4.22.
that Salvation is of the Jews. And it was very convenient that the new Light
which was one day to enlighten the People plunged in Idolatry, should spread it
self over all the World, from that place where it had always been. It was in
Jesus Christ the Son of David and of Abraham, that all the Nations were to be
blessed and Sanctified. We have often observed it, but have not yet observed
the Cause for which that suffering Jesus, that crucified and despised Jesus,
was to be the only Author of the Conversion of the Gentiles, and the alone
vanquisher of Idolatry.

St. Paul has unfolded to us that great Mystery in the first Chapter of the
first Epistle to the Corinthians, and it is worth our while to consider that
admirable Place with the following words. Christ, says he, sent me to preach
the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.17, 18, 19, 20. Isaiah 29.14, 33.18.
not with wisdom of Words, lest the Cross should be made of none effect; for
the preaching of the Cross is to them that Perish, foolishness; but unto us who
are Saved, it is the Power of God. For it is written, I will destroy the Wisdom
of the Wise, and will bring to nothing the Understanding of the Prudent. Where
is the Wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this World? has not
God made foolish the Wisdom of this World? Doubtless, since it was not able to
deliver Men from their Ignorance. But see what reason St. Paul gives of it.
It Is after that in the Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knew not God, by the
works of his Wisdom, that is to say by the Creatures which he had so wisely
ordained, he took another way, it pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching
to save them that believe: 1 Cor. 1.21.
that is to say, by the Mystery of the Cross, which the Wisdom of this World
cannot understand.

A new and admirable design of the divine Providence! God had brought man into
the World, where on what side soever he turned his Eyes, the Wisdom of the
Creator was illustriously eminent in the greatness, richness, and disposition
of so excellent work. Yet Blind and Ignorant, he mistook him; the Creatures
which presented themselves to raise up our Minds higher, fixed them here below;
blind and brutish Man fell down to them, and not content to adore only the
Works of God's Hand, they fell adoring the work of their own. Even more
extravagantly ridiculous fables, than those which old Women please Children
with, constituted their Religion: Reason they had forgot, and God was resolved
to make them forget it in another manner. One work, the Wisdom of which they
understood, wrought no impression in them, and another work was presented to
them, where their reason was lost, and every thing appeared foolishness to them
that was the Cross of Jesus Christ. It is not by reasoning that this Mystery is
understood; it is in casting down imaginations, and every high thing that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, 2 Cor 10.4, 5.
and bringing into Captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

In fine, how are we to understand this Mystery, where the Lord of Life and
Glory is loaded with reproaches; where the Wisdom of God is accounted
foolishness; where he, who being in himself assured of his natural Greatness,
thought he attributed nothing to himself when he said he was equal with God,
and yet took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of
Men; Phil. 11.7, 8.
and being found in fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient
unto Death, even the death of the Cross? all our thoughts are here confounded;
and as St. Paul said, there is nothing which appears more extravagant and
unreasonable to those that are not enlightened from above.

Such was the Remedy which God prepared for Idolatry. He knew the Spirit of
Man, and knew that it was not by reason that an error must be destroyed which
had not its Establishment from Reason. There are some Errors we fall into by
reason; for oft-times Man does embroil and entangle himself by disputation and
argument: But Idolatry came in by an extreme quite different and opposite; by
stifling all reason, and by giving the Dominion to Sense which loves to cover
every thing over with such qualities as touch that with the most agreeable
delight and pleasure. 'Twas by that the Divinity became visible and gross. Men
attributed their own figures to it, and that which was yet more shameful and
abominable, their very Vices and Passions. Reason bore no part in this so
brutish an Error. 'Twas the overthrow of all good Sense, a mere delirium, a
Phrensy. Reason, or argue with one that is Phrenitick, and dispute against a
Man, whom the violence of a Fever has made Lightheaded; you only incense him,
and make the Distemper more incureable. We ought to go to the cause, to correct
the Temper, and calm the Humors that cause by their extravagance such strange
transports: And so it must not be reason that cures the delirium of Idolatry.
What have the Philosophers got with all their pompous Discourses, with the
sublimity of their Style, and with their Arguments so artfully managed? Plato
with his Eloquence, which was thought to have somewhat divine in it, what one
single Altar has it thrown down, where those monstrous divinities were adored?
On the contrary, both he, and his Disciples, and all the Sages of the Age
Sacrificed to a lie: because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as
God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their Imaginations, Romans
1.21.22.25.
and their foolish heart was darkened, professing themselves to be wise, they
became Fools: For contrary to their own light of Understanding they worshipped
and served the Creature.

Was it not therefore with great reason that St. Paul brake out with that
passage, where is the Wise? where is the Scribe? 1 Cor. 1.20.
where is the disputer of this World? has not God made foolish the wisdom of
this World? Have they ever been able by themselves to destroy the Fables of
Idolatry? did it so much as ever come into their thoughts, that they ought
openly to set themselves against so many Blasphemies, and suffer, I do not say,
the heaviest Punishments, but the least affront or injury from the Truth? So
far were they from this, that they have held the truth in unrighteousness, Romans
1.18.
and have laid down for a maxim, that in matters of Religion, one ought to
follow the People: the People whom they despised and scorned so much, was their
rule in the most important matter of all, and where their illuminations seemed
to be most necessary. What service then, O Philosophy, have thou done? has not
God made foolish the Wisdom of this World, as St. Paul tell us? 1 Cor. 1.19, 20.
and has not he destroyed the Wisdom of the Wise, and brought to nothing the
Understanding of the Prudent?

Thus has God shown by experience, that the destruction of Idolatry could not
be alone the work of Humane Reason. He was so far from committing the Cure of
such a Malady to that, that God has perfectly confounded it by the Mystery of
the Cross, and he has at once brought the Remedy even to the Source and Root
of the Distemper.

Idolatry, if we understand it aright, derived its Birth from that profound
Love and Inclination we had to our selves. 'Twas that made us to invent Gods
after our own Image: Gods who effectually were but Men subject to the like
Passions, Weaknesses, and Vices with our selves; so that under the name of
false Divinities, 'twas in effect, their own Imaginations, Pleasures, and
Phancies, which the Gentiles worshipped.

Jesus Christ makes us to enter by other ways. His Poverty, his Ignominies, and
his Cross make him appear an Object horrible to our Senses. We must come out of
our selves, renounce all, and crucify all to follow him. Man rooted out of
himself, and from every thing which his Corruption made him in love with,
became capable to adore God, and his Eternal Truth, whose Rules he is willing
for the future to obey.

Thus all the Idols were destroyed and vanished, both those which were
worshipped upon the Altars, and they which were adored in each man's private
Breast. These had erected others. Venus was worshipped, because they attributed
to her a Dominion over Love, and they were charmed with her Power. Bacchus, the
most wanton of all the Gods, had his Altars, because men gave up themselves to
his Caresses, and sacrificed, I may venture to say, to the joy of the Senses,
more pleasant and drunken, than the Wine it self. But Jesus Christ by the
Mystery of his Cross came to impress into their hearts the Love of Sufferings
in the room of Pleasures. The Idols which they outwardly adored were destroyed,
because those which they inwardly worshipped, subsisted no longer: the purified
heart, as Jesus Christ himself has said, Matthew. 5.8.
became capable of seeing God; and then Man was so far from making God like to
himself, that he rather strove, as much as his Infirmity would suffer him, to
become like unto God.

The Mystery of Jesus Christ has discovered to us, how the Divinity, without
impairing it self, may be united to our Nature, and be clothed with our
Weaknesses. The Word was made Flesh; He that had the form and nature of God,
without losing any thing that he was, took upon him the form of a Servant.
Inalterable in himself, he yet appropriates to himself a stranger Nature. O ye
Men, you would need have Gods that were indeed but Men, and those too that were
vicious! Was not that a great blindness? But here is a new Object of Adoration
proposed to you; it is God and Man both together, but such a Man that has lost
nothing of what he was, in taking upon him to be as we are. The Divinity
remains immovable, and without a possibility of being degraded; that cannot
but raise up what it unites.

But let us consider, What is it that God has taken from us? are they our
Vices, and our Sins? God forbid: he only took from Man what he made in him, and
it is most certain that he neither made Sin nor Vice in him. Nature was made,
and that he took. We may say that he made Mortality and Infirmity to accompany
it, because although it was not in the first design, it was the just punishment
of Sin, and in that respect it was the work of the Divine Justice. So God has
not disdained to take it; and in taking upon him the punishment of Sin without
the Sin it self, he showed that he was not a Guilty one that was punished, but
the Just that died to expiate the Sins of the world.

So that instead of the Vices which men put into their Gods, all the Virtues
appeared in that God-Man; and that they might appear in him in the last Trials,
they were seen to attend him in the midst of the most dreadful Torments. Let us
not therefore look for any other visible God after him; he alone is worthy to
abolish all Idols; and the Victory he was to gain over them was fastened to his
Cross.

That is to say, it was fastened to a most apparent folly. 1 Cor. 1.22, 23, 24,
and 25.
For the Jews, as St. Paul goes on, require a sign, whereby God, in putting
even the whole Frame of Nature into a Convulsion, as he did at the Israelites
coming out of Egypt, set them visibly above their Enemies, and the Greeks or
the Gentiles seek after wisdom and labored discourses, as those of Plato and
Socrates were; but we, continues the Apostle, preach Christ crucified, unto the
Jews a stumbling block, and not a Miracle, and unto the Greeks foolishness, and
not wisdom: but unto them who are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ, the
Power of God, and the Wisdom of God: because the foolishness of God is wiser
than all the wisdom of Men, and the weakness of God is stronger than the
mightiest of Humane Power. This, this was to be the last blow (as I may say) to
be given to our proud Ignorance. The wisdom to which that brings us is so
sublime and lofty, that it appears foolishness to our wisdom, and the Rules of
it are so high and eminent, that every thing in it seems to us a Wilderness
wherein we are lost.

But though that Divine Wisdom was in it self impenetrable to us, yet it
sufficiently declared it self by its effects. A virtue comes out of the Cross,
and all the Idols are shaken. We see them fall flat on the ground, although
they were kept up and maintained by all the Roman Power. 'Twas not the Wise,
nor the Noble, nor the Mighty that wrought so great a Miracle. The work of God
was followed, and what he had begun by the Humiliation of Jesus Christ, he
perfected and completed by the Humiliation of his Disciples. Ye see your
Calling, Brethren, goes St. Paul on with that admirable Discourse of his, the
calling of which that victorious Church of the World was framed and composed, 1
Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29.
how that not many wise men after the flesh, whom the World has in admiration,
not many mighty, not many noble are called, but God has chosen the foolish
things of the world, to confound the wise: and God has chosen the weak things
of the world, to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the
world, and things which are despised, has God chosen; yea, and things which
are not, to bring to naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in his
Presence. The Apostles, and their Disciples, the Offscouring of the World, and
even Nothing it self, in beholding them with Humane Eyes, have prevailed over
all the Emperors, and all Empire. Men had forgot the Creation, and God renewed
it, by bringing out of that Nothing his Church, which he has made all powerful
against what Error soever. With the Idols has he confounded all the Humane
Greatness which was engaged in their Defense; and he has wrought as great a
Work, as he did when he made the World, by the alone power of his word.

XII. Diverse ways of Idolatry, Sense, Interest, Ignorance, a false respect of
Antiquity, Policy, Philosophy, and Heresies came to its Succor: but the Church
triumphs over all.
Idolatry now appears to us to be weakness it self, and we can scarce tell how
to imagine there should ever need so much power to destroy it. But however its
extravagance shows what a difficulty there was to vanquish it, and so great an
Immersement of right Sense and Understanding sufficiently discovers how much
the first Principles of Mankind were wasted. The World was grown old in
Idolatry; and being enchanted by its Idols, it became deaf to the voice of
Nature which cried out against them. What power did it require to retrieve into
Man's mind the true God who was so totally (as it were) forgot, and to recover
Mankind from so deep and prodigious a besottedness and lethargy?

All the Senses, Passions, and Interests stood up for Idolatry. It was
contrived for Pleasure: Diversions, fine Spectacles, and downright Libertinism
constituted one part of that Divine Worship. Their Feasts were only Sports; and
there was no Scene of Humane Life from whence modesty was more industriously
banished, than it was from the Mysteries of Religion. How to accustom minds so
corrupted to the Regularity of the true, chaste, severe, Religion, which was an
Enemy of the Senses, and only set upon invisible good things? St. Paul spoke to
Felix, Governor of Judea, Acts 24.25.
of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, and he trembling,
answered, Go thy way for this time, when I have a convenient season I will call
for thee. 'Twas a Discourse to be rejected, or put off by him that was resolved
to enjoy, whatever came on it, the Blessings of this World with full swinge.

Will you see Interest moved, that powerful Ressort and Spring which gives
motions to all Humane things? In that great cry against Idolatry, which the
preaching of St. Paul began to cause over all Asia, the Crafts-men (who got
their living by making Silver Shrines for Diana of Ephesus) were called
together by Demetrius a Silver-Smith, and he being of greatest credit,
harrang'd to them how their Mystery was like to signify nothing: Nay, says he,
Acts 19.27.
not only this our Craft is in danger to be set at naught; but also the Temple
of the great Goddess Diana is like to be despised, and her Magnificence
destroyed, whom all Asia and the World worshipped.

How powerful is Interest, and how bold and daring is Man when he can but cloak
himself under the pretense of Religion! There was nothing more needful to open
the Mouths of those that were of like Occupation with him. They ran out all
together full of Wrath, crying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, and dragging
Paul's Companions in Travel into the Theater, where the whole City was met in
Confusion. Then they redoubled their cries, and for two whole hours the Public
Hall sounded nothing but, Great was Diana of the Ephesians: and St. Paul and
his Companions were with great difficulty delivered from the hands of the
People by the Magistrates, who were afraid lest greater disorders might happen
from that Tumult. Add now to the Interest of private Men the Interest of the
Priests, who were also like to fall with their Gods: and to all that, superadd
the Interest of Cities which were eminently famous by their false Religion, as
the City of Ephesus, which owed her Privileges to her Temple, and the great
Conflux of Strangers, whereby she grew rich in Wealth: what a Tempest was like
to be raised against this newborn Church, and is there any need to wonder that
we see the Apostles so often beaten, stoned, and left for dead among the
Populace? But a greater Interest was to move a greater Machine; the Interest of
the State was to stir up the Senate, the Romans, and the Emperors.

For a long time before the Decrees of the Senate had defended the strange
Religions, and the Emperors were entered into the same Policy; and in that
great Consultation about reforming the Abuses of the Government, Live. lib. 39.
etc. Orat. Maecen. ap. Dion. 52. Tertul. Apolog. 5. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. 2.2.
one of the principal Regulations that Mecaenas proposed to Augustus, was to
prevent Novelties in Religion which were always sure to cause dangerous
Commotions in States. The Maxim was true; for what is there that more violently
stirs up men's minds, and carries them out to more strange Excesses? But God was
resolved to make us see that the establishing of the true Religion did not
create such Troubles, and that was one great Token that he was interessed in
that work. For who can choose but wonder, when he considers that for three
hundred years together, whilst the Church was suffering all the Cruelties that
the Rage of Persecutors were able to invent, amidst so many Seditions, so many
Wars, and so many Conspiracies against the Persons of Emperors, Tertul. Apol.
35, 36, etc.
there should never be found so much as one single Christian, either good or
bad? The Christians challenged their greatest Enemies to name one; but they
could not find one out: so great a Veneration for those in Public Power and
Authority did the Doctrine of Christianity inspire them with, and so deep an
Impression did that Saying of our Savior make in their minds, Matthew. 22.21.
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are
Gods.

That beautiful distinction filled their minds with so clear a light, that
never did Christians fail in their respect to the Image of God in Princes, though
they were Persecutors of the Truth. That Character of Submission so shone in
all their Apologies, that they do to this day inspire those that read them with
a Love of Public Order, and do show that they expect only from God the
establishment of Christianity. Men so determined to death, that they filled the
whole Empire, and were in all the Armies, never made once an Escape, Tertul.
Apol. 37.
during those several Ages of Persecution: they forbad among themselves not
only Seditious Actions, but even Murmurings and Complaints. The finger of God
was in that work, and no other hand than his could have preserved those that
were driven to the last Extremities by so many Injustices.

Indeed it was hard for them to be treated as Public Enemies, and as Enemies
to Emperors; Those, I may say, who breathed nothing but Obedience, and whose
most devout and servent Prayers were still for the safety of their Princes, and
the happiness of the State. But the Roman Polity thought themselves attacked in
their Foundation, seeing they despised their Gods. Rome boasted of her being a
holy City by her Foundation, consecrated from her first beginning by Divine
Auspices, and dedicated by her Author to the God of War. She scarce believed
but that Jupiter was more present in the Capitol than in the Heavens. She
fancied she owed her Victories to her Religion, and by that had subdued both
Nations and their Gods, for so at that time was their reasoning: so that the
Roman Gods were to be superior to all other, the Romans were Masters of other
men. Cic. Orat. pro Flac. Orat. Sym. ad Imp. Val. Theodos. and Arc. ap. Amb.
tom. 5. l. 5. Ep. 30. Zozym. hist. lib. 3, 4, etc.
Rome, in subjecting Judea, reckoned the God of the Jews among those other Gods
she had vanquished: The desire of reigning, was the overthrow or the
Foundations of the Empire; the hating of the Victories and Power of the People
of Rome. Thus the Christians, who were Enemies of their Gods, were at the same
time looked upon as Enemies of the Republic. The Emperors took more care to
exterminate them, than to drive out the Parthians, the Marcomans, and the
Dacians. Christianity beaten down appeared in their Inscriptions with as great
pomp and triumph, as the Samaritans defeated. But they were out in their
Boastings, that they had destroyed a Religion which grew (though insensibly)
greater under its Persecution of Fire and the Sword. Calumnies in vain were
added to Cruelty. Men who were virtuous in their Practices even above Mankind,
were yet condemned as being guilty of those Vices which are a shock and horror
to Humane Nature. Those were reproached for incestuous Persons who made
Chastity to be the glory of their Lives; and others were accused of eating up
their own Children, who were kind and beneficent to their very Persecutors. But
notwithstanding all that public hatred, the force and power of truth drew from
the mouths of their most violent Enemies very favorable Testimonies of them.
Plin. l. 10. Ep. 97.
Every one knows what Pliny the younger writ to Trajan concerning the Behavior
of the Christians. They were justified, but yet they were not exempted from the
severest Punishments: for thus it behoved them to undergo this worst of
treatment to effect in them the Image of their crucified Jesus, and they ought,
as he did, to go to their Cross with a public declaration of their spotlese
Innocence.

Idolatry did not put all its force to the last violence. Although its
Foundation was a brutish Ignorance, and an entire deprivation of Humane Sense,
yet it was willing to set it off with the color of some Reason. How often has
it endeavored to be in disguise and masque? and in how many ways has it been
transformed, that so the shame of it may be concealed? Sometimes it was for
paying all imaginable respect to the Divinity; saying whatsoever was Divine,
must needs be unknown: For only the Divinity can understand it self. It Is not
for such grovelling Dust as we to discover things so high and elevated;
wherefore it becomes us to believe the Ancients; and every one ought to follow
the Religion he finds by Law established in his Country. And by these Maxims,
those gross, as well as impious Errors, which had spead themselves over all the
habitable World, were remediless, and the voice of Nature, which declared the
true God, was stifled, and not allowed to speak.

There was then great ground to think that the weakness of our strayed Reason
had need of an Authority to call it back to its first Principle; and that it
ought from Antiquity to learn the true Religion. Thus have you seen the
continued constant course and pro^ress of it from the very beginning of the
World. But from what Antiquity can Paganism boast it self, which cannot read its
own History, but in them must find the Original not only of its Religion, but
also of its Gods? De nature. Deorum. lib. 1. and 3.
Varro and Cicero, not to mention other Authors, have sufficiently made this
plain. Or shall we have recourse to those numberless Thousands of Years which
were filled up by the Egyptians with confused and impertinent Fables, for the
establishing of that Antiquity, of which they boasted so much? There we shall
still see in them the Rise and Fall, the Birth and Death of the Gods of Egypt;
and that People cannot pretend to their Antientness, but they must at the same
time show us the beginning of their Gods.

But let us see another Form and Manner of Idolatry, that directed every one
that went by us to be looked on as Divine. The Roman Polity, which so severely
interdicted strange Religions, yet permitted Adoration to be given to the Gods
of the Barbarians, so that it had adopted tliem. Thus it endeavored to appear
equitable as well toward all Gods as toward all Men. Sometimes it offered
Incense to the God of the Jews together with all the rest. Jul. Ep. ad comm.
Judaeor.
And we find a Letter of Julian the Apostate, whereby he promises the Jews to
re-build the Holy City, and with them to sacrifice to God the Creator of the
Universe. 'Twas a common Error. We have seen the Heathen willing to worship the
true God, though not to worship him alone; and the Emperors did not stick even to
give Jesus Christ himself, whose Disciples they persecuted, some Altars among
the Romans.

What then? Could the Romans ever imagine they should honor him as God, whom
their Magistrates had condemned to the cruellest, as well as the vilest of
Punishments, and whom several of their Authors have loaded with very
reproachful Calumnies? And yet we need not wonder at it, for the thing is
beyond all Controversy.

First let us distinguish what in general a blind Hatred says, from positive
Facts the Proofs whereof are alleged. It Is certain that the Romans, though
they condemned Jesus Christ, yet never reproached him for any Crime in
particular: So Pilate condemned him with Repugnance, being violently carried
away by the Clamors and Menaces of the Jews. But that which is more to be
wondered at, is, the Jews themselves, at whose Importunities he was crucified,
have not preserved in any other of their ancient Books, the Remembrance of any
one single Action which might cast a Blemish upon his Life; so far have they
been from observing any that might make him to deserve so severe a Punishment
as his Crucifixion; whereby is confirmed in a most plain and manifest manner
what we read in the Gospel, that all the Crime of our Lord was, for calling
himself Christ, the Son of God.

Indeed Tacitus tells us of the Punishment of our blessed Savior under Pontius
Pilate, and during the Empire of Tiberius, but says not a word of any Crime
that might make him worthy of Death, but only that of being the Author of a
Sect convicted for hating Mankind, or at least for being odious to it. Such was
the Crime of our Savior Jesus Christ, and of the Christians; and their
greatest Enemies could never accuse them but in dubious terms, for they were
never able to allege one positive Fact as could fairly be imputed to them.

It Is true, in the last Persecution, and three hundred Years after Christ, the
Heathen who were at a loss how then to lay any Reproach either upon him or his
Disciples, published some ^^w. Acts of Pilate, by which they pretended th y saw
the Crimes for which he had been crucified. But as not a word of those Acts
were ever heard spoke of in all the precedent Ages, and that neither under
Nero, nor under Domitian, who reigned in the beginning of Christianity, how
great Enemies soever they were of it, there is nothing at all sound concerning
them; it is very probable they were made out of their own Fancy; and among the
Romans there are found so few constant Proofs of Jesus Christ, that his Enemies
have been forced to fly to their Inventions to make some.

Here then is one and the first thing to be considered of, the Innocence of our
Blessed Savior irreproachable. Let us now subjoin a second, the Holiness of
his Life, and his known and exemplary Doctrine. One of the greatest Roman
Emperors, to wit, Lamprid. in Alex. Sev. c. 45.51.
Alexander Severus, admired our Lord, and caused to be written in the public
Works as well as in his Palace, some Sentences of his Gospel. The same Emperor
commended, and proposed for an Example, the holy Precautions wherewith the
Christians ordained the Ministers of Sacred things. That was not all neither:
There was seen in his Palace a kind of Chapel, where he sacrificed in the
Morning. Ibid. c. 29.31.
He had consecrated the Images of Holy Souls, among which he placed with
Orpheus, Jesus Christ and Abraham. He had another Chapel, which we will
translate from the latin Word Lararium, a private Chapel, of less Dignity than
the former, wherein were set up the Image of Achilles, and some other great
Men; but Jesus Christ was placed in the (...) Rank. It was a Heathen who wrote
it, and he cites for his Witness an Author that lived in Alexander's time. Here
then are two Witnesses of this same Fact, and you shall have another no less
surprising.

Porph. 1. of Phil. by Orac. Eusebius. them. Ev. 3.8. Aug. de Civit. Dei 19. c. 23.
Though Porphyry, in abjuring Christianity, had declared himself an Enemy to it,
yet he forbears not in his Book entitled, Philosophy by Oracles, to affirm,
that some of them were very favorable to the Holiness of Jesus Christ.

God forbid that we may not learn by the deceitful Oracles, the Glory of the
Son of God, who silenced them at his Birth. Those Oracles cited by Porphyry are
pure Inventions: But it is good to know what the Heathen made their Gods to say
of our Lord. Porphyry then assures that there were Oracles, where Jesus Christ
was called a Man Pious, and worthy of Immortality; and on the contrary, the
Christians were impure and seduced People. He afterward recites the Oracle of
the Goddess Hecate, where she speaks of Jesus Christ, as of a Man illustrio^s
by his Piety, whose Body indeed submitted to Torments, but whose Soul is in
Heaven with the Souls of the Blessed. That Soul, said Porphyry's Goddess, by a
kind of Fatality inspired Error into those Minds wherein Destiny has not
confirmed the Gifts of the Gods, and the Knowledge of the great Jupiter; which
makes them Enemies of the Gods. But be very careful how you blame him, goes she
on in speaking of Jesus Christ, and be sure only to accuse the Error of those
whose unhappy destiny I have related to you. Very pompous and magnificent
Words, and absolutely void of all Sense, but however they show that the Glory
and Honor of our Lord forced his very Enemies to give him Praises.

But besides the Innocence and Holiness of our blessed Savior, there is yet a
third Point which is of no less Moment and Importance, and that is his
Miracles. It is certain that the Jews never denied them; and we find in their
Talmud some of those which his Disciples wrought in his Name. Only, Tr. de
Idololat. and Com. in Eccl. Tr. de Sabb. c. 12. l. generat. Jesu seu Hist.
Jesu. Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2.
the more to obscure and hide them, they said that he had done them by the
Enchantments he had learnt in Egypt; or rather by the name of God, that unknown
and ineffable Name, whose Virtue can do all thing, as the Jews themselves
acknowledge, and that Jesus Christ had discovered they know not how, in the
Sanctuary; or else, because he was one of those Prophets taken notice of by
Moses, whose deceitful Miracles were to seduce the People to Idolatry. Jesus
Christ, the Abolisher of Idols, whose Gospel preached up the acknowledging of
one only God throughout all the World, stands in no need of being justified
from that Reproach; the true Prophets have no less preached up his Divinity
than he has done himself; and that which is the Result of the Jewish
Testimony, is that Jesus Christ wrought Miracles to justify his Mission.

Now when they calumniously said that he wrought them by Magic, they would do
well to consider that Moses was accused of the same Crime. 'Twas the ancient
Opinion of the Egyptians, who being astonished at the wondrous things that God
had done in their Country by that great Man, ranked him in the number of the
principal Magicians.

We may likewise see this Opinion in Pliny and Apuleius, where Moses was found
named with Jannes and Jambres, those famous Inchanters of Egypt, of whom St.
Paul speaks, and whom M^ses had confounded by his Miracles. Plin. 30.1. Apul.
Apol. 2. Zim. 3.8.
But the Answer of the Jews was easy. The Illusions of the Magicians never have
a lasting Effect, neither do they tend to establish, as Moses did, the Worship
of the true God, and holiness of Life: To which we may also add that God knows
very well how to make himself Master, by doing such Works as the Power of the
Enemy cannot imitate. The same Reasons placed Jesus Christ above so vain an
Accusation, which, as we have already observed, was only i^strumental to
justify that his Miracles are incontestable.

They were in effect so powerful, that the Gentiles could never disprove them
no more than the Jews. Cels^s, that great Enemy of the Christians, and who
attacked them in the earliest Days with all imaginable Address and Subtlety,
seeking with a most industrious Scrutiny whatsoever might turn to their
Prejudice, has not been so hardy as to deny all the Miracles of our Lord: He
was for shifting them off, by saying with the Jews that Jesus Christ had learnt
the Secrets of the Egyptians, that is to say, Magic, Orig. cont. Cells. 1. 2.
and so would fain attribute the Divinity to himself, by the Miracles which he
wrought by virtue of that damnable Art. Orig. ibid. and in Act. Mart. passim.
Jul. ap. Cyr. lib. 6. ^p. Aug. tom. 2. Ep. 3.4.
And for the same Reason also were the Christians looked on as Magicians; and
we have a Passage of Julian the Apostate, who laughed at the Miracles of our
Lord, but who for all that did not bring them into Question. Volusian, in his
Epistle to St. Austin, has done the same, and that Discourse was grown common
among the Heathen.

Therefore we need not be astonished, that they who were so used to make Gods
of all Men in whom there appeared any thing particular and extraordinary, would
set up Jesus Christ too among their Divinities. Tiberius, upon the Relations
were sent to him from Judea, proposed to the Senate to give divine Honors unto
Jesus Christ. This was not a Fancy in the Air, Tertull. Apolog. 5. Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. 2.2.
for Tertullian reports it as a thing public and n^torious in his Apologetick
which he presented to the Senate in the name of the Church, who to be sure
would not have contributed any thing to the weakening of so good a Cause as
his, by Stories which might have been confuted with so much ease and evidence.
If we would have the Testimony of a Heathen Author, Lampridius will tell us
that Adrian had erected Temples to Jesus Christ, which were then to be seen at
the time when he wrote; and that Alexander Severus, after he had done him
Reverence in particular, was resolved publicly to prepare him Altars, and to
put him in the number of the Gods.

It is certainly a great piece of Injustice not to be willing to believe any
thing concerning Jesus Christ, but what those write of him that were none of
his Disciples: This is to seek for Faith among the Incredulous, or Care and
Exactness among those who, having their Heads full of other Matters, look upon
Religion as a thing indifferent. But for all that it is most certain that the
Glory of Jesus Christ shone with so great and dazzling a Brightness, that the
World was never able to desist giving him some Testimonies; and I know not how
to relate to you any more Authentic than that of so many Emperors.

I confess however, they had still another design. There was a mixture of
Polity in all the Honors they paid to our Savior, they gave insinuatingly
out that at length Religions would be united, and that the Gods of all Sexes
would be joined in common. The Christians nevertheless would not acknowledge
this Hotchpotch way of Worship, and they did no less despise the Condescensions
than the Severities of the Roman Polity. But God was resolved that the
Heathens from another Principle should reject the Temples which the Emperors
had set apart to Jesus Christ. The Priests of the Idols, according to the
Relation of that Heathen Author already so often cited, declared to the Emperor
Adrian, Ibid.
that if be consecrated those Temples built for the use and Service of the
Christians, all the other Temples would utterly be forsaken, and all the World
would embrace the Christian Religion. Idolatry it self felt such a victorious
force and energy in our Religion, as that the false Gods would never be able to
stand up against it, and of it justified of its own accord the truth of that
Saving of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.15, 16.
what Concord has Christ with Belial, or what part has he that believes with
an Infidel? and what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols.

Thus by the Power of the Cross did the Heathen Religion, confounded by it
self, fall to ruin: and the Unity of G^d was so established, that at length
Idolatry was at no great distance from it. Macrob. 1. Sat. 17. ^ seq. Apul. de
Deo Soc. Aug. de Civ. 4. 10, 11.
It said that the divine Nature was so great and extensive that it could not be
expressed either by one single name, or under one single form; but that
Jupiter, and Mars, and Juno, and the other Gods were at the Bottom but one and
the same God, whose infinite Virtues were explained and represented by so many
differe t words. When afterward they were driven to the Impure Histories of
their Gods, to their infamous Genealogies, to their immodest Loves, and to
their Feasts and Mysteries which were built upon no other Foundation, than
those prodigious Fables and Romances, then all Religion was turned
in-Allegories: The World or the Sun they found then out to be this only God; it
was the Stars, the Air, the Fire, the Water, and the Earth, and their several
Conjunctions that were hid under the Names of the Gods, and in their Armours. A
weak and miserable Refuge; for besides their Fables being all scandalous, and
all their Allegations cold and forced, what found they out at last, but that
that only God was the Universe with all its parts, so that the bottom of
Religion was Nature, and always the Creature adored instead of the Creator?

O (...). C^^. li^. ^, 6, etc.
The weak excuses of Idolatry, though drawn from the Philosophy of the Stoics,
yet did not satisfy and please enough the Philosophers. Celsus and Porphyry
sought for new succors in the Doctrines of Plato and Pythagoras, and you shall
see how they conciliated the Unity of God, with the multiplicity of the vulgar
Gods. That was, they said, Plat. Conv. Tim. etc. Porphyr. l. 2. de abstin.
Apul. de Deo Socr. Aug. de Civ. 8.14. and seq. 18.21, 22.9.3.6, etc.
but one Sovereign God: but he was so great, that he did not concern himself
with trivial matters. Being pleased that he had made the Heaven and the Stars,
he had not at all given his assistance to the making of this lower World, but
had left it to be fashioned by its secundary causes; and Man, though born to know
and to confess him, yet because he was Mortal, was not a work any ways becoming
or worthy his hands. He was likewise inaccessible to our Nature, he was lodged
too high for us, the heavenly Spirits that had made us, were to be as Mediators
to him for us, and therefore were we to worship and adore them.

It is not worth ones while to refute these opinions, Aug. Ep. 3. ad Volus. etc.
and fanciful dreamings of the Platonists; which indeed do fall of themselves.
The Mystery of Jesus Christ, tore them up by the roots. That Mystery taught
Men, that God, who had made them after his own Image, had no thoughts of
despising them, that if they stood in need of a Mediator, it was not by reason
of their Nature, which God had made like unto all others, but by reason of
their Sin, of which they themselves were the only Authors: but since their
Nature had not put them at a very ^reat distance from God, God disdained not to
unite himself to them, by making himself Man, and he gave unto them for a
Mediator, not those Heavenly Spirits which the Philosophers called Demons, and
the Scripture Angels; but a Man, who superadding the Power of a God to our
infirm Nature, made himself a Sovereign Remedy for all our weakness.

But if the Pride of the Platonists could not be brought down to the
Humiliations of the Word made Flesh, might they not at least be brought to
understand that Man, for being but little lower than the Angels, was as capable
of possessing God as they, so that he was rather their Brother than their
Subject, and therefore he ought not to adore them, but to adore with them in
the Spirit of Society, him who had made them both after his own Image and
resemblance? 'Twas then not only too mean a thing, but too ungrateful for
Mankind, to sacrifice to any other than to God, and nothing was so blind as
Paganism, which instead of reserving Supreme Worship to it self, so freely gave
it to so many Demons, or Idols.

Here it was that Idolatry, which seemed to be at a full Stand, did entirely
discover its Weakness. Toward the end of the Persecution, Porphyry being
pressed by the Christians, was forced to confess that the Sacrifice was not the
Supreme Worship; and do but mind how far he pushed on his Extravagance. That
most high God, said he, did not receive Sacrifice; Porphyr. lib. 2. de
abstinen. Aug. de Civ. 10.
for whatsoever has matter is impure to him, and cannot be offered to him. The
Word it self is not to be employed in his Worship, because the voice is a thing
that is corporal; we are to adore him in silence, and by simple thoughts; all
other Worship is unworthy of so high a Majesty.

Thus God was too great to be be praised. It was a Crime to express, as well as
we are able, what we think of his Greatness. Sacrifice, though it be only a way
of declaring our absolute dependence on, and an acknowledgment of his
Sovereignty, yet is not fit to be paid to him. Porphyry said so expressly, and
what is that else but to abolish all Religion, and to leave him wholly without
Worship whom however we acknowledge to be the God of Gods?

But what then were those Sacrifices which the Gentiles offered in all the
Temples? Porphyry had found out the secret of them: There were, Porphyr. 2. de
abstin. Lab. aapud Aug. 8. de Civ. 13.
says he, impure Spirits, Deceivers, Evil doers, who through an extravagant
Pride would needs be accounted as Gods, and would make themselves be worshipped
by men. It was convenient to gratify them for fear they should do us any hurt.
Some more gay and jolly, were wro^ght upon by Spe^tacles and Plays; the more
melancholy and reserved Humors of others were pleased with fat Odours, and
delighted in bloody Sacrifices. What does it signify to refuse these
Absurdities? there was so much that the Christians gained their cause. This was
certain, that all the Gods to whom the Gentiles offered up Sacrifices, were
Evil Spirits, whose Pride attributed the Godhead to themselves: so that
Idolatry, to look upon it in it self, seemed only to be the effect of a brutish
Ignorance; but to come up to the Source and Original of it, it was a work
brought from far, driven on to the last Excesses by malicious Spirits. 'Twas
what the Christians had always pretended, what the Gospel had taught, and what
the Psal^ist so truly sang in these words, Psalm 96.5.
for all the Gods of the Nations are Idols, but the Lord made in Heavens.

And beh^ld here the strange blindness of Mankind! Idolatry, though it was
reduced to extremity, and confounded by it self, yet it was kept up in the
World. It was only to cloth it with some probability, and explain it in words
which carried a sound with them that charmed the ear, and was enough to
captivate the mind. Porphyry was admired. Jamblicus his follower was esteemed
as a man divine, because he had the art of wrapping up the Sentiments of his
Master in terms that were seemingly very mysterious, though in truth they were of
no weight at all. Julian the Apostate, as cunning as he was, was taken by those
appearances, which the Heathens themselves relate. Enchantments, whether true
or false, which the Philosophers boasted of, their ill-understood Austerity,
their ridiculous Abstinence which even made it a crime to eat living Creatures,
Ennap. Maxim. Oribas. Chrysanth. Ep. Jul. ad Jamb. Am. Marcell. l. 21, 23, 25.
their superstitious Purifications, in a word, their Contemplation which
evaporated it self in vain thoughts and Chim^ra's, and their words as little
weighty as they seemed pompous and swelling, put the cheat upon the World. But
yet I do not speak the bottom of all. The holiness of the Christians behavior,
the contempt of the Pleasures that it commanded, and what is yet more than all,
the Humility which made up (as it were) the whole of the Christian Life, these
things offended Mankind; and if we can comprehend it, Pride, Sensuality, and
Libertinism were the only Guards and Defenses of Idolatry.

The Church was every day pulling it up by the Roots by her Doctrine, but yet
more by her Patience. Yet those wicked Spirits who were never weary of
deceiving men, and who had plunged them into Idolatry, were not now forgetful
of their Malice. They started up those Heresies in the Church which you have
heard of. The curious and inquisitive men, and by that means vain and fickle,
and lovers of novelty, would fain get to themselves a name among the faithful,
and could not be contented with that sober and temperate Wisdom which the
Apostle had so much recommended to the Christians. They launched too deep into
those Mysteries which they pretended to measure out to our weak conceptions:
New Philosophers that mingled Humane Reasonings with Faith, and undertook to
lessen the difficulties of Christianity, being able to digest all that folly
which the World found in the Gospel. Thus successively, and with a kind of
Method, were all the Articles of our Faith assaulted: the Creation, the Law of
Moses a necessary Foundation of ours, the Divinity of Jesus Christ, his
Incarnation, his Grace, his Sacraments, in short every thing occasioned matters
for those scandalous Divisions. Orig. lib. 5. cont. Cells.
Celsus and others reproached us for them. Idolatry seemed to ride in triumph.
It looked on Christianity as a new Sect of Philosophy which had the fate of all
others, and like them dwindled away of it self into several other Sects. The
Church seemed to them but a Humane Work that was ready to fall of it self. And
they concluded that it was not necessary in matters of Religion to refine more
than our Ancestors, nor to attempt to change the World.

In this Confusion of Sects which boasted themselves to be Christians, God
wanted not his Church. He knew how to preserve to it a Character of Authority
which Heresies were not able to master. It was Catholic and Universal: it
continued throughout all times, and extended it self on all sides. Jer. 3.1, 2,
3, 4. Tertul. de Carn. Chapter 2. de praescrip. 20, 21, 32. 36.
It was Apostolic, the Progress, Succession, the Chair of Unity, and Primitive
Authority belonged to it. All those who had forsaken it, first had acknowledged
it, and could not efface the Character of their Novelty, nor that of their
Rebellion. The Heathens themselves looked on it as that which was the Stem, the
whole from whence all the parcels were detached, the ever-living Trunk which
the lo^^ off Branches however left entire. Celsus, who reproached the
Christians for their divisions into so many Schismatical Churches which he saw
rise up, yet observed one Church distinct from all the rest, and always
stronger, which he also called for that reason the great Church. There are
some, Orig. lib. 1.
says he, among the Christians who do not acknowledge the Creator, nor the
Traditions of the Jews, meaning the Marcionites, but, goes he on, the great
Church receives them. In the trouble which Paul of Samosata stirred up, the
Emperor Aurelian easily knew which was the true Christian Church, to which
belonged the House of the Church, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 30.
either because it was the place of Prayer, or else the House of the Bishop. He
adjudged it to those who were in Communion with the Bishops of Italy, and that
of Rome, because he always saw the Gross of Christians in that Communion. When
the Emperor Constance embroyled all in the Church, the Confusion he made in it
by protecting the Arrians, could not keep Ammianus Marcellinus, as much a
Heathen as he was, from confessing that that Emperor strayed out of the right
way of the Christian Religion, Am. Marcel. l. 21.
simple and particular by it self, both in his Dogmata and Conduct. And it was
because the true Church had a Majesty and a Right, which the Heresies could
neither imitate, nor obscure: but on the contrary, they bore testimony to the
Catholic Church, though at the same time they never thought they did so.
Constance, who persecuted St. Athanasius, the Defender of the Ancient Faith,
ardently desired, says Ammianus Marcellinus, Id. lib. 15.
to get him condemned by the Authority which the Bishop of Rome had over the
others. By seeking to support himself with that Authority, he made the Heathens
themselves sensible of what was wanting to his Sect, and honored the Church
from which the Arrians had departed; thus the Gentiles themselves acknowledged
the Catholic Church. If any one asked them where they kept their Assemblies,
and who were their Bishops, they never deceived them. As for Heresies,
whatsoever they made, they could never get rid of the name of then Authors. The
Sabellians, the Paulianists, the Arrians, the Pelagians, and the rest, were
scandalized in vain at the title of the Faction which was given to them. The
World, whatsoever they could do, would speak naturally, and designed every Sect
by him from whom it first sprung. As for the great Church, the Catholic and
Apostolic Church, it was always impossible to affix any other Author to it
than Jesus Christ himself, nor to assign to it the first of its Pastors without
going up as high as to the very Apostles, nor to give it any other name than
what it had before taken. So that what Heretics soever were made, they could
not conceal it from the Heathens. She opened to them her Bosom all ^he World
over; and they ran to her in troops. Some of them were possibly lost in the
Bypath, but the Catholic Church was the great way wherein entered always most
of those who sought after Jesus Christ; and Experience has sufficiently
discovered, that to her it was given to bring in the fullness of the Gentiles.
Her also it was whom the unbelieving Emperors attacked with all their power
and force. Orig. cont. Cells. 7. Just. Apol. 2.
Origin tells us that few of the Heretics were sufferers for the Faith. St.
Justin, more ancient than he, has observed that the Persecution spared the
Marcionites, and the other Heretics. The Heathens only persecuted that Church
which they saw spread her self over the face of the whole Earth, and only
acknowledged her self for the Church of Jesus Christ. What matters it to pull
off some of the Branches? her good Sap was not lost for all that: she went into
other places, and the cutting down the superfluous Wood served but to make the
Fruit come better. In fine, if we consider the History of the Church, we shall
always find that when ever one Heresy impaired it, she recovered her losses,
both by enlarging outwardly, and increasing inwardly light and piety, whilst
she beheld in some distant Corners the cut off Branches to dry and wither. The
work of man was perished, notwithstanding the power of Hell to support it; the
work of God has continued; and the Church has triumphed over Idolatry, and all
Errors whatsoever.

THIS Church, so always attacked, XIII. General Reflections on the Progress of
Religion, and the relation there is between the Books of the Scripture.
yet never overcome, is a perpetual Miracle, and a clear and shining Testimony
of the Immutability of the Divine Councils. In the midst of the agitation of
Humane Affairs she still supported her self with an invincible force, so that
by an uninterrupted course for near these seventeen hundred years, do we see
her come up even to Jesus Christ, in whom she has collected the Succession of
the ancient People, and was found reunited to the Prophets and Patriarchs.

And so many astonishing Miracles which the Hebrews of old saw with their eyes,
do still serve at this day to confirm our Faith. That great God who wrought
them for a Testimony of his Unity and his Almightiness, what could he do more
authentic to preserve the memory of them, than to leave in the hands of so
great a People the Acts which punctually attest them in order of time? this is
what we now have in the Books of the Old Testament; that is to say, in the most
ancient Books that are in the World, in those Books which are the only ones of
Antiquity, where the knowledge of the true God is taught, and his service
ordained; in those Books which the Jews have always so religiously kept. It Is
certain that they were the only People who originally knew God the Creator of
Heaven and Earth; and consequently the only People to whom the Divine Secrets
were to be committed. They also kept them with a most religious care. Those
Books which the Egyptians and the other People called Divine, are lost long
since, and there scarce remains so much as any confused Remembrance of them in
ancient Histories. The sacred Books of the Romans, wherein Numa the Author of
their Religion had written the Mysteries of them, are perished even by the
hands of the Romans themselves, and the Senate commanded them to be burnt, as
tending to the overthrow of Religion. And those same Romans at last suffered
likewise the Books of the Sibyls, Tit. Live. li. 40. c. 29. Varr. l. de Cult.
Deor ap. Aug. de Civ. 12. 34.
to be destroyed which were for so long time reverenced by them as Prophetical,
and wherein they would make the World believe that they found the Decrees of
the Immortal Gods concerning their Empire, and yet notwithstanding they never
published, I do not say one single Volume, but so much as one single Oracle. It
has been only the Jews who have had the Sacred Scriptures in so much the
greater Veneration, as they were the more known. Of all the ancient People,
these alone preserved the Primitive Monuments of their Religion, albeit they so
fully gave testimony of their Infidelity, with that of their Ancestors. And at
this very day do this People still remain upon the Earth, to carry into all
Nations where they are dispersed, together with the course and progress of
their Religion, the Miracles and Predictions which render it immovable.

When Jesus Christ was come, and sent by his Father to accomplish the Promises
of the Law, he confirmed his Mission, and that of his Disciples by new
Miracles, which have been also written with the same exactness. The Acts of
them have been published all the World over; the Circumstances of Time,
Persons, and Places have made the Examen easy to all that have been careful of
their Salvation. The World was informed, the World has believed, and if we have
but ever so little considered the ancient Monuments of the Church, we must avow
that never has any thing been determined with more of reflection and knowledge.

But as to the Relation which the Books of the two Testaments have to one
another, there is one difference to be considered, that is, that the Books of
the ancient People were composed at diverse times. Some are the times of Moses;
others those of Joshua and the Judges; and others of the Kings; some are those
when the People were brought out of Egypt, and received the Law; others those
when they obtained the promised Land; and others those when they were
re-established by visible Miracles. To convince the incredulity of a People who
were wholly devoted to their Senses, God took a long extent of Ages in which he
distributed his Miracles and his Prophets, that so he might often renew the
sensible Testimonies by which he attested his holy Truths. In the New Testament
he tooks another conduct. He would no more reveal any thing anew to his Church
after Jesus Christ. In him was perfection and fullness; and all the Divine Books
that have been composed in the New Testament, were made in the times of the
Apostles.

That is to say, that the Testimony of Jesus Christ, and of those whom Jesus
Christ has been pleased to choose for the Witnesses of his Resurrection has
been sufficient for the Christian Church. All that has come since has edified
it, but it has not been looked upon as purely inspired by God, but what the
Apostles have written, or what they have confirmed by their Authority.

But in that difference which is found between the Books of the two Testaments,
God has always observed that admirable order, of making things to be written
just at the times when they happened, or at least when the memory of them was
very fresh. And so those that knew them, wrote them: those that knew them
received the Books which bore witness of them: and both the one and the other
have left them to their Posterity as a most precious and invaluable
Inheritance; and they most carefully and piously have preserved them.

And thus was formed the Body of the Holy Scriptures, as well the Old as the
New Testament: Scriptures, which from their Original have been regarded as true
in the whole, as given by God himself, and which have been also kept with that
great Religion, that it was thought none could dare to alter the least Letter
of it without a strange Impiety.

And thus it was that they came down to us, always holy, always sacred, always
inviolable; the one kept by the constant Tradition of the Jews, and the other
by the Tradition of the Christians, so much the more certain as it was
confirmed by the Blood and Martyrdom, as well of those who wrote those Divine
Books, as of them that received 'em.

St. Austin and the other Fathers demand upon whose Faith we attribute the
profane Books to certain Times and Authors. Aug. cont. Faust. 11. 2. 32. 21.
33. 6.
Every one readily answers, that the Books are distinguished by the different
Relations they have to the Laws, Customs, and Histories of a certain Time, by
the Style it self, which bears impressed the Character of particular Ages and
Authors; and more than all that, Iren. 1.2.17. Tertul. adv. Marc. 4. l. 4, 5.
Aug. de utilit. ced. 3. 17. cont. Faust. Manich. 22. 79. 28. 4. 32. 33. Cont.
adv. leg. and Porph. 1. 20. etc.
by the public Faith, and by a constant Tradition. All these things concur to
the establishment of the Divine Books, to distinguish the Times, and to mark
out the Authors of them; and the more Religion there was in preserving them
entire, the more indisputable is the Tradition which preserved them for us.

Thus hat it been always acknowledged, not only by the Orthodox, but also by
Heretics, and even by Infidels. Moses has ever passed in all the East, and
afterward in all the World, for the Legislator of the Jews, and for being the
Author of those Books that are attributed to him. The Samaritans, who had
received them from the ten separated Tribes, have as religiously kept them as
the Jews. You have seen their Tradition and their History.

Two People so opposite took them not one from the other, but both received
them from their Common Original in the Times of Solomon and David. The ancient
Hebrew Characters, which the Samaritans still retain, do sufficiently show that
they have not followed Esdras, who changed them. Thus the Pentateuch of the
Samaritans, and that of the Jews, are two complete Originals, independent one
on the other. The perfect conformity that is seen in the substance of the
Texts, justifies the Sincerity of both those People. They are faithful
Witnesses that agree without understanding one another, or to speak better, who
agree together notwithstanding all their Enmities, V. sup. 1. part. p. 24, 25,
34, 49, 59, 63, 80, 86, 87.
and which only Immemorial Tradition of both Parties has united in the same
mind.

Those therefore who say, though without any reason, that those Books being lost,
or having never been, were set up, or composed a new, or altered by Esdras;
besides their being contradicted by Esdras himself, as may very well be
observed in the course of his History, are likewise so by the Pentateuch, which
is even now at this day to be seen in the hands of the Samaritans, so as it had
been read in the first Agas by Eusebius of Cesaria, St. Jerome, and the other
Ecclesiastical Author; so as those People had kept it in their Original: and a
Sect so weak as that seems not to continue so long, but to bear this Testimony
to the Antiquity of Moses.

The Authors that wrote the four Evangelists received no less assured Testimony
from the unanimous consent of the Faithful, the Heathens, and the Heretics.
That great Number of various People who received and translated those Divine
Books as soon as they were made, agree in their date and in their Authors. The
Heathens have not contradicted this Tradition. Nor Colsus, who attacked those
Sacred Books even in the first beginning of Christianity; nor Julian the
Apostate, though he was neither ignorant of any thing, nor omitted any thing that
might descredit them; nor has any other Heathen ever suspected them to be
supposititious; but on the contrary, they have all given them the same Authors
as the Christians. The Heretics, although they were confounded by the
Authority of those Books, yet durst not say that they were not of the Disciples
of our Lord. Nay some of those Heretics saw the beginnings of the Church, and
before whose eyes were written the Books of the Gospel. So that fraud, if there
could possibly be any, would have appeared too near to have been success^ul.
It Is true, after the time of the Apostles, and when the Church was already
spread over the face of the Earth, Marcion and Man's always the most rash, and
the most ignorant of all the Heretics, notwithstanding the Tradition coming
from the Apostles, continued by their Disciples, and by the Bishops to whom
they had left their Chair and the Conduct of the People, and unanimously
received by all the Christian Church, were so bold as to say that there
Evangelists were supposititious, and that that of St. Luke, which they
preferred to all the others, they knew not why since it came by no other way,
had been falsified. But what proofs gave they of this? nothing but mere
Visions, no positive Matters of Fact. All the reason they gave was, that what
was contrary to their Sentiments, must necessarily have been invented by others
than by the Apostles, and, for all their proof, they alleged the very Opinions
which were in Controversy: Opinions otherwise so extravagant, and so
manifestly mad, that it is not to be imagined how they could ever enter into
the mind of man to conceive. But certainly to accuse the Sincerity of the
Church, one must have in ones hands Originals quite different from those of
hers, or some demonstrative proof. But they and their Disciples being called
upon to produce some, they are struck dumb, and have left by their Silence an
undoubted proof, that in the second Age of Christianity in which they wrote,
there was not only an Index and manifest signification of Falsity in them,
Iren. Tertul. Aug. loc. cit.
but there was not the least Conjecture that could be opposed to the Tradition
of the Church.

What shall I say of the Consent and Harmony that is to be found in the Books
of the Scripture, and of that admirable Testimony which all the Times of the
People of God gave one to the other? The Times of the Second Temple presuppose
those of the First, and carry us back to Solomon. Peace was only established by
Combats and Fightings, and the Conquests of God's People return us to the Times
of the Judges, to Joshuah, and to the Children of Israel's coming out of Egypt.
In reflecting upon an entire People's coming out of a Kingdom where they were
Strangers, we shall remember how they got in thither. The twelve Patriarchs
appeared immediately, and a People that were never looked upon but as one
single Family, leads us naturally up to Abraham, who was the Main-stock of it.
Were those People more wise, and less addicted to Idolatry after their return
out of Babylon? It was the natural effect of a severe Chastisement, which their
own past Offenses had drawn upon them. If that People boasted that they had
several Ages seen Miracles which never other People had seen, they might also
boast that they had had the knowledge of God which no other People had. What
would any have Circumcision, the Feast of Tabernacles, the Passover, and the
other celebrated Feasts in the Nation Time out of mind to signify, if not the
things we find taken notice of in the Books of Moses? that a People
distinguished from all others, by a Religion, and by a Carriage so very
peculiar, who had kept from its Original upon the Foundation of Creation, and
upon the Faith of Providence, a Doctrine so followed and elevated, a so lively
Remembrance of a long Succession of Facts so necessarily chained together,
Ceremonies so regulated, and Customs so universal, should be without a History
to recount their Origin, and without a Law to prescribe Customs to them for a
thousand years whilst it continued in that Estate, and that Esdras should all
on the sudden begin to give them under the Name of Moses, with a History of
their Antiquities, the Law that should form their Manners, when that People who
were then made Captives beheld their ancient Monarchy utterly thrown down;
what more incredible Romance could any one ever invent? And is it possible for
any one to give Credit to it, with joining at the same time Ignorance to
Blasphemy?

To lose such a Law, after one has received it, either a People ought to be
quite exterminated, or else, through diverse Changes, be brought to such a pass
that they have nothing but a confused Idea of their Original, Religion, and
Customs. If that Misery happened to the Jews, and that the Law so well known
under Zedekiah should be totally lost sixty Years after, notwithstanding all
the industrious Care of Ezekiel, Jeremiah, Baruch, and Daniel, without
reckoning up the rest, and in the time too when this Law had its Martyrs, as
the Persecution of Dan^el and the three Children do plainly demonstrate; If, I
say, that holy Law was lost in so short a time, and was so profoundly forgot
till Esdras was permitted to re-establish it according to his own Fancy, that
was not the only Book which ought to be made them: For he ought at the same
time to compose all the Prophets both old and new, that is to say, those who
had written both before and during the Captivity; those that the People had
seen write, as well as those which they very well remembered; not only the
Prophets, but also the Books of Solomon, and the Psalms of Dav^d, and all the
Books of History, since, in that whole History there can scarce be found one
single considerable matter of Fact, and in all those other Books so much as one
Chapter, which being taken out of the Books of Moses, such as we have 'em, can
subsist one Moment. Everything there speaks of Moses, every thing there is
sounded upon Moses; and indeed every thing ought to be so, for that Moses and
his Law, and the History which he wrote was effectually in the Jews all the
Foundation both of their public and private Conduct. Indeed it was a very
mavelous Enterprise in Esdras, and very novel in the World, to make at the
same time so many Men to speak with Moses of a different Character and Style,
and yet every one in a manner uniform, and always like to it self: And on a
sudden to make so great and entire a People, (as they were) to believe that
those were the ancient Books which they had always had in Reverence, and the
new which they had seen made, as if they had never heard any thing spoke of,
and that the Knowledge of the present time, as well as that of the time past,
was utterly defaced. Such are the Prodigies we must believe, if we will
disbelieve the Miracles of the Almighty, and refuse to receive the Testimony,
by which it was evident that they had told so great a People, they had seen
them with their Eyes.

But if that People were returned from Babylon unto the Land of their Fathers,
so new and so ignorant that they could scarce remember they had ever been, so
that without the least Examination they had received all that Esdras was
pleased to give them: How then is it that we see in the Book which Esdras
wrote, 1 Esdr. 3.7.9. 2 Esdr. 5.8.9.12, 13.
and in that of Nehemiah his Contemporary, whatsoever was there said of the
divine Books? With what Front durst Esdras and Nehemiah speak of the Law of
Moses in so many places, and that publicly, as of a thing known to all the
World, and which all the World had in their Hands? How were all the People seen
to act naturally in Obedience to that Law, as having had it always present with
them? But how was it said at the same time, and at the Peoples Return, that all
that People admired the Accomplishment of the Oracle of Jeremiah concerning the
seventy Weeks Captivity? That Jeremiah which Esdras had been forging with all
the other Prophets, how had he on a sudden found Credit? By what new Artifice
were they able to persuade a whole Nation, even the old Men who had seen that
Prophet, and had always looked for that miraculous Deliverance which he had
foretold them of: Esdras and Nehemiah could not have written the History of
their Time; some other must have done it in their Name, and those who have made
all the other Books of the old Testament would have been so esteemed by
Posterity, that the other Falsifyers would have gained little Credit to their
Imposture.

No doubt but they would have been ashamed of so many Extravagancies, and
instead of saying that Esdras had of a sudden brought to light so many Books so
different one from the other, by the Characters both of Style and Time, one
must affirm that he might have inserted into them the Miracles and Predictions
which made them to pass for Divine: An Error more gross still than the former,
since that those Miracles and those Predictions are so interspersed in all
those Books, so often inculcated and repeated, with such different turns, and
so great a variety of powerful Figures; in a word, they have so constituted the
whole Body of them, that if we have ever but so much as opened those holy
Books, we must see, that it was a great deal more easy perfectly to make a new
Model of them, than to insert in them those things which the Incredulous are so
much puzzled to find there. And though it should be granted them whatsoever they
ask, yet the miraculous and divine Parts are so much the Foundation of those
Books, that they must be yet acknowledged whatsoever Aversion any may have to
them. And admit that Esdras might have added afterward the Predictions of
those things that had already happened in his time; yet those which were
fulfilled since, which you have seen in so great a number, who should superadd
them? God, it is possible, might have bestowed on Esdras the gift of Prophecy,
that so the Imposture of Esdras might seem the more probable; and they might
rather have a false one to be a Prophet than Isaiah, or Jeremiah, or Daniel: Or
else every Age might have had a prosperous Counterfeit, who might impose upon
the Faith of a whole Nation; and that new Impostors, through an admirable Zeal of
Religion, might have continually been adding to the divine Books, after that
the Canon might have been closed, that they might be spread abroad with the
Jews over all the Earth, and translated into so many strange Languages. Would
not this have been (out of eagerness of Desire to establish the Religion) the
way utterly to destroy it? Would a whole Nation so easily suffer a Change of
what they verily believed to be Divine, whether through Conviction of Reason, or
through the power of Error. Could any one hope to persuade Christians, nay or
Turks, to add but one single Chapter, either to the Gospel, or to the Alcoran?
But perhaps the Jews might be more docile than other People, or not so
Religious as to preserve their holy Books? What Monsters of Opinions must come
into their Minds, to make then willing to shake off the Yoke of divine
Authority, and not to regulate their Sentiments, no more than their Manners,
but by their distorted Reason?

Let none say that the discussion of these Matters is perplexing and
troublesome: For if it should be so, they must either lay the Charge of it on
the Authority of the Church, and the Tradition of so many Ages, or else push on
the Examination to the utmost Extremity, and never believe they can be rid of
it, but say they require still more time than will be given to their Salvation.
But certainly, not to turn over the Books of both the Testaments with an
endless Labor, we need only read the Book of Psalms, where are collected so
many ancient Songs of Gods People, to see there in the most divine Poetry that
ever was, the immortal Monuments of the History of Moses, of that of the Judges
and Kings, imprinted by Song and Measure in Men's Minds. And for the new
Testament: The bare Epistles of St. Paul so Lively, and Original, so strong as
to time both of the Affairs and Motions which then were, and in short, of so
pointing a Character; those Epistles, I say, received by the Churches to which
they were addressed, and from thence communicated to other Churches, will be
sufficient to convince all honest Minds, that every thing in the Scriptures
which the Apostles have left us, is according to the Original.

So likewise do they support one another with an invincible Force. The Acts of
the Apostles are but a continuation of the Gospel, their Epistles suppose it
necessary; but that all may agree together, both the Acts, and the Epistles,
and Gospels, do every where own the ancient Books of the Jews. St. Paul and the
other Apostles are continually alleging what Moses has said, Act. 3.22.7.31,
32, etc. Romans 10.5.19.
what the Prophets have said and writ after Moses, Jesus Christ calls to
witness the Law of Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms, as Witnesses who all
depose the same Truth. When he has a mind to explain his Mysteries, Ibid. 27.
John 5.46, 47.
he begins at Moses and all the Prophets, and when he tells the Jews that Moses
wrote of him, he lays down for a Foundation what was most certainly believed
among them, and brings them back to the very Spring Head of their own
Traditions.

But however we will see what can be opposed to this so acknowledged an
Authority, and to the Consent of so many Ages: For since in our days Men have
been so presumptuous and daring as to print in all sort of Languages Books
against the Scriptures, we ought not to dissemble or conceal what they allege
for the decrying its Antiquities. Therefore what say they to justify the
Pentateuch's being supposititious, and what can be objected to a Tradition of
three thousand Years standing, upheld by its own Power, and by the course of
things? Nothing of Consequence, nothing that is positive, nothing that is of
weight and substance. Some little Chicaneries and Quarrels they have at
Numbers, Places, and Names; and such Observations, that in all other matters
are reckoned at most but as vain Curiosities incapable of reaching the stress
of the Case, are here allege to us by way of Decision of an Affair, the most
serious that ever was.

There are, say they, Difficulties in the History of the Scripture. No Question
to be made on it, which yet there would not be, we^e the Books less ancient, or
had they been supposititious, and made (as they are so bold to say) by a
cunning and industrious Man: If they had not been so Religious as to give it us
as they found it, but had taken the liberty to correct it where it did not
please them. There are Difficulties which arise by length of time, when places
have changed their Name or Condition; when Dates are forgot; when Genealogies
are no further known; when there is no remedy for the Faults which a Copy, though
never so little mistaken, so easily introduces in such things, or that matters
of Fact, which have slipped out of Men's Memories, do leave a Darkness upon some
part of the History. But then is this Obscurity in the Issue it self, or in the
stress of this Affair? By no means: All there is followed; and that which is
obscure serves only to let us see a more venerable Antiquity in those holy
Books.

But there are Alterations in the Text: The ancient Versions do not agree
together; the Hebrew in several Places is different from it self; and the Text
of the Samaritanes, beside the Word which they accuse them of for changing it
expressly in favor of the Temple of Gerizim, differs also in many other places
from that of the Jews. And from thence what do they conclude? That the Jews, or
else Esdras, had contrived the Pentateuch at the return of the Captivity? It Is
just the contrary that they should conclude. The Differences of the Samaritane
serve only to confirm what we have already established, that their Text is
independent from that of the Jews. So far can we be from imagining that those
Schismatics took any thing from the Jews and Esdras, that we have seen exactly
to the contrary, that it was in spite to the Jews and Esdras, and in hatred of
both the first and the second Temple that they invented their Chimera of
Gerizim. V. sup. 1. p. 49. and Seq. 57. 63.
Who therefore does not see it plain, that they would rather have accused the
Imposhires of the Jews than followed them? Those Rebels who scorned both Esdras
and all the Prophets of the Jews, with their Temple, and Solomon that built it,
as well as David who had assigned the place of it: what did they regard in
their Pentateuch, if not an Antiquity superior, not only to that of Esdras and
the Prophets, but also to that of Solomon and David; in a word, the Antiquity
of Moses, wherein they both agreed? How indisputable then is Moses his
Authority, and that of the Pentateuch, that all the Objections tend only to the
affirmation of it.

But then from whence come those varieties of Texts and Versions? From whence
indeed, unless from the Antiquity of the Book it self which has gone through the
Hands of so many Transcribes for so many Ages, that the Language in which it
was written is almost now worn out? But let us leave these vain Disputes, and
in one word pluck up the Difficulty by the Roots. Let any one say if it be not
evident, that in all the Versions, and Texts that are, there are still to be
found the same Laws, the same Miracles, the same Predictions, the same train of
History, the same Body of Doctrine, and in short the same Substance. Wherein
then after all this do the varieties of Texts hurt? What do we need further
than this unalterable Fond of the sacred Books, and what can we demand more of
the divine Providence? And as for the Versions, is that a sign of Forgery or
Novelty, that the Language of the Scriptures is so ancient that the Delicacies
of it now are lost, and we find our selves puzzled to give it all its Elegance,
and to express it in its full sense and Power of meaning? Is not that rather a
Proof of its greater antiquity? and if one would stand upon little trifling
matters, let any one tell me, if in those several places wherein they have
found themselves perplexed, any one of them has been settled by reason or by
conjecture. We have followed the Faith of Examples; and as tradition never
permitted the sound Doctrine to be altered, so we thought that the other
faults, it there were any, served only to prove that none has innovated any
thing here by the dictate of their own Spirit.

But now here is at last the main stress of the Objection. Are there not some
things added in Moses's Text, and how comes it to pass, that we find his Death
at the end of the Book that is attributed to him? What Marvel is this? that
those who continued his History, should have added his happy end to the rest of
his Actions, and so to make one and the same Body of the whole? for the other
additions let us see what they are. Is there any new Law, or any new Ceremony,
any Dogma, any Miracle, or any Prediction? they have not so much as dreamt of
any such thing, there is not the least suspicion of it, nor the least Sign:
That had been to add to the work of God: the Law had forbid it, and the scandal
it would have occasioned, would have been very horrible. What then? Deuteronomy.
4.12.12.5. supra 2. part. p. 220.
why they may have continued, perhaps, a Genealogy that he had begun, or
possibly may have explained the name of a Town changed by time, upon occasion
of the Manna, wherewith the People were fed for forty Years; they may have
particularized the time when that Heavenly Nourishment ceased, and that Fact
written since in another Book shall be made a Remark, Jos. 5.12. Exodus 16.35.
upon that of Moses, as a manifest and public Fact of which all the People
were Witnesses; and four or five Remarks of this Nature made by Josuah, or
Samuel, or some other Prophet of a like Antiquity; because they had only regard
to notorious Facts, and where there was apparently no difficulty, may have
naturally past into the Text, and the same tradition may have brought them down
to us with all the rest; shall presently all be lost? Shall Esdras be accused,
through the Samaritane, where those Remarks are found? show us, that they have an
Antiquity not only above Esdras, but above the Schism of the ten Tribes. It
matters not, all must fall upon Esdras. If those remarks came higher, the
Pentateuch would be then more ancient than it ought; and we could not pay
reverence enough to the antiquity of a Book, the very Notes whereof would be of
so great an Age. Esdras therefore may have done all; Esdras may have forgot
when he would make Moses to speak, and may have made him to write so grossly as
you see, what things did happen after his time. Shall a whole work be convicted
of forgery by this only place? the Authority of so many Ages, and the public
Faith will then be of no further stead to him: as if on the contrary we did not
see that those remarks which they so much boast of, are a new proof of
Sincerity and Integrity, not only in those that made them, but also in those
that transcribed them. Has there ever Judgment passed on the authority, I do
not say of a Divine Book, but of any Book whatsoever, upon such slight and
trivial reasons? But it seems the Scripture is a Book that is an Enemy to
Mankind; it would oblige Men to submit their Minds to God, to suppress their
disorderly passions: but Man is bent upon his own destruction, and let the
reward be what it will, he will make himself a Sacrifice to Libertinism.

Now can you believe that impiety did not lead them without any necessity in
the World into all these Absurdities you have seen? if against the testimony of
Mankind, and against all the Rules of good Sense, it strives to take away from
the Pentateuch and the Prophecies, their constantly avowed Authors, and to
dispute their dates with them. For the dates are all in all as to this matter,
for two reasons; First, because Books that were full of so many miraculous
deeds, which are seen in them, attended with the most particular Circumstances,
and advanced not only as public, but as present, if they had been capable of
being false; would have carried their own Condemnation with them; and instead
of keeping themselves up by their own weight, they wou^d long ago have fell of
themselves. Secondly, because their dates being once fixed, we can no more
efface the Infallible mark of divine Inspiration, which they bear impressed in
the great number, and the long course of memorable Predictions which we find
them filled withal.

It Is to shift off these Miracles and these Predictions that the wicked have
run themselves into all these Absurdities that have surprised you. But let them
not think they shall escape God. He has reserved for his Scriptures such a
mark of Divinity, as can never suffer any prejudice. It Is the relation there is
between the two Testaments. They do not dispute at least that all the old
Testament was written before the new; here there is no new Esdras which can
persuade the Jews to invent, or to falsify their Scripture in favor of the
Christians, whom they Persecuted. There needs no more. By the relation of the
two Testaments we prove that both are Divine. They have both the same design,
and the same Consequence. The one prepares the way to that Perfection which the
other shows openly to all the World; the one lays the Foundation, the other
finishes the Building; in a word, the one foretells what the other shows us
accomplished.

Thus all the times are united together, and the eternal design of divine
Providence is revealed to us. The tradition of the Jews, and that of the
Christians make together but one and the same Progress of Religion; and the
Scriptures of both Testaments, are but one and the same Body, and one and the
same Book.

And because the discussion of the particular Predictions, though in it self it
be full of Light, depends on many Deeds, which all the World cannot equally
understand; God has therefore chosen some of them, which he has made plain to
the most Ignorant. Those illustrious, those bright and conspicuous Facts, of
which all the World is a witness, are those Facts which I have here endeavored
to make your Highness comprehend, that is to say, the desolation of the Jews,
and the Conversion of the Gentiles happening together, and both precisely at
the same time as the Gospel was Preached, and Jesus Christ appeared.

These three things united in order of time, were yet much more so in the order
of God's Decrees. You have seen them go together in the old Prophecies: but
Jesus Christ, the faithful Interpreter of the Prophecies, and of the Will of
his Father, has still better explained unto us that Bond of Unity in his
Gospel. He does it in the Parable of the Vineyard so familiar in the Prophets.
The Father of the Family had planted this Vine, that is to say, the true
Religion founded upon his Covenant, and had let it out to Husbandmen, that is
to say, to the Jews. Matt. 21.38.
And that he might receive the fruits of it, he sent several times his Servants
who are the Prophets. But these unfaithful Husbandmen cause some to be put to
death; his goodness leads him to send them his Son; and yet him they treat
worse than they did his Servants.

At last he takes away his Vineyard from them, and gives it unto other
Husbandmen; he takes away from them the Grace of his Alliance, to bestow it on
the Gentiles.

These three things ought therefore to concur together, the sending of the Son
of God, the Reprobation of the Jews, and the Calling of the Gentiles. There
needs no further a Commentary upon the Parable which the event has it self
interpreted.

You have seen the Jews confess that the Kingdom of Judah, and the State of
their Commonwealth began to fall in the time of Herod, and when Jesus Christ
came into the World. But if the Alterations which they made to the Law of God,
have brought upon them so visible a Diminution of their Power, their last
Desolation which yet continues, must be the Punishment of a fat greater Crime.

That Crime is plainly their Ingratitude against their Messiah, who came to
instruct them, and to make them free. And it is from that time too that an Iron
yoke has been over their heads; and they have been long ago crushed with it,
but that God keeps them to acknowledge one day, and to serve that Messiah whom
they have crucified.

You then already see one averred and public Fact: that is, the total Ruin of
the State of the Jews at the time of Jesus Christ. The Conversion of the
Gentiles, which was to happen at the same time, is no less averred neither. At
the same time when the ancient Worship was destroyed in Jerusalem with the
Temple, Idolatry was attacked on all sides; and the People, who for so many
thousands of years had forgot their Creator, were now wakened from so long a
seeming death of sleep.

And that all things might accord, the Spiritual Promises are displayed by the
Preaching of the Gospel, in the Time when the Jews, who had only received the
Temporal ones, being openly reproved for their Incredulity, and made Captives
over all the face of the Earth, had no longer any worldly Grandeur to expect.
Then was Heaven promised to those who suffered Persecution for Righteousness
sake; the Secrets of the Future Life were preached; and the true Blessedness
was shown for from that abode where Death reigns, where Sin and all manner of
Evils do abound.

If we do not discover here a design always kept up, and always followed; it we
see not here one and the same order of the Counsels of God, who prepared from
the beginning of the World what he finished in the fullness of time, and who
under different Estates, but with a Succession still constant, perpetuated to
the eyes of all the World that holy Society by whom he would be served; we
deserve to see nothing, and to be delivered up to our own hardness, as to the
most just and rigorous of all Punishments.

And that this Course of God's People might be conspicuous to the most
undiscerning, God made it sensible and palpable by Matters of Fact which none
could be ignorant of, unless he purposely shut his eyes against the Truth. The
Messiah expected by the Hebrews; he came, and he called the Gentiles as it had
been foretold. The People that owned him as come, were incorporated with those
that looked for him, and there was not between them one moments Interruption;
that People were dispersed over all the Earth, the Gentiles ceased not to
gather together; and that Church which Jesus Christ has built upon a Rock, not
all the Powers of Hell have ever been able to overthrow.

O what Consolation is this to the Children of God! But what Conviction is here
of the Truth, when they see that Pope Innocent the Eleventh, who now most
deservedly fills the first See of the Church we are continually ascending
without any interruption even to St. Peter, made by Jesus Christ the Chief of
the Apostles: from whence, by running back to the Priests that served under the
Law, we go up even to Aaron and Moses: from them to the Patriarchs, and so to
the beginning of the World! what Course, what Tradition, what mavelous
Connection and Chain is here! If our Minds, which are naturally uncertain, and
by their doubtfulness become the Shittlecock of their own Reasonings, have need
in the Questions which concern our Salvation, to be fixed and determined by
some certain Authority, what greater Authority is there than this of the
Catholic Church, which reunites in her self all the Authority of passed Ages,
and the ancient Traditions of Mankind to its first Original.

Thus the Society, which Jesus Christ looked for during all past Ages, at last
founded upon the Rock, and where St. Peter and his Successors were to preside
by his Orders, justified it self by its own Course, and bore in its eternal
duration the Character of the Hand of God.

It Is also this Succession, that no Heresy, no Sect, no other Society than
only the Church of God, was able to give to it self. The false Religions could
imitate the Church in many things, and especially in saying as she did, that
God founded them: but that Discourse in their Mouth was only a Discourse in the
Air. For if God has created Mankind, and if in creating him after his own
Image, he has never disdained to instruct him how to serve and please him;
Every Sect that does not show its Succession from the beginning of the World,
is not of God.

Here fall prostrate at the feet of the Church all the Societies and all the
Sects that men have set up both within and without Christianity. As for
Example; The false Prophet of the Arabians had the cunning to say that he was
sent from God; and after he had deceived the People most grossly ignorant, he
knew how to make his advantage of the Divisions of his Neighborhood, to extend
into it by force of Arms, a Religion that was wholly Sensual; but neither has
he dared to suppose that he was the Savior expected, nor could he in short,
give, either to his Person or to his Religion, any real or apparent Unity with
past Ages. The expedient he found to free himself from that was new. For fear
lest they should search into the Scriptures of the Christians for Testimonies
of his Mission, like to those which Jesus Christ found in the Scriptures of the
Jews, he pretended that both the Christians and the Jews had falsified all
their Books. His ignorant Followers believed him on his own word six hundred
years after Jesus Christ; and he declared himself, not only without any
precedent witness, but also without any attempt either of supposing, or of
promising any one sensible Miracle which might authorize his Mission, either by
himself or any of his Followers. So likewise the Heresiarchs, who have founded
new Sects among the Christians, have had the Art to make the Faith more easy by
denying the Mysteries which passed our Senses. They were able to dazzle men by
their Eloquence, and by a seeming show of Piety, to move them by their
Passions, to engage them by their Interests, to gain 'em over by Novelty and
Libertinism, either by that of the Mind, or else by that of their Senses: In a
word, they could easily, either deceive themselves, or deceive others, for
there is nothing more Humane; but besides that they could never boast they had
done any Miracle in Public, nor reduce their Religion to positive Facts
whereof their Followers were Witnesses, there was always a most unhappy
mischief attended them, which they could never conceal, and that was their
Novelty. It will always be visible to the eyes of the whole World, that they
and their Sect which they have established, will be detached from that great
Body, and from that ancient Church which Jesus Christ has founded, where St.
Peter and his Successors have kept the Primacy, in which all Sects have found
themselves established. The moment of the Separation will be always so
apparent, that the Heretics themselves can never be able to deny it, and they
will never dare so much as to attempt to make themselves to come from the
Source by an uninterrupted Succession. This is the inevitable weakness of all
the Sects which Mankind has set up. None can change the Ages past, nor give
themselves Predecessors, nor ever make them to be found in possession. The only
Catholic Church fills up all precedent Ages, by a Course of Succession that
can never be disputed with her. The Law came before the Gospel; the Succession
of Moses and the Patriarchs makes but one and the same with that of Jesus
Christ: to be looked for, to come, to be acknowledged by a Posterity which is
to last as long as the World; this is the Character of the Messiah in whom we
believe. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, Heb. 13.8.
and to day, and for ever.

Thus besides the advantage which the Church of Jesus Christ has, of being
alone founded on miraculous and divine Facts which they have written for all to
see, without any fear of being falsified as to the time in which they happened;
there is likewise in favor of those who lived not in those Times, one Miracle
that always is subsisting, which confirms the truth of all the rest; that is
the Course of Religion which has been always victorious over the Errors that
have crept in, which endeavor to destroy it. You may add to this also another
Chain, and that is the visible uninterruptedness of a continual Punishment upon
the Jews, who have not yet received Christ so long ago promised to their
Fathers.

They nevertheless expect him still; and this their expectation, which is
always frustrated, is one part of their Punishment. They expect him, and
discover in their Expectation that he has always been expected. Condemned
therefore by their own Books, they confirm the truth of Religion; they, as I
may say, do carry all the Course of it written on their Foreheads: and at one
view we see what they have been, why they are as we see them, and for what they
are reserved.

Thus four or five Authentic Facts, and those more clear than the light of the
Sun, do discover our Religion to be as old as the World. And consequently they
discover that it has no other Author than He who made the World, who holding
all things in the hollow of his Hand, was able by himself alone both to begin
and carry on a design wherein all Ages are comprehended.

We need therefore no longer wonder, as we commonly do, why God proposes to us
to believe so many things so worthy of him, and yet at the same time so
impenetrable to Humane Understanding. But we should rather wonder, that he
having established the Faith upon so firm and manifest an Authority, there
should yet be any in the World blind and incredulous.

Our disorderly Passions, our being bewitched to our Senses, and our incurable
Pride are the cause of it. We choose rather to venture all, than to put a
constraint upon our selves; we choose rather to continue in our Ignorance, than
to confess it, and are pleased rather with a vain Curiosity, and indulging our
unruly Spirits in the liberty of thinking whatsoever delights 'em, than to
yield to the yoke of Divine Authority.

From thence it is that there are so many Unbelievers, and God suffers it to be
so for the instruction of his Children. Unless we had the Blind, the Savage,
and the Infidel, and that in the very Bosom too of Christianity, we should not
be sensible enough of the Corruption of our Nature, nor of that Abyss of Misery
from whence Jesus Christ has delivered us. If his holy Truth was not
contradicted, we should not see the Miracle which has constantly carried it
through so many Contradictions, and we should forget at last that we are saved
by Grace. Now the Incredulity of the one does humble the rest; and those Rebels
that oppose God's Decrees, make that Power conspicuous by which indepently from
all things else, he accomplishes the Promises he has made to his Church.

What therefore is it that we look for now to make us humble and submiss? do we
look that God should still work new Miracles; that he should make them useless
by his continuing of them, that he should accustom our eyes to them as he does
to the Course of the Sun, and to all the other Marvels of Nature? or else do we
ever expect that the wicked and the opinionative man should be silent? that
good and virtuous men and dissolute Libertines should bear an equal Testimony
to the Truth? that all the World by one common consent should prefer it to
their Passions; and that false Knowledge, which only the Novelty of it causes
to be admired, should cease its usual way of surprising men? Is it not enough
that we see it is impossible for men to combat with Religion, but they must at
the same time show by prodigious wanderings, that their Senses are perverted,
and that they only defend themselves either by Presumption or ignorance? Cannot
the Church, which has been victorious both over Ages and Errors, I say,
cannot that overcome in our Minds those weak and miserable Reasonings which are
opposed to her; and cannot the Divine Promises, which we see every day are
accomplishing, elevate and raise us above our Senses?

Now let us not say that these Promises are still kept in suspense, and as they
are to hold out to the end of the World, so it will not be until the end of the
World, that we can boast we have seen the accomplishment of them. For on the
contrary, that which is already past assures us of the future: so many ancient
Predictions so visibly fulfilled, make us satisfied that there will be nothing
but what shall be accomplished: and that the Church, against which, according
as the Son of God has promised us, even the Gates of Hell shall never prevail,
will be always subsisting until the consummation of all things, for that Jesus
Christ, who is true in all, has prescribed no other bounds to its duration.

The same Promises do likewise assure us of a future Life. God, who has shown
himself so faithful, in accomplishing what respects the present Age, will be no
less faithful in accomplishing that which respects the Future, of which all
that we see is but a preparation, and the Church will be always unshaken and
invincible on the Earth, until that her Children being gathered together, she
be entirely conveyed to her, which is her only true Mansion.

As for those who shall be excluded from that heavenly City, an eternal
Vengeance is reserved for them; and after they have lost by their Sin and Folly
a blessed Eternity, there will be left for them no other place but a Hell of
Eternal woe and misery.

Thus the Decrees of God are to terminate by an immutable state; his Promises
and his Threatenings are equally certain; and what he executes in time, assures
us of what he has commanded us either to expect or fear in Eternity.

You now see what may be learned from the continual progress of Religion as it
is in short presented to your Eyes. By time it conducts you to Eternity. You
see a constant order in all God's Decrees, and a visible Mark of his Power in
the perpetual duration of his People. You cannot but confess that the Church
has a Branch always subsisting, which cannot be separated from it without
destroying it, and that those, who, being united to this Root, do perform such
Works as are worthy of their Faith, and secure to themselves eternal Life.

Your Highness is therefore to study, but to study with attention this
uninterrupted Course of the Church, which so clearly assures to you all the
Promises of God. Whatsoever breaks this Chain, whatsoever goes out of this
Course, whatsoever advances it self, and does not come by virtue of the
Promises made to the Church from the beginning of the World, you are to have in
horror. Employ all your power to recall into this Unity whatsoever is stragled
out of the way of it, and to make it hearken to the Church by which the Holy
Spirit of God pronounces its Oracles.

The Glory of your Ancestors is not only that they never forsook it, but that
they always supported it; and thereby deserved to be called the Eldest Sons,
which is certainly the most glorious of all their Titles.

It Is needless for me to mention to you Clovis, Charlemaine, or St. Louis.
Consider only the time you live in, and from what Father God has given you
your Birth. A King so great in every thing, yet is more to be distinguished by
his Faith than by all his other admirable Qualities. He protects Religion not
only within, but out of his Kingdom, and even to the last Extremities of the
World. His Laws are one of the firmest Rampires of the Church. His Authority
revered as much by the Merit of his Person, as by the Majesty of his Scepter,
never supports it self so well as when it defends the Cause of God. We hear no
more Blasphemies; Impiety trembles before him: this is the King taken notice of
by Solomon, Prove. 20.26.
that in his Wisdom scatters the Wicked, and brings the Wheel over them. If
he attacks Heresy by such means, and that more too than ever did any of his
Predecessors, it is not that he is fearful for his Throne; for all lies quiet
at his Feet, and his Arms are dreaded over all the Earth; but it is because he
loves his People, and being sensible that he is advanced by the Hand of God to
a Power that nothing can equal in the Universe, he knows not what better use
to make of it, but to employ it to the Healing of the Wounds of the Church.

May your Highness imitate so glorious an Example, and leave it to your
Descendant Posterity. Recommend to them the Churches Care to be sure, more than
that Great Empire which your Ancestors have governed for so many Ages. May your
Illustrious House, the first in Dignity to any in the World, be the first in
defending the Rights of God, and in extending over all the World the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, who makes it to reign with so much Glory.

The End of the second Part.
THE THIRD PART OF THIS DISCOURSE. THE Empires.
ALTHOUGH there be nothing comparable to this uninterrupted Course of the true
Church which I have represented to you, I. That the Revolutions of Empires are
regulated by Providence, and serve to humble Princes.
yet the Succession of Empires which I am now going to set before you, will not
be of much less Advantage to such great Princes as your Highness is.

First, Those Empires have for the most part a necessary Connection to the
History of the People of God. God was served by the Assyrians and the
Babylonians to chastise that People; by the Persians, to re-establish them; by
Alexander and his first Successors, to protect them; by Antiochus the
Illustrious and his Successors, to exercise them; by the Romans, to maintain
their Liberty against the Kings of Syria, who made it their whole business to
destroy them. The Jews continued unto Jesus Christ under the Power of those
very Romans. When they had ungratefully Crucified him, those same Romans lent
their hands, without ever thinking that they did so, to the divine Vengeance,
and rooted out that ungrateful People. God who had resolved at the same time to
gather to himself a new People, out of all Nations, did first reunite both the
Land and Sea under that same Empire. The Commerce of so many different People,
otherwise Strangers one to the other, and afterward reunited under the Roman
Dominion, was one of the most powerful and effectual Means that Provid^n^e made
use of for the spreading of the Gospel. If the same Roman Empire persecuted for
two hundred Years this new People which rise up on all sides within its Walls,
that Persecution has confirmed the Christian Church, and has made its Glory
the more bright and conspicuous by its Faith and Patience. At last the Roman
Empire yielded; and having found something more invincible than it, it quietly
received into its Bosom that Church against which it had made so long and so
cruel a War of Resistance. The Emperors have laid out all their Power to make
the Church be obeyed, and Rome has been the Spiritual Empire that Jesus Christ
would extend over all the Earth.

When the time was come that the Roman Power was to fall, and that that great
Empire had vainly promised an Eternity to it self, was to undergo the Fate of
all others, Rome became the Prey of the Barbarians, yet by its Religion kept up
its ancient Majesty. The Nations that invaded the Roman Empire, by little and
little learnt their Christian Piety, which tempered their Barbarism; and their
Kings, in placing themselves each in their Nation in the room of Emperors,
found not any of their Titles more glorious than that of being Protectors of
the Church.

But here I must discover to you the secret Judgments of God upon the Roman
Empire, and even upon Rome herself: A Mystery which the Holy Ghost revealed to
St. John, and which that great Man, Apostle, Evangelist, and Prophet, has
explained in the Revelations. Rome that was grown old in the Worship of Idols,
found it extremely difficult to get rid of it even under Christian Emperors;
and the Senate counted it an Honor to defend the Gods of Romulus, to whom they
attributed all the Victories of the old Commonwealth.

The Emperors were wearied out with the Deputations of that great Body which
required the Re-establishment of its Idols, ^orym. 4. Orat. Symm. ap. Amb. Tom.
5. l. 5. Ep. 30. Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 1. etc.
and which thought that to correct Rome of her old Superstitions, was to do an
Injury to the Roman Name. Thus that Company which was made up of the chiefest
Grandees the Empire had, and an immense number of People, in which were well
near all the most famous and signalized Persons of Rome, could not be drawn
from their Errors, neither by the preaching of the Gospel, nor by so plain and
visible an accomplishment of the ancient Prophecies, nor by the Conversion of
almost all the rest of the Empire, nor to conclude, by that of the Princes all
whose Decrees were in favor of Christianity. On the contrary, they continued
most opprobriously to charge the Church of Jesus Christ which they accused
also, after the Example of their Forefathers, of all the Mischiefs and
Calamities of the Empire, always ready to renew the ancient Persecutions, if
they had not been suppressed by the Emperors. Things were in this Condition at
the fourth Age of the Church, and a hundred Years after Constantine, when God
at last called again to mind the many bloody Decrees of the Senate against his
faithful People, and at the same time rememb'red the furious Outcries of all
the People of Rome, whose greediness after Christian Blood had so often made
the Amphitheatres to resound. He therefore delivered to the Barbarians that
City, Apocalypse. 17.6.
drunken with the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of Jesus, as St. John
speaks. God renewed upon her the terrible Chastisements he had exercised upon
Babylon; so that Rome it self was called by that Name. That new Babylon, the
follower of the old, as she was fleshed and swelled with her Victories,
triumphing in her Delicacies and her Riches, polluted with her Idolatries, and
a persecutor of the People of God, fell also as she did, and her Fall was
great, Revelat. 17.18.
as St. John sings her Ruin. The Glory of her Conquests, which she attributed
to her Gods, is taken away from her: She is made a Prey to the Barbarians,
taken three or four times, pillaged, sacked, destroyed. The Sword of the
Barbarians only spares the Christians. Another Rome entirely Christian arises
out of the Ashes of that former, and it was only after the Inundation of the
Barbarians that the Victory of Jesus Christ was perfectly obtained over the
Roman Gods which were seen then not only destroyed, but quite forgotten.

Thus the Empires of the world have ministered to Religion, and the Preservation
of the People of God? Wherefore this same God who has caused his Prophets to
foretell the several Estates of his People, has also caused them to foretell the
Succession of the Empires. You have seen the places where Nebuchadnezzar has
been pointed out as he that was to come and punish the proud People, and
particularly the Jews so ungrateful against their Author. You have heard Cyrus
named two hundred Years before he was b^^n, as he that was to set up again the
People of God, and to punish the Pride of Babylon. The Ruin of Nineveh was as
clearly foretold. Daniel, in his admirable Visions, has caused to go before
your Eyes in a moment the Empire of Babylon, that of the Medes and Persians,
that of Alexander, and the Grecians. The Blasphemies and the Cruelties of
Antiochus the Illustrious were there foretold, as well as the miraculous
Victories of the People of God over so violent a Persecutor. We see there those
famous Empires to fall one after another; and the new Empire which Jesus Christ
was to set up, is there so expressly described by its proper Characters, that
there is no way to mistake it. It Is the Empire of the Saints of the most high;
the Empire of the Son of Man; an Empire which was to subsist in the midst of
the Ruin of all the rest, and to which alone Eternity is promised.

The Judgments of God upon the greatest of all the Empires of this World, that
is to lay, upon the Roman Empire, have not been kept hid from us. You have just
now had it from the mouth of St. John. Rome her self has felt the Hand of God,
and has been like others an Example of his Justice. But its fate was happier
yet than that of others; for being purged by her Punishments from the remaining
dreggs of Idolatry, she now no longer subsists but by that Christianity which
she declares to all the World.

Thus have all the great Empires which we have seen upon the Earth, concured by
several ways and means to the weal of Religion, and the glory of God, as God
himself has declared it by his Prophets.

When you read so often in their Writings that Kings in troops shall enter into
the Church, and be the Protectors and Nursing Fathers of it, those words
presently put into your mind the Emperors, and other Christian Princes: and as
the Kings your Ancestors, have more than any other, signalized themselves in
protecting and enlarging the Church of God, I shall not be afraid to assure
you, that it is they, who of all the Kings are most clearly foretold in those
eminently remarkable Prophecies.

God therefore, who was resolved to make use of diverse Empires, either to
chastise, or exercise, or to enlarge or protect his People, willing to make
himself known for the Author of so admirable a Council, revealed the Secret of
it to his Prophets, and has caused them to foretell what he had resolved to
execute. Wherefore as the Empires began the order of Gods Decrees on the People
whom he had chosen, so the fortune of those Empires were found declared by the
same Oracles of the Holy Ghost which foretold the Succession of the faithful
People.

The more you accustom your self to follow great things, and to recall them to
their Principles, the more will you stand in admiration of those Councels of
Providence. It behooves you to take the Ideas of them betimes, which will clear
up every day more and more in your Minds, and you will be the better able to
refer humane things to the order of that eternal Wisdom on which they depend.

God does not every day declare his Will by his Prophets concerning Kings and
Monarchies, that he sets up or destroys. But having done it so often, as to
those Empires whereof we have been speaking, he shows us by those famous
Examples what he does in all others, and he teaches Kings these two fundamental
Truths: First, That it is he who forms Kingdoms to give them to whom he
pleases: And Secondly, That he knows how to make them serve, in the time and
order which he has decreed, to the Designs he has on his People,

This, may it please your Highness, ought to keep all Princes in an entire
Dependence, and to make them always careful of the Orders of God, that so they
may lend their Hand to what he purposes for his own Glory upon all Occasions
that he offers them.

But this Succession of Empires, if we will consider it more humanly, has very
great Advantages, especially for Princes, seeing that Arrogance, the ordinary
Companion of so exalted a Condition, is so very much quelled by such a
Spectacle. For if Men learn to moderate themselves by seeing Kings die, how
much more will they be struck by seeing Kingdoms themselves to perish; and from
whence can they receive a more plain Lesson of the Vanity of humane Greatness?

Thus when you behold as in an instant before your Eyes, the Death and Downfall,
I do not say, of Kings and Emperors, but of those mighty Empires that have made
the whole Universe to tremble; when you behold both the ancient and the new
Assyrians, the Medes, the Persians, the Grecians, and the Romans, all before
you successively, and all to fall, as I may say, one upon another; this
dreadful Destruction presently makes you sensible that there is nothing solid
among Men, and that Inconstancy and Agitation is the proper Partage and Portion
of humane things.

BUT that which will render to your Highness this Spectacle both more
advantageous a more agreeable, II. The Revolutions of Empires have particular
Causes which Princes ought to study.
will be the Reflection you shall make not only on the Rise and Fall of
Empires, but also on the Causes of their Progress, and on those of their Ruin.

For, Sir, that same God who has made the Chain of the Universe, and who, as
he is Almighty by himself, has resolved, for the establishing of Order, that
the Parts of so great an All should depend one upon another; that same God has
also decreed that the course of humane things should have its Issues and its
Proportions; I mean, that Men and Nations have had Qualities commensurate to
the Advancements to which they have been designed; and that expecting some
certain extraordinary Strokes, wherein God has been willing to manifest his
own Hand in particular, there are no very great Changes happen but what may
deduce their Causes from precedent Ages.

And as in all Affairs there is that which prepares them, that which determines
to undertake them, and lastly, that which makes them have Success: So the true
Science of History is to observe in every time those secret Dispositions which
have prepared and made way for great Changes, and the important Conjunctures
which have brought them to pass.

Indeed, it is not sufficient to look only just before one, that is to say, to
consider those great Events which all on a sudden do decide the fortune of
Empires. He that would reach to the Bottom of humane things, ought to take them
at their first Head and Spring; and he must observe the Inclinations, and the
Tempers; or, to speak all in one word, the Character, as well of the People
Governing in general, as of the Princes in particular, and in a word, of all
extraordinary Men, who by the Importance of the Part they have had in the
World, have contributed, either well or ill, to the change of States, and to
the public Fortune.

I have endeavored to prepare you to these necessary Reflections in the first
part of this Discourse; you may be able there to observe the Genius of the
People, and that of those great Men that lead them. The Events that have
succeeded in the sequel have been shown; and that I might keep your Mind intent
upon the Chain of the great affairs of the World, which principally I would
have you to understand, I have purposely omitted several particular Facts,
whose Consequences have not been so considerable. But because by our fixing so
much upon the End proposed, we have too slightly past over several things, ever
to be able to make the just Reflections on them they deserve, you may be
pleased now to set your self about it with a more particular attention, and to
accustom your Mind to seek out the Effects in their most distant and remote
Causes.

Thereby, Sir, you will learn what is so necessary to be known, that although,
if we only have regard to particular accidents, Fortune seems alone to decide
the establishment and the ruin of Empires; yet perfectly to understand the
whole, it happens just as it does at Play, where the most agile and dextrous
carry it against the stronger Hand.

In fine, in this tragical and bloody game, where People are in dispute about
Empire and Power, he that has forecasted at the greatest distance, that has
most applied himself, that has continued longest in the most difficult
Labors, and in a word, he that has the greatest Skill, either in pushing on,
or in improving a begun Encounter, at last has had the advantage, and has
made even fortune her self assisting to his Designs.

Therefore it behooves you not to be weary of inquiring into the causes of
great Changes, since that nothing can be more serviceable to instruct you than
that; but especially seek till you find them in the Event of great Empires,
where the greatness of the Accidents makes them more plain and palpable.

I shall not here reckon among the great Empires that of Bacchus, III. The
Scythians, the Ethiopians, and Egyptians.
nor that of Hercules, those famous Conquerors of the Indies and the East.
Their Histories have nothing certain, their Conquests have nothing of
connection in them: we will leave them to be celebrated by the Poets, who have
made them the greatest Subject of their Fables.

Neither shall I speak any more of the Empire which the Madyes of Herodotus,
Herod. l. 1. Strab. lib. 15. Justin. 1. l.
that very much resembles the Judathyses of Megasthenes, and the Tanais of
Justin, raised up for a little while in Asia Maj^r. The Scythians, whom that
Prince carried to the War, did rather make incursions than Conquests. It was
only in Rencounters, and by repulsing the Cimmerians, that they entered into
Media, beat the Medes, and took that part of Asia from them, where they had
established their Dominion. Those new Conquerors reigned but eight and twenty
Years, their Impiety, their Avarice, and their Brutality made them quickly lose
it; and Cyaxares the Son of Phraortes, from whom they had Conquered it, drove
them out of it again. 'Twas rather got by address and trick, than by force.
Being driven to a corner of his Kingdom, which the Conquerors had either
neglected, or which perhaps they were not able to force, he waited with
Patience till those Brutish Conquerors had stirred up the public hatred, and
so ruined and destroyed themselves by the disorder of their Government.

Lib 15.
And we find yet in Strabo, who has taken it from the same Megasthenes, one
Tearco^ King of Ethiopia: this ought to be Tirkahah mentioned in the Scripture,
whose Arms were feared in the time of Sennacherib, 2 Kings 19.9. Is. 32.2.
King of Assyria. That Prince went even to the Colonies of Hercules, very
probably all along the Coast of Africa, and came unto the Borders of Europe.
But what should I say of a Man that I can find but very little mention of among
the Historians, and whose Government had no continua^^^?

The Ethiopians whereof he was King, we^e if we will believe Herodotus, Herod.
lib. 3.
the handsomest and most delicate shapen Men in the World. Their wit was quick
and st^ong, but they took no care to cultivate it, ^l^^ing their Confidence in
their robust Bodies, and nervous Arms. Their Kings were Elective, and they gave
the Throne to the greatest and the strongest. We may judge^ their Humor by an
action which Herodotus relates. When Ca^byses sent to them by way of surprise,
Ambassadors, and Presents, such as the Persians gave them, of Purple, Bracelets
of Gold, and Compositi^ns of perfu^e, they laughed at those Prese^^s in which
they could find nothing that was profitable to Life, as well as at their
Ambassadors, whom they took for spies, as they were. But their King was also
resolves to make a Present after his manner to the King af Persia: and taking
into his H^nd a Bow, which a Persian could scarce hold, so far was he from
being able to draw i^, he bent it in the Presence of the Ambassadors, bidding
them hearken to the Council w^^ch the King of Ethiopia gave to the King of
Persia. When the Persians are able, as eas^^y as I am, to make use of a Bow of
this greatness and Strength, let them come and attack the Ethiopians, but let
them bring with th^^ more Forces than yet Cambyses has. In the mean time let
them thank the Gods, who have ^n p^^ into the Hearts of the Ethiopians, the
ambitious desire of spreading themselves out of their own Country. When he had
ended this Sentence, he loosened his Bow, and gave it to the Ambassadors. We
cannot say what would be the event of the War. Cambyses being enraged at this
Answer, set forth against Ethiopia like a Madman, without any Order, without
Convoy, without Discipline; and saw his Army destroyed for want of Victuals, in
the midst of the Sand, before ever he came near the Enemy.

However those People of Ethiopia were not so just as they proudly pretended to
be, nor so shut up within their own Country. Their Neighbors, the Egyptians,
had several times felt their Power. There is nothing of continuedness in the
Councils of those savage and ill-cultivated Nations: If Nature did at any time
begin in them any good Sentiments, she never finished them. So that we find but
very little to be learnt or imitated from them. Therefore we will speak no more
of them, but now come to a more polished People.

The Egyptians are the first from whom we have learnt any Rules of Government.
This being a grave and serious Nation, first understood the true end of Polity,
which is to render Life commodious, and the People happy. The temperature of
the Country being always uniform, made their Judgments more solid and constant.
As Virtue is the Foundation of all Society, so they carefully cultivated and
improved it. Their chief Virtue was Gratitude. The Honor that was given to
them for being the most generous and grateful, Diod. lib. 1. Sect. 2.
shows they were likewise the most sociable. Kindnesses are the Bond both of
public and private Concord. He that acknowledges Favors, loves to Bestow
them; and in banishing Ingratitude, the pleasure of doing Good remains so pure,
that there is no way for one to be insensible of it. Their Laws were Simple,
full of Equity, and proper to unite Citizens to one another. He who being able
to rescue a man assaulted, did not do it, was punished with as severe a Death
as the Assassin himself. Ibid.
If we could not help the unfortunate, at least we ought to impeach the Author
of the Violence, and there were punishments established on purpose for those
that were failing in this duty. Thus were the Citizens a Guard each to other,
and all the Body of the State was joined against the wicked doer. It was not
permitted for any one to be unprofitable to the State; The Law assigned to
every one their Business, which was perpetuated from Father to Son. Ibid.
They were not to have two, nor could they change their Profession; but then
all Professions were honored. But it was necessary there should be some, both
Employments and Persons, more considerable than others, as it is but fit that
Eyes should be in the Body. Their Luster will not make the Feet and lower Parts
to be ever the less despised. So among the Egyptians, the Priests and the
Soldiers had their particular Marks of Honor: but all the Traders, even to the
least, were had in esteem: and it was believed a Criminal Matter to despise and
scorn the Citizens, whose Labors, whatsoever they were, contributed to the
weal Public. By this means all Arts came to their Perfection: the Honor which
cherished them was in every thing concerned: they made greater Improvements in
what they had always seen done, and to what in particular they had been brought
up from their very Infancy.

But there was one Occupation which all men were to be concerned in; and that
was the study of Laws and Wisdom. Ignorance of the Religion and Polity of ones
Country was no where excusable in any Government. Now every Profession had its
Canton to which it was particularly assigned.

There fell out no Inconvenience by it in a Country whose Extent was not very
great, and in so curious and exact an order. Those that had a mind to be Idle,
knew not where to hide themselves.

Amidst these many good Laws, that which was the best of 'em, was, that all
People were brought up to observe them. Hierod. l. 2. Diod. l. 1.. 2. Plat.
delegib. 2.
A new Custom was a Prodigy in Egypt: Every one did there always the same; and
the punctual Care they had to observe small things, maintained the great. So
that never was there any People that had longer preserved their Customs and
Laws. The order of the Judgments contributed to the upholding of that Genius.
Thirty judges were chosen out of the principal Cities to make up that
Commission to Judge the whole Kingdom. They were accustomed to see in those
high places only the most grave men of their Country, and such as were of the
clearest Integrity. The Prince gave them certain Salaries, that so they being
freed from Domestic Entanglements, might bestow the gross of their time in
making the Laws to be the better observed. They received no Advantage by Suits
of Law, for as yet they had never thought of making a Trade of Justice. To
avoid surprises, the matters were debated in those Assembly by Arguments in
writing. They were afraid there of false Eloquence, which might dazzle the
Understanding, and stir up the Passions. Truth could not be told there in too
plain a manner. The President of the Senate wore a Collar of Gold and precious
Stones, from whence hung a Figure without any Eyes, which they called Truth.
When he took it, that was the Signal to begin the Court. He bowed it to the
Party that was to gain his Cause, and that was the form of pronouncing the
Sentences. One of the bravest Artifices of the Egyptians to make their ancient
Maxims be preserved, was to invest them with certain Ceremonies that imprinted
them in their Minds. These Ceremonies were observed with reflection; and the
serious Humor of the Egyptians did not suffer that they should be turned into
simple Formula's. Those who had no Affairs, but their Lives were Innocent,
might avoid the Examen of that severe Tribunal. But they had in Egypt one kind
of Judgment which was very extraordinary, which none escaped. It was a
Consolation at the time of Death of leaving their Names in esteem among all
men, and of all humane goods it is the only one that Death cannot ravish from
us. But it was not suffered in Egypt to commend all the Dead indifferently:
That was an Honor to be had by a Public Judgment. As soon as a man was dead,
they brought him unto Judgment. The public Accuser was heard. If he proved
that the Conduct of the Deceased had been bad, then the Memory of him was
condemned, and he was deprived of Sepulture. The People admired the power of
their Laws, which reached them even after death, and every one being touched by
the Example, was afraid to dishonor his Memory and his Family. But if the
Defunct was not convicted of any Crime, then he had an honorable Interment:
they made his Panegyric, but they meddled not at all with his Birth. All Egypt
was noble, and beside they received no further Commendations than what they had
got by their own Merit.

Every one knows how curious the Egyptians were in preserving dead Bodies.
Their Mummies are to be seen at this day. Thus their Gratitude to their Kindred
was Immortal: Children by seeing the Bodies of their Ancestors, called to mind
their Virtues which the Public had paid such Acknowledgments to, and they were
incited to love those Laws which had so recommended them to them.

To prevent Borrowing, which was the Parent of Idleness, Frauds and Branglings,
the Decree of King Asychis did not suffer any to borrow, Herod. lib. 2. Diod.
1. Sect.
but upon condition that he pledged the Body of his Father to him of whom he
borrowed. And it was both an Impiety and an Infamy together, not to redeem, as
soon as ever one could, so precious a Pledge; and he that dyed before he had
acquitted himself of that duty, was denied Burial.

The Kingdom was Hereditary; but the Kings were obliged more than all others,
to live according to these Laws. Ibid.
Some there were more particular that a King had digested, and which made one
part of the Sacred Books. Not that they had disputed any thing against Kings,
or that any one had a right to constrain them; but on the contrary, they were
looked upon as Gods, but an ancient Custom had regulated them all, and they
resolved to live no otherwise than their Ancestors. So that they patiently
suffered themselves, not only to be regulated in their manner of Victuals and
Drink (for it was an ordinary thing in Egypt, where all People were sober, and
where the Air of the Country was a friend to Frugality) but they were content
that their very hours should be set them. In waking at break of day. Herod. 2.
Diod.. 2.
when their Minds were most refined, and their Thoughts most clear, they read
their Instructions, that they might have a more exact and true Idea of the
Matters they were to decide. As soon as they were dressed, they went to Sacrifice
in the Temple. There, being encompassed by all their Court, and the Victimes at
the Altar, they assisted at a Prayer full of Instructions, where the Chief
Priest prayed to the Gods to confer on the Prince all Royal Virtues, so that he
might be religious to the Gods, placid toward Men, moderate, just,
magnanimous, sincere, and far from falsehood, liberal, a Master of himself,
punishing below, but rewarding above desert. The Chief Priest afterward spoke
of the faults that Kings might commit, but he always supposed they fell into
them by surprise, or ignorance, charging with Imprecations the Ministers that
gave them evil Counsels, and concealed the Truth from them. This was the manner
of instructing Kings. Ibid.
They thought Reproaches did only sower their Spirits, and that the most
effectual way of inspiring Virtue into them, was to point out to them their
Duty in Praises conformable to the Laws, and gravely delivered before their
Gods. After Prayer and Sacrifice, they read to the King in the Sacred Books,
the Counsels and the Actions of great Men, that so he might govern his Kingdom
by their Maxims, and maintain the Laws which had made his Predecessors happy as
well as their Subjects.

That which shows that these Remonstrances were made and hearkened to
seriously, was that they had their effect. Among the Thebans, that is to say in
the chief Dynasty, that where the Laws were in force, and which came at last to
be the Mistress of all the rest, the greatest men were Kings. The two Mercurys,
Authors of Sciences, and of all the Institutions of the Egyptians, the one near
the time of the Deluge, and the other, whom they called Trismegistus, or Te^
maximus, a Contemporary of Moses, were both Kings of Theb^s. All Egypt profited
by their light, Herod. l. 2.
and Thebes owes to their Instructions their having had very few bad Princes.
Those were spared during their lives; the Public Repose would have it so;
Diog. 1.. 2.
but they were not exempt from the Judgment they were to undergo after death.
Ibid.
Some have been denied Burial, but there are few Examples of them, but on the
contrary, most of the Kings have been so much made of by the People, that every
one have bewailed their Death, as much as that of their Parents or Children.

This Custom of judging Kings after their Death seemed so holy to the People of
God, that they have always practiced it. We read in the Scriptures that wicked
Kings have been deprived of the Burial of their Ancestors, Ant. 13.23.
and we learn from Josephus that that Custom lasted even to the time of the
Asmon^ans. That gave Kings to understand, that if their Majesty put them above
Humane Judgments in this Life, they were not above them when Death equalled
them with other men.

The Egyptians had an inventive Genin^, and they turned it to things that were
profitable. Their Mercuries have filled Egypt with wonderful Inventions, and
scarce have left it ignorant of any thing that might make Life tranquil and
commodious. I cannot give to the Egyptians the honor they have conferred on
their Osyris, Diod. l. 1. 1. Plut. de Isid. and Osir.
for having invented Tillage, because it was found at all times in the
neighboring Countries of the World, where Mankind was spread, and questionless
it was known ever since the World began. The Egyptians themselves likewise give
so great an Antiquity to Osiris, that it is plainly seen they have confounded
his time with that of the beginning of the World, and they would fain attribute
some things to him whose Original was long before all times known in their
History. But if the Egyptians were not the first Inventors of Agriculture, nor
of the other Arts which we see before the Deluge, they have yet brought them to
such perfection, and have taken so great a Care to establish them among the
People, where Barbarism had made them forget, that their Honor comes very
little short of those that were the first Inventors.

Indeed there are some things of great usefulness, the Invention whereof cannot
be disputed with them. Plat. Epin. Diod. 1. 2. Herod. l. 2.
For as their Country was united, and their Heaven always clear and uncloudy,
they were the first that observed the Course of the Stars: and they were the
first also that regulated the year. Those Observations threw them naturally
into Arithmetic; and if it be true what Plato says, Plat. in Tim.
That the Sun and the Moon taught men the knowledge of Numbers; that is to say,
that they began the Accounts regulated by that of Days, Mouths, and Years, then
the Egyptians werethe first who hearkened to those mavelous Instructers. The
Planets and other Stars were no less known to them, and they found out that
great Year which brings back all the Heaven to its first point. To know their
own Lands every year covered over by the overflowing of Nile, they were forced
to betake themselves to Surveying, which quickly taught them Geometry. They
were great Observers of Nature, which in an Air so serene, and under a Sun so
burning, was very strong in its Products amongst them. 'Twas that which made
them find out, or perfect Physic. Thus all Sciences were in great esteem with
them. The first Inventors of useful things received, Diod. 1.. 2. Herod. 3.
init.
both whilst they lived, and after their deaths, rewards worthy of their
labor. 'Twas that consecrated the Books of their two Mercuries, and made them
to be looked on as Divine Books. Diod. l. 1. 2.
The first People of all that had Libraries, were those of Egypt. The title
that was given them made them very desirous to peruse them, and to search into
the Secrets of them; they were called, The Treasure of the Remedies of the
Soul. Thereby it was cured of the most dangerous Ignorance of its Maladies, and
the Source of all the others.

One thing which made the greatest impression on the Minds of the Egyptians,
was the esteem and love of their Country. It was; they said, the Mansion House
of the Gods, they had reigned there for many Millions of years. Plat. in Tim.
Diod. 1. 1.
It was the Mother of both Men and Beasts, which the Land of Egypt watered with
the River Nilus, had brought forth, whilst all Nature besides was barren. The
Priests that composed the History of Egypt out of that vast continuance of
Ages, which they only filled with the Fables and Genealogies of their Gods, did
it ^o imprint into the minds of the People the Antiquity and Nobleness of their
Country. But their real History was circumscribed within reasonable Bounds, and
yet they found so much as to lose themselves in an infinite Abyss of Time which
seemed to bring them near to Eternity.

But yet their love to their Country had more solid Foundations. Egypt was in
fine the most beautiful Country in the World, the most plentiful by Nature, the
best cultivated by Art, the richest, the most commodious, and the most adorned
by the care and magnificence of her Kings.

There was nothing but what was very great in their Designs and in their Work.
What they made in Nilus is incredible. It rained very seldom in Egypt: but that
River which watered it all by its orderly Flowings, brought to it the Rains and
the Snows of other Countries. For the multiplying of so beneficial a River,
Herod. 2. Diod. 1.. 2.
Egypt was Traversed with an infinite number of Channels of an incredible length
and largeness. Nilus carried fruitfulness every where with its wholesome Waters,
united Towns to one another, and the great Sea to the red Sea, kept up Commerce
both within and our of the Kingdom, and fortified it against the Enemy: so that
it was altogether both the Nourisher and the Defender of Egypt. The Fields were
swallowed up with it; but the Towns that were set above by vast pains and
labor, and raised as Islands in the midst of the Waters, joyful at such their
advancements, they beheld all the Plain overflown; and at the same time made
fruitful by the Nile. When it swelled it self above Measure, there were great
Lakes cut hollow by the Kings that opened their Bosoms to the poured our
Waters. They have their discharges prepared; great Sluices opened or shut them
up as there was occasion; and the Waters having thus their retreat, tarried no
longer on the Earth than just what was necessary to Marle, and make 'em fertile.

Such was the use of this great Lake, which was called the Lake of Myris, or of
Moeris: Herod. 10. Diod. ibid.
It was the name of the King that had caused it to be made. One would be
astonished to read what notwithstanding is very certain, that the Compass of it
round, was about a hundred and fourscore of our Leagues. That too much of the
good Land might not be lost by the cutting it hollow, they extended it chiefly
toward the Coast of Libya. The Fishery was worth to the King vast Sums of
Money; and so when the Land did not produce any thing it yielded Treasures by
being covered with the Waters. Two Pyramids, each of which bore upon a Throne
two Colossus-like Statues, the one of Myris, the other of his Wife, were raised
three hundred Foot high in the midst of the Lake, and were of an equal Depth
under the Water: So that they showed that they were built before the Hollow was
filled, and that a Lake of that vast Extent was made by Man's Hand under one
single Prince.

Those who do not know to what degree the Earth may be improved, take for a
Romance what is related of the number of the Towns in Egypt. Herod. 2. Diod. 1.
2.
The Richness of them is no less incredible. There was not one of them that had
not magnificent Temples, and most stately and august Palaces. Architecture
discovered there in all things such a noble Simplicity and Greatness, that it
took up the whole Imagination. Diod. Ibid.
The long Galleries exposed to every ones View such Sculptures in them as
Greece took for Models. Thebes was able to dispute it with the finest Cities of
the Universe. Her hundred Gates, which Homer sung of, are known to all the
World. She was as full of People as she was vast, Pomp. Mel. 1. 9.
and it was said she could at one time draw out ten thousand Combatants through
each of her Gates.

Let there be, if you please, a little stretch in that Number, yet it is most
certain that her People were not to be numbered. The Greeks and the Romans have
celebrated their Magnificence and their Grandeur, though they had only seen the
Ruins of her; Strab. 17. Tac. Ann. 2. 6.
so extremely splendid were her Remains.

If our Travelers had got so far as where this City was built, they would, no
doubt, have yet found something incomparable in her Ruins: For the Works of
the Egyptians were made to hold out against the destruction of time. Their
Statues were Colosses; Herod. and Diod. loc. citat.
their Pillars vast; Egypt aimed at Grandeur, and to strike the Eyes at a
distance, but always to content by the Justice of the Proportions. There were
discovered in Sand, or Salid (you know very well that that is the name of
Thebais) Temples and Palaces almost yet entire, Voyag. pr. by M. Thevenot.
where those Pillars and Statues are innumerable. One Palace is admired there
above all, the Remains of which seem only to continue to efface the Glory of
all, even the greatest Works. Four Galleries, whose Prospect lost our Sight,
bounded on each side by Sphinxes of as curious a Substance as their Greatness
is remrkable, serve as Avenues to four Portico's of such a hight as were an
Astonishment to the Eyes. What Magnificence and Extent was there! As yet, those
that have described to us this prodigious Building, have not had time of going
round it; nay, and are not very sure they have seen above half of it, but
however, all they have seen was very surprising. A Hall, which seems to be
placed in the middle of that stately Palace, was supported by six score Pillars
of thirty Foot in Compass, proportionably high, and intermixed with Obelisques,
which so many Ages have never been able yet to demolish. Even the Colors, that
is to say, that which rather tried the Power of time, are still preserved among
the Ruins of that admirable Edifice; ay, and preserved in their Strength and
Vivacity: So skilled was Egypt in imprinting the Characters of Immortality on
all her Works. Now that the Name of the King is gone through all the unknown
Parts of the World, and that that Prince likewise extends his Researches as far
as he has caused to be made the most beautiful Works of Nature and of Art,
would it not be an Object worthy of so noble a Curiosity, to discover the
Beauties which Thebais locks up in her Deserts, and to enrich our Architecture
with the Inventions of Egypt? What Power and what Art was it, that could make
such a Country to be the Wonder of the Universe? And what Beauties might there
not be found if we come yet unto this Royal City, since that at so great a
Distance from it, such Marvels are discovered?

But it is Egypt's Glory alone to erect Monuments for Posterity. Her
Obelisques, even at this day, as well by their Beauty as their height, do make
up the chief Ornaments of Rome; and the Roman Power despairing of ever
equalling the Egyptian, thought it would pretty well contribute to their
Greatness by borrowing the Monuments of their Kings.

Egypt had not yet seen any great Buildings besides the Tower of Babel, when
she invented her Pyramids, which as well by their Figures as by their Grandeur
triumphed over Time and Barbarians. The good Judgment of the Egyptians made
them then to be in love only with things truly Solid and Regular. Whether
Nature of her self, brought it to that simple Air to which it is so hard to
return, when the Judgment was vitiated by Novelties and extravagant attempts
however it be, the Egyptian have only loved regular attempts: they have only
aimed to be new and surprising in the infinite variety of Nature, and boasted
that they only, like the Gods, had made Immortal Works. The Inscriptions of the
Pyramids, were no less noble than the work it self. They spoke to the
Beholders. One of those Pyramids built with Brick, by its Title admonished all
lookers on, how they did compare her with the rest, saying, that she was as
much above all the other Pyramids, as Jupiter was above all the other Gods.

But whatsoever the efforts of Men were, there nothing was visible in every
thing. Those Pyramids were only Tombs; and yet the Kings who built them, Herod.
ibid. Diod. 1 Sect. 2.
have not been able to get an Inter^ment in them, and they have not enjoyed
their Sepulcher.

I should not speak of that Beautiful Palace, called the Labyrinth, if
Herodotus, who saw it, did not assure us that it was more surprising than the
Pyramids. Herod. ibid. Diod. 1 Sect. 2.
It was built on the side of the Lake of Myris, and a prospect was given to it
proportionably to the Grandeur of it. Otherwise, it was not so much one single
Palace, as a Magnificent Pile of twelve Palaces regularly disposed, and which
had as it were, one Communication. Fifteen hundred Chambers joined to Terass
Walks, were all ranged round a dozen Halls, and all those that came to visit
them, were at a loss how to find their way out again. The Building was as large
under ground. Those lower Fabrics were designed for the Sepulcher of Kings,
and (who can mention it without gr^ef and Shame, and deep deploring the
Blindness of Mankind?) yet withal to nourish consecrated Crocodiles, which were
the Gods of a Nation in all things else so great and wise.

You would be astonished to see so much Magnificence in the Sepulchers of
Egypt. For besides that they erected them as sacred Monuments to bear to future
Ages, the Memory of those great Princes, they looked upon them over and above
as Eternal Habitations. The Houses were called Inns, where we were only to be
en passant, and for a Life too short to finish our designs in, Diod. ibid.
but the true Houses were the Tombs which we were to dwell in to infinite Ages.

But Egypt laid not out its utmost efforts on inanimate things. Her more noble
works, and her most delicate art lay in forming the Manners of Men. Greece was
so convinced of it, that her greatest Men, such as Homer, Pythagoras, Plato,
Lycurgus also, and Solon, those two great Legislators, and others needless here
to mention, went to learn Wisdom in Egypt. God would even that Moses should be
learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians: Act. 7.20, 21, 22.
and by that came he to be Mighty in Words and in Deeds. True Wisdom makes use
of every thing, and God will not have those whom he inspires, to neglect humane
means, which do also in their way come from him.

Those Sages of Egypt had studied Rule and Government, which made their Minds
solid, their Bodies robust, their Wives fruitful, and their Children strong and
vigorous. By which means the People increased in number and in Force. The
Country was naturally healthful, but Philosophy had taught them that Nature
required Assistance. There is an art in forming Bodies as well as Minds. This
Art, which by Negligence we have lost, was very well known to the Ancients, and
Egypt had found it. Diod. 1. Sect. 1.
It principally made use of Frugality and Exercises for a good Design. In a
great Field of War which Herodotus saw, Herod 3.
the Sculls of the Persians easy to be pierced, and those of the Egyptians more
hard than the Stones, with which they were mingled, plainly showed the softness
of the one, and the robust Constitution, which a frugal Diet, and vigorous
Exercises gave to the other. Courses on Foot, Races on Horseback and in
Chariots were much practiced in Egypt, and with an admirable Address, and there
were not in all the World better Horsemen than the Egyptians. When Diodorus
tells us, Lu Diod 1. Sect. 2.
they despised the Lute as an Exercise which had a dangerous Strength, and was
but of a short Continuance, he would be understood of the Lute, broken by the
Wrestlers, which Greece her self, who Crowned it in her Games, had Condemned,
as but very little agreeable to free Persons; but with a certain moderation, it
was very well becoming Gentlemen, and Diodorus himself informs us, that the
Mercury of the Egyptians had invented the Rules of it, as well as the Art of
forming Bodies. The same must be understood also in what that Author says
concerning Music. That which he makes the Egyptians; to despise, Id. Sect. 2.
as being apt to soften and debase the Courage, was doubtless that soft and
Effeminate Music, which only provoked them to Pleasures, and to a false and
Womanish tenderness. For as for that generous Music, whose noble Concords
raise the Mind and Heart, the Egyptians never slighted that, seeing, as
Diodorus himself tells us, their Mercury had invented it, Id. 1. Sect. 1.
and had also invented the gravest sorts of Musical Instruments. In the solemn
Procession of the Egyptians, where the Books of Trismegistus were carried in
Pomp, there was seen the Chanter at the Head, holding in his Hand a Symbol of
Music (I know not what it was) and the Book of the sacred Hymns. Clem. Alex
Strom. lib. 6.
In short, Egypt forget nothing that might polish Mind, ennoble the Heart, and
fortify the Body. Four hundred Thousand Soldiers, which she maintained, were
those of her Citizens, which she exercised with the exactest Care. The Laws of
the Militia were easily kept, and as it were by themselves, because the Parents
instructed their Children in them: for the Profession of War went from Father
to Son, as other Professions did; and next to the Priestly Families, those that
were accounted the most Illustrious, were as among us the Families designed for
Arms. But yet I will not say that Egypt has been very Martial. She has had a
great many Troops well disciplined and kept; she has often exercised them for
a Show in Military Services, and as it were, had the Images and resemblances of
Combats; but it is only War and downright Fighting, that makes Men Warriors.
Egypt loved Peace, because she loved Justice, and had only Soldiers for her
Defense. Being contented with her own Country, which had plenty of all things,
she never thought of enlarging it by Conquests. She did it after another way,
by sending her Colonies all the World over, and with them politeness and Laws.
The most celebrated Cities came to learn in Egypt their Antiquities, Plat. in
Tim.
and the first beginning of their most excellent Institutions. They consulted
her on all sides in the Rules of Wisdom. When those of Elis had set up the
Olympic Games, the most famous of all Greece, they sought by a Solemn Embassy
the approbation of the Egyptians, and learnt from them new ways of encouraging
the Combatants. Egypt reigned by her Councels, and that Government of
Understanding appeared to her more noble and glorious than that she established
by her Arms. Although the Kings of Thebes were incomparably the most puissant
of all the Kings of Egypt, yet they never attempted upon the neighboring
Dynasties which they only enjoyed when they had been invaded by the Arabians:
so that to speak truly, they rather chose to get from Strangers, than were
willing to Lord it over their own natural Countrymen. But when they concerned
themselves with being Conquerours, they surpassed all others. I do not speak of
Osiris the Conqueror of the Indians; probably that was Bacchus, or some other
Hero as fabulous. Diod. l. 1.. 2.
The Father of Sesostris (the Learned will have him Amenophis, otherwise
Memnon) either through instinct or humor, or as the Egyptians say, by the
Authority of an Oracle, first thought of making his Son a Conqueror. He
followed the way of the Egyptians in it, that is to say, with great
deliberation. All Children that were born the same day as Sesostris, were
brought to Court by the King's Command. He bred them up as if they were his
own, and with the same care as Sesostris, near whom they were bred. He could
not give him either more faithful Ministers, or more zealous Companions for his
Battles. When he was somewhat grown up, he made him serve his Apprenticeship in
a War against the Arabians. That young Prince there learnt to be patient of
Hunger and Thirst, and brought that Nation into Submission, which till then was
untameable. Being accustomed to Warlike labors by that Conquest, his Father
made him turn to the East of Egypt; he attacked Libya, and a great part of that
vast Region was subjugated. About this time his Father dyed, leaving him in a
condition of undertaking all things. He formed no less a Design than that of
the Conquest of the World: but before he went out of his Kingdom, he provided
for his own security in it, in gaining the affections of all his People by his
Liberal^ty and Justice, Diod. ibid.
and also so by regulating the Government with an extreme Prudence. In the mean
while he was making his Preparations, he levied Soldiers, and gave than for
their Captai^s those young men which his Father had caused to be bred up with
him. There were sevente^n hundred of them, able to insp^re into all the Army
Courage, Discipline, and the Love of their Prince. That done, he entered into
Ethiopia, which he made Tributary to him. He went on with his Victories in
Asia. Jerusalem was the first that felt the force of his Arms. Rash and violent
Rehoboam could not resist him, so that Sesostris carried away the Riches of
Solomon. God, by a just Judgment, had delivered them into his hands. He
traveled into the Indies further than Hercules, or Bacchus, Ibid.
and further than ever was done since Alexander, for he subjugated the Country
beyond Ganges. You may therefore judge if the more neighboring Countries
withstood him. The Scythians obeyed him even to Tanais: Armenia and Cappadocia
became his Subjects. He left a Colony in the ancient Kingdom of Colchos, where
the Customs of Egypt have always continued since. Herodotus has seen in lesser
Asia, from one Sea to the other, the Monuments of his Victories, with the proud
Inscriptions of Sesostris, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. There were some of
them even in Thrace, and he extended his Empire from Ganges to the Danube. The
difficulty of getting Victuals, kept him from entering any further into Europe.
He returned after nine years laden with the Spoils of all the conquered
People. Some of them had very courageously defended their liberty; others
yielded without resistance. Sesostris took care to mark out in his Monuments
the difference of those in Hieroglyphick Figures; after the manner of the
Egyptians. To describe his Empire, he found out Geographical Cards. A hundred
famous Temples erected to the honor of the Tutelary Go^s of all the Towns,
were the first as well as the most beautiful Tokens of his Conquests, and he
was very careful to publish in the Inscriptions, that those great Works had
been accomplished without any fatigue to his Subjects. Herod. 10. Diod. ib.
He made it his glory to govern them discreetly, and not to make any but his
Captives to assist at the Monuments of his Victories. Solomon had given him the
Example of it. 2 Chronicles. 8.9.
That wise Prince employed only his Tributary People in the great Works which
rendered his Reign Immortal. The Citizens were engaged in more noble Exercises:
they were men of War, and chief of his Captains. Sesostris could not regulate
himself by a more perfect Model. He reigned thirty three years, and a long time
enjoyed his Triumphs, Diod. 1.. 2.
much more worthy of Honor and Glory, if his Vanity had not made him to be
drawn in his Chariot by vanquished Kings. It seems he scorned to meet Death as
other men; for being become blind in his old Age, he was his own Executioner in
giving himself death, and so leaving Egypt rich for ever. His Empire however
did not exceed the fourth Generation. But there remained yet in the time of
T^^erius, very magnificent Monuments, which sufficiently showed the Extent of
it, as well as the Quantity of his Tributes. Egypt soon returned to her own
peaceful Humor. Ticit. Ann. 2.
It has been writ that Sesostris was the first, that after his Conquests
softened the Tempers of the Egyptians, into the fear of Revolting. If we may
believe so, it could only be a Precaution he took up for his Successors;
Nymphod. l. 12. rer. barb. post Herod.
wise, and absolute as he was, what could be seen that might make him fearful
of his Subjects who adored him? Besides, such a Thought as that was unworthy so
great a Prince, and it was an ill Provision for the Security of his Conquests,
to suffer the Courage of his Subjects to be weakened and dejected. It is true
likewise that that great Empire did not last long. It was to fall some way or
other. A Divisio^ was made in Egypt. Under Anysis the blind, the Ethiopian
Sabacon invaded the Kingdom. He treated the People of it as well, and did there
as great things as any of the natural Kings. Never was there see a Moderation
like to that of his, since that after sixty years of a happy reign, he returned
into Ethiopia to obey the Advertisements which he believed came from Heaven.
The Kingdom thus left, fell into the hands of Sethon Priest of Vulcan, a
Religious Prince after his way, but a small Warrior, and who absolutely
enervated the Militia, by his ill treating of his Soldiers. From that time
Egypt maintained her self only by strange Forces. There was found in her a kind
of Anarchy: for there were twelve Kings chosen by the People, who shared among
them the Government of the Kingdom. 'Twas those who built the twelve Palaces
that make up the Labyrinth. Though Egypt could not forget her Magnificences, yet
she was weakened and divided under those twelve Princes. One of them (to wit
Psammeticus) made himself the Master by the assistance of Strangers. Egypt was
re-established, and remained pretty powerful for five or six Reigns. At length
that ancient Kingdom, after it had continued about sixteen hundred Years,
weakened by the Kings of Babylon and by Cyrus, became a Prey to Cambyses, the
most violent and outrageous of all Princes.

Those who very well understood the Humor of Egypt, Strab. l. 17.
have confessed that she was not given to War: You have heard the Reasons of
it. She lived in Peace about thirteen hundred Years, when she brought forth her
first Warrior, who was Sesostris. Also notwithstanding her Militia so carefully
disciplined and kept up, yet we see at last, that her greatest Force consisted
in strange Troops, which is one of the most deplorable Defects that a State can
have. But no humane things are perfect, and it is no easy thing to have in
Perfection both the Arts of Peace and the Advantages of War. It Is a long
Continuance to have subsisted for sixteen hundred Years. Some Ethiopians
Reigned at Thebes in that Interval, among others, Sabacon, and as we may
believe, Taraca. But Egypt gained this Benefit from the excellent Constitution
of her State, that the Strangers who conquered her, rather took up her Customs
than introduced any of their own there: Thus changing of Masters she made no
change of Government. She could very hardly endure the Persians, whose Yoke she
would often shake. But she was not martial enough to support her self by her
own Force, against so great a Power, and the Grecians, who defended her, being
engaged by other Diversions, were forced to leave her: So that she fell back
again always to her first Masters, but however she was resolutely tenacious of
her old Customs, and incapable of being brought off from the Maxims of her
first Kings. And although she retained many of them under the Ptolomy's, yet the
mixture of the Grecian and Asiatick Fashion was so great in her, that she could
scarce be any longer known for old Egypt.

We must not forget that the times of the ancient Kings of Egypt are very
uncertain, Diod. 1. Sect. 2.
even in the History of the Egyptians. We hardly know where to place
Osymanduas, though we see so many magnificent Monuments of him in Diodorus, and
such glorious Signs of his Combats. It seems the Egyptians knew not who was
Sesostris his Father, for neither Herodotus nor Diodorus have named him. His
Power, however, is more remarkable by the Monuments he has left in all the
Earth, than by the Memoires of his Country; and those Reasons do show us that
we are not to believe, as some do, that what Egypt has published of her
Antiquities, have been always so exact and punctual as she has boasted, seeing
that she her self is so uncertain of the most signal time of her Monarchy.

THE great Empire of the Egyptians was, as it were, detached from all others,
IV. The Assyrian^ both ancient and modern, the Medes and Cyrus.
and as you have seen, had not a very long Continuance. That which we have now
to say, is more supported, and has more particular Dates.

Nevertheless we have yet very few things certain concerning the first Empire
of the Assyrians: But let us place the beginning of it at what time we will,
according to the different Opinions of the Historians, you will see, that when
the World was divided into several petty States, which the Princes rather
thought how to preserve than to enlarge; Ninus, who was more forward and
undertaking, Diod. lib. 2. Just. 1.
and withal, more puissant than his Neighbors, subdued them one after another,
and went on with his Conquests far up in the East. His Wife Semiramis, who
together with the Ambition that is common enough to her Sex, joined a Courage,
and a continued Series of Councels, which is but very seldom found in it, kept
up the vast Designs of her Husband, and finished the forming of that Monarchy.

It was doubtless very great, and the greatness of Nineveh, Strabo 16.
which was set above that of Babylon, Herod. 1. Dion. H^l. 1. App. init. op.
sufficiently shows it. But as the most judicious Historians do not make this
Monarchy so ancient as others represent it to us, Genesis 14.1, 2. Jud. 3.8.
Plat. de l^g. 3.
so neither do they report it to be so great. We have seen a very long Duration
of the petty Kingdoms of which he must have composed it, if it be as ancient
and as large, as the fabulous Ctesias, and those who have taken it upon his
Word, describe it to us. It Is true Plato, a curious Observer of Antiquities,
makes the Kingdom of Troy in the time of Priam, a Dependence of the Assyrian
Empire. But there is no notice taken of it in Homer, who, in the Design he had
to advance the Glory of Greece, would not have forgot such a Circumstance; and
we may think that the Assyrians were little known toward the West, seeing so
learned and so curious a Poet in adorning his Poem with every thing that was
pertinent to his Subject, has not any where made them to appear there.

Yet, according to the Computation we have judged most reasonable, the time of
the Siege of Troy was the finest time of all the Assyrians had, for it was that
in which Semiramis made her Conquests: But she only extended them Eastward.
Those who are the greatest Flatterers, make her turn her Arms on that side. She
had had too great a Share in the Councels and Victories of Ninus, not to follow
his Designs, otherwise so agreeable to the Situation of her Empire, and I do
not believe it can be doubted but that Ninus kept close to the East, because
Justin himself, who favors him as much as is possible, makes him to end his
Enterprises on the West side, at the Frontiers of Libya.

Therefore I know not at what time Nineveh could extend her Conquests even to
Troy, because we see so little likelihood that Ninus and Semiramis had
undertook any such thing; and that all their Successors, to begin from their
Son Ninyas, have lived in such an effeminate Softness, and with so little
Action, that scarce their Names have reached to our Ears, and we might much
rather wonder how their Empire was able to subsist so long, than believe it
could be so enlarged.

It was, questionless, much diminished by the Conquests of Sesostris; but as
they were of a short Continuance, and but poorly kept up by his Successors, we
may easily believe that the Countries which they took from the Assyrians, being
used a long time to their Domination, would naturally turn to them again: So
that that Empire kept it self in great Puissance, and in great Peace, until
that Arbaces having discovered the softness of their Kings, so long concealed
in the Secrets of their Palaces, Sardanapulus celebrated by his Infamies,
became not only contemptible, but also insupportable to his Subjects.

You have seen the Kingdoms that came from the Ruins of that first Empire of
the Assyrians, among others, that of Nineveh, and that of Babylon. The Kings of
Niniveh retained the Name of Kings of Assyria, and were the most puissant.
Their Pride quickly raised them above all Bounds by the Conquests they
obtained, among which is accounted that of the Kingdom of the Israelites, or of
Samaria. It could be nothing less than the Hand of God, and a visible Miracle,
that kept them from overwhelming Judea under Hezekiah; and it was unknown what
Bounds could be given to their Power, when they were seen a little while after
in their Neighborhood to invade the Kingdom of Babylon, where the Royal Family
was decayed.

Babylon seemed to be born to command all the World. Xen. Cyr. 2.1.5
Her People were full of Spirit and Courage. Always Philosophy reigned among
them, and the generous Arts, and the East had not much better Soldiers than the
Chaldeans. Antiquity admired the rich Harvests of a Country which the
negligence of its Inhabitants now leaves without Culture: Herod. 1.
and its Abundance made the ancient Kings of Persia look on it as a third part
of so great an Empire. Thus the Kings of Assyria, swollen with an Increase which
added to their Monarchy so opulent a City, formed new Designs. Nebuchadnezzar
the first thought his Empire unworthy of him, unless he could add the whole
Universe to it. Nebuchadnezzar the second, prouder than all the Kings his
Predecessors, after his unheard of Successes, and astonishing Conquests, rather
chose to make himself be adored as a God, than to command as a King. What works
did not he undertake in Babylon? What Walls, what Towers, what Gates, and what
Circumvallations were there seen? It seemed as if the old Tower of Babel was
going to be renewed in the prodigious height of the Temple of Bell, and that
Nebuchadnezzar had resolved to storm Heaven anew. His Pride, although brought
down by the hand of God, did not cease to spring up again in his Successors.
They could not induce any Domination about them; and resolving to bring all
under the Yoke, they became insupportable to the neighboring People. That
Jealousy reunited against them together, with the Kings of Media and the Kings
of Persia, a great part of the Eastern People. Xen. Cyr. 3.4.
Pride is easily turned into Cruelty. As the Kings of Babylon did inhumanely
treat their Subjects, whole Countries, as well as the Chief Lords of their
Empire joined with Cyrus and the Medes. Babylon, too much used to Command and
Conquer, to fear so many Enemies that were all languid against her, whilst she
thought her self invincible, became Captive to the Medes whom she pretended to
subdue, and her Pride at last proved her utter ruin and destruction.

The Fate of this great City was strange, seeing she fell by her own
Inventions. Euphrates had almost in her vast Plains the same effect as Nilus
had in those of Egypt: but to make it more commodious, there was required more
of Art and Labor than Egypt used for the Nile. Herod. 1.
Euphrates was direct in its Course, and never overflowed. They were forced to
make throughout all the Country an infinite number of Channels, that so it might
water their Grounds, whose fruitfulness by that means became incomparable. To
break the violence of its too impetuous Waters, it was necessary to make it run
through a thousand Turnings, and to hollow it with great Lakes, which a wise
Queen filled up again with an incredible magnificence. Nitocris, the Mother of
Labynithes, otherwise called Nabonides, or Belshazzar, the last King of
Babylon, did those great Works. But that Queen undertook a Business much more
surprising and mavelous: It was to build a Stone Bridge over Euphrates, that
so the two Quarters of the City, which the vast largeness of that River
separated at two great a distance, might communicate together. It was necessary
therefore first to dry up so raped and so deep a River, by turning those Waters
into a most huge and unmeasurable Lake which yet that Queen caused to be
dug. At the same time they built the Bridge, the solid Materials whereof
were prepared before, and they bricked up the two sides of the River to a most
astonishing height, making Descents from it likewise of Brick, and of as good
Work as the Walls of the City. The Diligence that was used herein equalled he
Grandeur of it. But a Queen so discerning as she was, yet never thought that
she instructed her Enemies how to take her City. Herod. ibid.
It was into that same Lake which she had hollowed that Cyrus turned Euphrates,
when despairing of his reducing Babylon, either by Force or Famine, he opened
into it from the two sides of the City that Passage which we have seen so much
pointed at by the Prophets.

If Babylon could have but believed she had been perishable as all other humane
things, and an extravagant confidence had not thrown her into downright
blindness: Ibid.
she might not only have been able to foresee what Cyrus did, seeing that the
remembrance of such a Work as that was very fresh; but also by guarding all the
Descents she had overthrown the Persians in the Chanel of the River where they
passed. But they thought of nothing but their Pleasures and Entertainments:
they had neither order nor any regular command in them. And so are destroyed
not only the strongest Places, but also the greatest Empires. Dread and
astonishment filled every place; the Impious King was killed, and Xenophon, who
gives that Title to the last King of Babylon, Xenoph. 7.
seems by that word to aim at the Sacriledges of Belshazzar, which Daniel makes
us to see punished by so surprising a fall.

The Medes, who had destroyed the first and chiefest Empire of the Assyrians,
destroyed also the second, as if that Nation had been designated to be fatal to
the Assyrian Grandeur. But at this last time the valor and great name of Cyrus
made the Persians his Subjects to have the honor of this Conquest. And indeed,
it was entirely owing to this Hero, Xenoph. Cyr. 1.
who having been bred up under a severe and regular Discipline, according to
the Custom of the Persians, a People also then as moderate, as since they have
been voluptuous, was enured from his Infancy to a sober and military Life. The
Medes heretofore so laborious and martial, but at length being softened through
their Plenty and Abundance, as it always happens, had great need of such a
General. Cyrus made use of their Riches and of their Name, always respected in
the East: Pol. 5.44.10 24. Xenoph. Cyr. 4.5.
but he placed his hopes of Success in the Troops he had brought from Persia.
At the first Battle the King of Babylon was killed, and the Egyptians routed.
The Conqueror sent a Challenge to the new King; and by showing his Courage, he
gave himself the reputation of a merciful Prince who spares the Blood of his
Subjects. To his Valor he joined Policy; For fear of ruining so fine a
Country, which he already looked on as his Conquest, he resolved to have the
Laborers saved on both sides. He knew how to awaken the Jealousy of the
neighboring People against the proud and haughty Puissance of Babylon, that
was for Invading all; and at length the Glory that he gained, as much by his
Generosity and Justice, as by the Happiness of his Arms, having reunited them
all under his Standards, with such great Assistances he subdued that vast
extent of Land whereof he made his Empire.

Thus was this Monarchy raised. Cyrus made it so Puissant, that it could not
very much fail of aggrandizing it self under its Successors. But to understand
how it came to be destroyed, we need only to compare the Persians and the
Successors of Cyrus, with the Greeks and their Generals, especially with
Alexander.

CAMBYSES the Son of Cyrus was he who corrupted the Manners of the Persians.
His Father, V. The Persians, the Grecians, and Alexander.
who was so well brought up in all the Arts and Cares of War, took not care
enough to give to the Successor of so great an Empire an Education suitable to
his own: and by the common Fate of humane things too much greatness destroys
Virtue. Darius the Son of Hystaspes, Plat. de leg. 3.
who from a private Life was raised unto the Throne, brought better
dispositions to the Sovereign Power, and made some efforts to repair the
Disorders. But the Corruption was already too universal: Abundance had
introduced great Irregularities into their Manners; and Darius had not himself
observed so just a strictness as to be able on the sudden to redress others.
Every thing degenerated under his Successors, and the Luxury of the Persians
was not circumscribed by any Bounds or Measure.

But although those People, then become powerful, had lost very much of their
ancicient Virtue, by giving themselves up to their Pleasures, they had yet
always kept up something that was great and noble. What is there to be seen
more noble than the horror they had for lying, which was always accounted by
them a most base and shameful Vice? Plat. Alcib. 1. Herod. lib. 1.
What they looked upon as very unworthy next to lying, was to live upon
borrowing. Such a Life as that seemed to them to be idle, shameful, servile,
and so much the more contemptible, as it led on to lying. By a Generosity that
was natural to their Nation, Herod. 3.
they always treated vanquished Kings with great Civility. If the Children of
those Princes were not able to be assistant to the Conquerours, they left them
to Command in their own Countries with almost all the Marks of their ancient
Grandeur. The Persians were Courteous, Civil, Liberal to Strangers, and they
knew how to make use of them. Persons of Merit were considered by them, and
they spared for nothing to gain them. It Is true, they were not arrived at the
perfect knowledge of that Wisdom which instructed how to govern well. The great
Empire was always ruled with some confusion. They could never find out that
curious Art so well practiced since by the Romans, of uniting all the Parts of
a great Estate, and making but one perfect whole of them. So likewise were they
scarce ever without some considerable Revolts. Yet they had their Polity among
them. The Rules of Justice they understood, and they have had great Kings which
have made them be observed with an admirable exactness. Crimes were severely
punished, but with that moderation, that in easily pardoning the first Faults,
Herod. 1.
they corrected the after Relapses with rigorous Chastisements. They had a
great many good Laws, Plat. de leg. 3. Esth. 1.13.
almost all came from Cyrus, and from Darius the Son of Hystaspes. They had
Maxims of Government, Councils ordered for the maintaining them, and a great
Subordination in all Employments. When they said that the Great men who made up
the Council, Xenoph. Cyr. 8.
were the Eyes and the Ears of the Prince; they meant all together with the
Prince: that he had his Ministers as we have the Organs of our Senses, not for
him to be idle, but to act by their means; and the Ministers, that they were
not to act for themselves, but for the Prince who was their Chief, and for all
the Body of the State. Those Ministers were to be instructed in the ancient
Maxims of the Monarchy. The Register which they kept of past Occurrences,
served as Rules to Posterity. Esth. 1.13. Ibid. 6.
There were put down the Services which every one had done, for fear lest to
the shame of the Prince, and the great unhappiness of the State, they should
continue unrewarded, It was one good way to engage particular men to the
Public Weal, Herod. 1.
to tell them that they never were to Sacrifice for themselves alone, but for
the King, and for all the State, in which every one was concerned with the
other. One of the chiefest cares of the Prince was to see Agriculture flourish:
and those Noblemen whose Government was the best cultivated, had the greatest
part of the Thanks. As there were Offices set up for the Conduct of Arms, so
there were likewise some established to inspect into the Country Labors: So
that they were two Charges alike, one of which was to take care to preserve the
Country, and the other to cultivate it. The Price protected them with almost an
equal affection, and made them to concur to the Weal-Publick. Next to those who
had brought some advantages from the War, they were most honored who had bred
up a great many Children. The respect wherewith the Persians were inspired from
their Infancy for Regal Authority was grown to that excess, that they mingled
Adoration with it, and appeared rather Slaves than Subjects, brought by reason
to pay their Submission to a legitimate Empire: This was the Eastern Humor,
and peradventure the brisk and violent Nature of those People required a
Government that was more firm and more absolute.

The manner how they bred up the Children of Kings is admired by Plato, and
proposed to the Grecians as the model of a perfect Education. Plat. Alcib. 1.
At seven Years of Age, they are taken from the hands of the Eunuchs to teach
them how to ride on Horseback, and to follow the Chase. At fourteen, when the
Mind begins to form it self, there are given them to their Instructors, four
Men, who are the most Virtuous and Wise that can be found out in the Kingdom.
The first, says Plato, teaches them Magic, that is to say in their Language,
the Worship of the Gods, according to the ancient Maxims, and according to the
Laws of Zoroastres the Son of Oromases. The second instructed them how to speak
the Truth, and how to do Justice. The third taught them how they should not
suffer themselves to be overcome by their Pleasures, that so they might be
always free and truly Kings, Masters of themselves, and of their desires. The
fourth fortified their Courage against Fear, which had made slaves of them, and
had robbed them of that Confidence, which was so necessary for Command. The
young Lords were bred up at the Gate of the King with his Children, Xenoph. de
exped. Cyri. Jun. lib. 1.
there was particular Care taken that they should neither see nor hear any
thing that was unbecoming, they gave the King an account of their Conduct. And
that account which was given of them; was by his Order attended with suitable
Punishments or Rewards. The Youth who saw them, did early with their Virtue,
learn the knowledge of both, how to obey and command. And with such an
Institution, what might not be hoped for from the Kings of Persia, and their
Nobles, if as great a Care had been taken to direct them well in the Progress
of their Age, as there always was to instruct them in their Infancy? But the
corrupted Manners of the Nation drew them quickly into their Enchanted
Pleasures, against which no Education can Fence. Yet it must be confessed, that
notwithstanding the Effeminacy of the Persians, and notwithstanding the Care
they had of their Beauty, and of their Dress, they wanted not Valor. They
stood always much on that, and they have given very signal marks of it. The
Military Art with them had the preference it deserved, as that under the
Covert, whereof all others might be exercised in quiet. Xenoph.
But they never understood the bottom of it, nor knew what an Army could do
that used Severity, Discipline, ranking of their Troops, the order of Marches
and Incampments; and to conclude, a certain Conduct, which made those great
Bodies to move without Confusion, and in the best manner. They thought they had
done all, when they had collected together a huge number of People without any
choice, to go to the War with Bravery and Courage, but without Order, and who
found themselves Embarassed with an infinite multitude of unnecessary Persons,
whom the King and the great Men drew after them only for their Pleasures. For
their Effeminacy was so great, that they would find in the Army the same
Magnificence and delicacies as in those places where the Court made its
ordinary Commoration and Stay, so that the Kings marched with their Wives,
their Concubines, their Eunuchs, and whatsoever else might contribute to their
Pleasures. Their Gold and Silver Vessels, and the best sort of moveable
Household Goods followed in a most prodigious abundance; and in short, all the
train that such a Life requires. An Army made up of this manner, and already
encumbred with the excessive Multitude of its Soldiers, was overcharged by the
unaccountable number of those who did not Fight. In this Confusion, it was
impossible to move in any Regularity, and by consent; the Orders never came in
time, and in any action all went as they could, and no body could make any
Provision or Forecast. And withal they must make but a short work of it, and
come rapidly like a Torrent into a Country: for such a vast Body, and greedy
not only of what was necessary for Life, but also what was Serviceable for
their Pleasure, consumed all in a little time, and one can scarce imagine where
they could get all their substance.

And yet with this great Pomp and Ceremony did the Persians astonish the People
that understood the trade of War no better than themselves. And those who did
understand it, found themselves either weakened by their own divisions, or
overpowred by the Multitude of their Enemies; and by that means it was that
Egypt, a proud as she seemed to be both of her Antiquity, and of her wise
Institutions, and of the Conquests of her Sesostris, became subjected to the
Persians. It was no hard matter for them to conquer the lesser Asia, and also
the Greek Colonies, which the softness of Asia had Corrupted. But when they
came to Greece it self, they found what they had never seen, a regulated
Militia, well bred Commanders, Soldiers used to live sparingly, Bodies hardened
to Travel, which the Lute, and other Exercises common in that Country, had made
dexterous and nimble; Armies very small indeed, but yet were like to those
vigorous Bodies that seem to be all nervous, and where all is made up of Life
and Spirit; and withal so well commanded, and so compliant to the orders of
their Generals, that one would think that the Soldiers had all but one and the
same Soul, such an exact harmony of agreement was seen in all their Motions.

But what Greece had still, that was more great, was a firm and Provident
Polity, that understood how to abandon, hazard and defend what was necessary,
and what was greater yet, a Courage, which the love of Liberty, and that of its
Country made invincible.

The Greeks naturally full of Spirit and Courage had been early cultivated by
Kings and Colonies come from Egypt, which establishing themselves at the first
in diverse parts of the Country, had every where discovered that excellent
Polity of the Egyptians. From thence they learnt the Exercises of the Body,
the Lute, Foot-races, running on Horseback, and in Chariots, and the other
Exercises which they put in Perfection by the glorious Crowns of the Olympic
Games. But the best thing of all which the Egyptians had taught them was
Docility, and how they should form themselves by Laws for the public Weal.
This was not in particular relating only to their own private affairs, nor only
minding the Evils of the State, so far as they themselves suffered by them, or
the quiet of their Families were disturbed and troubled. The Greeks were taught
how to look after themselves, and also to have a regard for their Families, as
they were part of a greater Body, which was the Body of the State. Parents
educated their Children in this Principle; and the Children learnt from their
Cradles to look upon their Country as a common Mother, to whom they belonged
even more than to their Parents. The word Civility did not only signify among
the Greeks Humanity, Kindness, and mutual deference, which made Men Sociable: a
Civil Man was nothing else but a good Citizen, who always considered himself as
a Member of the State, which submitted to be governed by Laws, and with them.
Conspired to the public good, without making invasions upon any Man's right
and property. The ancient Kings whom the Greeks had had in diverse Countries, as
Minos, Cecrops, Plat. de leg. 3.
Theseus, Codrus Temenes, Cresphontus, Eurysthenes, Patroclus, and such as
these, had infused this Principle into all the Nation. They were all popular,
not at all in flattering the People, but in procuring their welfare, and in
making the Laws to be observed.

What shall I say of the gravity of their Judgments? What graver Tribunal was
there ever than that of the Areopagus so much had in reverence throughout all
Greece, as that it was said the Gods appeared there? It has been famous from
the earliest of time; and Cecrops probably founded it after the model of the
Tribunals in Egypt. Not any Society has so long kept up the reputation of its
ancient Gravity; for all manner of deceitful Rhetoric was ever banished from
it.

The Greeks thus polished by little and little, thought they were able to
govern themselves, and most of the Cities formed themselves into
Commonwealths. But the wise Legislators, who were set up in every Country,
Thales, Pythagoras, Pittacus, Lycurgus, Solon, Philolas, and as many others, as
Histories inform us of, took care that Liberty should not degenerate into
Licentiousness. Laws simply writ, and few in number, kept the People in their
Duty, and made them all concur to the public Weal of the Country.

The Idea of Liberty which such a Conduct inspired, was admirable: For the
Liberty which the Greeks figured to themselves, was a Liberty subject to the
Law, that is to say, to Reason it self acknowledged by all the People. They
would not have Men to have Power among them. The Magistrates who were feared
during the time of their Ministry, became private Men, who had only so much
Authority as their Experience gave them. The Law was looked on as the Mistress;
It was that which set up Magistrates, regulated their Power, and in a word,
which punished their Maladministration.

It is not here necessary to examine whether those Ideas were as solid as they
were specious. In short, Greece was charmed with them, and preferred the
Inconveniences of Liberty to those of lawful Subjection, though in reality much
less. But as every form of Government has its Advantages, that which Greece got
from her own, was, that the Citizens were so much the more in Love with their
own Country, as the all contributed to its Administration and Government, and
as every private Man might come up to the highest Honors.

How far Philosophy helped to preserve the State of Greece is incredible. The
more those People were free, the more necessary was it to establish among them
Rules of good Manners, and of Society. Pythagoras, Thales, Anaxagoras,
Socrates, Archytas, Plato, Xenophon, Aristotle, and a world of others, filled
Greece with those excellent Precep^* There were some extravagant Men that
assumed the Name of Philosophers, but those who were followed were such as
taught them to sacrifice their private Interest, and even their own Lives, for
the general Interest and Safety of the State: And it was the most common Maxim
of the Philosophers, that Men ought either to withdraw from public Affairs, or
else only have respect to the public Weal.

But why do we speak of the Philosophers? The very Poets themselves, who were
in the Hands of all the People, instruct them much more than they divert them.
The most famous of Conquerors look on Homer as a Master that taught to reign
well. That great Poet no less instructed how to obey well, and to be a good
Citizen; He and a many others, whose Works are equally grave as they are
pleasant, celebrate only those Arts that are useful to human Life, recommend
only the public Weal, their Country, Society, and that admirable Civility
which we have here displayed.

When Greece was thus refined, she looked on the Asiaticks with their Delicacy,
their starched Dress^s, and Beauty like that of their Women, and had them in
greatest Contempt. But their form of Government which was only regulated by the
Will and Command of their Prince, which was the Mistress of all, even their
most sacred Laws, wrought an absolute Abhorrence in them: And the most odious
Object that all Greece had, were the Barbarians.

The Grecians conceived this hatred from the very beginning, and it was become
as their second Nature. Isoc. Paneg.
One thing that made Homer's Poetry be beloved, was because he sang the
Victories and Advantages of Greece over Asia. On the part of Asia was Venus,
that is to say, Pleasures, foolish Loves and Softnesses; and on that of Greece
was Jum, and that is as much as Gravity joined with Conjugal Affection, Mercury
with Eloquence, Jupiter and Politic Wisdom. On the side of Asia was Mars
impetuous and brutish, that is to say, War made with Fury; on the G^ecian side
was Pallas, that is to say, the Military Art, and Valor led on by the Conduct
of the Mind. Greece had always from that time believed that Understanding and
true Courage was her natural Lot and Portion. She could by no means suffer Asia
to think of subduing her; for in undergoing that Yoke, she knew she must
subject Virtue to Pleasure, the Mind to the Body, and true Courage to a mad
extravagant Force, which consists only in the Multitude.

Greece was full of those Sentiments, when she was attacked by Darius the Son
of Hystaspes, and by Xerxes, with Armies whose greatness seems fabulous,
because it was so excessive. Immediately each are prepared to defend their
Liberty. Although all the Cities of Greece were as so many Commonwealths, yet
their common Interest reunited them, and there were no Disputes among them, but
to show who should do most for the Public Weal. It cost the Athenians nothing
to leave their City to be pillaged and burnt: and after they had saved their
old Men and their Wives with their Children, they put into Ships all that were
capable of bearing Arms. To put a stop for some days to the Persian Army at a
strait and difficult Passage; and to make it sensible what Greece was, a
handful of Lacedaemonians ran with their King to an assured Death, being
contented that in so dying they had sacrificed to their Country an infinite
number of those Barbarians, and had left to their Compatriots the brave Example
of an unheard of Boldness and Gallantry. Against such Armies and such a Conduct
Persia found her self weak, and oftentimes found to her loss, what Discipline
could do against Multitude and Confusion, and what Valor was able to effect,
that was conducted with Art against a blind Impetuosity.

Persia that was so many times overcome, had nothing left to do but to make
division among the Greeks: and the condition in which they found themselves by
their Victories, made that an easy Enterprise. As Fear kept them united, so
Victory and Confidence broke that Union. Plat. de Leg. 3.
Being used to fight and to conquer, when they thought they had nothing more to
fear from the power of the Persians, they fell then one upon another. But that
State of the Greeks, and the Secret of the Persian Polity wants a little
further Explication.

Among all the Republics, of which Greece was made up, Athens and Lacedemonia
were incomparatively the Chief. There could not be more Wit than was to be had
at Athens, nor more force and strength than what Lacedemonia afforded. Athens
was set upon Pleasure; the Lacedemonian life was hard and laborious. They both
loved Glory and Liberty: but at Athens Liberty naturally tended to
Licentiousness; and Lacedemonia being held in by her severe Laws, the more she
was suppressed within, the more did she endeavor to enlarge her Dominion
abroad. Athens was desirous all of Rule, but it was from another Principle.
Interest and Honor went together. Her Citizens were excellent in the Art of
Navigation; and the Sea over which she reigned had enriched her. To make her
self sole Mistress of all Commerce, there was nothing she could not attempt to
subject; and her Riches which had filled her with that desire, furnished her
with ways and means how to satisfy it. On the contrary, the Lacedaemonians had
Money in Contempt. As all her Laws tended to make her a Martial Republic, the
glory of Arms was the only Charm wherewith the Minds of her Citizens were
possessed. From thence naturally she was ambitious of Domination, and the more
she was above Interest, the more she gave her self up to Ambition.

Lacedemonia by her regular Life was firm in her Maxims and Designs. Athens was
more quick and Spiritual, and the People there were too much Masters.
Philosophy and the Laws indeed wrought very good Effects in such exquisete
Natures, but Reason by it self was not able to retain them. Plat. de Leg. 3.
A wise Athenian, and one who admirably well understood the temper and
Complexion of his Country informs us, that Fear was absolutely necessary for
Minds that were so sprightly and so free, and that there was no longer any
governing of them, when the Victory of Salamine had secured them against the
Persians.

Then two things destroyed them, the glory of their famous Actions, and the
Security, in which they thought they were. The Magistrates were no longer
obeyed, and as Persia was afflicted through an excessive Subjection, so Athens,
Plato says; felt the Calamities of an excessive Liberty.

Those two great Commonwealths, so contrary in their Tempers and Conduct, yet
embraced each other in the design they had to reduce all Greece; so that they
were always Enemies, and they were more so from the contrariety of their
Interests, than from the incompatibility of their Humors.

The Cities of Greece desired no Domination over either of them: for besides
that, every one wished to be able to preserve their own Liberty, they found the
Empire of those too Republics too troublesome. That of Lacedemonia was fierce.
There was in her People, an I know not what of a wild Barbarity. A Government
too rigid, and a Life too laborious, Arist. Pol. 8.4.
made their Spirits too fierce, too austere, and too imperious: add to this
likewise, that one must resolve never to be in Peace under the Empire of a
City, that being formed for War, could not preserve it self, Id. 7. 14. Xenoph.
de rep. Lac. Plat. de rep. 8.
but by an uninterrupted continuance of it. Thus the Lacedaemonians resolved to
Command, and all the World was afraid lest they should Command. The Athenians
were naturally more mild and agreeable. There was nothing to be seen more
delightful than their City, where their Feasts and their Plays were perpetual;
where wit, where liberty, the Passions afforded every day new Spectacles. But
their unequal Conduct was displeasing to their Allies, and was yet more
insupportable to their Subjects. It was therefore necessary to shake off the
Fantastry of a flattered People, that is, to say, according to Plato, something
more dangerous than that of a Prince corrupted by Flattery.

Those two Cities never suffered Greece to be at quiet. You have seen the
Peloponesian War, and the others always caused or kept up by the Jealousies of
Lacedemonia and Athens: But those Jealousies, which troubled Greece, did also
in some sort support it, and prevented it from becoming a dependence on one of
those two Republics.

The Persians soon perceived this Estate of Greece. Therefore all the Secret of
their Polity, was to keep up those Jealousies, and to foment those Divisions.
Lacedemonia, which was the most ambitious, was the first to engage them in the
Quarrels of the Greeks. They espoused them, with a design of making themselves
Masters of all the Nation; and being careful to weaken the Grecians the one by
the other, they only watched for the good Hour, when to overthow them all
together. The Cities of Greece did already in their Wars, Plat. de Leg. 3.
look only on the King of Persia, whom they called their great King, or the
King by way of Excellence, as if they already accounted themselves his
Subjects: but it was impossible for the old Spirit and Genius of Greece not to
awaken when they were upon the Brink of falling into Servitude, and becoming a
Prey to the Barbarians. The Petty Kings of Greece attempted to oppose that
great King, and to ruin his Empire. With a small Army, but bred up in the
Discipline we have already seen Agesilaus, King of Lacedemonia, Polyb. dib. 3.
c. 6.
made the Persians in lesser Asia to tremble, and showed that it was possible
to defeat them. The Divisions of Greece were the only thing that put a stop to
his Conquests: But it happened at a time when young Cyrus, the Brother of
Artaxerxes revolted against him. He had ten Thousand Grecians in his Troops,
which alone could not be broken in the Universal rout of his Army. He was
killed in the Battle, and as it is reported, by the hand of Artaxerxes. Our
Greeks were found without a Protector; in the midst of the Persians, and round
about Babylon. Yet victorious Artaxerxes could neither oblige them voluntarily
to lay down their Arms, nor force them to it. They attempted the bold Design of
going through all his Empire in an armed Body, and so return into their own
Country, which they accordingly accomplished. All Greece saw then more than
ever, that she trained up an invincible Militia, to which every thing was to
yield, and that only her own Divisions could subject her to an Enemy, who would
yet be too weak to resist her when she was united. Philip, King of Macedon,
equal able and Valiant, so well improved the advantages which were given him
against so many divided Cities and Commonwealths by a Kingdom, little indeed of
it self, but united, and where the Royal Power was absolute, that at last
partly by Stratagem, and partly by force, he made himself the most puissant of
Greece, and obliged all the Grecians to march under his Standards against the
Common Enemy. He was slain in those Conjunctures: but Alexander his Son
succeeded to his Kingdom, and to his Designs.

He found the Macedonians not only trained up to Martial discipline, but also
triumphant, and become by so many successes almost as much superior to the
other Grecians in Valor and Discipline, as the other Grecians were above the
Persians, and such like sort of People.

Darius, who reigned in Persia, in his time, was just, valiant, generous,
beloved of his People, and wanted neither Wit nor Courage to execute his
Designs. But if you compare him with Alexander; his Wit with that piercing and
sublime Genius: His Valor with that haughtiness and steadiness of that
invincible Courage, which was the more animated by the Obstacles that he met
with; with that unmeasurable Ambition of increasing daily his Name, which made
him prefer the least advance of Honor to all manner of Dangers, Labors, and
to a thousand Deaths: In a word, with that Confidence that made him think
verily and from his Heart, that all ought to submit to him, as to one whom his
Destiny rendered superior to all others; a Confidence which he inspired not
only into his Chiefs, but also into the least of his Soldiers, whom he raised
by that means, above difficulties, and even above themselves. You will quickly
judge to whom of them two the Victory belonged. And if you add to these things
the advantages which the Greeks and the Macedonians had above their Enemies,
you will confess that Persia being attacked by such an Hero, and by such Arms,
could no longer hold out from changing Masters. Thus will you discover at the
same time what ruined the Persian Empire, and what raised up that of Alexander.

To make his Victory the more easy, it happened that Persia lost the only
General that could oppose the Greeks; it was Memnon the Rhodian. Diod. 17.
Sect. 1.
When Alexander had vanquished so famous and renowned a Captain, he might boast
that he had overcome an Enemy that was worthy of him. Instead of hazarding
against the Greeks a general Battle, Memnon would needs dispute all the
passages with them, would cut off all their Victuals, would go and attack them
among themselves, and by a vigorous onset would force them to come and defend
their Country. Alexander had prepared for them, and the Troops he had committed
to Antipater, were enough to keep Greece. But his good Fortune did on the
sudden deliver him from that Embarrass. At the beginning of a Diversion, which
already disturbed all Greece, Memnon dyed, and Alexander brought all under his
Feet.

That Prince made his Entrance into Babylon, with so glorious a show, that
surpassed all that ever yet the World had seen, and after he had revenged
Greece, after he with an incre^^dible Expedition had brought under all the
Lands of the Persian Domination, to secure his new Empire on all sides, or
rather to gratify his Ambition, and make his name more famous than that of
Bacchus, he went into India, where he extended his Conquests farther than that
renowned Conqueror. But him that Deserts, Rivers, and Mountains were not able
to stop, was constrained to yield to his tired Soldiers, who desired th^n some
repose. Being forced to content himself with the proud Monuments he left upon
the Borders of Araspes, he brought back his Army, by another way than that he
had gone, and subdued all the Countries which he found in his Passage.

He came back to Babylon, feared and respected not as Conqueror, but as a God.
But that formidable Empire he had conquered, lasted no longer than his Life,
which was very short too. When he was but three and thirty Years of Age, in the
midst of the vastest Designs that ever Man had conceived, and with the justest
hopes of a most happy Success, he died before he had the opportunity solidly to
settle his affairs, leaving a weak Brother, and Children very young behind him,
incapable of supporting so great a weight. But what was most fatal both to his
House, and to his Empire, was, that he left behind him Captains, whom he had
taught to breath out nothing but Ambition and War. He saw to what excesses they
would rise when he should be taken out of the World. He, to retain them, and
for fear he should be contradicted, durst neither name his Successor, nor who
should be the Tutor of his Children. He only foretold them, that his Friends
would celebrate his Funerals with bloody Battles, and so he expired in the
flower of his Age, full of sad Images and Ideas of the Confusion which would
attend his Death.

In fine, you have seen the partage of his Empire, and the frightful ruin of
his House. Macedonia, his ancient Kingdom, enjoyed by his Ancestors for so many
Ages, was invaded on all sides as a vacant Succession, and after it had been
long the Prey of the strongest, it went at last to another Family. Thus that
great Conqueror, the most renowned, and most illustrious that ever was, was
likewise the last of his Race. If he had continued peaceable and quiet in
Macedonia, the greatness of his Empire would not have been a temptation to his
Captains, and he might have left to his Children the Kingdom of his Fathers.
But because he had been so very powerful, he was the cause of the loss of all
his own; and thus you see what was the glorious fruit of so many Conquests.

His Death was the only cause of that great revolution. For this must be said
to his eternal Honor, that if ever Man was capable of maintaining so vast an
Empire, although newly conquered, without doubt it was Alexander; for the
strength of his Mind was equal to his Courage. It owed not therefore to his
faults, though he had very great ones, the fall of his Family, but only to
Mortality; unless we will say that a Man of his Humor, and whose ambition
engaged him still to new undertakings, could never be at leisure to settle
things well.

Be it how it will, we learn by his Example, that besides the Faults which Men
might correct, that is to say, those they are guilty of through heat of
Transport, or through Ignorance, there is an irrecoverable Weakness inseparably
annexed to humane Designs, and that is Mortality. Every thing may fall in a
Moment by that way: That which forces us to confess that as the most inherent
Vice, if it may be allowed me to speak so, and the most inseparable from humane
things, is their own Frailty: He who knows how to preserve and strengthen a
State, has found out a higher point of Wisdom than he that can conquer and
gain Battles.

It is needless to tell you in particular what destroyed those Kingdoms that
were formed out of the Ruins of Alexander's Empire, that is to say, that of
Syria, that of Macedonia, and that of Egypt. The common cause of their Ruin
was, that they were forced to submit to a greater Power, which was the Roman.
If however we will consider the last Estate of those Monarchies, we shall
easily find the immediate Causes of their Fall; and see among other things,
that the most puissant of all, that is to say, that of Syria, after it had been
shaken by the soft Effeminacy and Luxury of the Nation, at last received the
mortal Stab by the Division of her Princes.

WE are at last brought to the great Empire which has swallowed up all the
Empires of the World, The Roman Empire.
from whence has sprung the greatest Kingdoms of the Earth where we dwell,
whole Laws we still respect, and which consequently we ought to undestand
better than all other Empires. Your Highness very well knows, I speak of the
Roman Empire. You have seen the long and memorable History of it in all its
Course. But to make you perfectly acquainted with the causes of Rome's
Advancement, and those of the great Changes that have happened in that
Commonwealth; You are seriously, with the Manners and Customs of the Romans,
to consider also the times on which all the Motions of that vast Empire do
depend.

Of all People in the World, the most fierce and hardy, but likewise the most
regular in their Councils, the most constant in their Maxims, the most
laborious, and withal the most patient, have been the People of Rome.

From all that, was formed the best Militia, and the most discerning Polity,
the strongest and most followed that ever was.

The Principle of a Roman was the Love of his Liberty and of his Country. One
of those things made him to love the other: For because he loved his Liberty,
he loved also his Country as a Mother that fed him with Sentiments equally
generous and free.

Under that Name of Liberty, the Romans framed to themselves a Government like
the Greeks, where none should be subject but only to the Law, and where the Law
should be more powerful than Man.

But though Rome was born under a Royal Government, yet had she also under her
Kings a Liberty which was not very much consistent with a regulated Monarchy.
For besides that Kings were Elective, and that such Elections were made by all
the People, it was also in the People assembled together to confirm the Laws,
and to resolve on Peace and War. There were also some particular Cases wherein
the Kings admitted the People to have the sovereign Judgment: Witness Tullus
Hostilius, who not daring either to condemn or acquit Horace, loaded at once
both with Honor for having overcome the Curatii, and with Shame and Infamy for
having killed his Sister, made it be determined by the People. Therefore Kings
had properly but the Command of the Armies, and the Authority of calling lawful
Assemblies, propounding Businesses to them, maintaining the Laws, and executing
the public Decrees.

When Servius Tullius framed that Design you have seen of bringing Rome into a
Commonwealth, he increased, in the People already so free, still a greater
Desire of Liberty; and from that you may judge how mighty jealous the Romans
were of it, when they had experimented it entirely under their Consuls.

One would even tremble to read in Histories the dreadful Constancy and
Resolution of the Consul Brutus, when he caused his two Children to be slain
before his Eyes, who had suffered themselves to be drawn over to the dull
Practices which the Tarquins used in Rome to re-establish their Domination
there. How much were that People confirmed in the love of Liberty when they
could see that severe Consul sacrifice his own Family to Liberty! We need no
longer wonder if the Efforts of the neighboring People were despised in Rome,
who undertook to re-establish the banished Tarquins. In vain did King Porsenna
take them into his Protection. The Romans almost starved, made him however to
know, Dion. Halic. Lib. 5. Tit. Live. 2.13, 15.
by their undaunted Resolution, that they would at last die free. The People
were more resolute than the Senate; and all Rome caused it to be told to that
puissant King that came to reduce her to Extremity, that he might desist
interceding for the Tarquins, since being resolved to hazard all for her
Liberty, she would rather receive her Enemies than her Tyrants. Porsenna being
astonished at the undauntedness of that People, and at the more than human
daringness of some private Persons, resolved to let the Romans quietly enjoy a
Liberty which they knew so well how to defend.

Liberty therefore was to them a Treasure which they preferred before all the
Riches of the Universe. You have seen also how in their Beginning, and likewise
forwarder on in there Progress, they looked not on their Poverty as an Evil: But
contrariwise, they looked on it as a means to preserve their Liberty more
entire; there being nothing more free and independent than a Man that knows how
to live on a little, and who Without Expectance of any thing from the
Protection or Liberality of another, grounds his Subsistence only on his own
Industry and Labor.

This did the Romans. To feed hardly, to labor in the Earth, to deprive
themselves of all they could, to live with great Frugality and painful Travel:
This was their kind of Life; by this way they kept their Families, and brought
them up to such like Labors.

Titus Livius was in the right in saying there never was any People among whom
Frugality, or Thriftiness, or Poverty, were had so long in Honor. The most
illustrious Senators, take them as to their outward appearance, differed very
little from Peasants, and carried no Show or Majesty but in Public and in the
Senate. At other times they were seen busy at their Tillage, and the other
Cares of a Country Life, when they were sought for to command their Armies.
These Examples are frequent in the Roman History. Curious and Fabricius, those
great Captains that conquered Pyrrhus, so rich a King, had only an earthen
Vessel; and the former, to whom the Samnites offered one of Gold and Silver,
answered, that he took no Delight in having them, but in commanding those who
enjoyed them. After their Triumphs were over, and they had enriched the
Republic with the Spoils of her Enemies, they had not wherewithal to inter
themselves. That Moderation also continued during the Punick Wars. Tit. Live.
E^. lib. 18.
In the first we find Regulus the General of the Roman Armies begging Leave of
the Senate to go and cultivate his Farm which had lain wast during his Absence.
After the Ruin of Carthage, there are also to be seen great Examples of the
first Simplicity. Aemilius Paulus, who increased the public Treasure by the
rich Treasure of the Kings of Macedonia, lived up to the Rules of the ancient
Frugality, and died poor. Mummius, in ruining of Corinth, got only for the
public use the Riches of that opulent and voluptuous City. So much were Riches
then despised: Cic. Offic. l. 2.
The Moderation and the Innocence of the Roman Generals filled the conquered
People with Admiration.

And yet notwithstanding that great Love of Poverty, the Romans never spared
for any thing that could contribute to the Grandeur and Beauty of their City.
From the very beginning their public Works were such, that Rome has not yet
blushed to see them, though at the same time she beheld her self Mistress of the
World. Tit. Live. 1.53, 55, 56. C. 5. Dion. Hal. 3.4. Tac. Hist. 3.72. Plin.
36.15.
The Capitol built by Tarquin the proud, and the Temple he erected to Jupiter
in that Fortress, were worthy then of the Majesty of the greatest of the Gods,
and of the future Glory of the Roman People. Every thing else was answerable to
that Greatness. The principal Temples, the Markets, the Baths, the public
Places, the great Ways, the Aqueducts, the very common Shores, and the Kennells
of the City had a Magnificence that seems almost incredible, but that all
Historians do testify it, and the Remains we now see of it do so plainly
confirm it. What shall I say of the Pomp of their Triumphs, Dion. Hal. 7.
of the Ceremonies of Religion, of Plays and Spectacles, which they gave to the
People? In a Word, whatsoever could be of any Service to the Public, and
whatsoever could give the People a great Idea of their common Country, was done
with Profuseness as much as the time would permit it. Thrift and good Husbandry
was only to be seen in private Houses. He who increased his Revenues, and made
his Lands most Fertile by his Industry and great Labor, who was the best
Governor and took the greatest Share on himself, was accounted the most Free,
the most Powerful, and the most Happy.

There was nothing at a greater distance from this kind of Living than
Effeminacy. Every thing rather tended to excess on the other hand, I mean, to
Hardship. Also the Manners of the Romans had naturally something in 'em, which
was not only harsh and rigid, but savage and cruel. But they forgot nothing
that might bring them under the Power of good Laws; and they were a People the
most jealous of their Liberty the World ever saw, and yet at the same time they
were the most submissive to their Magistrates and lawful Powers.

The Militia of such a People could not but be very admirable, seeing there was
so ready and so exact an Obedience joined to resolute Courages, and as vigorous
Bodies.

The Laws of that Militia were hard, but necessary. The Victory was dangerous,
and oft-times mortal to those who gained it contrary to their Orders. It was a
capital Crime, not only flying, throwing down their Arms, and going from their
Ranks; but also stirring, as I may say, and moveing, though never so little,
without the Command of their General. He that laid down his Arms before the
Enemy, that chose rather to be taken, than to die gloriously for his Country,
was adjudged unworthy of all manner of Assistance. Generally Prisoners were not
reckoned any thing by the Citizens, but they were left to the Enemy as Members
cut off from the Commonwealth. You have seen in Florus and in Cicero the
History of Regulus, Cic. de Offic. 3. Flor. 2. 2.
who persuaded the Senate, at the expense of his own Life to leave the
Prisoners to the Carthaginians. Polyb. 6. 56. Tit. Live. 22. 57, 58.
In Hannibal's War, and after the loss of the Battle at Cannae, that is to say,
at a time when Rome was drained by her so many Losses, and wanted Soldiers
most, the Senate chose rather against their Custom to arm eight thousand
Slaves, than to redeem eight thousand Romans, which would not have cost them
more than what the new Militia stood them in which was to be raised. But in
that necessity of Affairs they asserted more than ever, Cic. Off. 3.
as a Law inviolable, that a Roman Soldier either ought to conquer or to die.

By which Maxim the Roman Armies, though deseated and broken, fought and rallied
even to the last Extremity: And as Sallust observes, there were found among the
Romans more Persons punished for having fought without first receiving Orders,
Sallust. de Bell. Catil. 9.
than for having lost Ground and quit their Post: So that their Courage stood
more in need of being suppressed, than their fear of being excited.

To their Valor they joined Address and Invention; and besides their being of
themselves Subtle and Ingenious, they admirably well understood how to take
Advantage of every thing they saw in other People that was useful any ways
either for Encampments, for the ordering of their Battles, for the sorting of
their Arms; in a Word, for facilitating as well the Attack as the Defense. You
have seen in Sallust and in other Authors, what the Romans have learnt of their
Neighbors, and of their very Enemies. Who knows not that they have learnt from
the Carthaginians the Invention of Galleys, by which they have beat them; and
in short, that they have taken from all Nations they have known, those things
by which they have subdued them?

In fine, it is certain by their own Acknowledgment, that the Gauls exceeded
them in strength of Body, and yielded not to them neither in Courage. Polib. 2.
etc.
Polybius shows us that in one decisive Rencounter the Gauls, besides their
being stronger in number, showed more Stoutness than the Romans, how resolute
soever they were; and yet we see in that very Rencounter, those Romans inferior
in all other things, to get the better of the Gauls, because they knew how to
choose better Arms, to rank themselves in better order, and to make a better
use of their time in the Fight. This you may be able one day to see more
exactly in Polybius; and you have oft-times observed your self in Caesar's
Commentaries, that the Romans commanded by that great Man, have subdued the
Gauls, but more yet by their Addresses and Stratagems in the Military Art, than
by their Valor.

The Macedonians, who were so jealous of keeping up the ancient Order of their
Militia formed by Philip and Alexander, thought their Phalanx invincible, and
they could not be persuaded that human Wit was capable of finding any thing out
that was more firm and strong. And yet the same Polybius, Polyb. 17. in excerp.
c. 24, and seq. Tit. Live. 9. 19. 31. 39, etc.
and Titus Livius alter him have demonstrated, that only by considering the
nature of the Roman Armies, and those of the Macedonians, the latter could not
fail of being beaten at the last, because the Macedonian Phalanx, which was but
a great four square Battalion, very thick every where, could not move but all
of a piece, whereas the Roman Army, divided into several little Bodies, was
more ready, active, and disposed for all sorts of Motions.

The Romans therefore found, or else quickly learnt the Art of dividing their
Armies into many Battalions, and Squadrons, and of forming Bodies of Reserve,
whose Motion was so proper for either pushing on, or supporting what Side
soever they saw to fail. Make the Macedonian Phalanx to march against the
Troops that were so disposed and ordered; that heavy gross Machine it is true,
would be terrible to any Army on which it should fall with all its weight; but
as Polybius speaks, it can never long preserve its natural Propriety, that is
to say, its Solidity and Consistence, because it will want proper Places, and
as I may say, manifest Achievements, and for want of finding them, it will
confound it self, or rather break by its own Motion. Add likewise that being
once rushed in upon, it can never rally more: Whereas the Roman Army being
divided into such little Bodies, can make use of all places, and get their
Advantages by them They unite, or separate as they please; then unrank easily,
and come together again without any trouble. They are ready for detachments,
for rallying, for all manner of turnings and changes as they see are necessary
to be made, either in their whole Body, or any part of it. In a word, they have
more diversity of Motions, and consequently more of action and force than the
Phalanx. Therefore we may conclude with Polybius, that the Phalanx must needs
yield to the Roman Army, and that the Macedonian must be overcome.

It is very delightful, to discourse with your Highness of those things you
have been so well instructed in by excellent Masters, and which you see
practiced under the orders of Louis the Great, in so admirable a manner, that I
know not whether the Roman Militia ever had any thing more fine and perfect.
But not to dispute it here with the French Militia, I shall content my self
with showing you, that the Militia of Rome, whether you look on the Science it
self of taking its advantages, or seriously consider the extreme Severity, in
making all the orders and rules to be observed; I say it has by much surpassed
all that ever has been seen in the Precedent Ages.

After Macedonia, it is needless to speak any more of Greece: You have seen that
Macedonia prevailed over it, and that may teach you to judge of the rest. Athens
has produced nothing more since Alexander's time. The Etolians, who had
signalized themselves in several Wars, were rather ignorant than free, and
rather brutal than valiant. Lacedemonia had made her last effort for War, in
producing Cleomenes; and the league of the Achaians, in producing Philopaemen.
Rome fought not the against those two great Captains; but the latter, who lived
in the time of Hannibal and Scipio, Plut. in Philop.
by seeing the actions of the Romans in Macedonia, judged very rightly that the
Liberty of Greece was then upon the point of expiring, and that he had nothing
more to do, but to retreat just at the time of its falling. Thus the most
warlike People were forced to yield to the Romans. The Romans triumphed by
their Courage among the Gauls, and by art over the Greeks, and with all that,
supported by the most refined Conduct, in triumphing over Hannibal; so that
nothing could ever equal the glory of their Militia.

So likewise in all their Government did they never boast of any thing so much,
as of their Military Discipline. They always loo^ed on it as the Foundation of
their Empire. The Military Discipline was that which was first seen in their
State, and the last that was lost in it: so closely was it fixed to the
Constitution of their Republic.

One of the bravest things in the Roman Militia was, that false Valor was
never commended in it. The Maxims of false Honor, which have killed such a
world of People among us were not only known in a Nation so covetous of Glory.
It is observed of Scipio, Polix. 9.13.
and Caesar's, the two greatest Men of War, and the most valiant that ever were
among the Romans, that they never exposed themselves but with all the
Precaution imaginable, and when the most pressing necessity called for it.
There was no good expected from a General that did not understand the care he
ought to have of preserving his own Person, and to reserve the actions of an
extraordinary Courage, Ibid. 29.
for the most considerable Service. The Romans would have no Battles hazarded
unadvisedly, nor desired Victories at the Expense of too much Blood: so that in
short, there was nothing more bold and daring, nor altogether better managed
and disciplined than were the Roman Armies.

But as it is not enough to understand War, unless there be a very wise Council
to undertake it with most advantage, and to keep all the rest of the State in
good Order, it is convenient you should understand the profound Polity of the
Roman Senate. To take it in the best times of the Republic, there never was
any Assembly, wherein business was more maturely treated of, not with greater
Secrecy, nor with a deeper foresight, nor with a more general concurrence, or
lastly with a greater Zeal, for the Service of the public.

The Holy Ghost has not disdained taking notice of this in the Book of
Maccabees, nor commending the high Prudence, 1 Maccab. 8.15, 16.
and the vigorous Councils of that wise Company, where none gave them any
authority but by reason, and all the Members whereof conspired to the public
benefit without impartiality, and without Jealousy.

Tit. Live. 42.14.
As for secrecy Titus Livius gives us a very eminent Example. Whilst they were
consulting about the War with Perseus, Eumenes King of Pergamus, that Prince's
Enemy came to Rome to join in League against him with the Senate. He made there
his propositions in the full Assembly, and the matter was resolved on by the
suffrages of a Company, consisting of three hundred Men. Who should imagine
that the secret could be kept, and that nothing of that consultation should be
known till four years afterward, when the War was ended? But what is more
surprising still is that Perseus had at Rome his Ambassadors to observe
Eumenes. All the Cities of Greece and Asia, which feared to be enveloped in
that Quarrel, had also sent theirs, and every one of them endeavored to
discover a Business of so great a Consequence. And yet in the midst of so many
able and subtle Agents the Senate was impenetrable. To have a secret kept,
there was no need of punishments, nor of forbidding commerce with Strangers
under severe and rigorous Penalties, the Secret commended it self alone, and by
its own weight and Importance.

'Twas a surprising thing in the conduct of Rome, to see there the People
almost always to look on the Senate with great Jealousy, and yet nevertheless
to referr all things to them upon great occasions, and especially in times of
great Danger. Then all the People were seen to turn their Eyes upon that wise
Company, and to hearken to their Resolutions, as to so many Oracles.

A long Experience had taught the Romans that from thence came forth all the
Councils that had saved the State. It was in the Senate that lodged were the
ancient Maxims, and the Wit and Spirit, as I may say, of the Republic. There
were the designs formed, which were seen to support themselves by their own
Strength; and that which was greater in the Senate still, was, that they never
took more vigorous resolutions, than in the times of the greatest Excremities.

It was in the worst estate of the Republic, Dion. Halic. 8. Tit. Live. 2.39.
when weak yet, and in its Birth she saw her self absolutely both divided
within by the Tribunes, and pressed hard without by the Volsci, whom incensed
Coriolanus, brought against his Country. Those People always beaten by the
Romans, hoped to revenge themselves, having the greatest Man of Rome at their
Head, the most understanding and expert in War, the most liberal, and the most
incompatible with Injustice; but the most obdurate, exasperated and
untreatable. They resolved to make themselves Citizens by force; and after
great Conquests, and making themselves Masters of the Campaign, and of the
Country, they threatened to destroy every thing if they would not comply with
their Demands. Rome had neither Army, nor Men to Head them, and yet
notwithstanding in this sad Estate, and whilst all things were to be feared,
was there seen on a sudden, to issue out that bold decree of the Senate, that
they would rather all be cut off, than yield any thing to the Armed Enemy, and
that they would grant him very reasonable Conditions, after he had withdrawn
his Arms from them.

The Mother of Coriolanus, who was sent to make him flexible, among other
reasons, used this to him: Don't you know the Romans? don't you know, Son, that
you will have nothing of them, but by Prayers, and that you will neither obtain
much or little from them by force? Dion. Halic. 8.
The severe Coriolanus was hereby overcome: it cost him his Life, and the
Volsci chose other Generals; but the Senate continued firm in those Maxims, and
the Decree they made of granting nothing by force, Polyb. 6.56. Excerpt. de
Legate. 69. Dion. Hal. 8.
passed for a fundamental Law of the Roman Polity, whereof there was not one
single instance that ever the Romans departed from it, Plut. in Philop.
during all the time of their Republic. Among them, even in their worst
Conditions never were the weaker Councils only hearkened to. They were always
more treatable when victorious, than when conquered, so well did the Senate
know how to maintain the ancient Maxims of the Commonwealth, and so well also
did they know how to confirm the rest of the Citizens in them.

From the same Spirit likewise were those Resolutions taken in the Senate, of
overcoming their Enemies by open Force, without using Tricks or Stratagems,
even those that were permitted in War: Which the Senate did not out of a false
Point of Honor, nor because they were ignorant of the Laws of War; but because
they deemed nothing of more Efficacy to quell a proud Enemy, than to take from
them all the vain Thoughts they might have of their Forces, that so being never
so much overcome, they might expect no Salvation but from the Clemency of the
Conqueror.

Thus was that high Opinion of the Roman Arms established throughout all the
World. The Belief that was spread far and near that nothing could resist them,
made their Enemies to lay down their Arms, and gave an invincible Succor to
their Allies. You have seen what the same Opinion of the French Arms does all
over Europe; and the World standing amazed at the Exploits of your Royal Father
and Sovereign, confesses that it only belongs to him to set Bounds to his
Conquests.

The Conduct of the Roman Senate, so mighty and prevalent over their Enemies,
was no less admirable in their Conduct of the State within. Those wise Senators
had sometimes a just Condescension for the People; as when in an extreme
Necessity they not only taxed themselv^s higher than others, which was usual
with them, but also when they discharged the meaner People from all manner of
Import, adding that the Poor paid a Tribute great enough to the Commonwealth,
in bringing up their Children. Tit. Live. 2.9.


The Senate showed by that Ordinance that they understood wherein the true
Riches of a State consisted; and so generous a Sentiment joined to the
Testimonies of a paternal Goodness, wrought such an impression in the Breasts
of the People, that they became capable of sustaining the very last Extremities
for the Safety of their Country.

But when the People deserved Blame, the Senate gave it them likewise with a
Gravity and Courage worthy of so wise a Company; as it happened in the
Controversy between the Ardeates and Aricines. The History of it is very
memorable, and deserves here to be told you. Those two People were in War for
Lands which each Party made Pretensions to; Tit. Live. 3.71.4.7, 9, 10.
at last being weary of fighting they agreed to refer themselves to the
Judgment of the People of Rome, whose Equity was had in Reverence by all their
Neighbors. The Tribes were assembled, and the People being made acquainted
that those Lands pretended to by others, of right belonged to them, adjudged
them for themselves. The Senate, although they were convinced that the People had
in the main made a right Judgment, yet they could not endure that the Romans
should derogate from their natural Generosity, nor that they should basely have
deceived the Hopes of their Neighbors who had submitted to their Award. There
was nothing left unattempted that could be done to hinder a Judgment of so
pernicious an Example, where the Judges took for themselves the Lands that were
in dispute between the said Parties. After that the Sentence had been given,
the Ardeates, whose Right was most apparent, being incensed at so wicked a
Judgment, were ready to revenge themselves by Arms. The Senate, without any
more ado, publicly declared to them that they were as sensible as themselves
of the Injury which had been done them, but in truth they could not quash a
Decree made by the People; but that if after that Offense they would be willing
to rely upon their Company for Reparation, which they had great reason to
expect, the Senate would take that Care to satisfy them, that they should have
no cause of further Complaint. The Ardeates relied on their word. It was such
an Affair that had like utterly to have ruined their City. But they received so
immediate a Relief by the Orders of the Senate, that they reckoned themselves
very well paid for the Land which had been taken away from them, and they were
then studying how to pay their Acknowledgments to such faithful Friends. But
the Senate was not satisfied, until by their making the Land be restored which
the People of Rome had adjudged for themselves, they abolished the Memory of so
infamous a Judgment.

I do not undertake here to tell you how the Senate had likewise done several
such Actions; Pal. Tit. Live. Cic. de Off. 3. etc.
how often they have delivered to their Enemies perjured Citizens that would
not keep their word with them, or that played Tricks with their Oaths; how often
they condemned evil Councils, although they had met with happy Successes; I
shall only tell you that that august Company inspired nothing but what was
great into the Roman People, and upon all Occasions gave a very high Idea of
their Councils, being persuaded that the Reputation was strongest which was
strengthened by the States.

It Is easy to be believed that by a People so wisely directed, Rewards and
Punishments were assigned with great Consideration: Besides that the Service
and Zeal for the Weal public, were the surest means to raise them up to the
first Offices in it: The Military Actions had a thousand Recompenses which cost
the Public nothing, and which were extremely esteemed by private Persons;
because thereby they had conferred upon them that Honor which was so dear to
that martial and warlike People. A Crown of very fine Gold, and most commonly a
Crown of Oak Leaves, or of Laurel, or some Herb or other that is viler yet, was
of inestimable Price among Soldiers that knew no marks more glorious than
those of Virtue, nor no Distinction more noble than that which came from
Heroic Actions.

The Senate, whose Approbation was the same thing as Reward, understood very
well how to commend and how to blame when there was occasion. Immediately after
Fighting, the Consuls and the other Generals publicly gave to the Soldiers
and to the Officers, the Praise or the Blame as they deserved: But for
themselves they doubtfully waited for the Judgment of the Senate, which judged
by the Wisdom of their Councils, and not suffered themselves to be dazeled by
the Happiness of Events. Their Commendations were highly valued, because they
were given with Understanding: Their Reprimands went to the Hearts of the Free
and Generous, and kept the more Weak in their Duty. The Chastisements which
followed ill Actions, kept the Soldiers in fear, while in the mean time,
Rewards and Honors well dispensed raised them above themselves.

Those who can inspire into Peoples Minds Glory, patience of Labors, the
Grandeur of the Nation, and the Love of their Country, may truly boast they
have found out the most proper Constitution of State to produce great Men. It Is
without doubt great Men that make the Power of an Empire. Nature does never
fail to bring forth in all Nations exalted Minds and Courages, but yet they
want the Assistance of being better formed and cultivated. That which forms
them, and that which compleats 'em, are strong Sentiments and noble
Impressions, which are scattered in all Minds, and insensibly pass from one to
the other. What is it makes our Nobles so bold in fight, and so daring in their
enterprises? It Is an Opinion received at their Infancy, and established by the
unanimous sentiment of the Nation, that a Cowardly Gentleman degrades himself,
and is not worthy to enjoy the common Air. All the Romans were bred up in that
Opinion, and the People disputed with the Nobles who should be the briskest
Actors upon those vigorous Maxims. Whilst Rome was at Peace, the very Infancy
was exercised in hardships; there was nothing else heard discoursed of but the
greatness of the Roman Name. They were obliged to go to the War whenever the
Republic required it, and there to work perpetually, to Camp Winter and
Summer, to Obey without Resistance, to Die or Conquer. Those Fathers who brought
not up their Children in those Maxims, and as they ought, to make them capable
of serving the State, were Summoned to Justice, by the Magistrates, and judged
guilty of an attempt against the Public. When this way was first begun to be
taken, the great Men helped to make one another so: And if Rome has bred more
of them than any other City whatsoever of greater Antiquity, it has not been
by accident; but because the Roman State, being constituted so as we have seen
it, was, as I may say, of a Temperament likely to be most fruitful in Hero's.

A Government that finds it self thus formed, finds it self at the same time of
an incomparable strength, and never fancies it self without Recruit. That shows
us that they never despaired of Success, neither when Porsenna King of Etr^ria
famished them up in their Walls; nor when the Gauls, after they had burnt their
City, overwhelmed all their Country, and kept them locked up in the Capitol;
nor when Pyrrhus King of Epirus, as full of Address and Subtilty as Bold in his
Undertakings, frightened them by his Elephants, and defeated all their Armies;
nor when Hannibal, who had been already so often a Conqueror, killed also above
fifty thousand Men of them, and their best Militia at the (...)

'Twas then that the Consul Terentius Varro, who was but just come from losing,
through his own Fault, so great a Battle, was received at Rome as if he had
been Victorious, because only even in that very great Unhappiness he did not
despair of the Affairs of the Republic. The Senate gave him their public
Thanks for it, and then they resolved, according to their old Maxims, not in
that sad deplorable Estate to hearken to any Proposition of Peace. The Enemy
was astonished; the People took Heart afresh, and believed they ^ad new
Recruits which the Senate knew of by their prudence.

In fine, the constancy of the Senate, amidst so many mischiefs that happened
one on the heels of another, proceeded not only from an obstinate resolution
that they would never yield to Fortune, but from a profound knowledge of the
Roman Forces, and of those of their Enemies. Rome knew by her Census, that is
to say, by the Roll of her Citizens evermore exactly continued from the time of
Servius Tullius; she knew, I say, all her number of Citizens that were capable
of bearing Arms, and what her expectations could be of the Youth which were
growing up every day. Thus she managed her Forces against an Enemy that came
from the Borders of Africa; that time would destroy every Man of them in a
strange Country, where Succors were so tardy; and to whom their very Victories,
which cost them so much Blood, were fatal. Wherefore, what ever loss happened,
the Senate always being informed what good Soldiers remained, as also who
protracted their time; and never suffered them to be discomfited. When by the
defeat at Canna, and by the Revolts that followed, they saw the Forces of the
Commonwealth so weakened, that they could have scarce defended themselves if
the Enemy had pressed them, they kept themselves up by their Courage, and
without being troubled for their losses, they set themselves to watch the
motions of the Conqueror. As soon as ever they perceived that Hanniba^ instead
of pursuing his Victory, for some time only thought how he might enjoy it, the
Senate were secure, for they fully saw that an Enemy who was capable of
breaking his Fortune, and letting himself be dazzled with his great Successes,
was not born to overcome the Romans. From that time Rome made great Enterprises
every day; and Hannibal as courageous and victorious as he was, could not hold
up against her.

It Is easy to judge by that single event to whom at last all the Advantage was
likely to come. Hannibal swollen with his mighty Successes, thought the taking
of Rome was very easy, and therefore gave himself some intermission. Rome in
the midst of all her Calamities, neither lost her Courage nor her Confidence,
and undertook greater things than ever. It was presently after the Defeat at
Cannae, that she besieged Syracuse and Capua, the one unfaithful to Treaties,
and the other rebellious. Syracuse could not defend her self, neither by her
Fortifications, nor by the inventions of Archimedes. The victorious Army of
Hannibal came in vain to the help of Capua. But the Romans forced that Captain
to raise the Siege at Nola. A while after the Carthaginians defeated and slew
in Spain the two Scipio's. In all that War, nothing fell out more sensible, nor
more fatal to the Romans. Their loss obliged them to make their last efforts:
Young Scipio, the Son of one of those Generals, being not satisfied with his
having relieved the Affairs of Rome in Spain, went and waged War with the
Carthaginians in their own City, and gave the last blow to their Empire.

The state of that City did not permit Scipio to find there the same resistance
as Hannibal found from Rome, and you will be enough convinced of that, if you
do but a little look into the constitution of those two Cities.

Rome was in her strength, Polyb. 1.3^.6.49. etc.
and Carthage which was beginning to fall, was kept up only by Hannibal. Rome
had her Senate united, and that was exactly the time when that Concert was,
which is so much commended in the Book of the Maccabees. The Senate of Carthage
was divided by old irreconcilable Factions; and the loss of Hannibal had been
the rejoicing of the most considerable part of the great Lords. Rome although
poor, and engaged in Agriculture, yet bred up an admirable Militia, which only
aimed at glory, and to aggrandize the Roman name. Carthage enriched by her
trading beheld all her Citizens set upon their wealth, and not at all
d^sciplin'd in War; whereas the Roman Armies were almost all made up of
Citizens: Carthage on the contrary held it for a Maxim not to have any but
strange Troops, oft-times as much to be feared by those that pay them, as by
those that they are employed against.

These defects came partly from the first Instituti^n of the Commonwealth of
Carthage, and partly were introduced by time. Carthage always loved wealth:
Arist. Pol. 2.2.
And Aristotle accuses her for so much being set upon it, as to suffer the
Citizens to prefer it to Virtue. By that means a Republic wholly made for War,
as the same Aristotle observes, at last neglected the exercise of it. That
Philosopher does not blame her for having only strange Militias; and therefore
it is believed that it fell not into that defect till a long while after. But
Riches brought thither naturally a Merchandising Republic; they loved to enjoy
their wealth, and thought to find every thing in their Money. Carthage fancied
her self strong, because she had a great many Soldiers, and never could be
brought to understand by all the Revolts she had seen befallen her in the
latter times, that there is nothing more unhappy than a State which could only
be supported by strangers, wherein there can be found neither Zeal, nor
Security, nor Obedience.

Polyb. 11.17.
It Is true, the great Genius of Hannibal seemed to have supplied and remedied
the defects of his Republic. It is looked on as a Prodigy, that in a strange
Country, and for full sixteen years, there should never be seen, I do not say
any Sedition, but so much as a murmur in an Army all made up of diverse people,
who without understanding one another agreed so well in understanding the
orders of their General. But Hannibal's ability could not support Carthage,
when being attacked within her Walls by such a General as Scipio, she was found
without Forces. Then was Hannibal to be recalled, but he had with him only such
Troops as were weakened more by their own Victories, than by those of the
Romans, and which completed their own ruin by the length of the Voyage. Thus
Hannibal was beaten, and Carthage, formerly the Mistress of all Afric, of the
Mediterranean Sea, and of all the Commerce of the World, was forced to undergo
the Yoke that S^ipio put upon her.

This was the glorious fruit of the Roman patience: People who hardened and
fortified themselves by their unhappinesses, had good reason to believe they
might save all, provided they did not lose their hopes: And Polybi^s has very
rightly concluded, That Carthage would at last be obedient to Rome by the very
nature of the two Republics.

And if the Romans made use of those great Politic and Military Qualities,
only to preserve their State in Peace, or to protect their oppressed Allies, as
they made such a pretension to do, we must as much commend their Equity, as
their Valor and their Prudence. But when they had tasted the sweetness of
Victory, they then resolved to make every thing yield to them, and pretended to
nothing less than to put first their Neighbors, and afterward all the World
under their Laws.

To attain that end, they perfectly knew how to preserve their Allies, to unite
them among themselves, to throw division and jealousy among their Enemies, to
penetrate into their Councils, to discover their Intelligences, and to prevent
their Undertakings.

They not only observed the marches of their Enemies, but also all the
Progresses of their Neighbors; and they were above all things curious either
in dividing, or in Counter-balancing by some other way the powers that became
too formidable, or which put too great obstacles to their Conquests.

Therefore the Greeks were to blame for imagining in the time of Polybius,
Polyb. 1.63.
that Rome aggrandized her self rather by hazard than by conduct: they were too
fond of their own Nation, and too jealous of those People they saw raised above
them: Or peradventure that seeing at a distance the Roman Empire to advance so
quickly, without penetrating into the Councils which ordered the motions of
that great Body, they attributed to chance, as the custom of Men is, the
Effects of which the Causes were not known to them. But Polybius whose strict
familiarity with the Romans made him get so far into the secret of Affairs, and
nearly to observe the Roman Polity during the Punick Wars, has been more just
and equitable than the other Greeks, and has seen that the Conquests of Rome
were the consequence of a well formed and understood design. For he saw the
Romans in the midst of the Mediterranean Sea, to have their Eyes every where
round, even into Spain and Syria, to observe all that passed there, to advance
regularly, and nearer and nearer; to strengthen themselves before they enlarged
themselves; not to be clogged with too many Affairs; to dissemble for some time,
and at a convenient opportunity to declare themselves; to wait till Hannibal
was conquered to disarm Philip King of Macedon, who had favored him; after
they had begun a business, never to be weary, nor contented till every thing
was ended; not to leave the Macedonians a Moment.

And when they had overcome 'em, by a public Decree to restore to Greece which
had been so long Captivated, that Liberty which they never dreamed of; by that
means to scatter on one hand Terror, and on the other a Veneration for their
Name: All these are enough for any one to conclude, That the Romans never got
the Conquest of the World by hazard but by conduct.

This is what Polybius saw in the time of Rome's progresses. Dion. Halic. Ant.
Romans 1.2.
Dion Halicarnasseus who wrote after the establishment of the Empire, and in
the time of Augustus, has concluded the same thing, in resuming from the first
Origin the ancient Institutions of the Roman Commonwealth, so fit in their
very nature to form a People Invincible, and only to Command. You have seen
enough of this to enter into the sentiments of those wise Historians, Plut.
lib. de fort. Alex. and de fort. Romans
and to condemn Plutarch, who being always too great a lover of the Greeks,
attributed alone to Fortune the Roman greatness, and alone to Virtue that of
Alexander.

But the more of design those Historians discover in the Conquests of Rome, the
more Injustice do they show in them. That is a vice inseparable from the desire
of Dominion, which also for that reason is justly condemned by the Rules of the
Gospel. But Philosophy alone is sufficient to make us understand that force is
given us to keep our own Goods, but not to usurp those of other Men. Cic. de
Off. 3.
Cicero has confessed it, and the rules which he has given for making War are
a manifest condemnation of the Roman's conduct.

It Is true, they appeared pretty equitable at the beginning of their Republic.
It seemed as if they themselves were willing to moderate their warring humor
by circumscribing it within the bounds which Equity assigned. What is there
more Noble, and more Holy than the College of the Feciales, Dion. Halicar. 2.
Ant. Romans Tit. Live. 1.32.
whether Numa was the Founder of it, as Dion Halicarnasseus affirms, or Ancus
Martius, as Titus Livius will have it? That Council was set up to judge whether
a War was just or no: Before the Senate proposed it, or the People resolved on
it, that Examen of Equity always preceded. When the Justice of the War was
known, the Senate consulted about the measures how they were to have it
undertaken: But first of all they sent to the Usurper in all Formalities to
redemand of him the things he had unjustly ravished, and they never went to
extremities, till after they had tried all the ways of Gentleness, and Candor.
A holy Institution this, if ever there was one, and which may shame Christians,
in whom God-man that came into the World to pacify all things, has not been
able to inspire Charity and Peace. But what do signify the best Institutions,
when at last they degenerate into pure Ceremonies? The charms of Conquering,
and of absolute Commanding did soon corrupt in the Romans that right which
natural Equity had given them. The deliberations of the Faeciales were only a
useless Formality among them; and though they used toward their greatest
Enemies acts of extraordinary moderation and clemency, yet ambition did not
suffer Justice to prevail in their Councils.

But their Injustices were so much the more dangerous, as they knew better how
to cover them under the specious pretext of Equity, and as they insensibly
brought Kings and Nations under their Yoke, under color of protecting and
defending them.

Let us add also, that they were cruel to those who resisted them: Another
quality pretty natural to Conquerors, who knows that fear makes more than half
to Conquests. But is Dominion to be had at that rate, and to Command is that so
pleasing to make Men purchase it by such inhumane actions? The Romans, to make
every place afraid of them, affected to leave in their conquered Towns terrible
Spectacles of Cruelty, and to appear unmerciful to those who would be forced,
without so much as sparing Kings, Polyb. 10.15.
whom they inhumanely caused to be put to death, after they had carried them in
Triumph laden with Irons, and dragged by Chariots as Slaves.

But if they were cruel and unjust for conquering, yet they governed the
subdued Nati^ns with moderation. They endeavored to make the subjected People
sensible of their Government, and they believed that that was their best means
to secure them their Conquests. The Senate kept short the Governors, and did
Justice to the People. That Company was looked on as the Asylum of the
oppressed; also the concussions and violences were not known among the Romans
but in the last times of the Republic, and the retention of their Magistrates
was the admiration of the World.

It was not therefore of those brutal and avaritious Conquerors, who were only
greedy of Pillage, or who established their Domination upon the ruin of
vanquished Countries. The Romans made all those whom they took, better by
causing Justice to flourish in them, Agriculture, Commerce, and even Arts and
Sciences too, after they had once been made sensible of them.

'Twas that which gave them the most flourishing, and the best established as
well as the most extensive Empire that ever was. From Euphrates and Tanaus even
to Hercules his Pillars, and the Atlantic Sea, all Lands and Seas obeyed them:
From the middle, and as it were the Center of the Mediterranean Sea, they had
all the extent of that Sea, penetrating into both the length and breadth of all
the Kingdoms round thereabouts, and keeping it between two to make the
Communication of their Empire. It is enough still to astonish one when he
considers that the Nations which at this day make such great and redoubted
Kingdoms, all the Gauls, all Spain, Great Britain almost entirely, Illyricum
even to the Danube, Germany to the Elbe, Africa to its frightful and
impenetrable Deserts, Greece, Thracia, Syria, Egypt, all the Kingdoms of Lesser
Asia, and those which are shut up between the Euxine and the Caspian Sea, and
the rest which possibly I may forget, or am not willing to mention, have been
for many Ages but Roman Provinces. All the People of our World, even to the
most Barbarous, have respected their Power, and the Romans established in them
almost every where with their Empire their Laws and their Polity.

It Is a kind of a Prodigv, that in so vast an Empire, which reached over so
many Nations and Kingdoms, the People should be so obedient, and that Revolts
should be so seldom. The Roman Polity had taken care of it by diverse ways,
which it will not be amiss briefly to explain to your Highness.

The Roman Colonies established on all sides in the Empire, wrought two
admirable effects: the One was to discharge the City of a great number of
Citizens, and the most part of them poor; the other, to keep the principal
Posts, and by degrees to accustom strange People to the Roman Manners.

Those Colonies which carried with them their Privileges, remained always
attached to the Body of the Republic, and populated all the Roman Empire.

But besides Colonies, a great many Cities obtained for their Citizens the
privilege of Roman Citizens; and being by their Interest united to the
commanding People, they kept the neighboring Cities in their duty.

It happened at last that all the Subjects of the Empires believed themselves
Romans. The Honors of the Victorious People by little and little were
communicated to the conquered People, the Senate was open to them, and they
could aspire even to the Empire. Thus by the Roman Clemency, all the Nations
were but as one single Nation, and Rome was looked on as the common Country.

What Facility did not that mavelous union of all the People of the World,
under one and the same Empire, bring to Navigation and Commerce. The Roman
Society embraced all, and excepting some Frontiers now and then disturbed by
their Neighbors, all the rest of the Universe enjoyed a most profound Peace.
Neither Greece nor lesser Asia, nor Syria, nor Egypt, nor to conclude, scarce
were any of the other Provinces ever without War, but under the Roman Empire,
and it is easy to conceive that so pleasant a Commerce of the Nations held to
keep throughout the whole Body of the Empire Concord and Obedience.

The Legions divided for the Guard of the Frontiers, by defending those
without, strengthened those that were within. 'Twas not the Custom of the Romans
to have Citadells in their Holds, nor to fortify their frontiers, and I scarce
find when that Care began, but in Valentinian the first's time. Before then the
Strength and Security of the Empire was solely placed in the Troops, which they
disposed in that manner, that they mutually assisted each other Now as it was
ordered that they should be always encamped, the Cities were not incommoded by
it; and the Discipline did not suffer any of the Soldiers to disperse
themselves into the open Fields. By that means the Roman Armies neither
troubled commerce nor tillage. Their Camps were to them in the nature of
Cities, which differed little from others, but because they were there in
continual Exercises, their Discipline more severe, and their Command more
resolute. They were always ready for the least Motion, and it was sufficient to
keep the People in their Duty, to show them only in the Vicinage that
invincible Militia.

But nothing so much maintained the Peace of the Empire, as the order of
Justice. The ancient Republic had established it; the Emperors and the Sages
had explained it upon the same Foundations: all the People, even the most
Barbarous, looked on them with admiration; and by that principally the Romans
were judged worthy to be the Masters of the World. Now if the Roman Laws have
appeared so sacred, that their Majesty continues still, notwithstanding the
ruin of the Empire; it was because their good Sense, which is the Mistress of
humane Life, was seen every where in them, and there was no where seen a more
delicate and fairer application of the Principles of natural Equity.

But notwithstanding all that greatness of the Roman Name, notwithstanding her
profound Polity, and all the fine Instititutions of that famous Republic, she
yet carried in her own Breast the cause of her ruin, in the perpetual
Jealousy of the People against the Senate, or rather of the Plebeians against
the Patricii. Romulus had set up that distinction. It was necessary for Kings
to have persons distinguished whom they should engage to their Person by
particular Bonds, and by whom they should govern the rest of the People. Dion.
Hal. 2.
Therefore did Romulus choose the Fathers, of whom he formed the Body of the
Senate. They called them so, by reason of their Dignity, and their Age. And
from them afterward sprung the Patrician Families. Now whatsoever Authority
Romulus had reserved to the People, he had put the Plebeians in diverse respects
in a dependence on the Patricii; and that subordination necessary to Royalty
had been preserved not only under Kings; but also in the Republic. It was
always from the Patricii that the Senators were made. To the Patricii belonged
the Employments, Commands, Dignities, and even that of the Priesthood and the
Fathers, who had been the Authors of Liberty, did not quit their Prerogatives.
But Jealousy was quickly put between those two orders. For I need not here
speak of the Roman Knights, a third order as being in common between the
Patricii and the simple People, who espoused sometimes one side and sometimes
another. It was therefore between those two orders that Jealousy a^ose: It was
provoked upon diverse occasions, but the chief cause of all which kept it up,
was their love of Liberty.

The fundamental Maxim of the Republic, was to look upon Liberty as a thing
inseparable from the Roman Name. A People bred up in that Mind; nay more, a
People who thought themselves born for commanding other People, and whom Virgil
for that reason so nobly calls a Kinglike People, would receive no Laws but
from their own selves.

The Authority of the Senate was judged necessary for the moderating of public
Councils, which without that temperature would have been too tumultuous. But at
the bottom it was the Peoples Province to give commands, to make Laws, to
decide Peace and War. A People that enjoyed the most essential Rights of
Royalty, in some manner were of the Temper of Kings. They were willing to
receive grave advices, but they would not be forced by the Senate. Whatsoever
seemed too imperious, every thing that was too highly advanced: in a word,
whatsoever wounded or was likely to wound that Equality which a free State
required, gave suspicion to so nice and delicate a People. The love of Liberty,
that of Glory and Conquests, made such Spirits very difficult to be managed,
and that daring audacity, which made them attempt all things abroad, could not
fail to cause divisions at home among themselves.

Thus Rome that was so Jealous of her Liberty, through that Love of Liberty
which was the Foundation of her Government, saw divisions spread through all
the orders, of which she was Composed. From thence arose those furious
Jealousies between the Senate and People; between the Patricii and the
Plebeians, the one alleging always that excess of Liberty would at last
destroy it self; and the others fearing just the contrary, that Authority,
which in its own nature was always for increasing, would at last degenerate
into Tyranny.

Between those two Extremities, a People otherwise so grave and wise could find
^o Medium. The private Interests which made both Parties proceed a great deal
farther than they ought in whatever they began for the public good, suffered
neither of them to be conducted by moderate Counsels. The Ambitions, and
turbulent Spirits, were still stirring up Jealousies to make their own
advantages by them; and those Jealousies sometimes more concealed, and
otherwhile more declared, according to the times, but always strong and violent
at the Root, was at last the cause of that great Change that happened in the
time of Caesar, and the others that succeeded.

IT will be very easy to show to your Highness all the causes of it, VII. The
Successive Changes of Rome explained.
if after you have thoroughly understood the humor of the Romans, and the
Constitution of their Republic, you take care to observe some certain
principal accidents; which although they happened at several distant times, yet
have a manifest chain of Connection in them. I will give you a collected Series
of them for your greater Ease.

Romulus bred up in War, and reputed the Son of Mars, built Rome, which he
populated with an amassed Company of Shepherds, Slaves, Robbers, who came to
seek for freedom and impunity in the Isle he had laid open for all Comers; and
some also came that were better qualified, and more Civilized.

He bred up that People wild in their Nature, to undertake all things by force,
and by that means they got themselves Wives, whom they Married.

By Degrees he established order, Dion. Hal. 2.
and restrained luxurious Minds by most sacred Laws, he began by Religion,
which he looked on as the Foundation of all States. He made it as serious, as
grave, and as modest as the Darknesses of Idolatry could then permit him.
Strange Religions and Sacrifices, which were not established by the Roman
Customs were forbidden. Afterward that Law was dispensed; but the intention
of. Romulus was, that it should be kept, and something of it was always
retained.

He chose out of all that number of People, the better sort, to form the
public Council, which he called the Senate: He made it to consist of two
hundred Senators, whose number was likewise afterward augmented; and from them
came the noble Families that were called the Patricii.

The Senate was to examine and propose all matters; some of them it regulated
Soveraignly with the King; but the most general were referred to the People,
who decided them.

Rom^lus, in an assembly which he had called of all the People upon the Plain,
at the Marsh Capreae, where upon a sudden there arose a great Tempest; was cut
to pieces by the Senators, who judged him too imperious; and the desire of
Independance began then to appear in that Order.

To appease the People who loved their Prince, and to give a great Idea of the
Founder of that City, the Senators proclaimed that the Gods had snatched him up
to Heaven, and caused Altars to be erected to him.

Numa Pompilius the second King, in a long and profound Peace, completed the
formation of their Manners, and the regulating of Religion upon the same
foundations which Romulus had laid.

Tullus Hostilius by severe Rules Established the Military Discipline, and the
orders of War, which his Successor An^us Martius accompanied with sacred
Ceremonies, thereby to render the Militia Holy and Religious.

After him Tarquin the Ancient, to make Creatures to himself, increased the
number of the Senators to three Hundred, where they stuck fixed for some Ages,
and began the great Works which were to conduce to the Public weal.

Servius Tullius projected the setting up a Republic under the command of two
annual Magistrates, which should be chosen by the People.

In hatred to Tarquin the proud, the Royalty was abolished with horrible
Execrations against all those who should go about to reestablish it, and Brutus
made the People to swear to keep themselves eternally in their Liberty.

The Memoires of Servius Tullius were followed in that Change. The Consuls
chosen by the People among the Patricii, were equalled to Kings, excepting that
they were two who had between them a regular turn of Commanding, and they
changed every Year.

Collatinus being named Consul, which Brutus, as having been with him the
Author of their Liberty; though he was the Husband of Lucretia, whose Death had
been the cause of the Change, and he being interessed more than all others to
revenge the outrage which she received, because he was of the Royal Family,
became suspected, and was expelled.

Valerius substituted in his place, at his return from an Expedition, where he
had delivered his Country from the Veientes and the Etrurians, was suspected by
the People to affect Tyranny by reason of a House he had caused to be built on
an Eminence. He not on^y ceased from Building, but he became wholly popular,
although a Patrician, and made the Law which permitted Appeals to the People, and
attributed in some Cases to them Judgment of the last Ressort.

By that new Law, the Consular Power was weakened in its Origin, and the
People enlarged their Rights.

By reason of the Violences executed for Debt by the Rich upon the Poor, the
People that rise up against the Power of the Consuls and Senate, made that
famous Retreat at the Mount Aventinus.

There was nothing but Liberty spoke of in those Assemblies, and the People of
Rome did not believe themselves to be free, Dion. Hal. 2.
if they had not lawful Ways of resisting the Senate. They were forced to allow
them particular Magistrates called the Tribunes of the People, which might
assemble them, and help them against the Authority of the Consuls, either by
Opposition or Appeal.

Those Magistrates, to keep up their own Authority, were continually buzzing of
Jealousies, and creating Divisions between those two Orders, and always were
flattering the People, by proposing that the Lands of the Conquered Countries,
or the Price that would be the product of their Sale, should be divided among
the Citizens.

The Senate with great Zeal and Earnestness perpetually opposed those Laws that
would be so ruinous to the State, and would have the Price of those Lands
adjudged to be put into the public Treasury.

The People suffered themselves to be conducted by their seditious Magistrates,
and yet had notwithstanding so much Reason and Equity as to admire the Virtue
of the great Men that resisted them.

Against those domestic Dissensions, the Senate found no better Remedy than to
be continually raising Occasions for foreign Wars. They prevented those
Divisions from being pushed on to Extremity, and reunited those Orders in the
Defense of their Country.

Whilst Wars succeeded, and Conquests increased, Jealousies were still kept
awake.

The two Parties wearied by the many Divisions which threatened the Ruin of the
State, agreed to the making of such Laws as might be for the quiet of them
both, and to establish the Equality which ought to be in a free City.

Each of the Orders pretended that the establishment of those Laws belonged to
them.

Jealousy increased by those Pretensions, made them to resolve by common
Consent to send an Embassy into Greece to search therefore the Institutions of
the Cities of that Country, and especially for the Laws of Solon, which were
the most popular. The Laws of the twelve Tables were established, and the
Decemviri, who digested them, were deprived of the Power which they abused.

Whilst every thing appeared placid and tranquil, and that such equitable Laws
seemed eternally to establish the public Repose, Dissentions started up again
by new Pretensions of the People who aspired to Honors and to the Consulate
which till then were reserved only to the first Order.

The Law to admit them to them was propounded. Rather than to have the
Consulate pulled down, the Fathers consented to the Creation of three new
Magistrates, who should have the Authority of Consuls under the Name of
Military Tribunes, and the People were admitted to that Honor.

Being contented to have their Right established, they used moderately their
Victory, and continued sometimes in giving the Command to the Patricii only.

After long and various Disputes they returned to the Consulate, and by degrees
the Honors became common between the two Orders, though the Patricii were always
the most considered in the Elections.

The Wars continued, and the Romans subjected after five hundred Years the
Gauls Cisalpines, App. praef. Ep.
their principal Enemies, and all Italy.

There began to Punick Wars; and things went on so forward, that each of those
two jealous People believed they could not subsist but by the Ruin of the
other.

Rome, ready to fall, was chiefly kept up during her Misfortunes by the
Constancy and Wisdom of the Senate.

At last the Roman Patience got the better; Hannibal was overcome, and Carthage
subjugated by Scipio Africanus.

Victorious Rome enlarged her self prodigiously for two hundred Years both by
Sea and by Land, and reduced all the World under her Power.

In those times, and since the Ruin of Carthage, the Offices, whose Dignity as
well as Profit, increased with the Empire, were underhand furiously labored
for. The Ambitious Pretenders took care only to flatter the People, and the
concord of the Orders held up by the Business of the Punick Wars was troubled
more than ever. The Gracchi put all things into Confusion, and their seditious
Propositions were the beg^nning of all the Civil Wars.

Then began they to bear Arms, and by open Force to act in the Assemblies of
the Roman People, where before every one desired only to carry it by lawful
Ways, and with Liberty of Opinions.

The wise Conduct of the Senate, and the great Wars happening, moderated their
Disorders.

Marius the Plebeian, a great Man of War, with his military Eloquence, and his
seditious Harangues, wherewith he was continually attacking the Pride of the
Nobles, awakened the Peoples Jealousies, and by that means raised himself to
the greatest Honors.

Sylla a Patrician, put himself at the Head of the contrary Party, and became
the Object of Marius his Jealousy.

Factions and Corruptions could do all things in Rome. The Love of their
Country, and deference to their Laws, were quite extinguished there.

And to complete their Miseries, the Wars of Asia taught the Romans Luxury, and
increased their Ava^ice.

Then the Generals began to join themselves to their Soldiers, who till that
time saw nothing but the Character of public Authority in them.

Sylla, in the War against Mithridates, let his Soldiers enrich themselves the
better to gain them.

Marius, on his side, proposed to his Associates the Shares of both Money and
Lands.

By that means being Masters of their Troops, the one under pretense of
supporting the Senate, and the other under the name of the People, they made a
most furious War even in tne Heart of the City.

The Party of Marius and of the People were utterly beaten, and Sylla made
himself a Sovereign under the Name of Dictator.

He made most dreadful Slaughters, and treated the People with Severity both in
Deeds and Words, even in their lawful Assemblies.

Being more Puissant and better established than ever, he retreated to a
private Life, but it was after he had shown that the Romans could endure a
Master.

Pompey, whom Sylla had raised, succeeded to a great part of his Power. He
flattered sometimes the People, and sometimes the Senate to get himself
established: But his Inclination and Interest at length fixed him to the latter.

Being a Conqueror of the Pirates of Spain and all the East, he became very
puissant in the Republic, and in the Senate.

Caesar, who was resolved at least to be his Equal, turned to the People's
side, and imitating in his Consulate the most seditious Tribunes, he proposed
with the Divisions of the Land, the most popular Laws he could invent.

The Conquest of the Gauls brought the Glory and Power of Caesar to the
highest Pitch.

Pompey and he were united through Interest, and afterward broke again through
Jealousy. The Civil War began to kindle. Pompey thought that his Name alone
would carry all, and so neglected himself. Caesar active and discerning
obtained the Victory, and got the Mastery of him.

He made several Attempts to see whether the Romans could be brought to use the
name of King. But they only served to make him odious. To increase the public
Hatred, the Senate decreed him Honors until then unheard of in ^o^e; so that
he was slain in the full Senate as a Tyrant.

Anthony his Creature, who was Co^sul at the time of his Death, stirred up the
People against those who had killed him, and endeavored to take his Advantage
of those Commotions, to usurp the sovereign Authority. Lepidus who had also a
great Command under Caesar, endeavored to keep it. At last young Caesar, about
nineteen Years of age, undertook to revenge the Death of his Father, and so
sought an Occasion to succeed to his Power.

He knew how, for his own Interest, to make use of the Enemies of his House,
and even of his Competitors.

His Father's Troops went over to him being touched with the name of Caesar,
and the prodigious Rewards which he promised them.

The Senate signified nothing any longer: All things were done by Force, and
Soldiers, who were at their Service that would give 'em most.

In that fatal Conjuncture the Triumvirate destroyed all those whom Rome had
bred up, that were of greatest Courage and most opposite to Tyranny. Caesar and
Anthony defeated Brutus and Cassius: Liberty expired with them. The Conquerors,
after they had got rid of feeble Lepidus, made diverse Accords and diverse
Partages where Caesar, as being the more Cunning found always the way how to
get the better part, and so put Rome into his Interests, and overtopped him.
Anthony in vain undertook to relieve himself, and the Battle of Actium brought
the whole Empire under the Power of Augustus Caesar.

Rome being weary and exhausted by so many civil Wars, to get some Repose, was
forced to renounce her Liberty.

The House of the Caesar's fixed the Command of the Armies under the name of
Emperor, and exercised an absolute Power.

Rome under the Caesar's being more careful to preserve than to enlarge her
self, hardly made any more Conquests than to drive away the Barbarians, who
would fain have got into the Empire.

At the Death of Caligula, the Senate then upon the point or re-establishing
Liberty, and the Consular Power, were prevented by the Soldiers, who would
have a perpetual Head, and that their Head should be the Master.

In the Revolts occasioned by the Violences of Nero, every Army chose an
Emperor, and the Soldiers knew that they were Masters to dispose of the Empire.

They carried it so that they offered to sell it publicly to him that would
give most for it, and they use to shake the Yoke. With Obedience the Discipline
was lost. The good Princes endeavored, but in vain, to preserve it, and their
Zeal to maintain the ancient Order of the Roman Militia, served only to expose
them to the Fury of the Soldiers.

In the Changes of Emperors, every Army laboring to prefer their own,
occasioned civil Wars, and horrid Massacres.

Thus grew the Empire weak through the neglect of the Discipline, and was utterly
destroyed by the many intestine Wars.

In the midst of those manifold great Disorders, the Fear and the Majesty of
the Roman Name waxed less and less. The Parthians ofen times overcome became
formidable on the East side under the old Name of Persians, which they again
assumed. The Northern Nations, who inhabited the cold and uncultivated Lands,
drawn by the Beauty and Riches of that of the Empire, attempted always to make
their Entry into it.

One single Man was not sufficient any longer to sustain the weight of the
Empire which was so vast, and withal so strongly attacked.

The prodigious multitude of Wars, and the humor of the Soldiers, who were
resolved to have Emperors and Caesar's to conduct them, obliged 'em to multiply
them.

The Empire it self being looked on as an hereditary good, the Emperors were
naturally multiplied through the multitude of their Princes Children.

Marcus Aurelius associated his Brother to the Empire. Severus made his two
Sons Emperors. The necessity of Affairs obliged Dioclesian to share the East
and the West between him and Maximian: Each of them being overcharged, relieved
themselves by electing two Caesar's.

Through this multitude of Emperors and Caesar's, the Estate was ruined through the
excessive Expense, the Body of the Empire was disunited, and the civil Wars
were multiplied.

Constantine, the Son of the Emperor Constantius Chlorus, divided the Empire as
an Heritage among his Children: Posterity followed those Examples, and there
was scarce ever after seen one Empire.

The Softness of Honorius, and that of Valentinian III. Emperors of the West,
brought the Ruin of all.

Italy and Rome it self were diverse times sacked and became the Prey of the
Barbarians.

All the West was in Common. Asrick was possessed by the Vandalls, Spain, by
the Visigoths, Gauls, by the Franks, Great Britain by the Saxons, Rome and
Italy too, by the Heruli, and afterward by the Ostrogoths. The Roman Emperors
shut themselves up in the East, and left the rest, even Rome and Italy.

The Empire resumes some Strength under Justinian by the Valor of Belisarius
and Narsus. Rome often taken and retaken, fell at last to the Emperors. The
Saracens, become powerful by thee division of their Neighbors, and by the
carelessness of the Emperors, took from them the greatest part of the East, and
so tormented them on that side, that they no longer took care of Italy. The
Lombards there possessed themselves of the richest and most beautiful
Provinces. Rome reduced to Extremity by their continual attacks, and having no
defense from their Emperors, were forced to throw themselves into the hands of
the French. Pepin, King of France, passes the Mountains, and subdues the
Lombards. Charlemain, after he had brought the Government under, caused himself
to be Crowned King, where his alone Moderation preserved some small Remains to
the Successors of the Caesar's: and in the Year eight Hundred of our Lord, being
chose Emperor by the Romans, he founds the new Empire.

It Is easy for you now to know the causes of the Rise and fall of Rome.

You see that that Kingdom founded upon War, and thereby naturally disposed to
trespass upon her Neighbors, has put all the World under her Yoke, to carry
Politic and the Military Art up to the highest Degree^.

You see the causes of the divisions of the Republic, and finally of its fall
through the Jealousies of the Citizens, and through the love of Liberty pushed on
even to an insupportable excess and nicety.

It is likewise as easy for you to distinguish all the times of Rome, whether
you please to consider her in her self, or whether you look upon her in
relation to other People; you see the Changes which were to follow the
disposition of affairs in each time.

In her self you see her at the beginning in a Monarchical State, established
according to her primitive Laws, afterward in Liberty, and at last subjected
once again to the Monarchic Government, but by force and violence.

It Is easy for you to conceive after what manner the popular Estate was formed,
from the beginnings it had in the times of Royalty, and with as plain an
Evidence will you see how in the time of Liberty the foundations of the new
Monarchy, were by small footsteps raised and Established.

For in the like manner, as you have seen the Project of a Republic laid in
the Monarchy, by Servius Tullius, who gave as it were the first relish of
liberty to the People of Rome, so have you also observed, that Sylla's Tyranny,
though it was but very transitory, and short, discovered that Rome,
notwithwithstanding her fierceness, was as much capable of bearing the Yoke, as
those People whom she kept under Servitude.

To know what operation that furious Jealousy between the Orders successively
had, you need only to distinguish the two times, which I have expressly marked
out to you: The one, when the People were retained within certain bounds, by
the dangers they were in on very side; and the other when having nothing more
to fear from without, they absolutely, without, any reserve, gave themselves up
to their Passions.

The essential Character of each of those two times, is, that in the one the
love of their Country, and of their Laws, swayed their Minds; and that in the
other, all was decided by interest and force.

From thence it happened also, that at the first of those two times the Men of
Command who aspired after honors by lawful ways, kept the Soldiers in, and
fast to the Republic: Whereas in the other time, when violence ruled all, they
only thought how to manage them to get them into their Designs, in spite of
the Authority of the Senate.

By that last Government, War of necessity was brought into Rome: and because
in War, when Laws can signify little, force only makes the Decision, it follows
then, that the strongest must be the Master, and by Consequence that the Empire
must return into the Power of one single Magistrate.

And every thing so disposed it self for it of their own accord, that Polybius,
who lived in the most flourishing time of the Republic, foresaw by the
disposition only of affairs, Polyb. 7. and seq. 41. and seq.
that the Estate of Rome would at length return into Monarchy.

The reason of that change was because the Division between the Orders could
not be quelled by the Romans, but by the Authority of an absolute Master, and
on the other hand liberty was a thing too much doated on ever voluntarily to be
abandoned. It was necessary therefore by little and little to weaken it upon
specious Pretexts, and so by that means make it capable of being ruined by open
force.

Craft and Delusion, as Aristotle has observed, must begin by flattering the
People, and must naturally be followed by Violence.

But from thence they must fall into another Inconvenience by the Power of the
Soldiers, a Mischief inevitable to that State.

In fine, that Monarchy which the Caesar's formed, being raised by Arms, it was
necessary it should be all Military; and therefore it was established under the
name of Emperor, a proper Title, and natural for commanding of Armies.

Hereby you may see, that as the Republic had its inevitable weak side, that
is to say, Jealousy between the People and the Senate: So likewise had the
Monarchy of the Caesar's its Foible; and that was the Licentiousness of the
Soldiers, who had made them.

For it was impossible that the Soldiers who had changed the Government, and
set up Emperors, should be long before they perceived that it was effectually
they who disposed of the Empire.

You may now add to the times that you have already observed, those which point
out to you the State and Change of the Militia: That when it was subjected and
fixed to the Senate, and People of Rome; that when it was only fixed to the
Generals; that when it was raised to the absolute Power under the Military
Title of Emperors; that, when being in a manner the Mistress of her own
Emperors, which she created, she made them and unmade them as she had a Mind.
And from thence happened the outrageous Seditions, the Disorders, and the Wars
which you have seen; from thence in a word, came the ruin of the Militia, with
that of the Empire.

Such were the remarkable times, which the changes of the State of Rome
considered in her self, observed to us. Those which discover it to us in
reference to other People, are as easily discernable.

There was a time when she fought against her Equals, and when she was in
danger. It lasted a little above five Hundred Years, and ended with the ruin of
the Gauls in Italy, and of the Empire of the Carthaginians.

That when she fought, was always more strong, and without danger, how great
soever the Wars were that she undertook. It lasted two Hundred Years, and came
down as far as the Establishment of the Empire of the Caesar's.

That when she kept up her Empire and Majesty. It lasted four Hundred Years,
and ended in the Reign of Theodosius the Great.

And in a word that when the Empire being wounded on all Parts, fell away by
little and little. That Estate which lasted also three Hundred Years, began in
the Children of the Theodosius, and ended at last in Charlemain.

I am not ignorant that your Highness might add to the causes of the ruin of
Rome, many particular Accidents. The Severities of the Creditors toward their
Debtors, stirred up very great and frequent Revolts. The prodigious number of
Gladiators and Slaves, wherewith Rome and Italy were overcharged, caused many
horrible Violences, and also Bloody Wars. Rome being quite spent with so many
Civil, and strange Wars, made so many new Citizens, either out of Faction, or
in Justice, that she could scarce know her self amidst that vast number of
Strangers, which she had naturallized. The Senate was filld with Barbarians.
The Roman Blood was mingled: the love of their Country, by which Rome was
raised above all the People in the World, was not natural to those Citizens
that came from abroad, and the rest were spoiled by the Mixture. Patialities
were multiplied with that prodigious Multiplicity of new Citizens, and the
turbulent Spirits there found out new ways to embroyl and ruin her.

In the mean while the number of the Poor increased without end, thorough the
Luxury, Debauches, and Idleness that was encouraged. Those who saw themselves
ruined, had no refuge but in Seditions, and in every case, they were little
concerned that all should be destroyed with them. You know what caused
Cataline's Conspiracy. The Grandees who are ambitious, and the miserable, who
had nothing to lose, always took delight in Change. Those two sorts of Citizens
prevailed in Rome; and the Coparcened State, which alone holds all in Balance
in popular Estates, being the weakest, the Republic must of necessity fall.

To that also may be added the particular Humor and Genius of those who were
the cause of those great Commotions: I mean the Gracchi, Marius, Sylla, Pompey,
Julius Caesar, Anthony, and Augustus. I have observed something of them, but I
applied my self chiefly to dicover to you the universal causes and the true
root of the Evil, that is to say, that Jealousy between the two Orders, of
which it was very requisite you should consider all the consequences.

But your Highness may please to remember that that long Chain of particular
Causes which make and unmake Empires, depend upon the secret Orders and Decrees
of the Divine Providence. God that sits in the highest Heavens holds the
Reins of all the Kingdoms. He has all Hearts in his Hands; sometimes, he
restrains the Passions; sometimes again he lets them loose at full rage, and by
that he stirs up all Mankind. Is he pleased to make Conquerors? He causes a
Dread to march before them, and at the same time inspires them and their
Soldiers with an invincible Boldness. Is he pleased to make Legislators? He
sends them his Spirit of Wisdom and Foresight, he causes them to prevent the
Evils which threaten the States, and to lay the Foundations of public
Tranquillity. He knows that humane Wisdom is always short in some place; he
enlightens it, he opens the Eyes of the Understanding, and afterward he
abandons them to their own Ignorances, he blinds the Judgment, he precipitates
it, and confounds it with it self: Humane Wisdom is perplexed and embarassed in
its own Subtilties; and its own Precautions are as so many Snares to it. God by
this means exercises his fearful Judgments, according to the Rules of his
Justice which are always infallible. It Is he that prepares Effects in the most
distant Causes, and who strikes those fatal Blows of which the counter-blows
reaches so far. When he is pleased to let go the latter, and to overturn
Empires, every thing is weak and irregular in their Councils. Egypt, formerly
so wise, goes staggering, reeling, and as it were besotted, because the Lord
has shed the Spirit of Dizziness and Confusion in all her Councils: She no
longer knows what she does, she is lost to her self. But that Men may not
herein be deceived, God repaireth when he sees good, the straggling Senses, and
he that insulted over the Blindness of others, falls himself into more Egyptian
Darkness, and often times without any thing else to confound his Sense and
Understanding, than his too long Prosperities.

Thus it is that God Reigns over all People. Let us no longer talk of Chance
or Fortune, or speak of it only as a Name wherewith we conceal our Ignorance.
That which is Chance in respect of our uncertain Councils, is a concerted
Design in a higher Council, that is to say, in that eternal Council, which
circumscribes all Causes and all Effects in one and the same Order. Thus all
concurs to the same end, and it is for want of understanding the all that we
find of Chance or of Irregularity in particular Accidents and Emergencies.

By that is verified the Saying of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.15.
that God is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords. Blessed, whose Repose is unalterable, who sees every thing to change
without changing himself, and who makes all Changes by an Immutable Council;
who gives and who takes away Power, who transfers it from one Man to another,
from one House to another, from one People to another, to show that they have
it only by way of Loan, and that it is he alone in whom it naturally resides.

Wherefore all Governors find themselves the Subjects of a greater Power. They
a^t more or less than they think for, and their Councils have ever more had
unforeseen Effects.

They neither are Masters of the Dispositions which Ages past have made in
their Affairs, nor can they foresee what Co^rse the times to come will take, so
far are they from being able to force it. He alone holds all things in his
Hands, who knows the Name of that which is, and that which is not yet, who
presides at all times, and anticipates all Councils.

Alexander little thought he labored for his Captains, nor that he ruined his
House when he gained his Conquest. When Brutus animated the Romans with such an
excessive Love of Liberty, he as little thought he was casting into their Minds
the Principle of that unbridled and masterless License, by which the Tyranny he
designed to destroy, was one day to be re-established with greater Severity
than under the Tarquins. When the Caesar's flattered the Soldiers, they had no
designs of giving Masters to their Successors and to the Empire. In a word,
there is no humane Power but what, do what it can, serves for other Designs
than it aims at at present. God alone knows how to bring about all things
according to his own Will. Wherefore every thing is surprising if we only look
to particular Causes, and yet nevertheless every thing goes on in an orderly
manner. This Discourse makes you see it clearly, and not to speak of other
Empires, you see by how many unforeseen Councils, but yet always connected in
themselves, the Fortune of Rome has been carried on from Romulus down to
Charlemain.

Your Highness might perhaps have thought I should have told you somewhat more
of your own Country, and of Charlemain, who was the Founder of the new Empire.
But besides that his History makes a part of that of France, which you your
self have wrote, and which you have already so far proceeded in, I reserve to
make you another Discourse of that, wherein I shall be necessarily obliged to
speak to you of France, and of that great Conqueror, who being equal in Valor
to those which Antiquity has the most boasted of, does yet exceed them in
Piety, in Wisdom, and Justice.

That some Discourse shall discover to you the Causes of the prodigious
Successes of Mahomet and this Successors. That Empire which began two hundred
Years before Charlemain, may find its place in that Discourse; but I though it
would be much better to show you in one continued Series its beginning and its
declension.

So that I have no more to tell you in this first Part of my Universal History.
You will discover all the Secrets of it, and you will have nothing to do but to
observe in it all the Progress of Religion, and that of the great Empires down
to Charlemain.

Whilst you will see almost all fall of themselves, and Religion only support
it self by its own Strength, you will easily then discern what is solid
Grandeur, and where a wise and considerate Man is to place all his Hopes.

A TABLE TO THE FIRST PART OF THIS DISCOURSE.
I. Epoch. Adam, or the Creation. First Age of the World. Page 1. II. Epoch.
Noah, or the Deluge. Second Age of the World. Page 4. III. Epoch. The Call of
Abraham. Third Age of the World. Page 7. IV. Epoch. Moses, or the written Law.
Page 11. V. Epoch. The taking of Troy. Fourth Age of the World. Page 15. VI.
Epoch. Solomon, or the Temple finished. Fifth Age of the World. Page 17. VII.
Epoch. Romulus, or Rome founded. Page 25. VIII. Epoch. Cyrus, or the Jews
reestablished. Sixth Age of the World. Page 43. IX. Epoch. Scipio, or Carthage
Conquered. Page 71. X. Epoch. The Birth of Jesus Christ. Seventh and last Age
of the World. Page 89. XI. Epoch. Constantine, or the Peace of the Church.
Page 110. XII. Epoch. Charlemain, or the re-establishment of the new Empire.
Page 149.
A Table to the Second Part.
THE Course of Religion. Page 155. I. The Creation, and the first Times. ibid.
II. Abraham, and the Patriarchs. Page 178. III. Moses, the Law written, and the
bringing of the People into the promisid Land. Page 189. IV. David, the Kings
and the Prophets. Page 209. V. The times of the second Temple. Page 247. VI.
Jesus Christ, and his Doctrine. Page 267. VII. The Descent of the Holy Ghost;
the Establishment of the Church, the Judgments of God both on the Jews and on
the Gentiles. Page 298. VIII. Particular Reflections upon the Punishment of the
Jews, and upon the Predictions of Jesus Christ, who had taken Notice of it.
Page 316. IX. Two memorable Predictions of our blessed Savior are explained,
and their Accomplishment justified by History. Page 330. X. The Progress of the
Jewish Errors, and the manner how they explain the Prophecies. Page 345. XI.
Particular Reflections on the Conversion of the Gentiles. The profound Councils
of God, which resolved to convert them by the Cross of Jesus Christ. The
Arguing of St. Paul upon this manner of their Conversion. Page 366. XII. Diverse
ways of Idolatry. Sense, Interest, Ignorance, a false respect of Antiquity,
Policy, Philosophy, and Heresies, came to its Succor, but the Church triumphs
over all. Page 376. XIII. General Reflection on the Progress of Religion, and
the Relation there is between the Books of the Scriptures. Page 401.
A Table to the Third Part.
THE Empires. Page 437. I. That the Revolutions of Empires are regulated by
Providence, and serve to humble Princes. Ibid. II. The Revolutions of Empires
have particular Causes which Princes ought to study. Page 445. III. The
Scythians, the Ethiopians, and the Egyptians. Page 447. IV. The Assyrians both
ancient and new, the Medes, and Cyrus. Page 475. V. The Persians, the Grecians,
and Alexander. Page 48^. VI. The Roman Empire. Page 505. VII. The Successive
Changes of Rome Explained. Page 543.
FINIS.

