A Mirror of Christianity, AND A Miracle of Charity; Or, A true and Exact
NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE and DEATH Of the most Virtuous Lady ALICE Duchess
DUDDELEY. Published after the Sermon in the Church of St. Giles in the Fields
by R. B. D. D. Rector of the said Church on Sunday the 14th of March, MDCLXIX.

PSALM. 112.6. The righteous shall be had in an everlasting remembrance.

PSALM. 41.1. Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy.

Si vis esse mercator optimus, foenerator egregius, da quod non potes retinere,
ut accipias quod non poteris amittere, da modicum, ut recipias centuplum, da
temporalem possessionem, ut consequaris aeternam Haereditatem.

London, Printed by E. C. for R. Royston Bookseller to the King's Most
Excellent Majesty, at the Angel in St. Bartholomews Hospital, and for J.
Collins at the Kings Head in Westminster Hall. 1669.

To the Virtuous and most Religious Lady KATHERINE LEVISON The Relict of Sir
RICHARD Knight and Baronet; And the only Surviving Daughter of the Illustrious
DUCHESS, Whose just Encomium is published in the ensuing Treatise.
Madam,
I Do here present to your Ladyship a lively and true Portraiture of your
deceased Lady Mother, or rather your own genuine Picture: Though it wants those
lively Colors which might be required to set forth it is luster. However, it
being drawn after her Death (and so not to the Life) I doubt not but your
Ladyship will admit it into your favorable acceptance, and draw it over again
(as you have begun) by your great charity to the poor and piety toward God, in
your Christian Life and Conversation.

Your Ladyships Patronage of this work I cannot in prudence beg; for there is
no fence against contradicting envy, and malice, which is far from those Noble
Persons, and others in this place, where the Illustrious Duchess breath d, and
expired.

Yet I presume to say, that some, who shall peruse the ensuing Treatise, will
imagine, if not say, (when they have viewed her matchless deeds recorded in the
same) that, what they have Read is incredible; which censure they will disown,
after they have considered, that She was a Miracle of Grace, and a glorious
Prodigy of Munificence.

Let such persons, misguided in their Judgments, and misled in their deceiving
Phansies, know that to commend the dead for their unquestionable merits is a
work of that spotless Innocence, that the Author cannot be attached of
Flattery in doing it, as the Person commended is out of danger of being injured
by it, in that she cannot be elevated in her mind, nor tempted to Pride, so
said the Learned Maximus Taurinensis in one of his Homilies.

I shall close these few impolite Dedicatory lines with my Prayers to the
Almighty Lord the God of Grace, that he would be pleased to increase his Graces
(which are great and many) in you, and continue his Mercies to you; that,
having with a large Revenue a larger heart, and an open hand, you may tread in
the same path of charitable beneficence, in which your Deceased Renowned Mother
walked, and with Her be hereafter glorified in Heaven wearing the Crown of
Charity, and Perseverance. This is the hearty Vote of him, who is

Madam, Your humble Servant, Ready to Obey your Commands, R. Boreman.

Imprimatur,

Sam. Parker Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Domino Gilberto
Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacr. Dom.
Ex Aedibus Lambethanis, Aprilis 26 1669.
An Exact NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE and DEATH Of the Renowned Duchess DUDLEY Who
departed this Life in her House near the Church of St. Giles in the Fields,
Januarii 22. Anno 1669. in the XC. year of her Age.
WE never read of any that were blamed for drawing of too much water out of the
Well of Life, I mean for devoting themselves with an earnest assiduity to the
reading and study of Gods Word: Neither can we possibly give too much honor to
the Lord of Glory, and King of Saints, though we should put our inventions upon
the rack, and scrue up our expressions to the highest.

There be many ways and diverse means, whereby God may be glorified by us, but
none more effectual and powerful to the advancement of his glory, than by
acknowledging with due praises the many eminent Virtues, which (as so many
Rivulets) stream into the Souls of the Saints from the everlasting Spring of
Divine Grace. They glorified God in me, so said S. Paul of himself, Gal. 1.24.
Who, though he styled himself out of the depth of humility the chiefest of
sinners, and the least of Saints; yet in Gods esteem he was as great as the
greatest of the Latter, and Less then the least of the former.

Now to the glory of God (which is the aim of my weak endeavors) to the praise
of his eternal goodness (which should be the object of yours) I shall, by his
Blessing and Divine Assistance, discharge a duty which is pattern'd to us by
the practice of the Heathens, Jews, and Christians in all ages; it is to
present to the view of your Meditations one of the Fairest Flowers in the
Garden of Gods Church, one (for her Saintship) of the highest Stars in this
lower firmament, whilst I embalm the memory of the most Virtuous deceased
Duchess D. with a just Encomium, and praises due to her rare and transcendent
perfections. In the doing whereof I shall perform a double commendable work;
First, A Duty of Civility and Christianity to the dead; Secondly, A Duty of
Piety to the Living, whilst I stir up their Devotions to an Holy Emulation and
Zealous Imitation of the Graces and Virtues which Shined in the Life and Death
of the Renowned Duchess; (...). To speak in the Language of the Learned
Nazianzen whose Tongue, (that Tongue which sored so high in the praise of S.
Athanasius and S. Basil) would suit well with this great work better then mine;
who, when I have said all that I can, being not able to speak enough, may incur
that censure of endeavoring, or going about, to fit a Dwarfs Shoe to a Giants
Foot.

But to hold your expectation no longer in suspense I shall lay the Foundation
of this Structure in Her Graces Birth, and Education, and then lay upon it the
weight of an Holy Life, and happy Death, this done, refer all to your godly
imitation, and so commend you to God's blessing.

First, For her Ladyships Birth: we have here a Righteous Branch sprung of a
Righteous Stock, She was the second Daughter of Sir Thomas Leighe of Stoneley
in the County of Warwick, Knight and Baronet, the Relict of Sir Robrt Dudley
Knight, Son to Robert late Earl of Leicester; and for his extraordinary merits
created a Duke by Ferdinand the Second, Late Emperor of Germany.

For diverse great considerations, She was by Letters Patents, bearing date at
Oxford the twentieth day of May, In the twentieth year of King Charles the
first of Blessed Memory, By the said King advanced to the title of a Duchess,
being by the foresaid Robert the Mother of five gracious Daughters, Alice,
Douglasse, Frances wife of Sir Gilbert Kniueton Knight, Anne wife of Sir Robert
Holburne Late of Lincolnes Inn (all these Deceased,) And Katherine the only
surviving Picture in Piety and goodness of her Lady Mother, and Widow of Sir
Richard Leveson Knight of the Bath.

The Town of Stonely, in which our Illustrious Duchess was born, has more
reason to glory in that She breathed her first breath in it than the seven
Cities had in Homer the Prince of Poets; who by all of them was challenged, all
laying a claim or Title to his birth in them. But as her Ladyships being born
in the foresaid Stoneley will not add any inward virtue (though it may an
outward luster) to it, so Her being descended from, and related to an Ancient
Noble Family is the slenderest part or piece of her Character and Glory. That
she was born of God by Spiritual Regeneration (and so His Daughter by Adoption)
and a Sister of Christ by love and likeness of Him, this is her Chiefest glory,
the highest degree of her commendation. (...). So said S. Chrysostom in a
Panegyrical Oration, The principal thing to be looked at, and commended in
recounting a Genealogy, is the Virtue of a man or woman.

If we consider the whole Series or course of her life, we shall have a just
occasion to say, that in her person, and by her actions she gave a stop or
check in a way of answer to that doubtful Question of Solomon, Prove. 31.10. Who
can find a Virtuous Woman! who can without God's special blessing obtained by
Prayer unto Him, and without God's Divine appointment and Ordination? This sure
was the wisemans meaning. But to return to my purpose from this short
digression. The precious balm of Grace that was powered by God's blessed Spirit
into the Soul of our Renowned Duchess at her Baptism, or in her Infancy, being
strengthened with the addition of a godly Education, brake forth in such a sweet
perfume, even from her Childhood to Her riper years; that she was looked upon
as an Earthly Saint, an Angel clothed in Flesh, a lawful Image of Her Maker,
and Redeemer, a model of Heaven made up in Clay, the living Temple of the Holy
Ghost.

This was evidenced by these ensuing Graces.

First, By Her Extraordinary Piety, or Religion.

Her behavior toward God was rare and admirable; for being instructed in, and
persuaded of the truth of that Religion which we profess (as distinct from that
false one of the Church of Rome) and being firmly grounded in those
Fundamentals, and saving Truths which our Religion teaches us, viz. That God
alone is to be prayed unto and worshipped (not Saints nor Angels,) That by
Christ only we can be saved, by his merits and Gods mercy, not by our own
works, she accordingly upon these grounds served God night and day (as that
good old Prophetess Anna did, Luke 2.37.) with fastings and prayers, especially
during the time of her Virgin-widowhood; she was (...) 1 Timothy 5.5. a widow
indeed, such as was that famous Paula and Marcella by S. Hierome in his
Epistles so highly magnified. She well knew, that though second marriage is no
sin, yet (as one says) Iterato nubere est signum Incontinentiae, etc. She
therefore, to preserve in her fame the honor, and in her soul and body the joy
and sweet content of Continency, refused to marry; declaring thereby, that
though many great persons wanted her or rather (as the fashion of the world is)
her money, yet she had no need of any to be joined with her in a conjugal
society.

An enlargement of her Estate she never designed, nor desired by the addition
of a Jointure, but moving in the Sphere of her own fortune, and contenting her
self with the portion God had given her, she clave close to God, and was joined
to Him by Faith and Affiance; and so she was espoused to God, and the Lord of
Heaven married to her, being her Husband (as he professes himself to have been
to Israel, Jer. 31.32.) in regard of his Love, Care and Providence to her
Religious Person; who spent as much time (or more) in reading of God's word,
and other godly books the extracts of it, as others do in their Glasses, by
which they correct the defaults in their dresses, and blemishes in their faces,
not regarding in the mean while the blots and spots, the defilements and stains
of sin, that disfigure the native beauty of their Souls, which are usually left
naked, and, for want of prayer to God divested of Grace, but clothed with the
black mantle of Lascivious and Unclean thoughts.

Our pious Duchess took into her prime care her righteous soul the spouse of
God: by Prayer and Meditation (with which a soul is winged) she sent it up in a
flight to Heaven every morning, and thus conversing with God in the mount of
Devotion it returned again into her bosom (as Moses did from the Mount) with
it is face shining, and lightsome with joy and inward Consolation.

The more familiar conference we have with God in prayer, the more do we
partake of him.

He that passes by the fire may have some gleams of heat, but he that stands by
it will have his Color changed: It is not possible a man should have any long
conference with God in Prayer, and Meditation, but that his heart shine with
inward illumination, and being enflamed with the love of God, partake of some
Divine Inspiration.

And thus she acquainting her self daily and conversing with God, in her
Closet, or Private, and more public family devotions (which she never omitted)
was wonderfully beautified, and strengthened in her soul by Grace; which had
taken up it is lodging in her, and displayed it self outwardly in five special
Saint-like Qualities, which made her conversation amiable, pleasant, and
Venerable to all her Equals and Inferiors.

The first was a winning and obliging way or disposition, that sweetly scatters
favors; by this, being a desire of doing good to all, even to our very
enemies, we attract friendships, and make friends even of those that hate us.
Thus did that good Duchess.

The second is Affability, this was eminently in her, joined with a becoming
Grace and sweet behavior, and has in it a power to charm Souls that are in
any the least way or degree inclined to Honesty and Civility: She was Courteous
to all even the meanest person, who might find her ear, open to any just
Request or Modest Petition. When she bestowed any favor, or gave an Alms, She
gave it cheerfully without grudging, or any the least repining, so the loaf
which she gave was not Panis Lapidosus, as Seneca speaks, but pure and fine
Manchet without any mixture of Gravel. An Alms given with hard Language,
reproach or an harsh exprobration, is gravel-bread, and at once loses both it is
thanks and commendation.

The third, Prudence, a gracious Quality of the Soul, which is ever joined with
Wisdom as it is inseparable Companion, as appears by Ephesians. 1.8. -- According to
the riches of his Grace, wherein he has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and
Prudence. So Prove. 8.12. I Wisdom dwell with Prudence, Here too they are mated,
they cannot be severed. The property of Wisdom, is (...), to propound to it
self a right or good end, as it is the Office of Prudence, (which derives it is
name from Providence) (...) to advise of and devise proper and fit means
suitable to that end. To be happy hereafter in Heaven and to live honorably
with repute here on Earth, should be our main end: Faith in Christ attended
with good works is the way to attain the former, Justice and Honesty to man is
the means to acquire the other.

This virtue, this (...), was most eminent in our Renowned Duchess, she made
it her whole business, her (...) to get a place in Heaven, (where she now sits
and raigns) and by well-doing to leave a good name behind her, being dead; that
the transplendent light of her beneficence shining amongst men, and they
beholding her good works might glorify her Father which is in Heaven, Matt.
5.16.

Her Prudence likewise was seen in this that she had a great command over her
Tongue, and Passions; she knew that (as Th. de Kempis says well, lib. 1. c.
20.) It was an easier thing to be silent then not to offend in speech, or
multitude of words: she therefore seldom spoke but to the benefit of the
Hearer; Grieve she did at the miscarriages of men (whereby God was dishonored)
and for public calamities when the Church was afflicted, but this sorrow was
allayed with Religion, it never exceeded; Thus also her Anger was tempered with
Meekness, so that if at any time her blood boiled up in her tender heart out of
a dislike of any thing that did offend her, it never ran over the brim of
Reason, or bounds of Moderation. Her ears were ever open to the complaints of
the poor, but shut against all calumny and Detraction; Her Eyes ever open too,
looking up to Heaven ( as the eyes of Servants look unto the hands of their
masters -- Psalm. 123.2.) but shut against Objects dressed up with vanity,
through these casements they could not enter into her capacious Soul, the
receptacle only of chaste thoughts decked with Purity of good Intentions; Her
mouth had a watch set upon it, which then opened when she was to give rules of
Instruction, and Orders for direction to her well-ordered Religious Family, or
when she fell into discourse of Religion, and of the (...) the things above,
heavenly things; which she ever used to do, whenever I was admitted into her
blessed Private Society. In a word, which is another high degree of Prudence,
and that which the Philosopher terms (...), Perspicacitas, she could quickly,
and warily discern the dispositions, capacities, manners, humors, affections,
and aims of those with whom she did converse, and accordingly did suit her
carriage to every man's temper without flattery, which was far from, and
beneath, her.

She was a magazen of experience, the fruit or benefit of Old Age, and the
proxime cause of Prudence. Her vast Memory, which was strong and vigorous to
admiration, was the Storehouse and Treasury of Observations, and Knowledge of
Occurrences for many scores of years: so that I often have said, what I truly
found by her rare discourses, that she was a Living Chronicle bound up with the
thread of a long-spund Age; the which being cut asunder by the hand of Death,
we are thereby deprived of a great Jewel and comfortable benefit. In diverse
accidents and things relating to our Parish I often appealed to her stupendous
Memory, as an ancient Record, and as that was admirable, so what the Son of
Sirach says of Judas Maccabeus, Eccl. 93.7. Her memorial is, and shall be
blessed for ever. Who in the fourth and fifth place was admired and highly
honored for her Humility and Patience.

The former of these is a Virtue which is the Cognizance of a Saint, and the
true Badge of a Christian; it is the first Lesson which is to be Learned in the
School of Christ, who is Magister humilitatis so styled often by S. Aug. Learn of
me for I am meek and lowly, etc. Matt. 11.29. The Doctrinal saying of this
great Master of Humilty. It is grounded upon an high apprehension of the
Majesty and Greatness of Almighty God, together with a low estimation a man
has of himself, in regard of his many weaknesses, and sinful Infirmities;
These being ever proposed to the eye of Her Conscience, and looking upon all
the good things She had, her Gifts and Graces, as God's Donatives, (who can and
will, if we be proud of them to a contempt of others, take them from us) She
therefore ever paid to God the Tribute of thankfulness for them, bowing Her
Soul to God by an humble submission to His Will, and to the just commands of
her Superiors; being likewise assured of this, that if she had more riches,
others might have more Grace, and if she exceeded them in one or more gifts,
they might excel in others. Hence did spring and arise Her meekness, and
Humility, a Grace which renders a man amiable in the sight of God, who dwells
(as the Prophet Isaiah speaks, chap. 57.11.) in an humble heart, it being the
Chief Mansion or Manour-House of the holy Ghost, (...). Chrysostom. There is nothing
more acceptable and pleasing to God than for a man to degrade himself in his
humble thoughts, and to rank himself among the lowest, even then when he is in
a place of Dignity or Eminence: Such a one is God's delight, his special
Favorite. So was the good Dutch^ss, who reflecting in her Religious thoughts
upon her frail composition, as being (what Abraham styled himself, Genesis 18. and
what the greatest are) but Dust (in regard of her beginning) and Ashes (in
respect of her end) and knowing that (as the forenamed de Kempis says of man in
General) that she was (...).
Culpable in many things, prone by nature to evil, and unable of her self to
stand and persist in that which is good. This knowledge of her self beat down
Pride, and set up a throne for Humility in her heart, which displayed it self
by her delighting to be concealed by her private retirement, yet shining in
goodness though unseen, like those stars (called, Sporades) in the Galaxie or
milk-way in the firmament: It likewise discovered it self, First, By taking no
content or delight in the praise of men, when it was offered; Secondly, By her
contentation in every estate and condition, every mutation or change of
fortune, conceiving that what good she enjoyed was more, and what evil she
sustained was less, than she deserved.

This Grace of Humility in Her was the parent of Pa^ience, a cheerful bearing
of affliction without murmuring or repining at God's dispensations or
providence. (...).
He that thinks or believes he is the Son of God will not murmr at any
dispensation of his Providence; should I lead your Meditations through all the
Stages of her sufferings in the late bloody Rebellious times, truly I might
tire yours, though they did not overcome Her, Patience. But she with a most
Heroic Christianlike Courage and Spirit, bore up against all the batteries and
storms of plundering Persecutours, of railing Shimei's, and backbiting
Rabshakes, against whom her Innocence was no fence to keep of their approaches:
And as those lesser lights of Heaven shine brightest in the dark Winter nights,
and fire burns hottest in the cold frost; so the Star of her profession shind
most gloriously, the fire of her Zeal to the Truth glowed with a greater heat
under the rage of those, who did persecute her with their hands robbing her of
her goods (because she would not be as they were, bad, rebels against the King
and Church) and blasting her reputation with their black Tongues not dreading
to report she was a Papist, or (as one said before a Committee) something like
one: and why? Because she was loyal to her Sovereign, a lover and Patroness of
Orthodox Divines, and abounded in good works. If it were only Charity that did
constitute a Papist, I would not refuse or dislike to be so called; but her
soundness in her opinion, and practice of the true Religion manifested to the
World that she was a rare Christian, a Christian indeed and not only in name
(...). Ign. One of a most exact conversation, and fit to be proposed to this
loose and sinful Age as a pattern of good living; and as St. Augustine referred
those that desired to profit in Virtue to the life and conversation of S.
Paulinus, Vade in Campaniam disce Paulinum, Go to Campania and study Paulinus;
so would I say to any person, that should desire to attain to some degree of
perfection in Grace, Goodness, and Piety, Vade ad Sancti Aegidii oppidum, and
Disce Ducissam Dudleyam, Have recourse to St. Giles's and enquire after the
Life and manners of Duchess Dudley; conform your Life to Her Religious
Conversation (who has left behind her there many Ladies much like unto her) so
may you prove a good proficient in Religion.

Her Patience likewise discovered it self highly all the time of her sickness
which was long and tedious, and in the midst of all her pains, which were sharp
and grievous; her Soul was drowned in the Contemplation of that great Ocean of
bliss in Heaven, to which she was sailing through the narrow channel of this
life: She never complained with murmuring or bitter Lamentation, as too many do
in their sickness, nor saying as Rebekah did, Genesis 25.22. when the twins
strugled in her womb, If it be so why am I thus? No she knew that (...), that
the gate is strait which leads into the City of bliss, and that through many
tribulations we must enter into heaven (which she had learned out of Acts
13.22.) and therefore embraced her Cross with cheerfulness -- and why, should a
living man complain, a man for the punishment of his Sin? Lam. 3.39. She in
effect often said what St. Hierome suggested to Paula concerning the death of
Blaesilla, Bonus est Dominus, and quodcunq ^ecerit bonus Deus, non potest non
esse bo^.
The Lord is good, and whatsoever a good God does cannot be bad. To conclude
this particular, She looked upon her troubles as the Lot of God's Children, the
Physic of the Soul, the Pledge of Divine Love, the Badge of her profession (as
a Christian) the Incentive of her Devotion, and a mark of her Conformity with
Christ her Head, and the Captain of our Salvation; and therefore, following
him, she bore all with Patience.

To whom that she might by a closer Union be joined, Now that her Soul was
drawing toward Heaven, having spent all the time of her sickness in Prayer and
Repentance, and heavenly Conferences, of which I could give a large account,
She (as she had done oft-times before) desired to receive her last Viaticum
that heavenly food, which might (as it did) strengthen her Spirit in it is last
conflict with Death, and in it is long journey to eternity, or everlasting life;
I mean that which is a Sacrament, as of a thankful Commemoration of Christ
crucified, so of a blessed Confirmation, for that it confirms our Faith that
Christ is, and will be in all respects to our Souls (I had rather say to our
Persons) what the Bread and Wine is to our Bodies.

Had you been then present and seen with what flaming devotion, with what
burning affection, and lowly Reverence upon her Knees (when she could hardly
stand upon her feeble legs) she received that heavenly Food that (...), (as
Ign. calls it) which Physics the Soul for Eternity, the seal of her pardon,
and token of her Communion with Christ; had you then beheld her devout
deportment, and heard the Divine expressions, which immediately fell from her
gracious lips, you would hence have concluded that she was a rare Saint --
Having thus got a firmer hold of Christ by Faith in the Merits of his Death and
Passion, and grasping her Savior in the Arms of Her Love and Thankfulness, She
ever after chaunted out old Simeons Song, Luke 2.29. Domine nunc dimittis, etc.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace. She (as St. Augstine says of
Faith) tore of Death's grim Vizard, and beheld under it a comely smiling face;
so as, whiles unto the enemies of God (those that are not reconciled unto him
by Faith in Christ and the amendment of their lives) it is no other than a
terrible executioner of Divine Vengeance, it seemed to her an Herald of Peace,
a messenger of Joy, a plausible and sure Convoy unto Blessedness. For this
cause, or upon these considerations she longed after her (...), her
dissolution, even as the weary Traveller after he has measured many tedious
miles (as she had years) and passed many dangers both by Sea and Land, and felt
the harsh entertainments of a stranger, rejoices to draw near in his return to
a pleasant and Rich habitation. Thus she desired earnestly to be released from
Her Prison, (the body is such and no more to the Soul) She often wished to be
dissolved, and to be admitted into a nearer familiarity or Communion with
Christ: a few days after the Lord in Mercy made her partaker of her holy wish
and desire, gave her an happy Release by Death, and Grace to utter these last
words of the Protomartyr Saint Stephen, Act. 7.59. Lord Jesus receive my
Spirit; and when she had said this she (after ninety years current spent in
God's service) fell asleep.

Death was no more to this Illustrious Duchess then a sleep. Her body after
many vexatious Toils, Troubles, and Disquiets in this World shall sleep or rest
for a while in it is (...), it is Dormitory the Grave. But her soul is now awake
in Heaven, wearing the Crown of Perseverance, and singing with the triumphant
Chorus of Angels and Saints glorified a joyful Song to the Lamb Christ Jesus
sitting upon a golden glorious Throne; who will at the great day raise up her
body from it is long sleep by virtue of that Spirit which raised him from the
dead ( Romans 8.11.) and dwelt by a full measure of Grace in the Soul of our
deceased Saint, who being dead yet speaks (as the Apostle attests of
righteous Abel, Heb. 11.4.) and methinks bespeaks as now on Earth her
survivers, from Heaven, in the words of St. Paul. Let your conversation be, as
mine was, in Heaven, where I reign now in the Embraces and Glories of my
Savior: and, Be ye followers of me as I was of the Lord Jesus, in Faith and
Love, in Humility, Meekness, Piety and Patience, and suppose too that she
bespeaks you all in the words of Gideon to his Soldiers, and of Abimeleck to
his. Judge. 7.17. chap. 9.48. Look on me and do likewise, what ye have seen me
do [and shall hear I have done] even so do ye, according to your abilities, and
several capacities;

Clothe the backs of the poor, and feed the hungry bellies; adorn God's Houses,
and contribute to the Rebuilding of decayed, and, by war and fire, wasted
Churches; endow poor Vicaradges with Annual Accessions or Augmentations of
large Salaries; relieve poor Widows in Hospitals by yearly Pensions; give good
and competent Sums for the redemption of Christian Captives now chained up to
slavery in the hands, or under the power, of Infidels; and for placing out of
poor Children or Orphans yearly to be Apprentices, Honor your Ministers who
are set over you in the Lord, especially those who labor, in the Word, 1 Timothy
5.17. i. e. take great pains to dispense the lively Oracles of it, and
administer frequently the holy Sacraments for the edifying and saving of your
Souls; give what is due unto them, and take nothing by fraud or violence from
them, and, if they want an house to dwell in, provide one for them; All that
has been said the Illustrious Duchess did, and gave to God the Glory of it,
who afforded Her, by his blessing, that good and plentiful seed which she
liberally sowed and scattered in the fields of the poor, and has sprung in a
rich and large crop of blessings which she now enjoys with God in the
Celestial Paradise. Pauperum fundus est foecundissimus; The poor man's field
affords the largest Crop. And though all cannot keep an even pace, or go along
with her in her Bounty and Magnificence, yet follow her (though at a distance)
by conforming your lives and actions to her Charity, and goodness. Thus if you
do (as her good deeds in a manner exhort you) and declare the Sincerity or
Truth of your Faith by your goods works, Imitating Christ the King of Saints,
and this deceased Duchess a Queen among her Sex for her rare exemplary Virtues
and Graces, you shall be for ever blessed, as She is, and Crowned with
Everlasting Glory, and Happiness.

Trin-uni Deo Laus, honor, and Gloria, etc.
A Memorable and Exact CATALOGUE OF ALL THE RENOWNED DUCHESS Her Good, or Most
Charitable, Deeds.
AS to abound in Good Works is an Argument of a Lively Faith in Christ, and a
true mark of Christianty; so to disperse the same upon a self-seeking Interest,
out of a design to gain praise, and get glory by it, is an infallible note or
sign of Hypocrisy. This Pharisaical vice never lodged in the Soul of our
deceased Duchess, so Renowned for her stupendous Charity, the fire whereof
burnt hot in her Religious breast, but was covered over with the Ashes of
Humilty: She, whilst living, loved not to hear her just praises sounded in her
Ear for well-doing, but contented her self with God's approbation, whilst she
did all for His Glory, that the poor, releived by her bounty, might have an
occasion to say, Blessed be the Lord, for his merciful goodness, that has
opened the heart, and hand of his servant, to help, and succor us in our want.
She was such a stranger to Pride (which never enter's into a gracious Soul) and
so far from Ostentaion in her life, that I am persuaded, had any come to her
before her death, and mentioned the design of publishing the ensuing Catalogue
after it, she would not have consented to that motion, but rather forbad it.
However now that her Grace is out of the reach of Flattery, and cannot be
suspected for the guilt of Vainglory, I shall blow the Trumpet of her praise,
by presenting to the World a list of her good deeds, that those, who peruse it,
may thereby be induced to follow her steps, to conform their lives to the
exemplary pattern of her bountiful goodness, to abstain from superfluities in
Apparel, and Diet, (which murder Charity;) that what they spare, or gain by
abandoning all excess in needless expenses, they may contribute the same to the
relief and comfort of Christ's poor Members, his necessitous, pious Servants.
This was the practice of our Illustrious Duchess; and for this God has Crowned
her (as he will all those that imitate her) with everlasting glory and
happiness.

A just Account of her good deeds in her life, and little before her death,
taken out of our Church's Register, and specified in her last Will and
Testament.
1. HER Charity began at the House of God, which was first in her thoughts, as
it is usually the last, or not at all, in other's.

When the former Church here of S. Giles, which was decayed by Age, lay as it
were in Rubbish, there being a Void space at the upper end of the Chancel,
which was stored with Lumber, as the Boards of Coffins, and Dead-mens Bones;
She, being offended at that unhandsome prospect, erected a decent Skreen, to
divide the said Chancel from the forenamed place, and to hide it from the
beholders eyes, which could not but be troubled at it.

2. When the foresaid Church was fallen It began to be built in the year 1623
and was finished with the wall about it. A^. 1631.
(with the fall whereof that Skreen was demolished) God moved the hearts of the
Parishioners to erect a new Church in the Room or place of the former, which
was in a few years effected and finished, many hundreds of good Christians in
other Parishes contributing to so good and glorious a work, she most liberally
(as she had a magnificent large soul) gave to the advance and finishing of it,
together with the Wall that encompasseth it, many 100 l. of which her
magnificent bounty, the then grateful Parishioners erected a Monument which is
placed over the great gate or the Northside of the Church. The words engraven
in a large square Stone are these, QVOD FOELIX BONVMQVE SIT HEROINAE
MVNIFICENTIA GRATVM MARMORIS HVJVS

3. The Church being finished (which is a large goodly Fabric) that the Inside
of it might correspond with that which is without, She gave hangings of Watched
Taffity to cover the upper end of the Chancel, and those bordered with a Silk
and Silver Fring.

Item, For the back of the Altar a Rich Green Velvet Cloth with these three
Letters in Gold IHS embroidered on it.

Two Service Books in Folio, Embossed with Gold.

A Green Velvet Cloth with a Rich deep Gold Fring to cover the Altar on Sundays.

A Cambrick Altar-cloth with a deep Bonelace round about.

Another fine Damask Altar-cloth.

Two Cushings for the Altar Richly Imbroider'd with Gold.

A Large Turkey Carpet to be spread on the Week days over it.

A beautiful Skreen of Carved Work, which was placed where the former in the
Old Church stood.

Moreover she gave a neat pair of Organs, with a Case Richly Gilded.

Item, Very Costly handsome Rails, to guard the Altar or Lord's Table from
profane abuses.

Item, The Communion Plate of all sorts in Silver and Gilt, for that Sacred
Use, which is as large and Rich as any in the City and Suburbs.

Besides all this, She was at the Charge of Paving the Upper End of the Church
with Marble Stones.

And gave the great Bell in the Steeple, which, as often as it Rings, sounds her
praise; and was at the Charge of casting and hanging the other five Bells.

Only this Bell and the foresaid Plate excepted, all the forenamed Ornaments
of the Church (being counted Superstitious and Popish) were demolished, and
sold (under a pretense of relieving the poor out of the Money Received for them)
by the Deforming Reformers (as they were called) in the late bloody Rebellious
times. But the Church since has been by our care Rebeautified, though not in
the same high degree and manner as before specified.

4. She gave long since to the Church of Stoneley in Warwickshire (where Her
Sacred Body lies now Entombed) as also to the Churches of MANCESTER.
LEKE-WOTTON. ASHOW. KENELWORTH, and MONKSKIRBY,
twenty pounds and upwards per annum a piece, for a perpetual Augmentation to
the poor Vicaridges of those Respective Churches for ever.

5. Moreover she bestowed on the same Churches, and Likewise upon the Churches
of Bidford in the foresaid County of Warwick, Acton in Middlesex, S. Albans in
Hartfordshire, Patshil in Northampton, diverse pieces of fair and costly Plate
to be used at the Celebration of the Holy Communion in each of them.

6. And besides all this, She purchased a fair House and Garden near the Church
of S. Giles's aforesaid, and gave it for a perpetual Mansion to the Incumbents
after three lives, whereof two are expired.

7. She also allowed a yearly stipend to the Sexton of that Church to Tole the
great Bell when the Prisoners, condemned to die, were passing by, and to Ring
out after they were Executed.

8. She likewise gave great Sums of Money for the repairing of the Cathedral
Church at Lichfield, and for the Re-edfying of S. Sepulchers here in London.

All these (with many more of a lesser Magnitude) were the products or fruits
of her great Charity, whilst she lived; and thereby made (as wisemen and women
do) her own eyes her Overseers, and her own hands her Executours.

At her Death She made these following Bequests, viz.
1. For the Redemption of Christian Captives from the hands of Infidels, one
hundred pounds per annum for ever.

2. To the Hospital situate near the Church here in S. Giles's four hundred
pounds for twenty pounds a year for ever.

3. For the placing out for ever of poor Parish Children of S. Giles's
Apprentices, two hundred pounds, to purchase a piece of Land at ten pounds per
ann. And two to be put out every year.

4. To the poor of the foresaid STONELEY. KENILWORTH. LEKE-WOTTON. ASHOW.
BIDFORD and PATSHIL
aforesaid; and also of LICHBOROW and BLAKESLEY
in the County of Northampton, one hundred pounds per ann. to be disposed and
distributed among them in such sort or manner as Her Will does direct Her
Executrix.

5. And upon the day of Her Funeral fifty pounds to be distributed among the
poor of the said Parish of S. Giles, and other adjoining Parishes.

6. She bequeathed to fourscore and ten Widows (according to the Number of the
Years, She lived) to each one a Gown and Fair White Kerchief to attend the
Hearse wherein Her Body was carried, and one shilling a piece for their Dinner
after that Solemnity was performed, which was on the sixteenth day of this
present Month of March, 1668.

7. She appointed by Her Will five pounds to be given to every Place or Town
where Her Corpse should Rest in it is Passage from London unto Stoneley (as
aforesaid) in Warwickshire; where She has a Noble Monument long since prepared
by Her self.

8. She Ordered that six pence should be given to every poor body that should
meet Her Corpse on the Road.

9. She gave to BLACKSLEY, LITCHBOROUGH, and PATSHIL
aforesaid, ten pounds a piece to be distributed among the poor the same day
Her Corpse was Interred.

10. To the Parish of Stoneley fifty pounds, which was distributed the same day.

Thus our Illustrious Duchess did in Her Life, and at Her Death; and doubtless
for all Her Good Deeds She has Her reward in Heaven by God's Mercy, and
Christ's Merits.

Whom that short and Ingenuous Epitaph would befit, which is Inscribed on the
Learned Is. Causabone's Monument in Westminster Abbey: admit of it thus, with
the Alteration of a Name, and Word. Qui nosse vult Ducissam Duddeleiam, Non
saxa, sed facta legate, In English thus. READER, Would thou the famous
Duchess Dudley know,
Read not Her Monument (that is far below
Her Merits) but her Acts; which with her Name
Carried on the Nimble wings of Fame
Will profit those that shall hereafter come,
And last when Marbles have their fatal Dome.


To the former CATALOGUE of Her Innumerous Acts of Charity, Let this Epicedium
be added as a closing Epilogue.
When Greatness, with a Long-spund-age,
And Goodness joined fill up the Page
Of Her due Praises, we may say
That unkin'd Death has snatched away
A Phoenix of her Sex; in whose Breast
The Graces dwelt, and made their Nest:
O! from Her Ashes may there Rise
A Generation to Immortalise
What e're of Virtue bears the name,
Whilst, what She did, they do the same.
Floruit, Floret, ac Florebit.
THE END.
I shall desire the Candid Reader when ever he meets with the Name Dudley to
ready Duddeley: We find by a late Subscription under Her hand, that, as She
wrote, so Her Name is to be Read and Spelled.

There is one thing more of no small concern which has been omitted, but must
for a close of all be subjoined to what has been briefly said concerning Her
Pedigree.

As Her Grace was the second Daughter of Sir Thomas Leigh of Stoneley in
Warwickshire Knight and Baronet, so Her Mother was Katharina a most Virtuous
Lady, Daughter to Sir John Spencer of Worm Leighton Knight, and great
Grandfather to the Right Honorable now Earl of Sunderland, etc.

The foresaid Sir Thomas had by His Lady Katharina Issue, John Leigh Knight who
was the Father of the Lord Leigh Baron of Stoneley now living, in the County of
Warwick.

Philip. 3.20. Our Conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the
Savior the Lord Jesus Christ.


THERE is in Love so strange a piece of of Magic, as to transform a man into
the object of it, and to translate the Soul into a place far remote from the
body of the affectionate Lover. S. Paul, whose Soul was fired with a burning
flame of Seraphick love, was of this Divine, and Holy Temper after his vision,
when he was raped up into the third Heaven; where he heard, and saw (...),
words, and things which were inexpressible, and doubtless beheld the glorious
face of our Lord Christ Jesus, the beauty of Heaven, and the mirror of Angels:
ever after he was (yet with submission to God's will, whether for life or
death) weary of the world; which he looked upon as a Shop of vanities, a Sink
of uncleanness and a Dungeon of miseries, and by an holy transmigration of
Spirit converst daily and hourly with his God in Heaven: and knowing that the
only way, or means, to arrive at that place of Bliss, that Mansion of pure
delights, and sublimate Joys, is to follow Christ, to imitate H m, whose life
is the most perfect Idea of all virtues, the most exact rule of Holy Living, he
therefore in his Epistle to the Ephesians. 5.1. Exhorts them and with them us in
these words, Be ye followers of God, as dear Children; again, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be
ye followers of me, as I also am of Christ. S. Paul, who pressed this duty to
the Ephesians and Corinthians, did know full well the nature of man; whom an
Apish and Fond imitation turns into the nature of beasts: so it may be said of
some men as it is Psalm. 49. the last verse. They, being in honor, i. e. endu'd
with reason, wherewith they are honored by God above other Creatures, for want
of a right use of it, to a discreet ordering of their lives, may be compared to
the beasts that perish. When men do follow the bad examples of others, and walk
in crooked and bypath, which tend to destruction, they may be compared to the
silly sheep, who will follow their leaders even into deep waters, and down
steep Praecipicies, Non qua eundum sed qua itur, Senec. Not minding where they
should, but where the others go. There have been, and are those, who did, and
do count a defect, or deformity, a piece of graceful honor, if by it they may
be like their Superior: Thus a wry neck in Nero's court was the Mode, and
esteemed a piece of Gallantry; as the (...) to lisp in Julians, and to limp in
another; because these defects were beheld in those Emperors. But we
Christians ought to be wise and prudent in our Imitations, and, by setting
before our eyes the choicest patterns of goodness, we should endeavor to
heighten, and advance our Souls to an evenness in Grace, and virtue, with the
best Presidents amongst God's Saints. To this end, i. e. to raise their Souls
to an high degree of Perfection, S. Paul, verse. 17. of this Chap. exhorts the
Philippians to propose him for a pattern to walk by: Brethren be ye followers
of me, and mark them which walk so as ye have us for an example. To which
exhortation he subjoyns a reason in the words of my Text. For our conversation
is in Heaven, etc. The first word, Conversation, is in the Original (...), the
which, admitting of diverse Interpretations, has caused a Variety of
Constructions amongst Expositors. They, who with Tertullian and S. Hierome,
translate the same by Municipium (which is the State or Condition of those who,
dwelling out of a City in some remote place or Country, have yet the
Privileges of the same (they being enfranchised belonging to them) upon this
account, or for this reason, they take this to be the meaning of the Words;
That, although we be strangers, and sojourners here on Earth, however we are
Municipes, Freemen, or Free-denyzens of Heaven, and have the privilege to be
called, and owned by God as (...). The Fellow-citizens of the Saints, Ephesians.
2.17. With whom we shall, at the great day of the world's Assizes, Reign for
ever in Heaven, and partake of their Happiness.

But the word being of a larger acception or signication, for that by it is
understood many times in the Greek Fathers (as Chrysostom, Basil, and others)
vitae ratio and institutum, a trade or manner of living (which is agreeable
Likewise to the Syriack Translation) we may with Beza read the words thus, Nos
ut coelorum cives nosmet gerimus, we behave our selves as Citizens of Heaven.
And this Paraphrastical gloss suits with that of Grotius, who says that this
clause, Our conversation, etc. must borrow light for it is sense or meaning from
the preceding words, v. 19. (...), who mind earthly things, to which is opposed
that which follows in my Text (...) -- But our Conversation is in Heaven, etc.
The words thus explained, In them, and those that follow, are wrapped up these
two General parts. First, Here is the Apostles protestation of his holiness in
these words, Our conversation is in Heaven, etc. Secondly, His, and all good
Christians joyful hope, or expectation, From whence we expect the Lord Jesus
Christ. First, For the Protestor, S. Paul, and his Protestation.

I remember that S. Chrysostom, making mention of him, says, that he had (...)
a large Soul, a Soul as large as Heaven, for that it was not shut up nor
Imprisoned (as the worldly man's is) in his body, nor chained in fetters of
Earthly cares, but dilated (as ours should be) in his love of Souls, and spread
in its ardent desires of Heaven, or future happiness; after which he panted, as
appears by his Cupio dissolvi. Philip. 1.23. I desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ. Thus his conversation (or rather heart) was in Heaven. And this
his Protestation, in the Text of his Heavenly-mindedness, did not proceed from
Pride, or a vainglorious Ostentantion, but only from an holy, and earnest
desire to draw our Souls upward by his Example to God that made them, whilst we
follow him in our practice by a Godly Imitation of his Virtues.

In the second Epistle to Tim. 3.10. The Apostle thus bespeaks him, Thou have
fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering,
charity, patience; to which we may add his Sobriety and Temperance, of which we
have a record, 1 Cor. 9.27. As also his (...), his striving to keep a good
Conscience void of offense, Act. 24.16. And when we have beheld the Apostles
Soul decked with the forenamed Graces, and enriched with that inestimable Jewel
of Heaven the Souls Paradise, I mean a Conscience, that is, quiet and honest
bona, quietly, and honestly good, to the constitution whereof there must concur
these three Ingredients, Puritas Cordis, veritas oris honestas actionis, Purity
of heart, Truth in the mouth, and honesty in our life, or conversation. From
hence we may infer that Heaven had in a manner entered into him, and that he
was in Heaven whilst he breathed upon earth, not only in regard of his union
with Christ by Faith (as a learned Commentator notes upon the Text) but also in
respect of his conformity to Christ, whom he loved, and resembled in his life,
he being (as Christ was) Vir doloris and laboris, a man of sorrows, and of
great sufferings; likewise of a wonderful patience, as is evident by the
eleventh of his second Epistle to the Corinthians: When his feet were in the
stocks, Act. 16. His mind was in Heaven, Crus in Cippo, animus in Coelo, Aug.
When he was in that great storm at Sea, Act. 27. When neither Sun, nor Moon
appeared for many days, in the midst of that danger his Soul was (...). Chrysostom.
in a quiet Haven, even in the bosom of God: in that great darkness he had a
light within the light of Joy, and comfort, because God was with, and in him.
As there is all joy in Heaven, so there is Heaven in the Souls inward Joy,
which springs from Patience in Tribulation, and from the Peace of a good
Conscience: therefore, Holy, Patient, Meek, Humble S. Paul, who was ever
contented, his Conscience not disquieted, He might truly assert of himself, and
none but such as he was, of the same mould of Spirit, can say of themselves as
he said, Our conversation is in Heaven.

Having given you a brief Character of the Protestour S. Paul, I shall now turn
his Protestation into an exhortation or Precept, as he intended; for we must
suppose, that when he had said, Be ye followers of me, and mark such as walk so
(mark so as to imitate them) for our Conversation is in Heaven, he said thus in
effect; And let your conversation be in Heaven. First, By your Souls conversion
unto God. S. Hierome has a saying, which is a vehement asseveration, and
Protestation concerning himself, Testor Deum, quando lachrymis madent oculi,
videor tunc Angelorum interesse Choris, I protest and call God to witness when
mine eyes are drowned with tears springing from sorrow for my sins I seem to my
self to be conversant with or in the Company of the Holy Angels: Such is the
nature, and energy of true repentance, which of all things in the world makes
the greatest change; it works a change in God, it turns his frowns into smiles,
his angry displeasure into a gracious favor; It transforms a carnal
earthly-minded man into a Spiritual and Divine Nature, from Sin to Grace, from
vicious customs to holy habits, from drunkenness to sober practices; It raises
a sinner from death to life, from his Prison to a Throne, from Hell, and the
guilt of eternal Torments to Heaven, and entitles him to endless happiness: In
a word, It carries a man to God by confessing and forsaking his sins, and
brings God to man in pardon and forgiveness.

This brings peace to the Soul: and in whom this Peace resides, in him God
resides, and dwells by his Spirit, which is the Spirit of Peace. Now can
Heaven, in the Joys and comforts of it, be wanting where God is? When therefore
S. Paul exhorts us to have our Conversation in Heaven, he says in a manner
thus, " Make your peace with God by an hearty sorrow for your sins, and declare
the truth, or sincerity of your sorrow by an holy, and heavenly life, which is
the Nurse of Peace, and Mother of solid comfort. He is (as it were) in Heaven
who is a true and humble Convert; so was that Mary Magdelen; when she lay
weeping at Christ's feet: she loved Christ very much, because much was forgiven
her. Stans in terris in Coelo es, si Deum diligis; Aug. If thou love God,
thou art in Heaven whilst thou art on earth. A sinner, that is assured of his
pardon, will love his Savior, and this love will transport or carry his Soul
to Heaven, to converse there often by Meditation and Prayer with his Redeemer.

Secondly, Let your Conversation be in Heaven, by a frequent Contemplation of
it.

As for our Contemplation or Meditation of Heaven, I must tell you in general,
that for want of it, or because it is so neglected, virtue decays in men and
vice abounds, the Graces of God's Spirit our Faith and Hope as also our Charity
grow weak; but our Passions, as Grief and Fear with others, get strength, and
increase in us: If our thoughts be in Heaven (where true Honor, Wealth, and
Pleasure are to be found) our endeavors will be after it, and all our Studies
for it; and then, Si neglectis terrest^ (...) Coelum toti aspiramus (as
Pelacherus glosses o^ (...) Text) when neglecting or despising earthly things
(...) wholly pant and gasp after Heavenly, no sad event, (...) casualty here on
earth will trouble us.

We read in Genesis 24.62. That when Isaac went out to Meditate in the field at
eventide, he met Rebekah his beloved; so that man shall meet with joy and
content (as S. Paul did) in all his sufferings, that often takes a walk by
contemplation in Heaven, the Celestial Paradise, the Garden of pure delights,
Meditating on it is everlasting comforts, and concluding (which is an Act of
Faith and Hope) that they are provided for him, that he shall inherit them,
because he is fitted and prepared for them, being freed by the sanctifying
grace of God's holy Spirit from the bondage of corruption, from the filthiness,
power and command of sin, which raigns not in him. This work of Sanctification
in him is the only evidence a man has for his assurance, that he is designed to
be (...) a Fellow-Citizen with the Saints in Heaven. And when his Meditation of
it is joined with this assurance, as Discomforts will fly out of his Soul in
the midst of troubles, so neither will a temptation to any foul sin easily
seize on it; For he will thus argue with himself, when he is tempted, I am
marching or walking upward to Heaven, my City, and proper Country which is
above, but this sin is the Broadway which leads downward to Hell; I am bending,
or moving forward toward the possession of everlasting Joys, but this may turn
my course backward, and hurry my Soul to endless torments, therefore I will not
commit it. Thus not only a comfortable but also an holy life is the fruit of
Divine Contemplation, which is the Souls (...), it is prospective glass, through
which at so great a distance it can look into Heaven, and apprehend in some
measure the glories which are there prepared, and reserved for those that love
and serve the Lord Jesus.

But if we raise our Souls often upon the same wing of Meditation and look upon
God in our elevated thoughts, as filling Heaven and Earth with his unbounded
presence, so, that nothing can escape the Eye of his knowledge; again, if we
look up and behold him not only as omnipresent, but also omnipotent, a God
likewise of supereminent Mercy and Truth, who can do what he will do, and will
do what he has promised, This Act of Contemplation will first embolden our
Faith in Prayer, it will make us believe that, what he has promised, he will
grant unto us; it will secondly, beget in us an holy Fear, and awful Reverence
of his Majesty, so as to do nothing that shall be displeasing in his sight, or
distastful to his goodness; It will thirdly settle in us an attention or
collectedness of Spirit, and free us from wandering thoughts in our Prayers,
whilst our Souls are fixed (as the Prophet David's was, Psalm. 57.8.) upon God
by a settled Meditation of his forenamed Attributes, viz. His All-seeing
Providence, His Almighty Power, His Mercy, Truth and Justice; which if we
propose to the eye of our Souls and ground our Faith upon them, when we
commence our requests to God in the name of Christ, he will deny us nothing
that he knows to be good for us. Seeing then that without Meditation we cannot
attain to a collected Attention of our Spirits in our Prayers, without which
Attention these (as a Rabby tells us) are dead, vain and fruitless, (...) like
a body without a Soul; for this, and in regard of other great benefits which we
reap or receive by it, Let your conversation be in Heaven, by a frequent
contemplation both of it, and of the great God, who is our Almighty and most
merciful Father, and Lord of it.

Thirdly, let your conversation be in Heaven, By your eager affection or love
to the things that are above or in it. For if our Contemplative Meditations of
Heaven draw after them our affections to it, we may be said to have our abode
in it, even whilst we live here, and move upon the Stage of this Earth. A man
may be truly said to be where his mind is, and his mind where his heart by love
is fixed. Ubi jam sum ibi non sum, where I am there I am not, so said that fond
lover in the Comedian, because his body was in one place and his heart in
another: Not unlike to this expression is that of Origin concerning Mary
Magdalen, when she came to the Sepulcher of our Lord Jesus, John 20. and found
not his body there, Maria ibi non erat ubi erat, quia tota ibi erat ubi Dominus
erat, where she was there she was not because her love was firmly fixed on
Christ her Lord, she was only where he was; the place she knew not, but to his
Person, her heart was joined, thus was she in her Soul present with him though
in her body she was absent from Him: Anima est ubi amat, The soul is there
where it loves. Whence it will follow by a necessary induction or consequence,
that if a man divides his soul from his body by a voluntary separation, or by
setting his affection of love upon the things which are above, as the Apostle
exhorts, Col. 3.29. he may be at the same time, Accola terrae, and Incola
Coeli, abide in this world, and dwell in Heaven.

Now if you desire to know what the (...), what those things be which are
above, which may challenge (as they deserve) the prime of our affections, our
love and delight, and desires, They are first that Purity. Secondly, That sweet
harmony of peace and concord. Thirdly, That Love, and Amity. Fourthly, That
Piety that Assiduity in God's Worship: All which are the Jewels of Heaven
wherewith the blessed Angels, and the separate Souls of Saints are adorned, and
beautified. Now he that has set his affections on these things, and withal
desires to be released from the Prison of this World, which is an Hospital of
diseases, a nest of Profaneness, and a cage of Impurities, and warring
dissensions; where too hatred and malice, with all kind of wickedness reign
among us, and now more than ever to our great reproach and shame, after so many
and great obtained mercies; He that desires to be out of this Sodom, and to be
in Heaven with Christ, not so much to be out of trouble, and to live at ease,
as to be in the Company of His Savior, to be freed from the slavery of sin,
and to join with the Saints in their continued praises of the blessed and
glorious Trinity; He whose Soul is enflamed with these holy desires, and looks
upon all things here below as Pictures drawn in Sand or Snow, as fading, empty,
vexing vanities, not worthy of our least affections; briefly, he that is thus
dead to the world, and alive to Christ, because his whole heart is set upon him
by love, and leads a Divine, Celestial Life (such for kind, though not for
it is degree in Virtue) as Christ with his Saints do live in Heaven, a life that
is pure and peaceable, full of Charity and good works, also holy and pious,
such a one may truly say with S. Paul in my Text: My conversation is in Heaven.
From whence his Savior will come at the last day, and rejoyn his body to his
Soul by an happy Reunion, and that because his Soul in this life was severed
from his body, and fixed upon Christ by Love. Which affection, if pure and
sincere, is ever attended with a desire of union, and fruition, so as to be
joined to, and enjoy the Person that is beloved.

Thus he that loves the Lord Jesus (and woe will be to him that does not) will
desire his beatifical Presence, which cannot be obtained but by Death: he
therefore does not fear but wish and wait for it, As a full possession of glory
in Soul and Body, is not to be expected till that great day of Jubilee, the day
of Judgment. Therefore God's Saints, his Servants are delighted with the
thought, and remembrance of it, as was our blessed Apostle S. Paul, who in the
name of all his fellow Saints protested, saying, (...), our conversation is in
Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
This is the second General part of my Text, which I termed, S. Paul's, and all
good Christians joyful hope or expectation, we look for the Savior, etc.

In which words we have these three particulars to be discussed, First, Qui
expectantes, who be the expectants or those that look for Christ? Secondly,
Qualis expectatio, what kind or manner of expectation this is? Thirdly, Quis
expectatus, who it is that is looked for or expected? It is the Savior, which
is Christ the Lord. First, for the expectantes, We, i. e. nos fideles, We
Christ's faithful ones, we, as the Mother of Sisera, Judge. 5.18. Looked out at
a window, and cried (when she expected his return with victory over the
Israelites) Why, is his Chariot so long in coming? -- So we look through the
Casement of Hope for Christ's second coming to Judgment. Now Hope is the
expectation of some great good, which we believe we shall receive, because he
is faithful that promised it; For this cause Clem. Alexandrinus calls Hope
(...), the blood (or Life) of Faith, for that it keeps our Faith warm, without
the which it would languish and faint.

Faith without Hope may be in Hell, as well as on Earth. The Devils believe,
Jam. 2.19. That Christ will come to be our Judge, but they are afraid, and
tremble (as the wicked do) when they think of it, because their torments shall
be increased then, as the joy of the good Angels and Saints augmented with a
clearer or fuller Vision of Almighty God.

They only look for Christ with Hope, expecting his second coming, they only
who believe in him as their Redeemer: We look (says the Apostle excluding all
unbelievers) we look for the Savior. So it is Expectatio fidem testificans,
such an expectation as testifies our faith in Christ; and by this as an
infallible Rule, we may assure our Souls of the soundness and Truth of our
Faith in Christ, that our sins by him, and through him are pardoned, and our
Persons justified, if with Hope, joined with inward Joy, and Comfort, we wait
for his second Advent. For, in the second place,

This expectation, is, Expectatio animam exhilarans, it is such a looking, or
expectation, which in the midst of all their sorrows, refreshes, and revives
the Spirits of the Saints; for, they reason thus with themselves. Here in this
life our bodies are often upon the rack of sickness, pinched with pains, and
tortured with Aches, but then at the Resurrection, or last day of Judgment,
they shall rise, as so many bright shining Suns, out of the dark celles of
their graves, and in a moment be invested with those glorious qualities, that
adorn the body of our Lord Christ, as is attested by the Apostle in the next
verse to the Text.

Again, They believe that they shall find Christ then, at his Appearance, not
their Judge to condemn, but their Advocate, to plead for them: Why then, say
they, should we be dismayed for fear of that Judgment wherein he is to be the
Judge, who at first suffered for us in his body, on the Cross, as a Surety, or
Redeemer, that he might satisfy his Father's Justice for our sins, and, having
paid our debts by his death, has ever since prayed for us as an Intercessour,
and will at last be our gracious Rewarder? Thus the Saints look for Christ with
an expectation which rejoices the heart. They delight in the coming of their
Savior.

Thirdly, This their Expectation, or looking for Christ, is Expectatio vitam
purificans, such an Expectation, as is attended with purity of life, and
holiness, in a strict conversation. They ever have (as S. Hierome professes
that he had) the voice of the Archangel, Arise ye dead -- and the noise of the
last trumpet sounding (as it were) in their ears. When those that are Christ's
that lived, and died his faithful servants, shall rise first out of their
graves, and meet their Lord in the air, to receive an everlasting Crown, the
reward of their service: Then the sinners and ungodly shall be raised, their
bodies being as black as the Infernal darkness, and having received their
sentence from the mouth of their Judge, their bodies, and souls shall be sent
back to their dark Prisons in Hell, where they shall be ever burning and never
consumed in flames of fire and brimstone. The consideration of these
everlasting burnings, as it makes the Saints to set an high price, or value,
upon the Lord Jesus, so it engages them to a strict performance of all holy
Duties, as continual prayer, sobriety, and watchfulness, being assured, that
none at that great day shall escape the sentence of Condemnation with the
wicked, who are surprised by Death, and snatched away in their sins, of which
they have not repented. For most true is that saying of S. Aug. Epist. 80. to
Hesychius, In quo quemque invenerit suus novissimus dies, in hoc eum
comprehendet mundi novissimus: and qualis in die illo quisque moritur, talis in
die altero judicabitur. In what condition a man is found at the hour of Death,
in the same shall he be looked upon at the great day of Judgment: If he be
surprised by Death in the state of Impenitency, he shall then be condemned as
an Impenitent, without mercy. If death finds thee without sin (it being severed
from thy soul by an hearty Repentance) thy Soul shall not be separated from
God, but shall with thy glorified body partake of everlasting blessedness.

To conclude, He that shall come (i. e. Christ, who is designed by God to be
our Judge) will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37. i. e. not fail to come on
that very day, which is appointed for him to summon all men to Judgment. Of
that day and hour knows no man, Matthew. 24-36. It is hid from the eyes of our
understanding, and knowledge: but let not the thought of it be banished from
our hearts, let us expect our Lord's coming every day; he comes first by Death,
before he comes to judgment; Therefore let our expectation of him be in the
last place Expectatio attente vigilans, an Expectation, or looking for him,
attended with an attentive watchfulnes.

All our watching, all our praying, with other holy duties, should drive at
this end, that when Death comes it may find us well doing, or in an holy frame
of living, and we it our friend, which is an enemy to the Impenitent, and
ungodly sinners. Suppose thou see Death marching toward thee with a cup of
deadly poison in one hand, and a Crown in the other, and that if it take thee
in the midst of thy sins that Poison will be thy potion, but if it find thee
watching, and praying that Crown shall be thy lot or portion.

Oh! then put on Job's resolution, Chap. 14.14. All the days of my appointed
time will I wait, till my change come, (...) expectabo, wait, is but a
Syllable, but of a large, and spreading signification, and comprises the main
(if not the whole) duty of man.

He that waits does watch, (...), with an awful care, and circumspection, with
an holy Fear, and Jealousy over himself, ever suspecting his own weakness, so
that he is ever upon duty, always busied, either in the immediate Acts of
Piety, or in the ordinary works of his Calling, that the Devil, or his own
imbred corruptions may not supplant, or hurt him, nor Death surprise his Person
unawares, trading in sin, or living in any kind of lewdness. This waiting
vigilance is our shield to keep off the fiery darts of Satan, his evil
suggestions, and a Canopy to keep our Virtues pure from being sullied, or
spotted by any Vice. It does that indeed, which the Heathens thought their
Goddess Pellonia did, it drives and Chases all evil from us. He, that watches
for Death, conceives that it is ever at hand, and not afar off, and therefore
he makes a daily provision for it. He is of the same temper, of the same frame
of spirit as the Watchman was of Isaiah 21.8. my Lord (says he there to the
Prophet) I stand continually upon my watchtower in the day time, and I am set
in my ward whole nights. In this Watchman's posture we should ever be. There is
specula meditationis, a watchtower of meditation, which transports the soul
from earth to Heaven, and thus the good Christian is ever watching by
meditating on the benefits that redound or come by Death to us, it being only a
releasing us from a nasty Prison, (no more is the body to the soul) and an
advancing us to a stately Palace of pure Delights, a freeing us from our
toilsome fetters of sin, and sickness, with other woeful miseries, and a
possessing us of the Glorious liberties of the Sons of God, Romans 8.21. This
Meditation sweetens Death, and makes it is approach less terrible: Familiarity
takes away fear, and the Meditation of Death makes it familiar to us. The daily
constant Meditation of Death is likewise a great help, or means to Cool the
heat of Lusts, to kill Pride, and suppress Covetousness, when we shall
consider, and believe that the day or hour of Death is approaching, when a
winding Sheet and a Napkin about our heads will be all the goods we shall carry
hence with us, a Grave all the land, a Coffin the only house which we shall
possess; when worms shall be our sole companions, a noisome stench instead of
perfumes, and, instead of Robes, and rich attire, rags of Rottenness. He that
seriously thinks on these things, and digests in his soul or conscience the
bitter Pills of these sad truths, that man will not be proud, lustful, nor
covetous.

Secondly, there is, specula Praeparationis, a watchtower of preparation, and
on this the good man, or devout Christian is ever standing; his care is to do
that hourly, and daily, which Carthusianus advises all to do, and that is, so
to provide for the coming of Death, ut nihil in mente resideat quod
conscientiam mordeat, and cum quo mori timeat, that no sin reside or remain in
our breast which may wound and trouble the Conscience and with which we (being
guilty) cannot die in peace, and safety.

When sin is separated from thy Soul by a true and timely Repentance, thou
shall not need to fear a dissolution or separation of thy soul from thy body by
death. Make thy peace with God in time: if he be thy friend, death will be the
same to thee, not thy foe, not thy enemy.

No unclean Person shall inherit the Kingdom of God, Ephesians. 5.5. When therefore
thy soul, is cleansed, thy conscience purged, and purified, that the guilt of
no crying, or reigning sin lies upon it, then art thou fitted for Death, then
may thou with a cheerful confidence give a Christian-like invitation to it
and say, Come Death, and welcome Lord Jesus.

An holy, temperate, sober life, an happy Death, and comfort at the great day
of Judgment, these are close linked together, they never part asunder. Non
potest male moriqui vixit been, His death cannot be ill, who lived well, Aug.
that feared God, and performed his will, by keeping his holy Commandments.
Therefore let your conversation be in Heaven whilst you live here upon earth,
and be diligent as S. Peter exhorts 2 Epist. 3.14. that you may be found of
Christ in peace without spot and blameless, (...), at the hour of your death.
Then may you be assured that at the last day he will be your friend, you shall
find him in effect, what his Name Jesus imports, a loving Savior, and not a
severe Judge; even so come Lord Jesus, and, when thou come, make good thy
saving Name unto us. Thus we pray, to this end we Preach, and this is every
ones desire, to be saved from Hells everlasting torments.

But let me tell you that though he be a common, universal, potential Savior,
in respect of the Jews and Gentiles, and in respect of all sorts and conditions
of men, yet to them only he will be effectually a Jesus, who acknowledge him to
be their Lord; which Title is therefore prefixed, or set before that Name in
the Text, we look for the Lord Jesus, to teach us, that if we stoop to his
Scepter, and submit to his word, if we obey his Commands, and live according to
his precepts, wearing the Livery of His Holiness in our lives, making that
first Sermon of His, Matt. 5. the rule of all our Actions, and transcribing
that fair Copy, the rule of all perfection, by our holy practice, we may then
look for him as Jesus, and expect from him Salvation.

I look for the Lord, my soul does wait for him, and in his word is my trust,
So said the Prophet David, Psalm. 130.5. which words may be applied to Christ's
coming in Judgment. He looked for the Lord, whom he served, to be his Savior,
and his trust was in his word, that word of Promise, that he will not condemn a
penitent humble sinner. And whilst we look for the Lord, let that promise be
the comfort and stay of our souls, 1 Cor. 11.31. If we judge our selves, we
shall not be judged, by a judgment of condemnation. That which the Apostle
exhorts us to, is that Judicium paenitentiale (as Tertullian calls it) the
Penitential Judgment, or the Judgment of Repentance, when a man (...), (as S.
Chrysostom. exhorts us to do) sets up in his Soul a Tribunal, or Seat of Justice,
and makes his Conscience both Judge, and Witness, and, examining himself daily
wherein he has offended God, after this examination passes a sentence against
himself, as deserving for his sins eternal damnation, then appeals from
himself to God's mercy, and Christ's merits, humbly begging for Christ's sake a
pardon of all his transgressions, and seals or ratifies his pardon to his
Conscience by his amendment. -- The man that does these things shall never fall
from his hope of happiness; Christ will not condemn him, who thus condemns
himself, and his sins, by putting them to death, or by living no longer in
them. Judicium paenitentiale evacuat Paenale, says Tertullian, The Penitential
Judgment, whereby we condemn our selves, does evacuate the penal, we shall not
be punished for our sins.

He that is thus dead whilst he lives, shall live in his Death, and may say
upon his sickbed, as that devout man Myconius said to Luther his friend that
came to visit him, thy sickness is not unto Death, but unto life; for Death
shall only give a release to his soul from the Prison of his body to a full and
perfect State of liberty, and when Christ shall appear at the latter day he
will raise his body out of the Dust, and place it at his right hand to triumph
and reign with him in endless joy and unspeakable happiness. This honor shall
be conferred on all God's faithful Saints and dutiful Servants, whose
conversation is now in Heaven, from whence we look for the Lord Jesus.

And that our conversation may be such (even Heavenly) as it becomes those who
wait for the coming of their Lord. Let us pray.

O God most holy, who delightest in those Souls which resemble thee in purity,
let thy blessed Spirit take full possession of our Souls, and Spirits, and by
the power of it drive out of them the foul Spirit of envy, and malice, of
pride, and uncleanness, that being cleans'd from these Impurities, they may be
filled with thy Divine Graces, and our lives shine with the heavenly rays of
Charity, and Chastity, of Humility, and Meekness, of Sobriety, and Temperance,
which are the badge, the Cognizance of thy Elect, and the Lives of thy Saints.
And Lord wean our hearts from the love of this World's vanities, which can
neither content our Souls, nor continue with us, and fix them upon thy self,
who art the Joy of the Holy Angels, and our only Stay, Hope, and comfort in all
our distresses, that when we leave this sinful World, and all forsake us, when
death shall arrest our Bodies, our Souls may not be forsaken of thee, but
admitted into those Joys, which shall never end, because they stream from Thee,
who art Everlasting.

Those Graces, and this Glory we most humbly beg through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.


