AN ADMIRABLE TREATISE OF SOLID VIRTUE, Which the Men of this Generation know
not, seeing they take the Appearance of Virtue, for True Virtue, taught by
JESUS CHRIST, in these words, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly, and humble
of heart; as well as in the other Salutary Doctrines, which he has given for
true Christians.

BY ANTONIA BOURIGNON.

Written in 24. Letters to a Young Man, who sought after the Perfection of his
Soul.

Teaching him, that it Consists in the Knowledge of our selves, and the
Mortification of our Five Natural Senses.

Translated from the Original French.

At AMSTERDAM, By HENRY WETSTEIN. School.

(...) which Jesus says both reveals and judges men's hearts.

How much of this divine Truth is in these Epistles the more upright the soul
is, it shall more discover; and how much of this upright sincerity is in the
soul the same Epistles will detect. Here the most earnest hunger shall be
adequately satiated, and the most stupid inappetency (unless it be voluntarily
habitual and perversely obstinate) may be awakened to an earnest search of that
Virtue by the genuine representation of its inestimable value and ravishing
beauty; and the easy, plain and sure means of attaining it here held forth:
But being a little may be by far too much in the ordinary (yea, I had almost
said universal) way of talking much like a Perroquet of Virture, without any
living sense of it in the spirit, its best not to divert the Reader from that
Fountain where it flows living; I mean, that Speaker who can truly in a most
ample sense say with David, Credidi propter quod and loquutus sum; I believed,
and therefore I have spoken: and with the master of Virtue, Verba quae loquor
non mea sunt sed patris qui me misit; the words which I speak are not mine, but
the Fathers which has sent me.

Only this being likely the first that has appeared in our Language of the
Writings of that extraordinary Organ of God's Spirit, ANTONIA BOURIGNON, it may
be both suitable and acceptable to give the curious Searcher of solid Truth
some entry into the unparalelled greatness of the thing, by a brief recital of
some memorable things of that person, and of the thoughts of some few of them,
whose Souls that same Spirit touched by that Person and her Doctrine, who was
the Spring and Life of both.

To begin with the last, Mr. Grellot, an ancient Protestant Minister, expresses
the sense of his soul first to his friend Mr. P. and then to Mrs. A. B. her
self.

In his to Mr. P.
I Have long ago resolved for my self to endeavor to gain my living by the
most abject and contemptible Works and Employs in the World; and I have reason
to lay my acount so; for certainly, if I preached in a Church where there were
persons, how ever little more knowing, or of more worldly power than here; I
would never be suffered, only because I manifest the deceipts that reign in
Religion and in Sects.

I most willingly leave that precious Soul Mrs. Bourignon to sleep and rest in
Jesus Christ, therefore I dare not nor will not pray you to salute her in my
Name; I pray God only ratify the Salutation and divine Benediction that you
tell me she wishes to me --

-- I marvel not at what you write of the Spirit of God which is in Mrs.
Bourignon, that they who are with you will judge and think and cabal with the
spirit of Zelots, seeing I find no true Knowledge of God, nor of his son, nor
of the Holy Spirit in men. Seeing God shows the Mercy and Grace to you and to
me, to see and feel that the Spirit of God is in her. ( -- pauci quos aequus
amavit, Jupiter --) God give also Grace, that it may be for the greater Glory
of his Name, and to our Souls Salvation. Though before I said I durst not nor
would not have you to salute that Child of God Mrs. Bourignon from me, yet do
it if you can conveniently; I desire earnestly to see Mrs. Bourignon while she
is yet alive; for men are not worthy that she should be so long.

I know not what to make of the ministry: I have long deplored the imprudence I
had when I engaged in it.


His Letter to Mrs. BOURIGNON.
MISTRESS,
IT is now three years since Mr. P. began to address your Writings to me. I had
no sooner seen or read them, but I judged you were of God. I received the
Truths of them the rather, because God had already told me several like or near
unto them. Since that time I have been fully persuaded in my interior, and am
so daily more, that you are wholly filled with the Holy Spirit: and nothing is
capable to make me believe the contrary, although I were the only person in the
world of that mind: And I think not strange that you are wholly filled with it,
seeing you have employed so many years to attain it: I mean, that you practice
Holiness, and have given your self to the purifying of your soul, and the other
things that obtain it from God.

I see, you possess alone all the Truths whereof all the other Sects and
Religions of Christians have only a part; and that you have them in your Soul,
and in your Books, without any mixture of error: whereas on the contrary, I see
no Sect that has not more or less of Errors, as their Authors did more or less
come near to God internally. You alone discover fully the false Piety, wherein
the devout of this World are deceived.

As I do firmly believe then, that being filled with God, he wills that you be
a Chanel and Conduit, through which he will flow into the Souls of them that
are disposed and fitted to receive him: I desire that he may flow from you into
me, and that being in me, he put there the fruits of his Spirit --


Adducing, the sense of his own abjectness and indignity, the multitude of her
Letters and Writings already dispersed, the Grace and Spirit of God not
restricted to particulars, as retarding his writing to her: he proceeds.

-- Yet Mr. P. my Friend, among other things he wrote to me from you, having
saluted me in your name two different times: I desired and prayed, that these
salutations might be ratified by God; and thereupon I have resolved to
represent unto you something for the good of my soul. Which I do most humbly
and before God. I see also, that many good Souls from diverse places desire to
become yet better, some by your Letters, and the rest by coming as near unto
your Person as they can; and that you have the Charity to stretch forth your
arms unto all of them. I hope also you will hold them forth to me the more
willingly, because I am afflicted with the sense of my sins, and for my not
having Love enough to my God, and that there be yet many things to be amended
in me, if I may bear the Image of God or of Jesus, as I desire. I ought the
rather to do so, even with great Conviction and Sbame, that God has
replenished my spirit with several most rare Graces and unknown Lights; which
will render me so much the more damnable before him, if he have not Mercy on me.

I own, that all the knowledges which God has for so many years, and does
continue daily to pour into my Soul, as that of the new Jerusalem, of the
conversion of Jews and Pagans, of the destruction of Antichrist, of Satan
reigning in all States and Conditions, Sects and Religions under the name of
Christ, the vanity of human literature, or that which they call Theology,
whether studying, or composing Books; which I see by the Light of Faith to be
mere delusions of Satan, and so many other secrets which God speaks often in
the ear of my Soul; are all nothing in respect of the holiness it must be
filled with, that it may see God. And that if it have not the last, though it
did divinely possess all these others, Satan might well entertain it therein,
and even teach it more, provided he might keep it always captive under one or
more sins.

It was upon that very foundation that I did passionatly love and study human
Literature, in which Satan would willingly have nourished me, and entertained
my spirit all my life, in detaining me thereby from the search and from the
true adoration of God in the Soul. So I was already in the profession of the
Ministry, even for some years, that I had not any true knowledge of God, and
most ignorant of true Religion. These things could get no entry into my
Understanding, finding it so full of prejudices in favor of the reformed
religion, and against all other Sects, as also addicted to Books and worldly
Sciences. This is it that made me leave the Romish Church, in which I was born,
and lived to the age of 22. or 23. years, apprehending that I should perish if
I died in it, believing also that the Reformed Church was altogether holy, I
was abused or imposed on therein. From one Babylon which I left I Am come into
another. If I were yet in that of my Nativity, I would no more leave it, but
with my Soul and Spirit, and would sanctify my self there as well as in so
many other Sects, which I perceive now to be all but works or Idols of men's
hands. So many Pantings, Prayers, Studies and other things which I have
employed to attain to the quality of Minister, I had employed them to the
sanctifying of my soul. Also I know that the charge of Pastor, which I have
exercised more than these ten years, is a charge merely politic and human,
and that has nothing Divine nor of God, but vain in the persons exercising it,
and in them that yield themselves the subjects of it. And although for some
years I have preached Truths unknown unto me, and also which men cannot nor
will not know, to wit, that God is a Spirit, and that he is to be worshipped as
such: Yet I find it is a subtle Deceit to pretend to sanctify men without
being holy our selves, and that these good wills do not always come from the
holy Spirit: hence I am persuaded, that as long as Ministers are not holy, God
will not work any thing by them: and that I do firmly believe, that God has at
present in his Anger cursed the Ministers and Ministry of the Reformed
Churches. I say farther, that it is impossible for a good man to exercise it
after God without partaking with men's sins.

This is one of the reasons that oblige me to write to you; and because I
believe you give no counsel but after God's mind, I desire your advice herein,
and wish God give me Grace to follow it: namely, the Ministry being both in me
and in others, such as I have just now described it, if I should continue in
it, or not: that is, I desire to know by you what is Gods will concerning me;
many reasons oblige me to leave it off; and I cannot tell what other points of
conscience do yet retain me in it. If it were God's will that I should forsake
it, it would be in the desire of coming as near unto you as I could, especially
if I were assured to be in the least useful to aid you as much in the
glorifying of God (I mean in carrying that new and everlasting Gospel unto the
World,) as I should hope you would be unto me for my souls welfare.

Another reason obliging me to write to you is, that notwithstanding so many
Graces that God has put into my Soul, yet I am not satisfied in my Conscience:
I am yet wrathful, and am carnal in Marriage. These two sins have very sore and
often afflicted my Soul; even I dare not promise unto God that I will not
commit them any more: for I have promised too often to him, and have fallen
therein too too often again. My Soul has been in great sorrow for it, and has
learnt thereby, to put it self below all gross sinners; also God would so
humble me thereby, that I never reprove sin or sinners, nor ever speak of them,
but I fall into greater my self. It is in this and in other things that you
shall judge proper, that I desire you would give me some rules to lead my Life
after God, in the things of God, and in the things of the World: would to God
it may be to my Salvation.

But there is enough said and asked for the first time: I am in the bottom of
my Soul, and desire to be yet more,

Mrs, Your most Humble, most Obedient and most Obliged Servant ANTONI GRELLOT.
Minister of the French Church of Outreberg.
At Outreberg in the Electoral Palatine the 6-16. November. 1677.

She received a Letter from a Gentleman of London, the style and genius giving
reason to expound the R. B. that subscribes it to be the famous and honorable
Robert Boil.

A Vowing her writings most praiseworthy and of so sweet an odor, that he
caused translate them into English, with design to cause print them in that
Language; and signifying his most ardent desires to know of her State and her
other writings, so far as God should incline her heart, and so rejoice
extremely his spirit, because with her a Lover of the holy Truth and of the
life of which she gives testimony unto others and to him: wishing her all good,
and loving her in the Love which is life it self.

R. B.

The Inscription: To the most noble Virgin Antonia Bourignon in her Lodging,
Amsterdam.

See the veneration with bleeding regret of that just penetrating Spirit Sir
George Makenzie, Late Lord Avocat to his Majesty, in a Treatise, De
imbellicitate ratiocinationis humanae, published last year by Grevius at
Vtrecht (page 49.) having said, that we should employ our reason in warring
against Vice, and in attaining to Virtue, and that there is nothing more just;
adds: TAnta est ratiocinationis hujus efficacia, ut etiam in aetatis diluculo
infantes illustrare, adultisque ad subtilia ineptis persuadere valeat. Cujus
exemplum paucis ab hinc annis nobis tulit Flandria in virguncula infant
septimum aetatis annum nondum egressa, quae cum vitam hanc spatio brevem and
curriculo miseram satis cerneret, mortales tantopere ea capi obstupuit: and cum
Jesum Christum vitam immortalem suis acquisivisse audivisset, enixe and
continuo parents rogavit ut se in Christianorum regiones ducerent; cum autem
ipsi Christum in Flandria coli responderent, hoc incredibile exclamavit:
Christum enim paupertatem laudasse, illis autem nummos numen esse; illum
dignitates sprevisse, illos autem has ambire flendo arguebat et -- Quis talia
fando Temperet a lachrymis --


That is; Such is the efficacy of this reasoning, that it is able to illuminate
infants in the dawning of their age, and to persuade aged people, that are not
apt or disposed for subtle thoughts, whereof Flanders has a few years ago
furnished us an example in an infant Girl, not past the seventh year of her
age, who when she perceived well this life to be of a short continuance and
miserable course, was astonished that mortals were so much taken with it: and
having heard that Jesus Christ had purchased Eternal Life for his Followers,
she earnestly and continually asked her Parents, that they would take her into
the country of the Christians; and when they answered, that Christ was
worshipped in Flanders; she rejected that as incredible, and argued with tears,
Christ commanded Poverty, but they loved money as their God; he despised
Honors, but they coveted them: and who could relate or speak of these things
without weeping.

I add one A. de H. which may be something of a Directory to those in the like
case with the Writer, a renowned Physician in the Town of Middleburg in
Zealand, whose former Writings communicated to the world, give testimony how
just and penetrating his spirit is, when he had well begun to make the matter
in question, the object of its consideration gives his rawest thoughts in a
plain familiar Letter to Mr. P. thus: Reverend SIR;
AFter by your counsel and recommendation I began to read Mrs. Antonia
Bourignons Writings, I felt as it were a fighting against them, and they seemed
to me not to deserve so much praise; yet considering that your esteem must
depend on a well-grounded knowledge, because you knew the Gentlewoman, you
conversed with her, and have accurately examined her writings: Hence I began to
read more attentively: whence immediately a sublim wisdom laying open man's
interior displayed it self. The numerous difficulties that occurred in the
beginning, do evanish as my reading is with more attention. Yet I cannot as yet
assent unto all, perhaps because I have read only few of them, and have put
fewer of them into practice, without which these vritings seem not
understandable, as also the intelligence of Holy Scripture, is promised only to
them who obey the will of God. That seems to me the greatest difficulty, that
practice may keep pace with knowledge; which to overcome, we must seek strength
from the Father of Lights, which is seldom done according to his will. Our
corrupt Nature lays many obstacles in the way, and the seducing world
strengthens it: especially in the Art to which I have (perhaps without God's
conduct) addicted my self, in which a thousand distractions do daily occur, an
Act so uncertain, and so filled with Deceipts, that I doubt if it may be
exercised with a safe Conscience, before I would demonstrate and amend its
Errors; but I know not the source of Errors, Sin. And in vain is the redress
of Evil sought from him who is in Evil. I readily assent to Mrs. Antonia
Bourignon, that Christians must live otherwise than men do now adays.

Thoughts of this sort, Sir, have exercised me since I read your Divine
Oeconomie and Mrs. Bourignons Writings, and had given me occasion to speak with
you if my intended Journey into Holland had succeeded; but that being hitherto
hindered, I would give you these lines, to the end you may give me counsel, to
the reading of these Writings with the greatest fruit, and to overcome the
corruption of my nature. I willingly grant there are so many wholesome Counsels
in them, that it may seem superfluous to desire more. If you think so, I am
content: and recommending my self to your Prayers, that God would perfect the
work he has begun in me, I shall remain

Reverend SIR, Yours in Christ. A. de H




His succeeding Letters so much breathed out conviction of Sin, Righteousness
and Judgment, as might stumble worldling hearts. But why? it were a work beyond
a Volum to allege all that might be adduced of the mighty power and efficacy
of her Writings, in allarming the Consciences, enlightening the Minds, and
inflaming the Desires, to the overturning of the Works of Darkness, and
contempt of all worldly things, to seek only eternal ones, and all such as it
were to attribute robbery to another power than that of the adorable Majesty of
our God, and that in all ranks and sorts of persons of different Countries,
Professions, Capacities and Tempers, and of all Religions and Sects, and
generally all that seek God in Truth and sincerity in whatever circumstances,
have to the measure of that Truth and Sincerity joined hands, embraced,
approved and acquiesced in the substantial essence of the words and way of
Eternal Life here, every where, and only recommended; many of which have been
and are impartially speaking the most sound and profound Spirits of the age, at
least in the European World, and as far as the Latin Tongue serves to propagate
the communication of Thoughts, and that as well in the general quality of a
solid judgment and penetrating spirit, as in the specification by determining
the same to particulars, Subjects, and Studies, whether Theology, or Law, or
Physic or Philosophy; in all of which some sufficiently attested to the
literate World capable of its greatest attempts, yet in them God has reserved
that Candor that they would not be disobedient to the heavenly Call, but
counted all loss and dung for the Excellency of the knowledge of Christ; though
alas! the number of such is lamentably small in all sorts. In fine; Let
whosoever is weary and heaven laden come resolutely, absolutely, and
constantly hither, and he shall assuredly by divine assistance find rest to his
Soul, and the peace which the world cannot give, nor take away, even amidst all
outward Adversities, yea and inward tentations, beyond the reach of all the
Rhetorique in the world, yea and all the force and cunning of Earth and Hell,
to unstable the Foundation either means or end, if he continue faithful under
Christ's Yoke.

To pass further to a Brief touch of a few of the many Memorable things in her
Life from her own Manuscripts, and from the faithful and judicious record of
her Life continued.
ANtonia Bourignon was born in the City of Lisle in Flanders, on the 13th. of
January, 1616. of honorable Parents. As her Spirit and Tongue began to be
loosed from the Sleep and silence of Infancy, the first Expression she was
capable to give of what impression her Soul received, was a grain of admirable
and divine Wisdom, which fructified unto everlasting Life. At the age of four
years, her Parents having instructed her piously in the Gospel and Life of
Jesus Christ, she asked still, Where are the Christians? Let us go to the place
where Christians live: Where are they whom Jesus Christ taught? Take me to them
that live as Jesus Christ: O most profound and divine! They in their worldly
Wisdom would undeceive her, saying, that there in Flanders they were
Christians, and followed Christ. She said, That could not be; for Christ
commended Poverty, they were altogether for Riches; Christ despised honors,
and Pleasures, choosing meanness and trouble: but they were earnest for what he
rejected, and shunned his choice, (that they lived no ways like Christ) O Great
God! Ps. 8.
Out of the mouth of Babes and sucklings thou have perfected Praise. Ps. 119.
Thy Words and thy Entertainments enlighten and make wise even Little Children;
when great Doctors, growing old in their Studies, with all their Followers, are
in Darkness, blind and naked, without knowing it. Lo a little Child, her eyes
and mouth scare opened, discerning a worldly Life from a Christian, and far
beyond the old Philosophy Studied procedure, seeking a man among men, most
natively tattling out, where are the Christians, amidst Christians? men fight
and dispute, and write and preach, and what not, who shall have the best
Religion, and Christianity most pure and flourishing: Lo God will bring them to
agreement; and how he sets a Girl of four years old amidst them, and puts in
her little Mouth these stammering words, where are the Christians? Let us go to
the Country where Christians live; words (duly considered) of a profound
divine Wisdom, of more saving light and profit than millions of lifeless
Sermons, and volums of rational Speculations: and this is the Grain of Seed
which fructified unto all the fruit of her life, which was only a continued
urging, advancing, pressing and increasing that first Thought and Desire.

It is true in the Old and New Testament, that God will perfect his Praise out
of the mouth of Babes: but in the World we must expect the Truth and Praise of
God from a mouth that can speak Latin, or even Greek and Hebrew; and for the
more assurance, there must be a great many of these wise Heads assembled to
make a Synod or Council, not to slight our Theological Doctoralities and
Masterships by giving heed to this babe. So they laughed her iterated and
earnest Demands to silence; yet neither that nor the ruder treatment she met
with, as it increased, were so far from extinguishing that divine spark God had
kindled in her, that they served still to increase its flame: for this first
repulse made her turn more in to God in her own heart, detecting the Vanity of
worldly things, she sought of him the Grace to live as Christians did, and even
then every thing was to her occasion of turning to him with different prayers,
suitable to him who was her only Counselor and Companion, until her sister,
much addicted to the Vanities of the World, would needs have her follow, she
said to every body, she had no spirit to converse and accommodate her self to
others; and by that artifice the Devil prevailed so far as to make her follow
the company and mode of the Youth of the World, only to please them, to show
that she had spirit enough to appear brisk; in which she succeeded so well, or
rather so ill, that quickly she obscured her sister, gaining the favor and
goodliking of all, and pleasing her Parents extremely, being of a meek, humble,
affable and jovial Humor, and a good Spirit, that her Father employed her in
his affairs, which she managed with a great deal of dexterity and industry.
But all this cost her the loss of that communion she had formerly with God, as
familiar as one Child with another.

Yet God had pity on that poor Creature wandering from him, he gave her often
inward invitations, even amidst her divertisments, and will you then leave me
for another? shall you find a Lover more perfect and faithful than I am? This
pierced her heart so as to make her flow into Tears; but upon occasions she
would charm her serious thoughts, and the habit of Vanity, and Tentations got
the ascendant on her: at length God sent more assistance to his call, by
filling her spirit with the terrible thoughts of Death, Judgment and Eternity.
Sometimes she would regret, rent her clothes, and detesting her vanity, throw
away all her Ornaments of Folly; again she would yield to the tentation of
company and Divertisments. In these conflicts God fortified her, she became
pierced with so great fear of the Judgment of God, that she durst not shut her
eyes because of her sins, which she thought were so great that no body ever had
committed the like; not that she had done any evil or unhonest thing after the
world, whose honesty is consistent with turning away from God, and going to all
the Devils provided regularly and in form with approbation and privilege: but
because she had left her sweet Entertainments with God for worldly
Divertisments, after she had received so many Graces from him, she saw that so
great a sin that Hell and all the pains of Hell were not sufficient to punish
her ingratitude. God seeing her correspond to the tracts of his divine Mercy,
redoubled them on her, that she was swallowed up of contrition, passing the
whole nights on her knees, crying from the bottom of her Soul, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Ah! Lord, what shall I do that I may be acceptable to thee?
My God, my God! where art thou? what shall I do that I may find thee again?

After she had tasted long and deep of that bitter desolation, wherein the soul
finds it self as abandoned and rejected of God, which they that have tasted
call the Pains and Sorrows of Hell, as Job and David, and other Saints, God
began to heal: The first return she had of God into her Soul was (in answer to
that continual Prayer, Lord what will thou have me to do?) the whole of the
Gospel, these words, Forsake all earthly things; separate your self from the
affection of the Creatures; renounce and deny your self.

Her Vicissitudes of Desolation and Consolation succeeded until God purified
her from all task or stain of her vain conversation; and usually these inward
piercing afflictions were preparatives to some particular Graces or favors of
God.

And it is incredible what floods of Tears and of Contrition it cost her before
she recovered her former Familiarity with God, and her no less incredible
strict severe Austerity in a mortifying Life, which she continued many years by
a principle of justice, and its first mover was the love of God: until God
appointed her to return to an ordinary way of living, while God's extraordinary
divine communications to her flowed more and more, during all her life, like a
stream, still increased until its ending a mighty River into the vast Ocean,
which in the same degree increased in her soul that Constancy, divine Love and
all Virtues and Graces as not moved were more established by all the assaults
which the craft and malice of Hell did eagerly spue out all her life while she
pursued her first search of True Christians: which when she could not find any
true knowledge of a Christian Life and self-seeking among all the devout and
Religious Persons, whose earthly-mindedness she easily discovered through all
their fair Pretexts, she turned the more in to God in her Heart, where he
trained her in the true Christianity, and told her, She must not seek it in the
World, but in her own heart with God, and in Solitude; whereupon she did over
the belly of all Opposition, Tentations, Allurements of Friends, Riches, and
all worldly advantages, most generously and constantly forsake all, seeking
that beloved solitude where she might enjoy God without disturbance. God gave
her a Spiritual solitude, retiring her Heart and Soul from all that was not
himself, yet retained her from other to make her a Light to lead other good
Souls out of the Egypt of this World, into the same Wilderness of
heavenly-mindedness. The traverses she met with, her constant Advance, and all
the steps of her conduct so signally disposed by the immediate hand and Council
of God, as its unaccountable and vast, so it is beyond the bounds and design of
this short preliminary to insist on; who desire a more satisfying Account, may
be satisfied by the History of her Life, written partly by her self, partly by
a faithful and judicious eye and ear Witness.

Her desire was to be unknown and unnoticed; yet many persons of good will of
several sorts came to her acquaintance, who owed and owned unto her (as the
Instrument of Gods Spirit) their Conversion, their Enlightening, their
Inflaming in divine Love, their Comforting and Strengthening, and their Eternal
Life; testifying, as they were living and standing Testimonies, that her Words,
her Writings, her Works, and all her Life had an unutterable divine efficacy
and power of converting and saving Souls that were well disposed, infinitely
beyond all the enervate and lifeless Means and Ordinances in the hands of the
most elaborate and erudite heads, exercising that trade for their daily bread,
without the spirit of it; under which, alas! its too visible, and by all that
have but the least spark of ingenuity confessed, and of sincerity regreted that
we live most part so little or not at all moved from our earthly biass of self,
which declines us so much to Hell, that if we get but a little survey of the
Earth, we never attain, nor it may be seek, any true glimpse of heavenly
things: which gives us to notice the same proportion of illuminating,
enlivening and invigorating force of painted Preachings to real ones, as there
is of the sun painted on a board to that in the Firmament.

Several who with good applause had long exercised the function of conducting
and directing Souls, as Ministers and Fathers in the Church, not of the least
erudition, but of the most uprightness, made it their happiness to learn at
this illiterate Maid the empty Vanity of their former fruitless Labors, and to
begin again from the A, B, C, of Solid Virtue, under her direction, owning more
Solid Light and Divine Life from some few Rays of her Spirit, than from all
their Schools and Books, Studies and Preachings.

Notice only one notable Matter in the way; In an Hospital of poor Girls she
charitably governed, she discovered them all to be Witches in express compact
with the Devil, and that a vastly surprising greater part of the world than is
usually by the innocent thought, are such, by evidences satisfying and
convictive to the most doubting that will not be obstinate.

Passing from her first appearance in the World to her first public
appearance to the World.

On the second of December 1667. she departed from Mechline in Flanders, and
came to Amsterdam, with design to satisfy the solicitation of her friends, and
God's will of having the Truth promulgate and known by the printing her
Writings, entitled, The Light of the World; and at the convenient season of
sailing to go for Holstein, where in the Isle of Nordstrand she had bought a
Farm from Mr. de Cort, the Director of the said Isle, and Proprietor of most of
it, who was going with her. In honor and imitation of the obscure mean Life of
Jesus Christ, that she might be unknown, she hired a little House by the shore,
in a very retired place; but falling soon into a sore and dangerous sickness,
she was obliged to yield to Mr. de Corts bringing a physician of his
acquaintance, who with another he had told of her, coming to know her, could
not abstain from telling others, that quickly her fame was through all the
Country; and one of her Letters to the Dean of Lille, which is the 5th. Letter
in the second part of Light arisen in Darkness, and is the first of all her
Works that was printed, coming out in the beginning of the year 1668. made her
so famous, that every one was earnest to see her, and converse with her.

She seeing it God's will to manifest her, resolved to give free entry and
audience to all that pleased. She was then visited for about a year and a half
from all places by persons of all sorts of Professions, Religions and Opinions,
by Theologues, Phylosophe's, Rabbis, imaginary Prophets, and all the most
curious and expert in all Arts and Sciences. Almost all did easily discover in
her the divine Light whereby God would revive his love in their Souls, with
most sensible and convincing Touches and Motions of his spirit; but they could
not come to the Marriage of the Lamb for their Farms, their Merchandises, their
Offices and Callings, their Wives and Children; and the Love of the World and
the things of the World were in them, and stiffled the Love of the Father, and
all the Protestations they had made to follow Christ, forsaking all for him,
excepting two or three, who forsook all, and followed the Truth of God in her
to death.

Of the many memorable things passed in these Visits, you shall be diverted but
with two or three.

Before she had any Acquaintance or Visits there, Mr. de Cort told her, that
the Anabaptists were good and pious men, having a great esteem of the Graces
which God bestowed on her; and that they protested, if they might come to her,
it should be in Humility, as little Children, submitting to the Light of God:
She answered promptly, That is not true, these are great men, who will hardly
submit themselves to the truth, and become little Children; God revealing their
disposition to her better than themselves knew it. And they showed at first to
be touched; but no sooner did she, without designing any person, discover the
nature and properties of Hypocrisy, and the general corruption even in the
most devout and holy, but they finding themselves pinched, rose all up against
her by the artifices descried in the Letters she wrote then in the 3. part of
Light arisen in Darkness, and 2. and 3. Part of the Funeral of False Theology.
Mrs. B. in one of her Letters to them, having written (not considering) when
she sought after them, that there were no more true Christians, and God told
her she should be the mother of true believers. Lest that especially that
mother of true believers should stumble these erudide heads, she would score it
out; but God said to her, what is written, let it stay written: and indeed no
sooner had they that in their hands, but they made such a dirty hubub, her
Pride, her Pride, that though her after-writings satisfy any that have common
sense on that head, these men have not yet come to themselves.

Mr. Serrarius famous enough for his correspondencies and his Writings, was of
the first that knew and recommended her every where; he would lead her every
where as a living Gospel, that should enlighten all the world; he would cause
print all her Writings, and even of his Titles and Prefaces to them yet extant:
but seeing at length that she would not swerve from the pure Truth God revealed
in her, to second his particular Opinions of the restoring a Levitical Worship
of the Jews, and his esteem of a certain Seducer at that time arisen in
Palestine, he rejected her for his own Imaginations.

Mr. Comenius, so famous among the Learned, his Learning not having puffed him
up, as it does ordinarily, fell out with Mr. Serrarius because of his injustice
against Mrs. Bourignon, and retained a Veneration for her all the rest of his
Life, and on his Deathbed desired a last visit of her: saying, O That Holy
Maid! where is she then? may I be so happy as to see her yet once before I die?
all the Knowledge and Sciences I have attained, are but productions of reason
and of Human Spirit and Study; but she has a Wisdom and Light that come only
from God immediately by the Holy Spirit. After she had seen him, and was gone,
he said of her with transports of joy to them that visited him, I have seen an
Angel of God! God has sent me his Angel to day.

God did also let her see how far the best cultivated human spirit is blind,
and far from the Kingdom of God, by conferences she had with some Cartesians,
both Divines and mere Philosophers: she had a discourse with the Professors
Heydan and Burmannus; but Nicodemus was too great a Doctor, to understand
Christ's Language or learn of him; though so blind as to deny that the Spirit
blows where he lists at present, and his Voice to be heard, to infer that we
must not abandon our Vessel to the conduct of his divine Inspirations, but
steer by human spirit and reason. She wrote to him on that occasion Letter 12.
of the first part of the Funeral of false Theology.

The Philosophers would persuade her that she came near to their Principles,
but God showed her their Nullity and error. She told them their disease, that
they would comprehend all by the activity of human Reason, and not give place
to the Illumination of divine Faith, which requires a cessation of our Reason
and Spirit, that God may display that divine Light, which gives the only true
Knowledge of God; but the mean pass that Reason with all its equipage of Ideas
and clear and distinct Conceptions will be at to defend or regulate it self
before God at Death felt a Cartesian gentleman even in this life, who in the
profound stupid security they are all leavened with after their once doubting
to the full, Scorned Mrs. Bourignons admonitions, saying, laughing; You call
your self the Mother of believers by the Truths you say you persuade and make
them believe; and I who have clear and evident demonstrations, by which I can
persuade reasonable spirits, and make them believe much better; I shall be the
Father of believers.

But this poor Father of believers, who was otherwise a man of spirit of a good
beneficent nature, and a person of quality, being a little after in a deadly
Disease, in the flower of his age, God opened his eyes to see his poor state,
and lament his error; he began to cry with Tears night and day, O my
understanding! my understanding! whereto have thou brought me! Alas! my Reason
I relied so much on, what assistance can thou give me now? Thou can not now
give me Salvation, nor the hope of it! I must be damned, there can be no mercy
for me. A friend comforting him the best he could, he wholly disconsolate asked
continually, Think you than there is yet any mercy to be hoped for my Soul? and
then looking and tossing about cried again, My understanding! my understanding!
alas! whereto have thou led me! Then to the first Friend, Go tell desire that
good soul (Mrs Bourignon) to pray to God for me; that I may obtain pardon of
that sin: for otherwise I am damned; or I must suffer a flul long Purgatory: O!
if I could recover from this Disease, I would turn wholly to God, and would
follow altogether another way: but when he told Mrs. Bourignon of it, she
answered: he shall not recover, but he shall die; for if he did recover, he
would fall deeper in that pernicious Error. As in effect he did, in a good and
sound Judgment, in great contrition, adoring Jesus Christ crucified*

God having shown her experimentally by that frequent conversation, how little
hope remains of converting the world, by the little welcome, and less
Correspondence the Truth met with, even with the best and wisest of all sorts;
he brought her with the two or three, that, seeing the means of purifying their
souls to the Love of God, and working out their salvation, in her company,
would sell all for that Pearl of great Price, maugre the tentation that lost
the young man in the Gospel; for they had great Riches and Reputation too: I
say, he brought them from Holland to Holsatia. And as from the beginning, God
did in all her after course unto himself, serve himself of the manifold Malice
and Persecutions of Satan against the Truth and Light of God, to confound that
blackfiend and all his Hellish Works of Darkness; his violent Persecutions to
extinguish it, served but as wind to kindle it; his Attempts to cut off the
Messenger of it in one place, served but to carry her further to more places
and persons, as with a general embassage, his secret Blows God did more
secretly often forewarn her of in spirit; his outward open Violences he often
no less wonderfully averted; his calumnies and Accusations of Heresy did but
bring the Truth to more admirable and dazzling Evidence and bring to light more
and more divine and saving mysteries, which ripped up all his hellish Heresies
and Mysteries of Iniquity, to the gnawing of his malicious spirit, and all the
like instruments of his fury, while the Bread of Life was abundantly dispensed
to hungry souls, whom it shall nourish unto Eternal Life, when all the Wicked
shall be cut off, and the Meek shall inherit the Earth.

For the more particular Account of her divine Pilgrimage, see the History of
her Life, and take here a short Bill of that heavenly cheer now dispensed in
her Writings, that took up the spare hours of her many diversions at Amsterdam.

The funeral of false Theology; in the first part of which she shows the
Confusion, the Ignorance, Corruption, Insensibility and foundamental Errors of
Christians, and even of Conductors and modern Divines. In the second, their
Presumption, Envy, Pride, Obstinacy, and Head strongness. In the third, that
all their Theorie and Practices are no more but Pharisaical, without divine
Faith. In the fourth, that the Devil has great power over men; over the wicked
and even over the best, whom by these other he turns away from following God,
and engages them to cooperate to the Evil of others, and makes them draw back
after they have abandoned the World. That is a work of singular efficacy and
profit. Scarce did ever man read it without being touched in his soul, even the
most wicked, who became pale, and as struck dead with it.

Upon occasion of some converse she had with some Cartesian Philosophers, she
composed The Holy Perspective; wherein she shows, that Men, and particularly
Christians, have lost the Light of God, which is true and divine Faith, to be
led by corrupt Reason, and by a false or most faint Light they draw from
nature, so perverse, brutish, carnal, and gross as it is become by sin: that
this is it that has destroyed all Christian-religion, and brought it to the
Blindness and Darkness wherein it is immersed: and that God may restore it its
first state, there is no other way but to abandon that false Guide of Reason,
and to resign our selves to God, that he may himself revive in us that divine
Light of Faith which we have extinguished.

The New Heaven and New Earth: in which is shown, in what Glory the World and
Man were created: how they have miserably faild from it; how they entertain and
even increase their Misery; and by what means they ought to return into the
disposition God requires to restore them to their first Glory, and renew all
the world. God showed her in Spirit the Glory and Beauty of the first World,
not supportable by corporal Eyes. All was bright, transparent, shining with
Light and unspeakable Glory.

God's last Mercy: in which by a reason enlightened by Faith, not perverted by
human Studies and Prejudices, she leads every man of good judgment to a
conviction of the spiritual things which Faith discovers, and unto which every
man's Reason, when conducted by a person that is illuminated by Faith, renders
so convincing Testimonies, that they who will yield themselves to its Touch,
are moved and pressed to ask of God a saving and divine Knowledge of them by
the Light of Faith.

With all these are intermixed many other divine Lights and profound Mysteries,
which God had reserved to this end of the last hour, able to enlighten, to
quicken, to inflame to strengthen, to encourage, and to ravish any that have
not renounced all interest in heavenly things.

If any find difficulties in her Writings, consider, that she having no further
human Learning than that having learnt it, she did once read the New Testament,
and finding it the same with what God spoke in her Soul, she closed the Book to
apply seriously to the doing of it, seeking no more reading, meditation,
conferring or other study, than that of purifying her soul from earthly
Affections and sins, in following Jesus Christ's Doctrine and Example. She could
not speak after the Rules and with the Cautions of human Literature, far less
by the pedantry of the Schools; it were then most cruel injustice to judge her
by them.

Again, we must not suppose when she treats of a matter, what she does not
mention in that place, that she denies it, nor require her to treat so fully
(more than her scope there requires) as the Scholastiques, who handling a
matter at their tour, adduce all they can relating to it.

In the Third place, to understand her Writings, as all others divinely
inspired, the Key is a good Will, Humility and Prayer: to a Malign, a Corrupt,
Proud, Self-wise and Self-powerful Reader no entry in them, no favor from
them, but that of Death.

And the center, end and aim of these Writings being the Love of God, by
renouncing our selves, the Creatures and sin, the Devil, the World and the
Flesh; the farther we are from this, the greater discord and contradiction
between these Writings and our corrupt hearts and blind spirits: and if ever we
will be reconciled, it must be by valuing, loving, esteeming, and submitting to
them, as they are conducive to these ends, and the difficulties will all
quickly evanish: this way the Disciples of Christ, of Prophets and Apostles
entered into their Masters Doctrine.

To conclude with the zealous and sincere Author of her Life.
LOrd, thou have yet manifested the words of eternal Life in these last days,
and our ears have heard and our hands have handled the word of life, which thou
have put into her; these words of Life which are originally in thee, we have
seen and heard them, and we bear testimony that thou have manifested them to
us, and our testimony is most true before thee, and before whosoever will open
the eyes of his Conscience to consider it in thy divine Presence.

Yes Lord, my God, Creator and Inspector of my Heart, who have given me to love
thy divine Truth more than the Sciences and the Advantages of Egypt; thou
know that I hate lying and falsehood, and that I would not for any
consideration recommend untruth. I cannot deny that I have obtained of thy
Grace to discern the Truth from Falsehood, and that I have done it in this
Work, thou know O Lord. Thou know, my God, that if after all possible
application of spirit I could find in the intentions, in the end the Writings,
and the Practice of Antonia Bourignon, thy Creature, any thing contrary to thy
Glory, that rendered thee less worthy of the infinite and eternal Adoration,
Love, and Praises due unto thee; if any thing favoring Corruption and Sin, and
that might contradict thy holy Image and the Doctrine and Life of thy Christ;
if any thing dangerous for men's Salvation; thou know I would abhor that,
that I would detest it, that I would curse it. Is it not true, O Searcher and
Judge of my Thoughts, that this disposition is most really in the bottom of my
Soul? Is it not in the deepest and final sincerity of my heart that I protest
openly, that the words of eternal life were with incomparable Purity, Evidence,
Clearness, and Solidity in that Soul which thou did sanctify, and are yet in
her holy Writings? In truth, the way that is there recommended as necessary to
Salvation, is the only and the true way; there is no danger to abandon our
selves wholly and entirely in it: for it is the very Truth: it is the Truth it
self. It is the pure Truth. There is none, Lord, there can be none other in
Heaven nor in Earth. There is none other way unto eternal life than that which
thou have put into the Mouth, in the Writings, and in the Life of thy most holy
handmaid Antonia Bourignon. I praise and bless, and thank thee, O my God, that
thou gave me to know the same, and have opened and inclined the ear of my heart
thereto. Give me Grace to love, to observe and to maintain that heavenly Truth
unto Death. Happy he that should lose a thousand lives for so worthy a subject:
Happy he who shall never for any consideration leave the practice of it! Let me
by thy divine Grace be of that number, that after this short life of Trial,
that most certain and most infallible mean, make me enjoy my sovereign End,
which is to have the happiness ever to adore and praise thy great Majesty, O
Jesus eternal God, Creator, Savior, and redeemer of the World, while with the
Father and holy Spirit thou shall reign Gloriously in all eternity. Amen.

Revelation, Chapter 3. He that has Ears to hear, Let him hear.
THE PREFACE OF THE PUBLISHER.
THis Treatise consists of two parts; whereof the one may be called
[Extructive] which builds or establishes; and the other [Destructive] which
destroys or everts. For the first ten Letters are adapted to the planting of
Virtue, and all the rest to evert and root out what may hinder its increase. To
recommend Virtue is taken the precept of him who is the Master and Example of
it; by which is made an introduction, showing, what Virtues we must in the
first place embrace, and by what meanstend to them, which is, by Obedience, and
renouncing our own will, unto the Meekness, Lowliness and Humility of Heart of
Jesus Christ, (see Let. 1, 2, 3.) the Nature of which Humility is explained,
and the means conducing to the attainment of it, viz, the knowledge of our
Corruption, and the Miseries which our Bodies and Souls ly under ( Let. 4, 5,
6.) Which ought to produce in us the effect, of renouncing our natural senses,
and (being content with what is of mere necessity) we should flee all Pleasure
and proper Satisfaction, (Let. 7, 8.) which emptying of our selves, will be
accompanied with the Love of God, which incontinently possesses the Heart, from
which vicious affections are expelled, because of the near relation and
sympathy between them, as between the Creature and its natural Element. In
which Love consists the Essence and Complement of all Virtue, and all Good
(Let. 8, 9, 10.) Concerning the overturning and resisting the Impediments, and
Tentations of Satan is treated ( Let. 11.) whether they be offered to our
Imagination, or Sensibility even spiritual, (Let. 12, 13.) or to the
Understanding making us rest in the naked knowledge of the Truth. (Let. 14.) Or
exciting us to external acting or internal, with Vain Glory; or by Dejecting us
through immoderate mortifications; or in unseasonable good works spiritual or
corporal toward our Neighbor (Let. 15, 16.) Or in regard of the Devil accusing
him too much, or too little of our sins. (Let. 17, 18.) Whether these
Tentations affect the will, whose godly fervor Satan would extinguish by
Grief, Spiritual Negligence and Self-love, as show ( Let. 19, 20, and to the
end.)

There is briefly represente the whole subject handled in this divine Treatise;
which is more specially noted at the beginning of each Letter, that you may,
kind Reader, view as in a Table, and beter retain in your memory the divine
Instructions, therein delivered. Moreover you may with us well admire the
infamous audacity of some, as the Churchmen in Holsatia, whereby some years
ago they caused, that these so wholesome instructions, while under the Press in
the German and Low Dutch Tongues, were taken away by force and violence, and
rent. While I consider these obscure enemies of the truth that Scripture offers
it self to me; that, Every one that Does (and will do) evil, hates the Light;
and comes not to the Light, lest his deeds be reproved: and this is the
Condemnation, that Light is come into the world; and men Love Darkness rather
than Light, because their Deeds are Evil. It is far otherwise with him who does
(and will do) the Truth; for he comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be made
manifest, because they are wrought in God, Joh. Chapter 3. I pray the God of Truth,
that he graciously please to instruct and lead you in the way of Truth, that
you never refuse to come to the Light. Farewell.

TO THE READER.
Friendly Reader,
I Cannot abstain from imparting unto you, these twenty four letters; which I
have written to one of my particular Friends, where I show him what Solid
Virtue is: because it is a matter so necessary for the present time, when we
see false virtue reign, or such as is only apparent to the eyes of men; and
while so many persons deceive themselves, persuading themselves that they have
true Virtue; whereas they have nothing but fine Speculations. They think
themselves Humble, when they can talk well of Humility; and think they have the
Love of God, when they desire to have it: notwithstanding they have in effect
only the Love of themselves: and it is but Deceit and Falsehood, when they say
they have the Love of God. They do not so much as know the corruption of their
Nature; seeing they think they may follow that corruption without sinning,
provided they do no evil reproveable before men, and have a will to do well and
love God. Which notwithstanding is not sufficient to be saved; for good desires
without effect, are nothing before God. They are indeed Foundation stones,
serving to the building of true Virtue: For without good Desires we cannot do
good Works. We must first have the desire, and after put it in execution; which
is wanting to many persons of a good will; who content themselves to be of a
good will, and hope with that, all shall go well; without considering, that the
holy Scripture says to all in general, Depart from evil, and do Good.

Now the Evil is in our corrupt nature, which no person ought to ignore: yet
few depart from that corruption, and most love and follow it. thinking they do
well: which is a great abuse and presumption of spirit; for we cannot do good,
except we depart from evil; and he that does not resist that corrupt Nature,
and renounce it, cannot acquire true Virtue, which few persons comprehend: and
thence is it that they have only apparent Virtues, and no real ones.

Therefore is it that I have resolved to cause print these twenty four Letters,
which treat of Virtue; that they who aspire unto it, may see the state wherein
they are, and also if they have acquired any degrees of it: or if their Virtues
be only imaginary.

I do not present this matter of true Virtue to all in general; since many
should find it too difficult to be observed: for such as yet love themselves,
or the things of the earth, cannot have all their mind bent to acquire this
Virtue; nor tend to the spiritual diligence, which it requires.

But I speak to the free and generous souls, who have abandoned the world to
follow Jesus Christ, and such will easily understand me; for none is better
disposed to understand me, than he that will practice true Virtue. And others,
who have not that desire, may content themselves to know the Commands of God in
general, seeing they aspire not to a greater perfection. So I say to them, as
St. John to the soldiers, Use no Violence nor fraud to any person; and be
content with your Wages. He said so to them, because he found them not disposed
for greater perfection. And every one is free, to tend to what degree of
perfection he will: So St. John chooses of two Evils the least, in councelling
the Soldiers, to be content with their Pay, and do no Violence: but if these
Soldiers had tended unto Christian-perfection, doubtless St. John had
counseled them, to cease from being Soldiers, and to forsake all that they
possessed, as Jesus Christ did to the young man in the Gospel, after he said he
had kept the Commands of God.

I say the very same to them to whom I present this matter of true Virtue, in
these twenty four Letters, (which is but the beginning of my designs) to show
wherein it consists in every thing. To these, namely, who will follow it, and
to none other: seeing that were to cast Pearls before Swine, or the Childrens
Bread unto Dogs. Those are souls yet earthly and attached to the honors,
pleasures and goods of this life; and consequently are not in a disposition to
put true Virtue in practice. It seems enough to them not to transgress grossly
and externally the Commands of God; because they know no other Evils, but what
are expressed in these Commands.

But the souls who have abandoned the world, to follow Jesus Christ, and to
revive in his spirit, must labor with all their force to acquire this true
Virtue, in renouncing the corruption of their nature. And they may well be
assured, that they can never arrive at a truly Christian Life, unless they
have overcome the inclinations of that corrupt nature. Therefore must we labor
with diligence in the mortification of our senses, that we may carry the
Victory over that Corruption, which sin has brought unto human nature; without
that our Virtue is false, or only apparent, and in no wise Virtue before God.

For if you show me a person, sober, and chaste, and upright in his business,
who imparts his Goods to the Poor, who fasts at appointed times, with many
other good Deeds; and yet follows the motions of corrupt nature: I esteem
nothing all these Virtues, if there is not a renounciation of his corrupt
nature, and he has not entirely renounced his own will: for all these things
together come not near the Victory, which is in mastering the motions of
corrupt nature.

And St. Paul names yet greater Virtues, than these I have named; when he says:
If I had the Gift of Prophecy, and Faith that could remove Mountains, and gave
all my Goods to nourish the Poor, I am nothing if I want Charity.

Now Charity is nothing else but the love of God, which we cannot obtain but in
renouncing self-love, and hating the Corruption of our nature: for we can never
do good except we first depart from evil; and all sorts of evil are contained
in the corruption of our nature, since it is fallen into sin. So that we can
never arrive at true Virtue, but by renouncing that corruption; nor at the
Charity of which the Apostle speaks, without having overcome it. So I say with
him, unto all that would attain to true Virtue, that all other good actions
shall be nothing, until we have surmounted and overcome the corruption which
sin has brought unto humane nature, since all sorts of evil spring thence; and
therein can no good be found. Though the blindness of men, makes them presume
that they can do all well, yet they do altogether evil, so long as they act
according to the motions of corrupt nature. And it is only arrogance and
presumption of spirit, that they think themselves wise, and willing to do all
good. For if man were wise, he would always distrust himself, nor dare
undertake any thing; fearing to do evil; since that is in him; and there cannot
proceed out of a vessel, other than what is in it.

When Man was newly created by God, in the state of innocence, he was full of
all good, and all sorts of good proceeded from him: but since he is fallen into
sin, he is filled with all evil, and there can nothing proceed out of him, but
all evil.

That is a general rule, and by it ought every one to regulate his life, if he
would be saved: for there is no exception: seeing all men have been corrupted
by Adam's sin, and consequently are filled with evils, none excepted.

It is true, men's natures differ, in manners and conditions: one is Meek,
another Harsh; one is Proud, another Humble: but that is from their natural
temperament; because man being composed of four Elements, Water, Fire, Earth
and Air; his Manners naturally are disposed with proportion to the element,
which predomines in him. For every one has in his nature diverse dispositions.
He that in the forming of his body has contracted more of Fire, than of the
other Elements, will be more cholerique, and luxurious, because the Fire has
more power in him, than the Air Water or Earth. Another who in his formation
has contracted more of Water, will be more dull in his Manners, slow in
comprehending any thing, and less courageous. He that in his formation has
received more of Earth than of other Elements, shall be more heavy, lazy and
rude in his Manners. Finally, he that in his Formation has contracted more of
Air than other Elements, will be in his manners more light, and inconstant, and
more active in spirit, and prompter to good, or evil: and by these natural
temperaments, all men are of diverse complexions and different manners,
according as they have contracted of their Parents the intemperature of the
Elements, of which their body is formed.

But in respect of Grace, they are all of a like nature; and are by sin all
fallen into the same corruption, one as well as the other; and so they all need
to combat that corruption; since they are all equally corrupted by sin, which
they must master, if they would be saved, without going to persuade that one is
better than another, because he has in his nature a better temperament. For
that nature is nothing as to Grace; and sometimes he that has more of Fire,
will be more Virtuous, then he that has more of Water; seeing in case he serve
himself of that natural heat, to love God, he will love him so much the more:
and if he employ his Anger, to defend Justice and Virtue, he will do much more
good than a phlegmatic person, who ordinarily loves only his ease. It is the
same with them, that in the intemperature of their nature, have contracted more
Air, than other Elements; for they will always be more subtle, to discover
Evil, and more prompt to do good; when they will apply themselves to the search
of true Virtue. As he that has more of Earth, then other Elements, will be
more posed and grave; and if he apply himself to the service of God, he will be
more constant and persevering in it, than the other three. And so every one may
be agreeable to God in the state and condition wherein he is produced; provided
he apply the Talent which he has received, to the Glory of God, and the
Salvation of his Soul. Therefore says David: Let all spirits praise the Lord.
That ^s not as if he would say, that the Devils and wicked men praise the Lord,
seeing these blaspheme him: but he gives to understand, that all spirits, that
will become true Christians, praise the Lord, though they be all of diverse
natural complexions; seeing God is no Respecter of Persons, and does not regard
whether we have more of Fire, or of Water, or Earth, or Air, in our natures,
but with what affection every one will love and serve him.

Which I regard also in writing of Solid Virtue: I mean not to make it heavy
and difficult: I would only make it known, to them that will follow and
practice it; because I love such: So I cannot leave them in ignorance, nor let
them perish, amidst their good will, for want of knowing wherein true Virtue
consists.

That is it, which has engaged me to deduce that matter at length, lest these
souls, which are so dear to me, should perish by ignorance; as many have
already, who thought they had acquired true Virtue: while they had only
apparent ones, or curious Speculations of Virtue; not knowing that it consists
in the overcoming of corrupt nature, in true Humility, and voluntary Poverty.
Though Jesus Christ has so much taught it by Word and Works, yet it is not
followed in the practice; for want of good Explication, and the Light of the
Truth. Which God having given me, I will willingly impart it to others; in
sending to light this first part of true Virtue. And with time and opportunity,
I shall present more, to the Glory of God, and the Salvation of souls, who
aspire after true Virtue and Perfection. What I offer them at present is with
good heart, as a Present come from heaven, which shall show them the light of
the Truth, and manifest the deceits of false Virtue, as also the means to
arrive at that which is solid and true.

This First Part discovers* amongst other things, how the Devil attempts always
to divert Souls from true Virtue, by so many Wiles and different means. And
finally it is a School, where you may learn, To deny your self, take up your
cross, and follow Jesus Christ. As he has taught unto all that would be his
Disciples, in the perfect sense and true explication. Receive it therefore with
as good heart, as I present it you by Christian Charity. Who remain

Friendly Reader, Your well-affected in Jesus Christ, ANTONIA BOURIGNON.

INDEX Of the Contents of the First Part.
Letter I. WE must learn of Jesus Christ, Meekness, Lowliness and Humility of
Heart.Written to one desirous of True Virtue (also all the following are
addressed to the same) showing, that to attain thereto, we must have submission
and Obedience, by which we may begin to learn, Meekness, Lowliness and Humility
of Heart. Page 1. II. We must learn of Jesus Christ Meekness, Lowliness and
Humility of Heart.Showing wherein Meekness and Lowliness consists, which are
fruits of the holy spirit; and cannot be obtained unless we renounce our own
will, submitting to the Will of God. p. 10. III. Men can sufficiently know the
Will of God, if they would perform it.Showing, (him that persuaded himself that
the Will of God is not manifest in every thing that we might accomplish it,
denying our own) that it may be known, and is sufficiently manifested in the
Commands of God, which Jesus Christ proposes so clearly, saying: Learn of me,
for I am Meek and Lowly and humble of Heart. p. 18. IV. Humility is acquired by
the knowledge of our selves.Showing what Humility of Heart is, what the Marks
of it, and how we should endeavor to attain it, by the knowledge of the
Infirmities and Miseries of our Souls and Bodies, and blindness of our Minds. p.
25. V. Humility is acquired by knowing Ones self.Showing, that the true
Knowledge even of things most esteemed by men, ought to serve to humble them;
such as the Honors, Riches, and Pleasures of this Life: That all these are
vain, disquieting, unsatisfying and hurtful. p. 32. VI. Humility is acquired by
knowing Ones self.Admonishing to Learn Humility by knowing the Truth of our
corruption, and Sin; which is the disorder of our Five Natural Senses. p. 40.
VII. He that serves the Lusts of his Senses thereby actually renounces the Love
of God.Exhorting to the Effects of Humility, the renouncing of our Senses:
showing, that none can follow them, but he thereby renounces the Love of God,
which is the End of our Creation, and the Essence of true Virtue. p. 47. VIII.
It is Easier to Love God than any thing else.Showing, that we must renounce the
abuse of our Senses, and that the right use of them should be referred to God:
that it is possible, reasonable, and necessary to love God with all our Heart.
p. 57. IX. It is easier to Love God than any thing beside him.Showing, that it
is most easy, sweet, profitable and honorable to love God, and keep his
Commands, for him that will deny himself; but that it is Blasphemy to say, That
it is impossible to love God with all our Heart. p. 65. X. The Love of God is
easy, and renders all things easy.Showing, that the Love of God is in it self
most easy to be acquired: whence the difficulties proceed which we find them;
and how they should be removed: That this love admirably makes the
inconveniences of this life, and the keeping of the Commands of God, and the
Councels of the Gospel, easy and pleasant. p. 74. XI. We must always proceed
in Virtue, whatever Impediments occur.Giving encouragement in the Way of
Virtue; although the beginning be difficult, because of the Tentations, by
which the Devil vexes them that have resolved to embrace true Virtue. p. 83.
XII. The Devil, the Enemy of True Virtue, opposes it by all manner of
Devices.That it is necessary to know the Wiles of the Devil, which he opposes
to Virtue, that we may evite them, which are recited in this and the following
Letters; as 1. That the Devil mixes himself in what is sensual in man. 2. That
he accommodates himself to the inclinations and impulses of every one, leaving
all the rest in quiet. p. 93. XIII. Whatever is sensible to Nature, is not the
Work of Grace or Virtue.Discovering a third Artifice of the Devil, whereby he
persuades men, that they may satisfy their senses in a slate of regeneration,
and Praising God, A 4. by which he affixes the Heart to spiritual Pleasures and
Delights, wherewith the Followers of Virtue are affected. p. 102. XIV. The
Devil transforms himself into an Angel of Light.Discovering a 5. and 6.
Artifice of the Devil, by which he causes men to apply themselves to the study
of the Truth, and mystical and Spiritual things. ( 5) That they may comprehend
and understand them. Or 6. That they may unseasonably instruct others. p. 111.
XV. The Devil instigates unto Good, that he may bring Evil out of it.A seventh
Deceit of the Devil is, to carry us out of our selves, to compare our Good
Works with others, that we may draw: Vain Glory from our Virtue. An 8. whereby
he excites us to immoderate Mortifications and Macerations of our Body. And a
9. Whereby he excites us to immoderate spiritual Good Works toward our
Neighbor; as to desire to instruct, convert, reprove or correct him
unseasonably. p. 121. XVI. The Devil mixes himself in our Good Works.A tenth
Artifice of the Devil, in our corporal Good Works, which the Devil often turns
to his own honor. Yet we must not therefore cease from them, but join
Moderation, and avoid Human Respect and considerations and Pride; which insult
over us in this time of trial. p. 130. XVII. Sin proceeds from Man's Free
Will.An eleventh Tentation is proposed, by which we impute the guilt of our
sins to the Devil, to excuse our selves: It is showed, that the Devil cannot
bring man to sin, nor do him any hurt, without his own free Consent. p. 139.
XVIII. The Good and Evil Spirit are known by their Fruit.Proposing the Signs,
to know whether we are ruled by the Instinct of the Good Spirit, or of the
Evil. A 12. Artifice of the Devil, by which he causes, that we impute our
Vices, to our natural Inclinations, without suspecting him to lurk therein,
that he may remain undiscovered. p. 149. XIX. We cannot in this Life be free
from Tentations.Showing (to him that was afflicted, that the Devil has power
so variously to tempt us) that a 13. Artifice of the Devil is, to break the
firmness and strength of our mind, by grief. Also that Tentations are necessary
and profitable to try and purify us. p. 158. XX. Spiritual Diligence is
necessary to Salvation.A 14. Impediment of the Devil, more pernicious than the
rest, is, spiritual Negligence. Moving also unto spiritual diligence, by
consideration of the Care usually bestowed in Worldly things, which the
Children of this world manage with more Prudence and Care, than the Children of
Light do their Business. p. 168. XXI. Spiritual Diligence necessary beyond all
other Virtues.Showing how necessary Spiritual Diligence is, for confirming the
mind in Virtue, and to remove two more Impediments of the Devil; viz. 15. Sins
of Omission, with which the Devil tempts good men: and 16. self-love, which
insinuates it self in all, and is a continual sin. p. 177. XXII. Spiritual
Diligence necessary to Salvation.Exhorting unto Spiritual Diligence, because,
without it none can persevere in the Service of God; nor overcome corrupt
Nature and Self-love. p. 186. XXIII. Spiritual Diligence necessary to
Salvation.Showing the necessity of Spiritual Diligence; to watch over all the
actions of our corrupt Nature and proper Will, and to acquire the knowledge of
our selves: That spiritual Negligence is a fountain of all Evils, and is alone
sufficient to damn us; since it renders our Souls rude, and like uncultivated
and cursed ground, which brings forth noehing but Briars and Thistles; and so
is far from Meekness, Lowliness, and Humility of Heart. p. 194. XXIV. Men are
Idolaters of their own Corruption, and Enemies of True Virtue.Showing, that the
continuing of this subject is hindered, by the Devils exciting the Wise of this
World, who are Enemies of Virtue, and Friends of corrupt Nature; to distract
the mind of the Writer, by their Disputes, Lies, Calumnies, and all manner of
Persecutions. p. 202. An Extract of some of the Works of Mrs. A. Bourignon,
belonging to some Most Essential Matters of Christianism and Health: Being a
Letter written to one of her Intimates, Mr. van de Velde, concerning
TOLERATION; That it ought never to go the length of communicating with Sin,
directly or indirectly. Of the Essential and of the Perfection of Christianity.
Of Religions, Worships and Ceremonies; and their use. p. 220.
Some Conferences taken out of the Third Part of the Light of the World, viz.
Conference XI. How we must be Regenerated to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven:
and that we must return into the Dependence of God; which is the only thing
which God requires essentially of Man. p. 219. Conference XII. That there is
but one only thing to be done to be saved. p. 226. Conference XVII. Being a
Collection of all the preceding Matters; their End and Use. p. 235. Conference
XXVI. Declares the necessity of becoming a Child to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, renouncing all Worldly Wisdom, and all Human Abuses. p. 245.
A Profession of Faith and Religion made Public by Mrs. ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
I. I Am a Christian, and I believe all that a true Christian ought to believe.

II. I am baptized in the Catholic Church, in the Name of the Father, in the
Name of the Son, in the Name of the Holy Spirit.

III. I believe the twelve Articles of the Credo, or Apostles Creed, and do not
doubt in any Article of it.

IV. I believe that Jesus Christ is True God, and that he is also True Man; and
that he is the Savior and Redeemer of the World.

V. I believe in the holy Gospel; in the holy Prophets; and in all the holy
Scripture, both of the Old and New Testament.

I will live and die in all the points of this belief, which I protest before
God and Men: to all whom it may concern.

To the faith whereof, I have subscribed this my Confession with my hand, and
sealed it with my Seal.

Sleeswick 11. March 1675. Sealed and subscribed (L. S.) ANTONIA BOURIGNON.

A CATALOGUE Of Books Composed by Mrs. ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
I. THe Life of Mrs. A. Bourignon; wherein is (1) an Apology for her Person
and for her Doctrine; (2) Her Inward Life, by her self. (3) Her Outward Life,
by her self. II. Her Life continued until her death, by a Person of her
Acquaintance. III. God's Call and Men's Refusal, in two Parts; with a treatise
of the Solitary Life* and Gods Last Mercy. IV. Light arisen in Darkness, in
four Parts. V. and VI. The Funeral of false Theology, in four Parts. VII. The
Light of the World, in three Parts. VIII. The Accademy of learned Theologues,
in three Parts. And Confusion of the Builders of Babylon. IX. A Treatise of
Solid Virtue, in two Parts. X. Advertisment against the sect of Quakers. And
the persecution of the Righteous. XI. The Testimony of the Truth, first Part.
XII. A Collection of Testimonies given unto A. Bourignon. XIII. The Testimony
of the Truth, second Part. And Innocence avowed and Truth discovered. XIV. The
Touchstone. And the Morning Star. XV. The Blindness of the men of this time,
in two Parts. XVI. Antichrist discovered, in three Parts. And the Holy
Perspective. XVII. The renewing of the Gospel Spirit, in three Parts. XVIII.
The New Heaven and New Earth. And the Stones of the New Jerusalem. XIX.
Wholesome Advices.
All these Books are originally in French: The greatest part of them are
translated into High and Low Dutch. Solid Virtue 1 Part, The Touchstone, and
The Gospel Spirit 1 Part, are translated into Latin. And are all to be sold by
Henry Wetstein, Bookseller at Amsterdam.

AD SOLIDAE VIRTUTIS Amicum, ejusdemque hostem, ALLOQUIUM, Totius libelli ideam
exhibens.
DIscere Virtutem, Lector, sine fraud doloque
Vis? liber hic monstrat, Christum panditque sequendum.
Ep. 1, 2, 3.
Pare, teque nega, mitesce, dejice temet;
Ep. 4, 5, 6.
Men's ignara tibi est, cor pravum, corpus iniquum
Et cujus pudeat miseri, Ep. 7, 8.
ne tu illius ergo
Sensibus indulge, satis esto necesse, repelle
Cetera: Ep. 8, 9, 10.
replet amor vacuas, sacer, almaque virtus.
Ep. 11.
Ast non una manet te crux, non pugna reposcit
Te semel. Assiduos versas, o Orce, labores
Ep. 12, 13.
Mox sensum mulces; mox ludis imagine mentem,
Ep. 14.
Jam specie very noti: Ep. 15, 16.
Jam gloria pellit
Te motore animum; vis mox in corpore regnet
Saevitia; utve alios jam passim, men's pia curet
Ep. 17, 18.
Jam, te astute reum fers intus; mox sine culpa
Ut lateas fueris: Ep. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
Jam mentem sanguine tetro
Obruis and laxas, eam ut aut ignavia perdat,
Perdat amorve suus. Sic sunt fraudesque dolique
Orce tui. Patet ars tua sic; patet and modus illam
Frangendi. Ep. 24.
Rabiem fundis, nec miror, in ista
Quae docet, haec sacro (...) numine virgo.
THE FIRST LETTER. That all Christians ought to learn of Jesus Christ Meekness,
Mildness, Gentleness, and Lowliness of Heart.
Written to one desirous of true virtue: Showing him, that to attain thereto,
we must have submission and obedience, by which we may begin to learn meekness,
lowliness and humility of heart.

My Dear Child;
I Perceive you have not yet comprehended well what Jesus Christ teaches;
saying, learn of me, for I am meek and lowly, and humble of heart: because upon
occasion you do not exercise it enough; but yield loose reins to your nature:
for when it enclines to anger, you speak harshly; and sometimes use force and
violence to fulfill what you have resolved, as well in small matters as in
great: which does not testify humility of heart, seeing the humble heart yields
willingly to another in things not evil, and does not imagine that another ought
to follow our will. But it is always willing to follow another will in
whatever is not contrary to God, and the perfection of its own soul

I suppose you may well have observed that in me; for ordinarily I inform my
self of the will of my brethren, to Know what they love best in indifferent
things; and I have more contentment to do any thing after their desires, than
after my own; for that yields me more quiet and inward peace, feeling a certain
satisfaction to see them content and joyful. And even my nature enclines to it,
by the habit which I Have used to resist my own will in every thing: and being
overcome, it rules over all things, and has no grudge for whatsoever comes
contrary to it, provided it be not against the glory of God or the love of our
neighbor. All beside is indifferent to me; if it is rain, or fair weather; if
I eat harsh meats or sweet, when they wrong not my health; if I be alone, or in
company, so that the one be as wholesome as the other: And finally, I Am as well
content to be in one country as another; providing I have the same occasions
to live well. And so I am comforted in every event: whether I be sick or in
health, I have no choose, in case I honor God as well in one state as in
another: it is all one to me, and I would never choose any thing, so that I
receive from the hand of God whatsoever comes to pass: and so I as always
content and joyful.

If you knew but to learn that method, you would be very happy, and continually
in quiet: whereas now, fretting and discontent, you disquiet and trouble your
Spirit, and are burdensome to others, and so hinder mutual love: for a bitter
word is pleasant to no body, and a mild one mollifies the heart, even of a
furious person. I know your heart is good; and that you hate no person,
notwithstanding to judge by the tone of your voice, one would say, that you are
envious, and they that know not your heart, think you are in rage: you must
know, that they are not always disposed to bear with you, and that may mar the
peace, and diminish charity, which Jesus Christ has so much recommended to
Christians; Saying, if you love one another, thereby shall all men know that
you are my disciples; I believe you love the brethren in the bottom of your
heart; but sometimes you speak to them, as if you hated them, and would not
hear them speak. If they spoke as you do, you would have difficulty to suffer
them: So you ought to consider that they have much to suffer that you speak so
harshly. They do very well in suffering you, but it is no advantage for your
soul: for if all the world should bear with you, that will not justify you
before God, nor will your nature for that change its evil inclinations; but be
strengthened in them: And so you shall be in danger to live and die imperfect;
which you would regret much before God, when too late.

Therefore it is much better, to endeavor now to overcome that bilious humor,
which is in your nature; than be Slave to a wrathful passion, which masters
you, whereas you should govern it: and use it only when it concerns the
maintaining the truth and defense of the glory of God. Then is it that there is
place for anger, as the scripture also says, be angry, and sin not. But we must
never be angry for things indifferent, and of small import; much less speak
harshly, because Jesus Christ says, we must be meek and lowly of heart. That is
a lesson he gives to all Christians; and exhorts them to learn it of him;
rather than the other mavelous things he did on earth. He does not bid them
learn to raise the dead, to heal the sick, or to do other miracles. But
expressly to learn of him to be meek, lowly and humble of heart.

And therefore is it (my Child) that I counsel you to labor to acquire that
meekness, since it is good, wholesome and taught by J. Chr. himself, who
practiced it; and tells, that we should learn it of him. I know very well that
you will find some little repugnancy to it, and that you must do violence to
your nature, seeing it inclines always more to harshness than to meekness, but
we must take the kingdom of heaven by force; for it is written, that the
violent take it by force. Eternal life deserves well a little suffering, and
also the violence which we must use to resist our evil habits; for these
sufferings are but of short continuance, whereas the eternal joy they purchase
shall never end. These considerations may well make the greatest afflictions we
can endure in resisting our selves, appear but light. Therefore resolve with
your self to overcome that passion of anger, it is it which torments you most,
and gives the devil most advantage against your soul.

Watch over your self therefore, that you may resist it upon occasion; for the
first motions of anger are not in your power, because of the evil habit, which
your parents have not correcterd in your youth: and so it is become as natural
to you, and is stirred up almost at every occasion. You ought therefore to use
continual prayer, to resist these continual motions. The sin is not to feel
them, but to consent to them: and therefore when you feel the motions of anger,
give not place to them; but return in to your self, and pray to God for
strength to resist them. In that case hold your peace, because you would not
speak meekly as Jesus Christ teaches you should: and when others speak what you
are unwilling to hear; withdraw, rather than answer them. So shall you by
little and little overcome that inclination; and become meek and gentle. As for
humbleness of heart, it consists in submitting willingly to the will of others
in all good, or indifferent things. And believe assuredly, that so long as you
find a repugnancy to yield to another will, its a token that your heart is not
humble: since it would have another to yield to it, and will not yield to him.
An humble heart always distrusts it self, and desires rather to obey than to
command: it submits always its opinion to that of others, and will not contend
to maintain its own; esteeming it the least of any, and therefore yields
willingly to every body in matters good, or indifferent.

My Child, if you had that humility of heart which J. Chapter requires, you would
be happy, and content; for nothing would ever arrive against your will: which
being submitted to God, would always receive every thing from his hand,
although they came by wicked men, or the devil himself, which could not hurt
you when you refer them to God. And the devil will not long vex a humble heart;
for humility displeases him; he flies from the humble, because he cannot gain
upon them: and he searches out the proud, because they are more liker himself:
As the birds of one feather flock together. Therefore if you will be free from
the devil, be humble of heart; for so soon as you have learnt that virtue, he
will insensibly flee from you, and at length strive no more against you; but
you must have a true humility of heart, not consisting in humble outward
actions, but in the inward motions of your heart, which from the bottom ought
not to desire to be esteemed and honored, far less followed and obeyed: but a
humble heart honors and esteems others and obeys them willingly, seeing
there is nothing gives more quiet to man than obedience; for he that has no more
to do but obey, needs not devise in his mind what to do or speak; he has but
to hear what is said to him, and follow it; Living so as a Child, without care,
except that of pleasing God, which should yield great quiet outward and inward.

I suppose no body (even naturally) can desire to command, at least without he
have a proud and arrogant heart, desiring dominion over others; for submission
and obedience is pleasant and agreeable; and we find by experience, that he who
takes his own will, has often regret and dissatisfaction after, and is
discontent for doing so. Which flows thence, that our proper will is corrupted
by sin; and so produces all sorts of noxious corruption to him that follows it.
How many have ruined and made themselves miserable for all their life, by
following their own will? One has engaged himself in some marriage to his
hurt; another follows the wars, taken some charge; or undertaken some business
which has empoverish't and rendered them miserable: yea and by grief and
melancholy caused their death. And all this, because they would follow their
own will; without taking counsel, or submitting to any person. And such are
forced to suffer and endure the adversities which their own wills have caused;
but he that can find a disinteressed person, and obeys him according to God; is
most happy and content: As the proverb is, He that plays the fool by counsel
does it well. That is, not that any folly is good, but to show that he who
submits his will to God and the gospel councels; does always well, alhough men
should judge it folly; as most part do at this day judge it to follow these
councels expressly according to the letter. So it is folly to human sense, to
despise the goods, riches and pleasures of this life, to become humble and mean
with Jesus Christ; but he that plays the fool at that rate, fool's well.

Not that I would counsel you (my Child) to be submissive and obedient in
matters of importance to men, that live yet after their proper wills (as well
as you) for that would often times be evil, the corrupt will of another being
evil as well as yours. Yet it will be profitable for your perfection to obey
them in things indifferent, or of small consequence, when they do hurt to no
person: And thereby you shall overcome your own corruption; and shall accustom
your self to submit to what is well-pleasing to God, voluntarily; for habit
changes into nature; and he that accustoms himself to submit to men for his own
perfection; it will be easy and pleasant to him to submit to God for the same,
doing it without any repugnance of his nature: which being accustomed to obey
in indifferent things, will find pleasure to obey in good things; and hence
your heart may find always quiet and contentment.

But so long as you shall be unexercised in this obedience and submission of
your Spirit, you will have troubles and debates in your self, and shall not be
loved of others, nor united in the same will with them: as God has commanded
us; saying, be united together in one will: which we do not yet observe; for
our wills are as diverse as there as different persons of us, which testifies a
pride of heart in all, far from observing the counsels which J. C. teaches:
viz. to learn of him, who is meek, and lowly, and humble of heart: that lesson
ought to be well kept, and practiced upon every occasion. We have subject
enough: for being an assembly of persons that endeavor after perfection, there
is no fear of doing evil in obeying one another; as it often happens in the
world, where we cannot submit to any person without offending God, seeing they
are all full of sins and evil inclinations; which we must resist rather than
obey: for many well-enclined persons, have lost themselves by endeavoring to
please the wicked, and by that means had part in their sins.

We are by the grace of God free of that danger, seeing all our company are
persons of a good will and labor for the perfection of their souls; so that
you cannot do it to yield to them in indifferent, and principally in good
things. Examine always if what they counsel or propose be good, and when you
cannot assuredly find that it is such; examine if it is evil, if it may do hurt,
or bring prejudice to any body: and if you think so, you must excuse your self
from yielding with all the mildness you can: and so you shall irritate no body,
though you follow not their will: But if you resist them with harsh and
piercing words, designing to correct or rebuke them, you had better hold your
peace as speak.

But I Am unwilling to believe, that such cases will happen in our company;
because I trust none of them will ever give himself to evil things; they may
well afford occasion one to another to exercise patience; for being all
imperfect, every one has his own failing which Christian-charity ought to
support: and that should perfect you together: for if you had nothing to bear
with in your brother, you should never know how far you have advanced in
virtue, seeing the heart of man is deceitful, and flatters it self always, and
knows not it self till the emergents and occasions offer, which try how much
meekness and humility it has, which it would not know other ways: And
consequenly, you should love the opportunities of suffering; that you may be
exercised in Christian perfection. You will not always have so much
opportunity, as now, while all the brethren are yet so imperfect, and humility
of heart so little put in practice. So let not the present occasion escape; for
what is past, is not in your power; and what is to come is uncertain. There is
only the present moment, we have to use for perfecting our selves. Look not to
the failings of others; for every one must labor for his own advancement, and
not render an account of his brother. Do so as having nothing else to do, but
to perfect your soul, and fulfill the will of God; for there is only that which
concerns you: for if all the men in the world were Saints, and you not, their
virtues would not in the least profit you; and also if you be virtuous, and all
others vicious, that will not diminish your virtue: for God will not require an
account of others from you; but will judge every one according to his works.

So that when you have overcome your self, you overcome all the world, and
nothing can let your perfection; for even the faults of others, will serve you,
as a means to exercise your patience, and become meek, mild and humble of
heart, as J. Chapter counsels: And the virtues of others will excite you to greater
virtue; so that you shall rule over every one; for he that has overcome his
passions, is king over all the earth, and has subjected all things to himself;
not being moved for whatsoever happens. Behold a blessed state, and yet easy
to be attained, provided they embrace the means. They may overcome one passion
at once; and so get over them all in the end. I counsel you to begin with
obedience, seeing with it you may overcome diverse of your passions at once. For
I shall frequently order you things which your nature has a repugnancy against;
and if you perform them without gain saying, you shall so overcome its
corruption, although they be but small inconsiderable matters, you obey in: for
it is the fault of that corruption, not to yield willingly to another, and
would always be in the right, and thinks it has reason in all it imagins:
which proceeds from the haughtiness of heart, that would always have deference,
and will yield to none: It thinks always it self wiser and clearer-sighted than
another. And from that you must disengage it, and oblige it to submit to every
one in things good or indifferent.

As for me, I did so; and have thence found great advantages for the perfection
of my soul; I submitted always my self to whomsoever I conversed with; and have
endeavored from the beginning to discover their inclinations, that I might
conform my self to them; and I did it so absolutely, that sometimes I perceived
not the evil that was in them, to oppose it: but since, that God has given me
more light, I obey not men, but in things that are good or indifferent. And I
exhort you, my dear Child, to do the same; that you may become by little and
little agreeable to your heavenly father. Which is the earnest desire of her
who loves your soul, to render it unto God, unto whom it belongs.

In Holstein near Gottorp Castle this 12. Jan. 1672. old style. ANTONIA
BOURIGNON.

THE II. LETTER. That all Christians ought to learn of Jesus Christ Meekness,
Lowliness and Humility of heart.
Showing wherein consists meekness and lowliness; which are fruits of the Holy
Spirit; and cannot be obtained, unless we renounce our own will, submitting to
the will of God.

My Dear Child;
I Perceive you have not yet comprehended the words of J. Christ, where he
says: that we must learn of him to be meek and lowly, and humble of heeart.
Therefore you must know what that meekness is, otherwise you cannot love it;
for one cannot have a perfect love for what he does not at all know; and the
reason why true virtue is so little loved, is because it is so little known:
many think it is a visible, material and bodily thing, and thence is hypocrisy
bred in men's hearts; who persuade themselves, that they are virtuous, because
of doing some external good works: whereas there is nothing of the essence of
virtue in them: for true virtue is a Spiritual thing, which should possess the
hearts of men; and it cannot be seen nor felt, but by the operations it
produces, springing from the bottom of the heart: and if these operations
proceed not from that bottom, but are only studied, or practiced to please men,
or for our proper satisfaction; they are but moral and temporary virtues, which
add nothing to our souls, and cannot have the recompense of eternal life.

They may indeed be a mean to attain to true virtue, when our design is to
aspire and arrive at it; but the misery is, that many rest at these means and
external virtues, as if that were the end. And so they think they have virtue
indeed; whereas they have it only in shadow, not in reality.

And therefore is it, that I teach you what true virtue is, and particularly
what is that meekness which J. Chapter says we must learn of him. It is nothing
else but a peace, quiet, and tranquillity of Spirit, which resides in the
bottom of our soul; and all these are Spiritual qualities, which cannot be seen
or felt but by their outward operations. But the essence of that virtue of
meekness is a divine quality, and you cannot judge by the outward actions if
one possesses it: for one may well learn to speak mildly, without having the
mildness which J. Chapter says we must learn of him. We may learn meek words like a
Perroquet, and speak so perhaps for civility or by hypocricy: for I have known
persons that appeared most meek in their carriage, who inwardly were wicked and
arrogant. And therefore we must not amuse our selves at that outward mildness
which is often deceitful, and but natural: for there are persons so
faint-hearted that they fear to speak a harsh word, left it give themselves
trouble by as harsh an answer: and that Sillyness makes them mild and calm both
to good and evil. And yet such dare believe, that they have the virtue of
meekness, when it is only a vice of sloth and injustice; which makes them
yield to the sin of others, instead of resisting it with diligence and courage;
but they will not take so much trouble.

It is not then that false meekness, which I exhort you unto, my Child; for so
you should not learn that which J. Chapter teaches: but I would gladly make you
comprehend what is that true meekness, that you might love and follow it. It is
then an inward peace, a quiet of conscience, and tranquillity of Spirit, which
dwells in the bottom of our soul: behold what that meekness which J. Chapter
recommends to learn of him, contains; Himself practiced that meekness all the
time of his mortal life: and you may observe from that, if there be at present
any souls possessed by his Spirit; that is, who have effectually those three
qualities in their souls; for otherways they cannot be possessed of the Holy
Ghost.

Observe well in me, If I have peace in my soul, quiet of conscience and
tranquillity in my Spirit: And if you discover in me these qualities, believe
assuredly that you may obtain them also; for God refuses not his graces to them
that ask and desire them: and he will be loath to refuse that of meekness when
J. Chapter says, that we must learn it of him; for he will not command us to learn,
that which is impossible. God is just, and therefore he has not taught us any
thing by Jesus Christ, but what he will readily give us.

That Spirit of meekness and gentleness is the Holy Spirit; which J. Chapter says
shall not be refused to any; bringing us this comparison, to the purpose; who
is he of you, who when his son asks bread, will give him a stone; or if he
demand fish, will give him a serpent? And he Draws this conclusion; If you then
being evil, know to give good things to your children, how much more shall not
your heavenly father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?

All the evil consists in that we do not desire him; and that desire cannot be
great in us, as long as we do not know him. Many say, that the Holy Spirit does
not work in souls now adays as he did in the days of J. Christ rand his
Apostles; because they do not see him in form of a dove, as he appeared at the
baptism of J. Chr. or as tongues of fire, as on the Apostles at Pentecost,
which is a very feeble argument: For the Holy Ghost is not limited to times,
being an eternal God, who gives his gifts and bears his fruits at all times;
and will do to all eternity, seeing he can never be barren nor idle, operating
always in the souls that are disposed thereto: and if we see not now these
tongues of fire, that dove, or other external signs, it is because we need them
no more now, the gospel law and the doctrine of Jesus Christ being sufficiently
confirmed; at least there is no Christian (as I believe) that calls it in
question.

Moreover, these external forms added nothing to the souls of those that
received the Holy Ghost: but served only to convince the hard-heartedness of
the incredulous. And therefore true believers have no need to see external
figures, to believe that the Holy Spirit dwells yet in the soul of him that is
thereto disposed. They can well examine it themselves knowing but what the Holy
Spirit is, what are his gifts, what his graces, and what his fruits: of which
the meekness we must learn of Jesus Christ is one: And though it be declared in
diverse places of Scripture, yet it is all the same thing. For J. Chapter says,
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly; and St. Paul puts among the twelve fruits
of the Holy Spirit goodness and benignity; which is the same thing pronounced
in different words and is in substance, the peace, quiet, and tranquillity of
Spirit, residing in the soul, that has these three internal qualities. These
signs are assured testimonies of the habitation of the Holy Spirit. For the
natural Spirit cannot give true peace, nor true quiet, nor true tranquillity of
Spirit, as give the meekness and lowliness which J. Christ says we must learn
of him.

I suppose by these, My Child, you comprehend sufficiently what is that
meekness and lowliness which J. Chapter teaches. And also that you have remarked
enough, that I possess it in my soul: seeing you see me in inward peace, quiet
of conscience, and tranquillity of Spirit, without notable change; but yet you
know not how you may come to feel the effects of that meekness of J. Chapter in
your soul. I know certainly you love them so far as you know them, but you know
not how to attain to them: Which I shall also teach you, if you will give good
attention, and follow my counsel; for it is very easy to obtain the meekness
which J. Chapter teaches, if you will empty your soul of what hinders it, and
absolutely become a disciple of J. Chapter and follow his doctrines. And if you
feel not in your soul, true inward peace, quiet of conscience and tranquillity
of Spirit, you may believe you have not yet learnt of J. Chapter his meekness and
lowliness; and so you must embrace the means to attain to it.

The first and fundamental means is absolutely to will and desire it; which I
believe by the grace of God you do. In the 2d. place you must endeavor to
remove all impediments, which retard that peace, quiet, and tranquillity of
Spirit: these impediments are in our corrupt nature; for from sin men are fal^
into a continual trouble, war and disquiet; and our passions being disordered,
breed all these; and they cannot be governed, ordered and kept in peace except
we have resisted and overcome them, and also altogether renounced our natural
inclinations: and then is it that we find peace, quiet and tranquillity of
Spirit, and not before.

Behold wherefore it is, that J. Chapter says, we must Deny our selves if we would
be his Disciples; for that renouncing of our passions alone, is the true means
to attain to that peace, quiet, and tranquillity of Spirit: For since sin came,
our passions bereave us of these; which before sin, were well regulated, and
temperate, bringing joy, peace and tranquillity to our souls; whereas now we
feel the quite contrary: For if we suffer our passions to rule, they will lead
us to intemperance, sadness and disquiet of Spirit. So that it is impossible
for one that lives according to his natural senses, to learn the Meekness and
Gentleness which J. Chapter teaches us. And it is for that he adds the gospel
doctrine: That we must Deny our selves. For the one cannot be without the other:
if we will be meek and lowly, as J. Ch teaches, we must of necessity deny our
selves; seeing our nature has nothing but harshness and fretting, which causes
trouble of Spirit, and disquiet in the will, and contention with our neighbor:
for he that has not meekness in himself, cannot have peace with his neighbor;
except it be a Dissembled or civil peace; which yields not inward quiet, nor
tranquillity of Spirit. As I believe, My Child, you feel in yourself; for
though you have a quiet of conscience, because you have abandoned the world,
and the occasions of sin; yet you have not that inward peace which would render
your Spirit tranquile and peaceable. For you act yet with Disturbance, which
proceeds from corrupted and distempered passions. So if you knew to vanquish
that, and calm these unprofitable agitations, it were your great advantage, and
you would easily obtain the meekness which Jesus Christ teaches: as also
lowliness, and gentleness; seeing these two are knit together: meekness of
heart engenders gentleness toward our neighbor: for he that is tranquile and
peaceable in himself, will not trouble his neighbor, nor give any occasion of
fretting; seeing the meekness of the good, quenches the wrath of the wicked.
And though one that has learnt the meekness and gentleness of Jesus Christ were
surrounded with troubles of all sorts, he will yet keep a tranquile Spirit.
Because he does no more follow the motions of his corrupt nature, and so
retains peace, quiet and tranquillity of Spirit, where it is obtained by the
meekness and gentleness of J. Chr.

My Child, if you would also learn that Lesson, endeavor to Deny your self,
and not follow your own will in any thing. For Since it was corrupted by sin,
it always enclines to evil; suspect whatever proceeds from your own will, and
follow it in nothing; it is it which bereaves you of the meekness and
gentleness which Jesus Christ teaches; and we have no greater enemy in the
world than our proper will. If you could well comprehend that truth, doubtless,
you would not follow it in any thing; and you would Distrust even your Good
Wills and intentions, and suspect them; but because you know not yet well, that
your proper will is so evil, you do not distrust it: Notwithstanding is betrays
you often; and it leads you to do evil often when you would do good; your
bottom and inward intention is good, but your proper will opposes your good
desires, and makes you often do the contrary of what you have well resolved. If
I were in your place, I would not follow my own will in any thing, and hold all
my own best wills for evil; seeing there can never come good out of what is
altogether corrupt; as our will is become through sin, so that no good can
proceed from it. Whatever is good, must proceed from God: And whatever is evil,
from the Devil, and the corrupted will of man. It is as a fire, which kindles
in our nature luxury, anger, and all sorts of intemperance: it is insatiable;
never satisfied; ever desiring what it has not; restless in its desires;
turbulent in its searches; ever panting, and never refreshed nor content; in
the end our proper will creates us more evil than the Devil himself; who could
in no wise hurt us, if our proper will did not consent thereto. So that when we
have overcome our own will, we have overcome the devil also. For he can never
make us sin, but in moving our will to submit to him: It is for that, that I
said, man can never have a greater enemy than his proper will; and consequently
every one in particular, and all men in general, ought to make war with their
proper wills: yet how few esteem it their enemy, and a great many idolize it;
esteeming themselves happy that they can follow it in every thing, without
considering that it brings death to the soul; and hinders the will of God to be
fulfilled in us. For he that follows his own will is not subject to the will of
God; seeing these two are always contrary. So that he who will accomplish the
will of God must of necessity renounce his own will; and who will learn of J.
Christ meekness and lowliness, must refuse every thing to his proper will: and
so be shall possess in his soul peace, quiet and tranquillity of Spirit; which I
pray God grant you by renouncing your proper will? which is the only means to
make you happy in this world, and to all eternity; as wishes she that desires
your Salvation.

Holstein. near Gottorp Castle, 5 Feb. 1672. ANTONIA BOURIGNON.

THE III. LETTER. Men can sufficiently know the will of God if they would
perform it.
To the same; showing him (while he persuaded himself that the will of God is
not sufficiently manifest in every thing that we might accomplish it, denying
our own) that the will of God may be known, and is sufficiently manifested in
the commands of God; which Jesus Christ proposes so Clearly: Saying, Learn of
me, for I am meek and Lowly, and humble of heart.

My Child;
I Believe you understand sufficiently by my former what that meekness and
lowliness is which we must learn of J. Chapter how it is pleasant to obey; how man's
proper will is corrupted by sin; and how we must now fight with and overcome
it, if we will find peace in our souls, quiet of conscience, and tranquillity in
our Spirit.

But you cannot comprehend how you may so know the will of God in every thing,
to follow it, in quitting your proper will.

Believe me, that scruple proceeds from your corrupt nature, which would
willingly be dispensed, or excused from being obliged to renounce your proper
will, which it loves and would follow, if it can escape the obligation of
resisting it; and so persuades it self, that it does not know the will of God
in every thing, to do it. The heart of man is even so deceitful, that it
persuades its proper understanding that we know not the will of God, and
consequently cannot follow it in every thing. But that is a deceit invented by
Satan, to amuse us by false reasons and fine appearances of truth: which are in
effect but wicked falsities. For all Christians can know the will of God if
they take pains to inform themselves; but for the most part they are willing to
be ignorant of it, because they have not a mind to accomplish it when they do
know it; And they do certainly beyond doubt know it; but the love they bear to
themselves, and the little love they bear to God, makes them say, that they
know not his will; and sometimes they have the confidence to say (lying) they
would do it if they knew it. For that is false; but man's heart deceives
sometimes it self, so that it self does not know the deceit; and gives it self
to believe that its falsehoods are truth, which causes several to live in quiet,
believing themselves assured in the midst of perils of their Salvation.

Therefore we may well desire to discover the truth in a matter of so great
concern, on which depends our eternal happiness: and never sleep upon a false
bolster of Deceiving suppositions; for he that sins ignorantly, goes ignorantly
to hell. Seeing all Christians are obliged to know the will of God, which is
also clearly manifested to them by his commands, and yet more particularly by
the doctrine of J. Chapter for there be few Christians that know not that God has
commanded men to love him with all their heart, and their neighbor as
themselves; and there are yet fewer that observe these commands; and with that
they say, If I knew the will of God, I would follow it; and so they lie to God
and to themselves, persuading themselves they speak truth: so great is the
darkness in which men live at this day, in regard of their Salvation.

We may truly say, that it is at this day that they are abandoned to the Spirit
of error and wickness; and that the Scripture says with good reason, that all
men are liars: seeing they now lie to themselves to the prejudice of their
eternal salvation; and that sometimes without knowing it. For in that they say,
if they knew the will of God, they would follow it; is falsehood, both in the
well-intentioned and in the wicked; since we see in effect, that neither the
one nor the other do it, in the first command, viz. to love God with all our
heart, and our neighbor as our selves. For to love God with all our heart, we
must love nothing else but him only; otherwise our heart were divided and
parted: instead of being whole in the love of one God: so that if we love
riches, and the pleasures of this life, and honor, etc. we do not love God
with all our heart* though we know that to be his will. And when we envy the
happiness of our neighbor, and do not assist him in his need, we do not love
him as our selves; and we often do to him what we would not should be done to
our selves. Wherein we do not the will of God, though we know assuredly, that
his will is, that we love our neighbor as our selves; and so we do not
practice the will of God which we know: but we seek beside that so clearly
revealed, a more particular will in things little needful; and neglect to do
his will in that which regards our eternal Salvation.

It is therefore much to be feared, that we would not do the will of God in
small things, though we did know it; seeing we do it not in things so great and
so advantageous to our eternal salvation. So that it were to tempt God, to ask
what is his will in all things, while we do not fulfill it in the principal
things, as are his express commands and saving ordinances.

I hear sometimes said, that it is a very sweet thing and great happiness to
have the will of God discovered in every thing; esteeming that a particular
grace and extraordinary happiness. And yet if that mercy were given them; it is
to be feared it would turn to their greater condemnation; for he that knows the
father's will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. And the
reason why God does not communicate himself to all Christians, is, because they
are not ready nor disposed to perform his will when it shall be contrary to
their own. And therefore every one ought to endeavor to fulfill the will of God
which he knows by his commands; rather than go to and demand of God particular
things, so long as he does not perform the principal things, as are the
commands of God or the counsels of J. Chapter and these counsels explain yet more
particularly the will of God, than did the commands in general. For J. Chapter
deduces particularly all what we ought to do and leave, to fulfill that command
of loving God with all our heart, and our neighbor as our selves: Saying,
Learn of me, for I am meek and Lowly; which teaches the love of God and of our
neighbor: for the meekness signifies love of the goodness of God, and
lowliness the Love of our neighbor. Meekness or goodness is one of the
essential qualities of God, which seems to surpass his other qualities: it is
like oil among other liquors, which swims always above * for we see in a^l Gods
works his goodness superabound over his other qualities; though that goodness
be never separated from his justice and truth, yet it excels over them.

For we see in many things where God has stayed his wrath to give place to his
mercy, when men would turn; as he did to the people of Nineveh, who by their
sins had justly merited that Gods justice should be executed against them. Yea,
and the truth of God had foretold their destruction within forty days: but as
soon as that people returned to repentance, the goodness of God gets uppermost,
and swims above his justice and truth, and pardons them by his great meekness
and goodness; So that we may with truth say, that the goodness of God is over
his other qualities. And seeing J. Chapter exhorts us, to be perfect as our
heavenly father is perfect: we must labor particularly for that virtue of
meekness and lowliness which Jesus Christ teaches to learn of him: that we may
tend to that perfection of our heavenly father; and when we have in the bottom
of our soul justice and truth for a foundation to Christian perfection, we must
build upon that, meekness and gentleness; seeing that virtue will make us
fulfill the command, of Loving God with all our heart, and our neighbor as our
selves, wherein the scripture says, all the law and the Prophets are contained:
and that because justice and truth respects God; but meekness and goodness
respects also our neighbor. And although one were just and true before God, he
must also be meek and good; otherways he loves not his neighbor as himself;
seeing he gives not that testimony of his love which that command requires: And
because only God knows the heart, it is not enough that goodness be in any, it
must also be testified outwardly by gentleness, or else our neighbor should
not be edifyed thereby: and therefore is it that J. Chapter says, we must learn of
him meekness and lowliness or gentleness: he spoke no superfluous word in
distinguishing meekness and gentleness; but he gives us to understand, that it
is not enough to have goodness within us, but we must also testify it outwardly
by meekness and gentleness toward our neighbor.

Therefore, My Child, exercise your self in that virtue, and pray to God that
you may attain meekness and gentleness: he will never be wanting on his part to
give you his grace to practice them, if you will not be wanting on yours. It is
one of his commands, and he will never fail to afford grace to obey in what he
has commanded; otherwise J. Chapter would not bid us Learn of him to be Meek and
Lowly, if he knew not very well that God will surely give these virtues to them
that seek and desire them: and if you do not feel them yet in your soul, it is
a token, you have not yet enough demanded and desired them. And it is perhaps
because you have not till now discovered that they are necessary to salvation,
and contained in the commandments of God, and so have not labored to your
power to acquire them: but you have simply followed the motions of your nature,
which does not incline to meekness and gentleness, but to harshness and
fretting.

But our nature is as a horse, to which sometimes you must use a Bridle,
sometimes Spurs, to make it turn and march where it is needful. And though it
have repugnance to act contrary to its motions and inclinations; we must not
for that give it free bridle to go where it pleases, because our proper will is
always evil; since it was corrupted by sin; and is no more capable to make one
good determination; but it ought to be kept in with a bridle, and governed by
reason, as they do a horse with a bridle, otherwise it would precipitate our
souls into hell.

Now your reason can easily perceive, that you must keep the commandments of
God to be saved; and follow the counsels of J. Chapter to be a Christian. It is
then the duty of that reason to bridle and lead your nature into the way of
Salvation, and sure path of the gospel law, seeing you would be a Christian,
and save your soul. You must not then obey the motions and inclinations of your
nature, but God, who has shown us particularly what is his will, by the gospel
advices which J. Chapter has given us; saying, learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly, and humble of heart: he could not better express what God requires of
us, than by these express terms of meekness and lowliness, and humility of
heart. For every one can understand by these terms what is the will of God, and
what he requires of all Christians. Endeavor first of all to acquire these
virtues: and after, if you need other particular knowledge to discover his
will, without doubt, he will reveal them to you in due time, and will never be
wanting to reveal to us, what we have a desire to obey; no more than he will be
wanting to give his graces necessary to attain to Christian perfection. For he
desires our perfection more than our selves do; and so is far from refusing his
graces, that we may arrive at it, if we will but ask them with humility of
heart.

For without humility of heart, no prayers are acceptable to God: and our
meekness and gentleness cannot be good, if it is not accompanied with humility
of heart. For one may be meek and gentle by nature, dissimulation, or
hypocricy, which is often sin before God in lieu of virtue. For that apparent
and pharisaticall lowliness is not praiseworthy but before men, and J Ch tells
us, except our righteousness exceed that of the pharisees, we shall not enter
into the kingdom of God.

That we might understand, that no moral virtues, that proceed not from the
bottom of our heart, and engendered there by a divine faith, can have an eternal
recompense; and are recompensed only by the praise of men, who being material
judge by appearance; but God searches the hearts and tryes the consciences. And
therefore it is that Jesus Christ says, we must have humility of heart, with
meekness and lowliness: as being three things knit together, which cannot be
separated one from the other; no more than the three qualities of justice,
goodness and truth, which correspond to the three persons in the Trinity, and
are always joined inseparably in all his works, whereof if one were wanting,
his work would not be perfect. Even so meekness and lowlyness should be
imperfect if they were separated from humility of heart, which should beget
infallibly true meekness and lowlyness; for an humble heart is always meek and
lowly.

See, My Child, by that Touchstone, if you are arrived at that humility of
heart; and endeavor to obtain it of God, and then you shall assuredly be meek
and lowly, which is the desire of

Holstein near Gottorp Castle 9 Feb. 1672. style vel. ANTONIA BOURIGNON.

THE IV. LETTER. Humility is acquired by the knowledge of our selves.
To the same, showing him what Humility of Heart is; what are the marks of it;
and how we should endeavor to attain it, by the knowledge of the Infirmities
and Miseries of our Souls and bodies, and the blindness of our Minds.

My Dear Child;
I Exhorted you by my last to Humility of Heart; but I know not if you
understand well what that humility of heart is, wherein it consists, and by
what means you may discover if you have it, or not* and therefore I have
resolved to speak very particularly to you, that you may discern in every thing
true Virtue, from false and only apparent Virtue: and to lay in your soul a
good foundation, of solid virtue: without amusing you (as do now adays so many
persons of good will) with apparent or imaginary virtues, which before God are
of little or no value.

You have now sufficiently heard what is that meekness and lowliness, which
Jesus Christ teaches we must learn of him: Endeavor now to discover what is
that Humility of Heart which he teaches in that same counsel: For I shall show
you particularly what it is, what need we have to possess it, and what profit
it brings to our souls, that you want it not through ignorance. Humility then
is the foundation and accomplishment of all virtues, and ought to be esteemed
above others; and so we ought to labor more to attain it, than any other
virtue; seeing it begets of it self several others, and banishes several vices,
which cannot abide in an humble heart; as Pride, Presumption, Avarice, Pomps,
and Vain Glory, and many other sins, which proceed from Pride of Heart: but
when it becomes humble, then are all these vices banished.

And to know what that Humility of Heart is essentially, you are to believe
that it is a perfect knowledge of ones self. For he that knows himself well,
can never be proud, nor have an esteem of himself. He will not glory in the
Praises and Honors of Men; He will not desire Riches, to be adorned or served;
for an humble heart believes that it deserves nothing, and the least things
content and satisfy it.

An humble Heart is not in wrath for being abased or despised, because he sees
in knowing himself, that he deserves nothing, but is worthy of all contempt.
And whereas that is not practiced among men, it is because they know not
themselves, and so esteem themselves worthy of Esteem, and Honor, Riches and
service: and that makes them Proud. For if they observed well whence they are,
what they are, and what shall become of them; it were impossible that they
should in the least esteem themselves; on the contrary, they would see that
they deserve all sort of Contempt, because they are, as to the Spirit, frail,
ignorant, and unconstant; and as to the body, full of Miseries, Infirmities and
Diseases, liable to death and corruption.

All these things should not Give matter of exalting himself to man's
understanding, or to make him esteem himself in any wise: but rather ground to
humble and abase himself before God and Men, because of his infirmities and
miseries: and yet we see they make themselves great, are arrogant, esteem much
of themselves, and in fine, believe themselves worthy of all sorts of Honors,
Pleasures, Riches, and services; every one advancing himself with all his
power, all that proceeds from thence, that men know not themselves; for if they
did, they would be ashamed to glory in their miseries, folly and ignorance: For
man has nothing else in himself; and all these defaults are annexed to his
corrupt nature. If you open but the eyes of your understanding, you shall see
abundantly the miseries of your spirit, and how it is agitated by diverse
motions and intemperate passions.

Also, as soon as you open the eyes of the body, you see the bodily miseries
under which all men lie: and if you reflect whence the body of man proceeds,
and of what substance it is formed, you shall find that he proceeds of an
unclean and putrid matter, and from those members of his parents bodies which
are the most shameful. And thence he has no subject to glory or esteem himself
in his origin, seeing it is from so vile and base things, which ought to give
him occasion of confusion and humility. And even beasts have more estimable
qualities than men as to the body. For he would presently be stifled in the
filth accompanying his nativity, if he were not delivered by the assistance of
others; and he would presently starve with hunger and other necessities, if
care were not taken to sustain him: whereas the beasts can help themselves so
soon as they come into the world.

And if man will look forward into his life, he shall find that it is but a
mass of miseries, linked one to another: What feebleness is in man's body? He
can endure neither too much heat nor too much cold, a little over, in exercise,
and he is wearied; he must rest and sleep, or he looses his strength and
health; he must be clothed and alimented, cleaned, and cherished; whereby his
understanding is occupied in care, travail and disquiet all the days of his
life to relieve the infirmities of his body. And how many sorts of diseases
afflict the body of man* They are almost innumerable; and they say, tha^ the
Eye alone is liable to fifty sorts: what then o^ all the other members? When
every one has its particular ones, beside the disordered motions of the
passions; as of Fear, Terror, Sadness, Melancholy, Anger, Jealousy, and such
other sorts of evils, to which man is subject during this miserable life! where
he has no subject of glorying and esteeming himself; but great reason to abase
himself in the view of so many miseries to which his sin has reduced him:
which gives him good cause of submission and humility before God and Men;
feeling himself miserable and infirm both in soul and body: for the Spirit has
its diseases as well as the body; for do but take heed to yourself, and you
shall find your spirit agitated by various superfluous desires, and useless
thoughts which carry it away often against its intention, as the Apostle
testifies, that it is not in the power of man to order his thoughts: which
every one may feel. For when we would fix our heart on prayer, or other good
exercise, it wavers here, and there, that we cannot retain it. So that we may
truly say, that it is not in man's power to contain his thoughts: So infirm is
his Spirit, that his Reason has not the force to stay the course of his
thoughts; which often sway the reason whither it would not. So that man's
Spirit is captivated under the tyranny of his disordered passions, which often
lead him into great evils, even contrary to his will: whereof the Apostle says:
I approve not what I do, because what I would not, that I do; and what I would,
that I do not: To prove how many evils the spirit of man is subject, as well as
his body; and that there is no subject of glorying in the one or the other;
seeing they are equally infirm and miserable, changeable and inconstant.

For what mutations feel we not in our spirit? the variety and changing in one
day, of Joy, Sadness, Hopes, Displeasures and Desires are scarce numerable; how
many diverse thoughts? we love at one time, what we hate at another; what we
desire one day, dissatisfies us another: so that we know not our selves
sometimes what we would be at; and are often afflicted for having what we had
desired.

And if one should write all the thoughts and desires which pass in the spirit
of a man, himself would be ashamed of his inconstancy and instability, and
would be far from haughtiness for the qualities of his spirit, no more than for
those of his body; but would see ground of humility for his miseries: for there
is nothing can elevate the heart of man in an esteem of himself, but a blast of
wind, which the Devil inspires into his spirit, to precipitate him into the sin
of Pride by sottish imaginations, which proceed from that air (which is in
effect nothing) wherewith he is filled: For even all the sciences of man's
understanding are but figures formed of that wind; as we see figures in the air
by the Clouds, appearing sometimes as if we saw Mountains moving, or Houses,
and Armies, all which notwithstanding are but Clouds agitated by the wind, and
representing such figures to our eyes.

It is even so with men's Sciences, who fancy themselves wise, when they are
very ignorant. For I do not believe that they have yet truly discovered one
science, even natural; and how can they then in mystical (or spiritual) things?
That is what Jesus Christ said to his disciples, He that sees me, sees my
father; but you know neither me nor the father. Notwithstanding we will often
search curiously the profound Mysteries and divine Secrets; and we know not
natural things, which we see and handle. One will vaunt in being a Doctor of
Medicine, another in Theology, another will be an Astronomer, and so of other
sciences; although they be all alike ignorant of what they profess, and think
they know well. And that proceeds from that airy Pride which the Devil has
inspired in to their Spirit; persuading them, that they are wise, and worthy of
honor and esteem; though they be in effect ignorant and worthy of contempt.

We see that Physicians esteem themselves wise, because they have read
Medicinal Authors; and these Authors are often as ignorant as they that read
and follow them: because all they have written is but vanishing figures, which
waver in the air of their imaginations; and what the ancients have written, is
followed by their posterity: And so they think to cure the sick by remedies
coined in the air of man's imagination; who seem to have diverse Sciences and
Remedies, while they do but guess and hazard the lives of the sick: and I
believe the Physicians have killed many more than they have cured (to reckon the
most common and ordinary) and that because they have not discovered the Secrets
of Nature, and know not the constitution of man's body, nor the origin of his
diseases; and consequently cannot exhibit proper remedies for them; but often
give what proves poison, to kill men, instead of curing them.

And therefore there is no subject of glorying for being called a Doctor in
Medicine: but rather of abasement and confusion for their great ignorance to
the hurt of the Patient they take care of. And as that ignorance is great, in
regard of bodily medicine; it is yet greater in regard of the spiritual; which
is Theology; for it kills many more souls than medicine does bodies: and so
the one has not subject of glorying of his skill, more than the other; being
they are equally ignorant, which do not add nor pare the one from the other,
having each great ground of humility.

If Astrologers also knew, how far short they are of the knowledge of the
heavens, they would be ashamed to bear the name, and would acknowledge all
their wisdom in that to be but folly and fancies of men, who have not attained
to the truth of that Science: and what they have written are but imaginary
suppositions, far from being truths.

And upon like imaginations, are founded also all other human Sciences, which
they learn by reading and study. For when they are not founded (...) the Truth
of God, they are altogether vain and false; and are only fit to deceive men,
who by them deceive one another, and hinder each other to come to the knowledge
of the Truth of God and Wisdom of the Holy Spirit: which is the only true
wisdom, and before which all the wisdom of men is but folly, to blind our
spirits, that they should not come to the knowledge of themselves. In which
consists True Humility of Heart, which Jesus Christ says, we must learn of him:
which to do, she prays you, who loves the perfection of your soul.

Your Well-affectioned in Jesus Christ, ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
In Holstein, near Gottorp Castle, Jan. 18. 1672. St. Vel.
THE V. LETTER. Humility is acquired by the Knowledge of ones Self.
To the same, showing him, that the true Knowledge, even of things most
esteemed by men, ought to serve to humble them; such as the Honors, Riches and
Pleasures of this life. That all these are vain disquieting, unsatisfying and
hurtful.

My dear Child;
YOu have seen by my last, what Humility is; where I have shown you, that it
consists in the knowledge of our selves; and that no person can ever be proud,
but for lack of knowing himself; for in knowing themselves, they will find
subject enough to humble themselves, by seeing their infirmities and miseries
both of soul and body: for he who will reflect seriously upon himself, he shall
not only discover his own nothingness; but will judge himself much worse than
nothing; and consequently will be far from esteeming and magnifying himself,
unless he be altogether a fool, and void of all reason and understanding. For
if he judge by an upright judgment, what he is, he shall see nothing but misery
and infirmities in his nature, and ignorance and Disorder in his spirit; for a
Beast knows more than he, for the conduct of its life; and is more moderate in
eating and drinking, and other natural things, than man: and we see him
frequently exceed in these things, which Beasts do not. Thence is it that man
is much more subject to diseases than the Beasts, because they commit more
excesses and Intemperances, than they.

And when man finds himself more disorderly and foolish in the conduct of his
life than the Beasts, ought he not to humble himself before God and men, as
worthy of all confusion? seeing God has given him a Spirit, more perfect than
any Beast; and yet he knows not to apply it to rule his passions and appetites,
which often causes to him great evils, and sometimes death. Which ought to be a
great subject of humility and Contempt of himself: he can never, knowing that,
magnify and esteem himself; if it is not because he is void of judgment and
reason; which he looses as soon as he gives entry to the vanities which the
devil inspires into his spirit to esteem himself.

Then he goes from one error to another, because fallen from the Light of the
Truth, and knows nothing but falsehood, which that evil Spirit makes him
believe, and inspires into his Spirit, that he is worthy of Honor for his
Wisdom, or Riches, or Virtue; though he be contemptible even in all these very
respects. For his Wisdom is but folly before God; and his riches are but
weighty charges, painful to be born, and cause trouble and disquiet to preserve
them; and his Virtue cannot be other than feigned, seeing it is not founded on
the knowledge of his nothingness, and truth of his miseries.

And Therefore vainglory and esteem of our selves can never be other than mere
folly, which Satan inspires and foists into men's spirits: seeing there is in
them nothing esteemable, as to the corrupted nature; but abundance of miseries
worthy of Contempt and Scorn.

So that we may truly call a proud man a very Fool, because he glories of his
Miseries, and judges his Ignorance, Wisdom, and his Troubles, Riches, For such
are temporal Riches, which create continual troubles and disquiet, with a
thousand cares both to acquire them and to conserve them.

Some of the Pagans having discovered that, threw all their Gold and Money into
the sea, to be freed from the care and disquiet of keeping it, and live with
liberty of Spirit.

Which should confound the Christian, who employs all the force of his body and
industry of his mind, to acquire Riches, so burthensom to have and troublesome
to keep: when the Pagans by the Light of nature have had them in contempt, and
thrown them from them, which they did because they had a true knowledge of
themselves and of natural things. And thence also did they despise the Honors
and Pleasures of this life; and seeing them so miserable, and of so short
continuance, one counted it not worth the pains to build a House to lodge in,
being content with a barrel to defend him from Sun and Rain: Another seeing
that he could conveniently enough carry Water into his Mouth in the hollow of
his Hand, would no more use a Cup. So firmly have these Pagans despised this
present life, that they would not take any pleasure therein, nor use created
things but for urgent necessity, and the least that might be, rejecting what is
more.

And so they did, because they knew that all the pleasures and Honors of this
World are vain, false and deceitful; that they might obtain true ones, which
are eternal; they longed therefore to be delivered from this miserable life,
which they esteemed a Prison, a Valley of Tears, as in truth it is.

But men now adays discover not that: they esteem themselves happy in their
Miseries, and rich in their Poverty; they delight in their Chains and Bonds by
blindness of spirit, and for want of knowing themselves, and the things they so
prise; and so they esteem him happy who can take his pleasure in eating and
drinking, recreations, and other carnal satisfactions. Yet such are abundantly
more miserable than those that live soberly and chastely, and in poverty: He
that can content himself with little, has no need of much, and is more joyful
in his retiredness of spirit, than if he were in the midst of pleasant and
divertising company.

Beside, he needs not use much labor or trafique to gain money: Also he that
lives soberly is better content with his course fare, than they that follow
their appetites, which are insatiable by all their Dainties. And he that lives
chastely, keeps his liberty, and the repose of his Conscience. And he that does
not delight in company and divertisments, does not fear displeasing men, nor
studies anxiously to be acceptable to them, as others who take delight in them.
They must be clothed, and behave themselves after the fashion of the World;
and for that they must gain money, that they may be well treated as others;
which requires a continual care to provide all, that nothing be wanting, that
they may appear like others; and that is a slavery from which we cannot be
delivered, but by quitting the World.

For he that will please the World, has lost his liliberty, and cannot serve
himself: He is as a hired Servant, subjected to all sorts of Vanities, to the
great ones and wise ones of the world; whom he fears and respects more than God
himself: and withal, that they reckon themselves happy to be so engaged and
bound to the World and its vanities, to which they willingly yield themselves
Slaves. For if they would retain their liberty, they would disengage themselves
from these human regards, and withdraw from worldly creatures, without yielding
their spirit to be bewitched, in thinking its Slavery to be a Liberty, and its
Fetters to be Chains of Gold for Ornament; which is mere falsehood and vanity:
for, to serve God only, is to reign; and to serve the World, is to be a Slave.

Which these wise Pagans knew well, and therefore contemned the World and its
honors and pleasures. Yea some of them cared not to be visited by Kings and
Emperors; so that one of them desired, and bid a King that came to visit him,
Stand by, and be gone, complaining, That he kept from him what he could not
give, namely, by interrupting from him the Sunshine, which he esteemed more
valuable than all the Kingdoms of the World.

For which they had good reason; for the greatest Charges afford also the
greatest Troubles; and he that is over others, is servant of all; for he must
take care of them, and rule and govern them as he will answer to God; which may
disquiet and vex him all the days of his life, and puts in hazard his eternal
Salvation. For he must not only reckon for himself, but also for all that have
been under him, and bear for and with them the punishment of all that they have
done amiss; by order, sufferance, or for want of instruction, and correction,
according to the justice of God.

Therefore is it that a Superior is more miserable than another, in time and in
eternity, which we may observe even in the Master of a Family, who must take
care, and travail to entertain his Wife; Children and servants, while they are
often without care, knowing that their Master must feed and cloth them in due
time, that they want nothing: in which they are much happier than their
Masters; for they have only one service to perform, and their master is
burdened with several.

Yet such is the blindness of men, that every one desires Charges, Estates,
Superiorities and Masterships, which they could not desire, if it were not by
an air of pride, which the Devil has inspired into their minds, otherways it
were impossible that men should seek after Charges, but do their utmost to
evite them. As several Saints have done formerly, some lest they should be
obliged to undertake the charge of Bishops that was offered to them, retired
privately to evite it; and even one of the Popes, considering the heavy burden
of his Charge, exchanged his Popedom for a Desert. So afflicting are Charges
and Superiorities for them that have attained to know the truth of things; and
their own misery and frailty: and so they have contemned them, and thought it
enough to see to themselves, and desired not a Posterity to succeed to their
Miseries, which they knew too well to desire them for their Posterity. They
loved rather to live chastely, than to procreate Children so miserable as
themselves. In which they were very wise, being we see that in effect men wax
worse every day, and the Children are worse than their Fathers, and Childrens
Children yet worse, because of the great corruption that is now among men,
which augments even visibly.

So that he that knows the Truth, will be loath to multiply this perverse
Generation, but will expect that men resume a true Christian Life, and so may
multiply in the spirit of Jesus Christ a holy Generation.

Lo, what they that are wise desire, but the ignorant think it a happiness to
produce Children Heirs of their Miseries, because themselves do not know them;
and so glory in their shame, without perceiving it: they would willingly be
great and rich, that they may have Means to please their Senses; and these
Pleasures ruin Soul and Body.

For since Nature was corrupted by sin, all the senses of man are become
brutish and insolent, and know no more what is good or evil for them,
intemperate, without order or measure; and therefore the Scripture says, that
the Eye is never satisfied with seeing, nor the Ear with hearing; to show how
our senses are disordered and insatiable: the more the eye sees, the more it
would see, and so the ear hear, and they are never satisfied. It is the same
with the Feeling, Smelling and Taste, the other three senses.

For whenever a man gives himself to satisfy his senses, he is never fully
satisfied nor content: For in every place he may find something that smells
unpleasantly; and though he carry about Musk and Civet, that will not hinder
that he breath not in the bad Exhalations and Vapors of the Air, caused by the
corruption and filth of the bodies of Men and Beasts, although he had but the
stink of his own body, since all that proceeds out of it is nasty and putrid,
which cannot satisfy his smell, which desires always good smells and
agreeable; and in loving that, we can never be content nor satisfied.

And yet less can we satisfy the sense of feeling, it being insatiable. They
would have fine Linen, Silks, soft Beds, smooth Coverings, and other things
agreeable to the touch, which is not content with things that are sufficient.

But the sense of Taste exceeds all the others in disorder and intemperance.
For he that will satisfy his taste and delicacy, renders himself miserable,
and in continual dissatisfaction: For when he has one food that is good, he
desires another as better; the Wine is too sharp or stale for him, the Beer is
too sweet for his delicate taste: he longs always for what he has not, and
what he cannot get: so insolent are man's natural senses, that they often
tyrannize over the spirit with a thousand tortures of Desires, Intemperances,
Lusts, Excess and Gluttony, which bring Diseases, Poverty and Death. And yet
they call him happy who has the means to satisfy his senses, without
discovering that they are corrupted by sin, and therefore they beget all sorts
of Evils; which she prays you to discover, who wishes your good.

Holstein near Gottorp Castle 15. Febr. 1672. St. vet. ANTONIA BOURIGNON.

THE VI LETTER. Humility is attained by Knowing our selves.
To the same, who is admonished to learn Humility by knowing the truth of our
Corruption and Sin, which is the disorder of our natural senses.

My Dear Child;
I Cannot entertain you too much of the Corruption of man, and the Miseries to
which he is subject during this miserable life, to prevent your ever placing
your affections on it; but that you may learn the Humility of Heart which Jesus
Christ teaches, which will follow upon the knowledge of your self: but you
shall never attain it unless you examine in retail the miseries and infirmities
of your body and spirit, since it is that knowledge which should teach you the
Humility of Heart which Jesus Christ requires.

For if you remain in the general ignorance of men, you shall never attain to
it: you will always think you deserve Honor and Esteem, seeing others like
your self honored and esteemed; and that they also take their pleasures and
sensualities, more than you do. But trust me (my Dear Child) that conduct
proceeds from the blindness of their minds, and from the profound darkness in
which they are, without perceiving it: and they blind one another still more by
their practice; for one thinks he is as good as the other, and that he may do
what another does; and so one follows another blindfoldly, and thinks he does
but what is suitable for an honest man to do.

But however great the number of blind are, that will not help you in
particular; and that broad way will always lead to perdition, tho many tread
it. The great number of miserables will not lessen your condemnation; on the
contrary, it will augment your pains and miseries, far from any ways mitigating
them.

Therefore is it that you must not regard if others be blind, and know not
themselves, esteeming themselves, and following their sensualities; for you
shall not give an account for them. There shall only your own works follow you
at Death, and according to them shall you be judged. God affords you now the
occasion of Discovering the truth of all things; beware of neglecting it; but
bless the Lord; for it is a great mercy he shows you beyond so many thousands
of persons, who perish for want of knowing themselves, and for having never
discovered the truth of things as they are before God. They amuse themselves to
look one to another, without penetrating into the state of man, and what he is,
whence he is, and whither he tends; though it is a thing of so great import, on
which our eternal salvation depends.

Therefore I exhort you to lay to heart the knowledge of your self, seeing that
must rule all your actions, and make you become humble of heart, as Jesus
Christ teaches us to be. The truth of all things should deliver you from all
evil; that is also the mistress of virtues; for if you possess the Truth of
God, that shall teach you all virtues, and deliver you from all vice: for the
cause why man is vicious, and not virtuous, is because he knows not the truth
of things; and takes the Shadow for the Body, the Bark for the Wood; and so
goes from evil to worse.

For if he knew truly what sin is, and what virtue, he would deliver himself
from the one to attain the other: since he would see clearly that sin is a mere
Tyrant, which tortures Soul and Body; and that virtue is beautiful, good,
sweet, and pleasant. And so he could not retain himself from hating sin, and
loving virtue, seeing that is good and equitable; but for lack of knowledge of
things, they love what they should hate, and hate what is lovely: and to show
you what sin is, know, that in it self it is nothing but a disorder of
corrupted nature.

For when God created man, he was well ordered, temperate and regular in all
his natural functions: and he might enjoy the pleasure of all his senses
without doing evil; because all that God made was good; and he created
beautiful things to please his sight, and all the melodies of Beasts, Men, and
all melodious things to afford pleasure to the hearing; and all Flowers and
pleasant smells for his smelling; and all smooth and agreeable things for his
feeling; and all good and savory things to afford pleasure to his Taste: so
that he could allowably enjoy the Pleasures of all his five natural senses;
because all the other Creatures were created for the pleasure and recreation of
Man; who was so perfect, that he used all these things only for his recreation,
with just order, weight and measure; in praising his and their God: and in that
state he could not be disagreeable to him.

But after that he would abandon his dependence on God, and become wise in
himself; he has overturned all that beautiful order established by God; and
has brought into his nature all sorts of evil, disorder and corruption; and
that is called sin: which is nothing else but a disorder of the five senses,
which man can no more satisfy without sinning, they being corrupted and
disordered: for if the eye please it self now in looking on beautiful and
pleasant things, it is only to satisfy it self; and not to refer them to God
their Author, as he did before sin: and if he hears melodious Sounds and
Harmonies, it is only to delight and recreate himself, and that in this valley
of miseries, where he ought rather to mourn in embracing the chastisements of
God because of sin: and if he will satisfy his Smell by good odours, it is to
repel the putridity which sin has brought upon nature: and if he will satisfy
his Feeling, it is but to defile his Soul by unlawful pleasures, which he takes
in feeling; for it is not allowable for him to take pleasure in any of his
senses after by sin he has overturned the order which God established.

And if he will satisfy his Taste, he will fall into all sorts of evils; for
giving up himself to his palate, that brings Intemperance, Gluttony, Poverty,
Sickness, and Death; as also Avarice, Deceit, Riot, and other Sins; which
proceed from the pleasure in Taste, which is as a Mother, which engenders all
sorts of evil. For a glutton must needs covet Riches to satisfy his appetite;
and if he has them not of his own, he endeavors to get them by any means he
can, if it should be Falsehood or Robbery. For the Taste is insatiable, and is
not content with a few things. I have known persons addicted to the pleasure of
Taste, who spent upon dainties great Riches which they possessed: and yet were
never content, but continually desired what they had not; and having gotten
what they desired, perhaps would not taste it; but send again to seek some
other thing; and so consumed and ended their life in poverty, and without
satisfaction.

I have known others, that would come that length to take the goods of others,
to satisfy their delicacies; and said to me, That their Tongues could not be
deprived of the pleasures of Taste, and they must needs satisfy it. I suppose
there are more such, though not known by me; for the appetite of Taste is so
bound up with the flesh, that it is hardly overcome, having once got entrance,
and being accustomed to please their taste. And this pleasing the Taste begets
Lust also, by the affinity of the Belly with the genital parts, which are
stimulated according as the Belly is well pack't. Moreover, the Appetite breeds
Gluttony; for when it find's food agreeable, it devours to excess and
intemperance; which causes several diseases, and sometimes Death.

For we see by experience, that several have become sick, and even died, by too
much eating or drinking, or gluttonously eating things contrary to their
health; which falls out but too frequently.

And notwithstanding all this, we see so many follow this sense of taste, which
begets so many evils in prejudice of soul and body, and that because they know
not the truth of things, and have imagined a pleasure and contentment, where
there is nothing but displeasure and miseries. For if they knew truly what is
in the five natural senses of man, they would see nothing there but vanity and
misery, since they were corrupted by sin: and consequently would never follow
them, but resist them in every thing, seeing they are truly vain; which they
may see that will examine them narrowly: for what is in the sense of seeing, but
a pleasure which is past in a moment: If, for example, looking on a beautiful
thing, you shut your eyes, in that instant you see it no more, and in your
regard, it is no more; and if after by opening your eyes, you see it again,
that sight adds nothing to your soul or body, which cannot be nourisht by
sights if you should continue them from morning till evening; all that cannot
nourish nor fill us, nor give any thing but an airy pleasure to our eyes, which
also will not be refresht by these sights; for the more they see, the more they
would see. Wherefore the Scripture says, The Eye is never wearied with seeing,
nor the Ear with hearing; for these two senses are insatiable, and never
satisfied; for the hearing is as vain as the sight, and seems even of less
consideration; because it has less impression upon the mind, and passes as a
blast of wind which we neither see nor feel more when it is gone. It is even so
with Harmony and Sounds; for it is but a body of wind formed in the air, and
dissipated in it, and leaves nothing in him that has heard it. No more does
also the sense of Smell, yielding only a small satisfaction to the Nostrils,
and flys away with the wind, without leaving any thing in him that felt it, who
is as ready to be filled again with stink as he was with perfume.

So that we may see by experience, that the five senses are truly vain and
unworthy to be followed and affected by persons of judgment, and that would
come to the knowledge of the truth: for one must be a fool and blind to place
his affections in things so unworthy of man, as are the pleasures of his
senses, which pass like smoke; and cause so great evils to them that follow
them, both spiritual and temporal: for he that will give his senses their
pleasure, wounds body and soul, and renders himself miserable in all his life;
for he cannot have satisfaction and complete contentment by all the world; and
he wastes his goods to please his senses; wounding his health by intemperance,
and killing his soul by sin; which is the disorder of his natural senses. For
since they were corrupted, they have engendered death, bodily and spiritually in
man, who cannot love his sensualities without turning away from God, and
consequently deprive themselves of all good, and subject themselves to all
sorts of evil; for there can be no good without God, but all sorts of evil.

And it is that (my Child) which I entreat you to consider, that you may never
place your affections but in God; and may renounce your senses, seeing they are
corrupted, and contrary to the will of God, and in themselves evil and vanity.
For what is in feeling but a sensual softness, which adds nothing to man, and
is so mean and unworthy of a man, that he would never seek pleasure therein if
the devil did not persuade him that there is something in it; it is so frail
and contemptible, that it is not worthy a man's notice, or that he should
account it pleasure, since it is but imaginary, not real.

The sense of taste seems to have some pleasure in it, seeing there are persons
that have no greater pleasure in the world than to eat and drink well; and that
sense adds somewhat to man's body: Yet it is more replenisht with miseries than
the other four, because it hurts more both the soul and body of man* seeing it
causes so many diseases, and even death, by its excesses; and also, so many
souls damn themselves in striving to satisfy the pleasure of Taste, which
leads them to several other sins; and withdraws them assuredly from the love of
God, who requires to have our affections alone; For he is a jealous God; and
notwithstanding we place them in things vile and corruptible, as are meat and
drink. For what is more naughty than meat and drink? They have scarce past the
throat but they become putrid and corrupt, and especially the more fine and
delicate corrupt more than the courser.

And for all that people love them, bestowing pains and travail to attain them;
which is a gross blindness of mind; from which I pray God preserve you, that
your love may remain in God only, and you may know the truth of all salutary
things; in the desire whereof I remain

Your Well-wisher in Jesus Christ. ANTONIO BOURIGNON.
Holstein near Gottorp Castle 17. Febr. 1672. St. vet.
THE VII. LETTER. He that serves the Lusts of his Senses, by that same
Renounces the Love of God.
To the same, exhorting him to the effects of Humility, by the Renouncing of
his senses; showing him, that no man can follow them, unless thereby he
renounce the Love of God, which is the end of our Creation, and the essence of
true Virtue.

My Dear Child;
I Deduced to you in my last, how vain and miserable are the Pleasures of the
Senses; and have showed you the truth of several things, that you might arrive
to the Humility of heart which Jesus Christ requires. It is much to understand
well these things* but also you must set about the practice* and embrace in
good earnest the mortification of your senses, following the truths you have
known: otherways its a small matter to know the Truth, if you put it not in
practice: knowledge is very good: for you cannot practice what you know not:
but if that knowledge be not fruitful, it cannot serve for our Salvation. We
must needs put to our hand, and war against our corrupt nature; otherways we
must die the eternal Death after the temporal.

Which may easily be conceived, since man's nature is corrupted by Adams sin;
and has quitted dependence on God, to depend of it self. It must then of
necessity remain in that corruption and sin, until every man for his own
particular have overcome that corruption and disobedience which he has
contracted against God: or else he abides in death, and dies damned eternally.

For although Adam had not sinned, all men in general and every one in
particular, could have sinned and corrupted his way, by leaving dependence on
his God; and that because, all the men that were, or shall be, are all created
free, and can continue in the dependence of God, and also recede from it, if
they please: for God forces no person. So that he that is arrived to the use of
Reason, has the same liberty to sin, and retire from dependence on God, that
Adam had before his sin: yet with this difference, that Adam at the beginning
had not in his nature that frailty and inclination to sin and evil which men
have; who proceeded from him after his sin: for they have contracted that
frailty and inclination to evil from their first father, and also the
infirmities of body which we see in all men, and feel in our selves; for no
person is exempt from the evils which sin has caused in man's nature: Though
it is free to all men to follow that inclination to evil, which they feel in
themselves; as also, they can, by the Grace of God, overcome their infirmities,
and the corruption of their five senses; in not following them, but fighting
against them.

And it is in that, that Jesus Christ says, we must take the Kingdom of Heaven
by Force, and the Violent take it so: That is, not that we should fight by
force to gain the Kingdom; for God created it for us, and he gives it us
freely: but it is, that we must resist with force the corruption of our nature,
that we may enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: and so that we approve not in us,
the sin which Adam committed, and do not of our own proper will retire from
dependence on God.

Therefore it is the Scripture says, Our Life is a continual Warfare: For we
must continually combat the corruption of our senses; without that, we can
never return to dependence on God, from which Adam's sin has withdrawn us;
seeing our senses (being corrupted) beget all sorts of evil; and there needs no
more but to follow them, and their inclination to turn us away from God, and
remain in the way of damnation.

For no sooner loose we the reins to our Sight, but it pleases it self to
behold beautiful or curious things; and no sooner have we considered them, but
we covet them. And if we yield to the sense of Hearing, the Heart delights in
it, and the Affection is drawn to it. It is even so with Smelling, where the
sensitive part takes pleasure. And if we please our selves in Taste, all our
care and study are put to search means to satisfy it and that sense is more
insatiable than any other, and precipitates into all sorts of sins. Moreover,
it excites the sense of feeling; for he that pleases his taste, seeks also to
satisfy his feeling with pleasure and satisfaction. Even all the five senses
are moved only by the love we carry to our selves, and desire of affording our
selves pleasure.

All these things withdraw us assuredly from God, and dependence on him; and
he has commanded us, to love him with all our heart. So that he wills not that
we fix our heart on things so frail and vile, as are the Sight, Hearing,
Smelling Taste, and Feeling: For it is unworthy of a divine Soul, which God
has given us, capable of loving an eternal God, who desires and commands that
we love him with all our heart. So that the man that has affection for his
senses, quits voluntarily the dependence of God, seeing he does not submit
himself to his will, who demands that, we should love him with all our heart.

And that is, from the disorder which the devil has caused in man's nature,
when he made it turn the affection upon the creatures, which is due to God
alone. In which consisted the first sin which man committed, and thence all
other sins draw their origin. For nothing can be evil or sin, but what is
committed against the will of God: and there is nothing but that can be evil,
as nothing can be good but what is done by his will.

So the Devil labored violently from the beginning of the world to pervert man
from the will of God, who had created him to delight himself with him, and
willed for that, that he should love him with all his heart. There cannot be
delight but with what is beloved; and therefore will God be loved of man with
all his heart; and that he place his affections in nothing else but in him
only. The Devil no sooner perceived that, but he enticed him by the five
natural senses (which are as the five windows of our heart) to withdraw his
heart and affections from God, and to place them on visible and sensible things.

The Devil then first moved Adam's heart to regard the beautiful Creatures,
which God had created for him; he moved also his sense of hearing, to give
attention to the false persuasions of that old Serpent; who made him believe,
that he should know Good and Evil, if he did eat the fruit of the Tree which
God had forbid him to eat of. He moved him to put his Hand to touch that Apple,
his Smelling to smell it, and his Taste to eat it: and by that means the Devil
carried Adam's Heart and affection to the Creatures, and turned him away from
the Love he owed to God.

If the Devil could have drawn man's Heart directly to love him, he had done
it: but because he is an invisible spirit, he could not move the five natural
Senses of man to love him. And therefore he served himself of visible and
sensible creatures, to get himself indirectly loved by man; that by moving man
to self-love, and to use all the other Creatures to satisfy his self-love, and
consequently withdraw him from the love of God, which he has done with too
much success, seeing he has caused Adam, and all that were to proceed from
him, to disobey against God: and so made him abandon that dependence, that he
would no more depend but upon his own will, and love nothing but himself.

Behold the miserable fall into which the Devil caused all men to fall into in
Adam: And they all in general are born in that misery and disobedience since
the fall of Adam; and come into the world with that evil inclination to love
themselves, and follow the corruption of their senses, which breeds all sorts
of sins, because they are now moved by an evil spirit, which is the Devil;
whence no good can proceed: for the privation of all good is the possession of
all evil. So that he that has rejected the love of God, and would not renounce
himself, has deprived himself of all sort of good, seeing there is no other
good but God; and is fallen into all sorts of evil, that is to say, into the
privation of all sorts of Good.

God never created any evil, but man produced it when he deprived himself of
the Love of God, in which alone consists all sorts of Good. And that is the
thing they call sin, which signifies to turn away, and desert God, who is all
good; and in the privation of him is all evil. So that he that has withdrawn
his affections from God, to place them in the love of himself, or of any other
creature, has abandoned all Good, and embraced all sorts of Evil. For there
can be no other evil but the privation of all good; into which man engages
himself, when he carrys his love and affections to any thing else than God. And
what Adam did once by the instigation of the Devil, men do it for their own
particular as often as they set their affections on any thing beside God only.

Observe a little, my Child, how often you have fallen into the same sin with
Adam, and loved any other thing than God alone: and also, if you are not
actually addicted to your self-love, and retired from the love of your God: but
I am not surprised at it, because you never knew that sin consisted in that,
and no person has taught you it: for the men of this time are ignorant of that
truth, as well as you; and they that are esteemed the most virtuous, are full
of self-love, though they think themselves free from sin, so far does the heart
of man deceive it self.

But for your part, be wiser; for though all men should go to perdition, you
must endeavor to save your own Soul. The great number of damned would not
diminish your torments if you should be damned with them, but rather augment
them, by the augmentation of cries, blasphemies, and noysomeness of Fire and
Brimstone, which shall augment in Hell with proportion to the number of damned.
And therefore I counsel you to leave that common tract of the blindness of men,
which esteem nothing sin, but the material things which they have prescribed
one to another to be evil. Things which God regards little, seeing he is a pure
Spirit, whom not only these gross material things offend, as they decifer sins;
as Drunkenness, Robbery, Whoredom and other material sins, blameable before
men: but God is offended to see the heart of man cleave to and love things so
vile; since he created him to love his God only, who will delight himself with
him: And yet man deserts God to delight himself in the satisfaction he takes in
eating, drinking and clothing, and recreation with any other creature.

Which hugely displeases God, and man becomes his enemy by disobedience, while
he acts against the designs God had in creating him after his own image and
likeness, to take his delights with him: notwithstanding man, against the
intention of God, delights in himself, and the Creatures that are less than
himself. For whatsoever is created under Heaven, is much below man, who is as
the head and principal of all the works of God, and was established over all
the other inferior works of God; being made as a little God in his divine
nature, which is enclosed in his Humanity.

But the Devil, envious of his happiness, from the instant of his creation,
strove to make him lose that part of the divinity which God had bestowed on
him, he rendered him sensual and earthly, to make him leave the love of divine
and heavenly things, which alone he ought to have loved; and by that means he
had enjoyed all the other creatures at pleasure; as master and Lord of all that
was subjected to him. But the proud Devil could not suffer man in dominion over
the other Creatures, he being rejected and banished from the friendship of God,
deprived of all good, and replenisht of all evil; so he by Rage and Envy
attempted to destroy man with himself, and make him companion of his miseries:
and seeing man composed of a body and a spirit, he insinuated into his spirit,
endeavoring to unite himself with him, under pretext of procuring good to him*
and so made him imagine that he should know all things as God, if he would eat
the fruit God had forbid him to eat of; and these thoughts being entered into
Adam's spirit, gained his affection, and made him forget the Love and Obedience
which he owed to God; beginning to love himself, and search the means for his
own satisfaction.

Now God had given man five natural Senses, that he might prove all that God
had created for him, provided he praised and thanked the Creator for so many
good things: but he began to use his senses to please himself, and attribute to
himself the Favors and Graces God had bestowed on him, as if they had been his
own, and he the Sovereign, independent on God: for he pleased himself to see so
many beautiful creatures, and attributed them to himself; and also to hear the
pleasant Melody which God produced in nature, pleasing himself in hearing them,
without referring them to God; the same did he in smelling, taking his
contentment in all the good Odours which God had made to show unto man his
liberality; giving him not only the things neeful for the sustenance of his
being, but also Delectable things to procure him pleasure: as are the objects
of Sight, Hearing, and Smell; and man could well have subsisted without the
pleasures of these; but God would oblige him to love him by excess of benefits:
and so created so many good and beautiful Creatures, only for pleasure to man,
having created all sorts of delicious fruits for his nourishment, and so many
other creatures to satisfy his feeling; that he might lack nothing for
sustenance, and pleasures, which he could use at pleasure, provided he blessed
the Lord who had made them for him.

But ingrate man falls from that acknowledgment of his God, and takes all his
gifts for his proper satisfaction: and so he left the Love of God, and has
turned to love himself; which has necessarily rendered him an enemy to God; for
such ingratitude is insupportable, though it were but committed by one man to
another. For what man would be satisfied, to have desired the friendship and
fidelity of another, having with that aim bestowed his goods on him in
abandance, and procured him all sorts of pleasures and recreations, that he
might faithfully keep friendship; if that ingrate Wretch forsook his
Benefactor, to take his pleasure in these same goods which he had so freely
received; how much more then should God resent the ingratitude of man, while he
places his love and affection in the things which God has so liberally
bestowed on him, to oblige him to love him? and yet man has forsaken him, and
pleases himself only in self-love.

That you ought to consider well, My Child, that you render not your self
guilty before that great Majesty, and Discover, if you be not obliged to
embrace voluntarily, Adam's penitence; since you have fallen so often in the
same sin, in quitting the love and Dependence of your God, to love your self,
and Depend on your proper will. So resolve to renounce your five natural
senses, which are assuredly actuated by the devil: for since he got power over
Adam's spirit, he has after had it over that of all men; and will have it so
long as they continue to live in their corrupt nature: from which I pray God
Deliver you, and I remain forever

Your Well-wisher in Jesus Christ. ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
Holstein near Gottorp Castle 18. Febr. 1672. St. vet.
THE VIII. LETTER. It is easier to love God than any other Thing.
To the same; to whom is shown, that we must renounce the evil use of our
senses; and that the right use of them ought to be referred to God: also that
it is possible, equitable, reasonable and necessary, to love God with all our
heart.

My Son;
I Will not believe, that you are one of those evil advised persons, who say,
there is little evil in following the motions of corrupt nature. God created
Nature, say they, and cannot be offended that we follow it. Several of my
Aquaintance have been of that mind; they were given to Lasciviousness, and told
me, That God would not punish them for that, seeing himself had given them such
a Nature; and that it was needful to use it to multiply the world: So
flattering themselves in their Sins, to satisfy their senses; and more, say
they, God has given all these to man, and we cannot be without Seeing;
Hearing, Smelling, Feeling and Tasting: That Is all true; but they had not light
enough, to discern the miserable state into which man is fallen, by Sin, from
that happy one into which God had created him.

For then in that state man could enjoy the Pleasures of his five Senses;
provided he loved and blessed God. But since he has fallen into sin, he can no
more enjoy them without offending God; because all the pleasure he now takes in
his five Senses, is only to satisfy himself for his own Glory and Advantage:
but before sin was, the satisfaction of his Senses served only to bless, praise
and glorify the Lord for the Benefits and Mercies he received of him. So that
he no sooner saw these beautiful things, but his heart was elevated to praise
God, who had given him these beautiful Objects, these Melodies, fragrant
Odours, delicious Tastes, and Feelings. So that whatever he saw or perceived
good or pleasant, was to him matter of blessing God, and magnifying him for his
Benefits.

But since man is fallen into sin, the same things are to him matter of
offending God: for if he sees any beautiful thing, he covets it to satisfy
himself, and that Self-love retires him from the Love of God: and that is it
which makes sin, seeing he has commanded us to love him with all our heart; so
that we cannot love these beautiful things, without infringing that Command;
seeing all our heart cannot be in the Love of God, when a part of it is upon
beautiful things, fine odours, melodies, delights of the taste and feeling: For
that is a heart divided into as many parts, as there are Different things it
loves; and consequently far from being entire in the Love of God, as he has
commanded us.

But men are so blind, and do so blind one another, that every one persuades
himself that he loves God, while he loves only himself. It is as if they
thought to please God with words, in saying with their mouth that they love
him: but they deceive themselves; for as long as they will satisfy their five
natural senses, they will not love God, seeing these being corrupt, will
engender all sorts of sin, and consequently the Death of the Soul.
Notwithstanding no man values these evils, and they think it is allowable to
satisfy their senses, and so follow them (often as much as they can) without
believing they do evil, and not apprehending that there is nothing more
Deceitful than the Heart of Man; which often flatters it self to its own
destruction.

But you, my Child, be more wise, learn the truth of things, without yielding
your self to be Deceived by false appearances. Never believe that it is
allowable to take any pleasure out of God, and far less that there is no evil
in following your five natural senses, since that cannot be without sin: for
though we give our affections but for an hour, to any thing that is not of God,
we are for that hour turned from God to the creatures, which is sin, since we
do in that, what God has forbid, viz. We cease to love him with all our heart.
For we ought to love him always without interruption; and therefore is it, we
must refrain our senses, and give them laws, that they take no other liberty
but to follow the will of God. We may well use these five natural senses, and
employ them to the Glory of God who gave them: for we cannot be without seeing,
hearing, smelling, feeling, and tasting; but we must not take pleasure in these
for our proper satisfaction: we must employ them only on things necessary; and
those that may serve to the Glory of God, and the good of our Neighbor.

For example, man is made up of Soul and Body; he has need to employ all his
five natural senses for the conservation of the one and the other: he must see
and behold all things that may serve him for the perfection of his soul, and
hear, touch, taste and feel them, loving them as the means of his salvation: He
must also look upon all things that he needs for entertaining his body; to
which his natural senses can afford him much help: for he must see things
necessary, as a House to Dwell in, Clothes to cover him, food to nourish him,
all that must be looked on. He must hear the means to obtain them; smell them,
that he take nothing hurtful in his aliments; touch and taste them for that
same end. For all things necessary are good; and it can never be sin, to use
them for necessity: But it is always evil to use them to satisfy our sensual
pleasures or self-love; because that is an affection we carry to our selves:
and our affection and love ought to be to God alone; not to things so base and
vile, which we may well use, but never love; seeing God will have our heart
entirely.

Which was figured by the earthly Paradise, where God placed man at the
beginning of the world: He gave him a full liberty to eat of all sorts of
Delicious fruit; but reserved that of one only tree, of which he forbad man to
eat: and that to let us understand, that God does permit us to use all the
Creatures, which he has created for us, provided we keep our affection for
himself only: so he forbids us to place it on any thing else; as marks the
first Command, to love God with all our heart; that is, that our heart ought
not to be Divided, and parted to something else, but be altogether to him. But
men do not penetrate that, as they ought; they persuade themselves, that it is
allowable to love diverse other things with God: in which they grievously
deceive themselves, while the Command, of God expresses punctually, viz. Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart: if then it had been
permitted, to love other things with God, he had not added with all thy heart.

We make questions and Disputes upon so many Mysteries of our faith, and so
many degrees of virtue; and we leave behind the principal piece, in which
consists all faith and virtues. For what shall it profit a man to have
penetrated all the secrets of Nature, and even all the Doctrines of Deep and
mysterious Theology, if with all that he fulfill not the Command of Loving God
with his whole heart? and have his heart Divided into many diverse affections,
all his knowledge will profit him nothing; we must then fulful that first
Commandment, to love God with all our heart.

I know well there are several glosses to explain how we must love God with all
our heart; one says, we must love him above other things, and where we have an
ounce of love to our Money, Honor, Pleasures, Parents, or even our self, we
must have a pound for God; and that so we fulfill that first Command, and love
God with all our heart. Others say, we must love him so, that if the case were
we must lose God, or our goods, parents or any other thing; that we should lose
all rather than quit God. Others say, it is impossible to fulfill that Command.
And so every one attempts to extinguish in the spirit of man, the knowledge of
the necessity of loving God with our whole heart: which is much to be lamented,
and afflicts the heart, seeing so many men prefer the Glosses and Sentiments of
men, to so express Ordinances of God. He had added in vain, the words, with all
your heart, if we might put a part of our affections or of our heart in the
creatures: Yet God never did any thing in vain. If he had not intended to show,
that men ought to love him, with all their affections indivisibly, he had not
added with all your heart.

Consider a little (my Son) with your self, by his grace, if God does not well
Deserve that we love him with all our heart: Our being, and all that we have,
is from him; that whole heart, with which he will be loved, he gave it us;
should not that be great ingratitude to refuse him, the heart he gave us
himself, to the end it might be for himself alone? He gives us to enjoy so many
Creatures, provided we keep our Heart for him, which is the only forbidden
fruit.

Is not that the least God could demand of man, in bestowing so many benefits
on him? Ought not man of himself to offer unto God his Heart; with all other
things although he were not commanded. Whatever we have or can have comes
immediately from him, and consequently all ought voluntarily to be offered unto
him, without constraint. Moreover, on whom can we better bestow our heart than
on God? and who can render it more happy than he? If we bestow it on our
Parents or Friends, they cannot render it happy and content, even in this
world. If we place it in the Riches, Honors and Pleasures of this world, all
these cannot satiate it, seeing they are like salt water; the more our heart
Drinks, the more it is parched. And therefore man is very unprovident to place
his affections in any other thing than in God. There is nothing but him that
can satisfy and render us happy and content; seeing in God alone is all sorts
of Good, and out of him all sorts of Evil.

Never rest then (my Son) on men's Discourses; for they are Liars and Deceivers;
and their glosses are invented only to flatter their looseness, and that of
others, who have no internal Light. So they say, it is impossible to keep that
Command of loving God with all our heart; and they say so because they have no
will to do it. But God can never command things impossible: beside, man's spirit
can easily comprehend, that it is not impossible to love God with all our
heart; for there is nothing more natural to man than love; and there is no
object more lovely than God. All that we see and know in nature, has some
defect; Fire is good, in that it warms and enlightens; but evil, in that it
burns and smoaks: Water is good, in that it refreshes and quenches thirst; but
evil, in that it is crude and cold; the Air is good for respiration, and to
purge bad vapors; but evil in that it has tempests: the Earth is good, for
producing fruits; but evil in that it is miery, and that it produces pricking
Thorns and Thistles: Gold, Silver, and other Metals are good, in that they
serve men's commodities; but evil for their heaviness and obscurity: all the
Plants and Fruits of the Earth have something of good and something of evil;
and also all beasts of the Earth, the Air, and the Water; and man especially is
composed of Good and Evil.

So that there is nothing amiable but God alone, since there can never be evil
in him; and out of him nothing good to be loved, all being accompanied or mixed
with evil. Evil is not an object of Love, nor worthy of our affection. Man then
is created to love, and there is nothing more natural to him than love: He must
needs love something: For he may be as soon without life, as without love; for
there is nothing but death puts an end to the love of earthly things; but the
love which is in his nature can never end.

It is created of God, who is eternal; it shall also endure eternally: but that
love can have diverse objects: one loves good things, another evil, a-third
things mixed of good and evil. Now he that loves good things, loves God, since
there is nothing good beside him, and all the good that is in the Creatures
comes from him: He that loves evil things loves the Devil, seeing there is
nothing evil, but what comes from him. For God has not created evil, nor any
thing evil, it is the Devil alone, who has produced all evils, in separating
himself from all good, and is by consequence fallen into all evil, which is
nothing else but the privation of all good. And he that loves the creatures,
loves an object composed of good and evil; for God created them all good, but
the Devil by his subtle malice has insinuated the evil into the good when he
gained man's will, who consented to that mixture of good and evil. For God had
created man free, so he would not hinder him to use that liberty, which he had
once given him. And therefore man is free, during this life, which is his time
of trial, where he may choose one of these three Objects, viz if he will love
God, or the Devil, or earthly Creatures. Now there is no doubt but God is the
most lovely Object, who has nothing of evil.

Wherefore then should it be impossible, to love God with all our heart, as he
has commanded? there is nothing so lovely as him; and beside, that love brings
us all sorts of good; for God is as powerful as lovely, and can render man
happy in time and in eternity: O what Quiet, Joy and contentment even in this
world has a person that loves God? and how much shall these Goods be
augmented in Eternity? What disquiet Grief and Trouble inwardly has a man that
loves the Devil? for let him do all the evil he can, he is never pleased nor
content: his Conscience can never be in quiet; and his joy can be only false
and apparent, because of the sadness which sin infallibly brings. For evil
blinds the Soul, fills the Heart with dark and melancholy thoughts, dulls the
Spirit, and tortures the Conscience as soon as the pleasure of the evil is
over. And after these temporal evils, he must look for greater and eternal
ones; because he has loved the devil, who can give nothing but torments,
having nothing else in his power. So that evil Object, is as little profitable
as lovely. It is the same with the Creatures, while we cannot love them without
the evils which they carry mixed with the good which God had put in them: And
all the creatures of whatever nature, have no power to render us happy neither
in this life nor in that to come: For if we love Riches (which are so much
loved now adays) we are their Slaves, because of the travail we must use to get
them, and the care and disquiet to preserve them: nor can they afford us more
than a little nourishment for our bodies, and Clothes to cover us, which the
poor can have also, and with less trouble: and if they think themselves happy,
because they can satisfy their taste in eating and drinking deliciously, that
is only a greater misery, causing infirmities and diseases, from which they
that live soberly, are free: And if we love some human Creature, we are yet
more miserable, seeing we so sell our liberty, and become subject to the
passions and inclinations of another. So that there is no happiness for the
man, that loves the creatures; seeing they have no power to make us happy in
this world, and far less in eternity.

And therefore there is nothing but the Love of God, which is profitable and
amiable for man; and no other Object: we must then conclude from thence, that
it is very possible to love him; and beside that, it is profitable and
necessary both for our temporal and eternal happiness, which I pray you to
believe.

Your Well-affectioned in Jesus Christ, ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
In Holstein, near Gottorp Castle, April 20. 1672. St. Vel.
THE IX. LETTER. That it is easier to Love God than any thing else.
To the same; to whom is shown, that it is most Easy, Profitable, Honorable,
Sweet and Pleasant to Love God, and keep his Commands, for him that will deny
himself: It is Blasphemy to say, that it is impossible to love God with all our
heart.

My Dear Child;
NEver suffer your self to be persuaded, that it is impossible to Love God with
all our heart, as these Ignorants falsely say: for there is nothing more easy,
sweet, pleasant, honorable, and profitable than to love God with all our heart.

First, it is most easy, seeing man is created to love, Love is the strongest
passion he has in his nature, so that he can no more be without love, than
without life; consequently it is very easy to follow that natural inclination,
where there in no need to do any violence, seeing the bent and inclination of
man tends thither of it self; and that its easy to follow a Love which is
engraven in all both soul and body. No person then need doubt that it is most
easy for him to love.

But some doubt if it is easy to love God, being he is an object invisible to
nature, and we cannot love what we Know not but with great difficulty.

That sentiment is altogether brutish, and cannot be in the mind of a
reasonable man, who by his reason can see; that there is a God, Author of all
things; and that there is no creature that has not its origin from a supreme
cause, who is its Author and Creator: or else they could not have being nor
existence. For although man be above all the other creatures, yet he cannot
give light nor heat to the sun, nor sustain the Waters in the firmament, nor
fructtifie the earth. All that must needs be from a supreme cause, whom he may
know by his operations, his understanding can see clearly, even by his bodily
eyes, in contemplating the beautiful order which is in all nature: we need but
consider the distinction of Seasons, the production of Herbs, Plants, Beasts,
and of men. And though we cannot see the author of all these things, yet we can
see his works palpably and visibly The savage Pagans did both know and confess,
that there is a God, Author of Nature: and there are Christians at present so
unnatural that they dare say, they know not God, because they see him not with
their fleshly eyes. And from that they will argue, that they cannot love him,
because they know him not. They render themselves in that like to the Beasts
which have no spirit to perceive other than natural things, and see them as
though they subsisted by themselves. But men, having a spirit more noble than
beasts, comprehend even by their natural spirit, that there is a God, Author of
Nature: which engaged some Pagans to set up Altars to the Unknow God. Some
other of them at the Death of our savior Jesus Christ said, Either nature is a
dissolving, or the God of Nature suffers. These things ought to make the
Christians of this time blush for shame, who say, They cannot love God whom
they see not: So they shall be more punished in Hell, than the Pagans that have
applied their spirit to know God, by nature. Whereas on the contrary, these
Christians do not at all study to know him, neither by Nature nor by Grace,
which they have received in the Evangelical Law; beside that which God gave to
Moses.

These brutish Christians, must neither believe nature, nor the Law of God; to
say, they cannot love God with all their heart, whom they do not know: For
though they knew not God by his works, which yet they see and touch; they
should at least know him by the Law of God, which would not enjoin to love God
if he were not. Seeing then there is a God, there is consequently an Object
amiable above all things; and man being full of love, ought to be easily
carried to love him: for love is always carried to good and beautiful things;
so that nothing should be more easy to him than to love God, who is the source
of all Good and Beauty.

But all the difficulty man finds now to love him with all his heart, comes
hence, that he does not apply his spirit to discover and meditate the works and
marvelous things of God; and so cannot know nor love him: but he gives himself
to regard the earthly creatures in themselves, and attributes to themselves the
little of good and beauty that is in them, and by that means carrys his
affections to love the gross Objects, which are visible and sensible to his
stupid senses.

It is difficult for such persons to love God; they cannot love heavenly
Objects, while they regard only earthly ones: as they cannot comprehend eternal
things, because they contemplate only transitory. And that is not because of
their incapacity, seeing God has made them capable of loving him: but because
by their free will, they choose to love the vile creatures more than him: and
it is that vicious choice makes them say, that it is impossible to love God;
and themselves make that impossibility. They are like persons, who staying in a
valley full of Snow, complain that they are cold, and that they cannot be
warmed among that Snow; which is very true: but if they would walk a little to
get out of that Snow, and get up to the Mountain, they should well feel, that
it is full easy to become warm, where the sun bestows his rays. It is even so
with earthly men, who please themselves in the Snow of worldly lustres: they
say and think, it is impossible to be warmed by the Love of God, which is also
very true, so long as they remain in the affections of the pleasures of this
valley of tears. For nothing can warm them in the love of God, while there; all
is but Snow, which cools them.

He that has his pleasures in carnal things, cannot have them in spiritual:
and he that puts his affections in perishing goods, cannot have them in eternal
ones: and he that takes his pleasures here in sensualities, cannot have them in
spiritual things; seeing all these things are contraries, which can never abide
together.

So long then as a man feels himself cold in the Love of God, it is a token
that he lives yet in affection to the things of this valley of Snow, which are
quenchers of the Love of God. He cannot then feel in himself other than an
impossibility (or at least, great difficulty) to love God with his whole heart.
But if they would quit their affection to this valley of misery, and mount up
to the consideration of eternal things; they should soon feel the Sun of
Righteousness warm our Soul, and the Love of God fill our heart, which would
not only find Facility therein, but also Sweetness, Pleasure, Honor, and
Profit: seeing in effect there is nothing more pleasant than to love God.

For me, I have experienced, that all love to the Creatures, is bitter, and
that the Love of God only is sweet and pleasant: for when I loved Riches, they
gave me abundance of trouble to preserve them; when I loved Honors, I found
there many bitter and piercing displeasures, when I was not esteemed or
honored as I wished; so that sometimes one Slight caused me more pain than a
hunderd Honors had given me contentment: When I loved the pleasures and
delights of this life, I found there great bitterness, because there is none of
these pleasures that carry not its own pain with it: for the pleasures of the
taste breed poverty and diseases, and are insatiable; they never satisfy: no
more than those of the flesh, which resemble Salt Water, the more one drinks,
the more drought. I have remarked that in several carnal persons, who (after
having ruined their Body and Health in satisfying their concupiscence) used all
means to cure their infirmities; and that to the end they might wallow yet more
in their nasty pleasures. And when I have loved any human Creature, it was
always painful for me to satisfy and please them; and the fear of offending or
loosing them, was unto me a continual anxiety. So that there is nothing but God
alone whom it is easy and sweet to love.

Nothing is more pleasant: for all other Loves have Grief mixed with their
greatest Pleasures; we see young people marry with joy; there is nothing but
mirth, Plays and Dances; but the Wedding is scarce over, and sometimes sooner,
when we see them sad and afflicted, pensive and melancholy; Diseases attacque
them, the Care of their Affairs and Household disquiets them, Fortune is against
them, and in the end their Pleasures terminate in diverse Griefs; the Pleasures
of the Flesh in Pains, those of the Palate into Diseases, Honor into Contempt
and Slights; even as Haman's Pleasure, when invited to the Queens Banquet,
changed into Grief, when he saw that Mordecai would not render him the honor
he desired; so do all earthly pleasures terminate in Displeasure and sadness.

So that we can find no other true pleasure in the world, but to love God only;
which is full pleasant, and also honorable: for what Honor is man capable of,
approaching unto that of loving a God so mighty? who created Heaven and Earth,
and all other things; and sustains them by his almighty power; and who can give
unto men eternal Salvation. If we count it Honor that we love a King, a
Prince, or other Person in Authority; how much ought we to think us honored
that we may love a God who is incomprehensibly good and wise? and what Honor
is it for a small Worm of the Earth, such as man is, that he may love God, who
desires to be loved of him; and even commands him to love him with all his
heart; As if God delighted to honor man; by requiring to be loved of him. And
the honor of loving God is so considerable, that it passes all that man is
capable of in heaven or on earth.

Moreover, it is also Profitable for him, seeing that love can render him happy
in this world and to all eternity. Whereas all the Creatures together cannot
procure us the one nor the other. What profit can we draw from the Creatures?
who are unable to give us a Day, yea an hour, or even a moments life. What
could they then to give us Eternal Life? All the advantage men can Draw one
from another, is a little Money, Honor, or Pleasure, which vanish, and most
part ends in pain and grief, as I have before shown.

And therefore we cannot truly call Pleasures the Advantages and Profits that
men cause one to another. No more ought we to esteem Honors, which are but a
blast of wind, which vanishes in the air of a small Disgrace, and so leaves
nothing in the person honored, but a piercing grief, that he is no more
honored. What profit is it for a man to get of his fellow a little more money?
It is only a more weighty charge to bear in this world; where the richest are
the most miserable; for they can never have more of their Riches, but a little
necessary nourishment and clothing to cover them: all the rest is superfluous
to them, and should serve others, seeing he must not take for himself, but for
pure necessity. What Is over gives only the Disquiet, Care and Trouble of
Dispensing or bestowing it.

So that a Lacquey is happier than his Master; he has no care but for himself;
but the Master must care for himself and all under him, and see that nothing be
wanting to them, or else his servants will upbraid or despise him. Is not that
a poor advantage, a little money that men can afford* and yet he that receives
it, is obliged to a thousand thanks; and beside, to take a more honorable
state; which brings him more Care and Disquiet than he had before he was so
rich. That testifies that nothing in this world can advantage man, or give him
true Honor, Pleasure, or Content. And so there is nothing but God, can render
man happy in this life, and that to come: seeing all the advantages men reap
one from another, serve but for their damnation. Their Pleasures retire the
Soul from God; their Honors cause them to fall into Pride, and their Riches
into Avarice, which leads them to the broad way of damnation; and
notwithstanding they fancy themselves happy, for having the good will of men;
which is cause of their eternal misery.

But so great is their blindness, that they cannot see these miseries, however
evident; They persuade themselves, that they are Happinesses, that their
Disquiets are Peace, and their Displeasures, Contentments. For how many persons
are there in the world, who study all the Days of their life to perfect
themselves in some Science, to be esteemed of men? how many that labor,
travail, and put themselves in several hazards to gain a little money? and how
many, that expose riches and life too, to preserve their honor? Although all
these things be vain, yet they love and esteem them, often more than they do
God: for we see them not do for him what they do for the Creatures; they render
to them painful and hard services; and imagine to themselves that there is more
difficulty to love God, than to love the World. Notwithstanding the Love of God
is easy, sweet, pleasant, honorable and profitable; as I have shown: but the
love of the world is disquieting, sad, without repose, honor or profit, for
time and for eternity.

Which you may remark (my Child) by the reasons I have above deduced to you;
which should open your eyes, to discern Falsehood from Truth: that you may never
give place to the false persuasions, which the blinded Christians would
establish. They say, it is impossible to love God with all our heart; and so
blaspheme against him. For God could not command an impossibility: but all that
he commands is good, easy, and pleasant. And if you consider narrowly his ten
commands, you shall find but two of action, viz. That of loving God; and the
other to honor Father and Mother. The other eight are but prohibitions to do
evil: as not to kill, steal, bear false witness, and the rest.

Is it then impossible to abstain from committing these evils, that these
blinded minds say it is impossible to keep the Commands of God? Believe not
these falsehoods, but constrain your self to get out of that valley of Snow,
which is the Riches and Pleasures of this life; and ascend to the Mount of
Consideration of things eternal, and you shall find it pleasant to love God: to
which you shall have the helping hand of her who is

Your Well-affectioned in Jesus Christ, ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
Holstein near Gottorp Castle 25. April 1672. st, vet.
THE X. LETTER. The Love of God is easy, and renders all things easy.
To the same, to whom is shown, that the Love of God is in its self most easy
to attain; whence proceed the difficulties that occur in it, and how to be
removed; that this love wonderfully lightens the incommodities of this life,
and renders the observing the commands of God and the Gospel-advices easy.

My Dear Child;
BElieve firmly that the words of Jesus Christ are true, viz. That his Yoke is
easy, and his Burden is Light; and take his counsel in taking his yoke, which
you shall feel to be such, if you will take it on.

I experience it daily more and more; believe that you shall experience it, as
I do, if you continue in the resolution to follow Jesus Christ, and become his
true disciple. I will not promise that you shall have in his service sensual
Pleasure, or worldly Riches, and vain Contentment: but I promise you assuredly
Quiet of Conscience, Tranquillity of Spirit, an inward Peace and contentment in
your Soul: Which are things far more estimable than the vain Pleasures and
impure Contentments, and abundance of the Riches of this world; which can
never satisfy our souls, being they are spiritual, and cannot consequently be
satisfied with material things.

Therefore is it that there was never any man perfectly content and satisfied
in this world, unless he loved God with his whole heart. There is no other but
such an one who can be entirely content: for only the Love of God is capable
fully to satisfy our souls; for they are little divinities which cannot be
fully contented out of God, from whom they proceeded.

Therefore must you (my Child) labor to attain to that love: for when you have
truly found it, you shall have all things, and you shall reign over all the
world, having in contempt all that is not God. And you have no violence to use
with God to obtain his love, seeing he gives it liberally and freely, to all
that desire and ask it: and even compels men by an express Command which he
has given them: but you must do a little violence to your self to obtain that
love; because your affections are carried to other things than him, so you must
reclaim them, and constrain them to return to their God, and in that, you shall
have so many combats, as you have habitudes to love other things than God. If
you be then strongly addicted to self-love, or Love of other Creatures, your
combats shall be so much the greater.

But the business deserves suffering well, seeing after we shall enjoy so great
Good temporal and eternal, we should spare nothing to gain such a Treasure; the
Pain shall pass swiftly, and the Joy endure eternally. And therefore you must
suffer willingly, to retire your affections from earthly things, and place them
in God alone. I have sufficiently shown you in my last, that, that is good,
pleasant, honorable and profitable. It remains for you now to put it in
practice.

Examine once, what it is that you love beside God, and then detest that love,
and withdraw from it your heart: If you love objects without your self, flee
from them, as the enemies of your good; loose from them your heart, and desire
no more to see them. And if your Affections be occupied in Self-love, remove
them from an object so little lovely, to place them in God, who only merits
your affections, and nothing else. Protest then against that natural
inclination of Self-love, and yield no more any thing to that nature, but
things purely necessary; for it is your greatest enemy, to which you must not
furnish Arms to fight against you the better. You must know, that corrupt
nature wars against the Love of God, as far as you yield to it; So give it the
least satisfaction you can, even till you have overcome it: withdraw then from
it your Affections; you must restrain it as a Horse with Bridle, that it kick
not; nor attempt, but to serve the master you love.

Behold the means to render you free to love God with your whole heart: for as
soon as your affections are retired from all Creatures, they will be assuredly
carried to love God their Creator; because the Love of God is the element of
our Soul; in which only it can live, recreate and repose it self. That Love of
God is the true center of our Souls, whither they fall of themselves so soon as
they are disengaged of other affections, which are all vain. It is as with a
Stone thrown into the Air, which will not rest till it fall on the Earth, which
is its center, unless it be retained with bonds or other thing.

It is the very same with man's Soul, which is thrown into the air of the
Vanities of this world; It cannot find rest there: if we did not retain it by
Force, by Baits and Allurements of Affection for earthly things, doubtless it
would presently fall into the Love of God, which is its center and element;
where it can rest and recreate it self to satisfaction; because the Soul has
nothing more suitable to its nature, than God, from whom it proceeded; and it
can never repose till it be returned to him; and when it is compelled to remain
out of its element; it is as a Fish which by Nets and Lines is forced out of
the water: which is to it very disagreeable, and causes to it Death, if it be
not quickly returned into the water.

The same happens to the Soul, when it suffers it self to be entangled in the
nets of earthly Affections; it must quickly die, because it cannot find there
an element suitable to its divine nature, and so it languishes, withers, and
dies an eternal death; unless it break the nets of earthly Affections, to
return to its element, which is the Love of God.

You must, my Son, labor that you may break all the bonds of earthly
Affections: and so soon as you feel affection for any thing, that is not God,
rescind it quickly; for it is a chain which retains you out of your element:
and though it should be painful for you to loose your heart, from any thing to
which it enclines, these Pains shall quickly change into Consolations: for you
shall no sooner be returned into the Love of God, but you shall bathe in ease
and pleasure, as fish newly returned to the water, which is its element. It is
for that Jesus Christ says, that his yoke is easy, and his Burden Light. He
calls a Yoke our natural inclinations, because we must constrain and retain
them; and they are troublesome and grievous to bear. For if we follow them, we
precipitate our selves into a thousand Evils; seeing nature, being corrupted by
sin, enclines always to evil. And these evils are often troublesome and weighty
to bear.

I know well, that to us it seems grievous, that we may not in any thing follow
our natural inclinations: but if we take on that Yoke for the Love of God, it
will become light and easy to us, as Jesus Christ has taught.

No person can dispense or excuse himself from bearing it, since our first
Father Adam laid it on the shoulders of all his Posterity; all men in general,
and every one in particular, are charged with the miseries which sin brought
upon human nature. They are all subject to Heat, Cold, Intemperance of the Air,
Hunger, Thirst, Infirmities and Diseases of the Body, to Ignorance, and
Inconstancy of Spirit, and the disorderly motions of Passions; for sin has
brought all these things upon man's nature, which God created altogether
perfect: but since all men have pertaken of Adam's Sin, they are also subject
to his Penitence.

That is the Yoke which God has given man to satisfy his divine Justice: So
that all men coming into the world must bear that Yoke; will they or not, none
can evite it. And it is a happiness which man has had above the Angels, while
he can have Pardon of his sin, for a small time of Repentance, as is this short
life: for the disobedient Angels were confined to Hell without remission:
whereas man is only sent for a small time to this world, to do Penitence, and
after return to God, whence he proceeded. And therefore men ought voluntarily
to embrace that Penitence, to satisfy the Justice of God, when it is so light
and short, in regard of eternal Damnation; to which the Angels were condemned
when they disobeyed God. And that Penitence is light and easy, when we will
bear it as a Yoke, which God has given us for our sins.

Therefore also Jesus Christ calls it his Yoke, and not ours; to make us
understand, that all the miseries of this life are light and easy, when we
receive them from the Hand of God, and to satisfy his divine Justice: but that
same yoke, the same miseries are full heavy and grievous, when we bear them
grudgingly, or seek to be delivered, and discharged of them; which cannot be in
this valley of tears, which is only a Prison of Penitence, where we must stay,
until the time of our Penitence be over, to some longer then to others,
according to the sentence of the great Judge.

But if we will take this Life of Penitence for a time of delights and
Pleasure; we must make an eternal Penitence, which shall never end, and begins
even in this life: For although we should employ all the powers of our spirit,
and forces of our body, to charm our Miseries or evite sufferings; they will
not leave us for all that. And whatever we do or say, we must always feel heat
and cold, diseases of body and troubles of spirit, the changing of seasons, and
revolutions of times, and so many other accidents which befall man, during the
course of his life: All that must be troublesome and painful to him, if he take
it not as the Yoke of God: but if he embrace it affectionably as Jesus Christ
did, all shall be light and easy to him; as were unto our Savior Miseries,
Persecutions, Torment, and even Death: not that his nature was insensible of
the Pains and Torments which they caused him; but he suffered all for the Love
of God, which made the most heavy Burdens, and the bitter Gall of his cruel
Passion appear to him easy, light and pleasant.

If you will, my son, be his Disciple, and become a true Christian, embrace
with him all the Miseries of this present life: suffer patiently what ever
befalls you contrary to your will; and above all, deny and renounce your self,
as Jesus Christ your Captain taught and practiced. He warred against the
inclinations of corrupt nature in every thing. For because they tend always to
Greatness and to receive Honor, he choosed Meanness and Contempt: because they
tend always to covet riches, he would be poor: and because they seek always
their ease and Pleasure, he chose uneasiness and sufferings. So that he always
crushed the inclinations of corrupted Nature; constraining it by the Bridle and
Yoke of the Love of God, doing every thing contrary to the inclinations of that
corrupted nature.

Behold your Captain, who marches before you, and calls you to follow him;
saying, If any man will come after me, let him take up his Cross, and deny
himself, and follow me. You must not, my Son, seek any other Master, nor hear
other Doctrine; for men deceive and are deceived; who will take another way,
than Jesus Christ took; or will enter into life eternal, by means quite
contrary to those which he used himself. If there were another way of
salvation, Jesus Christ would have taught us it, and had followed it himself;
seeing all he did upon the earth, was to give us an example that we might
follow and imitate him. If then there were any thing better than to renounce
our corrupt Nature, doubtless he had taught us it. Never go to persuade your
self, that men are too frail to observe the Law of God and the Gospelcounsels;
seeing the one and the other was given us only for our frailty: for if we had
been perfect, we had not needed any Laws: It is sin which has brought these
Laws upon man.

Yet you must not believe that the Laws are evil, seeing they are very good,
and are the true means of our salvation: For without them man had never known
his sins, and had insensibly abandoned God; living without stop, worse than a
Beast, not feeling nor knowing his misery. You must know, that Adam was not
ashamed to see himself naked, before God called him, asking him, Adam, where
art thou? yet he had sinned, and his Wife also, in the Absence of God; and
lived still freely after their sin, as they had done before: but so soon as God
called them, they began to fear and tremble, and be ashamed: which made them
flee and hide themselves from him, not daring to appear before him as formerly.
The same effect did the Law of God in men's minds in Moses's Days; for then also
had they quite forsaken their God, and lived without minding their duties,
giving themselves up to all sorts of sins, without knowing them; and for that
would God give them a Law, that by it they might know their sins, and so
abstain from committing them. That Law was composed of ten Commands, or ten
things that they were to observe. It is not a Burden laid upon men by God, as
some ignorants say, blaspheming God. He has not given them Commands which are
impossible for them to observe; for these things were to be observed in all
times, although they were not distinctly commanded or forbidden. Natural reason
ought sufficiently to have taught man, that he should not Kill, Steal, commit
Adultery, bear False Witness, Covet his Neighbor's Goods, nor take the name of
his God in vain: And that same natural reason was sufficient to show them, that
they ought to love God with all their heart, since they had received of him
their being, and all other things, and received continually benefits for their
sustenance. The same natural Light was sufficient to show to man that he should
Honor his Father and Mother; since they have brought us up, cared for us,
nourished and taught us in our tender age. For ingratitude is an unnatural
thing; for even the most savage Beasts acknowledge their Benefactors.

So that the Law of God, has not charged man with any thing, that he was not
obliged to in all times. For from his creation, he was obliged to Love God with
all his heart, and to honor Father and Mother; which are the two things
commanded in the ten commands: the other eight are only Prohibitions of doing
evil; which man was always obliged to abstain from, and ever shall. And the
cause why God has declared these things in form of Commands, is man's
infirmity; who had so forgotten his duty, that he committed evil without
knowing it; and should become still worse, if the Law of God had not been given
him, as a Voice to reclaim him, and to ask him, as to Adam, where art thou? for
without that Law, he had not known his sin.

It is given him as a Light in the midst of his darkness, and as a Medicine,
for his Evils: But men now adays call these mercies weighty Charges, yea
insupportable to their frailty: which is a gross ingratitude, and deserves to
be punished, and that God should withdraw his Mercies from these ingrate and
stupid persons, seeing they overturn the benefits of the Law of God, and the
sweet and light Yoke of the Evangelical Law into Chastisements and
insupportable Burdens; saying, that it is impossible to observe them: and so
they belie the word of Jesus Christ, viz. That his Yoke is easy, and his
Burden Light.

Believe your Savior, my Son, and hear not these lying men, that say the
contrary: Abandon your self to God, embrace the Evangelical Law; and you shall
know by experience, that his Yoke is easy, and his burden light. Which she
assures you of, who remains

Your Well-affectioned in Jesus Christ, ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
Holstein, near Gottorp Castle, April 20. 1672. St. Vet.
THE XI. LETTER. We must always Advance in Virtue, whatever Impediments come in
the way.
To the same, who is encouragad in the way of true virtue; although the
beginning be difficult, because of the temptations with which the Devil vexed
them that have resolved to embrace true Virtue.

My Son;
NEver weary in the Service of God; the beginning of it is the difficultest.
You know that Rose-bushes bear thorns before they bear Roses: it is the same
with true Virtue. It begins with Thorns, a little pricking to corrupt nature:
but beautiful Roses will come in their season. True virtue has nothing
pricking in it, no more than the Rose; for it is altogether sweet, beautiful
and fragrant; nothing is sweeter than virtue. It gives Peace and pleasure to
the Soul; for Peace and Joy are fruits of the Holy Spirit.

O what Peace and Contentment has a virtuous Soul! it seeks nothing, fears
nothing, nor hopes nothing, but in the promises of its God. It acquiesces in
his providence. It yields it self to be conducted sweetly at the will and
pleasure of the Lord. It is not disquieted nor straightened by any thing, but in
peace expects what God will dispose. It affects nothing, precipitates nothing;
knowing that patience and Long-suffering are the fruits of the Holy Spirit. It
is meek in it self, and toward its Neighbor: for Goodness, Meekness, and
gentleness are also fruits of the Holy Spirit, which he produces outward in the
soul he possesses. A virtuous soul is always modest and moderate in all its
actions, chaste, continent and full of charity; because the Holy Spirit, who
produces in it true virtue, produces also his twelve fruits, which are sweet
and agreeable to God and Men. So that true Virtue, is desirable, for the
sweetness it carries in it self: It is desirable for its. Beauty; for nothing
is more agreeable and beautiful, than true Virtue; for all good persons esteem
and honor it, seeing it is more estimable and honorable than all created
things. It can well abide a narrow search and near view; for the neavrer we
approach it, the more we discover its beauty. It is also fragrant, as the Rose;
for true Virtue relishes in the nostrils of every one; even of the Wicked, who
often are engaged to esteem it, although they will not follow it. And if we
hear sometimes well inclined persons, despise true Virtue, it is because they
know it not, and have been often deceived with apparent Virtues, wherewith the
men of this time are filled, which causes that the true is not so relished as
it should: but though it be not known nor esteemed among men, yet it is sweet,
pleasant, and savoury unto God, who loves true Virtue as his Spouse, because it
is united inseparably with him.

And therefore (my Child) you must endeavor to acquire that beautiful Rose of
true Virtue; although you should feel the pricking of Thorns in the plucking
it. These pains will quickly pass, but the beautiful Rose of Virtue will never
fade. It shall be eternally beautiful, and of a good savor before God: so you
must spare nothing, to acquire true Virtue. If you feel pains therein, they
shall change into repose: if you feel Grief, it shall turn to Joy: if
Repugnance, it shall be changed into Contentment: for there is only the
beginning which is difficult in the acquest of true Virtue.

The reason is, because it is then the Devil uses all means to divert us from
it: He knows well that he can gain nothing upon us when we have acquired it;
and so he uses all his forces at the beginning, to hinder us from arriving at
it: that is the reason, why the Scripture says, My Son, if thou will embrace
true virtue, prepare your Heart for Temptation.

But the Devil leaves them in quietness, who have only apparent virtues; or
those that have only good desires; because he can ensnare them at his pleasure:
The first by presumption of their salvation, because of apparent Virtues; and
the others in precipitating them unto death, before they have brought their
good desires to effect: knowing well, that Hell is paved with Good-wills, which
men had in this world, without putting them in practice: And therefore he
leaves all such persons in peace, as well as the Worldlings; knowing well, that
he shall not miss them at one time or other: and so he leads them softly to
Hell, with a silken rope, without vexing or tempting them much.

But such, as have truly resolved to follow Jesus Christ, and embrace true
Virtue; he labors night and day to tempt them, and by all means, because he
knows, that he needs not pretend more to it, when they have arrived at true
Virtue. Then they shall laugh at him and all his assaults; and so he attempts
to shake them at the beginning, and to make them lose heart in considering the
difficulty there is in acquiring true Virtue.

First he shows them the Pains and Thorns, which they shall find in the
mortification of their senses: After he represents an impossibility to attain
to so great perfection: He shows them also the example of other persons, whom
they esteem good persons, and tending to true Virtue. For it is enough to them
to make a morally good outside, without being at the trouble to mortify their
five natural senses, nor to renounce themselves: and the Devil persuades them,
that that is not necessary for their salvation; but he is but a Deceiver and
Seducer of Souls, that he may in the end render them partakers of his Miseries.

Keep your self, My Son, from his deceipts, and give no ear to his suggestions;
nor to the Infirmities of your Nature. For neither the one nor the other can
hinder you to arrive at true Perfection; provided you have a firm Resolution,
God will assist you, and give you all that you need, if you remain faithful to
him: And after you shall see, that through God you can do all things, and shall
say with David, With my God I leap over walls. For so great is the power of
true Virtue, that it makes appear light the things that are most grievous to
nature.

That is it which Jesus Christ intended by the comparison, If you had Faith as
a grain of Mustard Seed, you should remove Mountains: It was not so marvelous a
thing to remove Mountains of Sand and Stone, seeing that would add nothing to
our soul: but he speaks of Mountains of difficulties, which we find in the
acquisition of true Virtue. It appears at the beginning as an inhabitable
Mountain, whither one can never arrive.

But if the Soul persevere faithfully in its good Resolution, it will revive by
Faith in the Promises of God; and with it will remove all these Mountains of
imaginary difficulties; since in effect there is no difficulty in the acquiring
of true Virtue We have no sooner abandoned earthly Affections, but we mount
with ease unto true perfection; for all the difficulties we apprehend, are but
false visages, which the Devil has placed, as Vizards to frighten them that
begin in true virtue. But we need not fear, for the Mask being taken off, we
find true Virtue, which is sweet, pleasant and agreeable. And he that has once
discovered and known it, finds no difficulty in it afterward; but on the
contrary much Quiet and consolation. Though the Devil will never cease to tempt
and pursue us. He tempted Jesus Christ, and pursued him even to the Desert,
whither he had gone by the conduct of the Spirit of God.

Therefore we must not be shaken, by the Tentations which the Devil makes us;
but we must despise him, as an Enemy of God, and who has no power over man,
but what himself gives him: otherways the Devil is in his nature mere
impotence, who could not lift a pile of straw from the ground, if man do not
permit him. So man, when he is in the Grace of God, may well mock at the Devil;
seeing then he cannot hurt him. He waits and goes about him indeed who is in
the Grace of God, but cannot hurt him; unless he fall from that grace, or that
he consent to the Tentations and Suggestions of the Devil.

It is nothing to feel Tentations, though they should continue all the days of
our lives, provided we do not consent to them. It is but a smoke, which
dissipates in the air; It is not very agreeable; but it cannot hurt him that
does not approach it: even so is it with the Tentation of the Devil; it
vanishes, if we do not follow it. It is the Devil's work to tempt, but man's to
resist thereto. Therefore says St. Peter, My Brethren, watch and be sober, for
your enemy the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. Resist him therefore, continuing firm in the Faith. He says so to teach
us, that we must not sleep in the Service of God, nor give up to follow our
Appetites; but that we must be sober, and watch with perseverance; for we have
an Enemy who never sleeps. We must overcome him by the strength of faith, which
is able to transport the greatest Mountains of difficulties, that can ever
present to our understanding.

And if the Devil should tempt us night and day, he cannot hurt our Soul,
provided it remain in faith, which begets Hope in the promises of God: He has
said, Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. He
excepts none; but calls all men in general, and every one in particular;
saying, they must come to him if they be heavy laden; and he promises to ease
us. What surer caution would we have? we have there the Promise of God himself;
for he says, That he will comfort us, if we go to him in need.

I am willing to believe (my Son) that you are burdened with Tentations of the
Devil; for he sees that you seek after true Virtue; and so he will not fail to
attacque you in the beginning, and so much the more as you have given him
advantage over your Soul by your former sins. He will not quit that fortress,
but by force, seeing he has so long been Ruler and Governor there. You must
now then chase him by force; it is in that only that the Kingdom of heaven
suffers Violence, and the Violent take it by Force. For we are the Children of
God, and consequently Heirs of his Kingdom; so we have no need to take that
Kingdom by force. It is given us freely of God. But we must use great force to
resist the Devil, and our corrupt Nature, which are the two Enemies of our
Salvation, who would rob our souls of that Kingdom, though it belongs to us, as
the inheritance of our heavenly Father: and that is the reason why he says,
that the Violent ravish it, and that we must take it by force.

It is not, that we must fight with Weapons of Iron, to gain that Kingdom: for
all the bodily force of Nature together could do nothing to the gaining it: but
we must fight our enemies with spiritual Weapons, of which the chief is faith;
seeing it begets Love, and Hope toward God, the two Bucklers to defend us
against all sorts of Enemies.

For he that loves God, fears nothing; seeing, Love is strong as Death; and he
that puts his trust in God, shall never be confounded. So that the Devil
shall never have power over him that resists him, by faith. So, my son, fear
nothing; persevere in the good resolution of attaining true Virtue. Give all
your affections to love God, and you shall be strong as Death. Place your Hope
in God alone, and you shall never be confounded, nor deceived. For having these
Arms, you need not fear the Assaults of your Enemy the Devil. He is as a
chained Dog, and can go no farther than goes the Chain of man's consent. If he
come to vex you in the night, during sleep, that cannot hurt you, seeing man
does not use his free will while he sleeps, and so cannot consent to the
Tentation of the Devil, which he knows full well: but he comes to vex man in
sleep, that he may get him to consent (when awakened) to evil suggestions,
which he excited in his spirit while asleep: for a man asleep, sins not.

But be prompt to evelate your spirit unto God as soon as you awake, and then
the tentation shall vanish as smoke. But if you begin to agitate in your
spirit, the things which you dreamed, by the Tentation of the Devil, and give
your consent thereto, or take pleasure in it: then you fall into sin, and shall
consent to the Devil; who is never more overcome than when we despise him.
Therefore I advise you never to regard Dreams, or Evil thoughts which he
represents to you asleep; nay nor those which he offers when you are awake:
because you cannot sin, so long as you do not take pleasure in, or consent
thereto.

Although you should be tormented all the days of your life by evil thoughts,
that shall not make you lose the Grace of God, so long as they displease you.
Yet you have cause, to humble your self before God, for your former sins: for
if you had never sinned, and willingly given entry to evil thoughts, the Devil
would not have had the power to cause you to have them after against your will.
But what is past is no more in your power: it remains only that you strive for
the time to come, never more to return to them. Remain then faithful to God,
and persevere in your good resolution which you have taken to find true Virtue.
Never weary in that search; it deserves well that you endure some trouble: for
even the worldlings endure yet much more in the service of the world. For what
Disquiets, Cares and Travails does not a Merchant suffer to gain a little
Money? What pains must not a Gentleman take, to preserve his Honor? what
Fatigue and Toil has the Labourer and Tradesmam to gain their Food, which you
have in the service of God without trouble! Will you not suffer a little
Tentation of the Devil, to arrive at true Virtue, which is to buy at a very
easy rate? For all that the Devil can do to you is inconsiderable, in respect
of the joy which attends you in Heaven: if you endure with perseverance, he may
well disturb your Spirit with diverse Tentations; but can never cause you to
fall into sin, without that your own will consent to him. For when you have
rendered your will to God, he will keep it well, and not permit that the Devil
gain to make it consent unto Evil. And what more the Devil can do is but a
small matter. He should have no power over your will, if he had not had so
formerly, so he could not have troubled you so often. For I perceive often his
contradictions against me, by you, against your will. He knows that I belong to
God, and follow his will, which he contradicts to his power; but he cannot
hinder that I know and practice it; and so hinder that you should follow it,
and causes you to contradict it often in small things, because he cannot obtain
that you should oppose it in great things. He gains always a little, when he
cannot gain much.

I know well that is against your will, and what comes to pass against it,
comes assuredly from the Devil: for a man cannot be contrary to his own proper
will: what he wills, he desires; and what he desires, effects it so far as he
can: And therefore it is the Devil that does in him whatever he does against
his own will. If you comprehended well that, (my Son) you would resist him
more, and would no more cause me so much pain, by the contradictions you make
to the Will of God; which, by his Grace, I know in things great and small; and
it you must follow to your power. But you have not yet sufficiently discovered
the subtle Snares of that old Serpent; nor overcome your self, nor human
considerations, which are the Chains that yet hinder your flight to God: but do
not lose courage. If I have overcome the world, you may also overcome it, and
shall become master of the Devil and of your self. God is not partial, nor an
Accepter of Persons. He bestows his Grace upon all them that seek and desire it
in truth. I wish you these desires, and remain

Your Well-affected in Jesus Christ, ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
Holste in near Gottorp Castle 27. April 1672. St. vet.
THE XII. LETTER. The Devil, the Enemy of true Virtue, Opposes it with all
manner of Devices.
To the same, to whom is shown that it is necessary to know the Wiles of the
Devil, with which he opposes true Virtue, that we may evite them, which are
shown in this and the following Letters: as 1. That the Devil insinuates
himself into what is sensual in man. 2. That he suits himself to the impulses
and inclinations of every one, leaving the rest in quietness.

My Son;
I Spoke much to you in my last of the tentation of the Devil, because it is as
necessary for you to know, in order to your salvation, as it is to know true
virtue. For if you know only the good, you shall easily fall into the evil,
even without perceiving it: and so shall sometimes follow evil, thinking that
you do well. But since I have undertaken to teach you all things necessary to
salvation, I must speak to you of the malice of the Devil, and how he tempts
men to lead them to perdition: as he has already led many, even such as have
never discovered, that is was the Devil who incited them to do evil, and so
have suffered themselves to be seduced insensibly by him; though they have been
persons well inclined, yet have they been lost by ignorance.

For ignorance does not excuse; before God. Every one is obliged to know what
he ought to do and leave, that he may please the Lord. If then I should now
speak to you only of the beauty and excellency of virtue, and you knew not the
Wiles of Satan, whereby he attempts to hinder men to arrive at it; doubtless
you should never enjoy it; he would stop you in the way by one means or other.
So that I judge it more necessary, that you know the Malice of the Devil, and
the power he has over men, when he is unknown to them, than to teach you the
Deepest Mysteries of Divinity. For all sciences together could not make you
holy; but the Malice of the Devil should lead you to Damnation if you knew it
not.

Therefore, I pray you to apply diligently your spirit to comprehend, that all
sorts of Evil come from the Devil; as all sorts of Good comes from God. There
is only these two things that are good and evil. So that whatsoever is good, in
Heaven, or on Earth in all the Creatures, in every place, proceeds immediately
from God: and all that is evil in every thing, comes from the Devil. For he
being by his sin separated from God, is fallen into all evils: There is no good
but in God alone; and in the privation of good consists all evil. All that is
infallible.

Evil then is no real thing, and God never gave it a being, but all good things
come ever from God; whence it follows, that the privation of all good, is all
evil. So that, the Devil being separated from God, (who is all good) is
consequently fallen into all evil, which is nothing else but a privation of all
good. That miserable Nothing is the Devil, who by his free will would separate
himself from all good: and it is that separation which makes all evil. There
can be no other evil, but the want and deprival of all good, seeing God never
created Evil. Now nothing can have a being, but what God created; and having
never created evil, it cannot be other thing, but a cursed Nothing; which we
call evil. And that evil is in its essence in the Devil, as Good is in God,
without mixture: for there can be no Evil in God; and there can be no Good in
the Devil.

But we find a mixture in the other Creatures, which have partaken of Good from
God, and evil from the Devil; and so they can be mixed of these two things: and
are good or evil in proportion as they partake of the one or the other. God
gave unto man all sorts of Goods in abundance, since he had the power to give
them. And the devil (that impotence) has given nothing to man, but so much
evil, as he has obtained consent from the free will of man, and no more: for
he is nothing but miserable impotence.

And to know, that the Malice of the Devil, and the Sin of Man, are but
nothings, you need but consider, what we see and touch in nature. For we see
assuredly that Hunger and Thirst, is but the want of Meat and Drink; Cold is
but the privation of Heat, and Death the privation of life; and so is it with
all other sorts of evils, which befall man; which are only the privation of the
Goods which he needs for his sustenance, temporal and eternal.

For, though we say, that there are in Hell, pains and Torments, Fire, Ice,
Sadness, Bitterness and all sorts of Pains. All these are nothing in effect but
the privation of the goods, which man should have had, to be happy, viz. all
sorts of Contentments in God, all Pleasure, all Satisfaction and Delight,
Refreshment, Peace and Joy eternal. But the privation of all these things,
makes the Torments and Sufferings of Hell; without need that there should be
material Fire, Ice, or Famine. It is enough, that the soul of man be deprived of
all good, to suffer all sorts of evil. We may see that yet more clearly in a
new born Infant, if it be left without the good of assistance, it is reduced to
all sorts of evil, and will die, without our touching it, to do it any evil;
for we deprive it of life in depriving it of assistance. It is the same with
the malice of the Devil, and the Sin of man. They are only privations of Good,
which notwithstanding cause Pains and Torments incomprehensible to man's soul.
And all that is represented to us by fire, Hunger, and other Torments of Hell;
which is nothing, in regard of the reality of the Pains and Torments, which a
soul suffers that is deprived of the Grace of God.

For that soul is not only fallen into the Cold of Ice, and Heat of Fire, but
also into all other sorts of Torments; because the privation of the Grace of
God, is the possession of all sorts of evil: and seeing that Grace causes us
all sorts of Good, its privation must needs throw us into all evil.

Now whatsoever lives in nature, generates always, because there is in it a
bent and inclination to produce its like. Herbs and Plants yield their seeds
and sprigs or branches; nothing remains unfruitful, that lives in nature; every
kind produces its like to its power. Beasts produce after their kinds; men
produce human Creatures; spirits, spirits; every one according to their nature.
The good spirits, which are the Angels of God, produce always good spirits; the
evil, which are the Devils, produce evil. The one and the other of these
spirits, attempt to produce in the souls of men, their own sort. And as men are
the noblest of all the Creatures, there is neither Angel nor Devil has power
over him, but so far as man gives them. The good Angels always incite men to
good: the evil, who are the Devils, to evil. And that by the desire that each
of these spirits has, to render men like to themselves; the Devil endeavors
to render the souls of men devilish, and the good Angels to render them
Angelical. Man in the mean while remains free to yield himself to be begotten
unto good, or evil: for none of these spirits can force man: they can but
incite him. Every one attempts to render him of his own party: but since the
Devil has corrupted man's nature, he has also more power over it than the
good Angel, which has not advanced it to good as the Devil to evil. All the
good in man comes from God only, and not from the Angel, who being a pure
spirit, has not power, but over the spirit of man, in representing to him good
things: but the Devil, as a subtle spirit, has insinuated himself into the
spirit of man, by means of the human nature. And as the vital spirits in man
are in his blood dispersed throw his whole body; so does the spirit of the
Devil mix and disperse it self with the vital spirits of man; and works much
more upon his nature, than the good Angel; who cannot join with the corruption
of that nature, because he is a spirit altogether pure; but the Devil is
impure, and accords well with the impurity of our corrupted nature. And
therefore he is always more united with us than the good Angel, who does not
delight but in the pure spirit of man: For he finds nothing conform to his
Angelick nature, but the spirit of man; because our human nature is too gross
and earthly, to be united with the Angelick Nature.

But the Devil, as an impure Beast, wallows freely in the flesh and blood, that
he may gain the soul of man. He so mixes himself with the blood of man, that he
easily moves all the parts of his body to do evil; but man knows not that it is
the Devil: For he is so united to corrupt nature, that though we feel his
motions, we think that they proceed but from our own nature. Which is because
man cannot comprehend, that the Devil should so mix with flesh and blood, since
he is only a Spirit without Body, as he is truly: but the Devil has that
subtilty to join himself to the vital spirits of man, to move the flesh to
Luxury, Wrath, and other vicious Passions.

You may see that, my Son, by your proper experience: For if you mark well the
disposition of your sentiments, you shall find that you have been often carried
away with vicious passions, even against your will; and that you have perceived
them with regret, which cannot proceed from your self, for your will cannot
contradict it self. If you had naturally a will to the pleasure of the flesh,
it would not displease you, but contrariwise you would take pleasure in it, and
be glad that you might effectuate it. But when that carnal thought or desire
displeases you, and you regret it, that is a token that it comes from a spirit
which is without you, and yet is in you, without that you know how he is there.
Yet you see well, by the operations which he does there, that that proceeds not
from your own will, which cannot desire what displeases it, but it complains
with St. Paul, where he says, the Good that I would, I do not; and the Evil
that I would not, that I do: and that to show us, that there is in us an evil
spirit, who is the Devil, who often acts in us contrary to our will. Which is
but too true, and what every one may experiment in himself; provided he will
examine himself narrowly. For though the Devil be an invisible spirit, yet he
renders himself visible by his operations. And since there is no other Evil but
the Devil, we must conclude, that all the Evils we do against our will, proceed
from him only.

For he endeavors always to cause us to sin, and to lose the grace of God,
that he may have us Companions of his miseries, by causing us to lose all good,
which consists in the Grace of God; to cause us to fall into all sorts of Evil,
which is the privation of all sorts of Good. The Devil is in that state, and so
attempts to beget others miserable as himself; and that with as much Care,
Labor, and Desire, as men can bestow to beget their like.

Behold the cursed instrument which acts always in man, to make him lose the
Grace of God: Which you must know (my Son) if you will arrive at true Virtue.
For if the Devil remain unknown to you, he will gain you by one means or other:
it is all one to him, provided he catch men; and he has diverse sorts of
Snares, proper for the condition of every one. He spies out the inclinations of
every man, that he may attaque him where he is weakest.

When he sees one addicted to covet the Riches of this world, he will give him
prosperity, that he may fix his heart thereon. If that succeed, then has he
gained the man; seeing his affections cannot be unto God, so long as as they
are in his money. Not that the Devil can give men Riches; for he is but a poor
Wretch, who has nothing but miseries: but he has power over the minds of many
men, whom he moves to labor and give profit to such, as he hopes to gain by
addictedness to Riches. So that he brings forth occasions to make them prosper
by his adherents. Now they that know not the Wiles of the Devil, think that it
is the Blessing of God, when they so prosper: The Devil so blinds their
understanding, that they discover not even that these Prosperities cause them
to fall into several sins. For he that is rich, becomes ordinarily proud, he
exceeds in Pomp, Vanity Delicious Fare, Idleness, Luxury, and diverse other
Excesses, which he could not commit before he was rich: So it is easy to
conjecture, that it could not be by the Blessing of God he acquired these
Riches. But men are at present so blind in that point, that they attribute to
God what the Devil does to draw them to Hell* one by oneway, and another by
another; For he is so subtle that he will be loath to tempt one by things
contrary to their inclination. If he sees one liberal, and that covets not the
Riches of the World, he will make him exceed in Liberality, in giving,
prodigueing and neglecting what is necessary for himself: and so he will make
him give his Riches to them that will offend God, by what he gives them. And if
he see another Addicted to Luxury, Blasphemies, or Drunkenness, he is often
content with some of these sins, and lets him do well in other things.

For it is enough to the Devil, if he hold us bound by one only sin, wherein we
have our affections that is enough to keep us out of the Graces of God; seeing
we must not withdraw our heart, to place it in any thing, but in God alone.
Yet the Devil always incites man to do all the evil, he can: But there are
many, who would not give themselves to many Vices, though they be addicted to
some one: Such sorts of persons are not much molested by tentations of the
Devil; but he lets them rest quietly in the sin to which he sees them most
addicted, without tempting them by others. When then he has no hope to carry
men to greater Evils, he contents himself to keep their souls fast by one Chain
until Death, that he may after drag them to hell with him. The misery is, that
men will not be aware; for they that are not addicted to many sins have always
hopes of their salvation. I confess, says one, I Am inclined to Luxury; but I
bestow much on the poor, and will wrong no man. Another says, It is true, I Am
given to Drinking; but I am kind and obliging to my neighbor. A third, It Is
true, I love Riches, and Honors; but I also attend the Service of God, I go
frequently to Church, and to Solemnities and Devotions. A fourth says, I Am
given to feeding and delicacy; but I hate no person. And so with a thousand
Excuses they think to evite damnation, and to abtain salvation, while they are
not addicted to many Vices and Sins.

But the Devil, derides all these Excuses; he would have of all sorts of
persons in Hell: them that commit more sorts of sins, and those also that are
addicted to one or two sorts. For there are in Hell all sorts of states and
degrees, even as there is in the world: where one is of higher condition than
another. Those that have here committed more sins, shall be in greater
damnation in Hell, than others. I pray God deliver you from that unhappiness,
and remain

Your Well-affected in Jesus Christ, ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
Holstein near Gottorp Castle 29. April 1672. St. vet.
THE XIII. LETTER. Whatever is Sensible to Nature, is not the Work of Grace or
Virtue.
To the same; to whom is shown a third Artifice of the Devil, whereby he
persuades men that they may satisfy their senses in the state of Regeneration,
and praising God. And a fourth, by which he affixes their minds to the
spiritual sweetness and Delights, wherewith they that desire to follow Virtue
are affected.

My Son;
I Have not yet sufficiently detected to you the Devils cunning craftiness;
although I have shown you, how he uses to tempt men, by the things they are
most inclined to, which I hope you now understand well. But you know not yet,
how he tempts spiritual persons, and them that seek after true Virtue: he uses
more endeavor to gain these; than for them of the world; for these he leaves
to do as they please, knowing well, that they need but follow their corrupt
Nature, to damn themselves, without his tempting of them much. For the
corruption of nature comes from the Devil, and we need but follow it to become
little Devils: as if we but follow the Light of God, we shall become little
Gods: for the good spirit and the evil also beget always their like when joined
and united to the soul of man. They produce always fruits of their own nature.
When man's will then joins with the Corrruption of his Nature, it needs no
other Devil from without to tempt it; having in it self that little Devil of
Corruption, which the great one has engendered there. And when it obeys that
Corruption, it obeys the Devil himself: For the Corruption of Nature and the
malice of the Devil are the same thing, even as a man's Child is another man.
Men are grossly ignorant in that they think they are not tempted of the Devil,
when they do not feel in themselves preter-natural evils: and they call the
Malice of their Nature, a Fragility, without having ever seriously considered,
whence that natural wickedness comes to them.

God never created evil; but he made man altogether perfect, and with an
inclination and will to Good, without knowing any thing of evil: and therefore
of necessity the wickedness and inclination to evil, which man feels in his
nature, must come from the Devil: and it self may be called a Devil, seeing
there is no other evil but him, as there is no other good but God. So that they
that follow the inclinations of their corrupt Nature, march quietly to eternal
Damnation. And the Devil does not drive such with tentations; but stands afar
off to see them go on, knowing well, that they shall become daily worse, if
they but follow simply the inclinations of their corrupt nature.

Which few are aware of; but they will find themselves deceived at Death; for
during their life they think it is no evil, to follow their natural
inclinations: yea, say some, God created Nature, and cannot be offended that we
follow it. That is one of the greatest Tentations, and is a sentiment which
opens a door to all sorts of evils. It is true, God created nature, and wills
that man use it; but the Devil has so corrupted Nature that man can no more
use and follow it without sinning, since it is corrupted. Man cannot even do
any natural function now, without sinning against God; and that as long as he
has not overcome the corruption of his nature. For if the natural man eat and
drink, he does it with affection: now that affection ought to be carried to God
alone; so he sins, when he turns it elsewhere: and when he gives his affection
to see, hear, smell, taste, or feel; he loves something else than God. But he
ought to love him with all his heart, and not place his affections on other
things, beside him alone: and so long as man puts his affection on eating,
drinking, clothing or lying, etc. he is turned from all good, which is God,
and turned to all evil, which is the privation of all good. It is the same if
we love our Riches, Honors, and Pleasures; for we are turned from God, unto
the love of our selves; when we love the Pleasures of the flesh, and not those
of the spirit; and that exchange of affection causes us to fall into all evil,
seeing it deprives us of all good.

If then we will depart from all evil, and possess all good, we must of
necessity resist and overcome the inclinations of corrupt nature: otherwise we
shall insensibly fall into all sorts of sin. For it is enough to carry us to
Hell, to follow corrupt nature.

And therefore (my Son) you must die to your self first, if you would arrive at
true Virtue: seeing as long as corrupt nature is not entirely mortified in you,
you cannot live in the spirit of Jesus Christ, because for that you must become
a new creature, and detest that old corruption, which the Devil has intruded
into the Works of God; for its that is our Enemy, and causes us all sorts of
Evil. Notwithstanding the ignorant think it a happiness when they can follow
their natural inclinations, although it is in effect the source of all Evils.
Which you may well see, by the reasons which I have formerly deduced. For
although God has created Nature, and ordained that it should be sustained, by
aliments, and also re-produce it self by generation: yet he would always have
the Heart and Affections of man to himself entirely, without parting.

God willingly permits that man eat, and drink and generate, and use his five
natural Senses for his necessity: but he will also that we place not our
Affections and Heart on these, which he requires to be preserved for himself
only indivisibly. We may then well use all these things, but not fasten our
heart on'em.

For when in the beginning man was created in Grace, he did eat, drink,
generate, and use his five natural senses: because he could do all that with
thanksgiving to God. When he tasted of good things, he praised God, who had
made them so savoury for him: when he saw beautiful things, he praised their
Author in admiring those Beauties. If he smelled good Odours, or heard pleasant
Melody, or touched smooth and pleasant things; he rejoiced in God, blessing
him, in that he had not only given him the things necessary for entertaining
his life, but also for Pleasure and Delight. All these things then served man
only to bless their Creator, and glorify him in his Creatures. And man desired
not Generation, but to increase the Praises and thanksgiving which they owed
unto God.

Behold how man used all these things well, before the devil had corrupted his
Nature: but since he is turned from God to carry his affections to himself, as
he does at present; he desires not generation but for his own satisfaction, and
not for augmenting the Glory of God, but to wallow in concupiscence; for they
have more inclination to enjoy the Pleasures of the Flesh, than to produce
Children to glorify God. And when men enjoy the pleasures of their senses, and
use the beautiful and good creatures, it is more to satisfy themselves, than
to bless and magnify God, who gives them: So esteeming more the gift than the
giver.

From all which we see, that what served unto man for blessing, when he was in
Grace, serves now as a means of sinning, and losing the Grace of God. Yet we
find men so blinded with self-love, that they persuade themselves, they can
see, hear, smell, taste, and feel, all that is good and pleasant, and praise
God in the mean while: which is but falsehood. For since man's Nature was
corrupted, it no more refers any thing to God; but in all these things pleases
it self; and uses them as if it were worthy of them, as it was before sin. But
that is a gross Error; for corrupt nature cannot seek the Glory of God; it
seeks only its own, and has no intention to bless and praise God for what it
posesses. This desire of satisfying the five senses, is common to all that live
according to corrupt nature, none excepted.

Therefore those that say, that they know to use good and pleasant things, in
praising God, do but flatter themselves. For, to do that, they must have
overcome corrupt nature: which they have not yet done, since we see them search
after good and pleasant things for their satisfaction. But if they had overcome
corrupt Nature, they would no more satisfy it in any thing; For that
corruption is never so mortified in this life, but it would soon revive, if
they granted to their nature eases and pleasures.

But the soul that is regenerated in Jesus Christ, knows well, that Nature must
be kept under subjection and restraint, during this short life, which is a time
of penitence; where we must suffer, if we will enjoy after. Which shows, that
those, who say, they may enjoy all beautiful and good things here, praising
God; are very ignorant, and deceived by the Devil. For they think themselves to
be regenerated in the Spirit of Jesus Christ; which is false: seeing his Spirit
does not teach that we should taste the Pleasures of this life, and use all
that is good and pleasant: But he teaches penitence, and renouncing our selves;
to be poor in Spirit; to forsake all that we have; to watch and be sober. All
that is not to enjoy whatever is good and pleasant. For Jesus Christ teaches to
take the least, and to choose the lowest place. If then these persons, had but
attained however little of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, they would be far from
saying, that they have overcome the corruption of their nature, and are renewed
in the Spirit of Jesus Christ, while they do things quite contrary to what he
did and taught.

For if it were permitted to the Regenerate, to take their pleasure, and to
enjoy whatever is good and pleasant in nature; doubtless Jesus Christ would
have done so: seeing there was never any person regenerated, and had overcome
the corruption of Nature, so perfectly as he: And yet he speaks of nothing but
suffering, becoming poor, bearing the Cross, and denying our selves: These
imprudents must think themselves more perfect than he, seeing they say, they
may well taste all what is good and pleasant in nature, provided they thank God.

Notwithstanding our Lord deprived himself of all these things, to give us
example. Do you not see, my Son, that it is a cunning device of Satan, to
deceive them that aspire unto Virtue? For he fills their Spirit with
presumption as soon as he has got them to digest some curious speculations of
the spiritual life. They imagine that they are already regenerated in the Spirit
of Jesus Christ, although they live altogether according to the corrupt nature
of the old Adam. Such persons are very far from true Virtue: And it is to be
feared, that they shall never arrive at it, seeing they think themselves in it
already; but they are far from it, and they had better never have begun to be
virtuous, than to take up false Virtues. These sins are worse than others
because of their Hypocrisy. They think themselves virtuous, and they are yet
full of Vices and Sins. I despair more of these apparent devout persons than of
the persons of the World, who have any Fear of God; for they have the beginning
of Virtue; which the others have not, who cannot fear God, believing themselves
regenerated in the Spirit of Jesus Christ. They fancy themselves to be in
Assurance, and they are in the midst of Perils and Dangers of losing their
souls, by Presumption, and the Delusion of the Devil, who attempts always to
turn aside them that desire to follow true virtue.

He first by some inward Consolation and sweetness endeavors to fix them on it
by self-love; for corrupt nature loves to be comforted. But the new Beginner no
sooner takes his pleasure in these sensible Sweetness and Consolations, but he
falls. The reason is, that he will not mind his duty in resisting the
corruption of his nature, when he is fastened to these sensibilities: But will
think he has already overcome it, when he feels delight, and consolation in
Spiritual things; whereas before he felt none, but in natural things: And that
makes him believe that he is already at the height of Perfection, though he be
not yet at the first degree; which is the Tears of Penitence, and regret for
offending God, and the desire to walk henceforth in his Fear, which is the
beginning of all Virtue.

But the Devil diverts that Fear, and persuades them, that they are already
virtuous, because they desire to become so. And so does the Devil amuse those
that begin; and he would willingly keep them all their life with Sweetness and
inward Consolations, which the Devil can give, and also man's own Nature. For
as soon as they withdraw from the Vanity of the World, they find great quiet;
since it is a Slavery to serve the World. There they torture and rack their
understanding by care to maintain themselves well in honor and reputation, to
be well clothed and adorned, and to be followed and esteemed. What Diligence
must not a Worldly Person use to please men? What Fear of incurring Disgraces?
How must he dissemble, and suffer to have men's Favor and keep it? How much
toil to gain sufficiently to maintain him honorably? What Device and Cunning
must he use to get Esteem, and to avoid Contempt? In fine, he that serves the
World, has nothing but toil and disquiet: but he that has resolved to quit
it, to serve God, begins to be loosed from the weighty yoke of pleasing the
World, and to find himself in much more quiet and contentment. Which is
pleasant to nature; but if it please and fix it self upon these Pleasures, it
will not advance in Virtue; but live in self-love, instead of the love of God;
And in that the Devil forwards Nature mightily, in augmenting these sweetnesses
and inward Consolations, to fix the person the more to them.

God bestows also Sweetness and consolations upon them that begin, to draw them
the more easily from Earthly Affections, to the Love of himself, by sensible
Consolations, which the soul finds in his service. But whencesoever they come,
we must never rest thereon, nor take pleasure in any thing, that is not God:
For all Sin came into the World by man's loving the Creatures, and taking his
pleasure in them. And when we take pleasure in Inward Consolation, we turn from
God, in loving that sensibility: It is permitted to feel and perceive them,
since God gives them sometimes, but we cannot addict our selves to them,
without sinning, no more than to other things beside God: For our whole heart
ought to be employed in the Love of God only.

I know well the Devil attempts to turn us from that Love by all sorts of
occasions; and he no sooner sees one retire from the Love of the World, Riches,
Honors and Pleasures; but he attacques them by the affection of Virtue, and
inward consolations, to withdraw their Hearts thereby from that pure Love of
God. Be then upon your guard, my Son, lest the Devil ensnare you, under pretext
of Virtue: Which Care she wishes you, who remains,

Your Well-affected in Jesus Christ, ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
Holstein near Gottorp Castle May 3. 1672. st, vet.
THE XIV. LETTER. The Devil Transforms himself into an Angel of Light.
To the same; to whom is discovered a fifth and sixth Artifice of the Devil, by
which he causes men to apply themselves to the knowledge of the Truth, and
Mysterial and Spiritual things; to the end that (5) they may comprehend them,
or (6) that they may unseasonably instruct others.

My Son;
I Have not yet exposed to you all the Wiles and Devices of the Devil; as it is
impossible for me to discover them all: but I shall yet tell you of more, which
I have experimented my self, and also such as I have seen in others.

You must then know, in what manner he treats with spiritual persons; otherwise
he might seduce you without your knowing it; and you should sometimes take for
Operations of God, what were Operations of the Devil. For he transforms himself
into an Angel of Light, and does in us almost the same things which the Spirit
of God does; he gives light to our understanding, and makes it conceive
mystical things and deep divine mysteries; for having been an Angel of God, he
knew his will, but did not put it in practice. He attempts to cause men to do
the very same. He does not hinder them to read mystical things, and to take
pleasure in them, while they are in themselves beautiful and pleasant. He gives
also curiosity to desire to understand them, that they may be able to speak
well of them: but he hinders with all his might, that they should bring them
into practice. For he knows well that it is written, that he that knew the Will
of his Father and did it not, should be beaten with many stripes.

His Malice is so great, that it is his satisfaction to see man in the greatest
miseries; and the deeper he sees man precipitated in Damnation, the more he
rejoiceth; and for that is it he excites always to do more Evil: and knowing
that it is a greater Evil to know mystical things, and not practice them; than
to be ignorant of them, or unable to know them: He gives light to the man's
understanding, to make him understand and comprehend well these divine things,
and so much the more as he reaps his advantage; seeing he that understands
nothing of these, will be always more humble, than he that does understand them
well. For he boasts and glories without reason; but the other fears God because
of his Ignorance, and accounts himself unworthy to receive his Graces while he
can say nothing in divine things: whereas the other, because he can, thinks
himself a Saint.

I have known several in that state, whom I could not help, because they
thought themselves wiser than me in mystical things: Yea, I have seen clearly
that the Devil teaches mystical things. For diverse Sorcerers have told me, that
the Devil taught them divine things, and catechized them even as a Missionary:
and I found in effect that they understood as much of divinity as some Divines
who have studied in it all their life.

I knew in particular one man, who spoke as Divinely as an Angel of Heaven
could; and when I heard him at first, I thought to have found another self, and
remained several years in that Opinion. For I had never heard any speak so
profoundly of the internal and mystique Life, as him: but at length he
discovered to me that all was but Hypocrisy. Which I could hardly believe,
because of the good Opinion I had conceived of him, and his inward disposition:
So I asked him, where he had learnt those profound Secrets of the inward and
mystique Life, seeing he had not studied, nor understood Latin? He answered
That he had an Ambition to be esteemed of men; and to effect it, he had neither
Birth nor money, being a poor countreymans Son, but seeing that Virtue was
esteemed among Persons of Virtue and Honor, he conceived that by learning it,
he should be esteemed of such persons; which did also succeed to him. For every
one esteemed him as a Saint, as he had in his Discourse and outward Comportment
the appearance of it. He was Modest; walked among men without regarding them;
he was always the first at Church on days of Solemnities, and Devotions; he
gave liberally to the Poor; and sometimes put off the Clothes of his own body,
to cover some miserable Body he saw Naked, because he had no substance to give
them Money; He ate and drank soberly; sincere and true in his words; showed to
be in continual Communion with God. And with all these fine apparent Virtues,
he was by compact joined to the Devil; as he confessed several times himself at
the end of his life; and died enraged, renouncing God, and calling upon the
Devils, of whom he complained because of the Torments they caused him to suffer.

Behold how men deceive themselves, in believing them to be virtuous, who can
speak well of Virtue: and the Devil himself teaches his Adherents to talk well.
For that man told me, that the Devil incited him to buy several good Books, as
Taulerus, Cantsvelt, Johannes a Cruce, and other good mystique Authors; that by
reading them, and retaining what he read, he might speak like them; and by such
discourse be esteemed one enlightened of God. Notwithstanding that Light came
from the Devil; which befalls also many others, who are but Beginners in
Virtue, even against their intention, and without that they perceive it; and
that, to stay them in these Lights, and pleasant Speculations of Divine things.

Therefore (my Son) be never curious to know much, nor that you may be able to
talk well of Virtue: but be careful to practice well what you know. For God
will call you to an account of it: Seeing much shall be required of him to whom
much is given. Be faithful to the first light God gives you; and he shall give
you more afterward. Go not out of your self to communicate it to others, before
you have put it in practice your self.

The Devil uses also that deceit, and thereby turns away many from following
true virtue: For he gives them at the beginning a certain fervor and desire to
convert all the World. And that as soon as they have in themselves any sensible
joy and sweetness, or have received some particular Light from God, or have
taken the resolution to abandon the World to serve God; they would gladly
impart all that to others, before they have received sufficiently themselves;
and by that means the Devil distracts their minds, and makes the little they
had to vanish, without any profit arriving to others. It is of such persons,
the Scripture says, that they rise too early in the morning. For they cannot
give true Virtue to others, while they have it not themselves. And so all goes
away in words and distractions: and in the end themselves remain with empty
souls, from which by little and little is dispelled all the humor they had
tasted of Virtue. They think to do good to others, and they profit no person,
but lose their time unprofitably.

Be aware of this Deceit, my Son, and go not out from your own heart before you
be sent. There are enough, who make it their trade to Teach others: but very
few that teach themselves. If it come that you have some Grace from God, keep
it hid until it be God's will that you should discover it: otherwise you put
your self in peril of committing several sins, while you shall not perceive it.
For there can easily slip into your heart some Vainglory, when you have
received any particular Grace: and even when you have only the desire of
forsaking the World, the better to serve God; that can give you to esteem your
self more than another: heware also of publishing it, before you have done it.
It is best to do, and be silent: for to speak of these things, gives
satisfaction to your nature; for it is much pleased to speak of good things; so
it is best not to give it matter of vain complacency; but to suffer the good
Seed which God has cast into your Soul to spring up secretly, until it bud,
and send forth branches outward, springing from the root within; and in the end
bear fruit; whereof every one may gather without your loss or hurt.

Which will come, when you have overcome all human considerations, and
Vainglory; and then shall true Virtue appear sufficiently in all your works,
without needing to make your trade to teach others. Then shall your actions
teach them: and works are much more effectual Sermons, than Words. For it
happens often, that they that speak well, do evil. And for that words effect
nothing in the Souls of others, though good, unless they know that these words
come from his heart that pronounces them: and then they have more force to work
in the Souls of others: but to speak of divine things and of Virtue, without
the practicing of them, is as tinkling Brass sounding, or as a Perroquet that
speaks without reason: and beside, the uselesness of these words to others,
they endanger their own soul by Vainglory.

For the Ignorant esteem for Virtue, virtuous words, and praise them, as if it
were reality; though they be not at all estimable; for the Devil himself can
speak well of divine things, as sometimes persons whom he possessed have said
unto me.

I heard a Story, how one time the Devil took the form of a Human Body, and a
Religious Habit, and in that equipage came and presented himself to a
Monastery, where there was kept a great Solemnity: and because of the Feast, a
great concourse of people. Now the preacher of the convent fell suddenly sick;
whereat the Prior was much vexed, having no person to preach; but at that
instant it was that the Devil came in his Religious Habit and knokt at the
Gate, and asked liberty to lodge in the Convent: and when he presented himself
before the Prior, to have his Blessing (as do ordinarily the Religious
Strangers) he asked the reason of his sadness? Who answered, It was because of
the sudden sickness befallen the Preacher, that was to preach at that hour;
and that he feared the Murmur and Scandal which that might cause, because there
was no Preacher to supply the want. The Devil answered, That he would willingly
make the Sermon: which rejoiced much the Prior, thinking God had sent him that
Minister in his Necessity. The Devil then going up unto the Chair, preached so
powerfully and so wisely, of the judgment of God, of the State of the Blessed,
and that of the Damned, that most of the Hearers wept with compunction, and
were astonished to hear so clear a deduction of all these things.

But a simple Religious Person of that Convent had a Revelation from God, that
it was the Devil; whereof he advertised the prior, who having ended his
Functions, caused the preacher to come before him, and conjured him by God, to
tell who he was. He answered, that he was the Devil. The prior asked, how it was
possible, that he could preach so beautiful Truths, and so profitable for the
salvation of Souls. To which he answered; I reap my advantage by that; for
those that have heard me speak these Truths, can find no more cloak of
ignorance. I have declared to them the State of the Blessed and that of the
Miserable, and the just judgments of God: and they were all moved. But they are
so addicted to self-love and the love of earthly things, that they will not put
into practice what I have taught them: but on the contrary. will follow their
old Customs, and forget the Truths which I have preached to them: and after
that he vanished like smoke, in presence of the Prior, and some other of the
Religious; leaving a noysom Stink behind him.

This history shows enough, that the Devil can well speak the truth, and good
things, when he sees he can make his advantage of it; and therefore should we
not esteem it a Virtue to be able to talk well of good things? Virtue consists
only in the practice: and so imagine not, that you shall do well to study much,
that you may speak advantagiously of Virtue: that would be but Vanity without
Profit.

But endeavor to study well the knowledge of true Virtue, to the end you may
put it into practice; and your practice shall teach others. Never read any
thing to learn to talk well: but read the Books which teach the practice of
Virtue: such as is that of Thomas a Kempis, or other such like. For the high
and difficult questions cannot make you holy: but will inspire your heart with
Vanity and Pride.

Now, seeing we ought to evite even the shadow of evil, we must consequently
beware of reading Unprofitable things, or elevating matters of Controversy and
hidden Mysteries; seeing all these things do no more but fill our Spirit with
wind, not bringing any profit to the soul, but much hurt. For as a Vessel
filled with some liquor; cannot receive any other thing, without mixing with
what is in it or spilling it over; It is the same with our understanding, when
it is replenished with curious studies of whatever matter: For then the light
of the Holy Spirit cannot be poured into it pure. It is mixed with our proper
thoughts, and so there is nothing but confusion. And in that Confusion, as in
troubled water, the Devil fishes, and dissipates quite that Light.

And therefore it is that so few souls receive purely the light of the Holy
Spirit. They are not empty; but filled with fine speculations of Mystique
things; Others have their minds filled with Medecin; Others with Astrology;
and so of other studies. They cannot comprehend why they should not have the
Light of the Holy Spirit, as well as some other particular souls, which they
see and know to possess it. But they need not be astonished at that; for the
Holy Spirit cannot enter into a soul filled with something else: It must be
altogether void of it is own Curiosities, before it can be disposed to receive
the wisdom of the Holy Spirit. It should then desire to know nothing, beside
what God wills that it should know: and consequently should not apply it self
to read any Book, but such as enlightens the understanding in the knowledge of
true Virtue. Neither must you read these things curiously, or much at a time;
you should pause, and consider what you find there profitable for your soul.

I would not altogether stop the curiosity you have, to read my Writings, or
those of others, who treat of solid Virtue: For that Curiosity is necessary at
the beginning; for you cannot learn if you be not curious to know. We must know
before we can love. If then you knew not the Truths which I write, you could
not practice them. So we may give liberty to that curiosity, to know good
things. You must not read only to nourish, or satisfy it: but to learn the
truth. You cannot discover it too much; though some natural satisfaction mix it
self, it shall not hurt you, provided you rest not on that pleasure.

They tell us, that Mary Magdalene went to Jesus Christ because they said to
her that he was a beautiful man, and spoke well. Notwithstanding that vain
curiosity led her to the knowledge of the truth. But after her first curiosity
vanishing, she gave her self to the practice of the Truths which she had heard
from him.

Do you the same, My Son. Search curiously the Books which treat of solid
Virtue; and neglect no occasion to find them; seeing they serve as means to
know the will of God; and because God often speaks to the soul by the means of
a good Book, moving the heart to the affection of eternal things, and contempt
of temporal; you must only discern, whether you read divine things for your own
satisfaction, or if you do it only to enlighten your soul in the knowledge of
the Truth of God. If it is for the last, there is no evil, that you give your
self to long reading. Stay your self only on the matters, which move your heart
to the Love of God; without going further, until you have found means to
practice it well.

I did that in my young years, when first I saw the New Testament; and when I
understood thereby what a Gospel Life was, I closed the book for twenty years,
and exercised my self to practice what is contained in it. And so I found the
Light of the Holy Spirit, without using Books to instruct me. In which you may
imitate me, when you have sufficiently read what may avail to the perfection of
your soul. Which she wishes to you, who remains

Your Well-affectioned in Jesus Christ, ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
Holstein, near Gottorp Castle, May 5. 1672. St. Vet.
THE XV. LETTER. The Devil incites to Good, that he may bring Evil out of it.
To the same, Discovering to him a seventh Wile of the Devil, by which he
carries us out of our selves; that comparing our works with those of others, we
may from our Virtue contract vainglory. And an Eighth, by which he incites us
to immoderate Macerations and Mortifications of the Body. And finally a Nineth,
in which he excites us to immoderation in spiritual good works toward our
Neigbour; as unseasonably to Instruct, Convert, Reprove or Correct him.

My Son;
I Must discover to you yet another Device of Satan, by which he does gain
several well inclined persons, even such as have a good will, who are not only
resolved to labor for the knowledge of true Virtue, but would also put it in
practice. For when he cannnot amuse them by fine speculations, and curious
searches to be capable of talking well of spiritual things, because they have
discovered, that to talk well of and understand well a Virtue, is but Vanity,
when it is not put in practice: and that so they have absolutely resolved to
fall to the practice, in the exercise of good works.

Then comes he to tempt by virtue it self, and by the practice of good works.
He endeavors to intrude Vainglory upon true Virtue; and secretly justles in
Self-esteem and Contempt of others with good works: None is exempt from that
Vanity at the beginning of their conversion. For all men carry in them an
inclination to Pride, when they come into the world, and also every one must
combat and oppose it, if he would attain to Salvation. But this Pride is harder
to be discovered, when it furrs it self into Virtue, lurking in the heart
without appearing outwardly; as does that which proceeds from plenty of Riches,
and the honors which men give. For that Vanity shows it self sufficiently
outwardly; for he that is proud of his Riches, will show to the world his
Riches and Liberality: by Prodigality in several things, as in Movables,
Clothes, Meat, and Drink, willing in every thing the best and dearest, to
satisfy his vainglory; and must also be served with Pages and Servants. So
that his outward Actions discover sufficiently the Pride of his Heart: but
spiritual Pride keeps it self hidden even under a cloak of Humility. For we see
ordinarily beginners in virtue give themselves to Fasting, Watching and Prayer,
to humility in their Clothes, to ly on hard Beds, and other Macerations of
their Body; and also to exercises of Works of Mercy spiritual and corporal.

Into which the Devil easily intrudes himself; for if he can gain nothing by
vainglory in our good works, because the man overcomes it by the Grace of God:
He attaques us by Excesses in them; and moves us to fast to excess, that it may
ruin our health or unfit it for necessary labor: and to obliege us after to
substantious or delicate food, and so precipitate us again into delicacy.

Lo! how the Devil attempts to sway us from one extreme to another, and
especially him that is not well acquainted with his wiles. He has brought some
to death by excess in fasting, and maceration of the body: I know that is rare
in the time we live in, when none will embrace penitence, most part loving
sensuality. Yet among the small number of Penitents, the Devil insinuates
himself, causing them to exceed. For when he can no more make them fall by ease
and sensualities, he does it by excess in good Works. And Prayer being the best
of all, he causes them to tie themselves to a number of vocal Prayers; to
over-charge them, and disquiet them, when they have not time to wait and fulfill
these ordinary Prayers; which makes the man sorrowful and dissatisfied,
thinking he does not please God, when he does not fulfill all his ordinary
prayers by custom: and in that thought he is sad and pensive, and uneasy to
them he converses with.

The Devil draws his advantages from excess in prayer; for it hurts the head
when too vehement, and brings often confusion in their affairs and housholding:
I have known Women so addicted to their prayers and devotions, that they
neglected their families to go to Church frequently at solemnities and
Devotions; and with all they thought they did well, without discovering the
cunning of the Devil, who made them sin instead of doing good.

For God is a God of Order, and not of Confusion; and he says expressly, that
our Prayers should not be as those of the Pharisees, who use many words, seeing
the Lord knows what we have need of before we ask it. And if we think to gain
time for Prayer by watching, the Devil will disturb our spirit, for want of
sufficient sleep, that he may weaken us, and in short time destroy us. I have
experienced all these things, and sometimes fallen into so great extremities,
that if God had not marvelously maintained me, I should have been dead long
ago, by excess in fasting, watching, and lying hard; which God has since
shown me to be but a disorderly fervor, which cannot be long continued; and
that the Devil finds his advantages in it, and easily insinuates therein
thoughts of vainglory; because they think themselves better than others, while
they use these mortifications of the body, though they be no more, but means to
mortify our Intemperances and Luxury. For if we were well disposed, we should
not need Watchings, Fastings, and other Macerations of the body. It is not our
Flesh that can sin, but the will only, which we must compel more to do well
than our flesh: seeing this is but as a Horse which ought not to be whipped when
he rides willingly; which he does as well covered with a Sadle of Leather, as
with one of Velvet; and contrariwise. Even so our Heart may be as virtuous,
when our Body is covered with velvet as when with Leather: seeing the outward
habit brings nothing to the Soul. Beside, a simple habit covers often
Hypocrisy, and causes pride in the Heart. And therefore we must never be tied
to these outward things; for the Devil thereby finds opportunity. But we must
be tied to God alone, on whom the Devil has no power; as he has on all our
outward actions, even the best.

For the Devil furrs himself into works of spiritual Mercy and Charity; he
persuades us, that it is well done to instruct the Ignorant, and admonish the
faulty; which in effect profits no more in this miserable time, when men perish
not by Ignorance, but by pure malice. For every one would profess to teach
virtue, and very few will practice it. I exercised my self about nine years in
teaching of the ignorant, without profiting any thing in the salvation of their
Souls. On the contrary, I had the dissatisfaction to hear some of them say, to
whom I had shown the Christian Doctrine and Virtue, That they could now do
greater Evils, than they could do before; because now they could cover their
wickednesses with feigned Virtues, which they could not do before they learned
to talk of Virtue.

So it is not advisable that we distract our selves to go and teach others,
unless we see that our teaching will be profitable to their Salvation whom we
would teach: and we must use in this great discretion, otherwise the Devil
vould amuse us all our life in teaching the Ignorant, thinking we did a work of
spiritual Mercy, which yet should be no profit to others, and much hurt to our
selves. We must indee^ ^ave Charity to teach our Neighbor; but not exceed
therein, nor have an indiscreet Zeal toward such as search not after the
Salvation or Perfection of their Souls themselves. For the Devil himself would
feign ignorance, and desire of us instruction, to distract us from our own
perfection. I have known persons possessed of the Devil, who went continually
searching pious Souls, to be instructed in Christian Perfection. These are such
as the scripture calls silly Women, ever learning, and never come to the
knowledge of the Truth. For they care not to put it in practice, although they
knew it; but seek only to amuse us, and cause good persons to lose their time,
who cannot advance in Virtue while they are attempting in vain to procure it to
others.

There is the profit the Devil draws from works of spiritual Mercy, both in
instructing Ignorants and admonishing the Faulty: for so evil is our time
become, that we can no more resist the evil; it is enough to endure and suffer
it with regret. If you should speak to admonish men for their Oaths, Whoredoms,
Robberies, Lies, and Infidelities, and other gross Sins; they would leap in
your face, curse you, despise you, calumniate and hate you. So that instead of
doing them any work of Mercy, you should excite them to greater sins, and put
your self in danger of being abused and persecuted, without any profit. As I
have known persons zealous for the Glory of God, who could not suffer the
wicked in their presence; and reproved their Vices, and admonished them upon
occasions; And these have often run the hazard of being killed by them they
admonisht; the Devil attempting so to extirpate them.

Which also happened to one of my Friends, who was Poisoned for being
over-zea^^^^ for the Glory of God, and over-fervent in opposing Evil: And
therefore we must in all things use discretion, if we would evite the snares,
which the Devil spreads every where, to catch souls. Yet we must not therefore
neglect to instruct the Ignorant, and admonish the Faulty, when we find persons
disposed to profit thereby. Yea, we must have in our heart the Charity of St.
Paul, who wished to be accursed for his brethrens Salvation. Which appears to
be an excessive Zeal; but it proceeded from the Charity of his Heart toward his
Neighbor, and forgetting of himself: For he regarded more the Glory of God
than his own Salvation or Advantage, seeing he was but one person to glorify
God, and his brethren a great number.

So that excess could not come of the Devil, seeing he had no interest or
profit by it. He knows that God does the will of them that he loves, and so he
might foresee, that St. Paul would obtain the Prayer which he made for his
Brethren; He knew also that God would not damn St. Paul for his great Charity
which he carried to his Brethren, offering his own Salvation that they might be
saved. He could have no extrance there, seeing Charity is God himself, on whom
the Devil has no power: but he has much over all our external actions, when
they are done without discretion. Therefore was it St. Anthony said, Discretion
is the greatest of all Virtues; seeing they are disorderly when not regulated
with Discretion: For Fastings, Watchings, Prayers and Works of Mercy, and other
Virtues, are not good when Discretion is wanting. It is good to admonish and
instruct our Neighbor in a fit season, and when he desires it; but when he
does not seek it, or will not suffer it, we must withdraw testifying that their
imperfections and sins displease us, without going to correct or restrain them
authoritatively. For God has not given us our Brother in charge; he is left
free as well as we: so we ought not to help him but by Charity as far as he
has need, and desires it; not farther.

God does equally the same with all men; he pleased to have them free, and so
constrains them in nothing. Now we must not presume to be more just or
charitable than God, in willing to obliege our Neighbor to do well by force,
and forsake his Sins and Vices, if he does not of himself entreat us to counsel
and admonish him, when he fails.

For one man ought never to go to compel another in what regards his
perfection, since God has created us free, and will not that we should be
Slaves; but wills that our souls should be his Spouses, to yield themselves
voluntarily to his Love: But all Constraint is Slavery: So we must never use
rashness to force men to do well, or constrain him to forsake his sins. God
will have us free during the time of our trial, which is this short life. And
it is the Pride and Presumption of our selves, to go to instruct or correct our
Neighbor by authority; who is sometimes better before God than our selves,
though he have not so many moral Virtues, or outward Appearance of Good: which
we often learn and observe, that we may be agreeable to men; who despise always
what is reprehensible before them. That is the reason of politic persons
abstaining easily from gross and external sins, that they may appear good;
which is often less virtue, than that of such as speak rudely, and commit open
evil. The best is to teach and preach to our selves, and to have Piety and
Charity for others, when we think they do evil, and we cannot hinder them. It
belongs to Judges to repress external Malifices, to preserve good Policy.

But you, who are a free person, take not the charge of others, but labor to
learn well true Virtue, and to put it in practice: for the Devil cannot deceive
you there; as he can easily in the exercise of external Works of Mercy bodily
or spiritual, which you would do: but he insinuates himself more easily in the
bodily, than spiritual, being more sensible and visible, and so more praised
and applauded of men; who esteem nothing more than liberality. When then they
see one that feeds the hungry, gives drink to the thirsty, clothes the naked,
lodges strangers, visits the sick and buries the dead: They hold him for a
Saint. But it is rare to find such now adays, in the miserable age wherein we
live. For generally men are filled with Avarice and Covetousness; and seek only
their own proper interests, without troubling themselves with the necessities
of their Neighbor. Charity is cold in men's hearts, and they esteem him
virtuous, who gives a little out of his superfluities to the poor, or does any
other outward merciful work.

Now the Devil easily furrs himself into all these things; and if we discover
not his subtilties, we may do many works of corporal mercy which shall turn to
his honor. For he that does these things to be esteemed of men, is a
Hypocrite, as were the Pharisees, to whom Jesus Christ so often upbraided their
Vice: They did truly many works of mercy spiritual and corporal; but those did
not save them. For Jesus Christ despised them, calling them so often
Hypocrites, notwithstanding all their good works.

And even though we do them not to be seen and praised of men, yet the Devil
can find his advantage therein by the vain complacency which we take from them
within our selves. For it is always more honorable to give than to receive.
And there are some so naturally given to liberality; that they will readily
give what they have need of themselves, only to satisfy their natural
inclination. Others are so disposed naturally to action, that they will
willingly incommode themselves, to give Meat and Drink to the Hungry and
Thirsty, to lodge Strangers, cloth the Naked, visit the Sick, and bury the
Dead; And that by a natural inclination they have to do so.

And therefore, my Son, you ought well to discern the Spirit which moves you to
do Works of Mercy, as well spiritual as corporal: For the Devil often moves our
hearts to multiply them, and do them to excess, to distract us from inward
entertainment; and to hinder us, that we may never attain to true virtue; And
that so we may rest upon Virtues, which men esteem such, as are external works
of Mercy, which are generally praised without discernment. But they can well be
Sins, instead of Virtues: From such, My Son, you must keep you well, that the
Devil deceive you not. Which you are advertised of by

Your Well-affected in Jesus Christ, ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
Holstein, near Gottorp Castle, May 5. 1672. St. Vet.
THE XVI. LETTER. The Devil Corrupts our Good Works.
To the same; showing him a Tenth Artifice of the Devil, in our Corporal Good
Works taward our Neighbor; which he often brings about to his Honor: Yet we
must not therefore cease from them, but join Moderation in them, and put away
human Considerations, and Pride, which attacque us in this time of Trial.

My Son;
I Believe it surprises you, that I said in my last, that Works of Mercy are
often done to the Honor of the Devil. Yet it is most true; but for want of
thoroughly considering the matter, that offends the tender-conscienced, and
them that by a natural easiness accounts all good, they believe blindly, that
all that is called Good is so, and that all sort of good works are agreeable to
God, which is false. For the Devil insinuates himself into our best actions, to
render them evil: And he has done so from the beginning of the world, bringing
evil into all the Works of God, which were all created good.

We may find that in our selves; for though God created Man altogether good and
perfect, yet we feel that he is now evil and imperfect. He was created to
honor God; and most men honor the Devil, and obey him in every thing, instead
of obeying their Creator. All judicious persons see that in the conduct of men
now adays to be true. And yet they will not believe, that men's good works are
done to the honor of the Devil: and so they there that they esteem more their
good works, than those of God. For man, though created of God altogether holy
and perfect, serves to the honor of the Devil: And wherefore should we not
believe, that men's good works serve thereto? So such persons, though otherways
judicious, here fail grossly.

But that is not strange, seeing the Devil blinds their understanding, that
they should not see the truth of things, but be led by their own inclinations
and simplicity. For it is much more agreeable to nature, to believe that we do
good, than to think that we do evil; and that our good works serve to the
Honor of God, and not to that of the Devil. For man feels in himself a
satisfaction when he does well, and he has an ambition to tend to do what is
most estimable. Then being more honorable to serve God, than the Devil, men
persuade always themselves, that they serve God, especially when they apply
themselves to Works of Mercy, Notwithstanding the Devil reaps often the glory,
more than God. So when the Devil sees any turn from sin, and keep himself from
evil doing, to which he can no more engage him; he induces him ordinarily to do
many good works, that he may have esteem and satisfaction in himself; And by
that he renders the good work evil; or he causes the merciful persons to be
much esteemed and honored, that he may make them fall into vainglory.

The Devil has also the art to disquiet our spirit, by the care of merciful
works both spiritual and corporal; And I was exercised my self with that
Temptation. For in my youth I took care of the poor sick, I visited them
frequently, I helped and served them to my power; And also I assisted all sorts
of poor and necessitous persons; I endeavored to reconcile them that were at
variance; and to engage the slothful to labor; and in short, I laid these
rhings so much to heart, that I sustained the cause of all sorts of afflicted
that asked my aid. And I was grieved to send any away unrelieved. I but I found
my self at length so occupied, that my spirit had no more recollection. and I
was so importuned by these poor, that I behoov'd to abstain from helping them
more, and that partly to recover commerce with God, which I had lost by the
voluntary distraction, which these poor gave me: And partly because I
discovered daily their Wickedness and Deceits. For abundance sought my help,
only that they might live more at their ease, and to commit more sins; as in
effect they did. I gave often Alms, which the Poor used in Drunkenness,
Gluttony and Luxury; and they became idle and lazy. For when they had not so
great necessity to labor, they neglected to undertake any work, for their
entertainment; because the Alms gave them it with less care and pains. Also I
found them Liars and Deceitful; for they often feigned Necessities, Diseases or
Infirmities, when there was no such thing. And so I saw my assistance gave them
more matter of sinning. They studied to lie cunningly to get wherewith to live
in idleness. But when my design was to do all that I could for the Glory of
God, and found that these Works of Mercy, turned to that of the Devil, by the
inward indisposition of those I would have assisted, now I cannot do any Work
of Mercy spiritual or corporal, before I know, if it shall be for the Glory of
God or not.

For I love far rather to cease, than to do evil; not that I fear Doing evil
upon my part, in assisting my Neigbour in all sorts of occasions, generally,
and without exception of persons. For I know that God regards always our
intentions, and sees whether they be upright, and aim at his Glory, or at our
own, But my fear is in regard of the Poor, who receive our assistances
unworthily; and employ our benefits only to the honor of the Devil: And it is
so that I understand, that Works of Mercy are done to his Honor. I know that
seemed strange to you, my Son; but you had not well considered my reason. For
if you will examine the state of men now adays, you will find it so corrupt,
that it is impossible more to exercise Works of Mercy, without sinning in those
to whom they are done. For most part are Covetous, Unjust, Deceiveas, and
filled with all sorts of sins. And assisting and sustaining them, we cooperate
to their sins. Which we can do in nine manners, as I have elsewhere shown, viz.
in councelling, assisting, defending, contributing, not hindering, (when able,)
not accusing to them that would hinder it, partaking, praising, or flattering
evil. Now all these ways of sinning are in part committed when we assist the
wicked, which we know to be such. For if you know that one covets earthly
goods, and give him of them, you cooperate to that Covetousness, whether the
person be poor or rich: the quantity of Goods makes nothing to the sin, which
is committed within the heart, and it is it which cleaves to the goods of this
world, instead of cleaving to God: And sin is nothing else but that turning
from and abandoning God. If then we turn from him, for much money or for
little; that does not diminish the sin of Concupiscence in the heart. It is the
same with a proud person: for if you give him goods or ptofits, you maintain
his pride, and become partaker of his sin, which shall be charged on you. Also
if you give to a Glutton, or a Sloathful Person, you contribute to all the sins
which he shall commit with your gifts. You sin also if knowing a Liar, or
Thief, or unfaithful Person, you praise him, instead of declaring his
wickedness to others: for you render your self guilty of all the evils which he
shall do, because others are not advertised and aware of his wickedness; Which
were it not dissembled or excused, could not hurt so many persons who are
deceived because they are ignorant of it; and so they yield to him without
knowing that they do evil.

And therefore, my Son, I would advertise you, that you let not your self be
deceived ignorantly, and for not knowing the subtle crafts of the Devil; For so
he makes himself to be honored, and brings his own glory out of men's best
actions, when he can no more bring them to evil actions. It is all one to him,
if he ensnares us by things good, or evil: He does as he that would draw one
out of the water; for it is all one if he get hold of his Hand or his Arm; he
takes hold where he can most easily; And when he cannot draw him so, he draws
by his Feet, Head or Hair, without considering much if he takes him by the one
or the other.

The same does the Devil with our souls, which are in peril of drowning in the
raging sea of this world: God will save them by true Virtue: and the Devil
Draws contrariwise with all his might. For when he sees he cannot draw them to
him by manifest sins, he draws them by Virtue it self, and by Works of Mercy,
which are done most part to his honor and glory, unless we be strictly on our
guard, and discover his deceits, that we may evite them. So we must purify our
intentions, and seek nothing in all our good works but the Glory of God alone:
resisting all the tentations the Devil can make us; protesting against
vainglory, and all human considerations. And so it is that we may evite all
sorts of Excess and Confusion; and proceed always with discretion to regulate
our good works.

Behold the means to do them not to the honor of the Devil; For I would not
say, that we should cease from good works; we cannot do too many, if we do them
with discretion. But we must labor that the Devil or Sin be not mixed with
them; as it ordinarily happens; because men are not wary enough lest the Devil
should mix himself into things that are good and holy in themselves. He was not
wanting to tempt Jesus Christ during his Fast in the Wilderness, although
nothing could be more holy and perfect than that retreat, whither the Spirit of
God had led him, that he might entertain himself with his heavenly Father, free
from all distraction: And nothing more pure than the intentions of our Savior:
He says: He came not into the world to accomplish his own Will, but the Will of
him that sent him. Notwithstanding the Devil had the impudence to go to tempt
him several times: by Vainglory, in presenting to him the Kingdoms of the
World; as also the Stones to convert into Bread, for his Hunger: He tempted him
also by the Scripture, saying, That be should throw himself down from the
pinnacle of the Temple, because it is written, that the angel shall preserve us,
etc. Are not these full cunning wiles of the Devil, while he uses the most holy
things to tempt Jesus Christ? He attempts to catch him, by his Fasts, his
confidence in God, and by glory in presenting him all the kingdoms of the World.

How then should he leave untempted frail and imperfect Creatures, like us? For
what is man there that must not confess himself far short of the least of Jesus
Christ his perfections? Who is he that retires to the Desert, to give himself
to entertainment with God, out of the Dangers and Divertisments of the world?
Who refuses the kingdoms and Riches of the Earth? Who is he among the
spirituals, that does not tempt God by his Temerity and Presumption? For they
no sooner receive any particular Light or Grace from God, but they Glory and
esteem themselves, beyond others And no sooner do they forsake sin, to give
themselves to Works of Mercy, but they think God is beholding to them, and that
every body should esteem them: Which happens to all that begin to serve God and
follow true Virtue, excepting none, because of the corruption of our nature. He
that says or believes the contrary is deceived, and walks not in the Truth and
the knowledge of himself. For all men in general, and every particular, brings
these natural inclinations with him, coming into the world; they are all proud,
presumptuous, covetous of honor, riches, and pleasures; Always prefer
themselves to others, and esteem themselves worthy of all goods and honor: Yea
they think God obliged to them for the least good action they do; because the
Devil has furred into man's nature that pride of life, which inflames the heart
of man, and hinders him to abase himself and acknowledge his faults. We see
that even Adam, did not humble himself after his sin, but endeavored to excuse
it, saying, The Woman which thou gave me, tempted me to eat of the Apple; and
she said, The Serpent beguiled me. All which proceeded from the pride which the
Devil had already planted in the heart of our first Parents, and consequently
in the hearts of all men that were to proceed from them. For all are stained
with that sin of Pride; and so they will not acknowledge their faults, but
defend them to their power; Which also remains with them till death: unless
they overcome that corruption of nature by true Virtue; And when they arrive at
that, they overcome the Devil. For he has no power but over his own works, or
the corruption which he has caused in our nature. That being once overcome, we
revive in the strength of the grace wherein Adam was created. And when man
finds himself united to God by the love he has to him, then he scorns at the
Devil, and becomes a new creature: And so will no more have any fellowship with
that corruption, wherein he was born.

Yet such an one must be upon his guard; for the Devil, who seduced our first
parents, when in the state of Grace may well seduce a man that is regenerated
in it; so long as he lives in his time of trial, which is this miserable life;
for God will prove man's fidelity to him: He created him free; that liberty then
must needs be proved, otherwise it should be constraint. For if God had willed
absolutely to constrain him to love him, he had been happy, as Gods slave: But
he would honor man much more, in creating him free, that he might entertain
himself with him. He would then choose the soul of man for his Spouse; and not
his Slave; And therefore it must have a time of proof or advisement to resolve,
if it would join and unite with its God, or not.

Now this time of trial was this present life, in which Adam should have given
testimony of his fidelity to his God. Notwithstanding he was so imprudent, as
to break the fidelity he owed to the Spouse of his Soul; would go join himself
to creatures, unworthy of his love: And so he interrupted the covenant and
fellowship which God would make with his Soul, even until his sin and
infidelity were purged by repentance. That is the reason why his time of trial
was turned into one of penitence, which Adam underwent faithfully all the time
of his life: But the pride which his first sin has planted in our hearts;
makes us often depise him, and wish evil to him because of the hurt he caused
us: As if he were the cause of our damnation, which is a great error.

For although Adam had never sinned, yet other men might always have damned
themselves by their own sins during their time of trial. For each one for
himself should in this time have given testimony of his fidelity to God; since
all men and every one in particular were of the same nature and condition, and
also in the same state, with Adam before his sin. And there is at present no
other difference betwixt the state of man now, and that of Adam; but that since
sin came, men are born with an inclination to Evil, whereas Adam had
inclination to Good only when he was created. With that exception we are of the
same condition with Adam, and created for the same end; that our souls should
be spouses to God, provided we remain faithful to him during the time of our
trial and penitence, which we must attend in this life; which is full short in
regard of that of Adam.

But if we knew the truth of things, and discovered the snares of the Devil, to
shun and evite them in our good actions; we might hope to attain again to an
eternal union with God. For Adam's sin cannot damn us, if our own sins do it
not; seeing God has pardoned Adam's sin, in case he fulfilled his repentance.
And he has also pardoned all other men upon the same condition: but the misery
of men now adays is, that they know not those things; and will here enjoy
instead of suffering. Which is a false persuasion of the Devil, who insinuates
himself into the holiest things, while we perceive it not. Which is a truth,
she exhorts you to believe, who is careful of your Soul.

Holstein near Gottorp Castle May. 8, 1672. St. vet. ANTONIA BOURIGNON.

THE XVII. LETTER. Sin proceeds from Man's Freewill.
To the same; showing him an Eleventh sort of Tentation, whereby we lay the
blame of our sins upon the Devil, to free our selves; where is cleared that the
Devil cannot draw man to sin, nor do him any hurt, except man give his own
Consent.

My Son;
IN my former, I set before your eyes, how the Devil tempts men many ways, and
insinuates himself into Virtue it self, that he may direct our good works to
his own honor and glory: which very often comes to pass. But I fear lest by
yet another sort of tentation, he catch you; which you could not discover if
you were not forewarned of it. To wit, when you have well considered the power
and wiles of the Devil, and find in your experience, that it is he who incites
you to do evil, It is to be feared that you will lay the blame upon the Devil,
because sometimes you do evil against your will. For man's heart is so proud,
that he will not confess his fault, and so seeks for the cause of his sins
without himself. Which you may the rather do because I have deduced to you at
length, that all evils come from the Devil, and all good from God: but though
that be most true, we must not therefore imagine, that the Devil of himself can
ever force us to do evil. For he is a miserable impotency, who has no power
over our souls, hearts and wills, but so much as we give him. The Devil may
well represent evil to our spirit, and incite our wills to follow it; and
incite our corrupt nature: but he can never force us, so long as our will
remains firmly resolved not to consent to evil.

The Devil is as a chained Dog, who can go no further than his Chain permits
him; and God will give him no more power than the will of man desires. For
though he permitted him to tempt Job, by the loss of his Goods, Children,
Friends, and Health; he did not permit him to cause him to fall into sin. And
although Job cursed the day of his Nativity, he did not herein offend God, nor
fall into any sin; For he cursed only the malediction which sin brought into
human nature; which all men have reason to do, in feeling the pains and
sufferings which sin has caused to us.

For before sin, man was not subject to any Evil; and he enjoyed all Good,
without mixture of evil; He was not annoyed with hunger or thirst, heat or
cold, he had no labor to weary him, he needed no sleep, nor had any alteration
in soul or body, was not subject to diseases nor death. So that man had enjoyed
all sorts of delights in this world; and the time of trial being over,
confirmed in Grace, he had lived eternally happy and blessed.

But sin has deprived him of all that happiness, and has reduced him to all
sorts of suffering and misery. Which Job considering in the midst of his
miseries, he had reason to curse the day of his birth, when he saw himself in
inevitable miseries. You must consider that Job did not curse the day that God
created him in; on the contrary, he blessed him for all, because he was his
faithful Servant, and so he desired to satisfy divine Justice for all his
sins, which he had committed. Now because he so desired, God permitted the
Devil to tempt him in diverse manners, that Job's faithfulness might be manifest
before all men, and the Devil himself.

But they that understand not the way of God, judge that Job was impatient;
which is false: For his soul rejoiced, in that God pleased to use him as a
mirror of patience, to confound the Devil; who could never make him fall into
sin, though he essayed it so many several ways. God knew that Job's heart was
submitted to his holy will, and that he offered himself continually to him, to
be proved in what manner it pleased him. And because of these wishes, God
permitted that the Devil might tempt him. Now if the Devil had had power over
man, he had not needed to ask God's permission to tempt Job; for he would have
done it of himself, without any permission.

But he has no power over man, save what he by his own free will gives him.
Besides, God can never do any evil to man, nor permit that it befall him,
without the consent of his free will. So if we commit sin, it is of our own
free will; as also when we damn our selves: for God can never damn any person,
without doing the greatest evil that ever was: which cannot proceed from God,
who can never do any evil. But it is our sins that damn us, and not God: for if
there were no sin, there should be no damnation: and sin depending on man's
free will, we must not attribute our damnation, either to God, or to the Devil:
seeing God gives us always Grace in abundance to save us; and the Devil has
no power to damn us.

So that man alone is truly blameable for the sins which he commits; and ought
never to attribute the fault to the Devil, because he cannot wrong us, if we
will not. He may well bark, as the chained Dogs, but he cannot bite us, unless
we approach him: And therefore, my Son, you ought never to believe that the
Devil is the cause of your evil doing, though all evils come from him; he
cannot effect them in us, without our consent. He may well afflict our Body or
Spirit; when we desire to purge our Souls by suffering.

Then God suffers him to tempt us, by the most salutary things: As he may
permit the Devil to bring to poverty a Good Man, when he sees that he would
forget himself by Worldly Goods; God loving his Soul, so takes away his Riches
as the occasion of the Damnation of his Soul. Sometimes also he takes away his
Honor, or his Health, lest these should hinder the perfection of his Soul. And
it is not always directly man's will that these things should be taken away from
him; for he complains sometimes of it: but when God takes them away, it is
always with the indirect will and consent of man. For example, the person does
not desire to be poor, afflicted, or sick; but desires that God send him every
thing that is necessary for his salvation: And God regarding that good will,
removes from him whatever might hinder the advancement of the desired
Salvation. And that is a fatherly Love which God bears to Man, and not a
Punishment, as the natural sense takes it, and complains of it: But it is
truly what the person desired in the bottom of his soul, viz, salutary things.
And the Prophet even prays God, That he would constrain his rebellious will. By
which we may see, that God never afflicts a person, without his will and
consent direct or indirect.

Because he created him altogether free, he cannot be touched to good or evil:
no more by God, than by the Devil, who can never cause man to sin against his
will direct or indirect. But man does not always know the indirect will he has
to sin, and for that says or believes, that it is the Devil that makes him sin,
against his will; but that is only an excuse for their sin.

It Is true, the Devil can tempt man against his will, but cannot make him sin
against his will; he may trouble his spirit, and make him remember what he
should forget, And forget what he ought to mind: But if the person be well upon
his guard, and will not do evil, he shall discover easily that that comes from
the Devil, being against his will; and so will betake himself to continual
Prayer to God, which Jesus Christ has so much recommended to us, as most
necessary for our salvation. Since we have continually an Enemy to combat, we
must continually have Arms to defend us: and that will be necessary all the
days of our life: That is it which the Apostle counsels us, To pray always,
without ceasing: Because we have always need of divine succor and help,
against the continual Assaults which the Devil gives us. For it is his business
and employ to do the most evil he can; And as a Merchant accounts himself happy
to gain much Money by his Trafick, or an Artist by his Labors; so also the
Devil accounts himself happy in gaining many souls to himself, that he may
exercise on them his Cruelty and Malice. And therefore he never ceases for his
part to labor, and invent new snares to catch the soul of man. And when we
shut the door of our heart to him on one side, he attempts to enter by some
window on the other.

So that, all human wisdom is not able to discover all the Subtilties of Satan;
who being a most subtle spirit, surpasses in subtilty the capacity of man's
spirit. And therefore is it that he must of absolute necessity use continual
Prayer, to discover the tentations of the Devil, which he cannot know without a
divine Light; and yet less has he power to resist them, without the assistance
of God: Whom he ought continually to invocate, and call for help, without
intermission; Seeing the Devil never sleeps, and watches over us when we rest.
But the strength of Faith, and Hope in God, can make us overcome the Devil, and
despise him, as but miserable impotence: Seeing he can never make us fall into
any sins, without the consent of our own will, which refusing him, he can in no
wise hurt man, although he should tempt him with all his might, during all his
life. These tentations serve only for greater and true virtues to the man:
because he passes the time of his trial, in testifying his faithfulness to God;
while he does not consent to the tentations the devil offers.

And I account it a much happier state to be tempted, than not to be so, while
we resist the tentations, seeing they purge our souls, and satisfy the Justice
of God, who has in Justice enjoined penitence for our sins, which we must
needs accomplish, during the time of our trial, which God has limited since
the creation of man.

And if we will not voluntarily suffer the tentations of the Devil now, we must
suffer abundantly more sensible pains after our death, when the soul (being
separated from this mortal body) feels more vividly the separation from his
God, than it does when joined with its mortal body, which diverts the sense of
that separation by its five natural senses, which seeing, hearing, tasting,
smelling, and feeling, gross and earthly things, are suspended and amused, that
he cannot feel so lively the separation of his soul from God; and so charms his
great misery, with the amusements of earthly things.

Which are nothing but truly Charms and Bewitchings: for though we see by
experience, that never any person in the world, was fully satisfied and content
with earthly things, although enjoying all they could demand of them; so love
we them, and that love ruins us from the Love of God, without that we feel the
pain of it.

But after death all these gross and earthly things being ended as to us,
thence shall we feel vividly the absence of God, because not diverted more with
other things; and that shall endure until the time of our trial shall be past,
which God alone knows how long it shall endure. But it is most certain, that he
that will not voluntarily endure the tentations of the Devil in this present
mortal life, shall assuredly suffer them more sensibly after death; seeing no
evil shall remain unpunished, and no good without recompense. And he that does
the good of resisting the Devil, in not following his tentations, must expect
an everlasting Reward; and therefore methinks, not to be tempted in this mortal
life, is the greatest of all tentations. Since it deprives us of the good of
satisfying the Justice of God, and oblieges us to suffer afterward more
sensible pains.

And therefore, my Son, be not offended to feel the tentation of the Devil, but
resist it valiently, for the Glory is in the combat, and not in Idleness and
Rest; seeing while we feel not tentation, it is a sign that the Devil holds us
in a lethargique sleep, to cause us to die an eternal death insensibly and
without pain. But when he combats us with all his forces, it is a sign that he
does not hold us, and that he fears to lose us. Therefore take courage, and
pray God with an humble heart, that he may give you strength, to overcome the
Enemy. But never say, it is the Devil makes you do evil: but smite on your
Breast, and confess your guilt; since the Devil cannot compel you to do evil,
but only your perverse will, when it consents to his tentations.

For if the Devil could speak, when you say that it is he made you do evil, and
sin, he would give you the lie; and say, that it was not he that made you sin;
but that it was your own will, without the consent of which, you cannot sin.
You may well sin, without the Devil; for his malice has entered into us by
Adam's first sin: but the Devil cannot bring forth sin in us without our
consent. You are always free to do evil, though the Devil do not tempt or
compel you; because your nature was corrupted by the first sin, and thence all
men from Adam bring with them in their nativity that corruption and inclination
to evil.

But when man is arrived to the use of reason, he ought thereby to discern good
from evil: and choose which he will follow. Yea, he has a natural instinct,
which makes him discern evil from good; for we see often a Child without any
Discretion, be ashamed for having done evil; and his countenance testifies
sufficiently that he knows when he commits evil: And therefore we ought never
to believe, that we cannot discern good from evil, to make choice: for that is
but to flatter our selves.

For lo! the wickedest man in the world, however blinded in his sins, knows
assuredly well enough when he does evil: but he has no will to change his
wickedness into good, or he has not the courage to resist the Devil, and that
because he has given him so much power over his spirit. Otherwise man has in
him a good judgment, beyond any other creature: and by that judgment he can
assuredly know and discern good from evil: And it is free for him to choose the
good and hate the evil, by an absolute act of his will, which the Devil cannot
hinder.

And moreover, he has power to resist the Devil by faith, and hope in God, who
never fails, to come to the relief of a man who asks and desires it.

And therefore, my Son, you must never say, that the Devil made you do any
evil: which were to make you his slave, and testify your subjection to him, as
are the Sorcerers, who have given him their souls, and promised to obey him.
For such have truly obliged themselves to do all the evil he pleases: and
when they do it not, he beats and abuses them.

But you being a Child of God, and voluntarily subject to him, you must nor
fear that the Devil can constrain you to sin against your will, and so never
attribute to him the fault you commit your self. It is true, the Devil first
incites good persons to sin; but they should despise him, and not follow him,
yea, and mock at his tentations. But we must always watch over his surprisals,
and never sleep in the way of true virtue. Believe then the Apostle's counsel,
where he says, My Brethren, be sober, and watch, for that very reason, because
the Devil goes about us like a roaring Lion, seeking to Devour us. We must
resist him courageously; and not say, I was not thinking of the Devil, when I
fell into evil. For he desires willingly that we do evil without thinking on
it. That is his best recreation. For it does not fall out that good persons do
evil, but while they sleep, and think not of evil: Then is it that the Devil
acts most in us, and causes that we think not of it, till after the evil is
committed. But our negligence or Sleepiness will not find excuse before God,
seeing we are obliged to watch always, if we would arrive at true Virtue. To
which, she exhorts you, who cares for your soul.

Holstein, near Gottorp Castle, May 13. 1672. St. Vet. ANTONIA BOURIGNON.

THE XVIII. LETTER. The Good and Evil Spirit are known by their Fruit.
To the same, giving him the signs to know, whether it is the Good or Evil
Spirit that moves us: showing also a twelfth Artifice of the Devil, by which he
causes us to impute our Vices to our natural propensions, without suspecting
him to lurk therein, that he may remain unknown.

My Son;
I see yet one difficulty which occurs to your Spirit: to wit, How you should
discover, when the Devil insinuates himself into your good Actions; and how you
shall know that it is he that moves you to do good, that he may catch you; or
to cause that what you do with a good intention, turn to his Honor. For you
protest, that you will not obey him, nor follow his tentation in any thing,
when you discover and know that he tempts you. Believe me, my Son, that is most
easy to discern; provided you have an absolute will to resist the Devil. It is
very good and most easy to discover, if it is the good or evil spirit, who
moves us in all our actions and words, to do or say any thing, small or great,
because these two spirits have their qualities and conditions quite different,
and work in us quite contrary operations, and dispositions. So that you may as
it were feel with your finger, if it is a good or an evil spirit, which moves
you to say or do any thing, by the dispositions you shall feel in your Soul.

For the good spirit produces in our souls Charity, Joy, Peace, Patience,
Long-suffering, Goodness, Bounty, Meekness, Chastity, Faith, Continence, and
Modesty: And the evil spirit on the contrary produces therein Self-love,
Sadness, Trouble, Impatience, Rashness, Wickedness, Fretting, Pride, Despair,
Intemperance, Inequality, Unconstancy, and Impurity: which are all things
contrary to the fruits of the good Spirit. And as the tree is known by its
fruit, so may we know the evil spirit by the fruit he produces in our souls:
And therefore we must always examine, if our enterprises or the will or
intentions we have to do or leave undone any thing, produce in our souls
Charity, Peace, Faith, Joy, and the rest: And then we may be assured that our
enterprises and wills are from God; seeing they bring unto us the fruits of his
spirit.

But if on the contrary, we feel in our souls Self-love, Sadness, Impatience,
and the rest; we may well be assured that our desires and enterprises are
excited by the Devil. Which is a firm and sure rule. We need not then amuse our
selves at fine speculations, to discover if we be moved by the Devil to do or
leave undone any thing, while we feel in our selves the effects of a good or an
evil spirit. For the Devil will never incite to Charity, seeing it is a divine
Quality, which the Devil has not in his power, and which unites souls to God:
But he draws from self-love all manner of advantage, and declines the soul from
the love of God.

For he that loves himself, covets Pleasures, honor and Riches, and all that
is not God; and so he is sad, and is not in the capacity to acquire true
Virtue, for he has not courage to resist the tentation of the Devil; but
suffers himself rather to be overcome by dark melancholy Thoughts. But the good
Spirit banishes these thoughts by the joy which it brings to the Soul: And
although there were all sorts of occasions of Sadness externally, even for our
sins; that good Spirit comforts and rejoices the bottom of the soul amidst the
most sensible Troubles and Pains. When we have then inward joy in the midst of
sufferings it is an assured testimony that the holy Spirit dwells in us. Which
has often rejoiced me in the midst of Suffering and Persecutions: I felt
therein a great joy in the bottom of my Soul, in lamenting my sins; and I
thanked God that he gave me these Tears of Repentance.

But the Devil gives only counterfeit and external joys, which afflict and
grieve the heart when they are over: that is the cause why we see worldly
persons always search after new Recreations and Divertisements: For the one is
no sooner gone, but Melancholy and Sadness seises the heart, who would so
divert himself: and for that he hunts insatiably after new divertisments,
without finding withal true Contentment, which we cannot have but by the joy of
the Holy Spirit, and that joy is not to be found among the Divertisments of the
World. I was astonished, to hear one day of a person, who would re-establish
Israel, that he searched for a great House with a Garden, to divert himself and
walk therein, as also that he must sometimes go to walk in the field, or go in
a Barque of Pleasure or Boat, to divert himself; which gave me enough to
understand, that the Holy Spirit had not yet brought forth his fruits in his
soul, though he was accounted a Saint. For then should he not have needed human
Divertisments to be joyful by.

As for me, I know by experience, that I have more joy and contentment in my
soul, in Solitude, and far from human divertisments; than I have in men's
conversation, or amongst the most divertising Objects. Which gives assurance,
that my joy proceeds from the Holy Spirit. It must needs be that it comes not
from human means: for it were my Consolation, never to come out of my Closet,
and to hear nothing but in my own heart and inner man.

But the Joy which proceeds from the evil Spirit, terminates and ends always in
Sadness and Melancholy, with an earning after new Divertisments, to divert that
Sadness; so that it is most easy to Discover, if it is the good or evil
spirit; which dwells in our souls, by the Dispositions and operations which we
feel in them; when we have the desire to do or say any thing, we need not so
much go to consider if it is in appearance good, or indifferent, to know if it
comes from God, as to examine the disposition which that desire brings into our
soul: to wit, if it is in Peace, and waits for the effect of its desires with
Patience and Long-suffering. For that is a sign the Spirit of God has given us
that desire, and that it is his will that we effect it: but if we perceive that
that desire to do or say any thing mar our Peace; and disturb our Spirit with
impatience, and attempt to precipitate us before the time of fulfilling our
desires; That is a sign that it comes from an evil spirit: And if the desire,
or thing is good in it self, it is a sign that the Devil would mix and
insinuate himself into that good work, to reap his Glory thence. However, we
must not cease to do or speak what is good in it self, but we must be on our
guards, that we suffer not the Devil to insinuate himself in it. We must then
use continual Prayer, to have God's succor and Assistance, and Strength to
overcome the tentation, which the Devil offers us, while we are doing good.

We must never cease from doing Good Works, because of the tentation of the
Devil; For he would gladly always hinder them if he could; But we must examine
well the inward disposition of our Souls, to discover if the Devil does not
insinuate himself therein, that we may purify our intentions, and beware that
the Devil find no advantage therein. And if you will know, my Son, when it is
God that inspires any thing to you; remark always if it is accompanied with
Goodness, Benignity, Faith, Continence and Chastity: For God never gives
inspirations that are not accompanied with these conditions: But the Devil
often gives inclinations to do good with Fretting, Malice, Despite, Despair,
Inconstance, Levity, and Impurity. I have seen sometimes persons that gave to
the Poor by Despite and Fretting, upbraiding and reproaching them, without any
faith of an eternal Reward. I have seen others assist at public Devotions
with insolence and lightness; And now adays almost all marry by incontinence
and impurity. All these things, though good in themselves, are induced and
excited by the evil spirit; since they tend to an evil end, though good in
appearance. And therefore must we always be upon our guard, and watch against
so powerful an Enemy, who attempts to surprise us in all our actions, both good
and indifferent, that he may render them evil: therefore we must study well to
discern the good spirit from the evil: Which we may do, seeing there are
assured marks to know them. Never say then, My son, that you know not if it is
God or the Devil who moves you to do or omit any thing: but rather acknowledge
with Humility of heart, that you are not vigilant enough and diligent to
discover that evil spirit, who dazles your understanding that you should not
know him. For every word you speak or action you do, you may discover if it
comes of the Devil, provided you make a serious reflection upon your self; But
the misery is, that we are distracted and wandering, and the Devil makes us
forget what we should remember, and puts in our mind what we should forget,
that he may bring confusion in all our behavior.

Remark well that Advertisment, and you shall find by experience, that it is
but too well grounded; for since the Devil can no more make you fall into
manifest sins, he will always endeavor to make you contradict the holy spirit,
which you do not yet know well. You have indeed resolved in general to obey
him, and follow him; as you have done in abandoning the World, in loosing your
affections from earthly goods, and desiring to follow Jesus Christ in his
Lowness and Humility. All that proceeds from the Spirit of God, who has
governed you in the most important things, and the Devil could not hinder it.
But now he attacques you in small things and of little import, that he may
hinder you to do the will of God in every thing; and often he gains your will
to make it contrary to the will of God in common and ordinary things. For if
you reflect upon your self, you shall find there a certain opposition to
whatever I propose to you, which comes often even contrary to your will; yea,
you are vexed that you should have so opposed or contradicted me. Yet on the
first occasion you do it again: which cannot proceed of your self, since you
are displeased at it. Now it is a firm and true Rule, that whatever Evil we do
against our will, comes of the Devil; and not of our selves. I know that Spirit
of contradiction which you have against what I desire, comes not of your own
will. For you would gladly obey me in every thing, seeing you know that I never
desire any evil: But you cannot in effect obey me in things good and salutary,
which comes assuredly of the Devil, who is a spirit directly contrary to the
Spirit of God, which governs me. For he moves as soon as I speak, and brings
some contradiction or opposition to what I propose; he is troubled enraged and
frets, and would cause among us Thunder and Lightning, as Heat and Cold do
which occur in the air; Which you do often, and know not to help it, because
you have not sufficiently Discovered that it is the Devil does it in you
against your will: For you allege sometimes reasons, as if you would sustain
his Quarrel, and show that you have reason to contradict me; which you could
not do, if you believed that I have the Spirit of God, from whom no evil can
proceed: But the Devil makes you forget that, and excite in you a spirit of
contradiction: to which your nature is also inclined, which is the cause you
Discover not sufficiently that it is the Devil; and attribute it to your
natural inclination. Which yet is not so, though it mix it self with the
Devil's motion. It is his custom, to follow every ones natural inclination, to
cover himself the better that he be not known.

And by that Device, he remains unknown, each attributing his fault to his
nature, one would be supported in his Anger; Another in his Sadness and
Morosity; Another in his Lust. Saying often, I cannot help these things, it is
my Nature. That is a language the Devil hears gladly; because so he lurks
unknown, and makes us go from evil to worse unto death: But they that have
esteemed the Malice and Wickedness of the Devil, natural Weakness and
infirmities, shall see clearly at death that it is Devilish Malice which mixes
it self with every ones natural inclination. And the Devil labors always to
discover these natural inclinations, that he may the better play his part, and
remain unknown under that covert of natural infirmities.

And so he amuses many, that they never think it is the Devil, because he is so
straightly united with their natures: and that is his subtility. He knows well,
he should not be so much obeyed, if he gave tentations contrary to ones natural
inclinations, and so he follows always every ones Nature, and augments the
inclinations which he finds there. If he meets with a Cholerique person, he
stirs him up the more to Anger. If a Luxurious, or Sad person, he augments
their Luxury or Sadness to gain them all on the weakest side; he does as an
Enemy, that would attacque a City, he will not assault where it is fortified,
but where it is weakest; if he find some corner of the wall broken, he attempts
to break it more, that by it he may enter the Town* being the most advantageous
entry for him: And the Devil our Town Enemy does the very same; he cannot
surprise us in things wherein we are on our guard: so he attacques us where we
do not expect it: and by that means he gains easily our will, and makes it obey
him in what we have inclination to.

We must then always make a serious reflection on all our words and actions,
and then we shall easily discover, what comes from the devil; seeing it has
always his qualities, and produces within us the fruits of Envy, Trouble,
Impatience, Sadness, and others which I marked above. We may also remark enough
the qualities of the things the Devil causes us to do; For if you will examine
your self narrowly, you shall always find something in your words untrue or
dissembled, or spoke by vain complacency to please men: which makes that there
is not always Justice in your words; For he that speaks by the good Spirit, is
true in the bottom, and never speaks any thing to please or flatter men: but
declares natively the truth of things; as well what is contrary to himself, as
what is advantageous: seeing he seeks only to please God alone.

To know if our actions are excited by the Devil or not, you need but mark, if
they be done for the Glory of God, or for your own, and if you seek not your
self therein. For the Devil will always incite us to seek our selves in all
that we do. He knows well that Self-love mars the Love of God: And so he
excites our understanding to consider, if what we do or say shall be
advantageous to us, if it shall give us Pleasure, Honor or Profit: and when we
observe none of these advantages in it, he slackens our courage, that we do not
accomplish our undertaking, nor prosecute our work.

The good Spirit on the contrary incites always to labor for the Glory of God,
and Assistance of our Neighbor: And so he that is guided thereby does nothing
for his own proper interest, but endeavors to his power to assist his
Neighbor in need: because the Charity, which that good spirit carries in it,
attends more the common good than his own particular.

By that, my Son, you may observe all your words and actions, to know if they
are excited by the good or evil Spirit; For these are infallible marks to
discern the spirits, if from God, or the Devil, without amusing you to
Speculate or seek to discover the Devil in himself, since he is an invisible
spirit, and incomprehensible to your understanding: but you shall always
discover him infallibly by his qualities, and the fruits which he produces in
your soul, and your inward disposition will tell you it. Which she assures you
of, who is

Your well-affected in Jesus Christ, ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
Holstein near Gottorp Castle 15. May 1672. St. vet.
THE XIX. LETTER. We cannot, in this Life, be Free from Tentations.
To the same; who was grieved, for that the Devil has power to tempt us so
variously. A Thirteenth Artifice of the Devil is shown him, wherein he breaks
the firmness of the mind, by Sadness. That Tentations are necessary and
profitable to try and purify us.

My Son;
I See you are grieved in Spirit because the Devil has power to tempt men so
many diverse ways; but you should rejoice, while you learn the truth of every
thing. For if you knew it not, the Devil would seduce you by ignorance, as he
has done so many thousands who have obeyed him, because they did not know it;
they thought to follow the will of God, while they followed certainly that of
the Devil, and so have perished insensibly.

For before God Ignorance does not excuse sin; every one is obliged to know
what he ought to do and omit, to attain to Salvation. We need not think to say
to God after death, Lord, I knew not this or that; or I thought not I did evil
in that; for all excuses will be uncurrent coin, which will not be received nor
approved of him; seeing we have abundantly the means to find, if we have the
desire to seek. What should we say, to see a man poor and miserable,
overcharged with his enemies, when he will not be at the pains to labor or
seek a better way of living, and would needs sleep and rest at his ease, though
he knew himself to be surrounded by his Enemies? we should certainly say, that
man were the cause of his own miseries, and of all the evil that may befall him.
And why will you not judge also, that he who neglects to search the means of
his salvation, and to discover the wiles of the Devil his Enemy; is the cause
of his own Damnation? for it can be imputed only to our selves, seeing we have
abundantly the means to find if we had a true desire to seek. Tell me, I pray
you, what cause of ignorance can a Christian pretend, who reads and hears the
Gospel, and the Teachings of Jesus Christ and his Apostles; to which he gives
credit, and accords that they teach that there is a Devil who is our Enemy, and
who seeks to Devour us; that our life is a continual combat; that we must watch
and pray, that we enter not into tentation. Notwithstanding men will not do
either the one nor the other; but live at ease, without fighting; they remain
in quiet amidst the danger of their Enemies.

And which is strange, when any would waken them out of that Lethargique Sleep,
they are grieved and dissatisfied, notwithstanding that Sleep will assuredly
procure them eternal Death, if they do not awake to fight their Enemies. We
cannot hinder that these Enemies assail us every where: but they are unwilling
to be discovered, because an Enemy discovered is half vanquished.

And therefore, my Child, you ought to rejoice rather than be sorrowful, that
God permits that I now discover so many wiles of the Devil; For you cannot make
that he be not wicked, and that all manner of malice proceeds not from him; nor
can you hinder that he tempt men, since our first parents have given him that
power: and if they had not done it, we give him daily the same power over us,
which he got over them, by the consent of our will to his tentation; It being
so, we must fight, or render to him; which were lamentable. For we were created
true Children of God, after his Image and Resemblance: And we should become by
our Sloth, Children of the Devil; which you must never suffer; but endeavor
to discover the evil, and resist it to your power: And bless God also, that he
sends you his Light, that you may know it, and beware of it; without afflicting
your self so much because the Devil hoth power to tempt men.

For tentations purify the soul, and render it agreeable to God: He takes
pleasure to see us fight his and our Enemies: And he gives us strength and aid
if we persevere constantly: yea he has prepared for us Triumphant Laurels and
Eternal Rewards of Victory. Therefore you must not give place to that
feebleness of spirit; to languish because the Devil has power to tempt men,
since it is not in you to take it from him: he has too long possessed it.

For since he made himself the Enemy of God, he has had power to do in himself
all the evil he pleased; although his evil cannot hurt man unless he consent.
For man has full liberty to resist him; as the Devil has full liberty to
tempt us. If that were not true, he could never have tempted Adam our first
Father, who was altogether holy and perfect at his Creation; and had not in his
beginning given any occasion to the Devil to tempt him. But the Devil being
created free, as well as man, he had power to do all the evil he pleased in
himself. For he would even be equal with God, which is a greater evil than to
tempt Adam in his innocence: And that of tempting men now is yet far less,
seeing they are corrupted by the first Sin; And it is yet less when he tempts
them, that have so often consented to him with deliberate will. And therefore,
my Son, you have no ground to fret because the Devil has power to tempt you;
but you ought truly to regret, that you have by your past sins given him so
much power over your soul. Resolve now to war against him with manly courage,
and hinder that he get more power over your soul, by resisting his tentations;
for that is a holy and salutary Resolution.

But that Grief which you conceive because the Devil has power to tempt you
and others, comes from him. He makes us always desire things impossible, and
such as are not in our power, that he may afflict and discourage us. For he
knows well, that a grieved and discouraged person, is not well fitted to resist
his tentations, and that in that state he can easily lead him from one evil to
another. And therefore he often causes vain griefs; such as is that, which
proceeds from that the Devil has so much power to tempt men, and also the
disturbing grief for our sins past, which are no more in our power.

These are Extremities into which the Devil attempts always to precipitate us.
It is true, we ought to regret that we have willingly given the Devil so much
power over us; and more lament our by past sins: but we must not therefore rest
in these griefs, seeing they would mar the Graces of God in us. It is better to
go to God by love and amendment of life, than by Melancholies, which proceed
from the Devil: for before his entry there was nothing but all joy in the world
and in the heart of man. So that sadness is truly a quality of the Devil; and
so man ought to Despise it if he seeks after true virtue. He ought indeed to
have a sincere regret from his heart, that he has offended God, and beg pardon
of him as often as he remembers his sins: but he ought never to suffer himself
to be overcome of grief, since what is past is not in his power; And though he
should destroy himself, he can never make that what is past should not be.

He ought then for penitence of his bypast sins, endeavor a true conversion
to God; departing from evil to do good, detesting sin to embrace true virtue.
Which is a true contrition, much more solid, than tears and immoderate sadness,
which the Devil ordinarily gives them that begin. Of which you must beware, my
Child; for God would be served with a ready and joyful heart: And he says, that
he treats with the converted sinner, as if he had never offended him. You
should then rejoice for the Grace God has given you to forsake the World, and
to turn from Vanity unto the Truth, which you now discover; and not afflict
your self, because the Devil has so much power to tempt men* seeing that power
cannot be exercised, but on those that give or have given him their full
consent: and that all things turn to good to them that fear God. When the Devil
tempts you, remember that he cannot hurt you without your own consent; and your
resisting his tentation renders you agreeable to God. For your soul must be
proved, as Gold in the Furnace, which grows still the purer by continuing in
the fire. Even so is a soul purified by long tentation, if it remain firm in
resisting; and nothing can hurt it, but sin; from which if it abstain, it
carries the victory over its enemies; and all they can do against it are but
false allarms, which try its Fidelity and Vigilance.

And therefore, we must not desire that the devils power should be taken from
him; but earnestly pray to God for strength to resist him, and fight until
death. For Jesus Christ in the prayer which he left to Christians, has not
asked to be free from tentation; but only not to be led to follow the
tentation, and to be delivered from evil: And since there is no other evil but
sin, we pray only to be delivered from it, and not from tentation; which is
often profitable and salutary for us; yea, sometimes necessary to our frailty.
For our nature is so feeble and corrupted, that it could not remain faithful to
God out of tribulations; forgetting ordinarily it self in too much Prosperity;
we see daily among men, that he that prospers, becomes proud, and fixes in the
world as in a place of abode, and permanent: And on the contrary, that he that
is in Adversity and tribulation, becomes humble, and has his recourse to God.
I speak of such as are well-meaning and pious; for to the wicked all turns to
evil: If they Prosper, they offend God the more; if they are in Adversity, they
blaspheme him, and despair.

And all these things arrive in temporal Prosperities and Adversities; so do
they also to them that seek after true Virtue: for not being tried by
Tentations and sufferings, they should not persevere in Virtue. Although they
were arrived at the profounest knowledge of divine Mysteries, had the Gift of
Prophesying, and doing Miracles; all that should vanish into smoke, except they
Pass through the furnace of Tentations, and Afflictions. For we cannot in this
life arrive at that degree of Perfection, in which Adam was at his Creation:
who yet fell full sordidly into sin against his God. He forgot God, and turned
himself to the Creatures; for he had all sorts of Prosperity, Joy, Content and
Pleasure, and knew not evil; he could not imagine that his turning from God,
would render him so miserable, having never felt any Misery.

But after he was tempted of the Devil, and saw by experience, that earthly
Pleasures and Contentments had rendered him so miserable; he was loath to stay
longer in them, and loved rather to embrace Sufferings, and Patience, as he did
all the time of his life, as to remain in the pleasures of an earthly Paradise:
which had made him forget his God, by sensible Pleasures. And if Adam a
Creature so noble, so holy and so perfect as God created him, could not remain
constant in the fidelity which he owed to his Creator, before his trial of
tentations, as he certainly did after them, how should we, contemptible and
frail Creatures, born with a propension to evil, be able to remain faithful to
God, without being proved by tentation? Our souls should be like wood silvered
on the outside, which rusts with a little rain: but we must endeavor to
render them Silver or Gold, purified by the fire of tentations and afflictions;
otherwise we can never arrive at true Virtue, to which you, my Son, aspire.

And therefore, rejoice, rather than afflict your self, because the Devil has
power to tempt you; for his tentations serve to perfect your soul, and to
acquire true Virtue; at which you cannot arrive, without passing through the
furnace of Tribulations and Tentation of the Devil. That Furnace is an
Instrument most necessary for the perfection of your soul. So Constrain your
self to embrace them, as St. Andrew embraced the Cross, Saying, O Good Cross.
Say also, O blessed Tentation! seeing by it I shall become more agreeable to
God. You have perhaps when in the World, loved your mistresses Favors or
Colors: Show now that you have chosen Jesus Christ for your Lover, love and
carry willingly his Colors and Livery, esteem as love-favours all the
Tentations which the Devil gives you: because Jesus Christ was clothed all the
days of his life with Tentations and Sufferings, both from Devils and Men. You
must then wear his Livery if you will be his Servant.

Do you not feel, my Son, that the Devil tempts you every day? yea, every hour
and moment; and for that you have need to fight and resist continually, if you
would be saved. It is a good sign, that you perceive and feel the tentation:
for many feel it not at all, and follow in every thing the tentation of the
Devil. Would you willingly be seized with that Lethargy? and would you wish
that the Devil should tempt you no more? that were an evident sign, that he
held you as his own; for ordinarily he tempts but little the persons that do
his will easily. He leaves such in quiet, and they are well content not to be
vexed with tentations. They imagine themselves to be then in a good state,
though they be in effect in the greatest of all tentations. But God has
delivered you from that danger, in making you know and feel the tentation; So
you can no more be ignorant of it. For I have showed you it too plainly; and
you feel it also upon occasion.

I see by the eyes of the Spirit, that the Devil moves your passions, so soon
as I open my mouth to speak to you; and I feel, that your inward motions are
stirred up to oppose and contradict mine: Which cannot proceed from your self;
for you have resolved assuredly to follow and hear me; because, you are
convinced in your conscience that the spirit of God governs me; And yet you
cannot do it upon occasion; and you feel fightings against whatever I propose
to you. Now if you will not resist thereto, you shall always follow the will of
the Devil, which you desire not to do.

You must then watch continually; and be never weary to resist the Devil, no
more than he is to tempt you. The greatest assault he gives you now, is to make
you contradict and oppose my will and desires. And that because he sees, that
if you follow my will, you follow assuredly the will of God, seeing I have no
other will but his: And therefore it is that he acts continually in you to
contradict me; and your spirit strives against mine, as Gabriel did with
Lucifer. You must resolve to which you will give the Victory. If you will that
the spirit which is in you have the Victory, that shall be the Devils will: But
if you will that the spirit which is in me, carry it; you must combat your
own, and hold it suspect in every thing. For from a spirit that is evil can
nothing good proceed. Now you cannot doubt but the spirit which is in you is
evil, seeing it opposes it self to mine, and does the things which you would
not of your own will do; and that you have displeasure from the bottom of your
soul, that you contradict me, and are not conformed to my will. For your own
will cannot be contrary to it self, and cannot will that which it wills not.

And so we must conclude, that it is the evil spirit who acts in you, contrary
to your own will: and since you will not obey him, you ought to be very glad
that I resist him upon occasion. For I hold him for my Enemy, and will oppose
him with all my power in every one in whom I perceive him, all I do in you. I
am then sure that it is the Devil, that evil spirit, who gives and inspires in
you these oppositions to my will; For if it were not he that opposes, you would
follow all my will and desires with joy.

Resist then valiently all your proper inclinations, and hold suspected all the
motion of your corrupt nature; to which the Devil is united, and by these
motions he acts in you: But receive my sentiments, and follow that which I
incline to, and you shall follow assuredly the Spirit of God: So shall you
carry the victory over that evil spirit, who troubles you now. Ply and submit
your understanding under the Holy Spirit, and never believe your self wiser
than him in any thing. For men are now abandoned to the spirit of error; and
their best Sciences are but Ignorance, their Wisdom Folly; And although you
think sometimes to have reason to contradict me, do it not: And after you shall
see that your reason cannot be better than mine, which you may experiment,
while I remain.

Your well-affected in Jesus Christ, ANTONIA BOURIGNON
Holstein near Gottorp Castle May. 19. 1672, St. vet.
THE XX. LETTER Spiritual Diligence is necessary to Salvation.
To the same; to whom is shown a Fourteenth snare of the Devil, more pernicious
than the rest, viz. Spiritual Negligence: He is moved to Spiritual Diligence,
by consideration of the diligence usually bestowed on temporal things, which
the Children of this World administer with more Care and Prudence than the
Children of Light do Spiritual Things.

My Son;
I Perceive, it appears some what difficult to you, to watch continually so
narrowly over all your Words and Actions: But believe me, if you do it not, the
Devil will assuredly surprise you in every thing: And you shall obey him
without knowing it. For he is a most cunning spirit, who watches always,
without rest. And therefore it is necessary, despising all difficulties to
resolve absolutely for the combat, if you will obtain salvation, and tend to
true Virtue. For without fighting, there is no Victory; and except you apply
your spirit, to watch diligently over all your actions and words, you shall
fall into all sorts of evil.

And therefore is it, that they call Negligence a mortal or capital sin. Now
Negligence is not understood to be a mortal sin, as signifying the want of
bodily travail and labor: for many persons are not obliged to bodily labor,
having other occupations of Body and Spirit more profitable and necessary
sometimes than bodily Labor: And when they apply themselves to those good and
useful things, they fall not into that sin of Negligence, which is called
mortal; for every one ought to occupy himself in different things, according to
his condition or disposition.

A sick person cannot labor bodily, and sometimes also not in Spirit neither,
because of his Infirmity, and so he falls not into the mortal sin of
Negligence: for he may by acting resignation to the will of God, be more
diligent, than one that labors both in Spirit and Body. A good Master of a
Family labors often more in eying and watching over his Servants, than he that
delves the Ground. An Artist labors more by ordering well the Building of a
House, than the Workman that builds it; And so with other persons, who perform
their duty, every one in his state and vocation.

So that we must not believe, that that sin of Negligence is committed by them
that labor not corporally, but by all them that neglect to watch over their
souls, and to discover the tentation of the Devil: Seeing such neglect their
eternal Happiness, and consent tacitly to the tentation of the Devil; which is
certainly a mortal sin, and causes Eternal Damnation: that is it, wherefore
this Negligence is accounted among capital sins, and ought to be called Mortal,
since it causes Death to the Soul.

For he that, through Negligence, does not resist the Devil, he leaves his soul
a prey to him; And he that searches not all means to find true Virtue, shall
never obtain it; but dying without it, shall never come to eternal Happiness:
And therefore you must of necessity have spiritual Diligence, if you would be
saved; For it were but flattering of your self to think, that God will receive
your Excuses, when you shall say, I did not know that the Devil had so much
Subtilty and Power over us to tempt us: or if you should think to excuse your
self before God by your Frailty and Weakness, you could not abstain from sin,
and could not attain to true Virtue, because you could not find the way. For
all these Excuses and false Reasons God will not accept, because he searches
the Reins, and tryes the Consciences, and sees the least motions of our wills;
And he knows (without needing witnesses) what Diligence we have given to watch
over our Souls, and what Diligence to evite sin, and follow true Virtue.

For God is not as men, who amuse one another by the false Philosophy which
they have learnt in the Schools: which serves only to maintain wickedness, and
excuse the malice of their likes. They invent smooth words, to make wickedness
appear Truth, and please themselves with these fine words, and suffer
themselves to be persuaded, that Falsehood is Truth, when adorned with the fine
terms and words of their false Philosophy. But God regards the Essence and
Reality of the thing, and sees even to the bottom of our Souls; and so he knows
if we have done all Diligence in earnest to discover the deceits of the Devil,
and find the means to arrive at true Virtue; and finding that we have done
neither the one nor the other we are condemned, without place for Excuses.

And so my Child, you must not be deceived: Think not to find Excuses before
God, when you have lived in spiritual Negligence; for he will not accept them.
He has given you a Body and Spirit, and that to apply them both diligently to
eschew evil and follow good. But the misery is, that men now adays are fallen
into so profound an ignorance, that they employ body and soul in Care and
Diligence to acquire the things of the earth, and render themselves by that
means incapable of having spiritual Diligence: for when a Vessel is filled with
dung, there can be nothing that is good put in it.

Alas! what are all the Cares of the business and affairs of the world, other
than Dung, which has filled your Spirit? You were a diligent Merchant; and
your care and diligence has heaped up money to you: but now what will you do
with that money? you cannot expend it for Meat and Drink and Clothing, nor can
you carry it with you at Death; and if you leave it to your Relations, they
shall thereby become more vicious, and proud. So that every way you must
acknowledge, that your spirit has been always filled with the dung of cares
and diligence for earthly things; And it is no wonder that so you could not
discover the wiles of the Devil, nor the means which advance unto true Virtue,
because your Diligence was employed about other things. But now, when the
Goodness of God has discovered to you the truth of these things, you must
endeavor to use that Diligence to discover the tentations of the Devil, and
the means to arrive at Virtue, which formerly you used in your temporal
affairs. I believe you would not then let slip any occasion, wherein you saw
any profit, without accepting it; and that you suffered not your self to be
deceived, when you could discover the Deceits they would put on you.

Now if you had such vigilance, for the goods which pass away so swiftly, and
can give no help at death: how can it now be difficult for you to use the same
diligence to discover the Devil, and the sure way of true Virtue, that you may
thereby gain Goods that shall never end? Ought you not rather to double your
Diligence, Care, and Study to acquire eternal Goods, than to find difficulty in
it; which you found not to acquire the goods of this world. Think you them more
worthy than the eternal? I do not think so of you, seeing there is no
comparison betwixt them. For temporal goods afford nothing to our souls, but
care to preserve them, and regret to leave them: whereas vigilance to acquire
eternal Goods, brings an inward Joy, Hope in God, and repose in the Soul: And
beside, we cannot live in spiritual Negligence, without being in that mortal
sin of sloth.

I know you desire not to live in sin: but you have not sufficiently discovered
in what that sin of Sloathfulness consists. It appears to you a repose, to live
without tentations, and without watching so precisely over your words and
actions: but that small Repose you might have in this life, should cause you
eternal Disquiet.

For we are not come into this world to rest, but to be careful, to watch and
to labor for our Salvation ever until we have obtained it. We must not then go
to change the order of God. He has sent us into this world, as unto a place of
Banishment, or into a Prison of Penitence, to satisfy his divine Justice: And
we would yet live here in ease, without Care, or Diligence, or watching against
our Enemies. Though worldly persons watch sometimes night and day, to gain a
little Money, some vain and empty Honor, or infamous Pleasure. Believe me,
these Worldlings shall rise up against us in the day of judgment, and confound
us, that they have watched, labored and cared more in the service of the
world, than you have done in the Service of God.

Apply your self then to the Diligence necessary for discovering the Wiles of
the Devil your sworn Enemy; for he will not cease to tempt you, and endeavor
to surprise you, as long as you live in this world; so you must not cease to
watch over your actions and words, that you may resist him always: And that is
the reason, why the Scripture says, Our Life is a continual Warfare. Nor must
you take that Spiritual Diligence for a difficult thing, for it will become
easy by use: and it is most necessary, useful, and profitable, far beyond that
of things temporal and corporal; As things durable and eternal, are much more
estimable, than transitory and mortal ones: And yet we see the men of the world
take so much care for the present life, which is of so short continuance. For a
Gentleman will take heed to all his words and actions, that he do or say
nothing against his Reputation: He has also always his spirit occupied to
perceive if others carry that Respect and Honor to him, which he desires; and
all his care is intent to perserve his reputation in this world, neglecting no
occasion to maintain it. He exposes sometimes even his life for a point of
Honor; or takes away the life of another, of whom he thinks he has received
some affront.

And what care, study and fatigues do they take who would perfectionate
themselves in some Sciences, whether in Divinity, Law, or Medecin? what
frequenting of schools? How many Books must they buy, and how many Masters must
they seek? And care to observe things well, to come to some reputation of a
learned man? Now though all such Honors be vain and perishing, yet you know,
my Son, how much care a Merchant must adhibit to order his affairs: There are
many who neglect often their eating and drinking and sleeping to attend
constantly their profit. How much care takes a Labourer or Tradesman, to gain
their food? And God gives you yours so liberally, without Care or Trouble, that
you may the better take care of your Salvation, and labor the more for the
perfection of your soul.

Is it then just that you should complain of a little difficulty you have to
watch over all your words and actions, to find true Virtue and discover the
Snares of the Devil? Methinks that is the least a Christian can do to attain to
eternal life and happiness. For man is created for no other end but that
happiness and eternity. If then he is capable (as it appears that he is) to
watch and be careful, and labor for things temporal and transitory, how much
more ought he to do the same for eternal things? we see that Merchants go by
Sea and Land, and put their life in hazard to gain a little Money. We see
Tradesmen pained and sweeting by excessive labor, and that they do mean,
abject and nasty works, to gain their poor nourishment. We see hired Servants
subject to the will of their Master, and watch and attend with diligence the
services they owe them, and that to gain a small wage or fee. And a Christian
will not do all these things, to keep himself out of the Snares of his Enemy,
and to acquire true Virtue, which conducts his soul to eternal life: Were it
not a great weakness to say, that it is difficult to watch always over our
words and actions, to become agreeable to God? While we see all men doing the
same thing, upon accounts that no way deserve it. How much care takes a
faithful Page to serve his Master? He Will study almost night and day to do what
he knows is pleasing to him: and performs with diligence what he knows to be
his will; And when he has served him well and gained his friendship, he
obtains nothing but a pitiful temporary Wage.

I have heard a Story related of a Servant, who had faithfully served a Prince,
so that he was well satisfied with him; And for that promised that he would
give him, whatever he should demand. It happened a long time after that promise
that the Servant fell sick, and was in great danger of death, and when he felt
himself at the extremity, he entreated earnestly to be visited by his prince.
The Prince being come to his bedside, asked him, what he would demand of him.
The Servant demanded, that he might not die of that disease, and that he might
live yet some years. The master Answered; that it was not in his power, and
that he must demand of him something else. After the servant demanded of him
one years life, or a Months, or in end one days life? But the Prince continued
to answer, that he could not do what he demanded, since it was beyond his
power, and that he must demand of him things possible, as Money, Medecines, or
other Benefits, that were in his power. But the servant replied, that he needed
neither Money nor other Service, nor Medecines, which could not prolong his
Life one day: And so he demanded of him assurance of his Salvation, since he
could not prolong his life; that if he must die, he might do it with peace, and
in assurance to die happy, and to be saved. That demand afflicted much the
Prince, and made him answer, that his Salvation depended upon the Grace and
Mercy of God, and consequently it was not in his power to promise and far less
to give it him. Which grieved the Servant so exceedingly, that turning away
from his Prince, and turning his face to the wall, he said, O Miserable man
that I am, have I passed all the days of my life to serve and please a Master,
who is not able to assist me in my greatest need, nor give me one hours life? I
will not henceforth serve so impotent a Master. And in that resolution he made
a vow to God, That if he would restore him his health, that he would forsake
men, and retire to the Desert, to serve God alone, and attend the perfection of
his Soul, and so give himself to a Lord, that could give him Life and
Salvation. Which he did in effect; for God having restored him to health, he
retired to the Desert, and there lived a good life during some years, and in
the end died well. Does not that History open your understanding, to understand
the blindness of men, who spare nothing in the service of the world; but bestow
therein their care and labor without scruple to please men such as themselves,
or to gain a little earthly Goods?

For Although that Story were not true: (as I believe firmly that it is) Yet we
see daily that every one cares and labors for a little Money, or a little
Favor, which they expect from men; though it is most certain, that they can
give us nothing that is solid, and that they leave us at death, not having the
power to give us an hour of life.

Ought we not to have shame and confusion, to say or think, that it is
difficult to watch always over our Words and Actions to discover the Snares of
the Devil, and the means to attain true Virtue? While thereon depends our
eternal Happiness; and there is nothing can concern us so nearly as that. For
the devil snatches all occasions to surprise us: And if we are not well on our
guard, we shall not speak one word, nor do one action, whereby he will not
cause us to sin, although we do not perceive it. For he will make us speak,
what we ought to keep in silence; and be silent of what we ought to speak; to
draw thence his advantage, and to bring disorder, and confusion in all, to make
us sin, or others by our means. And therefore, pray I you, to be diligent and
to watch over all your actions, that you may overcome the Devil, and arrive at
true virtue. Which she wishes you, who loving your Salvation, remains forever.

Your well-affected in Jesus Christ, ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
Holstein near Gottorp Castle June 1. 1672. St. vet.
THE XXI. LETTER. Spiritual Diligence necessary, beyond all other Virtues.
To the same; showing him how necessary Spiritual Diligence is, to confirm the
mind in virtue; And to remove yet two Impediments of the Devil, Viz. (15) sins
of Omission wherewith the Devil tempts good persons: and (16) self-love, which
everywhere mixes it self and is a continual sin.

My Son;
YOU must know that Spiritual Diligence is the most necessary of all the
Virtues, without which you cannot persevere in any Virtue; and the Devil will
always labor to cause you to lose them by degrees, if you keep not firmly that
of Spiritual Diligence.

For if he see you to have obtained the Virtue of Humility, he will excite
occasions of Pride, as the Praises of men, Prosperity in temporal Goods, and
such like, to make you lose your Humility, which you have already obtained, by
the Grace of God. Be always on your guard then, with Spiritual Diligence,
otherways you shall insensibly loose Humility, before you be aware. Which befell
my self; for after God had given me the Virtue of Humility, I felt again Pride
rise in my heart. I felt a dissatisfaction when men gave me no Title of Honor
or Respect, but called me simply by my Name. I even murmured at their
incivility; and though I testified nothing of it outwardly, my Humility was
notwithstanding weakened inwardly.

So that if God had not given me spiritual Diligence, to watch continually over
my Soul, I had assuredly lost that comely Virtue of Humility, as also that of
Voluntary Poverty. For after I was entirely freed from the Covetousness of this
worlds Goods, and had effectually forsaken them, I felt covetous thoughts many
years after: For certain pious persons having demanded of me, to put some Money
in fellowship with them in their businesses; which I did with intention to
bestow all the Gain upon the Poor; but after I had made that resolution, I
began to argue with my self* If it was not enough to leave them the half of the
Gain, or some part of it, and keep the rest for my self.

But examining my Conscience with Spiritual Diligence, I discovered, that the
Devil intended by that to cause me to relapse into the Covetousness of the
goods which by Virtue I had abandoned: Which befell me also again after many
years. One time while I was at Malines about some business, I conceived a
desire to buy some Laces (which are made there in abundance) with design to
sell them dearer at Lisle, and so save the expense of my Voyage. Now after I
had boughr them, and saw appearance of gain I thought I might well keep that
gain for my self, though I was then in a house of poor, which I had undertaken
to govern for Charity, and to employ thereon all my Labor and Industry, for
entertaining those Miserable Girls, without seeking my own particular interest.

But the Devil endeavors always to surprise persons of a good will by most
subtle snares, unless they remain firmly fixed in spiritual Diligence, and
watch over all their words and actions. For though it seems often that our
actions are good, reasonable, and for a good end; yet the Devil furs himself
therein; and attempts to get his advantage. And when he cannot gain much, he
contents himself with little, but yet brings always some hurt to the perfection
of our souls, or that of others. So that we must be diligent, that he may gain
nothing. For he cannot hurt us when we perceive it, and have our wills fixed on
God, and a resolution to tend to true Virtue. For when we discover the snares
of the Devil, we shall assuredly resist them: but if we fall into spiritual
negligence, he will ensnare us in all things; and I believe we shall not speak a
word, from which he shall not draw some advantage against our souls, or those
of others. For he will make us be silent of what we should speak for our
advancement spiritual or temporal, or for the good and edification of our
Neighbor. In all such cases the Devil will play the dumb, and keep us silent,
when we should speak: At another time he will play the Orator, making us speak
and discourse, what we ought to be silent of, and so will draw from our words
great sin. For both good and evil persons are often offended at our words. If
we speak the Truth, they are not capable to hear it. For it is as a two-edged
sword, and so even pious persons themselves cannot support it while it
reproves, since correction is never agreeable in the time when it is
administered: but if we speak falsehood, or say any thing to please men, the
wicked as well as the good shall be thereby stumbled; For our example will
fortify the wicked in their wickedness and falsehood; and the good shall be
offended that we who profess Virtue are not true in every thing, and will yet
please the world and worldlings: So that on every hand we give advantage to the
Devil; in speaking or keeping, silence; And that as long as we have not
obtained spiritual Diligence, to watch over all our words and actions.

For if you will, my Child, reflect upon your self, you shall experience, that
you do or say nothing without sinning. But because the Devil holds you yet in
Spiritual negligence, you perceive it not but by chance.

For he obscures your memory, that you should not remember what is necessary;
and represents to your mind what you ought to forget: And by that makes you do
his will, as well in Spiritual as in temporal concerns; for it is indifferent
to him by what he ensnares you: But he will be loath to tempt by evil actions,
such as seek to become Jesus Christ's Disciples; He tempts them but by
Omissions, knowing that they will not follow his suggestions in evil things,
though readily in omissions: and so he makes them forget, or neglect the things
that are for the Glory of God, and the Salvation of their Souls, or that of
others. Now he gains much more with good persons, by these Omissions, than he
could do by actions: seeing evil actions displease welmeaning persons, and are
reprehensible before men: And therefore they would not commit them, although
the Devil did tempt them; if it were only for avoiding a bad example, or
scandalizing their Neighbor.

But sins of omission are more secret and difficult to discover, and
consequently more dangerous for souls, which have not spiritual diligence. For
they fall insensibly, and without perceiving it in spiritual negligence; And
when they are fallen therein, they often know not that they have sinned:
Attributing that neglect to the weakness of their Memory or infirmity of their
Understanding; without perceiving, that the Devil occasions the forgetting of
things necessary for the soul and body of man: which is a subtle Snare of
Satan. So, my Son, you must watch well, lest he surprise you ignorantly. For it
will not be enough before God to say, I thought not of it, or I forgot; Seeing
we are always bound to think of, and remember the things that are necessary,
and salutary: hence is the proverb, He that sins ignorantly goes ignorantly to
Hell: And it is said somewhere, That Ignorance does not excuse Sin. To show
that spiritual Diligence is especially necessary for him that would work out
his Salvation; and that God admits no excuses, in what man is obliged to do.

I believe among men, every one will be ready to justify and excuse himself;
for being all frail and imperfect, they flatter and excuse also such as are
like themselves when they love them. Then they attribute to fragility what
proceeds from spiritual negligence; but God who tryes the Reins, and searches
the Consciences, makes another judgment of our actions and omissions. He will
condemn for sin, whatever we have neglected to do, for his glory, and our
Salvation, or for the Salvation of others, when it was in our power. It will
not be enough to say to God: I have not found; if you have not done necessary
duty to search.

There are persons so imprudent to believe, that God will not take an account
of them, for what they have not known. In which they shall find themselves far
deceived at Death. For we are always obliged to search, what we need to find:
And we should absolutely know the means by which we may arrive at Salvation: as
are the Commandments of God and the Gospel Precepts: And he that performs not
what is there ordained, cannot be saved. It will not be enough for him to say,
I did not know what God required, nor the Gospel-law, seeing he is obliged to
know both; and to do all possible diligence to learn them, that he may do them.
If then we have not that spiritual Diligence for our Salvation, we shall never
obtain it. For we are obliged to know what is necessary to Salvation: and the
ignorance of these things will not excuse the sin: So much the rather, because
Jesus Christ says, Seek and you shall find; pray and you shall receive; knock
and it shall be opened to you. 1 John. 12:15.


Which is not to say, (as many ignorants allege) that Jesus Christ has
satisfied all for us: seeing he exhorts us to seek the Kingdom of Heaven, to
pray, to knock, and to do all that we can to obtain it: Teaching thereby that
that spiritual diligence is necessary to Salvation: And these persuade
themselves that they shall obtain it by the diligence of another. Which is but
a flattery to Destroy us: while the Apostle admonishes us so much, To watch and
pray, that we enter not into Tentation. For if the merits of Jesus Christ had
satisfied all, what need had we to watch and pray; we needed but to remain in
ease and quiet, in expecting that Jesus Christ had satisfied all for us. Then
we needed not to do any thing. For it should be in vain to knock, pray, and
search, if all were found and obtained by the merits of Jesus Christ; Which may
well let you see, my Son, that men are at present given up to a Spirit of
Error, and that they know not the truth of things: for they make one another
believe Falsehoods for Truths, and would by their glosses annul the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ and his Apostles.

But that Doctrine excites always unto Spiritual Diligence: for Jesus Christ
says, We must pray always, and without ceasing. That is to say, that we must
always be diligent to watch over all our words and actions: Otherwise we shall
not speak one word without committing sin, nor do any action that shall not be
defiled; so long as we remain and live in corrupt nature, wherein we are born.

For that corruption loving it self turns to its own glory and profit all that
we do or say: Which is a continual sin, which we cannot evite but by Spiritual
Diligence, or continual Prayer, which is the same thing. For being continually
attacqued by sin, we must continually combat it, or yield and rendet our selves
its Slaves: And though there were no other Devil, but the Corruption of man's
Nature; we behoved notwithstanding to combat it continually: seeing that
Corruption is as much an Enemy of our Salvation as the Devil.

If you will, my Son, examine well your own self, you shall find by experience,
that you do not one single action which (though good in it self) is not defiled
with self-love and self-seeking; and that you speak not one word, which you aim
not for your own advantage, or praise, or to excuse and justify your self. For
Self-love searches always his own ease and satisfaction, and will not have the
blame in any thing. Yea it would appear innocent in the most manifest faults it
commits; It speaks to excuse them, reasons to maintain its opinions, or what it
has fancyed or undertaken to maintain. In fine, it employs all the forces of
body and spirit to disown its guilt. So proud is that corrupt nature, that it
will not be blamed in any thing, if it can evite it. Now all these things are
manifest sins, which rob our heart of the Love and Honor of God, to make us
love and esteem our selves; And so infring the Command, To Love God with all
our Heart: while we love our own glory, and esteem our selves with all our
heart.

I have often declared, that the ressence of sin consists, in that man retires
his affections from God, to place them in any thing else beside him: So we must
conclude, that man falls so often into sin, as he turns to love himself; And he
falls so often into the love of himself, as he will justify or excuse himself*
since there is nothing just or excuseable in his corrupt nature. It is by sin
become altogether evil; and cannot of it self do any Good, spiritual or
temporal; But is filled with all sorts of evils, from which no good can proceed.

That is a truth, to which all the world would readily acquiesce, if they were
disengaged of self-love; for then should they see, that they are slow to all
good, and bent to all evil. That they are ignorant, impotent, and in short, all
that we do in this life is only to be esteemed, or to evite the contempt and
humiliations that may befall us.

Which proceeds from that Pride of Life, which sin has planted in the bottom
of the hearts of all men that come into the world. They bring with them that
pride which makes them live in continual sins, if they do not resist it
continually by Spiritual Diligence, and watch not over all their Words and
Actions to limit and regulate them by the Law and Will of God; Which cannot be
done without that Spiritual Diligence, which ought to rule all our words and
actions, if we would attain to Salvation. Which she wishes you, who loves your
soul,

ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
Husum Jan. 27. 1674.
THE XXII. LETTER Spiritual Diligence is necessary to Salvation.
To the same; Exhorting him to Spiritual Diligence, because without it none can
persevere in the Service of God, nor overcome his Corrupt Nature and Self-love,

My Son;
I Cannot over much explain the worth and necessity of Spiritual Diligence;
since it does occasion your eternal Salvation, and all the good things we
attain in this life and that which is to come. Consider well that necessity,
that you may apprehend it, and put it into practice; since thereupon depends
your eternal happiness. For though you had acquired several other Virtues, yet
the Devil could easily ensnare you by Spiritual Negligence; and suffer you to
do well for a time, that he might ensnare you after.

He has not been able to hinder you to forsake the world, to give your self to
the Service of God; seeing that was your absolute resolution. Neither could he
hinder, that you have detested sin, and undertaken to follow true Virtue. But
he attends you in the passage, that he may stop your course and hinder your
perseverance by diverse tentations, and by occasions which he will excite, to
withdraw you from your good purpose. He will excite men of good will to render
your resolution suspect, even upon pious pretext. He Will make you sometimes
doubt, if you should not do better to remain in the world, and make your Light
to shine to others, to enlighten them again; he will represent to you, if you
had not better yet merchandise, that you might assist your Neigbour out of your
superfluity or by your good Example. For the Devil tempts by all sorts of
means; and when he cannot bring us to evil actions, he insinuates himself into
our good works; yea even into our good intentions, and mixes therein some of
his venom, a little when he cannot much.

He gives sometimes a weariness in the way of Virtue, and makes appear
burthensom what is in it self light: giving the Soul a backwardness or
difficulty in well doing, or in overcoming it self. Also he takes away the Hope
of surmounting our imperfections, and arriving at true Virtue, that he may
render our souls slack and lazy, because they see not the means whereby to
arrive at true Virtue. So that he confounds our spirits, that they may not
discover the truth of things as they are before God: but that they should
occupy themselves always with apparent Virtues, and curious Speculations. And
therefore is it we have need of continual Prayer, and spiritual Diligence, if
we would persevere in the service of God, otherwise the Devil would gain us by
the one or other way, Let us then watch always, that he make not our first
Fervor cool, and slacken our good resolution of embracing solid Virtue.

He will attempt, even when we have obtained true Virtue, to lead us into
Spiritual Negligence; persuading us, that we may well rest at ease, seeing we
have acquired it, and that we cannot advance further. I have known such
persons, as said to me, That they were arrived at the highest degree of
perfection, to which they could attain. And they said so because they had read
all they could read; And so they judged, that to read more, was but to repeat
what they had already read and understood: Which was to me a great Pride, and a
Spiritual Negligence, which the Devil had planted in their heart, to make them
perish by that Negligence. For not to advance in Virtue, is to fall back and
recoil; seeing man never attains that perfection that he ought.

It is written in the holy Scripture, Be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is
perfect: To teach us, that we should tend to the perfection of God, and never
rest in the way of Virtue; but always tend to a higher degree of perfection;
even to the last moment of our life, to follow the nearer the perfection of our
heavenly father. But the Devil, envious of our happiness, endeavors to his
power to divert us. He serves himself of spiritual Negligence, when he cannot
prevail by evil desires and actions. It is alike to him by what means he
ensnare our souls, provided he can in the end retain them to himself, be
therefore upon your guard, my Son; and before all embrace spiritual Diligence,
as that which is most necessary for the perseverance of your Virtue,

For though there were no other Devil to tempt us, but the Corruption of our
Nature, it is sufficient to give continual exercise, to combat it. For it is so
corrupted by sin, that it produces continually evil effects in our soul, to
cause it to perish eternally; We need but follow that nature to be damned, as I
have else where told you. The reason is, because it neither wills nor desires,
but what is evil, and tends to self-love. It is true, man was created by God
perfect, and in that state of perfection he did all good, blessing and
honoring God; and so enjoyed every thing without sinning: but since man
abandoned that state of perfection by his sin, he is become so corrupted, that
whatever he does or says, tends only to his own glory, or satisfaction, which
is to sin: Seeing all Glory belongs to God alone, and man ought to seek
nothing, but to please him; and as often as he does otherways, he offends him:
And therefore must you have that spiritual Diligence, to watch over all your
words and actions, except you would live in continual sins.

For if we eat and drink, it is ordinarily to please our taste, and sensuality,
instead of taking these necessary things with praising the Lord, who made them.
If we cloth our selves, it is also for our own satisfaction, ease, and glory,
instead of clothing our selves in humility, and with confusion, because our
sin made us ashamed, and necessitated us to cover our body, to preserve us from
the injuries of the air, which the same sin rendered intemperate in Heat, Cold,
and tempests.

For before Sin, man was altogether naked, without shame, and had no necessity
to cloth himself, being clothed only with Glory and Light. He was Lord and
Governor over all the Elements, which were submissive and obedient to him,
encompassing him only for his contentment and pleasure. But now, that is, since
sin has corrupted human nature, man cannot take pleasure in walking on the
Earth, in the refreshing of the Wind or Water, without sinning; because he does
all these things, only for his own satisfaction, instead of doing them to
satisfy God alone. If man study, labor, or undertake any thing, it is always
for his own glory and proper satisfaction or profit: instead of undertaking all
these things for the Glory of God only; and to apply all the forces of his
body, and powers of his spirit, to glorify God, who gave us them.

He also does often glory vainly in the gifts and talents which he has
received of his God, and attributes them to himself; as if he were the
proprietary of them, and independent of the Author of all Good: And so forgets
what is written, viz. That every good Gift is from above, and comes down from
the Father of Lights. They come not then from man's power, who inclines to
nothing, but to do evil: And consequently, if man can labor, study, or do any
other good and necessary thing; these are graces and favors, which God has
given him, and can take from him in a moment. And therefore man has not reason
of glorying, or to attribute to himself the least good thing; Which he does
notwithstanding, either through ignorance or malice: So he has need to watch
continually, if he would abstain from sin: otherwise he shall fall every
moment, without perceiving it.

For since he is corrupted by sin, he cannot have a good thought, nor speak one
word that is not defiled, and mixed with self-love, or self-esteem: which I
could show you, my Son, in your own experience, if you were capable: but all
your thoughts and words are mixed with impurity.

I know well, you are resolved in the bottom of your soul, in general, to
please God, and no more to sin; yet you do it as often as you seek your own
satisfaction. You do it through ignorance, because you have not sufficiently
discovered how much human nature is corrupted by sin; and you have not esteemed
it evil to follow it. On the contrary, you, and all other men, who live
according to their corruption, have held it for a good thing, to follow their
own wills, as far as they did not induce them to do any thing evil and
reprehensible before men. For every one walks in his darkness, and have no
light to know their miseries, and the state into which sin has brought them;
And that ignorance makes them live at ease in their self-love, without holding
it for sin; though in effect that self-love is the essence of all sorts of sins.

For if man kill, steal, commit adultery, or do any other thing, forbidden in
the commands of God: it is only to satisfy his self-love. If he seeks his
profit, pleasure, or ease, if he esteem or boast of himself, it is all to
satisfy that love; the same if he seek the honors and pleasures of this
world. In fine, Self-love is the womb in which are engendered all sorts of sin;
and it entriely robs our heart of the Love of God: Which being pure, cannot
remain with the impure love of our selves. Therefore is it that it need not
appear strange to any, that they cannot obtain the Love of God, though they
desire it: For they can never obtain it, while they continue in the love of
themselves. And they should rather account themselves unworthy of the Love of
God, than rashly to desire that God should come to reside in a heart filled
with self-love, and polluted with sins.

They that would have the Love of God, and will not forsake that of themselves,
are very imprudent; seeing they would make so unsuitable a match, as is that of
the Love of God (in which consists all sorts of good) with self-love (in which
consists all sorts of evil) which is intolerable, and unworthy of good Reason:
for it is the same as if they would join Heat and Cold in the same place, which
is contrary to nature, which will never suffer that; but these two contraries
shall so wrestle together, that the stronger shall hold the place alone. For if
we put Fire in the Water, it is extinguished, when it cannot overcome the
Water: but if the Fire is so great that it can consume the Water, it becomes
victorious, and destroys the Water.

It is even so with the Soul that desires the Love of God. It is the place
where is the Cold of Self-love, and the Heat of the Love of God: And when that
Self-love is the stronger, it extinguishes entirely the Fire of the Love of
God. But if the Love of God kindle more in the Soul, it banishes quite
Self-love.

Which arrives unto the purified souls, which scarce feel any more their
Self-love, when that of God has gotten the upper-hand in the soul. They live
and die in that love, and despise Self-love. But he that lives in Self-love, is
a Slave of sin, and commits it upon all occasions. But he that would evite
these Perils, should have spiritual Diligence, to watch over all his words and
actions, to resist the corruption which sin has brought unto human nature;
which is so corrupted by sin, that it can produce no more any good, temporal or
spiritual, since retired from the Love of God, wherein is all good; it is
fallen into Self-love, wherein is all evil; which produces always its like.

So that whatever we do by our natural motion, it is altogether evil and sin:
And if you could well comprehend that Truth, as it is, you should always
distrust your self: and never dare to do or undertake any thing, if you would
not do evil, and fall into sin. But man's rashness, and ignorance renders him
bold, to undertake things spiritual and temporal: As if he were wise and free
of corruption; which often precipitates him into great faults and sins: which
they do not perceive until after they are committed; and so cannot be helped, I
believe, my Son, that you have often experienced that in your self, without
knowing whence these faults proceeded, seeing your will was to do all well:
believe me, they proceed all from spiritual negligence, and because you know
not yet sufficiently the corruption of your nature, which you have followed
while in the world, you thought your self full wise, when you could order your
temporal affairs to your profit: You have not perceived, that the Devil could
well help you in that; that by procuring you prosperity, he might detain you
always in the affection of earthly things; and that you should neglect eternal
ones, as other Merchants, of your profession, do yet: Who instead of laboring
for the Gospel-pearl, labor to follow the will of the Devil, the Enemy of
their souls, without perceiving it.

Yea, they think it a Blessing of God that they prosper in temporal Affairs:
but it is often a Curse, seeing God gives his Friends temporal Adversities, and
reserves for them eternal Joys. But to men that have done some temporal good in
this world, but have not overcome the corruption of their corrupt natures, God
recompenses the temporal good they have done in this world, with temporal
prosperities, because God leaves no Good without Recompense, nor Evil without
Punishment. Wherefore I pray you, my Son, to watch over your soul with
spiritual Diligence, that you let not one word or action escape, that proceeds
from your corrupted nature: seeing it produces all sorts of sins, which would
finally lead you to eternal damnation.

But labor to resist manfully the corruption of your nature, by a Spiritual
Diligence. So you must always watch over your words and actions, that the Devil
gain you not by spiritual Negligence, which she wishes you, who loves your soul.

Husum, Febr. 1. 1674. S. vet. ANTONIA BOURIGNON.

THE XXIII. LETTER Spiritual Diligence is necessary to Salvation.
To the same; To whom is shown the Necessity of Spiritual Diligence, to watch
over all the actions of our corrupt nature, and proper will, and to acquire the
Knowledge of our selves. Moreover, that Spiritual Negligence, is a Fountain of
all Evils, and is alone sufficient to damn us; because it renders our soul
rude, and like to a cursed ground, which bears only Thorns and Thistles, and
so, is far from Meekness, Lowliness, and Humility of Heart.

My Son;
I Have entertained you largely of the Necessity of Spiritual Diligence, which
we must have in this perilouslife. I have shown you how necessary it is unto
Salvation, and that without it none can be saved, because of the many enemies
we have to war against.

I must now show you all the Evils, which Spiritual Negligence causes; It is a
Pest in the good Air of Virtue: for although you had acquired a great number of
Virtues, they could not subsist in your soul without Spiritual Diligence,
seeing in this world we cannot be free of enemies, who attacque us continually.
We might well be for some time, in repose in Virtue: but that repose should be
the most dangerous combat of our souls, which thinking to take rest, as did the
rich man in the Gospel, who had his Granderies filled; but it was said unto
him, thou Fool, this night thy Soul shall be required of thee, and whose shall
then these things be? The same shall be said to them, who think they have
acquired so many Virtues, and yet have not Spiritual Diligence. For they shall
find themselves deceived at Death, because they have not watched over their
Virtues, having suffered the corruption of their nature to reign.

For if you be not Diligent in Virtue, to watch and be aware, that Vainglory
insinuate not it self; it will take away all the force and merit of your
Virtue: Seeing God says, That he resists, the Proud, and that he cares not for
Offerings and Sacrificespb. So he has no need of our virtue, when it is
accompanied with esteem of our selves, or with Vainglory, as when we artribute
any good unto our selves; seeing we are truly filled with all evils, where is
no good. For man's nature is so corrupted by sin, that there remains to him no
good spiritual or temporal. So that we may with truth say, that there remained
nothing in man after sin, but ignorance, malice, and power to do evil. I know
my Son; You have to oppose, that man by his nature can do some good; as we see
the wicked do in regard of their temporal affairs; They gain Money, and assist
their Neighbor. One can Write well, another make Accounts, one can Paint well,
another is a good Carpenter, or other Mechanique, which is good and necessary
for the present life: How then can we say with truth, that man can do no good,
even in temporals: It appears necessary that I should explain my self, that I
be not argued of falsehood; I know that all men in general, and every one in
particular* believe that they have something good in themselves, and that they
can do well according to their knowledge. Which is also true in regard of some,
even imperfect before God; such are they that have the skill to exercise some
Art, or Trade which they have learnt. I experienced that in the Girls of my
Hospital at Lisle; for they did very well what I had taught them; Though
otherways I knew, that they had given their souls to the Devil, and were joined
to him by explicit compact. That did not hinder, that they should learn well
to sew, cleanse, spinn, read and write, and manage Housholdrey, and several
other things which they did very well. So that it would appear not to be true,
which I averred, viz. That man has nothing good in him, and can do no good.
For we see they do several goods things, even to the view of men. But you must
know, that all the good they do, proceeds not from them, but from God, who has
bestowed it on them by particular Grace and Mercy, or else they have learnt it
of other men.

For it is a certain truth, that man has not of himself any thing but sin, and
that he can do no good spiritual or temporal; since all good comes from God;
and all evil from man, and the Devil: But when one has learnt any good from
God, he can teach it to his Neigbour. But he cannot have that good of himself,
because sin has filled him with all evil, and deprived him of all good. And we
cannot bring out of a thing, what is not in it. For if the Fire were not latent
in the Flink, it would not come out, by striking on the Iron, and if Virtue
were not in a soul, it would not appear upon occasion. So as it appeared in
Job, in the midst of so many tentations: For he blessed God, saying, when he
was informed of the Death of his Children, God gave them, and God has taken
them; blessed he his holy Name. Which was a Grace; which he had received of
God, It was planted in his Soul, and so produced fruit in its reason.

But he that lives yet in the corruption of his nature, can produce nothing but
sins, and evil, since he has nothing but that in him; and no good can proceed
out of his soul, because there is none in it. Therefore man is sottish to
believe that he can do good temporal or spiritual, seeing in effect, he ruins
whatever he touches, and can do no good, but by the particular Grace of God.

But because man does not sufficiently study spiritual Diligence, that he may
come to know himself, he easily persuades himself, that he is wise to do
things, spiritual and temporal, without noticing, that his nature is altogether
corrupted by sin. He speaks, works and acts of himself, as if he knew to do any
good, though all that proceeds from the corruption of our nature is evil.

Man then ought always to have that distrust of himself, that he never follow
his own proper will; for whatever proceeds from it is evil; and he that
believes not that Truth, shall fall into many excesses and sins. Therefore is
it that Jesus Christ has taught Christians to deny themselves; and more, he
gives himself an example of that denial: Saying, I am not come to do my own
Will, but the Will of him that sent me. Now if there could in all the human
nature, be a good will, it was assuredly that of Jesus Christ; and we learn in
the Gospel, that he renounced altogether his own will: Saying to his Father,
Not my Will, but thine be done. And he said so because he knew, that the wills
of all men were corrupted by Adam's Sin; and consequently cannot be followed,
without doing evil. And therefore Jesus Christ himself would not follow his own
Will, knowing well, that (as to his mortal nature) his own proper will was
evil; Which is solidly proved in the 2. part of Solid Virtue, letter 6.
as are those of all other men, unto whom he would make himself like, when he
put on our Mortality. Now if Jesus Christ prays his Father, that his proper
will, be not done; how much more ought man, corrupted by his own sins, beside
the corruption of Adam's sin, which all men have contracted from him? It is
thence that their wills are become evil; and so produce all sorts of sins;
which we cannot evite, but by a spiritual Diligence, watching continually over
the motions of our proper will, that we may resist sin.

For if we fall into spiritual Negligence, our own will shall always have the
upperhand, and govern all our words and actions, which shall be always evil;
and so we shall commit continual sins, without perceiving it; and it is by that
spiritual negligence alone, that souls perish insensibly, and from which all
sorts of evil proceed. We may see that Truth in temporal and corporal things;
for when they are neglected, they catch always hurt. If we neglect a new born
Infant, it must of necessity die for lack of vigilance: If we take not care
after to teach it, in speaking, walking and laboring, it shall grow up like a
Beast; and when it is come to the use of reason, it must labor, trade, or
study, if it would subsist, and have necessary aliment. So that, all sorts of
evils should befall it by that negligence, in things corporal; and it would even
rot and be eaten of Vermin, if neglected to be cleansed.

What evils does not negligence bring in civil matters? Countries and Cities
are ruined by want of foreseeing; for if a Lord or Governor of a Country, be
not diligent to watch over what he has in charge, his Enemies will surprise
him, and he will lose his Honout, and Goods, while asleep. And if the
magistrate of a City, be not diligent to watch over his Citizens they shall
forget their duty, and introduce into the Republique evils which after they
cannot remedy: and that because they have by their Negligence suffered them too
long. The same is it with the Master of a House or Society: If he neglect to
watch over his Subjects, he shall find himself oppressed with confusion, which
he cannot redress afterward. Negligence in business, empoverishes many, and
loses their Honor by infamous Banquerupts.

Also by Negligence, are lost the Grain and Fruit of the Earth; when we do not
sow and reap them in due season: It destroys the Household Provision; brings
Rust on the Iron; Moths in Clothes; and Rotting in Linnens, and in fine,
negligence brings many Rich Men to Poverty; Disgraces those that were in Honor
and Reputation, it brings damage and evil unto every thing, even to the
smallest things. For if but one stitch in your Stockings slip, and you neglect
to mend it, that stitch will quiekly become a great hole, and in the end rent
the whole stocking, which your Diligence might have preserved for some years.
It is even so with many other things which diligence preserves in good order,
whereas by negligence they are destroyed, and brought to confusion; yea, it
often causes death.

For if a Disease were well attended at the beginning, it were often easily
cured: but negligence renders it difficult, and sometimes incurable; as if a
Pleuritique be let blood too late, he must die: and if the nature of the sick
be not known to apply timely suitable remedies for his indisposition, he must
die.

That is the reason, that men now adays live so short a while, in regard of
Adam and his successors, who lived to several hunderds of years, because they
knew the disposition of nature better; each knew what was good and needful for
himself on every occasion: but now, while men are ignorant of Nature, they take
often Remedies contrary to their evils, and neglect such as might cure them.

But this corporal or civil Negligence, though it causes so many evils, is
nothing in regard of spiritual Negligence: Seeing the first causes only
temporal and transitory evils; and the other, eternal ones. It deprives man of
all sorts of good, and subjects him to all sorts of evil, which is eternal
damnation. For he that has not Spiritual Diligence to watch against the
Enemies of his Soul, and for the means he should embrace to his Salvation, he
must perish by that only Negligence, though he committed no other sin; for it
is of our Souls, that the Scripture says, in the perfect sense, The Ground that
is not labored, shall bring forth Thistles and Briars: because the ground of
our Souls became cursed by sin, and being fallen into that Curse, it can no
more bear any wholesome fruit, without bestowing on it a great Diligence. We must
trench and till it with the iron of penitence, to tilk the Tares, and bad Weeds
of Corruption, which have sprung up in the earth of our souls, For if these be
not rooted out, they shall suffocate always the good grain of true Virtue,
which should thereby be stifled, though sowed in good quantity in our souls: we
must maintain it by a continual Diligence, otherwise it will bear no fruit; we
must watch over our Enemies; we must always resist the inclinations of that
corrupt nature; and finally, we must continually study the knowledge of our
selves. For he that knows not himself, is ignorant of all, and cannot arrive at
the Virtue to be Meek and Lowly and Humble of Heart which Jesus Christ says, we
should learn of him.

No other means can be found than that, he that knows not the Miseries,
Ignorance, and Malediction, wherein sin has brought us, cannot be meek. He
shall on the contrary be fierce and arrogant, and presume to be worthy of
honor and esteem: which shall also take away and hinder his Meekness toward
his Neighbor; and also his Humility of Heart. For he that knows not himself*
thinks he has need of no person, and consequently will not be meek nor kind
toward his Neighbor; and yet less Humble of Heart: which comes for want of
knowledge of his Misery, and the miserable estate into which sin has reduced
him: and so he cannot humble himself, according to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ
which is so good and salutary, unto which I exhort you, my Son, that you follow
it to your eternal Happiness. And I am

Your well-affected in Jesus Christ, ANTONIA BOURIGNON.
Husum Feb. 3. 1674. St. vet.
THE XXIV. LETTER. Men are Idolaters of their own Corruption, and Enemies of
Virtue.
To the same; advertising him, that the continuation of that Subject is
interrupted by the Devils exciting the Wise of this World, Enemies of Virtue,
and Friends, of corrupt Nature, to distract the mind of the Writer by their
disputes, Lies and Calumnies, and all manner of Persecutions.

My Son;
I have yet many things to say to you, of solid Virtue: but the time is wanting
to me at present, seeing my Enemies are all earning to hinder it. I doubt not
but it is the Devil, our common Enemy, who will not suffer that we speak of
solid Virtue Beside, he keeps men at present in spiritual Negligence, with
apparent Virtues; and they take them for solid and true ones, therefore would
he make them rest in the Love of themselves, without arriving at solid Virtue.

Now while he cannot hinder that I should discover it, because God discloses it
to me; he endeavors to his power to hinder its being published: He induces
diverse persons to write against me, to take up my time, in answering them; and
to entertain me with matters of Contention, instead of that of solid Virtue.
Which bereaves me of my time, and gives me the displeasure of leaving this
Treatise of solid Virtue. Yet I must apply my self to repel the Calumnies and
Lies which they have dispersed against me in diverse places. As some in England
have also done,

So I was obliged to write a Large advertisment against them; for if I did not
give testimony to the truth, against so many fall accusations and sies, which
they have made; I should be guilty of the sin which these false accusations
produce; and should be the cause, that good persons did not follow the Truths
which I propagate from God. For so many false reports would render them
suspect; the rather when I am not attacqued by the common people; but by the
ministers and learned, which are esteemed worthy of credit.

These wise and learned strive at present to kill the spirit of Jesus Christ,
as such like before killed his body; you have seen the defamatory treatise,
which John Berckendal, in name of the Ministers of Calvin's Reformation, in
Altena, has composed against me. And I was obliged to give testimony to the
truth, against so many falsehoods, by a great Teatise; whereto are joined the
testimonies of a great many persons, yet alive, and worthy of credit. That work
hindered me from writing more to you of solid Virtue: though I know that to be
very profitable and necessary for you, and for all that desire and aspire at
becoming true Christian as you do.

There are at present so many persons deceived by apparent Virtues, and who
learn always and never come to the knowledge of the Truth. They think they are
already in true Virtue; whereas they are yet altogether in the love of
themselves.

Therefore is the Devil so angry, when I write of true Virtue; lest the Deceit
of the false be discovered by the true. But the Devil cannot hinder me to know
it, since God discovers it to me: so he attempts to bereave me of the time to
write it, that neither you, nor other souls that aspire after it, should know
it. That is the cause why he incites diverse persons to write against me, that
so I may not have time to write of solid Virtue. He labors to occupy me always
in opposing Slanderers. But he deceives himself: for among the refutations of
the calumnies of my Enemies, I intermix always something of solid Virtue. It
ought to be unto you, My Son, a Discipline to regulate well your life, and
become a true disciple of Jesus Christ.

Examine well then all that comes from my pen, and you shall always find therein
more and more enlightening and wholesome instruction; which you shall find
principally in the (23) Letters which I have written last to you, concerning
the words of Jesus Christ, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly, and humble of
heart: all that matter shall suffice for aliment to your soul, until I can
write more unto you, which I shall do when I have answered two treatises, which
the Disciples of Labadie have composed against me. I have not yet had leisure
to read them; but I conjecture that they shall be, as the rest, full of Errors
and Calumnies. And that, because all they that follow the motions of corrupt
nature, are in error and falsehood, and are not in quiet nor at peace with the
Truth; because these are two contraries, which always exclude one the other. And
therefore is it, that all these learned Scholars oppose the doctrine which I
advance. It is not such as they have learnt in the Schools, besid^ neither will
they approve any thing but what maintains them in Honors, Profit, Eases, and
Commodities of this life. To which the Doctrine of Jesus Christ is quite
contrary: For it speaks of nothing but poverty, Contempt, sufferings, and
Persecution for Righteousness sake; And by consequence, the Doctrine of the
learned now adays, is altogether Antichristian; that is to say, contrary to
that of Jesus Christ. Not that their words are dissonant; for they read the
same Gospel which Jesus Christ and his Apostles taught; but they gloss and
explain so the words of the Gospel, that they bring forth a quite perverse
sense; Notwithstanding they live in quiet; though all their actions, manners,
and desires be quite contrary to the Gospel Doctrine.

For every one now idolizes his own proper will; And Jesus Christ said, That we
must renounce it. Methinks all Christendom is become at present the people of
Ephesus, which adored the great Diana; with this difference, that Christians
now adays adore the Corruption of the flesh, whereas those adored a Statue of
gold or Silver. For we see these learned strive who can best find out subtle
Inventions, by which they may flatter men in their sins, or persuade them, that
they may well follow the motions of their corrupt nature, and withal attain to
Salvation; So that every one follows that Doctrine, without perceiving that it
is evil.

That is the reason, why every one adores that Diana of corrupt nature as a
Goddess; And so they bestow all their time and goods to nourish, honor, and
satisfy corrupted nature. And more, they think, there is no evil in so doing,
while the ministers and learned do the same; and promise Salvation to the
people that live in that Idolatry.

But they ought to teach in effect, the mortification of their senses, the
corruption of their natures, how much it is ruined by sin, and finally, the
necessity of denying our selves, to be saved; as Jesus Christ taught by word
and works.

But these savage Pastors will not teach so unto their flocks; and will yet
less put it in practice themselves; Yea, nor will not suffer another to teach
these Christian Truths. It is for that, they pursue me every where, and would
gladly exterminate me because I have written of true Virtue. The same befell St.
Paul by them of Ephesus, who would exterminate him, when he taught the truth:
Saying one to another, That they should lose their gain if they suffered Paul
to continue preaching Jesus Christ: That he would ruin the worship of the great
Diana, and cause that the Goldsmiths should gain no more in the Workmanship of
the Image of Diana.

It goes just so with these learned ones, who are as the masters of the great
Diana of corrupt nature; which every one adores for his own particular. But the
Learned are the Masters, to gain Money by the worship and adoration of corrupt
nature: So they speak and teach the people such things as please their
corruption; and endeavor to please men, that they may receive advantages of
them, which they will not lose.

When then I begin to speak of true Virtue, they are all allarmed against me,
as they of Ephesus were against St. Paul: But these learned take also the
Judges to their assistance, and persecute me, that I should be banished, or be
discharged to write or speak of true Virtue. Some wish me dead, others burnt,
others that I were thrown in the midst of the Sea, that I might speak no more
of solid Virtue, and so their gain and trade be not diminisht, and their shops
become unfrequented; that is, that they sell no more their frivolous Discourses
to please men. It is that, which at last alarmed them so at Flensburg, whither
I had gone about some business; for the Ministers no sooner had any suspicion,
that I was in their Town, but they preached in diverse Churches, that I am an
arrant and pernicious person, that I have a devilish Doctrine, and finally no
person should lodge me.

So that I behoved to come out secretly, lest I should be massacreed by the
Rabble and Children: whom the preachings of the Ministers had animated against
me: For they had spoken of me with great spite and horrors, proclaming
publicly, that my Doctrine is worse than that of the Jews: Adding beside, that
my doctrine is a mass of all the old Heresies that ever were in the world.

Yet I will not teach any thing, by my Writings or Discourse, but what Jesus
Christ taught; And if there is any thing contrary to that in them, I detest and
revoke it; as I have often offered to revoke, all that they would show me to be
contrary to the holy Scripture.

But it is not for Errors they persecute me, or any evil in my Writings; seeing
they can show me nothing such therein, They persecute me then because I declare
truly, what is true Virtue, and how a true Christian should live, to be a
Disciple of Jesus Christ. I know well they mask these things; saying, that
there are Errors in my Writings: But no person shows me these errors. They know
not what to say, to contemn the truths which I maintain; For the Learned said
first, that I bring nothing of new; and that they taught and preached tho same
things twenty years agot: But when they saw in the Book entitled, The
testimony of the Truth, particulars and truths more clear in divine Mysteries,
than those they learnt in the Schools; they say presently that they are Errors;
and that never any person wrote such things.

So that, it behoved, that God should regulate all according to their studies;
And should not give any new Graces to men now adays: But that he should measure
his Light by the rule of their scholastique doctrine; and should, not send the
Holy spirit, promised by Jesus Christ who shall teach all Truths. Men then
resist that Holy spirit, and will not hear of other Truths, but those they have
learnt in the Schools.

It is every lamentable to see men such enemies of their eternal Happiness, in
rejecting the Light of the Truth, which comes in this last time: as the
Prophets of God have foretold: That he will pour out his Spirit on all flesh,
and that your Sons and Daughters shall prophecy, and the Old Men see Visions.

Now because I repeat the same things, with many others from God, they would
kill me, as was done to the ancient Prophets: they think to hinder by that,
that true Virtue should be known and far more, practiced.

But though they should kill me, the Spirit of God shall not die for that; And
the Truth shall always be true. For if I should not speak it, the Dead would
speak or the Stones, to declare it unto men: And tho, these Ministers put me to
death; God has yet more than a hunderd millions of persons, whom he can use to
declare the same Truths, which I advance.

And therefore, my Son, I exhort you to retain them well, and put them in
practice: for though I were not in the world, you must nevertheless save your
own soul; cost what it will, if you will enjoy God to all eternity. Which she
wishes you with all her heart, who loves your Happiness.

Husum, Febr. 5. 1684. St. vet. ANTONIA BOURIGNON.

The End of the First Part of the Treatise of Solid Virtue.
EXTRACTS OF SOME OF THE WORKS OF Mrs. ANTONIA BOURIGNON. Belonging to some
Most Essential MATTERS of Christianism and Health.
LETTER I. Of Toleration; That it ought never to go the length of communicating
with Sin, directly, or indirectly. Of the Essential, and of the Perfection of
Christianity. Of Religions, Worships and Ceremonies, and their use.
This Letter was written to one of her Intimate's, Mr. Van de Velde, and is the
second of Light arising in Darkness, 3. part.

Sir,
1. I Know you seek the Perfection of your Soul, and that you aspire after God
I know also that he has imparted of his Grace to you, and particularly taught
you his will in some things: but I know also that you have not yet received the
Holy Spirit, which should teach us all Truths, seeing you discern not yet well
Evil from good, and love all indifferently by a natural goodness, as did Adam,
who knew very well the Consolation and Quiet which a Soul finds in entertaining
it self with God; but knew not what Evil was, because he had never proved it.
He was created in Pleasures and Delights, and conversed with his God, in peace;
without apprehending the Evil which might come upon him, in abandoning God to
please himself with the Creatures; And therefore did he so easily fall into
sin, before he perceived the Mischiefs and Miseries it would cause him.

2. And almost the same is befallen you, my dear Brother; for when you enjoyed
sweet entertainment with God, you remained in the sensualities of corrupted
nature, by which you have insensibly lost commerce with God; because so soon as
he sees one take pleasure in any thing else but himself, he retires by little
and little, and leaves the Soul to live to it self, which precipitates it self
often into diverse Evils, because our proper will engenders death, since it was
corrupted by sin.

3. You did love Good, and do yet love it, but you have not enough hated Evil,
because you did not well know it, persuading your self, that you did well
enough, when you supported it in others, not perceiving that we can sin in
another nine ways; the First is in Consenting thereto: 2d, in Councelling it;
3d. in Tolerating it: 4th, in Assisting it: 5th, in Defending Evil: 6th, in
Commanding it: 7th, in Partaking with it: 8th, in not Hindering it when in our
power: 9th, in Hiding it from him that would hinder it.

4. All these are not enough considered, and we easily fall into them without
considering it. Although we desire to please God, the Devil often surprises us
by sins without us, when he perceives that he cannot prevail to get us to
commit them in our selves; for he has as much power over us by the sins which
we commit in another, as by them we commit in our selves; seeing they shall
both alike be imputed to us; and if I did not advertise you of it, you might
easily fall into them without perceiving it.

For example; you converse with persons that are avaritious, proud, or stained
with any other sins: they ate subject and inferior to you as your Wife and
Children, or your Men or Maidservants: or Hirelings, or whoever they be over
whom you have authority, notwithstanding lest you should displease them, or
lose their friendship, you consent to their committing of sin, without Daring
or willing to resist it. All these sins which are committed with your consent,
shall assuredly be imputed as if you had committed them your self: To council
to do evil, that you will not so long as you fear God; but for suffering it, in
others I doubt you do it sometimes, because you have not enough of hatred to
sin; as when you see one deceive in selling to or laboring for you, and yet
continue to buy of him or employ him in labor, that is assuredly to suffer the
evil which he commits.

5. It were better to be in necessity, without dealing with them that sell or
labor by Avarice, Fraud or Deceit; for the Soul is more precious than the
Body, which ought rather to endure its necessities, than to supply them to the
prejudice of its soul, which is assuredly defiled by suffering the sins of
another, and yet more by assisting and helping evil, as he that would give
goods to one that is Avaricious, Gluttonous, Proud, Slothful or a Drunkard,
would assist him to go on in his sins, and commit more with the Gifs and
assistances he affords him: and if we defend or excuse the Evil of another, we
also become guilty of the same; for we ought never to excuse or defend it, lest
we so maintain the Evil-doer in his sins, to commit which our corrupt Nature
needs no encouragment, and whoever affords it, is partaker of the sin of the
other. Although it is commonly said, That we should excuse the Faults of other,
and assist Sinners; that is a false Theology, very hurtful to the Upright, who
are often deceived by Evil for lack of knowing it.

6. Also you are not in hazard to command Evil, so long as you fear God,
neither would you ever partake with manifest sin, as with Robbery; for God has
delivered you by his Grace from Avarice; Yet you must take care to hinder evil
when in your power, or else the omission would render you partaker of the Evil
committed; and even so when you do not declare it to them that would hinder it.
All these sins or part of them may be committed by good men, who aspire after
Perfection, particularly when they are of a good disposition naturally they
take all in good part.

I have sometimes slipped into some such Faults by too much natural goodness or
human regard; but after God showed me clearly these sins which we commit in
another, which I impart to you because I love your perfection as much as my own
by a true Christian Charity; seeing that you aspire unto its perfection, which
I will also show wherein it consists; for the darkness of this world is at
present so great, that the souls that are well inclined know nor whither they
walk in regard of perfection, taking often the false for true, and imperfect
for perfect, and that because they have now taught so many diverse means to
perfection, that one knows not which to take for the surest.

Of Religions and external pious exercises,
One says we must go frequently to Church, and frequent the Sacraments. Another
places Christian Perfection in entering into some Religious Fraternity or
Convent. Others in fastings and Macerating the Body. All these things were Good
if well used, but these are not the end, nor that wherein Christian perfection
consists; For these may be performed by them that shall never attain to
salvation: because no external thing perfects the soul, nor can they defile it.
They are only the means whereby we more easily attain to virtue, or by abuse
fall more easily into sin.

8. Every Soul in particular ought to use the external means which excites them
most to Christian Virtue; and evite also things that engage them unto sin; for
it is written, Whosoever loves hazard, shall perish in it. So that he that feels
himself so weak in Chastity that he has not the force to look upon Woman,
without lust, he ought not to look upon one; and he that drinks drunk when he
has Wine, ought also to abstain from it: and so of all other things, though in
themselves they be not evil, because of our infirmity they cause Evil; as
others occasion Good and Virtue in our Soul, when these means of perfection are
used for their end.

9. For example, if you find by a true experience, that you are more united to
God in going to Church, or frequenting the Sacraments; you are obliged to use
these means as much as possible: For every one ought always to seek his own
further perfection: but if those means effect nothing in your soul, you should
not use them; and if you return better into God, in being shut up in your
Closet, you are obliged to remain there, and not divert your self by going to
Church; and if your Soul feels more union with God in Solitude than when you
seek that union by frequenting the Sacraments, you ought to keep you solitary,
and there feast inwardly with your God; for a Good Conscience is a Continual
Feast; where the soul reposes and recreates it self with his God. And therefore
it has not always need of external means to excite it self to that Union.

10. For often God prevents it with a spiritual joy and Contenrment: without
that it knows whence that Joy had its origin; for God is a Spirit no ways tied
to material things, neither to Time, Places, nor any means whatsoever; he being
a Spirit, and the Soul a Spirit, they comunicate in spirit: and he that has
need to seek God in different Religions and Fellowships, is not very far
advanced in the Knowledge of God, and knows not yet the place where he
feeds at Noon, nor where he rests at Night: for if he knew that, he would
not run from one Religion to another to find God; but would remain fixed in
himself, because the Center of our Hearts is the Palace of Honor, where God
rests and takes his delights. All the Fraternities and Religions in the world
cannot give that Union with God; we must find it in our selves; and though the
perfectest Societies, may well serve as means to lead us to
Christian-perfection, yet they cannot save us without the inward Virtues.

11. One boasts that he is a Catholic, another that he is Reformed, others
will be spiritual, because in Orders, or of the Reformation of Menno: Truly,
my dear Brother, all those things are not Good, and can yield no perfection to
our Souls: to build our salvations upon any Religions, is to deceive our
selves; seeing none of them can save us without having in our Souls true
Christian perfection.

12. An excellent Rule and Comparison.
If the Rules or Statutes of any Religion serve us as Means by which we
experiment, that they Unite us to God, we are obliged to embrace and follow
them; for we must esteem the means as one would esteem the Sheath of a Sword of
grear price: but never esteem the Sheath so precious as the Sword, which is
within, seeing it can never serve us to fight against our Enemies, nor make
them retire from us. The Devil, the World and the Flesh are our three sworn
Enemies, which continually attacque our Souls, whom we must fight with the
sword of Faith and the Buckler of Charity; for if we think to overcome them
with the outward Sheath of our Religions, the Devil should laugh at us; we
should laugh at a Soldier, who would fight his Enemy with the Sheath of his
Sword: It is yet more ridiculous to see how Christians would gain the Kingdom
of Heaven, by their Religions, which cannot save them without the Love of God
and Charity to their Neighbors.

13. True Catholics, and their Worship.
It is nothing but Amusements and Folly, to fix themselves upon such an Order,
or such a Religion, or to believe that they shall be saved for being enrolled
in the most perfect Order or Religion in the world. If you think to be saved
for being of the Catholic Religion, without a living Faith, Hope in God, and
Charity to your Neighbor, you are deceived; for no person is truly
Catholic, but he that is in the communion of the Saints; seeing to be
Catholic is nothing else than to be UNITED in heart and will with all the
souls that are UNITED in the Spirit of JESUS CHRIST.

Behold what makes the communion of Saints and the Assembly of Catholics. But
if you see and feel that the rules of the Catholics, lead you unto God, you
must observe them faithfully, and rather die than slip from them: for as it is
certain that he that loves peril shall perish therein; so is it certain, that
he who embraces faithfully the means of his Perfection, shall be perfected: by
reason of the infirmity of our nature it must always be aided and sustained by
the means that can strengthen it.

14. But if our souls were arrived at UNION with God, they should no more need
to use any means; because then Love is a law unto it self; and that union
overcomes all the motions of corrupt nature, to which we have then no more need
to resist by Fastings or other Macerations of the Body, which means are good
for those that have given loose reins to their sensuality in eating and
drinking, or have allowed their Body other carnal Pleasures, the habit of such
ordinarily not yielding, but by doing things quite contrary: because our Nature
is as an undaunted Horse, which is not tamed, but furious and unruly, which we
cannot tame after we have let him follow his liberty, but by the bridle and
spurs of Mortifications of the flesh.

15. See there, my dear Brother, how you may learn to regulate well your Soul,
and discern wherein perfection consists, that you take not apparent Virtue for
real; for ours is that dangerous time whereof Jesus Christ prophesied, saying,
that we must take heed, and that many false Christ's and false Prophets shall
arise, and shall do great Signs and Miracles. I know you are fallen into evil
insensibly, and by little and little have lost entertainment with God, by
ignorance, and for not having enough hated evil, nor known the sins which you
can commit in another; but you must resume courage, and begin anew, considering
more narrowly in what consists Christian perfection; that as Adam did no more
fall into sin, after he knew the Evil it had brought on him; so you fall no
more into the sensualities of Nature; but follow the conduct of the motions of
the Holy Spirit, as Adam did when he knew them: for his whole life was a
continual penitence and regret for having deserted Entertainment with God.

16. And if you have that perfect regret, it will be impossible for you to
relapse again into natural sensualites, seeing that they have interrupted yout
Communion with God: that regret will purge your Soul, and dispose it to recover
that Union, while I shall endeavor by mine that shall follow, to show you what
true Virtue is, and of whom you are to learn it, that you be not deceived by
any body, and that you may discern truly between true and false Perfection, in
which many well-meaning Persons are deceived of themselves and others; and your
self has not yet gotten that light of true discerning to know things as they
are before God, taking them only as they appear to men's judgments, who often
deceive; for it is written, that all men are liars; yea we lie often even to
our selves, persuading our selves that we know and understand mystique things,
while we are wholly ignorant of them.

Here follow some CONFERENCES, Taken out of the THIRD PART Of the LIGHT OF THE
WORLD.
CONFERENCE XI. Declares, how we must be regenerated to enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven: and that we must return into the Dependence of God, which is the
only thing which God requires essentially of Man.
I asked her, How that Regeneration could be performed for persons already
advanced in Age and Doctrine?

SHe said, Sir, we must take wholly a new Life, as if we were newly born to
day: because all the Good which we esteem our selves to have done heretofore is
evil, or at least good for this life: for all our good works have always been
accompanied with Self-love, or with human Considerations, Math. 6. v. 2, 3.
which can never be recompensed in eternity, because we have here received
their Reward. What we do by Self-love is recompensed by our satisfaction: and
what we do by human Considerations is recompensed by the complacency of men: so
that we can never in justice pretend any thing else, being fully satisfied in
this World after the pretensions and ends which we have had in doing our good
works. Although they have been covered with the cloak of the Glory of God, or
Charity toward our Neighbor, all has been in effect but vanity. Therefore is
it that he who will be converted, must assume Romans 6. v. 4.
a life wholly new, and believe that he has never done one only action purely
for the Love of God. Which he shall know sufficiently by examining all the sins
against the Holy Spirit, and them which we commit in another, with the eight
Beatitudes, and the other solid Virtues. Every one may thereby see how far he
is alienated from the state of the Blessed, which Jesus Christ has declared in
these eight Beatitudes; and if he has the will to acquire them, how he must
take up a wholly new life, and become as a Child newly born, who suffers
himself to be governed by his heavenly Father. Neither age nor learning can
hinder that we abandon our selves unto God, suffering our selves to be ruled as
it pleases him: because the more we are advanced in age, the more must we make
haste to recover our Salvation, because we have but the small time that our
life endures. The conversion of persons in age should not be deferred one day,
lest their life escape, and there be no more recovery, because Heb. 9. v. 27.
after death there is no more remission. The Learned must also acknowledge,
that all their Wisdom is but Ignorance before God, which is often an impediment
unto his Graces: and that the time is come, 1 Cor. 1. v. 19.
when he will destroy the wisdom of the wise* and abolish the prudence of the
prudent, that Mark. 10. v. 15.
all may receive the Kingdom of Heaven as little children.

I said unto her, That it was very desirable to be of the number of them who
shall be converted; and that I would be the first to abandon my self wholly
unto God as a little Child.

She said: Sir, no person can be entirely converted if he do not know the sins;
and also the true virtues. These two things are necessary: For otherwise men
should think they were converted, while they were yet full of sins, and had not
yet acquired any solid Virtues. Therefore is it that I have spoken unto you so
particularly, that you should not remain in the darkness which invirons all the
men in the World.

There should yet be found many who would turn and be converted: but very few
who know their internal sins, and yet fewer who know what true Virtue is. All
these would make conversions false before God: for if they do not know their
hidden sins, they cannot amend them; and if they do not know what true Virtue
is, they cannot practice it. The ignorance of these two things hinders that
they cannot be converted unto God, nor yield themselves to be governed by him.

That then must be learned first of all, to know the state of their Soul, in
what degree of sin it is, and also in what degree of true Virtue. If these
things were known, there should be yet many who would embrace the spirit of
penitence, and abandon themselves unto God as little Children: but because they
know not the state of their Conscience, many perish insensibly, Is. 5. v. 13.
not knowing their miseries. If you will, Sir, be abandoned unto God as a
Child, think that all that you have done hitherto is of no value; and cast your
self Ps. 37. v. 5.
in Gods Arms, who is your Father, as a Child who cannot speak, that he may
teach your every thing. He shall do it assuredly: For it is his desire, Ezekiel.
18. v. 23.
that we be converted unto him: when we withdraw from him by our sins, he
suffers it, because he will not retract the free will which he has once given
us: for he is Romans 11. v. 29.
immutable in all his works: but so soon as we return unto him by penitence, he
receives us as the father did his prodigal Child, Luke 15. v. 24.
accepts us for his Child, and Heir of his Glory. But if you think to continue
in your proper wisdom, you shall never receive the Holy Spirit: You must become
simple as a Child, and not will any more to use your proper will, remitting and
reposing it wholly in Gods hands, giving him the reins of your proper will,
that he may guide it, and conduct it whither he pleases, and that you may no
more be able to abuse it, as hitherto you have done: which you must confess
with regret: for if our will had been ruled by God, we had never come into such
Extremities of all Evils.

I said unto her, That I must confess that my will had not been ruled by God,
because I had not known as at present the manner of abandoning my self unto
God.

She said: Sir, no man can ever be saved unless he know that he must be
entirely abandoned unto God: because that is the first and last Commandment
which he has given unto man: and to speak better, it is the only thing which
God requires of man. If we would absolutely depend upon God we should fulfill
all the Law and the prophets. That is the only thing necessary. All that I can
ever have said, Sir, is comprehended in the DEPENDENCE which we ought to have
upon God, because he has never required any thing else of man, (and also shall
never for the future so long as the world lasts) but that dependence which he
owes unto God. It is a very small matter that he requires of us. It is also
great ingratitude Deuteronomy. 32. v. 6.
that we deny him that Dependence upon him: seeing he is the Lord and Creator
of every thing, that he has created us of nothing, and gives all that we
have, to enjoy it in full liberty, provided only we have always the
acknowledgment that we depend upon him in every thing. Could that great God
demand less of a little Earth-worm, than the acknowledgment of the Dependence
of his God? It is athing so just, that although God had never testified that he
desired that of Man, he was obliged always to acknowledge it; seeing all came
truely-from him, and he had enriched him with so many Graces and Prerogatives,
which obliged him unto a continual acknowledgment, even although he had never
had more than a natural reason: for they say, that brute and cruel Beasts have
acknowledged some good deed of men all the days of their life; and man with an
understanding so complete will not acknowledge the Dependence which he has
upon God, nor submit his will ununto that of God, although he be so good Prove.
23. v. 26.
as to desire it: for if God were not an Excess of Goodness, he would rather
disdain men, of so little worth, than to permit them to unite their will unto
his. Nevertheless he permits and desires it, yea threatens and rejects them who
will not do it, as Jesus Christ threatened St. Peter John. 3. v. 8.
when he would not be washed by him. If we had but a very little judgment, we
should say unto God, that he should not permit only our will to be united unto
his; but rather, that ours should be wholly annihilated, and he exerce his over
us only and absolutely.

I asked her, How she understood that, in saying, That the acknowledgment of
the Dependence of God, was the only Commandment of God, seeing he has made so
many diverse ones.

She said: Sir, there is only that Commandment alone essential; all the others
are accidental. For when God had created Adam, and all men in him Ps. 8. v. 7.
he gave him the power over all subordinate things, having subjected all living
Creatures unto him, that he might rule over all as a little God, without
reserving any thing, but that he should always acknowledge the dependence which
he had upon his Creator; beside that, that he might, rule over every thing as a
Dependent Deity: and to denote that Dependence, he forbids him to eat of the
fruit of one only Tree; permitting him to taste all the others: which
signified, that man might use, enjoy, and rule over every thing, provided that
he always acknowledged his dependence upon that supreme Deity, of whom he held
every thing: and if Adam had not forgotten himself, in forsaking that
Dependence, to depend upon himself, he had never received any other Commandment
from God, nor all other men after him; but the Justice of God was obliged to
make other Commandments unto him for Penitence of his Disobedience: he enjoins
him Genesis 3. v. 17, 19.
to labor the Earth, and gain his living with the sweat of his face; which was
the second Cummandment which God made unto man, which yet is only accidental by
Adam's fall, and not essential by the Will of God, who loved well to see him
free, without subjecting him unto any thing but himself alone.

And when he made the Commandments given unto Moses for the People of Israel,
that was also by accident; for if they had not forgot themselves in so many
diverse sins, which withdrew them from the Dependence of God, he had never given
them diverse Commandments; but fearing lest his People should perish through
Ignorance, he gave them always Commandments, that by means of them they might
know their sins, and amend them, otherwise God had never constrained man unto
any thing else, but to acknowledge him as superior of all thing: because God
had created him to Prove. 8. v. 31.
take his delights with him, in full liberty, and without constraint, not
willing to subject him unto any other Law than that Cant. 2.4.
of Love: whence appears that all these other Commandments are but accidentally
appointed, because of the sins which men have committed in diverse times, who if
they would yet at present reassume that Dependence upon God, they should not
need all the other Commandments nor Precepts: because all are but means to
attain unto that Dependence of God; and that we might see and know all the
things which hinder us to abandon our Will unto that of God; and that knowing
them by the Commandments, we might remove and correct them, that we might be
able to enter again into that Dependence which was first enjoined unto us, as
the only thing necessary unto our Salvation: as it is yet at present even as
then.

CONFERENCE XII. Declares, that there is but one only thing to be done, to be
saved.
I said unto her, That it was very agreeable to hear that there was but one
only thing to be done to be saved; that I would gladly take that short way.

She said: No, Sir, Luke 10 42.
there is nothing but one only thing to be done for Salvation: but there are
many to be omitted, which give us great Impediments and Disturbances. We omit
to do what serves us as means to arrive at that Dependence, and we do what mars
it. The Penitence which God gave unto Adam to gain his living with the sweat of
his face, is very little observed by men at present. Every one will live
without laboring, and they account it a happiness to have Riches to live at
ease. That is very far to contradict the means which God has taught us so
salutarily. After Adam had sinned, and all men in him, he had by his free will
departed from that Dependence upon God, to become wise of himself: he had
rendered himself with all his Posterity miserable: because all the Miseries
which we endure are engendered by willing to do our own will. We must not
impute all our Miseries unto Adam, but only unto our own faults, which we our
selves commit. If we had only Adam's Sin, we should only have the Penitence to
labor for our living, and endure the Intemperance of the Elements; but our own
sins cause unto us a thousand other sorts of sufferings. If we would labor,
and endure heat and cold, or other intemperances of the said Elements, and
remit the Dependence of our Will unto that of God, Ps. 81. v. 14, 17
we should quickly return into the blessed state wherein Adam was created; for
our Penitence should be accomplished in this short life, which is much
shortened by the Mercy of God; and then we should enjoy an eternal beatitude,
which should never end: but since our proper actual Will would not depend upon
God, but upon it self, following its proper inclinations, it has caused us
many other Evils, which we attribute unto God, or unto Adam; and if we regarded
them truly, we should see that they take their origin and reign from our
proper Will, and nothing else: For our diseases are often caused by our
intemperance in Eating and Drinking, or other Excesses of the body, which we
commit to satisfy our proper Will, which precipitates us sometimes into some
state that causes us a thousand Pains, or some Employment, or Traffic, which
lead us into great Troubles of Processes, Quarrels, Disquiets, or other
Poverties and Miseries: And all that proceeds from that we would not submit our
Will unto that of God, who would have ruled us as a good Father his Child,
having loved rather to follow our own Will, and undergo all manner of
Calamities in this world, and be in peril of suffering after greater ones,
which shall never end: because he that will not be guided by God, can never be
saved: seeing our proper conduct shall lead us into abyses of all manner of
Evils, temporal and eternal: because our proper Will is ignorant, precipitant,
never satiated nor satisfied, not staying for any sorts of Evils: although it
discover its Miseries, it does not amend them, but attributes them unto
another, to Adam, or else to God: and so flattering themselves always in their
own Will, they persist therein until Death, which gives beginning unto eternity
of Misery: because no person can be saved of himself, and if they will not give
their Will unto God, from whom can they expect Salvation? It is great
blindness, Sir, not to know these Truths, which are so evident; seeing we feel
our impotency, and know that we have received all from God, and cannot hope for
any thing but from him. And with all these considerations, we will not abandon
our Will into his, loving rather to be miserable and perish in the end by
following our own. We are ingrate unto God, and cruel unto our selves: For it
is very great ingratitude to refuse God the only thing that he requires, of our
proper Will, having given us all the rest; and great Cruelty unto our selves in
withdrawing from the Dependence of God, to subject our selves unto so many
sorts of Evils.

I asked her, How it was possible that men should refuse God their proper Will,
seeing all belonged unto him?

She said: Sir, all the world does that by effect; and I know not one only
person upon Earth who will depend on the will of God: because every one will
follow his own proper will: great and small, none excepted, will not abandon
their will unto that of God, but will all depend upon their own. Is it any
wonder that I have said unto you formerly, that none can be saved in the manner
that they live at present? It is an infallible Truth, which none have yet
discovered, because of the universal Darkness which is at present in the world:
Every one imagins to himself that he will abandon himself unto God, when there
is nothing like it: for if that were true, we should not see men so earnest to
negociate, or traffic, nor run through Cities and Countries to gather Money,
nor also to solicit for offices, states, or benefices; because every one
remitting himself into the Dependence of God, would labor to have only his
necessities, and no more, knowing well that this life is short, and that the
necessity suffices unto a Sojourner, who will be loath to burden himself with
things useless or superfluous unto his Voyage, which would be a burden to him.
All men's Cares, Goings and Comings, or pretensions for things present, are as
many Witnesses which affirm that they will not abandon their will unto God, but
will follow their own proper will, leaving the penitence which God has
enjoined, to exalt themselves into States, Honors and Dignities, seeking to
live at our ease, instead of laboring to fulfill the Penitence due unto our
sins. We act directly contrary unto the Will of God, because we cannot be
ignorant that he requires that Submission and Penitence of us. And with all
that we say by word, that we are abandoned unto God, and look upon it as a
thing impossible, that we should refuse him our will; which discovers always
the more our blindness.

I said unto her, That there was truly horrible darkness over the universal
World; and that I my self was environed with them, in believing that I would be
abandoned unto God, while I had yet many cares for this life.

She said: Sir, you see well that your abandon is not true, so long as there
are yet cares for this life. It were to have great distrust of God, that after
we were abandoned unto his governing, we should yet have Cares for temporal
things. God, who has created all things for man, can he refuse him his
necessities, when he were abandoned unto him? If he Math. 6. v. 26.
nourishes the Birds of Heaven, who labor not, should he not nourish men in
laboring? We are exceeding full of false persuasions, which flatter us to our
ruin. For it is assured, that he who has resolved to abandon himself unto God,
seeks no more earthly things, but those which are eternal. God makes him see
sufficiently, that what is here below are but transitory things, which the
Servant of God should not touch but with the extremity of his foot, because
they are unworthy of a Soul dedicated unto God, which regards no more any thing
but to please him. And if you, Sir, have other Cares, believe assuredly, that
you are not yet abandoned unto him: because that abandon consists in a
cessation from every thing, to receive from God only; and the less self acts,
the more we receive. There needs no more but TO CEASE, AND TO RECEIVE. For all
our Cares and Disquiets, or activity for the things of this life, are all
Impediments, which extinguish the operations which God would produce in our
Soul. We must cease and rest, to let the Holy Spirit act alone. If our will be
abandoned unto God, he will Ps. 73, v. 23, 24.
rule it wisely.

Let us yield our souls unto his Government, and let us labor for
accomplishing the penitence due unto our Sins, that we may have things
necessary for the entertainment of our body: and then we may truly say, that
we are abandoned unto God, not before: because the States, Cares, and Affairs
of the World, are all Impediments unto that Abandon: yea, even so many diverse
means of devotion as men practice at present are all great Impediments, since
there is only that Abandon alone necessary.

I said unto her, That that little word Abandon comprehended great things; that
it was nevertheless the Philosophers Stone to discover the eternal Treasures,
unto which I aspired.

She said: Sir, that word of ABANDON UNTO GOD comprehends Ps. 73. v. 25, 26.
all things: for he that is abandoned unto him, knows him and loves him, and
knows also true Virtue to follow it, and the falsity of Vices to evite them:
because God abandons himself unto the Soul which is abandoned unto him, and the
Holy Spirit lives in it; and remaining with it, replenisheth it with his Gifts
to know every thing, and with his fruits to entertain it: so that all our
happiness depends on abandoning our Will unto that of God; and not in many
diverse things, as men imagine. There needs no more but that abandon to be
reunited in Grace and Favor with God, entirely converted unto him, and out of
all sorts of dangers. If you Luke 15. v. 18.
be guilty, abandon your self unto God, he shall presently receive you, and
convert you unto himself; and if Ps. 18. v. 5, 7.
you be in fear of his Judgments, and of this dangerous time, abandon your self
unto him, he shall preserve you, and save you. There is nothing to be done but
that alone, to abandon your self unto God, and remain under his dependence. Is
not that a thing most reasonable, that a Creature remain under the Dependence
of its Creator? must there be Commandments and Constraints to oblige him unto a
duty so just, so good, and so advantageous? There is no right, divine, human
nor civil that can dispense us from so just a thing. Notwithstanding we rebel
against all manner of rights to adhere unto our proper Will, which is so wicked
and insolent, which percipitates us into so many sorts of evils; for all the
Miseries which we find in this life, proceed from our proper Will: and as the
abandoning of it unto the Will of God, Ps. 37. v. 5, 6, 7.
is the accomplishment of all good; so the possession of it is Is. 65. v. 3.
the consummation of all manner of Evils; so that he who will be converted,
needs nothing else but to remit his will into the power of God: In doing that
he fulfilleth all the Law and the Prophets: because they teach us nothing else
but means to attain to that abandon.

I said unto her, That being supposed, as it is most true, that in
acknowledging always that we depend upon God in every thing, we need no other
Precept nor Commandment; that it was a marvel that she had taught me so many
means.

She said: Sir, I have spoken to you of the state of the World and of the
Church, that you refer no more thereto by pious Beliefs. I have also told you,
that we are arrived in the reign of Antichrist, lest you should be deceived;
and also that the world is judged, that you flatter not your self by false
hopes, believing that it shall yet endure, to continue in negligence.

I have also showed you true Virtue, that you be not deceived by that which is
only apparent; having also declared unto you the sins against the Holy Spirit,
and them which we commit in another, that you might be ignorant of nothing that
should hinder your abandoning unto God: for the ignorance of Good and Evil
would destroy us insensibly; and as we are fallen in the time of universal
Darkness, the common Enemy might very easily deceive you, as he does all the
world, persuading you that you are abandoned unto God, when you lived yet
wholly unto your self. For that have I explained so many things particularly to
you, that you might make a good discretion of the Truth from Falsehood: and that
you might assuredly abandon your self unto God according to your desires. And
as you can never do Good Ps. 34. v. 15.
without departing from Evil, nor depart from it without knowing it; I have
therefore labored to discover unto you the good and the evil which reigns at
present in the world, to give you the assured marks to know if you are
abandoned unto God in truth, or not; and as the Commandments of God are given
us to discover unto us what hinders us to be abandoned unto him, and also the
Evangelical Law, that by means thereof we might remove all the impediments of
our abandoning us unto God: Voluntary Poverty being the means to disengage our
proper Will from desiring perishing Goods; Chastity to disengage the same Will
from desiring the Pleasures of the Flesh; and Obedience to disengage our desire
from accomplishing our proper Will; so all the other Evangelical Councels,
which teach us to omit the things that hinder our abandoning our selves unto
God: So I judged it necessary to declare unto you all the things which give let
unto that abandon unto God, and also them that may serve us as means to
facilitate unto us that abandon, which is the only thing essential Is. 58. v.
13.
which God requires of all them who will be saved.

I asked Her, if it was sufficient to resolve absolutely, that I will from
henceforth absolutely depend upon God, and no more use my own proper Will in
any thing?

She said: Sir, that Resolution is a great beginning; but it were to be feared,
that we should not effectually put it in practice through our evil habits so
long inveterated. Our proper will having always ruled, how can it be entirely
subjected, unless by the means which Jesus Christ has denoted us in his
Gospel, which are as so many degrees or steps to mount unto that abandon? for
otherwise we might yet make false suppositions; as we have done heretofore
until now. But when we put in practice the Evangelical doctrine, we shall
thereby discover, how far we are advanced in that abandon unto God: for if our
frailty had not needed these means, God had not taken human flesh to come and
teach us them: because he can do nothing unprofitable. You must then stay upon
that, Sir, and take up simply that Evangelical Doctrine, which shall teach us
all things palpable unto our senses; which following, we shall assuredly arrive
at that abandon: for that is the true way, the most short, and most sure way.
Although God has in diverse times sent Prophets and holy Persons to tell men by
what means they might recover that abandon unto God, yet have they never done
it in such perfection as Jesus Christ when he was upon Earth: because he has
omitted nothing, but has taught all, so punctually, that men shall never need
other instructions: because that is the last Mercy which God will exercise
toward men, who must expect nothing after the Doctrine of Jesus Christ; and
what has been taught before or since, has been nothing comparable unto that
Evangelical Doctrine: we must embrace and follow it, if we will be saved,
because it teaches us all the means of accomplishing the Law of God.

CONFERENCE XVII. Is a Recollection of all the preceding Matters; their End,
and Use.
I rendered her many thanks for the Goodness which she had to tell me so many
things profitable unto my Salvation, promising to practice them as much as it
were possible for me.

SHe said: Sir, in the practice consists your Salvation: for it is a very small
matter to know all the Conduct of the World, with all its Sciences and Secrets:
if all that do not serve you as means to work out your Salvation, all Ecl. 12.
v. 8, 9.12.
is vanity and delusion: yea, Wisdom shall be unto our greater Condemnation,
when we do not put in practice the Good which we know, and do not flee and hate
what we know of Evil. I had not enlarged to declare to you so many things of
Good and Evil, if I had not remarked that you desire to put them in practice:
for to know the Essence of Virtue without practicing it, is nothing else but
vain Speculations; and to know the Evil without eviting it, is a worse
curiosity, which fills our understanding, without fruit.

I have spoken of True Virtue, that you might follow it rather than the false;
and also of the Romish Church, that you might not follow it as holy.

I have spoken unto you of the Reign of Antichrist, that you be not deceived by
its false appearances of piety: declaring unto you that more then three fourth
parts of the World are of his compact, that you might work out your Salvation
with fear, and might not trust your self unto any person, because the most
Wicked are the greatest Hypocrites, that they may the better deceive.

I have told you, That we are in the judgment, and that the last Plagues are
begun: that you might not refer your Salvation unto another time: because that
which remains unto us is short.

I have told you, That Jesus Christ shall come upon Earth to judge the Good and
the Wicked, and shall there exterminate all Evils; that you might aspire after
that Felicity, and depart from the Misery of them who shall be sent to Hell.

I have told you, That Jesus Christ shall remain upon Earth to reign there with
all the Righteous eternally; that the expectation of that Glorious Coming might
give you strength to sustain with Patience the Plagues and Tribulations which
must shortly arrive, the like whereof have not yet been seen.

I have told you, That the world shall endure eternally, and that none of the
Creatures shall perish in their kinds: that the hope of your Felicity might not
be founded upon imaginary Goods, and that we may in some manner comprehend what
contentment the Souls and Bodies of the Blessed shall have when all malignity
shall be removed from every thing; that all the Elements and other Creatures
shall then serve for Delights unto man, who shall rule over all, united unto
Jesus Christ in Body and Spirit; and that, that you might contemn the Pleasures
of this present Life by the hope of these to come.

I have told you, that the Jews shall turn unto God, and be his People; and
that the Catholics shall be rejected and abandoned: that you might never
despise any person; for the Jewish people, the most contemned of all Nations,
shall be the most exalted; and Matthew, 3. v. 9.
of Stones shall be made Children of Abraham; and that you might willingly
leave the Maxims of the Romish Church, which shall for its Evil-doings be
quickly extermined.

I have told you, That Man is created for no other end, but to take his
delights with God; that you may no more seek any thing upon Earth, and contemn
every thing, to enjoy that Entertainment with God; having also told you, that
this present Life is only a time of Penitence; that all your Labors be
performed in that Spirit of Penitence, unto which God has subjected all men
for their Sins.

Finally, Sir, I have told you, That all the Laws, the Prophets, and all
Virtues consist in the abandon of our Will unto that of God: that you be not
distracted by so many other diverse things; but might pass your Life joyfully
under that Dependence of God, which is the least thing we could render unto God
for so many Benefits which we have received of him, which he permits us to
enjoy, provided we depend upon him in all things: having also showed you, That
so many diverse means which the Priests, Monks, and Religious teach us as means
to procure our Salvation, are things that withdraw us therefrom, by which we
are seduced and deceived: because they make us refer more to men than unto God:
which is an Idolatry that has infected all Christendom, in which none study to
abandon their will unto the will of God; but every one enjoys and disposes of
it at his own pleasure, as if every one were sovereign of himself. One will be
Great, and another Rich; one will rule over others, and be followed and served;
one goes in a Chariot, another upon Horseback; finally, every one will follow
his solace and pleasures after his proper inclinations, believing with all that
to work out their salvation, because the Priests and Religious promise it to
them. These are new Gods and new Saviors, who have changed unto us the Order
established by God, our Father and Creator, and the Practice which his Son
Jesus came to teach us. They conduct us by the way of Hell, persuading us, that
it is that of Paradise: with these persuasions every one suffers himself to be
deceived and seduced, there being no person in Christendom that believes that
he cannot be saved without abandoning his will unto that of God: which is
nevertheless an eternal Truth, which shall never change, whatever man do: if he
do not acknowledge the Dependence which he has upon God in every thing, he
shall never be saved; and if he do not assume the Evangelical Councels as the
true means taught by God for returning into that dependence, he shall never be
save: because God teaches nothing unprofitable, but only things expressly
necessary, unto which all the world must yield: which no person does, believing
men more than God: though the most part be ruled by the Devil, who gains unto
himself the most part of men by means of these savage Pastors, who abandon the
Sheep in the power of the infernal Wolf, to make them perish with themselves
eternally, in retiring them from God to attract them to themselves.

I have also told you, That there are no more any true Christians upon Earth:
that you might become one, and should not suppose blindly to be such: because
there can be no Christians, but they who follow the Doctrine of Jesus Christ:
all others are deceived in believing it: for God does not change for the
changing of men: we are at present as much obliged to depend upon God as Adam,
the first man was; and as much obliged to labor the Earth as he, although we
had done no other sin than that which he committed in us: we must also now
follow the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, as did the first Christians, because that
Doctrine is immutable, and shall never change: so he that does not follow it,
is not a true Christian, and cannot be saved without becoming such. No person
must flatter himself in that point. We must imitate Jesus Christ, or Joh. 15.
v. 6.
perish eternally: because we are all fallen into that sin of Ingratitude, that
we will not depend upon God, as well by the will of Adam, as of our own proper
will: and so we have need to assume that Evangelical Law, that we might return
into that Dependence upon God, which is so just and reasonable.

Although God had never demanded it of man, he ought by divine and human Right
to render unto God that submission of his free will; and he would assuredly do
it if he were not diverted by men like himself: because even natural reason
obliges him to depend upon him; from whom he receives every thing; which
human wisdom has diverted, having found so many Studies and Arguments to
favor our proper will, that all men believe it to be lawful to follow it
without offending him, who pleased to reserve it for himself. Sir, Math. 15. v.
24.
these are all blind, who lead the blind, and all fall into the ditch. Be you
never of that band; but believe in the Light which God shows you. I have
spoken TRUTH unto you, not affecting to be believed or followed; but only to
tend and aim at your Salvation. All that I have told you is necessary for you,
if you will use it well: because we cannot love God without knowing him, nor
follow Virtue without comprehending it: we cannot also evite the Deceit without
discovering it, nor escape the Paws of the Devil without turning away
therefrom: make good use of all these things, and you shall be happy in this
world and in the other. I doubt not but my manner of speech may have given you
pain and difficulty, because they do not accord with your Philosophy, Theology,
or other Scholastique Sciences. But believe that I have never made profession
of any human Sciences: I love rather to be ignorant of than to know them; and
if I could learn in a quarter of an hour all the Sciences of the Schools, I
would not employ so little time thereto: because I know that human Sciences are
great Impediments unto the Holy Spirit; and also that the time is come, Is. 29.
v. 14.
when God shall destroy the Wisdom of the Wise, and bring to nothing the
Prudence of the Prudent: and so I cannot use fine Discourses, but such only as
make known the native Truth: the words, the terms, may well be debated and
controlled: but never the true sense, which is true. I will not dispute with
the Wise, seeing God shall shortly overcome them by the effects of my words;
nor also polish my Language, because the simple nativeness pleases God more
than the rhetorical Eloquences, subject unto vanity: for he that speaks that he
may speak elegantly, is filled with vainglory, willing to renounce which, I
seek only simple words, that may express my conceptions.

I believe, Sir, that you have sufficiently understood me; and that I can say
no more to you to cooperate unto your Salvation; there remains no more but to
put it in practice. Which you shall do more easily in solitude, or the desert,
than elsewhere, because of the corruption of men which are great letts unto us,
and also the power which the Devil has at present over their spirits, to
bewitch them that are yet sound and entire. Flee then, Sir, that you may evite
all these dangers, lest you might be diverted from your good proposal, and
should look back Gen 19. v. 26.
as Lot's Wife, who was changed into a Statue of Salt. Yet a little Penitence,
and after God will deliver you to enter into the joy which shall never end.
That is it I wish unto you, in giving you Adieu.

I was grieved to hear that she would leave me, praying her not to withdraw,
seeing I would follow what she had taught me, which was nothing else but
Self-denial, and Dependence upon God.

She said unto me: Sir, it shall be more pure that you remain alone: for I am
only a Creature as you are, and we must cleave unto the Creator alone, without
interruption: Is. 58. v. 13, 14.
he shall conduct you at his pleasure, provided you be abandoned unto his will;
you need no more instructions of any person. I have told you more than
sufficient to conduct you unto union with God. It should be hereafter only
repetitions of things foresaid, which should bereave your time and mine, which
it is better to employ in the practice than in repetitions. Leave me in my
liberty, and take you also yours: God has not created us together. He shall
save us, though separated in body. True Union consists in a conformity of will
with God, and not in particular Conferences. I must confess, I have often
distracted my self from entertainments with God to speak to you of so many
diverse things: but I judged them necessary for your Salvation: therefore have
they not been grievous unto me: but now, when you know the truth of many
things, it is not necessary to speak more unto you. God shall always teach you
enough, provided you continue faithful unto him. He has never refused what men
ask for their Salvation. You must have no more any other pretensions. Let the
Ps. 46. v. 3. etc.
World be overturned; Let the Romish Church perish; Let the Elements be moved
against sinners; all that cannot touch you, provided you keep you firmly united
with God. Leave willingly every thing to find that union. If I be with you or
not, it is a small matter, provided you be with God, that should suffice;
because he alone can save you, and none else. There is always mixture when a
Creature cleaves to its like. I have often despised them who hold themselves
addicted to persons, although it were under some pious pretext. I will not do
my self what I despise in others.

I said unto her, That she had promised to explain to me the 24. Chapter of St.
Matthew, that she should at least give me it before she left me.

She said: Sir, I do not willingly fail of my Promise: give me the text of that
Chapter, and I shall explain it unto you word by word, wishing that all men of
good will might see it, that they might discover that it is of this present
time that that chapter speaks. Every one reads it without understanding it:
notwithstanding there are pleasant advertisments to beware of this dangerous
time wherein we live at present. These are not Fables made at pleasure; but
Truths proceeded out of the mouth of Jesus Christ himself, which every one
ought well to apprehend, and follow the councels which he gives. They are most
salutary and most proper Luk 21. v. 36.
for escaping the evils to come, which hang over our heads. I must give it in
writing for an eternal remembrance, that men may observe if all that it
contains shall not be effected in our time. Do not oppose what you shall find
contrary to your studies, or old impressions, because the Holy Spirit shall
give perfect and unheard of intelligences of the Holy Scriptures; because we
are arrived in the fullness of time. If you will receive them with Humility of
Heart, you shall understand all things in perfection: but you must become a
Child, and cease from being a Wise Man; because Ps. 25 v. 14. Math. 11, v. 25.
God reveals his secrets only unto little ones, and hides them from the great
and wise of the earth. We must not resist the Holy Spirit, and say, such a
Father explaineth it so or otherwise: because the fullness is always more than a
part. You shall find what I say more clear than whatever the Holy Fathers have
said, because the time of the fulfilling of every thing is come; but we must
render simple our understanding as little Children, or otherwise we cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

I brought unto her the text of the gospel, with promise to submit my
understanding unto the Light of the Holy Spirit entirely to my power.

She said: Sir, that Submission is the preparation requisite: For if you would
act the Doctor or wise learned man, you should put opposition unto the Light of
the Holy Spirit, source of all Wisdom. You must always believe and maintain
that he is more wise than all the Doctors that ever were in the world, and that
we learn more by a little ray of his Light, than by an hundred years of most
assiduous study. Therefore 1 Cor. 8. v. 12.
render all your Wisdom Ignorances, and Math. 18. v. 3. 1 Pet. 2. v. 2.
become as an Infant newly born again, that you may receive these new
Intelligences, which shall give you more light than ever all the Old Fathers
together have had: because they have never discovered the Math. 13. v. 44.
hidden Treasures; because the time was not yet come. Every one spoke according
to his thoughts, and not as it was really, because it was Rev. 5. v, 1 -- 9.
a closed Book, which none was worthy to open but Jesus Christ himself, since
he was killed and put to death. There is not hitherto any thing accomplished of
all the Holy Scriptures but that death, which shall disclose the mavelous
things of God, which have remained hidden until now, and begin to be revealed
unto them who shall be humble of heart: but the wise Is. 29. v. 14.
shall perish with their wisdom. Therefore do I exhort you, Sir, unto
Simplicity and Submission, that you may receive the Light which begins to
soring in our time, and Rev. 21. v. 2.
see the new heavenly Jerusalem descend, adorned as a Bride unto the day of her
Nuptials. The Ibid v. 3.
League and alliance of God with men shall then be accomplished. The Earth
shall then be renewed. All Creatures shall leave their Malignities, which shall
be Rev. 20, v. 14, 15.
confined unto the center of the Earth, to torment the Bodies and Souls of all
them who would not submit their wills unto God; They shall receive there pains
according to their sins, being overwhelmed with those Malignities which these
sins have caused.

CONFERENCE XXVI. Declares the Necessity of becoming a Child to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, renouncing all Worldly Wisdom, and all Human Abuses.
I asked her, How it were possible to leave all Sciences humanly acquired, to
become a Child, when one is an Aged Man?

SHe said: Sir, except you do it, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. It is Jesus Christ Math. 18, v, 3,
who says it: and he cannot lie; but he urges that necessity of becoming
Children by Threatenings of not entering into the Kingdom of heaven: which were
the greatest evil that can befall man. It were better never to be born, than not
to be saved: and seeing we cannot be saved without becoming Children, we must
do it at any rate. Would you, Sir, esteem more the Honor of the World, or your
acquired Science, than the Kingdom of heaven? That were very lamentable, seeing
all the things of this world do but pass as the Bird which cutteth the Air, and
leaves no trace of its way after it; so we, when we shall be passed through
this world, there shall remain nothing of our Sciences or Studies, nor of our
Honor and Reputation: all ends with us; and if there remain in the spirit of
others any reputation that we were wise and learned, that is insensible unto us
after death. If we have pleased our selves therein in our life, the sufferings
of these complacencies attend us in the other world: and instead that it should
be a happiness to us that we have been wise, it is a great misery to us to have
lost the Kingdom of Heaven by the same wisdom. Forsake all these human
Considerations, Sir, and become a Child though you be aged. You must make the
more haste, lest time and life escape: Never consult Gal. 1. v. 16.
flesh and blood, for they deceive and corrupt us. Eccl. 37. v. 17, 18.
Let us consult only our divine Soul, which is reasonable; and it shall tell
you, that nothing is better nor more reasonable than to abandon our free will
unto God, who has given us it, and to submit it unto his government as a
little Child: that on that depends our eternal Happiness; and that nothing else
can save us: because without that Dependence, there is no Salvation.

I said unto her, That I knew most clearly that truth, that there was no
Salvation without the Dependence of God: asking, how I could now ignore
Sciences formerly acquired, seeing I could not make my self not to have them?

She said: Sir, nothing can hurt you if all be submitted unto God. You cannot
ignore what you know by means of your Studies: but you can well submit all
these Sciences unto God, and account them as Ignorances; as in effect they are.
Apply no more your spirit unto the study of Sciences, and believe them to be
all vain in respect of the Wisdom of God. You shall know that you are abandoned
unto his will, when Ps. 73. v. 25, 26,
you seek no more any thing upon Earth, neither Learning nor Wisdom, nor desire
to know any thing else but what may render you acceptable unto God: For he that
is abandoned unto him without Deceit, moves himself no more but for what
regards his Glory, all the rest touches him no more. If he is wise, or
ignorant, it is indifferent unto him. Wisdom serves him for what regards the
Glory of God, and in no wise to rule upon Earth; knowing well that he who is
abandoned unto God without Sciences, is as great as he who is so with much
Learning: and even as we may well be Poor of Spirit in possessing Riches; so
can we possess much learning, and withal be simple of Spirit: when we have
submitted all our Learning unto God, he serves himself of it as he pleases:
but so long as we will rely on and make account of them, we are not yet become
Children, to have entry into the Kingdom of Heaven. And seeing God shows you,
Sir, that there is no Salvation without dependence on him, put your self
promptly therein, without considering if you have Sciences or any thing else:
For (as the Proverb is) God makes Mercury of all wood: we must not regard our
selves, but his will, who desires that all men, of whatever conditions, hold
themselves under his Dependence, remitting their free wills into his power,
without using the same themselves.

I said unto her, That absolutely and irrevocably I abandoned my self unto God
to be a true Child; but that I had yet some repugnancy to renounce the Church.

She said: Ha, Sir, you must never renounce the Holy Church: but rather die:
but you must only renounce the abomination which is crept into the Romish
Church of these days. Do you not see that she has falsified her faith unto her
lawful Husband Jesus Christ: and has not remained faithful unto him? I should
be glad that you could show me one only point of the Doctrine of Jesus Christ
that she observes, or one only thing that she practices, that is not contrary
to the Life and Doctrine of her lawful Husband, who descended from heaven unto
the Earth to teach her them, as well by his Works, as by his Words: all which
things are despised by her who should be his lawful Spouse. I have often spoken
to you of her Excesses, and Adulteries: will you yet hold her for the Holy
Church, while the Devil 2 These. 2. v. 4,
has placed his throne in her? what weakness of spirit, to feel repugnancy to
forsake so evil a thing upon frivolous persuasions that it is holy! while God
has given us an understanding and reason; it is for no other end but that we
may discern evil from good, that we may not perish blindly: and now you would
change Gods designs, in stifling your understanding and reason, to follow evil
blindly: and seeing it so openly evil, you form some foolish imagination, that
it is yet good; That must come only from a mere bewitching of spirit: because
reason, even natural, discovers sufficiently unto us, that the Romish Church at
present is not the Spouse of Jesus Christ: because she does not in any thing
follow her husband; and that two things so alienated cannot make confederacy.
How can you have repugnance to leave her who has forsaken her God? If Beasts,
and insensible Creatures, and all the Elements, have arisen against man when he
did forsake the Dependence of his God; how should man, so reasonable, not arise
against that Church, which has forsaken the Dependence of her God, to will no
more dependence but upon her self? we should rather have repugnancy to remain
under her, than to forsake her: or otherwise we have less resentments of the
offense done unto our Creator, than the Beasts and elements, or inanimate
things, which have always resented the injury done unto their Creator; yea, at
the death of Jesus Christ Math. 27. v. 51.
the Stones did rent, and the Sun was darkened. Have you less affection for
God, Sir, then these stones, in not resenting the continual injuries which that
Church does unto God? If a beautiful Angel is become a Devil for having desired
in his heart to be equal unto God, what shall become of her which prefers
her self unto the same God without willing to him in any thing? I regret yet
your blindness in that point, Sir; and cannot believe that your repugnancy
comes from your reason, but some habitual sensibility which you have unto the
Church: For if your Understanding did apply it self to discover the origin of
that repugnancy, it should see clearly that it comes from the pious affection
which you have for the Church; but that you do not take it where it is: because
men are deluded in that, as in other things, by terms and words of men: and
when they hear Rome named the Holy Church, that word engenders in us affection
for her, without penetrating if she be that of which they speak: when we would
deceive a Child, and keep him in fear of his Father, we put his Cloak and Hat
upon a Faggot in some place, somewhat obscure, which the Child perceiving, he
believes that it is truly he, and fears and respects him. But if he drew
near, and lift up the Cloak, he should see that he was deceived, and that what
he held for his Father, is only some Wood. Verily, Sir, in the Darkness wherein
we live at present, they do the very same with us, covering Rome with the Cloak
of the Holy Church, and clothing it with the Head of Jesus Christ; we fear and
respect it, as if it were our true Mother, the Holy Church, authorized by Jesus
Christ, and his lawful Spouse: but when we draw near, and lift up that Cloak,
we shall see that there is nothing but Wood, instead of Sanctity, which cannot
be profitable unto us, except to warm us in the Winter. Verily, Sir, we must
not be so much Children in what regards our eternal Salvation. We must not walk
blindly in a matter so important. If men apply all their spirit to make a Hose,
or a Shoe, why should they not apply it more to save their Soul? It is good to
have the Math. 10. v. 16.
simplicity of the Dove in regard of God: for he that has abandoned himself
unto him, has no more but to suffer himself to be conducted as a little Child:
but we must have the Prudence of the Serpent to beware of men, who can deceive
or be deceived: and when they say to us, behold the Holy Church! we must
observe narrowly, if it is truly her, or if it is a Faggot covered with her
Mantle. It is for that only that God has given us an understanding, that we
may 1 Cor 20. v. 15.
always discern true good from false, especially in the matter of our
Salvation: because all other things are vain and perishing, unworthy of a
serious application of spirit; seeing it ought not to be applied but unto
things eternal, for which we are created: and our misery proceeds from that we
make more serious searches to discover the turns and courses of the affairs of
the world, than those of our Salvation. In which the Scripture has reason to
say, that Luke 16. v. 8.
the Children of this world are more prudent than the Children of the Kingdom:
because before engaging in any State, Office, or Traffic, they will always
ponder if it be truly advantageous and profitable: and they will be loath to
rely upon the Words of men, and believe blindly that a thing is good before
they have first experienced it. If they have so much providence for what
regards the Earth, how much should we have for what regards Heaven? we found
our Salvation blindly upon what they tell us, that Rome is our Mother the Holy
Church, and we do not sound that affair which concerns us so much, to know if
truly she has the quality of our true Mother, and if she is confederated with
our true Father, who is immutable in all his qualities, unto which that Spouse
must always be conform. We must see if she whom they call our Mother, has the
Spirit and Practice of our Father; and if we find nothing like it, we must
renounce her, and account her deceitful and lying, unworthy of our affection.

FINIS.
THE ARMS OF THE CITY OF RYSEL, ON THE RIVER OF LYSSE IN FLANDERS.



