A RELATION OF THE Famous Conference HELD ABOUT RELIGION AT PARIS, BETWEEN M.
Bossuet, Bishop of Condom (late Tutor to the Dauphin) AND Monsieur Claude,
Minister of the Reformed Church at Charenton; AT The Countess of Royes house,
in the Presence of several Persons of the first Quality, at the Request of
Mademoiselle de Duras, Daughter to the Famous Marshal de Turenne, she being
then upon Changing her Religion.

Translated from the French Copy, as it was lately Published by Monsieur Claude.

LONDON, Printed by H. C. for Thomas Malthus, at the Sun in the Poultrey, 1684.

A TRUE AND EXACT ACCOUNT OF THE FAMOUS CONFERENCE BETWEEN THE Bishop of
Condom, AND Monsieur CLAUDE.
An Account of what passed in the Conversation which the Bishop of Condom the
Dauphins Tutor, had with Monsieur Claude, at the Countess of Royses house, in
the presence of Mademoiselle Marchalle de Lorge, the Countess de Roys,
Mademoiselle de Duras, the Marquess de Miremont, Mademoiselle de Roucy, and
Monsieur Cotton.
SOme days before this Conversation Mademoiselle de Duras went to see Monsieur
Claude, whom she told she had some Scruples about Religion, and took out of her
pocket a Paper, which had been given her, containing some passages of S.
Augustine, touching the Eucharist; to which M. Claude made answer, and then fell
to showing her by other passages, that the Doctrine of that Father upon this
Subject was the same with what was taught at Charenton, and herewith she seemed
satisfied.

On the morrow Monsieur Claude chancing to see her at the Countess of Royses
house, after a pretty long Discourse, she told him, she could wish he would
have in her presence a Conference with some Roman Catholic Doctor or other. M.
Claude made answer, That this was in no wise practiced, that such Conferences
might have Dangerous consequences, and that she knew very well that the State
of those of the Reformed Religion in France, and in particular at Paris,
obliged 'em to use many measures of Prudence and of Pre-caution: But said she,
What course would you take if by Chance you met with any of those Gentlemen,
and that you were urged upon Points of Religion, sure you would not abandon your
Cause? In such a case, said M. Claude, I would avoid entering into Dispute as
much as possible I could, but being forced to it I would give a Reason of my
Faith, and in those unforeseen Occasions, people are not used to flinch and run
away. But why added he, do you ask me this Question? That Is not the matter in
Dispute.

Two days afterward, the Countess of Roy^ told M. Claude, how endeavors were
used to ^ave him meet as if i^ were by. Chance with M. de Condom, and how she
had thought it fitting to give ^im ^otice of that Design. If I we^^ to meet
said he, with any one, I should rather choose it should be with M. de Condom
than any other, Because he is a Wise, Honorable and Understanding Man, and for
whom I have a great Esteem and Consideration; but being as I am a Public
Person, methinks this ^usiness does deserve to be well ^ho^ght on and weighed.
Sho^^ly after he gave an account of this business to two of his Friends, an^
the^ all thr^e went to visit a Person of Quality of an extraordinary Merit and
consummated Prudence, with whom it was concluded, that this Rencounter with M.
de Condom was absolutely to be avoided. The Reasons were, that People already
knew Mademoiselle de Duras was wholly disposed to Change her Religion, that
according to all appearances, she only demanded a Conference, to do it with the
more Sol^mnity, and to make use of it as a Pretext, and that what success
soever it might have, 'twould not hinder her from Changing, or from saying she
had not been satisfied; and that the Gazette also would not fail to make it an
Article. The Person of Quality, who was consulted, took upon him to visit the
Countess of Roye, and make her relish these Reasons. And she relished 'em
indeed and easily comprehended their Strength. But notwithstanding all she
could do, i^ lay not ^n her power to dissuade Mademoiselle de Duras from her
first intention. This Lady compla^ned highly of being abandoned, saying this
was even what she had often been reproached with, that the Ministers dare not
appear before the Catholic Doctors. To which she added Tears, to touch the
Countess her Sister, by all manner of means, proceeding even to protest, that
if People did but know what Good this would do her, they would certainly have
this Charity for her.

This obliged the Countess of Roye to endeavor the bringing about the
Interview of M. de Condom, with M. Claude, and she did it to that purpose that
M Claude found himself as it were forced to grant it her, that so he might not
be exposed to the insult of those of the contrary Religion. She assured how M.
de Condom had told her, that he wished this Interview might be by form of
Rencounter, that it might not be published in the world, and that there might
be no affecting to speak of it on either side.

Tuesday the first of March, about two a Clock in the afternoon, M. Claude went
alone to the Countess of Royes houses, whither came presently after Madame la
Mareschalle de Lorge, Mademoiselle de Duras, M. le Marquis de Miremont, and M.
Cotton. About a quarter of an hour after M. de Condom came alone.

The first Civilities being over, and all the Company seated, M. de Condom
adressing his speech to M. Claude, told him, That he had been desirous of
seeing him, to propose to him some things of the practice of those of his
Religion, which he thought entirely contrary to their Principles. That those
things consisted first of all, in an Article of their Discipline, which orders,
That in case, there arises any Contention touching the Doctrine, the Question
shall be decided in the Consistory, by the Word of God, and that in case, they
do not acquiesce, it shall be removed to the Provincial Synod, and from thence
to the National Synod, where the entire and final Resolution shall be made by
the Word of God, and to which those who shall refuse to acquiesce shall be
Excommunicated. That in the second place, he produces a Formulary of
Letter-Missive to the National Synods, drawn up in the Synod of Vitre, for to
be thence forward followed in the Provinces, by which People promise to Submit
themselves to all that shall be resolved on in that Holy Assembly, to be
obedient thereunto, and to execute it from point to point, being persuaded,
says the Formulary, That God will provide therein, and conduct you by his Holy
Spirit, in all Truth and Equity, by the Rule of his Word. That besides this he
produced an Act of the National Synod of Charenton, held in 1644. wherein is
condemned the Opinion of the Independants, who will not allow that particular
Churches depend on Colloquies and Synods; but that every one may govern it
self, by its own laws. Now that Act does expressly mention, that this Sect opens
a door to all manner of Irregularities and Extravagancies, that it takes away
all manner of applying a Remedy, and that if it were suffered, there might
arise as many Religions as Parishes. In short, he produced an Act of the
National Synod of Saint Foy, by which upon some overtures of Reunion with
those of the Confession of Augsbourg, the Synod names Deputies to go and Confer
with them; to whom was given full power of granting and concluding all the
points that should be brought into deliberation, whether concerning Doctrine,
or any other thing, concerning the good and repose of all the Churches,
proceeding so far as to insert their results in the Confession of the Faith:
The Conclusion he drew from all this was, That those of the Religion of M.
Claude, did themselves acknowledge that to preserve the Unity of the Church, it
was Necessary to submit ones Judgment, and to render an Entire and absolute
Obedience to Ecclesiastical Assemblies, without taking the freedom to Examine
their decisions, or Judge whether they were squared according to the Word of
God, or not; and that in case of disobedience Excommunication was Just. That it
was precisely what the Church of Rome pretended, that it required nothing more.
But that nevertheless when we have to do with her, we establish a quite
contrary Principle. That he desired M. Claude to answer him distinctly to all
this, and how he would listen peacably to all he should say to him. That as to
the rest, M. Claude ought to be so much the more ready to answer him in that
there was nothing new in all this, and that the same Act and the same
consequences which he drew, were found in the Exposition of the Catholic
Doctrine.

M. Claude immediately made answer, that tho he came not thither with any design
to have a Regular Conference, yet nevertheless he was glad that this Occasion
furnished him with the means of Testifying to M. de Condom the Esteem he had
for his Person, and that not having any particular merit of his own, it was a
great honor to him, to have such a Prelate as M. de Condom to pick him out to
measure himself with him. That he would endeavor to satisfy him upon all the
points he had newly proposed to him, and that if in the sequel of the
Discourse, any Expression should start from him, which might personally shock
M. de Condom, he protested from that moment it should be contrary to his
intention.

M. de Condom Replied to this very handsome and very obliging things, and M.
Claude renewing the Discourse, told him, That in general, all he had newly
alleged, concluded nothing less than blind and absolute submission, which the
Church of Rome pretended was owing to the decisions of Ecclesiastical
Assemblies. That a Distinction ought to be made of two sorts of Authorities,
the one Sovereign and Unlimited, to which one ought to pay a full and Entire
Obedience, the other depending and Limited, which ought not to be obeyed, but
under certain Conditions. That M. de Condom knew very well the Protestants did
not attribute this first, but to God, alone speaking in his holy Scriptures,
and that for the other, they gave it to the Pastors of the Church, Whether that
they are considered each a part, or were assembled in Synod or in Council. That
their Authority which is only Ministerial, is Limited in two manners, whereof
the one is, That they ought to make their decisions, not of themselves, as they
think fitting, but according to the Word of God. The other that they leave
still to Persons which are submited to them the Right of Examining the
Decisions, to know if they are indeed Conformable to the Word of God: From
whence it follows, That the Obedience which is owing them is Ever suspendedly
on this condition, That they have not deviated from the Word of God, That the
Authority of the Pastors and of their Assemblies, cannot be greater than that
of the Parliaments in France, which have not the Power to change the ancient
Laws, nor of making new, and to whom, if it should happen, that they should
order or exact things contrary to the Kings Service, and the fidelity that is
owing him, People would both have a Right, and be under an Obligation of
disobeying. That the Authority of Ecclesiastical Assemblies could not be
greater than that of Fathers over Children, since both God and nature have
invested Parents therewith, that Parents have a right of acting in the name of
their Children; since they have the right of their education, the right of
commanding them, and the Scripture in a thousand places recommends to Children
Docility and Obedience toward their Parents, but this does not hinder Children
from having a right, or from being under an obligation of examining if what
their Parents teach 'em, and what they command 'em be true or false, just or
unjust. How that nevertheless it did not follow from thence but that the
Authority of Pastors and their assemblies was very great, as it did not follow
but that of Parliaments, and that of parents, was likewise so, though they were
limited authorities; that the Pastors were as public keepers of the Word of
God, established for the studying it and meditating it incessantly in order to
the drawing from thence truths necessary for the instruction of the People, and
for the abridging private persons of a trouble, to which they cannot entirely
apply themselves, by reason of the distractions of Civil Affairs; that when the
Pastors acquitted themselves well of this duty, the people were obliged to
receive their word with submission and obedience, but when they deviated from
it, they were to look upon them as prevaricatours.

Then descending particularly to the acts alleged by M. de Condom, he said
that 'twas upon this principle, and with these limitations, that we ought to
understand the Clause of submission contained in the letter-missives to
national synods, since it was only founded upon this supposition, that all will
pass therein according to the Word of God, for these terms, Being as we are
persuaded that God will preside therein and conduct you by his Holy Spirit in
all truth, by the rule of his Word, signify a persuasion of Charity and Equity,
because it is ever to be well presumed of assemblies and hope that God will
preside therein, and that they will do their duty until the contrary appears.
But that this did not carry so absolute a submission, as to deprive people of
the right of examining what shall be resolved therein. As concerning the Act
which condemns the Independants, it is, (said he) the highest justice. For
tho the assemblies are not infallible, nevertheless they ought not to be
abolished? It Is in truth an humane order, but however an order which God
himself has established for the conservation of his Church, and from which one
cannot depart without a crime. Nevertheless it does not follow from thence that
a blind obedience is to be paid to the decissions of the assemblies, nor that
it was the sense of the Synod of Charenton. As for the deputation which the
synod of Saint Foy made of four persons to go and confer with those of the
confession of Augsbourg, and to whom it gave a full power, you cannot draw from
thence, said he, any advantage. For it was with those Deputies as with
Ambassadors which the King sends with full power to propose, treat and
conclude as Plenipotentiaries which are sent to negotiate the Peace. How full
soever their power be, and though they are called Plenipotentiaries, the
condition is always naturally understood, that they shall do nothing contrary
to the true interest of their Authorizers, to whom what they do must
necessarily revert for to be approved and ratifyed without which nothing would
de done, that they ought to be understood that full power given by the Synod to
its Deputies, for the hearing of those of the confession of Augsbourg, for the
receiving their propositions, their complaints, their overtures, to make the
like to them reciprocally, to receive from them illustrations, and return the
like, nay and to agree with them if possible, but not to be the absolute
Masters of the Faith, nor to receive blindly all they should have concluded;
For in such sort of things the cause of recourse to the Authorizers, and the
necessity of ratification is naturally understood. To which M. Claude added
this consideration, that if the point in question was the true sense of an act
of the Roman Church, of a Canon, for example, of the Council of Trent, M. de
Condom would doubtless find it more just, to receive it from him than from M.
Claude, because the thing in dispute was the sense of a Church whereof M. de
Condom is a member, and that in all probability he ought to understand it
better than a man that is not so. I expect then from you, My Lord Bishop, said
he, the same equity, which if you would receive from me the sense of the Acts in
dispute, at least unless the sense I give 'em be contrary, to that of the
Doctors of my communion, or evidently illusory, or contrary to our other
principles, but if the sense I give of those acts has nothing of that, methinks
you have no right to reflect it, nor to fancy to your self any other.

M. de Condom renewing the Discourse said, that he would begin where M. Claude
had ended, because that he had said in the last place, seemed to have some
justice and truth at first, though it had nothing at all of solidity. That what
M. Claude said would be true, if the point in issue was no more than explaining
their rights and the manner or administering the Word, and the Sacraments, in
that he should think him better informed, and that he did not at all intend to
hinder him from explaning it as he pleased, the sense of those who had set up
their discipline and made the acts he urged: That he knew they denied that they
ought to submit themselves without examination, to the judgment of the Church.
But that he pretended this absolute submission was so necessary that those very
people who denied it in speculation, could not forbear establishing it in
practice, that thus they were fallen into a contradiction, and that 'twas what
he pretended to prove, and wherein he was not obliged to believe M. Claude. For
if the thing in dispute was to show any contradiction in the sentiments of the
Catholic Church, he would not urge for authority it is explication, nor hinder
M. Claude from drawing from the terms of the Councils such conclusions as be
thought fitting.

M. de Condom making then pawse, M. Claude replied, that since 'twas certain
that those who had made the acts in dispute, denied that people should submit
themselves without examination to the judgment of Ecclesiastical assemblies, he
had at least this advantage, that by M. de Condoms own confession, the
explication he gave to those acts was conformable to the principles of the
Protestants who had made them, and that it was much more reasonable to receive
it, than to fancy to one's self a sense which entangled 'em in a contradiction,
that if the thing in dispute was any act of the Church of Rome, he would make
no difficulty to receive the sense which M. de Condom should give thereof,
conformable to the principles of that Church, unless the very words of the act
should oppose it, in which case he might induce the contradiction, and if M. de
Condom was upon those terms in regard of the acts alleged, it would be easy to
see upon what terms he established that pretended contradiction.

M. de Condom said how that was no difficult matter to make out: That he made
it consist in regard of the discipline, in that on the one side it required
that the decision of the Doctrine should he made in the consistory by the Word
of God, that it also understood that it was performed in the provincial Synod
by the Word of God, as well as in the national, and that on the other it
required that if they did not acquiesce to the decision of the consistory, or
to that of the provincial Synod, things should remain in the same state until
the national Synod, where it says, shall be performed the entire and ultimate
Resolution by the Word of God, to which if they do not acquiesce they shall be
retrenched from the Church. Which clearly showed that the acquiescing which was
required for the decision of the national was founded not upon the Word of God
precisely as such, for the decision of the Consistory and that of the synod of
the province had been also made by the Word of God precisely as such, and
nevertheless the appeal was allowed of. But that it was founded upon the Word
of God, in as much as explained and interpreted by the last judgment of the
Church, that is to say, upon its being the last and final resolution, and by
consequence upon the authority of the assembly considered in it self: Now this
is, said he, a manifest contradiction to the principle which denies the
absolute submission to the judgment of the Church, that this was confirmed by
the discipline which did not order any Excommunication against those who do not
acquiese in the decisions of the consistory, and of the provincial Synod, and
yet ordained against those who refuse to obey those of the National.

The same thing, said he, appears by that letter-missive to the national Synod.
For how can we promise and swear we will submit to all that shall be resolved
therein, without supposing we ow to the Church an entire and absolute
submission? Say that we submit thereunto upon the persuasion we have that God
will preside therein by his Spirit and his Word, and upon this swear, that is
to say, that upon this persuasion is founded on, an express promise that God
will conduct, the last judgment of his Church, by his Holy Spirit after an
infallible manner. Nay and this, said he, appears in the act of the national
Synod of Charenton, against the Independants, for the reason then and there
alleged, That if their principle was suffered, there might be as many
Religions as Parishes, concluded for the absolute Obedience to the decisions of
the Synods, since if it was allowed to particulars to examine the ultimate
decisions, not only then might be as many Religions as Parishes, but as many
Religions as Persons, and that by consequence there would be no way to preserve
the Unity of the Faith, or the Unity of the Church.

As for what concerns the Deputies which the synod of Saint foy nominated to
go and confer with those of the confession of Augsbourg, he said he did
faithfully acknowledge that how full power soever the synod might have given
them, the intention however of the Synod was not that it should depend of them
to overturn all, or to put, if he durst make use of that expression, the Cellar
in the Garret and the Garret in the Cellar, that he really believed that the
synod meant, that what they effected should return to them, and that in such
sort of things a Ratification is always necessary. But that it was a very
amazing thing, and to which M. Claude had not made any answer, that this synod
had offered to insert in the Confession of the Faith what the Deputies
concluded with the Lutherans. For this is making a doubt of the confession of
their faith, of which we were however told that it contained naught else than
the pure Word of God, wherein nothing was to be changed. Do You think, said he,
one can change the articles of your confession of Faith.

M. de Condom having ceased speaking, M. Claude said that he would answer to
all the points of that discourse, and desired him to afford him a peaceable
audience. Whereunto in the first place he said, that M. de Condom does
misapprehend the Article of the Disciplines which bears that in case they do
not acquiesce in the decision of the consistory, nor in that of the provincial
synod, things shall remain in the same state until the National, where shall
be taken the last and final resolution from the Word of God, to which those who
shall not acquiesce shall be retrenched from the Church. For it is not said, if
either that the Decisions of the consistory, and of the provincial synod ought
not to be made by the Word of God, in like manner with those of the National,
or that this Word has not an equal authority, whether that it be declared,
either by the consistory, or by the synod of the Province, or by the national
synod, or that it be precisely to it alone, in as much as such that we ow an
entire obedience. But this order, added he, was established for two reasons,
very different from that which you have pretended, the one is that therein
appearance, that the examination of the Word of God, upon the point of question
shall be made in the consistory with less exactness, and light, than in a synod
composed of all the Ministers of a province, nay and with less light and
exactness in a provincial then in a national synod, which is commonly sound to
be composed of all the most sagacious and most able persons in a Kingdom. The
other Reason is, That People may have prepossessions against a Consistory,
which shall hinder 'em from listening to it with all due docility; whereas it
will not be so in regard of a Provincial Synod, which will be looked upon as
less interessed, and more empty of Passions and personal Prepossessions, and by
Consequence they will hearken to it more peaceably. In short, those sort of
Personal Passions and Interests having still much less room in a National
Synod, composed of Persons far distant, who assemble from all parts of the
Kingdom, in all probability People will not entertain any prejudice against
them, and by consequence will receive the Word of God from their mouth with
more docility, and listen to 'em in a better disposition. He said then that
this order had been taken for the avoiding as much as possible, two
inconveniences; the one, That the final Decision might not be made lightly,
inconsiderately, out of passion, and a humane Interest: The other, That the
prepossessions against the persons might not be an Obstacle in the Parties to
give Ear to, and receive the Word of God with Obedience and Submission of
Faith, which is owing it. But that from thence it could not be concluded, that
in the sense of the Discipline, it was not always according to the Word of
God, in as much as such, and not to the authority of the Assembly, that the
Obedience ought to be rendered. That as to the Rest, the Decision of the
National was called Ultimate and Final, because that in the humane Order, and
in the present state of things there was no going further.

As for the Letter-missive to the National Synods, he made answer, That it did
no more Conclude the absolute Submission, that the Act of the Discipline, since
that the Condition of Judging according to the Word of God, was therein
expressed by these Terms, Being persuaded as we are, that God will Preside
therein, by his Spirit, and his Word.

As to the reason alleged by the Synod of Charenton against the Independants,
he said, That it did not suppose a blind Obedience. That the Dependence which
particular Churches have of Coloquies and Synods, is an Exterior Order, which
though it does not contain an Exterior and infallible Means, to preserve the
Church in the Unity of the Faith, does not fail nevertheless to be of very
great use for that very purpose, and that it is ever to be presumed that the
Blessing of God will accompany it, since it is an Order which he himself has
Established. That the Independants, who reject this Order, deprive themselves
of this means, and expose themselves willingly to that inconvenience, of having
as many Religions as Parishes, insomuch that the Synod had reason to make them
this Reproach. That there is no saying of the same thing of the Principle of
the Protestants, which by rejecting the Blind Obedience, and absolute
Submission, does nevertheless preserve the outward means useful and proper for
the maintaining the Unity of the Faith. And as to what M. de Condom has said,
That without the absolute Obedience, there might happen to be as many Religions
as Parishes, he owns it might so happen humanly speaking, notwithstanding the
practice of the order, and Ecclesiastical Assemblies, for humane Wit is of it
self subject to an infinite number of Errors. But that this cannot happen if a
regard be had to God, who Blessing the outward order, and communicating to his
truly Faithful and Elect, one and the same Spirit, maintains them by that means
certain and infallible, in the Unity of one and the same Faith, and by
consequence in that of one and the same Church, That the Faith being a thing
not humane but Divine, there is but one God alone, who can produce it, or who
can preserve it in the hearts of men. And this is also what he infallibly does
in the hearts of his Elect, by his Spirit, and by the outward means of the
Ministry, which he himself has established, for Paul plants, and Apollo waters,
but God only gives the Increase.

Then he proceeded to the Deputies which the Synod of Saint Foy nominated to
go to the Lutherans, and said, that he very agreeably received the Confession
which M. de Condom had newly made, That they meant not to give them the power
of putting the Cellar in the Garret, and the Garret in the Cellar, as he had
expressed himself after a very ingenious manner, and that a Return was required
to the Authorizers, and a Ratification: That he thanked him very heartily for
this downright Confession, which in this respect decided the Question, so as he
could no longer make use of that Act for the blind obedience, which he
pretended. That as to the rest, his accusation against that Synod, for having
undertook to change the Confession of the Faith, was null in the sense which M.
de Condom understood it? For that we ought to distinguish in the Confession,
what is Essential, from what is not so. That the Essential consists in those
very things, which are called Articles, or Points of Faith, and what is not so,
consists in the terms and in the manners of expression. That the Synod might
well have consented to a change of the expressions of the Confession, nay, and
to the inserting therein of illustrations or explications if it was found
useful for the bringing back Spirits that were gone astray, but that it never
pretended that any thing should be changed in the essential of that confession,
which in this regard remains immutable, for as much as it is Conformable to the
Word of God.

M. Claude having made an end, M. de Condom replied, first of all, that what M.
Claude had newly said touching the order set down by the Discipline, did hot
hinder but that the Discipline did order that those who should not acquiesce in
the National Synod, should be retrenched, that they did in effect retrench the
Arminians in the Synod of Dordrect, and he asked M. Claude if he did not think
that retrenchment just and legitimate? M. Claude having made answer, that he
thought that what the Synod of Dordrect had done was very just: M. de Condom
said, that the Church of Rome demanded nothing more; that it acknowledged it
self obliged to judge according to the Word of God, and that was not in
question, but the point in issue was only the sense and explication of that
Word, and that it belonged to the Church to give that explication, to
particular persons to acquiesce therein, and when in case they did not do it,
the Church did justly excommunicate. And thus it was that the Protestants had
been excommunicated in the Council of Trent.

Upon the Letter-missive to National Synods is it not, said he, a manifest
illusion to swear that they will submit themselves thereunto, supposed or upon
condition that what shall be decided therein, shall be conformable to the Word
of God? there is nothing serious in that: What say you Sir, to this? M. Claude
said there was no illusion therein, and how he saw nothing but what was
regular. If I comprehend your Doctrine aright, replied M. de Condom, you
believe a private person may doubt of the judgment of the Church even when it
pronounces in its highest Tribunal. We believe said, M. Claude, that there is no
certainty of faith that an Ecclesiastical Assembly shall judge rightly, and in
that respect one may doubt thereof: But that nevertheless one ought ever to
presume well of an Assembly, and in that respect a body ought not to say he
doubts it, but must say he hopes, nay and beleives it will judge well: For
Jesus Christ has promised that all those who seek shall find, Mat. 7. and that
it is to be presumed they will do their duty in seeking well until the
Contrary appears. Wherefore this is an assurance of Charity and of Equity which
excludes doubt in some sense. But when people see Cabals, Factions, and humane
interests to swarm and reign in Assemblies, then the truth is they may with
reason doubt; for we see persons who stray from their Duty, and by consequence
are not in a state of hoping any thing from the blessing of God. I beseech you,
Sir, said then M. de Condom, let us lay aside what is only good to cast dust
into the eyes. What you have newly started of Cabals, Factions and Interests,
is impertinent and serves only to puzzle. I ask you, suppose there appears in
an assembly neither Factions, Cabals nor Interests, and that all its
proceedings were just and regular, ought their decisions to be received without
examination? No, Sir, said M. Claude. I had then reason, said he, to say that
all you have urged of Factions and Cabals is impertinent. Your conclusion's not
just, replied M. Claude, for though there is nothing which staggers the
presumption, which people have that this assembly will do its Duty, and
according to all appearances things will be orderly therein; this is however
but a humane presumption, which offers no certainty of Faith, and by
consequence does not hinder examination. But when disorder and corruption are
seen to reign therein, the presumption is still no longer in favor of such an
Assembly, and instead of entertaining good hopes of it, all is to be feared.
Thus it is not without reason that I have spoke of Cabals and of Faction. There
M. de Condom taking again in hand the thread of his discourse, said it was not
true that the Independants did absolutely reject all sorts of Ecclesiastical
Assemblies, for they held one, said he, at London in the Year 1653. so as the
Synod of Charenton could not condemn them for that, but only because they would
not acknowledge there was owing a Dependence and an absolute submission to the
Synods.

As for the Synod of Saint Foy, added he, if the question had been only to
make illustrations and explications, as M. Claude called it, what necessity was
there of inserting them in the Confession of the Faith? might it not have been
done by an Act of Synod, without chewing the confession? Wherefore its certain
their design was to express the Article of Faith touching the Lords Supper, in
ambiguous terms, whereof both parties had agreed, and which each might wrrest
to his advantage, a thing which had been attempted several times, but had not
succeeded. Now this had been in effect not merely giving illustrations and
explications, nor even establishing a Mutual Toleration, but changing the
Confession of the Faith. After that, added he, every one may guess what he
ought to believe of a Confession of Faith, which a whole National Synod was
willing to change. That as for the rest, things were already in such a point
between M. Claude and him, that the truth must quickly appear, on the one side
or the other. That the Principle which M. Claude maintained was a Principle of
Insupportable pride and presumption. For is it not the highest arrogance for
mere particulars to imagine they have more sense for the understanding of the
Scriptures, than a Whole Ecclesiastical Assembly, than a whole Council, Which
was nevertheless what did necessarily follow from his Opinion, which gave
particulars the right and freedom of examining what the Councils have decided,
that there was a great deal more Christian Justice and Humility in submitting
ones self absolutely to the judgment of the Church, and pay them absolute
obedience, than to pretend to reform its Decisions.

M. Claude's Turn being to speak, said how 'twas true that their Discipline,
did mention that after the last and final resolution which should be made by
the Word of God in the assembly of a National Synod, those who should refuse to
acquiesce should be excommunicated, but that the Discipline did in no wise mean
that they were to acquiesce to the authority of the Assembly precisely, but as
he had already observed it, to the authority of the Word of God; according to
which the Assembly was to square the decision, which still supposes an
examination, that thus the excommunication was just upon this supposition that
the Word of God had been followed, and not otherwise. That indeed the
excommunications of Councils were neither just nor efficacious but when their
decisions were grounded upon this Word, and if they were not, their
excommunications where unjust, and fell again with full right upon the head of
those who had uttered them: according to the Maxim of St. Paul, If we
ourselves or an Angel from Heaven should preach to you besides what we have
preached to you, let him be accursed. That if the Church of Rome pretended only
that, they would not dispute with her, because any one would still have a right
and an obligation to examine if the Decisions are conformable or not to the
Word of God, and by consequence whether the excommunications are just or
unjust. That in this Spirit it was, that the Synod of Dordrecht had condemned,
not the persons against whom they did not pronounce any Anathema, but the
errors, by showing them contrary to the express Texts of Scripture. That for
his own part he held that excommunication very legitimate, but 'twas because he
saw it grounded upon the Scripture, and not upon the authority of the Assembly.

That the Independants had in truth held an extraordinary Assembly in 1653. to
draw up their Confession of Faith but this did not hinder but that commonly
they rejected the use of Colloquies and Synods; and for that reason was it the
Synod of Charenton had condemned them, and not for their not having rendered to
Assemblies a blind and absolute obedience in matter of Faith, as appears by the
very Act.

As to the Synod of Saint Foy, I know not, said my Lord, why you will needs
have it there was a design to change the Confession of the Faith, in what it
has essential, for this is in no wise in the power of National Synods, and if
that of Saint Foy had undertaken it, it had been disowned by all the
Protestants of the Kingdom. I own they might put Illustrations and Explications
in an Act, but you must also own to me that they could do it in the confession,
and when a thing may be done by several ways, People are at liberty to choose
that which seems the most proper. There M. de Condom interrupting M. Claude,
said, how it was certain this Synod was contriving how to couch the Article of
the Lords Supper in ambiguous terms, and that it was the design of the
Mediators, that there was mention made of deciding every point of doctrine
which did manifestly regard the reality which the Lutherans held. M. Claude
made answer, that to impute to the Synod a design of agreeing upon ambiguous
terms, was one of the conjectures of M. de Condom, whereof he had not any
proof, and for his part he conjectured otherwise, that he did not doubt but the
design of the Synod was to do what was possible to bring the Lutherans to a
full knowledge of the truth, and this was that which signified that full power
of deciding with them every point of Doctrine, namely by the Word of God.

Then falling again to the thread of his discourse he made answer to that M. de
Condom had said, that it was an insupportable pride for mere particulars to
believe they have more sense for the understanding of the Scripture, than a
whole Ecclesiastical Assembly; whereupon he said, that indeed mere particulars
ought not to presume so much of themselves as to believe they have more sense
for the understanding of the Scriptures than a whole Assembly; that on the
contrary People ought to presume well of an Assembly, and have docility for it.
But that this did not hinder but that they ought nevertheless to have their
eyes open to see if indeed an Assembly had done its Duty, after the example of
the Bereans, of whom it is said, that they conferred what St. Paul told there
with the Scriptures to know if it was so; that we ought to distinguish a
judgment of Charity and of Humility, which only framed a probable conclusion,
from a persuasion of infallibility, which framed a necessary conclusion, that
out of this judgment of Charity and of Humility we ought to presume in favor
of an Assembly, and even of a particular Doctor, but that because as well
Assemblies as particular persons are subject to error, we ought not to push on
this judgment of Charity and Humility, even to the blinding ones self, when
that indeed an Assembly or a Doctor had erred, and that this would be pushing
things beyond their just bounds; for example, said he, being what I am in my
flock, People are obliged to prejudge in my favor, that I understand better
the sense of the Scripture than mere private persons, but they ought not
nevertheless to think me infallible, nor imagine it can never happen to me to
be deceived in point of Doctrine; in which case certain it is that a mere
private person would have a right to believe he might understand the sense of
the Scripture, better than me. The business in dispute, said then M. de Condom,
is not about particular Doctors, we know particular Doctors may err, and by
consequence, we ought not to have for them an absolute obedience, but we talk
of a whole body of Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and I require of you a clear
answer upon this point, whether you believe mere particular persons may
understand the sense of the Scripture better than a whole Body of the Church
assembled in Council?

M. Claude made answer, that he had spoke of particular Doctors only to show
that humility ought not to be abused, nor under a pretense of shunning pride
and presumption, make men blind themselves; for if there be not an absolute
obedience owing to particular Doctors, as M. de Condom did aver it, there is
then neither pride nor presumption in believing it may so happen that one may
understand the sense of the Scripture better than them, though people are obliged
to presume Charitably and probably that this will not happen. That it was the
same thing in regard of the Assemblies which not being of themselves
infallible, ought not to pretend to have an absolute obedience paid them, being
a thing which is only owing to God, that St. Paul himself had said there was no
dominion over the Faith of the Corinthians.

M. de Condom said this passage was ill alleged and asked M. Claude if he did
not think an absolute Obedience was owing to Saint Paul. M. Claude made answer
that an absolute Obedience was owing to things divine which Saint Paul taught,
and not to his person, neither is it said M. de Condom to the persons who
compose the Councils we pretend that Obedience to be paid, but to the Holy
Spirit which conducts 'em, according to what the Council of Jerusalem said, it
has pleased the Holy Spirit and us. When the Holy Spirit, said M. Claude
appears in the Decisions of the Councils as it appeared in the Doctrine of
Saint Paul, and in that of the Council of Jerusalem, we ought to render them
that Obedience, and not otherwise. Now it appears therein when their decisions
are framed according to the Word of God. M. de Condom insisted, there was no
question about the Word of God, but about the true sense thereof. M. Claude
said t^is distinction was of no use, for the true sense of the Word of God, and
the Word of God are but one and the same thing.

There M. de Condom returned to the Independants, and said, that upon the
principle of M. Claude there was no way to avoid Independantisme, nor prevent
the being as many Religions as Parishes, as many Religions as heads. That the
Independants did not reject the Assemblies, for instructions, but that they
would not allow the Assemblies should decide by authority, and that the
pretended reformed were conformable to them. He repeated over and over the same
thing a pretty while, to which M. Claude reparteed what he had already answered
that in truth there was no humane means, certain and infallible to hinder the
errors of the with of man, but that there was one divine and infallible, which
was the Holy Spirit which God communicated to his true Beleivers and that the
Synods and other Assemblies were useful means, and proper for that purpose, and
that the Independants had only been condemned, because they rejected these
last, and not because they would not allow the Assemblies should decide with an
entire and absolute authority, that though the Protestants did not allow
Assemblies a sovereign and illimited authority, they allowed them however all
the authority that Ministers and the Dispensers of the Word of God can have.

This would be disputing everlastingly said then M. de Condom, I ask you once
again, Sir, if you believe mere particular Persons can understand the sense of
the Word of God better than the whole Church Assembled in a Council. M. Claude
said he had already answered him to that, viz. that it did not commonly so
happen, nay and that People were obliged to hope better from the Ecclesiastical
Assembly, but that it might nevertheless happen that humane passions and
worldly interests prevailing in an Assembly, the Decisions would not be squared
therein according to the truth. There Is no having recourse, said M. de Condom
to humane passions, nor to worldly interests, you must answer in a word to the
question and say yes, or no. Humane passions and worldly interests, said M.
Claude, are very reasonably urged upon this subject, for those are the
principal causes of erroneous Decisions, but since you will not allow 'em to be
spoken off to you, I Will answer you by distinguishing and saying, that God does
not allow that this ordinarily happens, but that in absolutely speaking it may
happen. M. de Condom said he demanded but that, and how 'twas the greatest of
all absurdities to believe it may come to pass a mere particular person may
better understand the sense of the Scripture better than a whole Church
Assembled in Council.

M. Claude made answer, how he wondered he should tax us of so great an
absurdity, what was but an effect of the freedom of God in the dispensation of
his Grace. That if the point was concerning humane Lights, there would be
absurdity in saying that a mere particular person, had more understanding than
a whole Assembly, and that this would be a principle of pride and presumption.
But tho the thing in issue was the Lights of the Holy Spirit which breathes
where it pleases, and which God may possibly not give to a whole Assembly, when
he shall give it to mere particular persons, that this same thing had
effectually happened in the time of Jesus Christ according to what he himself had
said in Matt. I give thee, thanks, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, for that
thou have concealed those things from the Wise and Understanding, and have
revealed them to the little. That the whole Judaick Church had determined in
its Assemblies that Jesus Christ was an impostour. That it was nevertheless not
only a Church, out the only Church in the world, invested with all the
authority of God, who had founded, nourished and brought it up until that
time, that God had instructed it by his Apostles, had made in the depositary of
his Oracles. That with a just Title it gloryed in a succession of two thousand
years, that its Assemblies were in the former, and Jesus Christ Himself owned
it, they are seated, said he, in the Chair of Moses, all the things they shall
bid you keep, keep them and do them. That nevertheless this Church had
determined the most Capital and most Criminal of all Errors, which was to
reject Jesus Christ as a wretched person and an impostour that then it must
necessarily have been said, that mere particular persons might better
understand the sense of the Scripture, than the whole Body of the Church
Assembled, and that if the principle of M. de Condom was true, namely, that one
must have an absolute submission for the Decisions of Ecclesiastical Assemblies
without attributing to ones self the right examining 'em, it would be to
condemn Jesus Christ, and all those who should believe in him. For according to
this Principle Jesus Christ ought not to address himself to the People after
the Decisions of the Church which were contrary to him, neither ought the
People to have given ear to him, since they were no longer allowed to examine
what had been decided, nevertheless, added he, I. C. did not forbear preaching
to the People, and converting several, the People also listened to his motion
notwithstanding the Decisions that were against him, for whence it follows that
his prinple Blind Obedience is bad, and contrary to the conduct of I. C. and
that of his discipline.

That 'twould be to no purpose to urge that I. C. made use of miracles by which
he proved his Authority Divine; for there are two sorts of micracles, the one
true, the other false, the one for lying the other for truth. God Himself has
made this distinction in the third Chap. of Deuteronomy. Where he says to the
Israelites, that if a Prophet does miracles and turns them afterward to other
Gods, they ought not to listen to him because it is God who tryes them. I. C.
himself and acknowledged the truth of this distinction. If then, said he, the
Principle of M. de Condom had held good, it could not have been in the People
to have made that judgment after the Church had decided Jesus Christ, performed
his miracles not by the virtue of God but by that of Belezbub, they might not
after that, according to M. de Condom; opened their eyes to see those miracles
or receive the least impression of them, from whence it follows that this
principle is false, and destructive to the Christian Religion.

M. de Condom interrupted M. Claude upon this, and said, that there was no
doing of this example of the Judaish Church for said he, the Synagogue was to
fall, the Prophets hand so foretold it, and the people ought not by consequence
pay it such an obedience as ought to be paid to the Church of Jesus Christ
which is never to fall. To which M. Claude reparteed, that since the Synagogue
was to fall, it might so happen that mere particular persons understood better
the sense of the Scripture than a whole Body of the Church in its Assemblies,
which was the point in issue, and how from thence it plainly followed, 'twas
neither pride nor presumption in particular persons to be believed it might so
befall 'em as to understand the Scripture better than a whole Body of Assembly,
or to examine its decisions upon this Principle. That he required nothing more.

Besides this Reason, said he could not have any effect upon the Jewish People
because that not only the Synagogue were not agreed upon the point, but on the
contrary maintaining that it was never to fall, and produced in favor of its
self promises which at first push seemed extremely strong: To allege upon this
the prophets who foretold its fall, would be nothing to the purpose, for the
business in Dispute is the sense of those Prophesies, and the Synagogue
explaining them in a sense which was favorable to it, 'twas the People's duty,
according to the principle of M. de Condom to stick to that explication without
examining it; in short said he, this fall of the Synagogue makes not any
difference between it is Assemblies and those of the Christian Church, for the
Question in dispute for what promises soever of Perpetual subsistence the
Church of Jesus Christ has, there is nothing in Scripture which assures us the
Assemblies of Councils shall not fall.

There M. de Condom taking up the Discourse said, how what M. Claude started of
the time of the fall of the ^ynagogue was of all thing in the world the most
unseasonable, for then there would not be said that there was no visible
authority upon Earth, wherein people ought, necessarily to acquiesce, since I.
C. himself was there that is to say, the truth it self appeared visibly among
men, to who God had rendered Testimony from Heaven, and who performed miracles.
Do You, added he, but bring us back, I. C. teaching, preaching, working of
miracles, and we shall have no more nee of the Authority of the Church. What I
have urged, said M. Claude, is not only the thing in the world the most part,
but the p^ainest and most concluding, and I hope you your self will agree to
'em when I shall have desired you to consider how this visible Authority of the
Son of God, was then the point in question be^een the Synagogue and I. C. how
it was this point which the Synagogue had decided in the negative, that the
business was to know if I C. was an Impostour, or not, if his miracles were
from God or from Beelzebub, that the visible Authority of I. C. could not decide
the question in the Spirit of the People; for an Authority does decide nothing
until first of all it ^e received, and that of I. C. was not so yet, since the
D^^pute was about receiving, or rejecting it: thus there only remained the
authority of the Church which had decided against him, from whence it follows,
that according to the principle of M. de Condom partiticular persons ought to
have stuck to that and recieve Jesus Christ. M. de Condom called this argument
of M. Claudes a Jewish argument. M. Claude replied that it was not his
argument, he ought to call Jewish argument since it concluded in favor of
Christianity, but that it was the contrary principle which he ought to call by
that name, since it favored the cause of the Jews.

After this M. Claude said that if he would have recourse to History it would
be no difficult matter for him to show how several Councils fell, and have
decided the errors as amongst others the Council of Arimini which condemned the
Consubstantiation of the Son, that is to say His Eternal Divinity, M. de Condom
cried out, whither do you hurry us to the Council of Arimini, when shall we have
done if we must discuss all those histories? Do You not know that the Council of
Arimini was an Assembly of robbers, that my Lord said M. Claude, is just what I
would say, that a General Council may become an Assemby of robbers, now here is
one composed of four hundred Bishops, what is become of it, M. de Condom said
that the Bishops had been forced by the Authority of the Emperor, who had sent
Soldiers thither; but that afterward being returned every one to his home
they had disowned what they had done, and had shown repentance for it, M.
Claude replied that in truth several of them had acknowledged their fault, but
that this very Act of their acknowledging it and repenting it, as M. de Condom
does affirm, confirms this truth, that they had committed it and there is no
need of knowing out of what principle they had committed it, since they had
committed it in reality; that their Recantation also showed that each of them
in particular thought not himself obliged to acquiesce in what they had
determined all together in Council.

M de Condom cried out, 'twas not necessary to enter into all those points of
history which would lead 'em too far. The thing, said he, may more easily be
decided: the Dispute is concerning the first principle of the faith of
particular persons, which you believe to be the Holy writ, and we the authority
of the Church. I suppose a Child that has been baptized, and has not yet read
the Scripture, and I ask you by what principle that Child beleives the
Scripture to be Divine, that the Book of Canticles, for Example, where there is
not a Word spoke of God is divine. Either that child that is a Christian, who
has received the Holy Spirit and the Faith infused by Baptism and is a member
of the Church, doubts of the Divinity of the Scripture, or does not doubt of
it, if not he beleives it then Divine by the Authority of the Catholic Church,
which is the first Authority, under which he lives; if he doubts of it, a
Christian may then doubt of the truth of the Scripture.

M. Claude made answer that he might have something to say upon M. de Condoms
supposing that every child baptized, received the Holy Spirit, but that he
would not insist upon what is spoken by the by, nor deviate from the principal
subject in question, wherefore he would be contented with making some reflections
upon what M. de Condom had just urged. The first said he shall be that probably
the first knowledge which the Holy Spirit gives to the Child of the Catholic
Church, is by his Creed, wherein he says, Credo Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam.
Never theless in the Creed this Article is posteriour to the Articles of
Doctrine since it begins with God the Father Almighty, and continues with Jesus
Christ and with the Holy Ghost after which comes the Catholic Church. Now it
appears clearly from thence that Faith of the Doctrine does not depend on the
Authority of the Church, for otherwise the symbol must have been composed
after an other manner, and say at first, I believe the Catholic Church, and by
the Catholic Church I believe in God the Father, etc.

My second Reflection, said he, is that you cannot suppose as you do, that
first authority under which the Child begins to live is that of the Catholic
Church, for certain it is that the first Authority under which a Child lives,
is that of his Father, or that of his Mother, or if you will that of his nurse,
and how that of the Church can only come afterward, and in some sort by
dependence on the other. Now from thence it follows that this first Authority
which is the Paterna may as well conduct the Child to the Scripture as to the
Church.

In the third place, said he, there is nothing more easy then to retort your
argument against your self: Either the Child Baptized doubts of the Authority
of the Church or does not doubt of it, if he does not doubt of it, he beleives
it then by the authority of the Scripture, for he cannot by any other way
believe it of Divine Faith, and by consequence it is not the Church which makes
us believe Scripture, but it is the Scripture which makes believe the Church,
which is that, we aim at. If he doubts of it, see here then a Christian who has
received the Holy Spirit and Faith infused by Baptism, and who is a member of
the Church who can doubt of the first authority, on which depends the rest of
the Faith. That the Child cannot believe of Divine Faith the Authority of the
Church but by that of the Scripture, I prove it, for if it is not by the
Scripture that he beleives the Church and its authority it is then either by
way of inspiration and enthusiasm, or by the Authority of his Father, of his
Mother, or of his nurse, or by argument drawn out of the very Nature of the
Church. It cannot be out of enthusiasme for the Holy Spirit does not act in
that manner. Neither can it be by the Authority of the Father, or the Mother,
or Nurse, for you see this would be to establish those sorts of authorities for
the first principle of Faith, neither can it be by proof and arguments drawn
out of the very nature of the Church; for as in your argument you suppose the
Child has not yet read the Scripture, I suppose also in mine that he has not
yet Meditated upon the Nature of the Catholic Church, and knows only its name.
It then remains that the Child believes the Catholic Church by Scripture,
which is, what you do not allow off, or does not believe it at all, and that he
doubts it, which is the same inconvenience you would have thrown me in, in
regard of the Scripture.

Here a body may say with truth, that M. de Condoms Wit was not in its usual
state, and how that freedom which is natural to it was sensibly diminished, He
undertook to maintain that the first Authority under which a Child lived in
respect of Religion was that of the Catholic Church, and not that of the
Father or Mother. M. Claude replied, that there was no denying a thing so clear
as that, that the first Authority in respect of Religion, is that of the Father
or Mother, who took the first care of the Education of the Child, or that it
was from them that the Child learnt the first time that there was a Catholic
Church, to which he ought to range himself, or that there was a Scripture which
was Divine, and to which he ought to submit himself. Now the point being to
know by what means the child might believe the Authority of the Catholic
Church, he had only to choose either the way of Enthusiasm, or that of the
Paternal Authority, or that of the Scripture, which might instruct him. M. de
Condom replied, the faith of the child in the Authority of the Church was
divine, because 'twas the Holy Spirit that formed it in him. M. Claude
reparty'd that the thing in debate was not the cause efficient which produced
that Faith in the child, but the argument by which it was produced; that if M.
de Condom understood that the Holy Ghost produced it in the child, without
proof and without argument it would be a kind of Enthusiasm, and yet the Holy
Ghost did not act in that manner. M. de Condom said, that in effect there were
Motives of credibility; to which M. Claude replied, that if he gave the child
time to examine the Motives of credibility by the Authority of the Church, and
to perceive the force of 'em, he also would give the same child the time to
examine the Motives of credibility for the Authority of the Scripture, and to
perceive the force of them; and this being so, he must renounce his argument,
which supposed the child as not yet having read the Scripture.

But is it not true, said M. de Condom, that in this state either the child
doubts or does not doubt of the Divinity of the Scriptures? But said M. Claude,
is it not true that in that state either the child doubts or does not doubt of
the authority of the Church? for if you suppose the child before his having
read the Scripture, I suppose him also before his having read the Motives of
credibility for the authority of the Church. You are obliged to answer to my
argument, and the same answer you shall make me, I shall make you; you may take
what course you please, but i will be sure to answer you directly to your
reasoning: now the child must be distinguished in three times; before his
father has showed him the Bible, and told him that this Book is Divine, after
his Father has told him so, without his having yet read it himself, after he
has read it himself. At the first time, which is that wherein you consider him
in your argument, there is no saying he doubts, or does not doubt, for neither
the one nor the other is true in the sense you understand it. Not to doubt of a
thing signifies to be assured of it. Now before a body can say, either that one
doubts, or is assured of the Quality of a thing, one must know the thing it
self. I do not doubt nor am I assured that such a person is the King of Spain
until first I have had some knowledge of the Person. Wherefore your argument is
not just, either the child doubts or does not doubt of the divinity of the
Scripture, there is a Medium, namely which is called an ignorance of pure
negation. He knows not yet what Scripture is, never having heard talk of it. To
doubt or not to doubt of the divinity of the Scripture, a man must have some
knowledge of it, and frame to himself some idea at least of it. But the child
does not frame to it any idea of a Book, whereof he never heard any mention; in
the second time when his Father has showed him the Bible, and told him this
Book is is the word of God, yet without his having yet read it himself, He
beleives it the Word of God: He beleives it the Word of God, not of Divine
Faith, but of Humane Faith, because his Father told him so, which is a state of
Catechumene. In the third time when he has read himself this Book, and
perceives the Efficaciousness of it, he believes it the Word of God no longer
by Humane Faith, because his Father has told him so, but by Divine Faith,
because he himself has immediately perceived the Divinity of it, and it is the
state of the faithful.

M. de Condom fastened upon this word Catechumene, and said that the child was a
Christian, was baptized, and was in the Alliance of God. M. Claude made answer,
that by the word Catechumene he meant only, the child baptized, in the state he
received the first instructions. M. de Condom repeated again much the same
things he had said, still affirming 'twas by the authority of the Church that
the child received the Scriptures as Divine, and after having received them
from the Church as Divine, he received also from the Church their sense and
interpretation.

Tell me, I beseech your Lordship, said then M. Claude, When a Child learns the
first time, there is a Catholic Church, is it simply a general Idea, which
only consists in knowing there is a Catholic Church, without knowing where it
is, or what it is: Or does it determine that Church, whose Assemblies it sees?
For if it be the first, it is a principle of Faith very insignificant, very
useless, which you establish. I know there is a Catholic Church to whose
authority People ought to submit themselves, but I know not where it is, or
what it is, this would be a strange principle of Faith. True, said M. de
Condom, the Child determines this Idea to that Church particularly whose
Assemblies it sees or assists at it self, and beleives it to be the Catholic
Church, and not simply there is one. Let us then suppose, said M. Claude, a
child born in a Heretic or Schismatic Church, in the Ethiopian Church for
example, the first principle of Faith this child will entertain, will be that
of the Ethiopian Church, as being the Catholic. It will be from it, and
according to its authority, that he will receive the Scripture; as Divine, from
it 'twill be he will receive the sense and explication of that Scripture and he
can never believe he has a right to examine the Decisions of his Ethiopian
Church, for fear of falling into the inconvenience of imagining he may better
understand the sense of the Scripture, he a mere particular person, than the
whole Body of the Church. Tell me, My Lord, Whether by this principle the child
will not always remain in that Heretical and Schismatical Church? Tell me by
what way you pretend to free him out of it? Certain then it is, your Principle
is equally proper to maintain the Jew in Judaisme, the Pagan in Paganism, the
Heretic in Heresy, as the Orthodox in the true Church.

M. de Condom replied to this, that one was to distinguish in the persuasion of
the Ethiopian child what came from the Holy Ghost, from what came by humane
prepossession; that 'twas the Holy Ghost which dictated to him in general there
was a Catholic Church in what place soever it was, but that this Catholic
Church was that where he was born, this came from humane prepossession. That in
truth he received the Scripture from the hand of that Church, and did not
believe it divine but by its authority, but afterward by reading the
Scripture, the Holy Spirit produced in him doubts against the Church of his
Birth, and from that means freed him from the Heresy, and the Schism wherein he
was engaged.

M. Claude made answer, that either M. de Condom must renounce his principle,
or own the impossibility of what he urged, For since this Ethiopian in dispute
cannot nor ought not to understand the Scripture, but in the sense of the
Church, by the authority of which he beleives it divine, and from whose hand he
receives it is interpretation, it is impossible that by reading the Scripture
there should arise any doubts in his mind, contrary to the truth of his Church;
for he only explains that Scripture conformably to the sense of that Church.
But if on the contrary, you mean this man should explain of himself the
Scripture, and takes it ^n an other sense than his Church does, you make him,
said he, renounce your princiciple, for which you have hitherto combated, and
you not only make him renounce it, but you establish that it is the Holy Spirit
himself which makes him renounce it, and all the inconveniences which you have
so exaggerated, vanish into smoke; he added, that what M. de Condom had just
said, justified the proceedings of the Protestants in respect of the Roman
Church, for though it were it which we ought to have believed from our birth to
have been the Catholic Church, though it were by it and its authority that we
should have received the Scripture as divine, we cannot be blamed for having
distinguished in that Belief, what was of the Holy Spirit, from what proceeded
from humane prepossession, We cannot be blamed for having in reading the
Scripture, received doubts contrary to the truth of that Church, and for having
freed our selves by that means from out of its communion.

M. de Condom said, there was this difference, that the Ethiopian withdrawing
from out his Church, would join himself to the Catholic, whereas the pretended
reformed have not joined themselves to any communion, you sought strongly after
that, said he, of Jeremy the Patriarch of Constantinople, but he would have
nothing to do with you. We did not separate of our selves, said M. Claude; and
this is sufficient to say that we did not separate our selves from the true
Church, If Jeremy the Patriarch of Constantinople, would not accept of us as
you say, it is to his own, he did not what he ought.

Upon this the Company got up, and the Conversation, which continued still some
time, became much more confused. There was spoken therein of diverse things. M.
de Condom compared with a great deal of exaggeration, the separation of the
Protestants to that of the ancient Heretics, to that of the Arrians, and to
that of the Macedonians, who had made new Churches. M. Claude compared the
conduct of the Protestants to that of the Apostles of I. C. when they were
separated from the Jews, and said that as the Apostles supported themselves
upon the Scripture against the Jews, who supported themselves upon the
authority of Ecclesiastical Assemblyes, the Protestants did the like against
the Church of Rome. He said the Arrians maintained that the consubstantiality
of the Son of God, decided by the Council of Nice, was a novelty, and indeed
several persons before the Arrians had spoken imprudently enough of the
Divinity of the Son, and amongst others he named Origin, Justin Martyr, and the
Council of Antioch; as for Origin, M. de Condom said, he was a suspected
author. As to the Council of Antioch, 'twas, said he, a Council of Arrians. To
which M. Claude reparty'd, that he was mistaken, that 'twas a Council held
before the Arrians, and that it had rejected the term of consubstantial. As for
Justin Martyr, ha, said M. de Condom, that a Martyr e're spoke ill of the
Divinity of the Son of God, I will never believe it. You may believe My Lord,
what you please, but the thing is however so, said M Claude.

M. de Condom fell afterward upon the Invocation of Saints, and upon the
prayer for the dead; of the first said he, M. Daille granted it thirteen
hundred years antiquity; and as to the Second, M. Blondel owned it very
ancient. M. Claude replied, it was not to be thought strange that the Church of
Rome which had scraped up and canonized the errors and superstitions of former
ages, should find some that were of a sufficient old date. That he ought to
have added how. M. Daille, had proved that for the space of three hundred years
there had not been the least trace seen of the Invocation of Saints, but
especially that it had not the least foundation in Scripture, that he owned
that the prayer was one of the most ancient superstitions, but how that of the
ancients was very different from that of the Church of Rome at this day, and
how after all 'twas an error contrary to the principles of the Scripture.

M. de Condom returned again to his comparison of the Protestants with the
ancient Heretics; concluding their novelty and that of their Church. M. Claude
made appear this prepossession was full of injustice, and of a dangerous
consequence; unjust, because on the one side it gave the cause to the
strongest, and to those who have the multitude on their side, contrary to what
Scripture teaches us, that We ^ought not to follow the multitude to do ill,
Exodus 2.3. for the strongest party never fails to accuse the other of making a
new body, a new Church: Unjust also, because one may take a false Antiquity for
a real Antiquity, an Antiquity of some ages which in effect will be a novelty,
for an Antiquity of all ages, which in matter of Religion is the highest
injustice; he added how this prepossession was besides of a dangerous
consequence, for by these means from the time errors and superstitions shall
insensibly be introduced into Religion, and that Custom or the School shall
have authorized them, 'twill be no longer possible to oppose them or root them
out. Those who maintain will be perpetually saying, that they make a new Church
and Religion. Thus the Pharisees accused I. C. of being an innovator, under
pretense that the Disciples did not observe the tradition of the ancients,
which themselves were but innovations; thus the Jews accused St. Paul of
stirring up sedition among them through all the World, and being the head of
the Nazarites, which they looked upon as a new Sect. Thus all the Apostles were
accused by the Pagans of being Disturbers of the public repose, and
innovators, under pretense that they would root out of the hearts of men their
ancient errors, and reduce them to the adoration of one sole true God Creator
of Heaven and of Earth.

M. de Condom replied that I. C. was not new, that the Messiah was expected by
the Jews, that John Baptist, Anna the Prophetess, Simeon and the Wise Men had
owned him. True he was not new to consider the thing in it self, said M.
Claude, for he is yesterday, and to day, and eternally: But he was new to a
whole Nation that expected a Temporal Messiah, and perceived not in him any
mark of what they expected, he was new in their opinion, in that he condemned
the ancient traditions. His Church was new to them, in that it separated it
self from the body of the Jews, and made a Body apart which they had not yet
seen. And as to John Baptist, Anna the Prophetess, Simeon and the Wise men who
owned him, what were those but mere partiuclar persons in comparison of the
whole Body of Sacrificers, Pharisees, Doctors of the Law, and the whole body of
the Jews in general, who did not acknowledge him, and expected a Terrestrial
Messiah; wherefore certain it is prepossession of novelty, which will not allow
a body to examine things to the bottom, which does not distinguish between a
false and true antiquity, which holds for ancient all that was found out
yesterday, and for new all that is contrary to what was found out yesterday, is
a bad and dangerous prepossession, which furnishes arms both to Jews and Pagans
against the Christian Religion, and in effect Calsus and the other enemies of
the Christians have not failed to make use of them.

I o^^, said M. de Condom, that the Pagans have repro^ched the Christians with
their novelty, but the Christians have shown them that they always believed the
same God whom they ad^red, and expected the same Messiah. What you said, said
M. Claude, confirms my sentiment, which is that one ought not to conclude out
of prepossession infavour of an apparent novelty, but that you must pry into
the bottom of things, to see if what (...), is really so. That reproach of the
Pagans proceeded from prejudice and prepossession, and the (...) of the
Christians followed my maxim. For 'twas by the discussion of the bottom that
the Chritians made appear, that though they seemed new, yet that they were not
so, and that what they combated in Paganisms, though it seemed ancient, was
nevertheless new.

As the Conversation had lasted a long while, near upon five hours, with a
great Applicacation on each side, and with a great Attention of the By
standers, the Company began to intermeddle in the Discourse, and the Dispute
ended. After which M. Claude addressed himself to M. de Condom, to whom he
rendered a great deal of honor, and beseeched him that the diversity of
Religions and of sentiments, might not hinder him from granting him his good
will. That f^r his part he would ever preserve a perfect respect and esteem for
the merit of his Person. M. de Condom answered him very civilly, that he knew
him before by his writings, but that he was over joined to know him also by
this Coversation, wherein he had done all that was possible for the
maintainence of his cause, and that there should be no occasion offered of
serving him, but he would do it with a willing heart.

Presently after M. de Condom withdrew, and M. Claude having thanked the
Company and particularly Madam La Marechalle de Lorge, for the attention it had
offer^d him, took Leave of Mademoieselle de Duras, to whom he said, that he had
defended the truth (...), and that he had nothing more to do than to pray to
God for her, and to exhort her to make a good use of what she had heard for the
Confirming her in the Religion wherein God had called her, without suffering
her to be staggered by any temptation, and this he should make his request to
God for her. Mademoiselle de Duras thanked him very affectionately for the
trouble he had taken, and desired him with some emotion of heart to pray to God
for her; which M. Claude having promised her to do, he went his way.

The End.
ERRATA.
Page 13 line 25. read pertinent, ibid line 36 read reject.


