A LETTER TO Dr. Charles Goodall, Physician to the Charter House; OCCASIONED By
his late Printed Letter, Entitled, A Letter from the Learned and Reverend Dr.
Charles Goodall, to his Honored Friend Dr. Leigh, etc. To which is Annexed, An
Answer to a Sheet of Paper, Entitled, A Reply to Mr. Richard Boulton, etc.
Writ by the aforesaid Honored Charles Leigh by Name, M. D. Resident in
Manchester, not far from the Well near Haigh, and the Well prope Boulton, in
Lancashire. By R. BOULTON, of Brazen-Nose College in Oxford.

Nor has the great Number of those Escaped my Observation, who finding it a
much easier Task to Censure -- than to write -- endeavor to acquire the Title
of Judicious, by condemning all things themselves have not written or thought
on. Boil, Phis. Es. p. 1. LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin, 1699.

THE PREFACE to the READER.
THE following Sheets containing an Answer to Dr. Goodall's Letter; and also an
Answer to a Sheet of Paper writ by Dr. Leigh; I think my self bound to make an
Apology to the World upon a double Score: And first, for what I have said in
Answer to Dr. Goodall's Letter. And upon this Account, all that I need to say
is, that had the Doctor not suffered his Letter to be Printed, I had not Writ
or Published what I have; but since he began first, he I hope, or at least the
World will pardon me, for Relating Matter of Fact so plainly, that they might
judge of the Sincerity and Truth of his Letter.

But perhaps there are some, and I hope a great many, that will be unapt to
believe the Grounds of the following Relation true; I say, I hope they will be
unapt to believe it; because I would not wish them to have the same Reasons to
change their Thoughts of him as I have; and that I have fufficient Reason to
think the Character I once gave him, rather what I could have wished him to be,
than what he is. I conceive the following Certificates, together with his own
Letter, will be self-evident Arguments; I have the Copy of his Letter writ by
his own Hand, and the Certificate signed and witnessed by the Persons whose
Names are Subscribed; so that if any Body should question the Truth, they shall
be convinced with those Papers.

As for Dr. Leigh, all the Apology I need to make is, That I beg their Pardon
for taking Notice of his Libels, since Envy and Malice needs no other Answer
but Cantempt: And if the Doctor takes such a delight in writing Penny and
Two-penny Books, he may look out for some other Adversary, that thinks it worth
his while to hearken to him: I for my Part, shall entertain the same Opinion of
him as the World does, viz. That his Remarks are his true and real
Representatives.

And here I shall let the World know, that I take so little delight in opposing
such Adversaries, that for the future (except I have great Reason for it) I
shall leave such as have not the use of their Reason to confute themselves; and
shall rather spend my time in making what Improvements I can in the Profession
I have made choice of: And as Truth and Reason shall always be the Rules by
which I shall write so far as I can, so if I think my self upon that Score
concerned to oppose any one that may be mistaken, I shall show that respect
which is due both to their Learning and Characters; but if on the contrary,
their Ignorance and Contempt of Learned Men, deserves ill Usage, I shall leave
it to some body else to gave them their Merit, who shall not think it time
misspent to answer them.

I shall conclude this Epistle with this Advertisement, viz. That whereas a
Party of Men have imagined, that by Vindicating the College, I opposed them; I
profess, that by the College, I meant no separate Party, but all such Members
which had not adopted that Doctrine which I writ against; and except they
include themselves in that Number, I shall declare that no Party shall engage
me further than Truth and Reason, either for or against any Body; and what is
the Product of that small share I have of either, I shall always submit to the
Candid Censure of the Learned; to whom I subscribe my self

London, Jan. 18. School/9. Their Most Humble Servant, R. BOULTON.

AN ANSWER TO Dr. Goodall's Letter, Dated December. 6th, School. in a Letter to
Himself.
SIR,
I Must confess, it was not without a little Concern and Surprise, that I found
a Letter against me with Doctor Goodall's Name to it: I once thought, and had I
not evident Reason to the contrary, I should think still, that Doctor Goodall
was a Man of more Courage and Honor, (as well as Justice, than to desert a
Cause he had once engaged himself in; of more Courage and Honor) I say;
because it is an Argument against both, to turn your Back upon what you thought
Just; and of more Justice, because it would be unjust to engage your self in
Encouraging or Patronizing that, which in your Opinion was not Approved. And
give me leave to say, this Letter which Dr. Leigh has Printed, will, I am
afraid, call in Question your Judgment, as well as Honor and Justice; for if
in your Judgment you thought my Book was faulty, why did you Patronize it with
such Zeal? If the contrary, why should you not have the same Opinion now as
before?

At least, Doctor, it had been better to have been Silent, and much more
Prudent, than to force me to prove, what in your Letter you deny. It is a thing
I confess I am very loath to do, and would not, did I not think my Reputation
concerned in it: For I am yet ready to acknowledge, that I not long since,
thought my self very much obliged to you; and as Favors received from any one,
shall with me be perpetual Obligations of Respect to them that bestowed them on
me; so I would be unwilling to do any thing which should look like Ingratitude
to you: For I must beg leave to say, that with me, Ties of Friendship shall be
held inviolable, if it lies in my Power; and Obligations I shall ever hold as
Sacred. But as the Case now stands, the greatest Respect I can show you, is to
prove the Contents of your Letter in respect of your Reflections false, without
that Severity which your Usage of me really deserves; for whatever you may
think, I am bold to say, that I shall make it appear that your last Obligations
and Favors have made your former of very little value. Therefore to justify my
self, and to do you no wrong, I shall answer your Letter in the same Method you
have writ it; first returning you thanks for the good Character you are pleased
to give of my other Books.

The First Words which concern me are these; I -- own your Writing to me about
Mr. Boulton' s Book, as a Particular Favor, he having by no means obliged me
by his Rude and Unmannerly Reflections upon you; who I am sensible are not
therein treated like a Gentleman or a Scholar. The Language and Reflections I
own to be such, as no Man of good Breeding, much less any Censor of the College
of Physicians would pass with an Imprimatur. To this, Doctor, I must answer,
That as for an Imprimatur to such a thing as that, I never desired it, for
there was no need of it, it being an Answer to such Ridiculous Reflections on
me, as you were pleased to say at your own Table, were the Rudest and most
Malicious that ever you saw in your Life, and that you thought that no Doctor
in Physic could write such Stuff: This was your Opinion of Dr. Leigh's
Remarks; and as for my Answer to them, I will certify any Body upon Oath, that
you Read the greatest part of them whilst I sat by you, and that when you were
weary, I read the remaining part to you; and that you were so far from finding
Fault, that you smiled almost all the while; and not long after gave your
favorable Opinion of them to a Learned Man of Merton College in Oxford; this
I affirm to be true, with as much Solemnity, as if I were to say it upon Oath.
But supposing you had neither approved nor disapproved the thing, I leave the
World to judge, whether you have not much more reason to reflect on Dr. Leigh
than me, he having reflected on me, who never was in the least acquainted with
him, and consequently could not possibly disoblige him; and as for me, I have
only turned his own Dirt upon him again.

The next Words I shall take notice of in your Letter, are these, As to his
writing against Mr. Colbatch, I must own that did encourage him thereto, he
having so rudely treated the Universities, College of Physicians, and the most
Learned Men of our Faculty, and likewise Published and Defended such an
Erroneous Hypothesis, and raised such a Dangerous Superstructure thereon, as I
fear will prove fatal to many. -- Yet notwithstanding Mr. Colbatch has
deserved Ill of Learned Men, etc. -- I cannot commend Mr. Boulton' s Treating
him in the manner he has done, which was so far from my Opinion and Good
liking, etc. Really, Doctor, I am concerned for your Reputation, that you
should suffer such things to be Printed, which you could not but think highly
disingenuous, and contrary to Truth, if not inconsistent with Reason it self:
For here you declaim against my way of treating Mr. Colbatch, yet say he has
deserved Ill, his Hypothesis is Erroneous, Dangerous and Fatal to many: Where
you Justify what I have done; for if his Hypothesis be Erroneous, Dangerous and
Fatal to many, and deserved Ill; if what I have writ be ill Usage, it is what
you here pronounce to be his Merit, though in the following Words you say it is
contrary to your Approbation and Good Liking: Which Words, if true, it follows,
that your own Opinion is contrary to your own good Liking; because what I have
writ is according to it; and if you fall out with your own Opinion, well may
you with mine.

But give me leave to say, my Book is not only Justified by what you say now,
but was Printed and was Writ or altered according to your good Liking: For
before I writ one Word of it, when you enourag'd me to it, I told you, I
thought it was not worth my while to take notice of his Books, and that I hated
to write in such a manner as it was by some thought he ought to be treated in;
but to this you told me, I could not handle him too roughly, or some such
Words; and this (to put it into your Memory) you told me as I was walking with
you cross Smithfield. Again, you declaimed upon the same Subject coming down
Floulborn, where you told me, It would do the Faculty of Physic a great deal
of Service; which prevailed with me to gratify your Humor, though contrary to
my own Inclination; I then thinking your Opinion preferable to my own,
especially in a City where I was almost a Stranger then, and the Temper of
which I was then unacquainted with.

But you did not only approve it then, but when I had writ but a small part of
it, you gave me leave to Dedicate it to you; for though in your own Parlor, you
seemed with a Smile to refuse it, yet upon Reading over the Dedication, you
were pleased with another Smile to accept it, telling me modestly, It was more
than you deserved: And really I fear you have given me Reason to think it so;
yet, I confess, I am heartily sorry, if I was so much mistaken in you.

But to proceed to your further Good-liking, you not only accepted the
Dedication, but read over the Sheets from the Press; and altered or put in what
Zealous and Fervent Words you had a Mind; and at the same time approved of
them. To convince the World of which, I add these Certificates.

I Whose Name is hereunto Subscribed, do certify, that I carried several Sheets
of Mr. Boulton's Book against Colbatch to Dr. Goodall, who read them over
whilst I was by; and not only put in several Words, but blotted out what he
thought fit, and withal repeated these Words, This will Maul him: And this I am
ready to Testify upon Oath.

Witness my Hand, Edward Midwinter.

I whose Name is hereunto Subscribed do Testify, that I carried several Sheets
of Mr. Boulton's Book against Mr. Colbatch to Dr. Goodall's House, and
delivered them to him, one of which, I received back from him my self; several
Words being put in according to his Direction: And this I am ready to testify
upon Oath.

Witness my Hand, Henry Lloyd.

Besides these Certificates, I could add Two more, were there Occasion, but
these I suppose may be sufficient, to show that you approved of them; besides,
when the whole Book was Printed, I carried the Dedication to you, which you
consented to; nor did you express the least Dissatisfaction concerning the
Dedication, when the Book was Published, but only said, there was (to) instead
of (of) in one Place.

But you further say, you requested me to read the Learned Mr. Boyle's Book,
and to imitate that Learned Author, in my Answer to Mr. Colbatch. Truly, I
remember you were commending Mr. Boil, and said, He had mauld the Unmannerly
Dr. Bently, when I had writ about half my Answer; but I can never think your
Judgment so weak, as to have proposed it for a Pattern, Since there is no
Parallel in the Case; for though I remember you said, One might see how a
Gentleman could manage a Clown; yet it is on all Hands agreed, that as Mr.
Boil is an Ingenious Man, so Dr. Bentley is a Learned Man, as well as the
former; but Mr Colbatch sure is not a Doctor Bentley, though you think sit to
parallel them, for you say, Mr. Colbatch has raised a dangerous, a fatal, and
an Erroncous Hypothesis, but Dr. Bentley has not; for it is not dangerous or
fatal to read any thing about Phalaris.

So that the Circumstances show there is no Parallel, and consequently it could
be no Pattern: And I hope you will not wrong your Judgment so much, as to say,
that when a Man runs down Learning as much as he can, the same Measures are to
be taken as if he only erred in Criticisms; for one Critic may make Remarks on
another in a different way, by which he may think the World will be set a
Laughing, and by that means Ridicule the other: But when a Man, as you say,
lays down Notions of a more Dangerous Consequence, and which may be fatal to
many, Ridicule may set Men a Laughing that understand the Jest, but it will
never convince weak and unthinking Physicians; nay, that which is Ridicule to a
Judicious Man, is not Ridicule to a Man that Understands not the
Unreasonableness of a thing; for such cannot think it Ridiculous till they are
convinced it is Erroneous; and though Laughter may make an Impression upon
their Lungs, it never influences the Reason of those that think Laughter
unreasonable; and though the Weaker sort of Physicians can read a Satyr, and
keep the Subject before them in their Thought at the same time, yet Laughter
puts them out of a Capacity of Thinking, and consequently of being Convinced.
In short, it may make Men Merry for a time, but it never lasts longer than
their Lungs are in a violent Motion; whereas a Satyr where it is due, renders
the Subject opposed more despicable, and brings a Cloud upon it, without
setting the Readers Head a shaking, and rendering the Sight inconstant.

But not to urge at present what might be said in favor of Satyrs, where a
Design is to influence the Vulgar, and not to set Learned Men a Laughing, I
shall only show you how much your Proposition of a Pattern was inconsistent not
only with Reason, but the Opinion of the greatest Orators that we know of. For
Cicero, that Father of Roman Eloquence, in his Oration pro Sext. Ros^io Amerino
says, Non in Omneis arbitrar omnis convenire, The same Measures are not to be
taken upon all Occasions: For as he further says, Haec enim est Causa Nova ac
Singularis, This is a peculiar Cause, and therefore must have a peculiar Method
in managing of it. Again in his Book, de Oratore, he says, Neque est dubium,
quin Exordium dicendi, vehemens and pugnax, non saepe esse debeat; No doubt but
sometimes an Oration ought to begin with heat and earnestness. According to
which, in his Oration pro Q. Rossio, he falls upon a whole Body of Men. O!
Societatem captiosam and indignam, etc. Again, the same Father of Eloquence, in
his Book of Oratory says, it is the Part of an Orator, Ut inveniat quemadmodum
fidem faciat eis quibus volet persuadere, and quemadmodum Motum eorum Aninus
afferat; It Is the part of an Orator to consider what Arguments are necessary to
gain Assent, and what may move Men's Passions. And I leave it to any candid
Judge, whether Laughter or Satyr are more proper, where an Hypothesis is
Erroneous, Dangerous and Fatal to many? Whether Men's Lives are to be made
Subjects of Laughter, or rather of more Concern?

But to proceed to the last Paragraph of your Letter: You say, I am truly
sorry, that in the Particulars you mention, he has not only disobliged me, but
many others. How many I have disobliged by opposing them, I am not insensible;
but as for your self, I can assure the World, it is not by writing against Dr.
Leigh, nor Mr. Colbatch, for if it were so, I had disobliged you half a Year
ago; for then you had read Mr. Colbatch's Answer; and it is above Four Months
since my Answer to Dr. Leigh was Printed, though for some Reasons it was not
Published so soon: But you and I have not been fallen out above Seven Weeks;
besides, if you had been disobliged with my Writing so against Mr. Colbatch, by
the same Reason you would have fallen out with Dr. Leigh, he having writ a
Two-Penny Book with worse Language than Mine; and if my Answer to him
disobliged you, his Reflections would have had the same Effect; but instead of
that, you are both raised to such a Pitch of Friendship, that you are got to be
Reverend, and your Friend, the Honored; though before the Reverend fell out
with me, the Honored was unknown to the Reverend altogether.

But further, if my Reflections on Dr. Leigh, or Mr. Colbatch had disobliged
you, you would have disobliged your self, for you did not only correct my Book, but
Mr. Young's against S^lmon, which has as many Reflections as Mine; and I am
afraid that is contrary to your Good-liking by this Time. But sure you will not
turn your Back on Mr. Young, and say it is contrary to your Good-liking: No,
he is a little Older than I, and you're a little more afraid of his Resentments:
But though Young Birds are more easily catched with Chaff than Old ones, yet
they are not all so ensnared, but sometimes they make shift to disintangle
themselves. But to proceed,

We are to look for another Cause of your present Obligations, and to seek for
another Cause of our falling out, which in short was this. In May last, I
received the following Letters from you, writ both upon the same Paper. Dated
May 26, School.

This to Mr. Richard Boulton, of Brazen-Nose College in Oxford.
-- As to Mr. Boulton, be pleased to acquaint him, that there is a Work in a
certain Part of Natural History, which he is very capable to perform, and will
be both Reputable and Advantageous to him; but that for some Reasons you cannot
as yet acquaint him with Particulars. But let him disingage himself from all
other Studies, reserve himself wholly for this, and come to Town as soon as his
Affairs will permit. --


This is a part of the Letter, though the Persons Name is not here to be
mentioned; but upon the same piece of Paper, I received likewise the following
Lines.

SIR,
I Thank you for your very Kind and Ingenuous Letter of the 18th Instant; your
Gratitude expressed therein, does highly oblige me, and you may be assured I
will do you all the good Offices I can: -- Your Printer has brought but one
Sheet since we Parted; if you let me know his Name and House, I will take some
Care about the Press, we all give our Service to you. I am

Your Sincere and Faithful Friend, CHARLES GOODALL.


Now from this Letter, it is plain, you were concerned about the Press; but of
that enough before. And how far you have been my Sincere or Faithful Friend, I
leave the World to judge, who have a Specimen of your Sincerity in this Letter.
Upon the Receiving thereof, I came to Town as soon as I could possibly, but too
late for what was mentioned in the former part of the Letter; which was to be
taken for a peculiar kind of Favor to be sent for from Oxford for nothing;
whereas I writ to you the Week before about it. But that it might not be for
nothing, you got me to Translate Dr. Groenvelt's Book about Cantharides, into
English for you, which to please you, I did. Why you could not answer that Book
(for you threatened it mightily) in Latin as well as in English, I will not say.
But this was not enough to send for me from Oxford for, but you so tired me
with one thing after another, that I must either spend my time wholly for you,
or you would not be pleased.

But you will be apt to say, I am still obliged to you; and truly I am not
insensible of your last Obligations, since to make Trial of them, I only
deferred Writing some Unreasonable things you desired, upon which the Storms
rose, and the Winds blew, and presently untied the Bonds of Friendship.

But since I have made this Relation Public, it perhaps may be wondered, why I
should be your Humble Servant so long, having no more Reason than your sending
for me to London, for nothing almost; since to disappoint me, and serve me so
handsomely, was none of the most worthy Actions of the Physician to the
Charter House. That this then may seem less strange, I must own, that you made
me such Promises of your Interest in Oxford, that I was willing to spend a
little time to see the Event; but when I saw you had deceived me in that, as
well as your Letter to Oxford, I thought it high time to make better use of it,
than to consume it with Dr. Goodall.

Thus Sir, I have, I hope, satisfied the World, that you have dealt, if I may
be so bold to say so, very disingeniously with me; yet I was willing to say
nothing, had you not Maliciously done me the favor to publish your Spleen
against me.

Yet I can easily forgive you; and am from my Heart sorry, that your Reason
should be so prevailed on by the violence of your Passion: But since it is so,
and past help, I hope you will pardon this Freedom* which you your self have
been the Occasion of: And this I will assure you of, though it lies in my Power
to say much more to your Disadvantage, I shall not, except you give me further
Reason: And I could wish, there were no just Cause given to prevent me from
Subscribing my self,

SIR, Your Humble, And Obliged Servant, R. BOULTON.

ADVERTISEMENT.
SInce the former Sheets were put to the Press, I am told by several, that Dr.
Goodall does own that he consented to the Dedication, and that he wonders Dr.
Leigh should pretend to say, that I presumed to dedicate my Book to him, since
it was done with his Consent; and he likewise declares, that he is not a little
displeased, that Dr. Leigh should be so unfair, as to print his Letter, without
his Consent: But I thank Dr. Leigh for it, because had it not been printed I
could not have vindicated my self.

AN ANSWER TO Dr. Leigh, etc.
THAT Doctor Leigh may be satisfied I am the very same Man I ever took my self
to be, I have, by Certificates from the Persons who carried my Sheets to Dr.
Goodall's House (from the Place where I have lodged ever since I came to
London) proved, that Dr. Goodall did correct and approve of my Book; and that
he was concerned in it, appears from his Letter sent to me at Oxford: And how
disingenuously and dishonourably the Doctor has dealt with me, let the World
judge.

But of this I have said enough before; I shall therefore take a View of what
the Doctor has said, either against me, or in Defense of himself; in doing
which, I shall only lay down Matter of Fact, and leave the World to judge
whether I have given him his Answer.

And First in his Title, he calls my last Book, my Last Piece; he calls my Book
of the Heat of the Blood, a Piece; so that all I can write in the Language of
the Famous Doctor Doctorum Doctor Leigh must needs be Pieces: But I leave it to
the World to judge, whether what he writes, be not more like Pieces than Books;
for in the first Place he writ a Penny Book against me; next he writ a Three
penny Book against Mr. Colbatch; and now I have got a Two-penny Book again: So
that I cannot for the Heart of me, stretch the Doctors Fancy, to write a Book
as valuable as a common Almanac; and it is strange that all the Doctor can say
against me is not worth more than Two pence in his own Opinion; but perhaps he
has squeezed more Sense into his Pieces than usually sticks in so small a
Compass, and therefore I shall examine their Merit.

In his first Piece he has made Remarks on Pigs, Mice, Elephants,
Cheesmongers, Irish- Men, C -- w T -- d. The Pudenda of a Salt Bitch,
Duck-Shot, Roger a Coverly, the Wise Men of Gotham, the Cuckoo and Diego and
his Spanish Geese. And all these wonderful Phenomenon has he declaimed on,
instead of Answering me: But truly in his last Piece, he has condemned
himself. And Page the 12th says, They were writ in a Style too light for the
Gravity and Sobriety of Philosophy; so that in this, we must expect something
like a Philosopher; truly a happy Change: And I hope my last Prescription has
taken effect. But let us see what Alterations it has wrought. Page 5th, he
makes his Observations on Sportive Rattles of unthinking Striplings: Page 6th,
He says, a Snail will make a swift New Market Courser; which may be true, if a
Horses Name. Page 7th, he has coined a New Metaphor, viz. Faeculent Brain,
derived from Bog-house, in his first Piece, Page 7th. But Page 8th, He says, if
the Lapwing would stay till the Shell dropped off his Head, he might fly: Page
9th. He says, The Crane and the P^gmies might have fought about the Knots in a
Bull-rush ^. 10th. He tells us a Story of a Tartar that defaces the Plains he
was foraging in, and straight removes to a (...) Clime: Whence it is evident
that his Notions of Feve^^ and Inflammatory Diseases, could not be borrowed
from Dr. Willis. A strange Consequence. p. 14th. he says, The Weash-man
purchased the Pompion for the Mare's Egg and got never a Colt from it, and
these are things not too light for the gravity and sobriety of Philosophy.
Strange! how the Dr. Philosophized when he wrote these things of Weight and
Sobriety, and how much they differ from the admirable Contents of his first
Piece.

But if this be the Dr's Philosophy, unenvied by me may he phylosophize, till
he has gathered enough to complete his Theory; I for my Part shall leave him
to hug and admire his Pieces till he is weary; and shall only take notice of
what he further dogmatically denies in my Book without giving any Reason for
it, and what he says for himself.

And First, all that sticks with the Doctor, as to my Books, is, That he cannot
See or Taste the Mucilage; which I conceive to be Animal Spirits; and that the
Metaphorical Glands which are made up of the Extremities of the Vessels, cannot
be discerned by Microscopes: This is all that the Doctor alleges against my
Books, the remaining part of his Sheet being either Enlargements upon the
wonderful Stock of Philosophy, but just now mentioned, or a Vindication of his
own Book.

As to the First, he tells me, I no where prove Animal Spirits to be an Oily
Mucilage; and he asks me, Whether I ever saw it or tasted it? To this I answer,
that I have both seen and tasted it; and have already proved the Animal Spirits
to be an Oily Mucilage, in my Book of the Heat of the Blood; and therefore, I
shall refer the Reader thither, it not being requisite that I should trouble my
self to repeat what is there said, as often as Dr. Leigh shall ask the Question
afresh.

And since he here says, Their Agility in Voluntary Motion, demonstrates that
they do not move slower than Blood; I answer, That it is no Demonstration; for
though the Spirits move slowly in the Nerves, yet when they come to be mixed
with the Blood, and meet with Particles which are of a different Temper and
Texture, they may then become Active, and many degrees more active than before.
So the Particles of Alkalies and Acids when kept separate in distinct Vessels,
have not half the Agility and Activity in their Parts, as when mixed together;
the Result of their Mixture, if Volatile, being a strong Fermentation, which
was in neither of the separate Liquors, And although Gunpowder be slowly
squeezed through a long pipe and out of that falls upon the Fire, yet it is
Explosion when worked upon by so powerful an Agent, is no argument that the
Corpuscles of the Gunpowder were in as violent a Motion before the Explosion;
since it is evident that they are not; so that the Spirits may move slowly in
the Nerves when kept separate from the Blood, yet be put into a more violent
Agitation when mixed with it; that Agitation being no Argument of their equal
Agility before, but a consequence of their Mixture.

But to proceed to his other Objection, viz. That the Metapborical Glands
cannot be seen with a Microscope; To this I answer, that by Metaphorical
Glands, I mean nothing but a Commixture of the Extremities of Vessels,
Metaphorical Glands implying no more; which appears from what I have said in my
Book of Muscular Motion, to which I shall refer the Reader, it not being
necessary to repeat what is there, though Dr. Leigh should for Information sake,
ask the Question again and again: But that what I have said there, is
sufficient to prove, that there are such Glands, I presume undeniable, till
what I have offered with submission to Reason, be confuted by it; and then if I
cannot maintain it, let it fall: It is Knowledge and Truth I shall ever value
above my own Opinion, if it be not so; but if it be, I shall value it as Truth,
and only content my self with the satisfaction of contributing my Endeavors to
the General stock of Knowledge. But to satisfy the World, that we are not to
dis-believe, what I have said of those Glands, because we cannot see them, I
shall add a Quotation from the Honorable Esquire Boyle's Works, which will
show him, that there are several Truths in Nature, which we believe, because we
have Reason for it; though as to Sight they are imperceivable; for that most
ingenious and experimental Promoter of useful Knowledge, who was a profound,
and one of the greatest of Philosophers, in his History of Fludity, Page 189.
Sect. XX. admits of Reason to be proof, where the minuteness of Bodies renders
them imperceivable: For he says, If it be objected, that the Various and
Insensible Parts of Water, and resembling Bodies, wherein we make the Nature of
Fluidity chiefly to consist, is but an Imaginary thing, and but precariously
asserted, since by our own Confession they are so small, that the Particles
themselves, and more, the diversity of their Motions, are imperceptable by
Sense, etc. We shall not deny the Objection to be plausible, but must not
acknowledge it to be unanswerable. And the like may be said for those Glands;
for if we have Reason to believe there are such, we are not to deny what our
Reason tells us, because it is not an Object of Sight; and that it is the
Smallness of those Glands that makes them to be imperceiptible by Sight is
evident, since the best Microscopes will not make the Terminations of those
Vessels visible which compose them: Yet I hope no Body will say, that the
Vessels have no ends, because they cannot see them: If then we allow what is
beyond Contradiction, viz. That the Terminations of the Vessels cannot be
perceived, we must allow that these Glands must be Invisible, because made up
of those Vessels which are too fine to be perceived; and that those Vessels do
communicate with one another, and consequently make up such Glands I have given
such Reasons in my Book, and also laid down such Experiments, that I need not
to bring any more till those are deficient.

Having answered all the Doctors Objections against my Book, I shall consider
what he says for himself: And First, to pass by all that heap of loud sounding
Words, which is vulgarly called Bombast, or Sound without Signification, I
shall briefly take notice, that though I quoted Doctor Willis, and showed him
that his Notion of Heat was the same with it, as also that Doctor Willis had
the same Notion of the Cause of Intermitting Fevers; and though I showed him,
that in Dropsies, he mistakes the Effect for the Cause; and that in his
Dissertation of Mineral Waters, he only proves what no Body denies; he thinks
it an Answer sufficient to deny what is evidently true, and matter of Fact: For
he says, he did not borrow his Notions from Dr. Willis, neither do I say so;
but he acted the Plagiary (to use his own Words) or he stole them from him; for
those Words he makes use on himself.

But he says Dr. Willis assigns Fermentation to be the Cause of Heat; and that
he assigns Collision; but any Body that knows the least of the Corpuscularian
Philosophy, would not think to come off with such mean Evasion, since
Fermentation implies Collision, and Collision, which is the Effect of Motion,
where it is violent enough, is but calling Fermentation by another Name, since
Fermentation and Collision of the Parts of hot Bodies, are significatively the
same, though different Sounds.

Again, he says, He does not endeavor to prove an Acid in Vitriolated Waters,
but that there is a perfect concocted Vitriol; which is as much as to say, he
does not argue for an Acid, but for a perfect Acid, since Vitriol is an Acid;
so that to prove Vitriolate Waters have Vitriol in them, is to prove Acid
Waters have Acid in them; which I suppose none denies. But let the Doctor
dispute the Case, it is a fine easy Subject for him; he may tell his Countrymen
such Amusing Stories; and that there is Salt in their Porrage if he will;
perhaps he may convince them, by the same Strain, and Vigorous Arguments used
at the Well near Haigh, and the Well prope Boulton in Lancashire.

But lest People should (...) Doctor really confuted, he says very little in
vindication of himself, thinking if he should use Arguments, it would make
People take Notice of his Faults the more.

Therefore to divert their Observations, he thinks to make a Noise about a
Latin Sentence, and Three Latin Words; as if convincing me there, would atone
for the whole Notions of Value in his Book, taken from Dr. Willis; but I don't
think I need to use any Arguments to persuade Physicians, to believe what I
have said, since it is the generally received Opinion that Dr. Leigh has
nothing in his Book of his own worth owning.

But to come to his Scholarship, he tells me I don't understand Latin, and that
I must go to School again: Poor good Natured Soul! he finds the Good Effects of
my last Advice, and by his Quoting of Horace and Virgil, etc. I find he has
been at School, and taken it; and now like a sweet Tempered Gentleman, he would
needs advise me to make use of the same Means* This had been a Symptom of a
good D^sposition in Mind, had I not been mightily prejudiced; for there is
scarce any Body that finds Benefit by a Medicine, but they usually recommend it
to every Body that they have a Respect for, whether they want it or not:
Whether I want it or not, I don't pretend to say, but am sure that
notwithstanding his Quoting Dr. Lister, I must tell him, pro me, is not so good
Latin, as Quod ad me attinet, or Quatenus me refert; but he has a mind Dr.
Lister should be blamed with him, as when Two Children fall out about their
Play, the one thinks it hard to be whipped, and the other saved; so he must
needs have Dr. Lister in for Two Words at least; with all my Heart, I am not
against it; if he must be blamed, when the one has the Ferula, let the other
stand by.

The Doctor is not angry that I find fault with Sic Regero: But let him not be
concerned, I only think it a mean Metaphor, and fitter to be used by him in the
Genuine Sense of the Word, than Metaphorically. But he cannot let one Sentence
pass; I carp at a harmless Word in proclivi, and say it should be in promptu;
but that he may be satisfied in this particular also, I shall tell him I
designed it, as an Emblem of his Ingenuity; for I did not say in Proclivi was
never used, but I meant, that his Thoughts which were in Proclivi, ought to be
in Promptu; which was as much as to say, they were according to the Aetymology
of the Word; i. e. Mean and Weak, instead of easy and fluent; and I only
expressed my self so ambiguously, to catch the Doctor; for I knew he would fall
foul upon any Bait; and truly I had a mind to lay up a Reserve to Banter him;
for I could not think the Doctor when roused, would have said so little in
Vindication of himself.

But again, what shall I do now, he says I fall hard upon Case; and truly his
Case is such, that I cannot avoid it; but he brings Cicero, Virgil, Ovid,
Horace and Plautus against me, can I oppose them? No, but I can easily show
that they will oppose him, for though he be so Vigorous, these Quotations are
against him: For Opinioni haud Natura se Credidit, is false Latin; and to make
it appear, we are to consider, that Cicero in his Book, de Oratoriae
Partionibus says, Ut in simplicibus Verbis, quod non and Latinum; sic in
Conjunctis, quod non est Consequens V^^uperandum est. So that though Doctor Leigh
has joined Words, if the Connection be false, the Latin has no Consequence,
and consequently is culpable. And where the Sense of Words are not connected,
the Sense is broke, and consequently to be blamed. I shall therefore, because
he is so zealous upon his Sentence, show him, that the Sense wants Connection,
and that none of the Quoted Sentences will help him: For in this Sentence,
Opinioni haud Natura se Credidit, the Person is the Accusative Case, and the
Thing in the Dative, where if Credo be taken in a Grammatical Signification of
that Word; it must signify to believe, and then the English will be, I believe
my self to Opinion not Nature. But the Doctor thinks this absurd himself; let
us see then what the Authorities avail; The first Instance in Plautus which he
brings is, credere se Neptuno. The Second is, Credere se Coelo praepetibus
pennis, Virgil: The remaining Instances are, Credere suum animum Alicui,
Terence, Credere uni omnia, Cicero. Libris Arcana Credere, Horace. Veritus se
Credere nocti, Ovid. Now in all these, Credo signifies to Commit, as to commit
ones self to the Waves, to commit ones self to the Air, to commit Secrets to
Writing, etc. But if one should say, I commit my self to my Opinion, and not to
Nature; how incoherent would the Sense be, and ridiculous. But perhaps the
Doctor will say, that Credo may s^gnify, I give my self up to my Opinion and
not to Nature; if he does, the Sense is not much better; besides, the Word
Nature is used so ambiguously, that I cannot tell what he gives himself up to,
till he informs me, what he means by Nature; for Nature is by some
Philosophers, and particularly the Honorable Mr. Boil, used to signify the
Natural State of Bodies, or their Natural Texture and Modification; but to say
a Man gives himself up to the Natural State of Bodies, or their Texture and
Modification, must be nothing but Absurdity; and let the Doctor try, if Credo
will bear any other English Sense better than what I have mentioned, still
remembering to keep the Person either in the Accusative or Dative Case; if he
cannot, as I am sure he cannot, the Sentence is false Latin, according to
Cicero, because false Sense, and consequently Vituperandum; and not only so,
but since Credo is used by Dr. Leigh, in a different Sense from what it is in
those Citations, and the Authors Quoted, it is impossible to use the Word Credo
in their Sense, so as to make Grammatical Sense of his Latin Words; besides, as
Cicero says, there must be a like Consequence or similar Signification, to make
the Comparison good; for it is not placing any Latin Words in the same Cases
and Order, that makes them Justifiable, except there be a parity of Sense and
Reason.

But why do I talk of Reason to the Doctor, since nothing is more Heterogeneous
or disagreeable to his Head, than any thing that concerns that Faculty; for my
Book of the Heat of the Blood contains nothing, but what I hope I have given
Reason for. Upon which Account* the Doctor fell out with it, was dissatisfied,
and in sine was resolved to show his Wit; to which I gave an Answer, which I
thought most agreeable to such a Philosopher; which had so good an Effect, as
to bring the Doctor to a very little better Temper. But since I see he will be
a Two-penny Author, I was resolved now to talk Reason to him, finding it the
properest Method to be revenged on him; for if Reason before made him so mad
with me, it may have a stronger Influence, if reapplied to a weak Head.

And now I shall leave the World to judge what is become of Dr. Leigh's Reply,
and Dr. Goodall's Letter. As for a Letter of Mine, that he tells me of; he has
taken a great deal of care to mis-represent it, and to make it what he would
have it: But the Sense of what I writ was, that though there were a great many
Learned and Ingenious Men in the University, they were not all such, which was
no Reflection, since it is mod certain, that those that are come fresh from
School, or of a small standing, cannot reasonably be ranked amongst Graduates
in the University. And as for my Qualifying my self for a Degree in a Month, or
to perform the Exercise of a Day in an Hour, I do not think saying so, was
calling the Exercise trifling; for I having studied Five Years after I left
Chester-School before I came there, and having studied Philosophy before, and
read most Conttoversies of Value, I do not think it much Presumption in me to
say, that that which Five Years hard Study had made easy to me, was difficult
to those that came fresh from School: and I presume if Dr. Leigh should be sent
to the University now, which were to be wished, he would be apt to say, the
Exercise was easy; for when a Thing is Learnt, any thing is easy; and I had
learnt most of those things before; so that I gave my Friend an Account how
easy it was to me then, and how much my past Studies had made those light: So
that what I said, was nothing but what any Batchelour of Arts will say, viz.
That at Four Years end they remember so well what they had learnt for the Four
Years past, that were they to begin the Exercise of the first Year again, they
could do in an Hour, what a fresh Scholar could not do in Twelve: And if a
Batchelour at Four Years might without Reflection say so, I hope in the Sixth
Year of a continued and hard Study, I might presume to say, I could do that in
an Hour, which a School boy could not do in Twelve.

But the Doctor would needs represent me as an Enemy to the Universities, that
they might revenge his Cause; but I here declare and say, that nothing shall
make me an Enemy to them, as long as I have the Use of my Reason; and I shall
ever contribute my utmost Endeavors in Vindication of the Universities, till I
have Reason to the contrary, which I hope I shall never have; and till then, as
I shall make it my Business to make what Improvements I can in real Knowledge,
so I shall to the utmost of my Power vindicate Learning, and oppose the
Opposers of it.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the Three former Sheets were Printed, I hear that Dr. Goodall is very
angry, that I should offer to answer his Letter in Vindication of my self: And
I am likewise told, that a certain Friend of Dr. Leigh's thinks I have used him
too hardly: But as to the First, I must beg Dr. Goodall's Pardon; for if he is
offended, he may blame himself for it; I thought my self concerned to take off
the unjust Imputations laid upon me; and if he can think well of himself for
Publishing a Letter so inconsistent with Truth, I have a better Apology to
make, for laying down Matter of Fact. As for Dr. Leigh, had he writ against me
as a Rational Man ought, I should have answered him with that Deference which
is due from me to a Graduate; but if he thought fit to transgress the Bounds of
Reason, it was but Reason to answer him in a way he made choice of himself; a
Method which I by no means would have made choice of, had he deserved a better
Character from me, than he has amongst Learned Men.

FINIS.

