A CONFERENCE WITH Mr. CLAUDE MINISTER OF CHARENTON, CONCERNING The Authority
of the CHURCH.

By JAMES BENIGN BOSSUET, Bishop of Meaux, Councellor to the most Christian
King, and formerly Preceptor to the DAUPHIN: First Almoner to the DAUPHINESS.

Faithfully done into English out of the French Original.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Turner at the Lamb in High-Holbourn, 1687.

ADVERTISEMENT.
I Had no intent to publish either this Conference* or the Instructions, it was
accompanied with. They both had for their Object the Conversion of a particular
person, and having wrought their Effect, there was no obligation to make any
farther noise about 'em. But as I was not (...) to publish the Recital of it,
so neither did I affectedly strive to keep concealed. I gave a Copy to
M^demoiselle de Duras, who requested it (...) but just (...) I consented
without difficulty to the communicating it to some Gentle^^^ of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, that desired to see it: because 'twas thought, it might be
instrumental to their Conversion. The same Motive (...) to impart it to some
other of these Gentlemen, either by my self, or by the Interposition of
Friends. Thus it passed into several hand^ (...) Copies taken, than I knew of
(...) they were spread (...) they were altered: (...) the Relation, I had made,
or turned it according to their (...) 'twas printed at Tholoze from a very
corrupt (...) I can no longer forbear giving it to you, as I had my self set it
down with great Fidelity and Exactness.

At my coming forth from the Conference, I related it entirely to the Duke and
Duchess of Rich^lieu in the presence of the (...) T^stu. The particular zeal,
they had for the Convers^^^ of Mademoiselle de Duras, made them desire me so to
do^ I had before (...) to them the precedent Conversations. The next day. I
made the same Recital to some of my particular Friends, amongst whom was the
Bishop of Mir^poix. I was full of the matter, and related it naturally. All
those Gentlemen (...) me to put it in writing, whilst 'twas fresh in my memory,
alleging several Reasons, to persuade me, that this Labor would not ^e (...).
I believ^^ it (...). I was (...) to write with the same swiftness, which is
usual, when one (...) d^w^ facts, that are present, without troubling ones self
about the Style: and these Gentlemen observed in the written Narrative the same
sinplicity, they, had discerned in my recounting it by Word of Mouth.
Mademoiselle de Duras acknowledged my Report to be exactly true, and I hope,
those, that shall read it without (...), will have the same Opinion of it.

Several Copies of my Relation being dispersed, as I have told you, one (...)
into the hands of Mr. Claude, as himself av^rs; and he on his side together
with an Answer to the Instructions, I had particularly given Mademoiselle de
Duras, gave abroad a Relation of the Conference, very different from this of
mine. To speak freely, what I think, his Relation is neither for his Credit,
nor min^: We hold in it round about long Discourses, languishing, in^ipid, and
inconsequent enough. (...) Mr. Claude's Relation we often return back, to what
we had left, without perceiving how we get (...) again: We did not act in that
mann^r, and our Dispute was consequential and close enough. In this sort of
Contests men naturally grow hot, as in a kind of wrestling: and so the sequel
is more animated, than the Beginnings. Men try one another, and if I so speak,
in the first Blows, that are given: when they have a little explained
themselves, when they think, they have discovered, where each Party places the
Difficulty, and found, as I may say, one another weak sides, all, that
follows, is more lively and pressing. Whether all this be as natural in Mr.
Claude's Discourse, as in mine, the Reader shall be Judge. As his is turned,
many will scarce believe, but that it has been adjusted and trimmed up on the
perusal of mine. But I will not stay upon these Reflections. It Is with
Discourses, as with Pictures, in which every one cannot discern, what is
Original, and, as I may say, from the first hand. Nor will I here make use of
the odious Reproach of Insincerity. One does not always, so exactly remember
either the things, that were said, or the Order, in which they were delivered:
We often confound in our Minds our After-thoughts, with what we indeed said in
the Dispute; and one is frequently found to have changed the Truth without any
Design of lying. What I shall say of Mr. Claude, the same he may say of me. Our
Conversation was in private, and neither of us can produce indifferent
Witnesses: thus every one will judge of the Truth of our Recitals, according as
himself is prepossessed. I pretend not to draw any Advantage from the Success
of the Conference, which was followed by the Conversion of Mademoiselle de
Duras: it is a Work of GODs, for which we ought to give him thanks: it is an
Example for those, that are well disposed, but not an Argument for the
Obstinate. The Catholics will look on this Change in one manner, and the
Pretended Reformed in another. So that, should Mr. Claude and I set our selves,
each of us to justify his Relation, the Result would be only a Dispute, with
which the Public has nothing to do. And what great matter is it, will the
Reader say, which the two had the better? The Cause resides not in these two
men, who would appear extremely vain, and so of little Credit, if they would
have every one, whether Friends or Adversaries, believe them equally (...)
their Word. In these Altercations the best Course, a prudent Reader can take,
is to search into the Bottom of the Matters, and without regarding the personal
Facts, to consider the Doctrine, laid down by each Party.

The Subject, treated of in all this Relation, is no less clear, than
important. It Is the Authority of the Church. Our Adversaries make little
account of this Dispute, being always heard to say, that we must come to the
Bottom, setting aside as an unnecessary Formality, all the Arguments drawn from
the Authority of the Church: as if it were not an essential Part of the Bottom
to examine, by what Authority and what Means JESUS CHRIST would have Christians
resolve themselves on the Disputes, that should spring up in his Church.
Catholics pretend, that this Means is to hear the Church it self. They
pretend, that a particular Member ought not to resolve but with the whole Body,
and that be hazards all, when he resolves any other way. They pretend, that to
know, in what Church we ought to stay, we need only know, which it is, that was
never accused of being formed by separating it self; that was extant before all
Separations; from which all others have separated. Without going forth of our
House, our very Parents will show us this Church. Deuteronomy. xxxii. v. 7.
Ask thy Father, and he will show thee, thy Elders, and they will tell thee.
According to this Rule whoever can show a whole Church, a whole Society of
Pastors, the Beginning of its Being, and a Time, whenever, during which it
was not, has convinced it of not being a Church truly Christian. This is our
Pretention, and we pretend not, that this Question is about a simple Formality.
We averr, that it concerns a fundamental Article, contained in these words of
the Creed, I believe the holy Catholic Church: an Article besides of such
importance, that it carries with it the Decision of all the rest. But as this
Point is decisive, so it is no less clear, and it cannot be long spoken of, but
one side or other will show their weakness. Let us say better: when a
Catholic, never so little instructed, undertakes a Protestant upon this Point,
this Protestant, how able and subtle soever, will find himself reduced, not
always indeed to hold his Peace; but, what is no less strong than Silence, to
say nothing, when he shall attempt to speak, but visible Absurdities.

This is, what here befell Mr. Claude through the sole Defect of his Cause: for
'twill appear, that he defended it with all possible Skill, and so subtly,
that I feared for those who heard him: for I know, what St. Paul writes of such
Discourses. But in fine we must boldly say: The Truth gained a manifest
Victory. What Mr. Claude avows, ruins his Cause: The Places, where he stood
without an Answer, are indeed such, as suffer none.

And to the end it may not be said, I assert, what I please: or that I now
desire, what I ere while disclaimed, to be believed on my own word: two things
will show, whatever Opinion may be had of me, that in this Point I must
necessarily he believed.

The first is, that relying on the force of Truth, and his Promise, who said,
Luke xxi. v. 15.
that he will give us a Mouth and Wisdom, which our Adversaries shall not be
able to resist, wherever Mr. Claude shall say, that he has not acknowledged,
what I make him acknowledge in the Recital of the Conference, I engage my self
in a second Conference to draw again from him the same Acknowledgment; and
wherever he shall say, that he was not without an Answer, I will force him
without any other Argument, but those, he has already heard, to Answers so
visibly absurd, that any men of good Sense shall acknowledge, he had far better
have been silent, than have made use of them.

And for fear it should be said; for in an Affair, that concerns the Conversion
of Souls, we must, as much as may be, prevent all Objection: for fear then once
again it should be said, that Mr. Claude engaged himself in these
Inconveniences by ill management, I on the contrary affirm, that this Advantage
is so inherent to our Cause, that there is no Minister, no Doctor, no man
living, but must in the same manner sink under the like Arguments.

Those, who will make trial of it shall see, that this is no vain Promise. If
any one says, I presume too much on my strength; now that I examine my self in
the presence of GOD, if such a Presumption had made me speak, I should disown
all, I had said. Instead of promising my self any Advantage, I should esteem my
self already vanquished by trusting only to my own Arm, and my own Weapons: and
so far should I be from defying the strong, as David that, I should rank my
self among those, Ps. 63.
of whom the same David sings, that the Arrows of Children have pierced them,
and their own Tongue, too weak to defend them, is in fine turned against
themselves.

The Instruction, I offer in general to the Pretended Reformed, I particularly
offer those of the Diocese of Meaux, whom I am above all the rest obliged to
bear in my Bowels. Those, that shall refuse this Christian Instruction, no less
peaceable, fraternal and paternal, than concluding and decisive, I shall say to
them in the words of St. Paul with sorrow and groaning, there being no comfort
in the loss of ones Children and Brethren, Acts. xx. v. 26.
I am pure from the Blood of them all.

This is the first thing, which will show, that I impute nothing to Mr. Claude,
which might give me any Advantage. The second is, that Mr. Claude himself in
the midst of what he opposes against me, and amongst all the Turns, he gives
our Dispute, still acknowledges at last, what was in contest between us, or
else shifts it off in such a manner, as plainly shows, he cannot entirely
disown it. But this will be better understood by those, who, after the
Instructions and the Conference, shall read the Reflections, I make on Mr.
Claudes writing.

Some Attention is requisite, to comprehend the whole sequel of these
Instructions: for whatever Easiness it has pleased GOD to let us find in a
matter, in which he shows the most ignorant, as well as the most learned, the
plain way of Salvation, yet would be not discharge any one of the Attention, he
is capable of; and since the following Discourses had their Rise from the XIX
and XX Articles of my Exposition, the reading of these two Articles, which will
take up but half a quarter of an hour, will facilitate the Understanding of all
this Work, tho I moreover hope, that it is of it self sufficiently intelligible.

Besides, the Reading of them will not be unuseful to Catholics, who
ordinarily too much neglect Books of Controversy. Grounded on the Faith of the
Church, they are too careless in perusing such Works, by which their Faith
might be confirmed, and in which they might find means to reduce the Erring.
This was not the Use in the first Ages of the Church: the Treatises of
Controversy, written by the Fathers, were sought after by all the Faithful,
Conversation being one of the Means, proposed to us by the Holy Ghost for the
gaining of Unbelievers, every one endeavored to render his profitable and
edifying by such Reading. The Truth insinuated it self by so sweet a Means; and
Conversation won those, whom a premeditated Dispute would perhaps but have made
more averse. But to the end the Works, we make of Controversy, may be read, as
those of the Fathers were, let us endeavor, as the Fathers did, to fill them
not only with exact and found Doctrine, but also with Piety and Charity; and
let us, as much as we can, correct the Dryness, not to say the Sourness, which
is too often found in such Books.

A TABLE OF THE ARTICLES.
CONFERENCE.
I. THE Preparation to the Conference, and particular Instruction. p. 1 II. The
Conference. p. 20 III. The Sequel of the Conference. p. 49
REFLECTIONS.
THE first Reflection, on Mr. Claude's Answer to the Acts extracted from the
Discipline of the Pretended Reformed. p. 58 Second Reflection, on one of the
Propositions, acknowledged by Mr. Claude in the Conference, and on the Examen,
he prescribes after the Churches Judgment. p. 64 Third Reflection, on another
Proposition, acknowledged by Mr. Claude in the Conference: an Explication of
the manner of instructing Christians, and that the Churches infallible
Authority is necessary for the knowing and understanding the Scripture. p. 73
Fourth Reflection, on Mr. Claude's objecting the same Difficulty to us about the
Church, as we do to him about the Scripture. p. 76 Fifth Reflection, on Mr.
Claude's alleging here the Practice of the Greek Church, and the like: which
is only to embroil the matter, and not to resolve the Difficulty. p. 78 Sixth
Reflection, on Mr. Claude's reducing, as much as he can, this Dispute to the
Instruction of Children. p. 82 Seventh Reflection, on Mr. Claude's saying in his
Relation, that I appeared embarrass'd in this part of the Dispute. p. 86 Eighth
Reflection, on another Proposition, acknowledged by Mr. Claude in the
Conference, where is shown the manner, how all false Churches have been
established. p. 88 Ninth Reflection, on the Churches Visibility: that Mr. Claude
opposes not the Doctrine, I have explained, till he has first framed himself a
false Idea of it. p. 91 Tenth Reflection, on the Pretended Reformeds Confession
of Faith; that it acknowledges no Church, but what is visible, and that Mr.
Claude satisfies not this Difficulty. p. 95 Eleventh Reflection, on Mr. Claude's
own acknowledgment of the Churches perpetual Visibility: the surprising Doctrine
of this Minister. p. 99. Twelfth Reflection. Two of Mr. Claude's principal
Objections, resolved by his Doctrine. p. 104 Thirteenth and last Reflection. Mr.
Claude's Doctrine shows the Gentlemen of the Pretended Reformed Religion, that
there is no Salvation for them, but in the Roman Church. p. 107
A CONFERENCE WITH Mr. CLAUDE Minister of CHARENTON, Concerning the AUTHORITY
of the CHURCH.
MADEMOISELLE de DURAS, I. The Preparation to the Conference, and particular
Instruction.
being in some Doubt about her Religion, caused me to be asked by several
Persons of Quality; Whether I were willing to Confer with Mr. Claude in her
Presence. I answered, I should very readily do it, if I saw that such a
Conference were necessary for her Salvation. She afterward, by the Duke of
Richelieu, invited me to be at Paris on Tuesday the last of February 1678. and
to enter into Conference the next day with this Minister, on the Subject she
would speak to me about. This was to intimate to me, that she was willing to
see me before the Conference. Being with her on the Day appointed, she
acquainted me, That the Point, she desired to have cleared with her Minister,
was that of the Churches Authority, which seemed to her to include the whole
Controversy. She appeared to me not likely to come to a Resolution without this
Conference, so that I judged it absolutely necessary.

I told her, she had indeed great Reason to lay her principal and whole Stress
on this Article, which in effect comprehe^^ded the Decision of all the rest, as
she herself had well observed; and endeavored to make her yet fuller
understand the Importance of this Article.

It Is a thing, said I to her, ordinary enough with your Ministers to brag, That
they cannot be denied to believe the Fundamentals of the Faith. They say, that
we believe all they believe; but that they believe not all we believe. Their
Meaning by this is, That they have kept all the Fundamentals of the Faith, and
rejected only what we have added to them. They draw thence a great Advantage,
and pretend that their Doctrine is secure and indisputable. Mademoiselle de
Duras remembered very well, she had often heard them use such Discourses. I will
make, proceeded I, but one Remark upon this; which is, that, instead of
granting them to believe all the Fundamentals of the Faith, we show, that there
is one Article of the Creed, they believe not, which is that of the Universal
Church. It Is true, they say with the Mouth, I believe the Catholic or Universal
Church, as the Arians, Macedonians, and Socinians say with the Mouth, I believe
in JESUS CHRIST, and in the Holy Ghost. But as there is reason to accuse them
of not believing these Articles, because they believe them not, as they ought,
nor according to their true Sense: so if we show the Pretended Reformed, that
they believe not, as they ought, the Article of the Catholic Church, we may
truly say, that in effect they reject so important ^an Article of the Creed.

Mademoiselle de Duras had read my Treatise of the Exposition, and told me, she
remembered, that she had seen something in it, like to what I now said: but I
answered, my Intention in that Treatise was to mention things very briefly, and
that 'twas fit she should now see them a little more at large.

You must know then, said I to her, what is meant by this Expression, The
Catholic or Universal Church; and upon this I began to lay for my Ground, that
in the Creed, which was only a bare Declaration of the Faith, this Term must be
taken in its most proper, and most natural Signification, and such, as is most
used amongst Christians. Now all Christians by the Name of the Church
understand a Society, making Profession to believe the Doctrine of JESUS
CHRIST, and govern it self by his Word. If this Society makes this Profession,
it is consequently visible.

That this was the proper, and genuine Signification of the Word Church, such
as was known by every one, and used in common Discourse, I desired no other
Witnesses, than the Pretended Reformed themselves.

When they speak of their Ecclesiastical Prayers, of the Churches Discipline,
of the Churches Faith, of the Pastors and Doctors of the Church, they mean not
the Prayers of the Predestinate, nor their Discipline, nor their Faith; but the
Prayers, Faith, and Discipline of all the Faithful, assembled in the exterior
Society of GODs People.

When they say, That a Man edifies the Church, or that he scandalizes the
Church; that they receive one into the Church, or exclude one out of the
Church, all this is undoubtedly understood of the exterior Society of GODs
People.

Thus they explain it in the form of Baptism, when they say, that they are
going to receive the Child into the Fellowship of the Christian Church; and
when for this cause they oblige the Godfathers and Godmothers to instruct the
little one in the Doctrine received by GOD's People, as it is, say they,
summarily comprised in the Confession of Faith, which we all have: And again,
when they ask of GOD in their Ecclesiastical Prayers, to deliver all his
Churches from the Throat of the ravening Wolves: And yet more expressly in the
Confession of Faith, Article XXV. when they say, That the Order of the Church,
which was established by JESUS CHRIST, must be sacred; and therefore that the
Church cannot subsist, if there be not in it Pastors, who may have the charge
to Teach: And in Article XXVI. That none ought to dr^^ aside, but that all
together ought to keep and maintain the Unity of the Church, submitting to the
common Instruction: And in fine, in Article XXVII. That we must carefully
discern, which is the true Church; and that it is the Company of the Faithful,
which agree to follow GODs Word, and the pure Religion, that depends on it.
Whence they conclude Article XXVIII. That where GODs Word is not received, nor
any Profession made of subjecting themselves to it, and where there is no use
of the Sacraments, one cannot, to speak properly, judge, that there is a Church.

It Is evident by all these Passages, and by the common Practice of the
Pretended Reformed, that the proper, natural, and generally used Signification
of the Word Church, is to take it for the exterior Society of GODs People,
amongst whom tho there be found some Hypocrites and Reprobates; their Malice,
say they, cannot efface the Title of the Church, Article XXVII. That is, The
Hypocrites, mixed in the Exterior Society of GODs People, cannot take from it
the Title of the true Church, provided it be always vested with these exterior
Marks, the making Profession of GODs Word, and the Use of the Sacraments, as is
said in Article XXVIII.

This is the Acceptance of the Word Church, when we speak simply, naturally,
and properly, without Contention or Dispute; and if this be the ordinary manner
of taking this Word, we have reason to say, that 'twas in this Sense, the
Apostles made use of it in their Creed, where they were to speak in the most
ordinary and simple manner, as being to enclose in few Words the Confession of
the Fundamentals of the Faith.

In effect, this Word Church has in the common Discourse of all Christians been
taken to signify this exterior Society of GODs People. When by this Word Church
is intended the Society of the Predestinate, it is so expressed, and they say
the Church of the Predestinate. When by this Word is meant the Assembly and
Church of the Firstborn, Heb. xii. v. 23.
which are written in Heaven, it is expressly named, as we see in St. Paul. He
takes here the Word Church in a less used Signification, for the City of the
Living GOD, the Heavenly Jerusalem, where is an innumerable company of Angels,
and Spirits of just Men made perfect; that is, for Heaven, where the holy Souls
are gathered together. Wherefore he adds a word to mark out this Church; that
is, the Church of the Firstborn, who have preceded their Brethren in Glory.
But when we use the word Church simply without adding any thing, the common
Practice of all Christians, not excepting the pretended Reformed themselves,
takes it for to signify the Assembly, the Society, the Communion of those, that
confess the true Doctrine of JESUS CHRIST. And whence proceeds this Custom of
all Christians, but from the Holy Scripture? where we see in effect the word
Church commonly taken in this Sense; so that this cannot be denied to be the
ordinary and natural Signification of this Word.

The word Ecclesia (which we render Church) originally signifies an Assembly,
and was principally attributed to the Assemblies, heretofore held by the People
for the discussing of public Affairs. And this word is used in this Sense in
the nineteenth Chapter of the Acts, when the People of Ephesus were assembled
in Fury against St. Paul: Act. XIX. v. 32. v. 39. v. 40.
the Assembly (Ecclesia) was confused. And again: If ye enquire any thing
concerning other Matters, it shall be determined in a lawful Assembly
(Ecclesia.) And in fine. When he had thus spoken, he dismissed the Assembly
(Ecclesiam.)

This was the use of the word Ecclesia ( Church) amongst the Greeks, and in
Gentilism. The Jews and Christians afterward made use of it to signify the
Assembly, the Society, the Community of GODs People, which makes Profession to
serve him. There is none, but knows that famous Version of the Seventy, who
translated the old Testament into Greek some Ages before the coming of JESUS
CHRIST. Of above fifty Passages, where this Word is found to be made use of in
their Translation, there is not any one, in which it is not taken for some
visible Assembly, and very few, in which it is not taken for the exterior
Society of GODs People. In this sense also St. Stephen makes use of it, when he
says, that Moses was in the Church in the Wilderness, Acts VII. v. 38.
with the Angel which spoke to him, calling by this name Church, according to
the Usage received amongst the Jews, the visible Society of GODs People.

The Christians took this word from the Jews, and kept it in the same Sense,
using it to signify the Assembly of those, that confessed JESUS CHRIST, and
made Profession of his Doctrine.

This is, what is simply called the Church, or the Church of GOD and JESUS
CHRIST: And of above an hundred Passages, where this word is made use of in the
New Testament, there are scarce two or three, where this Signification is
contested by the Ministers; and even in the Places, where they contest it, it is
manifest, they do it without reason.

For Example, they will not have this place of St. Paul, where he says, Ephesians. V.
v. 27.
that JESUS CHRIST presented to himself a glorious Church, not having Spot, or
Wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it is holy, and without Blemish: This
Place, I say, they will not have it possible to be understood of the visible
Church, nor yet of the Church on Earth, because the Church, so considered, is
so far from being without Blemish, that it stands in daily need of this Prayer,
Forgive us our Sins. And I say on the contrary, that to affirm, this glorious
and unspotted Church is not the visible Church, is manifestly to contradict the
Apostle. For see, v. 25, 26.
of what Church St. Paul speaks: It Is of that, which JESUS CHRIST loved, and
gave himself for it: that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of
Water, by the Word. This Church, washed in Water, and purified by Baptism; this
Church, sanctified by the word of Life, whether by that of Preaching, or by
that, which is made use of in the Sacraments, this Church is without doubt the
visible Church. The holy Society of the Predestinate is not excluded from it,
GOD forbid: They are the most noble part of it; but they are comprised in this
whole. They are there instructed by the Word, they are there purified by
Baptism; and often also some of the Reprobate are employed in these
Ministeries. They must then be considered in this Passage, not as making a Body
apart; but as making the fairest and most noble part of this exterior Society.
It Is this Society, which the Apostle calls the Church. JESUS CHRIST without
doubt loves it: for he has given it Baptism; he has shed his Blood to assemble
it; there is not any one either called, justified, or baptized in this Church,
who is not called, justified, and baptized in the Name, and by the Merits of
JESUS CHRIST. This Church is glorious, because she glorifies GOD, because she
declares to all the Earth the Glory of JESUS Christ's Gospel and Cross. This
Church is Holy, because she always, constantly, and without varying, teaches
the holy Doctrine, which continually brings forth Saints in her Unity. This
Church has neither Spot nor Wrinkle, because she has neither any Error, nor any
evil Maxim; and moreover because she instructs and contains in her Bosom the
Elect of GOD, who, tho Sinners on Earth, find in her Communion exterior Means
to purify themselves, so that they shall one day come in a most perfect Estate
before JESUS CHRIST.

This perhaps is the only Place, in which it may with some show of Probability
be said, That the word Church, taken simply, signifies something else than the
exterior Society of GODs People; and yet you see, how clear it is, that it
ought to be understood as all the others.

But should this Passage, and two or three more, have a Signification either
Doubtful, or even different from this, yet are all the other conformable to it.
For what is there more frequent, than such Expressions as these, That the
Church must be edified, that the Church has been persecuted, that GOD is
praised in the midst of the Church, that she is saluted, that she is visited,
that there are Pastors and Bishops established to govern her, and other like,
the number of which is infinite?

It cannot then be denied, that this is the ordinary Signification of the word
Church, and consequently that, which is to be followed in so plain a Confession
of Faith, as is the Apostles Creed.

In this Sense was it taken by a whole great Council, Conc. Ni^. post Symb.
the first and holiest of all the Universal Councils, when condemning Arius, it
pronounced in this manner: The holy Catholic and Apostolic Church anathematizes
all those, who say, That the Son of GOD was drawn out of nothing.

It Is JESUS CHRIST himself, who taught us to believe the Church in this Sense.
For to found this Church, he came forth from the invisible Bosom of his Father,
and rendered himself visible to Men; he assembled about him a Society of Men,
that acknowledged him for their Master: This is, what he called his Church. To
this Primitive Church the Faithful, who afterward believed, congregated
themselves, and thence sprung the Church, which the Creed terms Catholic or
Universal.

JESUS CHRIST used the word Church to signify this visible Society, when he
said himself, that we must hear the Church. Mat. xviii. v. 17.
Tell it unto the Church: And again when he said: Thou art Peter, Mat. xvi. v.
18.
and upon this Rock I will build my Church: and the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it.

Why, said I, Madam, why will not they of your Religion understand here by the
word Church, the Society of those that make Profession to believe in JESUS
CHRIST and the Gospel, since it is certain, that this Society is in effect the
true Church, against which Hell could never prevail, neither when it made use
of Tyrants to persecute her, nor when it set false Doctors on work to corrupt
her?

Hell shall not prevail against the Predestinate; it is certain: For if it
cannot prevail against this exterior Society, with much greater Reason shall it
not prevail against the Elect of GOD, who are the purest and most spiritual
part of this Church. But by the same Reason, that it cannot prevail against the
Elect, it cannot prevail against the Church, which teaches them, in which they
confess the Gospel, and receive the Sacraments.

It Is this exterior Society, in which the Elect serve GOD, that we ought to
understand by the word Church, and at the same time admire the invincible Force
of JESUS CHRIST's Promises, who has so supported the Society of his People, tho
weak in comparison of the Infidels, which environed it without; tho torn by
Heretics, who divided it within, that there has not been so much as one sole
Moment, in which this Church has not been seen by the whole Earth.

But the Pretended Reformed have not dared to retain this natural Sense of the
Gospel. For, that they might establish themselves, they have been forced to say
in their Confession of Faith, Article XXXI. That the State of the Church was
interrupted, and that they were fain to raise it up again anew, because it was
in Ruin and Desolation.

In effect, when their Church was set up, it entered not into Communion with any
other Church, then extant on the Earth; but was formed by breaking with all the
Christian Churches, which were in the World.

They have not then the Consolation, which the Catholics have to see JESUS
CHRIST's Promise visibly accomplished, and maintained, during so many Ages. They
cannot show a Church, which has ever been, since JESUS CHRIST came to build it
on the Rock; and to save his Word, they are obliged to have recourse to a
Church of the Predestinate, which neither themselves, nor any else can show.

But JESUS CHRIST would show something illustrious and clear, when he said,
that his Church, maugre the Opposition of Hell, should be always invincible: he
would, I say, show something clear and resplendent, which might serve in all
Ages for a sensible and palpable Assurance of the immutable Certainty of his
Promises.

And in effect, let us consider, when he spoke this Word: Thou art Peter, Mat.
xvi. v. 18.
and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it. 'Twas, when having asked his Apostles, Whom say ye, that I
am? Peter in the Name of them all answered him, Thou art CHRIST the Son of the
living GOD.

Upon this illustrious Confession of Faith, which Flesh and Blood had not
dictated, but the Heavenly Father had revealed to Peter; upon this illustrious
Confession of Faith, I say, is founded both St. Peter's Dignity, and the
Churches immovable Firmness. This Church, which confesses JESUS CHRIST to be
the true Son of GOD, is that, against which Hell shall never prevail, and which
shall subsist without Interruption, maugre all the Efforts and Artifices of the
Devil.

It appears then clearly, that the Church, of which JESUS CHRIST speaks in this
place, is a confessing Church, a Church, that publishes the Faith, and
consequently an exterior and visible Church. See also what he adds: And I will
give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: Ibid. v. 19.
And whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven: And
whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.

Whatever is to be understood by these Words, whether Preaching, Ecclesiastical
Censures, or the Ministry of Priests in the Sacrament of Penance, as Catholics
understand them, it is still certain, That here is an exterior Ministry given
to this Church: It Is then this Church, which confesses the Faith, and confesses
it principally by the Mouth of St. Peter: It Is this Church, that uses the
Ministry of the Keys: It Is she, that shall always be on the Earth, without
Hells ever being able to prevail against her.

And because JESUS CHRIST would have her always visibly subsist, he has
clothed her with sensible Marks, which are always to continue. For see, how he
sends his Apostles, and what he says to 'em at his ascending into Heaven: Go ye
therefore and teach all Nations, Matt. xxviii. v. 19, 20.
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: And
lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the World: Teaching with you,
baptizing with you, instructing with you my Faithful to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded, consequently exercising with you in my Church an
exterior Ministry: It Is with you; It Is with those, who shall succeed you; It Is
with the Society, assembled under their Conduct, that I shall be from this
present even to the Consummation of the World; always; without Interruption: For
there shall not be any one Moment, in which I will leave you, but tho absent in
Body, I will be always present by my Holy Spirit.

In Consequence of this Word, St. Paul also tells us, that the Ecclesiastical
Ministry shall last without any Discontinuance, till the general Resurrection.
He that descended, is the same also that ascended up far above all Heavens,
Ephesians. iv. v. 10, 11, 12, 13.
that he might fill all things. And he gave some, Apostles: and some, Prophets:
and some, Evangelists: and some, Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body of
CHRIST: Till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the
Son of GOD, unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the Stature of the fullness
of CHRIST; That is to say, till we have attained the Perfection of JESUS
CHRIST, glorified in Body and Soul: This is the Term, which GOD has set to the
Ecclesiastical Ministry.

The Pretended Reformed will not have the visible Church to be that, which is
called JESUS Christ's Body: Which is then that Body, where GOD has established
some Apostles: some Prophets: and some Pastors and Teachers? Which is that
Body, where GOD has placed several Members, and different Graces, Romans xii. v.
4, etc.
The Grace of Ministry, the Grace of Teaching, the Grace of Exhortation and
Consolation, the Grace of Ruling? Which, I say, is that Body, if it be not the
visible Church?

But that, which makes the Pretended Reformed unwilling to acknowledge, that
the Body of JESUS CHRIST, so much recommended in the Scripture, can be the
visible Church, is their being constrained to say, that the visible Church
sometimes ceases to be upon the Earth; and they have an Horror to say, that
JESUS Christ's Body is not always, for fear of putting JESUS CHRIST once again
to death.

It Is then without Difficulty this Assembly of Pastors and People; it is this
Church composed of so many diverse Members, by whom so many Holy Ministeries are
exteriorly exercised; it is this that is called JESUS Christ's Body; 'twas to
this Body, assembled under the Ministry of Pastors, that he said at his
ascending into Heaven; Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the World.
He then, that descended, is the same that ascended, to the end he might fill
all things, Heaven by his Person and his visible Presence, Earth by his Spirit
and his invisible Assistance, both the one and the other by his Truth and his
Word. And, 'twas for to continue (at his ascent into Heaven) this Assistance,
promised to his Church, that he placed some Apostles, some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers: A thing, which must last till such time, as the Work
of GOD is entirely accomplished, till we are all perfect Men, and till the
whole Body of the Church be arrived at the Fullness and Perfection of JESUS
CHRIST.

Thus JESUS Christ's Work is eternal on the Earth. The Church, founded on the
Confession of the Faith, shall always be, and always confess the Faith: Her
Ministry shall be eternal: She shall bind and loose even to the end of the
World, Hell never being able to hinder her: she shall never discontinue the
Teaching of Nations: The Sacraments, that is, the exterior Liveries, with which
she is clad, shall last for ever. Teach and baptize the Nations, 1. Cor. xi. v.
26.
and I shall be always with you. As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this
Cup, ye do show the Lords Death till he come. With the Supper shall last the
Confession of the Faith, the Ecclesiastical Ministry, and the exterior and
interior Communion of the Faithful with JESUS CHRIST, and of the Faithful
amongst themselves, till such time as JESUS CHRIST comes. The duration of the
Church, and of the Ecclesiastical Ministry has no other Limits.

It Is not then only the Society of the Predestinate, that shall subsist for
ever; it is the visible Body, in which the Predestinate are included, which
preaches to them, which teaches them, which regenerates them by Baptism, which
nourishes them by the Eucharist, which administers to them the Keys, which
governs them and keeps them united under Discipline, which forms JESUS CHRIST
in them: It Is this visible Body, that shall subsist for ever.

And it is for this reason, that in the Apostles Creed, where the Grounds of the
Faith are proposed to our Belief, we are at the same time taught to believe in
the Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost, and to believe the Holy
Catholic Church, and the Communion of Saints: The interior Communion by
Charity, and in the Holy Ghost, who animates us, I acknowledge it; but at the
same time also the exterior Communion in the Sacraments, in the Confession of
Faith, and in all the exterior Ministry of the Church.

And all, that we have now said, is included in this Word, I believe the
Universal Church. We believe her at all times; she is then always: We believe
her at all times; she always then teaches the Truth.

Your Ministers will have us believe, that it is one thing to believe the
Church, that is, to believe, that she is; and another thing to believe or give
credit to the Church, that is, to believe all her Decisions. But this is a
frivolous Distinction. He, who believes, that the Church always is, believes,
that she is always confessing and teaching the Truth. It Is to this Church,
which confesses the Truth, that JESUS CHRIST has promised, Hell shall not
prevail against her. The Truth then shall never fail to be confessed in her;
and consequently in believing, that she is, we are assured, that she is always
credible.

In effect, the retaining some Points of JESUS CHRIST's Doctrine is not
sufficient to preserve the Name of Church: For then the Arians, the Pelagians,
the Donatists, the Anabaptists, and the Socinians would be of the Church. They
are not however: GOD forbid, that we should call this Confusion by the Name of
Church! The Church must not then only keep some Truth: She must keep and teach
all Truth; else she is not the Church.

Nor is it to any purpose to distinguish the fundamental Articles from the
others. For all, that GOD has revealed, must be retained. He has revealed
nothing to us, that is not very important for our Salvation. Isai. xlviii. v.
17.
I am the Lord, which teaches thee profitable things. In the Faith then, which
the Church teaches, must be found the fullness of the Truths, revealed by GOD:
Otherwise she is no longer the Church, that JESUS CHRIST founded.

That particular Persons may be ignorant of some Articles, I easily confess;
but the Church conceals nothing of what JESUS CHRIST has revealed: And
therefore the Faithful, who are ignorant of certain Articles in particular,
confess them nevertheless all in general, when they say: I believe the
Universal Church.

This, said I, is the Church, which your Ministers know not. They teach you,
that this visible and exterior Church may cease to be upon the Earth; they
teach you, that she may err in her Decisions; they teach you, that to believe
this Church, is to believe Men: But it is not in this manner, that the Church is
proposed to us in the Creed. It Is there proposed to us to believe her, as we
believe in the Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost; and therefore the
Faith of the Church is joined with the Faith of the three Divine Persons.

These things having been said at several times, but almost in this Order, I
added, that our Doctrine on this Point was so true, that the Pretended Reformed,
who denied it, could not wholly reject it: That is, their Synods acted in such
a manner, as showed, that they required (as well as we) an absolute Submission
to the Authority and Decrees of the Church.

Here I let Mademoiselle de Duras see the four Acts of the Gentlemen of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, which I have taken notice of in the Exposition,
Article XX. She had read them there; but I caused her to read them in the very
Book of the Discipline.

The first is taken out of the Vth. Chapter, Title of Consistories, Article
XXXI. Where it is said, That Disputes about Doctrine should be determined by
GODs Word, if it might be in the Consistory; if not, the matter should be
brought before the Colloquy, thence to the Provincial Synod, and in fine to the
National, where the full and final Resolution should be made by GODs Word, to
which if any one refused to submit with an express disclaiming of his Errors,
he should be cut off from the Church.

It Is not then, said I, to GODs Word alone precisely, as such, that the full
and final Resolution belongs, since after it is proposed, an Appeal is
permitted; but to GODs Word, in as much as explicated and interpreted by the
Churches last Judgment.

The second Act is taken out of the Synod of Vitre, related in the Book of the
Discipline. It contains the Letter of Mission, which all the Churches make,
when they send Deputies to the National Synod: See the Terms of it. We promise
before GOD to submit our selves, to whatsoever shall be resolved in your Holy
Assembly, being persuaded, that GOD will preside in it, and guide you by his
Holy Spirit in all Truth and Equity, through the Rule of his Word. This
Persuasion, said I, if it be grounded only on an human Presumption, cannot be
the matter of so solemn an Oath, by which they swear to submit to a Resolution,
they do not yet know: It cannot then be founded but upon an express Promise,
That the Holy Ghost will preside in the last Judgment of the Church; and
Catholics say no more.

The third Act, which is found also in the same Book of the Discipline, is the
Condemnation of the Independents on their saying, That every Church ought to
govern it self without dependence on any one in Ecclesiastical Matters. This
Proposition was in the Synod of Charenton declared as prejudicial to the State,
as to the Church. 'Twas there judged, That it opened the Door to all sorts of
Irregularities and Extravagances, took away all Remedies, and made way for the
forming as many Religions, as Parishes. But, said I, whatever Synods are held,
if we do not believe our selves obliged to submit our Judgments to them, we
cannot avoid the Inconveniences of the Independents, and the leaving a Door
open for the setting up as many Religions, I do not say as there are Parishes,
but as there are Heads. We must then come to this Obligation of submitting our
Judgment to what the Catholic Church teaches.

These three Acts are taken out of the Book of the Discipline, printed at
Charenton in the year 1667.

The fourth is found in a Book of Mr. Blondes's, Entitled Acts Autentiques,
printed at Amsterdam by Blaeu in the year 1655.

It Is a Resolution of the National Synod of Saint Foy 1578. which names four
Ministers to meet at an Assembly, where was to be treated a Reunion with the
Lutherans, by framing a Formulary of Profession of the common Faith. Power was
given to these Ministers to decide all Points of Doctrine and others, that
should be brought into Deliberation, and to consent to this Confession of
Faith, even without communicating any farther about it with the Churches, if
the Time permitted not to do it. From this Act I concluded two things: One,
That the whole Synod trusted their Faith in the Hands of four private Persons,
a thing far more extraordinary, than to see particulars submit to the whole
Church: The other, That the Pretended Reformed Church is yet but little assured
of her Confession of Faith, since she consents to the changing it, and that in
Points so important, as are those, that make the Dispute with the Lutherans,
one of which is the Reality. If the Pretended Reformed hoped, that the
Lutherans would return to them, there was no need of a new Confession of Faith.
What was then intended, was, That both the one and the other continuing in
their Sentiments, there should be framed a Confession of Faith, in which both
Parties might agree; which could not be done without adding or suppressing
something essential in a Confession of Faith, which they give us, as teaching
only the pure Word of GOD.

Mademoiselle de Duras acknowledged to me, that having seen in my Treatise
these Acts and my Reflections, which are the same with these I now made, she
knew not what to answer to 'em; and that therefore she desired to hear what
Answer Mr. Claude would make, as well upon these Acts, as upon the other
Difficulties, that regarded the Authority of the Church.

I told her, That tho those of her Religion acted, as holding the Churches
Authority infallible and indisputable; yet 'twas true, That they denied this
Infallibility: and I added, That 'twas a constant Maxim in her Religion, That
every private Person, how ignorant soever, was obliged to believe, That he
could understand the Holy Scripture better than all the Councils, and all the
rest of the Church together. She seemed astonished at this Proposition. But I
added, That there was yet believed in her Religion something far more strange;
which was, That there is a Point of Time, when a Christian is obliged to doubt,
whether the Scripture was inspired by GOD; whether the Gospel is a Truth or a
Fable; whether JESUS CHRIST was a Deceiver, or a Teacher of the Truth. When she
appeared yet more amazed at this Proposition, I assured her, that both this and
the other, I just before mentioned, were necessary Consequences of the Doctrine,
received in their Religion, concerning the Churches Authority; and that I
doubted not, but I could force Mr. Claude to own 'em.

I declared to her the Reasons of my Assertion, and showed her at the same time
what a Mark of Falsity 'twas amongst them, to see, how on one side they denied,
that we must believe without examining, what the Church decided; and that on
the other they were fain, for the establishing of Order, to attribute to the
Church the Authority, they had denied her.

She let me know, that she understood this Discourse; and that she remembered,
she had read it in my Book; but that, tho she saw not any way to answer it, she
could scarce believe, but that 'twas answered in her Religion.

The Countess de Roye came to tell her, that Mr. Claude, who had promised to
meet me the next day, could not do it, having received a Prohibition.
Mademoiselle de Duras testified a very great Discontent at this Proceeding. I
would have retired and left her with her Sister; but she requested me to repeat
what I had just before represented to her. I did it in a few words, and
answered some Objections, that were made me.

The next Morning Mademoiselle de Duras came to my House with a worthy Person
of her Religion, whom I knew, named Mr. Coton. She had made use of him to
engage Mr. Claude to the Conference, and he brought her word, that Mr. Claude
had accepted it. She desired me to repeat, what I had said the day before. I
did so, and Mr. Coton confessed, he knew not what to answer, and that he had a
great Passion to hear Mr. Claude upon this Point. He and Mademoiselle de Duras
made me some Objections concerning the frequent Revolts of the People of
Israel, who had so often forsaken GOD, the Kings and all the People, as the
Holy Scripture speaks; during which, the public Worship was so extinct, that
Elijah thought himself the only Servant of GOD, till he learnt from GOD
himself, that he had reserved to himself seven thousand men, 1 Kin. xix. v. 18.
which had not bowed the Knee unto Baal.

To this I answered, That for what regarded Elijah, there was no difficulty,
since 'twas apparent from the very words, that it concerned only Israel, where
Elijah prophesied, and that the Divine Worship was so far from being at that
time extinct in Juda, that 'twas there under the Reign of Josaphat in the
greatest luster, it had been since Solomon's time. The thing passed for
manifest, and I observed only, how little Sincerity there was in the Ministers
to produce still this passage, after the Cardinal du Perron had given it so
decisive an Answer.

As to what happened in Juda it self, I would yet make the Objection stronger
than they had proposed it, by considering the State of GODs People under Ahaz,
2 Kin. xvi. 2 Chronicles. xxviij.
who shut up the Temple, caused Vrijah the Priest of the Lord to sacrifice to
Idols, and filled all JERUSALEM with Abominations; and afterward under
Manasseh, 2 Kin. xxi. 2 Chronicles. xxxiij.
whose Impieties transcended those of Ahaz. But to show, that all this made
nothing to the question, I desired 'em only to observe, that Isaiah, who lived
during all the Reign of Ahaz, for all these Abominations of the King, of the
Priest Vrijah, and almost all the People, never separated from the Communion of
Juda, no more than did the rest of the Prophets, who lived at the same time,
and in all the other: which shows, that there is always a People of GOD, from
whose Communion it is never lawful to separate.

It Is written also, 2 Kin. xxi. v. 10.
that in the time of Manasseh, GOD spoke by the Mouth of all his Prophets, and
threatened this impious and all the People. But these Prophets, who reprehended
and detested the Impieties of this People, separated not from the Communion.

And to see into the bottom of the Matter, we must, said I, consider the
Constitution of the ancient People. It had this peculiar to it self, that it
was multiplied by carnal Generation, by which as well the Succession of the
People, as of the Priesthood was kept up; that this People bore in their Flesh
the Mark of the Covenant, to wit, Circumcision, which we do not read to have
been ever discontinu'd; and so, tho the Priests, and almost all the People
should have prevaricated, the State of GODs People subsisted always in its
exterior form, whether they would or no. Nor could there fall out any
interruption in the Priesthood, which GOD had tied to Aaron's Family. But it is
not so with the new People, whose exterior Form consists in nothing, but the
Profession of JESUS Christ's Doctrine: so that if the Confession of the true
Faith should be extinct for one only Moment, the Church, which has no
Succession but by the continuance of this Profession, would be wholly extinct
without any possibility of ever rising again either in its People, or Pastors,
but by a new Mission.

I added besides, that I would not say, the true Faith and true Worship of GOD
could be wholly abolisht in the People of Israel, so that GOD had no more any
true Servants on Earth. But I find on the contrary, first that it is clear,
that, maugre the Corruption, GOD still reserved to himself a sufficient Number
of Servants, who participated not in the Idolatry. For if it were so in Israel,
which was schismatical and separated from GODs People, as GOD himself declared
to Elijah, it must with far greater reason have been so in Judah, which GOD had
reserved to himself for the perpetuating his People and Kingdom till the Time
of the Messiah. When therefore it is written, that the King and all the People
had forsaken GOD^ Law, it must not be understood of all the People without
exception, but of a great Part, and perhaps of the greatest Part, which the*
Ministers did not deny. Secondly, It Is not to be imagined, that GODs Servants
and the true Faith were preserved only in secret; but that in all the
succession of the ancient People, the true Doctrine always shone forth. For
there was a continual Succession of Prophets, who instead of adhering to the
Peoples Errors, or dissembling them, ro^^ up against them with force; and this
Succession was so constant, that the Holy Ghost fears not to say, 2 Chronicles.
xxxvi. v. 15.
That GOD rose up night and morning, and daily admonisht the People by the
Mouth of his Prophets: Jer. xi. v. 7. xxv. v. 3, 4.
the forciblest expression, that can be imagined, to show, that the true Faith
was never so much as one moment without Publication, nor the People without
advertisement. And that 'twas so, we just now saw, how in all the Reign of
Ahaz, Isaiah ceased not to prophesy: and under Manasseh, when the Abomination
seemed to be mounted to the highest, since neither the Penitence of that King,
nor the Holiness of his Grandchild Josiah could revoke the Sentence given
against this People, GOD always remembering the Abominations of Manasseh: in
this time, I say, we have seen, that GOD made his Prophets speak; and that a
great part of the People publicly followed them, appears, in that this impious
Prince filled Jerusalem with innocent Blood, 2 Kin. xxi. v. 16.
a certain sign, that he found a great resistance to his Idolatries. It Is also
held, that he caused Isaiah to be put to Death, as his Predecessors had done
the other Prophets, who reprehended them; and this History is conserved in the
ancient Tradition, conformable to the Word of our Lord, who upbraids the Jows
with having killed the Prophets, and to the Discourse of St. Stephen, who says,
Mat. xxiii. v. 31, 37. Act. vii. v. 52.
That there was not any Prophet but they persecuted.

These Prophets made a part of GODs People; these Prophets kept a considerable
part both of the Priests and People in their Duty; these Prophets, who
confirmed their Mission by visible Miracles, hindered the Corruption from
gaining all; and whilst a terrible Multitude, and perhaps the Gross of the
Synagogue was drawn unto Idolatry, they kept the Tradition of the Truth in the
People of Israel.

Ezekiel, who appeared a little after, shows it, when he speaks of the Priests
the Levites, Ezekiel. xliv. v. 15.
the Sons of Zadok, that kept the charge of the Sanctuary, when the Children of
Israel went astra^. They, proceeds he, shall come near to me to minister unto
me, and they shall stand before me to offer unto me the (...) and the Blood,
says the Lord GOD. This Succession, not only that of the Flesh, but also that
of the Faith and the Ministry, was conserved in those Priests and these
Levites, whom GODs Grace and the Prophet's Preaching had retained in the
Service.

And it is to be observed, That GOD never made this Ministry of the Prophets
more illustrious, than when Impiety seemed to have gained the upper hand; so
that in the time when the ordinary means of instructing the People was not
destroyed, but obscured, GOD prepared the extraordinary and miraculous Means.

To this may be added, That this extraordinary Means, to wit, the Prophetical
Ministry, was before the Captivity in a manner ordinary with GODs People,
where the Prophets made as 'twere an Order always subsisting, whence GOD
continually drew Divine Men, by whose Mouth he spoke loudly and publicly to
all his People.

From the Return of the Captivity to JESUS CHRIST, there was no more any
public and lasting Idolatry. We know what happened under Antiochus the
Illustrious; but we know also the Zeal of Mattathias, and the great number of
true Believers, that joined to his House, with the famous Victories of Judas
Maccabeus and his Brethren; under them and their Successors the Profession of
the true Faith continued to JESUS CHRIST. At last the Pharisees introduced into
the Religion and Worship many Superstitions. As the Corruption was about to
prevail, JESUS CHRIST appeared in the World.

'Till his coming the Religion was preserved, the Doctors of the Law had many
pernicious Maxims and Practices, which crept in and got ground by little and
little: they became common, but they were not passed into Doctrines of the
Synagogue. Wherefore JESUS CHRIST also said: Mat. xxiii. v. 2, 3.
The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses Seat, All therefore whatsoever they
bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their Works. He
ceased not to honor the Ministry of the Priests: He sent the Lepers to 'em
according to the Prescript of the Law: He frequented the Temple, and
reprehending the Abuses, continud always joined to the Communion of GODs
People, and the Order of the Public Ministry.

In fine, the time of the Fall and Reprobation of the ancient People, foretold
by the Scriptures and Prophets, came, when the Synagogue condemned JESUS CHRIST
and his Doctrine. But then JESUS CHRIST had appeared, he had begun in the Bosom
of the Synagogue to assemble his Church, which was to subsist for ever.

It Is then manifest, first, That there was always a visible Body of GODs
People, continued by an uninterrupted Succession, from the Communion of whom
'twas never lawful to separate. Secondly, Always a Succession of High Priests
and Priests descended from Aaron, and Levites issued from Levi; so that there
was never any need of GODs raising up People in an extraordinary manner.
Thirdly, It Is no less evident, That the true Faith has always been publicly
declared, and that there cannot be any one moment assigned, in which the
Profession of it has not been as clear as the Light of the Sun: a thing, which
shows, how much they are deceived, who believe, that, for to keep up the
exterior State of the Church, it is sufficient, that one can name from time to
time pretended Teachers of the Truth. For if there be any Time, that the
Profession of Faith has ceased in the Church, her Condition is so much worse
than that of the Synagogue, as she loses from that moment the Succession, as I
erewhile said.

After I had spoken these things, there was some time employed in passing them
over again: and in the mean time the Countess de Roye came to tell us, That Mr.
Claude consented to the Conference, which, if I liked it, should be at her
House about Three a Clock.

I Was at the Rendez-vous, II. The Conference.
where I met Mr. Claude. We began by mutual Civilities, and he on his part
testified a great Respect. After this, I entered into the Matter, by demanding
the Explication of the four Acts, transcribed in my Book, and mentioned here
before.

After I had in few words explained the Difficulty, as it is proposed in the
Exposition, and repeated, what I had said to Mademoiselle de Duras, I added,
That Mr. Claude ought to be so much the more ready to answer it, in that what I
said, was not at all new to him, since in all appearance the Treatise of the
Exposition had fallen into his hands; and that 'twas a great satisfaction, in an
Entertainment of the Nature of this, to be assured, there would be no Surprise.

Mr. Claude took up the Discourse, and having reiterated all his former
Civilities in terms yet more obliging, he declared at first, that all I had
objected from their Discipline and Synods in my Treatise, and also at present,
was very sincerely related, without any alteration of the Words: But for the
Sense he desired Leave to tell me, That, tho there were, as I had observed,
diverse Degrees established in the Jurisdiction, the force of the Decision ought
wholly to be referred to GODs Word alone. As to what I objected, That GODs Word
had been proposed in the Consistory, from which one might appeal, whence it
followed, as I inferred, that the last Decision, from which there was no more
appealing, belonged to GODs Word, not taken in it self, but inasmuch as
declared by the Churches last Judgment: This was not their Intent; for they
held, That the Decision wholly appertained to GODs Word alone, which the Church
in her Assemblies both first and last did but show and point to: But that these
diverse Degrees had been established to give those, who erred, leisure to bethink
themselves. Wherefore they proceeded not at first by Excommunication, the
Consistory hoping, that a greater Assembly, such as the Colloquy might be, and
afterward the Provincial Synod, composed of a greater number of Persons,
perhaps more respected, or at least less suspected by the Gain-sayer, would
dispose him to hear the Truth. That the Colloquy and the Provincial Synod used
like Moderation through the same Reason of Charity; but after the National Synod
had spoken, as 'twas the last human Remedy, there was no longer any thing to be
hoped, and that they proceeded also to the last Sentence, by making use of
Excommunication, as the last Effort of the Ecclesiastical Power. That 'twas not
thence to be concluded, that the National Synod held it self any more
Infallible than the precedent Assemblies; but only, that, after all had been
tried, they came to the last Remedy.

That for the Promise made before the National Synod, 'twas founded only on the
Hopes they had, that the Assembly would follow GODs Word, and that the Holy
Ghost would preside in it, which signified not, that there was an entire
Certainty; and besides that the Word, being persuaded, was an honest manner of
expressing a Condition without weakening the Reverence of so great an Assembly,
or the favorable Presumption, that ought to be had for their Proceedings.

As to the Condemnation of the Independents, he prayed meto observe, that
touching the Authority of the Church and her Assemblies, there was something,
in which those of his Religion agreed with us, and something, in which they
agreed with the Independents: With us, That Ecclesiastical Assemblies are
necessary and useful, and that some Subordination must be established: With the
Independents, That these Assemblies, how numerous soever, are not therefore
Infallible. This being so, they were obliged to condemn the Independents, who
denied not only the Infallibility, but also the Utility and Necessity of these
Assemblies, and this Subordination. It Is in this, said he, that Independency
consists. He added, That to maintain it, was in effect to overthrow Order, and
make way for as many Religions, as there were Parishes, because all means of
Agreeing were taken away by it. Whence he concluded, That tho they agreed
Ecclesiastical Assemblies not to be Infallible Means, yet 'twas sufficient for
the maintaining of them, and condemning the Independents, that they were useful
ones.

For the Synod of Saint Foy, the Matter there agitated was either to render
the Lutherans more tractable by making them, said he, approach to us; or
however to establish a mutual Toleration; which obliged us not to suppress any
thing in, or add any thing to the Confession of Faith, which was always held
for unalterable. And that besides, tho full Power was given to four Ministers,
yet I well knew, that such Acts were always subject to Ratification, in case
the Proxies went beyond their Instructions: Witness the Ratifications necessary
in the Treaties, agreed by the Plenipotentiaries of Princes, and other like
Examples, in which there is always a Condition to obtain the Princes
Ratification, a Condition, which, without being expressed, is naturally fixed to
such Procurations.

After he had said these things in a Discourse of sufficient length, very
clear, and well composed, he added, That he Believed me so equitable, as to
acknowledge willingly, that, as in things, in which I should be to explain to
him our Sentiments and our Councels, 'twould be fit, he should acquiesce in
what I should tell him of them, so 'twas no less just, I should rest satisfied
with his Explication of the Articles of their Discipline, and Sentiments of
their Religion, it being certain, that there was no other amongst 'em, but what
he had now declared to me.

I replied to this Expression, that, what he said, would be true, if it
concerned only the Explication of their Rites, if this Word might be used, and
the manner of their Administering the Word or Sacraments, or holding of Synods;
that in this I should believe him, as better Instructed; but that here I
pretended, it had happened to them, as it does to all those, who are in Error;
that is, to fall into Contradiction, and be forced to set up, what they had
denied. That I knew, they denied any Obligation of submittingto the Churches
Judgment without examining it; but that at the same time I pretended this
Infallibility of the Church to be so necessary, that even those, who denied it
in Speculation, could not forbear establishing it in Practice, if they would
keep any Order amongst them. Besides that, if the Question were here about
showing any Contradiction in the Sentiments of the Catholic Church, I should
not pretend to oblige him to receive the Explication, I should give him of her
Sentiments and her Councels, but that it should then be free for him to draw
from their Words such Inference, as he pleased; and I thought, he would not
refuse me as much, to which he consented without Difficulty.

I had no Design to insist much on the Synod of Saint Foy, which would, I
thought, cast me too far from the two Propositions, the Acknowledgment of which
I aimed to draw from him. I only therefore answered, That I yielded to the
Reason, he alleged concerning the necessity of a Ratification, tho in matters
of Faith such Powers and Trusts were alittle Extraordinary; and besides, I was
willing to believe, that the Synod had no Design, the Deputies should overturn
all. But that, which touched me, and which he seemed not to have answered, was.
That the Synod had doubted of their Confession of Faith, since they permitted
the making of another; and I saw not, how this agreed, with what they farther
told us, That this Confession contained nothing but the pure Word of GOD, in
which every one knows, that there is nothing to be changed. As to what he said,
That their Aim was only to reduce the Lutherans to more equitable Sentiments,
or however to establish a mutual Toleration, two things gainsay'd it. 1. That
there was mention of a Power to decide all Points of Doctrine: Which manifestly
concerned the Reality, whence the Lutherans would never recede. 2. That to
settle a mutual Toleration there was no need of framing a Confession of common
Faith, but only of Establishing this Toleration by a Synodal Decree, as had
been done at Charenton.

Mr. Claude answered, that the Point of Doctrine to be decided was, Whether a
mutual Toleration might be established, and that the Confession of common Faith
would have done nothing else, but declared this Toleration: Which he denied not
but it might be done in a Synod, as I must grant, that it might also be done in
a Confession of Faith, where there should have been an express Article to that
purpose.

I answered him, That this could never be called a Confession of common Faith;
and asked him, Whether he thought the Lutherans, or they, should have retrenched
any thing of what the one said for the Reality, and the other against it. He
answered me, No. And then, said I, each party would have continued in the Terms
of their own Confession of Faith, having nothing common but the Article of
Toleration. There were, said he, many other Points, in which we agreed. It Is
granted, answered I; but 'twas not about these Points, the Accord was to be
made: the Question was about the Reality, and some others, on which there could
not be made a Confession of common Faith, except one of the Parties changed, or
both agreed upon ambiguous Expressions, which each might draw to their own
Opinions; a thing, that had been often attempted, as Mr. Claude himself could not
but own. He granted it, and related also the Assembly of Marbourg, and some
others, held for that purpose. I concluded then, That I had reason to believe,
the Synod of Saint Foy had a like Design, and that 'twould have been to mock
the World to call that a Confession of common Faith, which should have made
appear such manifest oppositions on so important Points of the Christian
Doctrine. To which I farther added, 'twas so much the more certain, That a
Confession of Faith was, as I said, really in agitation, in that the Lutherans
having already several times declared against a Toleration, there was nothing
to be expected from them, but by the Means, of which I spoke. The Matter rested
there; and I only said, That every one need but consider, what he ought to
think in his Conscience of a Confession of Faith, which a whole National Synod
had consented to change.

When Mr. Claude was saying, That the Oath of submitting to the National Synod
included a Condition, I had interrupted him by putting in a word. Yes, said I,
they hoped well of the Synod, yet without certainty; and expecting the Event,
they forbear not to swear, they would submit. Mr. Claude telling me here, That
I interrupted him, and praying me to let him say all, I held my peace. But
after the Affair of Saint Foy was discussed, I said to him, That I thought it
necessary, before we passed any farther, I should tell him in a few words, what
I had conceived of his Doctrine, to the end we might not speak in the air. I
said then to him; You say, Sir, That these Words, Being persuaded, that GOD
will preside in it, and guide you by his Holy Spirit in all Truth and Equity,
through the Rule of his Word, are only an honest manner of proposing a Condition.
He agreed it. Let us then, said I, reduce the Proposition into a conditional
one, and we shall see, what will be the sense of it. I swear to submit to all
you shall decide, on this Supposition, or Condition, That, what you shall
decide, be agreeable to GODs Word. Such an Oath is nothing else but a manifest
Illusion, as signifying nothing, and being but what I might make to Mr. Claude,
or he to me. But in this there would not be any thing serious; and it is to be
observed, that something more particular must be aimed at, since this Oath is
only made to the Synod, which gives the final determination; tho in Mr.
Claude's Sense there were as much Reason to make it to the Consistory, to which
they ought to submit, as well as to the Synod, supposing, it has the Word of
GOD for its Guide.

In this place I held my peace a little, and seeing, that there was not a word
said, I went on thus. But in fine then, Sir, if I well understand your Doctrine,
you believe, That a private person may doubt of the Churches Judgment, even
when she gives her final Determination. No, Sir, answered Mr. Claude, it is not
to be said, That one may doubt, there being all the Likelihood in the World,
that the Church will judge well. He, that says Likelihood, Sir, replied I
immediately, says a manifest Doubt. But, said Mr. Claude, There is more: for
JESUS CHRIST having promised, that those who would seek, should find; since
it is to be presumed, they will seek well, it is to be also believed, they will
judge well, and in this assurance there is something indubitable. But when
there shall be seen in Councels Cabals, Factions, different Interests, it may
with reason be doubted, Whether in such an Assembly there will not be mixed
something human and doubtful. Pray, Sir, said I, let us set aside what is good
for nothing but to throw dust in ones Eyes. All, you say of Cabals, Factions,
Interests, is absolutely to no purpose, and consequently serves only to
perplex. There is nothing, said Mr. Claude, more to the purpose. And I affirm,
answered I, That your self will grant, there is nothing less to the purpose. For
I ask you, Sir, Supposing there should appear in the Council neither Factions
nor Cabals; supposing also one were assured, that there were not any, and that
all passed in Order, must one receive the Decision without examining it? He was
fain to answer, No. Whence I immediately concluded: I had then reason to say,
That all, you alleged, as very considerable, concerning Factions and Cabals,
was in the bottom only an Amusement; and in fine, that a private person, a
Woman, any ignorant Fellow, whatever he is, may believe, and ought to believe,
that he may happen to understand GODs Word better than a whole Council, tho
assembled from the four quarters of the World; and than all the rest of the
Church. Yes, said he, it is so. I repeated twice or thrice the Proposition, he
had granted, adding still some stronger Circumstance; but evidently contained,
in what was accorded. What, said I, better than all the rest of the Church
together, and than all her Assemblies, tho composed of the holiest and most
illuminated persons in the Universe? For all these are still but men, after
whom, according to your Doctrine, every one ought still to examine. A private
person shall believe, that he may have more Grace, more Light; in fine, more of
the Holy Ghost than all the rest of the Church! All this must pass; and I might
have added, more than all the Fathers, more than all the past Ages, reckoning
immediately from the Apostles times. But, proceeded I, if it be so, how do you
avoid the Inconveniences of the Independents; and what Means has the Church
left to hinder the being of as many Religions, I do not say, as there are
Parishes, but as there are Heads? We have, said he, Synods, which are Means to
hinder so great Evils, Means not infallible, but nevertheless profitable, as I
have said. For tho a Pastor, that preaches, is not infallible, his Ministry
ceases not to be profitable, because he declares the Truth. But a great
Assembly, composed of more persons, and those of greater Learning, will yet
better make this Declaration. Methinks, Sir, replied I, That you refer all to
Instruction: but this is not precisely either the Intention or Institution of
Synods; for oftentimes one understanding private Person will give more
Instruction, than a whole Synod together. What must be expected from a Synod,
is not so much Instruction, as a Decision by Authority, to which there is a
necessity of yielding: for this is, what both the ignorant, who doubt, and the
proud, who contradict, stand in need of. An ignorant private person, if you
leave him to himself, will confess to you, that he knows not, on what to
resolve; and far from abating Pride in a Synod, you carry it to its highest
Point, since you oblige a private person to believe, that he can understand the
Scripture better than the Synod, and all the rest of the Church: and the Synod
it self, tho assembled from the whole Church, being asked by him, whose Faith it
examins, whether he is not obliged to examine after the Synod, and whether it
may not so fall out, that he, tho a private person, may understand the
Scripture, better than all the Pastors assembled, the Synod, tho universal,
must, according to your Doctrine, declare, That without doubt he may.
Presumption, Sir, cannot go higher. And observe, if you please, that these
Assemblies, which you propose as profitable Means, are no longer so, when every
one may believe, that he has a better, and the only one, that can secure him,
to wit, that of examining by himself, and believing only his own Judgment.
This, Sir, is perfect Independency; for the Independents neither refuse to hold
Synods for their mutual Instruction, nor to receive these Synods, when they
find, that these Synods say well. You know, they have held some. He
acknowledged, they had held one, to frame their Confession of Faith. I matter
not, replied I, whether one, or more; they do not then absolutely reject them,
and they reject in them precisely no more, than you do, which is the obligation
of submitting to them without examining. And upon this, to reduce my self in
few words, see, what was my Argument. The Independents are very willing to have
Ecclesiastical Assemblies for Instruction; all, they will not have, is the
authoritative Decision, which you will no more have than they: you are then
wholly conformable, and you ought not to have condemned them. You see not then,
Sir, said Mr. Claude, That we deny not, but there is an Authority in Synods,
such an one as the Paternal Authority, such an one as the Authority of
Magistrates, such an one as the Authority, a Master has over his Scholar, and a
Pastor our his Flock; all these Authorities have their use, and are not to be
rejected under pretense, That the Fathers, Magistrates and Masters may be
deceived: it is the same then with the Authority of the Church. But, Sir,
answered I, the Independents deny not the Authority of Magistrates, nor the
Authority of Masters over their Scholars, nor that of Pastors over their
Flocks. They have Pastors, Sir, for whom they require no less than you, that
there should be some Deference had; and much more will they not deny, but it
ought to be had for a whole Synod. If then you accuse them of denying the
Authority of Synods, you must add something to what they believe, and there is
nothing to be added, but what we believe, which is, That we must submit to them
without examining.

After this, for a little time we did nothing on both sides but repeat the same
things. Which having caused Mr. Claude to observe, I said to him, In fine, Sir,
we should dispute without end; every one has nothing more to do, but to examine
in his Conscience, and before GOD, whether he thinks himself capable to
understand the Scripture better than all Councels, and all the rest of the
Church, and how such an Opinion can agree with the Docility and Humility of
GODs Children. I inculcated in few words, what a Pride it was for one to
believe, he could understand GODs Word better than all the rest of the Church,
and how after this, nothing hindered the being of as many Religions, as there
are Heads.

Mr. Claude here told me, he wondered, this Proposition should appear so
strange to me, That a private person might believe, he might happen to
understand the Holy Scripture better than the whole Church assembled; That the
Case had happened, and he could give me many Examples of it: The first in the
Council of Ariminum, where the Word Consubstantial was rejected, and Arianism
set up. I interrupted him, saying: Whither do you carry us, Sir? From the
Council of Ariminum you will bring us to the false Council of Ephesus, to the
Council of Constance, to that of Basil, to that of Trent: When shall we have
done, if we must here pass over all these Councels? I declare to you, that I
will not engage my self in this Discussion, since our Question may be
determined by something more precise. But because you have mentioned the
Council of Ariminum, tell me, Sir, I beseech you, whether the Fathers of that
Council continued long in this erroneous Decision? I ought to have said
equivocal and imperfect rather than erroneous.
I believe indeed, Sir, said he,, That they quickly returned. Say, say, Sir,
answered I, that, as soon as the Emperor Constantius declared Protector of the
Arians, and Persecutor of the Faithful, had permitted them to retire, these
Bishops complained aloud of the Violence and Surprise, that had been put upon
'em. Oblige me not, Sir, to relate this Story, which you know as well as I, and
acknowledge, That it is unjust to compare a Council, manifestly packed, with
Assemblies held canonically, and according to Order. Ha, Sir, replied Mr.
Claude, do not we say, That the Council of Trent was neither free nor
canonical? You say it, Sir, and we deny it; and that is not the Question of
this Dispute. The present Question is, to know, whether you can avoid
Independency; and whether there be in your Doctrine any Remedy against this
insupportable Presumption of a private person, who must believe, according to
your Principles, that he can understand the Scripture better than the best
assembled and best held universal Councels, and than all the rest of the Church
together. Let us leave then, if you will, the Council of Ariminum; see here
another indisputable Example: It Is the Judgment of the Synagogue, when it
condemned JESUS CHRIST, and consequently declared, that he was not the Messiah,
promised by the Prophets. Tell me, Sir, would not a private person, who should
then have believed our Lord to be the true CHRIST, have judged better, than all
the rest of the Synagogue together? See then an indubitable Case, in which one
may without Presumption do, what you think so presumptuous. In effect,
proceeded he, it is no Presumption, not to give to the Church, what belongs only
to GOD alone. We cannot give him any thing greater, than to believe him
blindfold, as you would have us believe the Church. But you know, that St.
Paul, at least as much inspired as the Church, forbears not to declare to the
Corinthians, That he will not have Dominion over their Faith. 2. Cor. i. 23.
The Church ought yet less to do it than he. We must not then believe her
simply on her Word; we must examine after her, and make use of our Reason, as
those of Beraea did, who examined the Scriptures, Acts xvii. v. 11.
to see, whether the things were there, as St. Paul had preached them.

When Mr. Claude held his Peace, Here, said I, are many things: But we must
first take in hand this indisputable Example, you have proposed to us. Upon
this I remonstrated to him, That the Christian Church had great Privileges
above the Synagogue, even considering the Synagogue in the time of its greatest
Glory: But not to mention this, 'twas a strange thing to compare the Synagogue
falling, at the very Moment, when its Hardening and Reprobation was clearly
marked by the Prophets, with the Christian Church, which was never to fall. But
in fine, Sir, replied he, one might have then made to this private Person the
same Argument, you make to us. To allege the Prophets was to no purpose, for
'twas concerning the Application of these Prophecies to JESUS CHRIST, that the
Synagogue doubted. Thus a private Person could no more believe in JESUS CHRIST,
without believing at the same time, that he understood the Scripture better
than all the Synagogue; and this is the Argument, you make to us.

There were but few People at the Conference, and they were all Hugonots,
except the Mareschalless De Lorge. I saw two of these Gentlemen look on one
another at this place with Complacence. I was touched, that a Reasoning, so
visibly ill, should make such an Impression on these Spirits; and I besought
GOD to grant me the Grace, that I might by something, that should be clear,
destroy the odious Comparison, which was made of his always well-beloved Church
with the faithless Synagogue at that very Moment, he had assigned for her
Divorce.

You say then, Sir, said I to Mr. Claude, that the Argument I make, may
authorize the Error of those private Persons, who condemned JESUS CHRIST on the
Faith of the Synagogue, and on the contrary condemn those of Presumption, who
believed JESUS CHRIST alone before the whole Synagogue. Yes, Sir, said he, the
thing is so, repeating his Discourse afresh. Let us see then, said I, whether
my Argument has this unhappy Consequence. It consists, Sir, in saying, That,
the Churches Authority being denied, there is no longer any exterior Means,
which GOD can make use of to dissipate the Doubts of the Ignorant, and inspire
necessary Humility into the Faithful. To the end such an Argument may be made
concerning the time, when JESUS CHRIST was condemned, it must be said, that
there was not then any exterior Means, any certain Authority, to which one
ought necessarily to submit. Now, Sir, who can say this, since JESUS CHRIST was
upon the Earth, that is, the Truth it self, which appeared visibly in the midst
of Men, the Eternal Son of GOD, to whom a Voice from on high bare Witness
before all the People, Matt. iii. v. 17.
This is my well-beloved Son, hear ye him; who, to confirm his Mission, raised
the Dead, healed those that were born blind, and wrought so many Miracles, that
the Jews themselves confessed, never any Man had done the like? There was then,
Sir, an exterior Means, a visible Authority. But 'twas contested: It Is true,
but 'twas infallible. I do not pretend, Sir, that the Churches Authority should
never be contested; I hear you, you, Sir, who contest it: But I say, it ought
not to be so by Christians. I say, That she is Infallible; I say, That there
never was any time, when there was not on the Earth a visible and speaking
Authority, to which Men were obliged to submit. Before JESUS CHRIST we had the
Synagogue; when the Synagogue was to fail, JESUS CHRIST himself appeared, when
JESUS CHRIST retired, he left his Church, to which he sent his Holy Spirit.
Bring again JESUS CHRIST teaching, preaching, working Miracles, I have no
longer need of the Church; but also take from me the Church, I must have JESUS
CHRIST in Person, speaking, preaching, deciding with Miracles, and an
infallible Authority. But you have his Word. Yes we have without doubt a Word
Holy and Adorable, but such an one, as suffers it self to be explicated and
managed, how one will, and makes no Reply to those, that misunderstand it. I
say, we must have an exterior Means of resolving Doubts, and this Means must be
certain. And not to go over again the Reasons, already alleged, now there is
nothing else required but to answer your Objection concerning the Error of the
Synagogue, I aver, you are so far from being able to say, That there was not
then a certain exterior Means, or speaking Authority, to which Men were obliged
to submit their Judgments, that you must avow, there was one, the highest, and
most infallible, that ever was, which is that of JESUS CHRIST; and so that
there was never any time, when the Argument, I use against the Protestants,
could less be made, which is, That they want an exterior infallible Means to
determine Doubts about the Scriptures.

After I had said this, I perceived, there was no Reply to be made me. In
effect, There was not a Word said to me upon it, tho I held my Peace, to hear
what Answer would be made.

I will not say, that Mr. Claude stood silent, it is an Effect not much to be
expected in Conferences of this nature. He repeated something of what he had
already said, and insisted afresh on what the Apostle himself had declared,
That he had not Dominion over the Consciences.

I was glad, that he returned to this Passage, which I had an intent of
Explicating at first; but was fain to go to what was most pressing, which was
the Example of the Synagogue. This being done, I only asked Mr. Claude, whether
the Apostles Meaning, when he said to the Corinthians, We have not Dominion
over your Faith, was, that they must examine after him. He saw well, that it was
not, and confessed it. I concluded, Nor does the Church, Sir, pretend to have
Dominion over the Faith, when she requires us to believe it in her Decisions,
because she gives not this Authority to her self, no more than St. Paul did,
but to the Holy Ghost, who inspires her. You equal then, said Mr. Claude, to
St. Paul, Author of the Revelation, the Church, which is but the bare
Interpreter. No, Sir, replied I, I equal not the Church to St. Paul; but I say,
that to pretend, one ought to be Believed without examining, when one thinks to
act only as an Instrument, of which the Holy Ghost makes use, is not to have
Dominion over the Conscience, as the Example of St. Paul demonstrates. Besides,
I pretend not to equal the Churches Authority to the Apostolical. The Apostles
were Authors of the Revelation, as you have very well said; that is, they first
received the Truths, which it pleased GOD to reveal: The Church is only the
Interpreter and Depositary. But saving this essential Difference between the
Apostles and the Church, I say, That the Church is as much inspired to
Interpret, as the Apostles were to Establish; and that holding the Grace of
Interpretation from the same Spirit, which gave the first Revelation to the
Apostles, she no more exercises Dominion over the Consciences in Interpreting,
than the Apostles did in Establishing: But that both the one and the other
cause the Holy Ghost to have Dominion over them, according to the Measure,
which is given to every one. It must be proved, said Mr. Claude, that the
Church has received a like Grace. There Is no need of proving, answered I
immediately; it is sufficient to show, that the Passage, you allege, is not
concluding.

To this there was nothing said. But, if I remember well, Mr. Claude
exaggerated a little, how strange it was, that we would oblige Men to believe
the Church, like GOD himself, upon her bare Word, without making use, for the
Interpretation of Scripture, of the Reason, GOD has given us; that those of
Beraea did not so; and that the Apostle, according to our Opinion, was much to
blame for letting them examine his Preachings.

I answered, That there was a very great Difference between the Faithful,
already Children of the Church, and subjected to her Authority, and those, that
still doubted, whether they should enter into her Bosom: That those of Beraea
were in this last Condition, and the Apostle would not by any means propose to
'em the Churches Authority, of which they doubted: But that the Faithful were
not instructed in the same manner after the Council of Jerusalem. There the
Apostles decided by Authority of the Holy Ghost: Act. XV. v. 28. Act. XVI. v. 4.
It has seemed good, say they, to the Holy Ghost, and to us. What do Paul and
Silas, Carriers of the Councels Letter after this? They went through the
Cities, as it is in the Acts: What, to cause the Counce^ of Jerusalem's Decree
to be there examined? 'Twould have been to examine after the Holy Ghost himself.
What then? They went through the Cities, delivering them the Decrees for to
keep, that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders which were at Jerusalem.
See the Order: The Examen in the Council; the Obedience without examining after
the Decision; the Examen in those of Beraea, that is, in those, who, not being
in the Church, have yet no Authority to regulate them: Submission without
examining in those, who, being already in the Church, are only to hear her
Decrees. It Is their Happiness to be in a Body, which, guided by the Holy Ghost,
can never be deceived, and by that means be delivered from the Danger of an
Examen, the end of which would perhaps be Error.

The Conference had already lasted four Hours. I already had from Mr. Claude's
Acknowledgment one of the Propositions, I would make him confess, to wit, That
every particular Person ought to believe, he may understand the Holy Scripture
better than the Universal Councels, and all the rest of the Church. He must yet
own the other Proposition, no less Important; and see how GOD brought him to it.

As he had spoken much of this Dominion of the Church over Consciences,
repeating three or four times, That we gave her the Respect, which was due to
none but GOD alone, when we believed her without Examining, I told him, he need
not make so strange of a thing, which they did, as well as we; and upon that I
asked him, Whether a Believer at his first Receiving the Holy Scripture from the
Church were obliged first to doubt, and after to examine, whether the Book, she
put into his Hand, were truly inspired by GOD or no. If this Believer examins
and doubts, he renounces the Faith, and begins the reading of the Gospel by an
Act of Infidelity; and if he doubts not, he then receives, without examining,
the Authority of the Church, which presents him the Gospel.

To this see Mr. Claude's Answer. The Believer, you suppose, who has not read
the Holy Scripture, and into whose Hands it is put, to speak properly, doubts
not, he is ignorant: He knows not, what this Scripture is, which, he is told,
is inspired by GOD. He has heard his Father, and those, who instructed him,
say, That 'twas divinely inspired: He yet knows no other Authority but theirs;
and as for what concerns the Scripture, he knows not, what it is. Thus he
cannot be said to be Unbelieving or Incredulous. And pray, Sir, said he, let me
make you the same Argument upon the Church, as you make me upon the Scripture.
The Believer, to whom the Churches Authority is proposed, either believes it
without examining, or doubts: If he doubts, he is an Infidel: If he doubts not,
by what Authority is he assured? Is the Churches Authority a thing evident of
it self, and must be not find it by some Examen? This is your Difficulty, which
you have to solve as well as I: either let us quit 'em both, or resolve 'em
both together. I declare to you, that I will answer for the Scripture, what you
shall answer me for the Church.

I understand you, answered I, but before I explain to you, how the Christian
believes the Church, let us first settle the Matter, that is in question. Is it
not evident, Sir, amongst you as well as amongst us, That, when the Holy
Scripture is shown to Children educated in the Church, it is shown them, as a
Book inspired by GOD; and I ask, whether they cannot, when they are caused to
read something in it, make this Act of Faith: I certainly believe, that, what I
am going to read, is GODs Word? Mr. Claude answered here, That those, of whom I
spoke to him, had yet no divine Faith concerning the Authority of the
Scripture, but a bare human Persuasion, grounded on the Deference, they had for
their Parents, and that they were but Catechumens. Catechumens, Sir? said I.
You must not, if you please, speak so. They are Christians; they are baptized;
they have in them the Holy Ghost, and Faith infused; they are in the Covenant,
according to you; they have received Baptism, as a Seal of the Covenant, to
which they are admitted; and as the Covenant is sealed in them by the exterior
Seal of Baptism, the Holy Ghost seals it interiorly in their Hearts. Know your
own Doctrine. Upon this, said Mr. Claude, you know, that one might dispute; but
I own, what you say. And well then, answered I, if it be so, they are by the
Grace of the Holy Ghost, and Faith infused, in condition to make an Act of
Faith, when the Faith shall be preached to them; and I ask, when the Scripture,
acknowledged by the whole Church for a Word inspired by GOD, is shown them,
Whether they are not in condition to make with the whole Church this Act of
Faith: I believe, that this Scripture is GODs Word, as I believe, that GOD is.
Mr. Claude would never acknowledge this, but always answered, That they had yet
only an human Persuasion about the Scripture, and that Divine Faith came not to
them, till they had read it. If they have, said I, but an human Persuasion,
they have but a doubtful Persuasion; and consequently doubt of that, which is,
according to you, the whole Foundation of the Faith: In one word, they are
Infidels. No, said he, they are barely ignorant; and you must also say as much
of the Faith, one has in the Church: For it is not a matter of small difficulty,
to discern, which is the true Church; and before one is in a condition to know
it of ones self, one is ignorant of it; or one has at most but a bare human
Persuasion on the Faith of ones Parents. Thus once again, what you shall say
upon the Church, I will say to you upon the Scripture. Let us see, Sir,
answered I, whether you will say it, or whether you will have reason to say it.
You acknowledge then, That a baptized Christian, who has neither read the holy
Scripture, nor heard it read, is not in condition to make this Act of Faith: I
believe, that this Scripture is GODs Word, as I believe, that GOD is. Behold a
terrible Inconvenience, that a Believer cannot make so essential an Act of
Faith. It Is not so amongst us: For the Believer, who receives the Holy
Scripture from the Hands of the Church, makes with the whole Church this Act of
Faith: As I believe, that GOD is, so I believe, that this Scripture is the Word
of him, in whom I believe. And I say, that he cannot make this Act of Faith but
by the Faith, he has already in the Authority of the Church, which presents him
the Scripture. I must here, proceeded I, thoroughly explicate, but simply
nevertheless, in what Order Christians are instructed concerning the Truth of
the Scripture. I speak not of Infidels, I speak of baptized Christians; and I
desire you to observe well this Distinction. There are two things here to be
considered. The one is; who it is, that inspires us with the Act of Faith, by
which we believe the Holy Scripture as GODs Word; and we say, that it is the
Holy Ghost: On this we are agreed. The other thing to be considered, is, what
exterior Means the Holy Ghost uses to make us believe the Holy Scripture; and I
say, That it is the Church. That it is so, we need only see the Apostles Creed,
that is, the first Instruction, which a Believer receives: He has not read the
Holy Scripture, and already he believes in GOD, and in JESUS CHRIST, and in the
Holy Ghost, and the Universal Church. There is no mention made to him of the
Scripture; but the believing the Universal Church is proposed to him, as soon
as the believing in the Holy Ghost. These two Articles enter together into his
Heart, the Holy Ghost and the Church; because he, who believes in the Holy
Ghost, necessarily also believes the Universal Church, which the Holy Ghost
directs. I say then, that the first Act of Faith, which the Holy Ghost puts in
the Hearts of Baptized Christians, is to believe with the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, the Universal Church; and that this is the exterior Means, by which the
Holy Ghost insinuates into Hearts the Belief of the Holy Scripture. If this
Means is not certain, the Faith in the Scripture will consequently be doubtful.
But as the Catholic has always found this Means certain, there is not any
Moment, in which he cannot say: As I believe, that GOD is, I believe, that GOD
has spoken to men, and that this Scripture is his Word. And the Reason, for
which he can at first make this Act of Faith, is, because he never doubted of
the Churches Authority, and because this is the first thing, which the Holy
Ghost put in his Heart with the Faith in GOD and in JESUS CHRIST.

As to what you ask me, how he believes the Church, that is not precisely our
Question: It Is sufficient, that we see, he always believes it, since it is the
first thing, the Holy Ghost puts in his Heart, and the exterior Means, by which
he makes him believe the Holy Scripture, The Scripture, of which he never
offers to doubt, since he never doubted of the Church, which presents it to
him. This, Sir, is our Doctrine, and because it is not yours, you necessarily
fall into the Inconvenience, I have noted: Because you believe not the Churches
Authority, as a thing, which cannot fail, we show you a Point of time, in which
you cannot make an Act of Faith upon the Scripture, and consequently in which
you cease to be a Believer.

Mr. Claude told me here, That the Child, who recited the Creed, spoke like a
Parrot, without Understanding, what he said; and so we ought not to insist much
upon that: And besides, that I affirmed gratis, That to believe the Universal
Church was the first Act of Faith, which the Holy Ghost put into the Heart of
the Baptized Christian, to insinuate to him by that means Faith in the Holy
Scripture: In fine, That I answered not, what he asked me concerning the Church,
nor how we began to believe her; for, said he, The Holy Ghost is the Principle,
and not the Motive of Believing: That 'twas requisite therefore, I should
explicate, how we believed the Church, and by what Motive; and that from my
manner of speaking it seemed, as if we believed her by Enthusiasm, and without
any Motive inducing us so to do.

To this I answered, I pretended not, That the Church was believed by
Enthusiasm; That for the acknowledging her there were diverse Motives of
Credibility, which the Holy Ghost suggested to his Faithful, as he pleased;
That he was not ignorant of them, but they were not now in Question. Our
Business now is, said I, to know, whether the exterior Means, which the Holy
Ghost uses to make us believe the Holy Scripture, is not the Churches
Authority. I speak not gratis, when I say, That this is the first thing, which
the Holy Ghost puts in the Hearts of baptized Christians; for in the Creed
there is mentioned to them the Universal Church, and she is proposed to their
Belief, without speaking to them of the Scripture. It Is to no purpose to say,
That Children repeat at first, like Parrots, both the Creed, and the Name of
the Universal Church. Let us leave, said I, the Parrot, that speaks only by
Memory: Let us come to the time, when the Christian has the use of Reason, and
when he can make an Act of Faith. By what shall he begin, but by what he began
to be instructed? He believes then the Universal Church, before he believes the
Scripture. In effect, make, I do not say a Child, but any Man whosoever, read
the Canticle of Canticles, in which there is not the least mention of GOD,
either good or bad: In good earnest, He believes this Book inspired by GOD,
only because of the Tradition; First, of the Synagogue, and Secondly, of the
Christian Church, that is in one word, through the Authority of the Universal
Church. But let us keep to our Point. Let us consider the Christian in the
Moment, when the Holy Scripture is proposed to him as the Word of GOD. It Is the
Holy Ghost, which makes him believe it; we are agreed on that Point: But we
dispute about the exterior Means, of which the Holy Ghost makes use. I say,
That it is the Church, since it is she in effect, which proposes to him the Holy
Scripture; since he believed the Church, before he heard of the Scripture;
since at his opening the Scripture, he is in Condition to say: I believe this
Scripture, as I believe, that GOD is. You say, That he cannot make this Act of
Faith: He is then no Believer, and his Baptism is of no use to him. We must
instruct him as an Infidel, saying to him: Here is the Scripture, which I
believe inspired by GOD; read it Child, examine it, see, whether it be the very
Truth or a Fable. The Church believes it inspired by GOD; but the Church may be
deceived, and thou art not in condition to make with her this Act of Faith: As
I believe, that GOD is, so I believe, that he himself inspired this Scripture.
If this manner of Instructing strikes an Horror into Christians, and leads
manifestly to Impiety, the Christian must be able at first to make an Act of
Faith upon the Scripture, proposed to him by the Church; he must consequently
believe, That the Church is not deceived in giving him this Scripture. A^ he
receives from her the Scripture, he receives from her the Interpretation of it;
and she no more exercises Dominion over the Consciences in obliging her
Children to believe her Interpretations without examining, than she does in
obliging us to believe, without examining, the Scripture it self.

By this Argument, Sir, replied Mr. Claude, you would make every one conclude
in Favor of his Church. The Greeks, the Armenians, the Ethiopians, we our
selves, whom you believe to be in error; we are nevertheless Baptized; we have
by Baptism both the Holy Ghost and this Faith infused, of which you have been
speaking. Every one of us has received the Holy Scripture from the Church, in
which he was baptized; every one believes his to be the true Church declared in
the Creed; and at the first he even knows not any other. Now if, as we have
received, without examining, the Holy Scripture from the Hand of that Church,
in which we are, we must also, as you say, receive blindfold all its
Interpretations; it is an Argument to conclude, That every one ought to
continue, as he is, and that every Religion is good.

This was in truth the strongest Objection, that could be made; and tho the
Solution of this Doubt appeared clear to me, I was in pain, how I might render
it clear to those, who heard me. I spoke with trembling, seeing it concerned
the Salvation of a Soul; and I besought GOD, who made me see the Truth so
clearly, That he would give me Words to express it fully and plainly: For I had
to do with a Man, who heard* patiently, spoke clearly and strongly, and in fine
pusht the Difficulties to the utmost points.

I told him, I must first distinguish their Case from that of the Greeks,
Armenians, and others, he had named, who indeed err in taking a false Church
for the true; but believe at least, as indubitable, That the true Church,
wheresoever she is, must be believed, and that she never deceives her Children.
You are, said I to him, much farther off; for I can lay to your Charge, That
you do not only, like the Greeks and Ethiopians, take a false Church for a
true; but, what is undeniable, and what you your self confess, That you will
not have us even believe the true. After this Distinction, which seemed
necessary to me, let us come to your Difficulty. Let us distinguish in the
Belief of the Greeks, and other false Churches, what there is of Truth, what
they have in common with the true Universal Church; in a word, what comes from
GOD, from that, which comes from human Prejudice. GOD by his Holy Spirit puts
in the Heart of those, who are baptized in these Churches, That there is a GOD,
and a JESUS CHRIST, and an Holy Ghost. Hitherto there is no Error; all this is
from GOD: Is it not true? He agreed it. They believe also, That there is an
Universal Church: Are they not right in this, and is it not a Truth, revealed
by GOD, that there is one indeed? I expected his Acknowledgment, and after he
had given it, I added, That the Greeks and Ethiopians were disposed to believe
without examining, whatever the true Church proposed to 'em. This is, what you
approve not, Sir; in this you are separated from all other Christians, who
unanimously believe, That there is a true Church, which never deceives her
Children. I, who believe this with them, reckon this Belief amongst the things,
which come from GOD: But see, where the human Prejudices begin. This Baptized,
being seduced by his Parents and Pastors, believes the Church, in which he is,
to be the true, and attributes in particular to this false Church all, that GOD
makes him believe in general of the true. It Is not the Holy Ghost, that puts
this in his Heart: Is it not true? It Is without doubt true. In this place he
begins to believe amiss. Here Error begins; here the Divine Faith, infused by
the Holy Ghost, begins to be lost. Happy are those, in whom the human
Prejudices are joined with the true Belief, which the Holy Ghost puts in their
Heart. They are exempt from a great Temptation, and the terrible Pain, there is
to distinguish that, which is from GOD in the Faith of their Church, from that,
which is from Men. But whatever Difficulty Men have to distinguish these
things, GOD knows them, and distinguishes them; and there will be an eternal
Difference between that, which his Holy Spirit puts in the Heart of the
Baptized, when he interiorly disposes them to believe the true Church, and
that, which human Prejudices have added to it by fixing their Spirit to a false
one. How these Baptized may afterward disentangle these things, and by what
means they may get out of the Prepossession, that has made them confound the
Idea of the false Church, in which they are, with the Faith of the true Church,
which the Holy Ghost has put in their Hearts with the Creed, is not now in
debate; and it is sufficient, that we have seen in all the Baptized a Belief of
the Church, which comes to them from GOD, distinguished from the Thought, which
comes to them from Men. This being so, I affirm, That to this Belief of the
Church, which the Holy Ghost puts in our Hearts with the Creed, is fixed a firm
Faith, That we must believe this Church as certainly, as the Holy Ghost, to
whom the Creed it self immediately joins her; and that this Faith in the Church
is the Cause, the Believer never doubts of the Scripture.

I stopped a moment, to ask, whether I were understood. Mr. Claude answered, That
he understood me perfectly. And if it be so, said I to him, you ought to see
the Inconvenience, into which your Belief casts you; and you ought also to see,
That I am not in the same by mine. You not only say, That we must not believe a
false Church, but that we must not even believe the true one without examining
what she says; and in this you speak against all other Christians. Mademoiselle
de Duras interposed, saying: in this place: This is, what must be answered by,
Ay or No. I said it indeed, answered Mr. Claude, and I did not stick to say it
at first. So much the better, replied I. We shall soon see, which of us two has
Reason, and in the clear State, things have been put in by our reciprocal
Discourses, the Truth will soon appear on one side or other. From the time, you
lay it down for certain, That the Church, even the true one may deceive us, the
Faithful cannot believe on the Churches sole Faith, That the Scripture is the
Word of GOD. He may believe it with an human Faith, answered Mr. Claude, but
not with a divine Faith. But human Faith, replied I, is always defective, and
doubting: He doubts then, whether the Scripture be inspired by GOD, or no. Mr.
Claude here prayed me to remember, what he had already said, That he was not in
Doubt, but in Ignorance. As a Man, said he, not skilled in Diamonds, being
shown one, and asked, whether he believes it to be good or bad; knows nothing of
it, neither is he in Doubt, but in Ignorance. In like manner, when a Master
teaches some Opinion in Philosophy, the Scholar, who understands not yet, what
he means, has no formal Doubt, but is in a bare Ignorance. So is it with those,
to whom the Holy Scripture is the first time given. And I, said I, affirm, That
he doubts, and that he, who is not skilled in Diamonds, doubts, whether that,
which is presented to him, be good or bad, and that the Scholar with Reason
doubts of all, his Master in Philosophy tells him, till he sees it clear,
because he believes not his Master Infallible; and by the same Reason, he, who
believes not the Church Infallible, doubts of the Truth of GODs Word, which she
proposes to him. This is called Ignorance, and not Doubt, still said Mr.
Claude: And I made this Argument. To doubt is not to know, whether a thing be
or not. The Christian, of whom we speak, knows not, whether the Scripture be
true or no: He is then in Doubt. Tell me, what is it to doubt, but not to know,
whether a thing be or no? To this there was no Answer, but that this Christian
did not in any manner doubt of the Scripture, but was only ignorant of it. But,
said I, he is not like an Infidel, who perhaps never heard* any mention of it.
He knows, That the Gospel of St. Matthew and St. Paul's Epistles are read in
the Church as GODs Word, and that none of the Faithful doubt it. Can he believe
with them as certainly, as he believes GOD is, That this Word is inspired by
GOD? You have said, That he cannot make this Act of Faith: He, that cannot make
an Act of Faith on an Article, proposed to him, makes at least, as I may so
say, an Act of Doubt. Mr. Claude still answered, That he was in a pure
Ignorance. And well, let us leave contesting about Words: He does not Doubt, if
you please; but he knows not, whether this Scripture be a Truth, or a Fable; he
knows not, whether the Gospel be an History inspired by GOD, or a Tale invented
by Men. He cannot then make an Act of Divine Faith upon this Point, nor say, I
believe, as GOD is; that the Gospel is also from GOD. Do you not acknowledge,
That he cannot make this Act, and that he has nothing but an human Faith? He
again freely confessed, That he knew nothing else. Well, Sir, it is enough. In
fine then there is a Point of Time, when every Baptized Christian knows not,
whether the Gospel be not a Fable: This is given him to examine: See, to what we
must come, when we are set to examine after the Church. We might discourse
without end: But we have said all, that can be said on both sides, and we
should do nothing but begin again. It Is for every one to examine in his
Conscience, how he can maintain, That a Baptized Christian ought to have been a
Moment without knowing, whether the Gospel be a Truth or a Fable, and that
amongst other Questions, which one may make in ones Life, this also must be
given him to examine. It appeared to me, by the Countenance of Mademoiselle de
Dwas, that she understood (...): I notwithstanding expected a little* And Mr.
Claude rose up.

Mademoiselle de Duras rose with us, and coming to us, said: I could wish,
That, before you broke up, something might be said concerning the Separation.
The thing is done, answered I. As soon as it is certain, That one cannot examine
after the Church without falling into an insupportable Pride, no^ without
doubting of the Gospel, there is nothing more to be (...). Every one need only
consider, whether he will doubt one Moment of the Gospel, and also, whether he
finds himself capable to understand the Scripture better than all the Synods in
the World, and than all the rest of the Universal Church. But since
Mademoiselle desires some particular Instruction concerning the Separation, I
beseech you, Sir, give me a Moment more. I shall propose to you essential
Facts, on which, ^f I be not deceived, you must soon agree. I ask you, Sir,
Whether the Arians separated from the Church, and whether their Sect, when it
appeared, was not new? They did not, said he, separate from the Church; they
corrupted it. He set himself to represent with a great deal of Exaggeration,
^ow they drew with them the whole Church* It Is not so, Sir, said I, You know,
That St. Athanasius, St. Basil, St. Gregory Nazianzen, and many other Holy
Bishops held for the Truth, and that a great Body of People followed them. You
know, That all the West, and Rome it self, notwithstanding the Fall of
Liberius, was Orthodox. But let us leave all this, said I to him; in what
Number soever they separated, there was a Church before them, from which they
brake, and against which they set up another Church. No, said he, They
corrupted it. Ha, Sir, replied I: What Difficulty is this? Never any Heretics
separated but by corrupting some of the Churches Children, and separating with
them from the Church, in which they had all been baptized. But in fine, tell
me, Sir, Was not the Sect of the Arians, and that Church, which is named the
Arian, new? If you mean, Sir, answered he, That Arius was the first, who spoke
against the Divinity of the Son of GOD, it is not true. Origin before him, and
Justin Martyr said the same thing. Ha, Sir, said I: That a Martyr denied the
Divinity of GGDs Son, is, what I shall never believe. As to Origin, you know,
that he is alleged both for and against it: He is an ambiguous and suspected
Author. But, Sir, let us leave uncertain Facts: And let us endeavor to find
one, about which both you and I may agree. That Sect, which after the
Condemnation pronounced against Arius, joined with this excommunicated Priest,
and formed a Church against the Church, was it not new? He could not but grant
it. To prove its Newness, continued I, was there any need of ascending up to
the Apostles, and could not one say to it: Church, separated from that other
Church, in which Arius was born, and in which he received Baptism, you were
neither yesterday, nor the day before? One might, said Mr. Claude. May one not
say as much of the Macedonian Church, which denied the Divinity of the Holy
Ghost; of the Nestorians, who divided JESUS Christ's Person; of the Eutychians,
that confounded his two Natures; and of the Pelagians, who denied Original Sin,
and the Grace of JESUS CHRIST? Might one not say to them without ascending up
to the Apostles: When you came into the World, you found the Church baptizing
Children unto Remission of Sins, and praying for the Conversion of Sinners and
Infidels? What then all these Heretics, and all the rest, whom you and we
know, oppugned, was believed not only from the Apostles time, but yesterday and
the day before, and at the time, when these Heresiarchs came, and they found
the Church in this Belief. But, answered Mr. Claude, There are two ways of
establishing Error; the one open, and the other secret and insensible. Stay,
Sir, said I to him, we ought to propose evident Facts, which both Parties
agree. I do not agree this insensible way of establishing Error. Ha, Sir, said
he, will you say, That you shall find praying to Saints, and Purgatory, in the
Apostles times? No, Sir, answered I, I will say nothing about them, for you
will not agree it; and I will say such things, as you may agree. Deal in the
same manner with me. He, that shall draw most solid Advantages from Facts,
granted by his Adversary, will have a great Argument, that the Truth is for
him: For it is the Property of Truth to keep it self upon all sides, and to
condemn Error by Facts, which Error it self acknowledges. And since you mention
Prayer to Saints, you are sincere: is it not true, that Mr. Daille grants us
thirteen hundred Years Antiquity? Thirteen hundred Years, Sir, answered he, is
not the whole time of the Church. I agree it, said I to him; but in fine, my
Adversary grants me already thirteen hundred Years; he gives me St. Gregory
Nazianzen, St. Basil, St. Ambrose, St. Hierom, St. Chrysostom, St. Augustine.
All these, said Mr. Claude, are but Men. Let them be Men, as much as you
please: But in fine, we have from our Adversaries Confession, thirteen hundred
Years for Invocation of Saints, and Veneration of Relics; for these two things
were joined together, as you know, Mr. Daille asserts. And how much does Mr.
Blondel grant for Prayer for the Dead? It Is true, said Mr. Claude, That this is
the antientest Error of the Church. Fourteen hundred Years Antiquity, said I to
him, is what Mr. Blondel yields us. I say not this, to create a Prejudice for
the Truth of our Doctrine; that is not the matter in hand: But I say it, to
show, That we are not without Defense upon these Examples of Errors insensibly
spread, since we already have by your Consent thirteen hundred, and fourteen
hundred Years. Let us come then to* evident Facts, on which I may agree. For as
for you, you agree, That the Arians, Nestorians, Pelagians, and in one word,
all Heretics were established, as I have said. They found not any Church, to
which they united themselves. They erected one, which was separated from all
the other Churches, that then were. This is certain: Is it not manifest? I
expected: Mr. Claude contradicted it not; I thought not my self obliged to
press him any farther upon a thing evident, and already owned. Now, said I to
him, how were the Orthodox Churches established? When particular Persons and
People, for Example the Indians, were converted, found they not a Church
already established, to which they united themselves? He acknowledged it. Did
you, went I on, find one in the whole World, to which you joined your selves?
Did you embrace the Greek, the Armenian, or the Ethiopian Church, when you
forsook the Roman? Can we not mark you the precise Date of your Churches, and
say to all that Church, to all that exterior Society, in which you are
Minister, you were not yesterday? But, said Mr. Claude here, were we not of
this Church? We went not out, we were driven out of it. We were Excommunicated
in the Council of Trent. Thus we went forth: But we carried the Church with us.
What Discourse is this, Sir, said I to him? If you had not been driven out,
would you have staid in it? To what purpose then is that Command so often
repeated amongst you, Go forth of Babylon, my People? Tell me sincerely, Would
you have staid in the Church, if she had not driven ye out? No sure, Sir, said
Mr. Claude. To what purpose then, answered I, do you say here, That you were
driven out? Because, said he, it is true. And well, Sir, proceeded I, it is
true: This is common to you (be not displeased at what I am going to say) this
is common to you with all Heretics. The Church, in which they received
Baptism, cast them forth, Excommunicated them. They would perhaps have
willingly stayed in it to corrupt and seduce; but the Church cut them off. And
as to what you say, That you were in this Church, which cast you out, and that
you carried the Church with you, what Heretic may not say as much? 'Twas not
of Heathens, that the Ancient Heretics composed their Churches; 'twas of
Christians bred in the Church. You also have not formed yours by amassing
Mahometans; I agree it: But in this you do not outgo the Examples of the
ancient Heretics, and they were all able to say as well as you, That they were
condemned by their Adversaries. For they were not made to sit amongst the
Judges, when their Novelty was condemned. But, Sir, replied Mr. Claude, we
agree not this Novelty. What is in the Scripture, is not new. Patience, Sir, I
beseech you, said I to him: None of the Ancient Heretics agreed the Novelty of
their Doctrine; they all alleged the Holy Scripture for themselves: But there
was one Novelty, which they could not deny; to wit, That the Body of their
Church was not yesterday, and you granted it. And well, in fine, said Mr.
Claude, if the Arians, if the Nestorians, if the Pelagians had been right at
the Bottom, they would not have been to blame in their Proceeding. To blame or
not, said I to him, is not, Sir, the Bottom of the Question: But it still
continues evident, That you have the same Proceeding with them, the same
Conduct, the same Defenses; in a word, That in forming your Church you have
done, as all the Heretics did, and we do, what all the Orthodox have done.
Every one may judge in his Conscience, which he had rather resemble, and I have
no more to say.

Mr. Claude was not silent on this occasion, but told me, That this Argument
was excellent in Favor of the Jews and Pagans, and that they might maintain
their Cause by the Reason, I made use of. Let us see, said I to him, Sir, and
remember, that you promise us the same Argument. The same, answered he, without
doubt: The Jews and Pagans upbraided the Christians with their newness; you
know it: The Writings of Celsus, and so many others, are Proofs of it. I agree
it, said I to him, and is this all? And 'twas true, proceeded he, That
Christianity was new, if we regard it in the State immediately preceding. What,
said I to him, when JESUS CHRIST began to preach, could they say to him, as I
do to you, That in the Church, he was born in, there was yesterday no mention
of him non his Coming? What then was St. John Baptist, Anna the Prophetess,
Simeon, the Wise Men, and the Priests consulted by Herod, when they answered
him, That the Place of his Birth was Bethlehem? Was there any one Moment, when
CHRIST was not expected in the Church, where he was born; and so well expected,
that the Jews expect him still? It Is very true, Sir, That there was a
Necessity, this Novelty should once be seen to happen, and this Change by
CHRIST, expected at Christ's Coming. But JESUS CHRIST is not therefore new. Heb.
xiii. v. 8.
He is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. It Is true; answered Mr.
Claude, but the Synagogue agreed not, That JESUS was the CHRIST. But, replied
I, The Synagogue condemned not St. John Baptist; but the Synagogue heard,
without contradicting them, the Wise Men, Simeon, and Anna. JESUS CHRIST
gathered in the Synagogue, the then true Church, the Children of GOD, which it
contained. The Synagogue at last condemned him. But JESUS CHRIST had already
founded his Church. He gave it its last Form presently after his Death, and the
new People followed the old without any Interruption: These are undeniable
Truths. And for what concerns Paganism, it is true the Pagans upbraided the
Christians with their Newness. But what did the Christians answer? Did they not
show, That the Jews always believed the same GOD, which the Christians adored,
and expected the same CHRIST? That the Jews believed all this yesterday, and
the day before, and always without Interruption? But, Sir, once again, said Mr.
Claude, The Gentiles agreed not all this. What, answered I, was there amongst
them any one so unreasonable, as to say, That there never were any Jews, or
that this People expected not a CHRIST, and adored not one sole GOD, Creator of
Heaven and Earth? Did not they show the Pagans the manifest Beginning of their
Opinions, and the Date, I do not say of the Authors of their Sentiments, but of
their Gods themselves, and this by their own Histories, by their own Authors,
and by their own Chronology? Do you believe, That a Pagan could have made a
Christian confess, That the Christian Religion was new, or that there never was
any Society, which had the same Belief, the Christians then had, as I make you
own, That all the Heretics, which you and I acknowledge for such, came in this
manner, and that you have done, as they did? See, Sir, how you prove, That the
Jews and Pagans might maintain their Cause by the same Argument, I use: None
can ever do it, nor can ever any one deny the evident Fact, which I affirm,
That we do, as all the Orthodox, and you, as all the Heretics have done.

Here the Conversation ended. It had lasted five Hours with a great Attention
of the whole Assembly. We heard one another peaceably: We spoke on both sides
close enough; and except the beginning, where Mr. Claude a little enlarged his
Discourse, in all the rest he came to the Matter, and presented himself to the
Difficulty without Recoiling. It Is true, he aimed rather to entangle me in the
Inconveniences, in which I engaged him, than to show, how he could himself
get out: But in fine, all this proceeded from the Cause; and he assuredly said
all, that his could furnish him with upon the Point, to which we had
confined our selves.

For my part I cared not to go from it, since 'twas that which Mademoiselle de
Duras desired to have cleared. She appeared to me touched: I nevertheless
retired, trembling, and fearing, lest my weakness might have put her Soul in
danger, and the Truth in doubt.

I Visited her the next day. III. The Sequel of the Conference.
I was glad to see, she perfectly understood all, I had said. This is, what I
had promised her. I had represented to her, That amidst the immense
Difficulties, which the Spirit of Cavilling, and the Depth of the Christian
Doctrine, had caused to spring up aamongst men, GOD would have his Children
provided of an easy Means to resolve themselves in what concerned their
Salvation; that this Means was the Churches Authority; that this means was easy
to be established, easy to be understood, easy to be followed; so easy, said I,
and so clear, that, if you shall not understand, what I shall say upon it, I am
contented you believe me to be in the wrong. This in effect must be so, when
the matter is well handled: But I durst not promise my self, that I had treated
it, as I ought. I knew with joy and thanksgiving, that GOD had turned all to
good. The Arguments, that ought to affect, affected her. She could not
comprehend, how an ignorant private Person could without an insupportable pride
believe, he might happen to understand the Scripture better than all the
Universal Councels, and all the rest of the Church. She saw as well as I, how
weak the Example of the Synagogue was, when it condemned JESUS CHRIST, and how
little reason there was to say, That the particular persons, who believed well,
wanted an Exterior Authority to resolve them, when they had in the Person of
JESUS CHRIST, the greatest and most visible Authority, that can be imagined. I
passed again over the Doubt, in which one must be touching the Scripture, if
one doubted of the Churches Authority. She said, she never so much as thought,
that a Christian might doubt one moment of the Scripture; and besides she
perfectly understood, that Mr. Claude, rejecting the Name of Doubt,
acknowledged the Thing in other terms: Which served only to make appear, how
hard this Matter was both to think and say, since being forced to own it, he
thought not fit to do it in simple Terms. For in fine not to know, whether a
thing be or no, if it be not to Doubt, is nothing. It appeared then clearly,
That the two Propositions, which were in debate, were established: And I showed
Mademoiselle de Duras in few words, That her Church, by believing two such
strange Things, had changed the whole Order of instructing GODs Children,
practiced at all times in the Christian Church.

For this purpose I needed only repeat to her, what she had heard me say, and
what she had heard Mr. Claude grant. GOD nevertheless put in my heart something
more express, and I said to her, as follows.

The Order of instructing GODs Children, is to teach them, before all things,
the Apostles Creed: I believe in GOD the Father, and in JESUS CHRIST, and in
the Holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the
Remission of Sins, and the rest. As much as the Faithful believes in GOD the
Father, and in his Son JESUS CHRIST, and in the Holy Ghost, so much does he
believe the Universal Church, where the Father, where the Son, where the Holy
Ghost is adored. As much, I say, as he believes the Father, so much does he
believe the Church, which makes Profession to believe, that GOD, the Father of
JESUS CHRIST, has adopted Children, whom he has united to his Son. As much as
he believes in the Son, so much does he believe the Church, which he has
assembled by his Blood, which he has established by his Doctrine, which he has
founded on the Rock, and against which, he has promised, that the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail. As much as he believes in the Holy Ghost, so much does he
believe that Church, to which the Holy Ghost was given for a Teacher. And he,
that says, I believe in GOD, and in JESUS CHRIST, and in the Holy Ghost, Romans
X. v. 10.
when he says, I believe, confesses: With the heart he believes unto
Righteousness, and with the mouth Confession is made unto Salvation, as St.
Paul says, and he knows, that the Faith, he has, is not a private Sentiment.
There is a Church, a Society of Men, which believes, as he does: It Is the
Universal Church, which is neither here, nor there, neither at this time, nor
at another. She is not confined to one only Country, like the ancient Judaical
Church; nor is she to end, as that was; Dan. II. v. 44. C. 7. v. 14.
and her Kingdom shall not pass to other People, as it is written in Daniel. She
is at all times, and in all places, and so dispersed, that whoever will come to
her, may. She has no Interruption in her Succession, for there is not any time,
when one cannot say, I believe the Universal Church: As there is not any time,
but one may say, I believe in GOD the Father, and in his Son, and in the Holy
Ghost. This Church is Holy, because all, she teaches, is holy; because she
teaches all the Doctrine, which makes Saints, that is, all the Doctrine of JESUS
CHRIST; because she encloses all the Saints in her Unity. And these Saints must
not only be united in Spirit: They are exteriorly united in the Communion of
this Church; and this is meant by the Communion of Saints. In this Universal
Church, in this Communion of Saints, is the Remission of Sins. There is
Baptism, by which Sins are remitted; there is the Ministry of the Keys, by
which whatsoever is remitted or retained on Earth, Matt. xvi. v. 19. John xx.
v. 23.
is remitted or retained in Heaven. Behold then in this Church an exterior
Ministry, which lasts as long as the Church, that is to say, always, since
this Church is believed at all times, not as a thing, which has been, or must
be, but as a thing, which actually is. See then, to what this Church is joined,
and what is joined to this Church. She is joined immediately to the Holy Ghost,
which governs her: I believe in the Holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church. To
this Church is joined the Communion of Saints, the Remission of Sins, the
Resurrection of the Flesh, eternal Life. Out of this Church there is neither
Communion of Saints, nor Remission of Sins, nor Resurrection to eternal Life.
Behold the Faith of the Church established in the Creed. It makes no mention of
the Scripture. Is it, because it despises it? GOD forbid. You shall receive the
Scripture from the Hands of the Church; and because you never doubted of the
Church, you shall never doubt of the Scripture, which the Church has received
from GOD, from JESUS CHRIST, and from the Apostles; which she always keeps, as
coming from that Source, which she puts into the Hands of all the Faithful.

Methought, this Doctrine, truly Holy and Apostolical, wrought the Effect, it
ought to work: But there is, said I, one Word more. It Is what I said to Mr.
Claude, and I reduce it now to this most plain Argument, which every one may
equally understand, I mean, the Learned as the Ignorant, and the private Person
as the Pastor: The baptized Christian, before he reads the holy Scripture, can
either make this Act of Faith, I believe, that this Word is inspired by GOD, as
I believe that GOD is, or he cannot. If he cannot, he then doubts of it; he is
reduced to examine, whether the Gospel is not a Fable: But if he can make it, by
what means shall he do it? The Holy Ghost shall put it in his Heart. This is no
Answer; for it is agreed, That Faith in the Scripture comes from the Holy
Ghost. The Question is concerning the exterior Means, which the Holy Ghost
uses, and there can be no other but the Churches Authority. Thus every
Christian receives from the Church, without examining, this Scripture; as a
Writing inspired by GOD.

Let us go a little farther. Does the Church only give us the Holy Scripture in
Paper, the Bark of the Word, the Body of the Letter? No, without doubt, she
gives us the Spirit, that is, the Sense of the Scripture: For to give us the
Scripture without the Sense, is to give us a Body without a Soul, a Letter,
which kills. The Scripture without its lawful Interpretation, the Scripture
destitute of its natural Sense, is a Knife to cut our Throats. The Arian cut
his Throat by the Scripture misunderstood; so did the Nestorian; so did the
Pelagian. GOD forbid then, That the Church should give us only the Scripture,
without giving us the Sense of it. She received them both together. When she
received the Gospel of St. Matthew, and the Epistle to the Romans, and the
rest, she understood them: This Sense, which she received with the Scripture,
she has kept with the Scripture; and the same exterior Means, which the Holy
Ghost uses, to make us receive the Holy Scripture, he uses also to give us its
true Sense. All this comes from the same Principle; all this is the Sequel of
the same Design. As then there is nothing to examine after the Church, when she
gives us the Holy Scripture; so there is nothing to examine, when she interprets
it, and proposes its true Sense. Wherefore you see, that after the Council of
Jerusalem, Paul and Silas, said not, Examine this Decree; but they taught the
Church to observe, what the Apostles had judged.

In this manner has the Church always proceeded. I would not believe the
Gospel, says St. Augustine, were I not moved by the Authority of the Catholic
Church. Ep. 5. Cont. Manich.
And a little after: Those, whom I believed, when they said to me, Believe the
Gospel, shall I not believe, when they bid me not believe Manicheus. This
Society of Pastors, established by JESUS CHRIST, and continued until now, giving
me the Gospel, has also told me, That I must detest Heretics and evil
Doctrins; I believe both together, and by the same Authority.

After this manner were Christians instructed in the primitive Times, Tertull.
praescrip. adv. haeret. 18. 37.
in which Heretics were told, That they were not receivable to dispute of the
Scripture, because without Scripture they could be shown, that Scripture is not
for them; that there is nothing common between them and Scripture.

And observe, if you please, That all Christian Societies, except the Churches
newly reformed, have kept this manner of Instructing, Mr. Claude and I said,
That the Greek Church, the Ethiopian, the Armenian, and others, were deceived
indeed in believing themselves the true Church; but all at least believe, That
there is nothing to examine after the true Church.

There is no other manner of teaching the Faithful. If we tell them, That they
may understand the Holy Scripture better, than all the rest of the Church
together, we nourish Pride, we take away Docility. None says it, but the
Churches, which call themselves Reformed. Every where else they say, as we do,
That there is a true Church, which must be believed without examining after
her. This is believed not only in the true Church, but also in those, which
imitate the true Church.

The Pretended Reformed is the only Church, which says it not. If the true
Church, which soever she is, says it; the Pretended Reformed is not then the
true Church, because she says it not.

Let them not tell us: The Ethiopian says it, the Greek says it, the Armenian
says it, the Roman says it; which shall I believe?

If your Doubt consisted in choosing between the Roman and the Greek, 'twould
be necessary to enter into this Examen. But now it is agreed in your Religion,
That the Greek Church, the Ethiopian Church, and the rest, are in the wrong
against the Roman; and if they were true Churches, you ought, in leaving the
Roman, which, as you say, was not, to have sought Communion with them.

They are not then the true Church. No more are you: For the true Church
believes, That we must believe without examining, what the true Church teaches.
You teach the contrary. You call your selves the true Church, and you say at
the same time, That one must examine after you: Which is to say, That one may be
damned in believing you. You renounce then from that time the Advantage of the
true Church. You are not the true Church: You must be left: It Is here the
Beginning must be. If any one in leaving you be tempted to unite himself to the
Greek Church, he shall be answered.

Mademoiselle de Duras having heard these things, nothing seemed to me capable
to trouble her, but the Habit contracted from her Infancy, and the fear of
afflicting her Mother, for whom, I knew, she had all the Tenderness, and all
the Respect, that such a Mother deserves. I also saw, she was concerned for the
Reproaches, that were made her, of having human Designs, and especially of
having delayed the doubting of her Religion, till after a Donation, made her by
her Mother. Your own Conscience, said I to her, best knows, in what Condition
you were, when this Donation was made you; whether you had any Doubt, and
suppressed it in prospect of procuring your self this Advantage. I did not so
much as think of it, answered she. You know well then, said I to her, That this
Motive has not any part, in what you do. Continue therefore in Peace; provide
for your Salvation, and let Men talk: For this Apprehension of having human
Respects imputed to you, is it self a sort of human Respect, and that of the
most delicate and most to be feared.

She requested me to repeat in Mr. Coton's Presence, what had been said,
through a Desire, she had, that he should be Instructed with her. He was sent
for; we agreed on the Facts. Mr. Coton with an extreme Sweetness made me some
Objections about the Doctrine, I had explicated. I answered them. He told me, he
was not exercised in Dispute, nor versed in these Matters. He said true; he
referred himself to Mr. Claude. I prayed GOD to enlighten him, and departed to
return to my Duty.

After another Conference, which Mademoiselle de Duras and I had at St. Germain
in the Duchess of Richelieu's Apartment, she told me, That she believed her
self in condition to take her Resolution within a little while, and that there
was nothing more to do, But to pray GOD to conduct her well. The Success was
such, as we wished. On the 22. of March I returned to Paris to receive her
Abjuration. She made it in the Church of the Reverend Fathers of the Christian
Doctrine. The Exhortation, I made her, tended only to represent to her, That she
was returning into the Church, which her Fathers had forsaken; That she would
not henceforth believe her self more capable than the Church, more illuminated
than the Church, and fuller of the Holy Ghost than the Church; That she would
receive from the Church, without examining, the true Sense of the Scripture, as
she received from her the Scripture it self; That she was henceforth going to
build upon the Rock; and that her Faith must fructify in good Works. She felt
the Consolation of the Holy Ghost, and the Assistance was edified by her good
Example.

The End of the Conference.
REFLECTIONS ON A Writing OF Mr. CLAUDE'S

REFLECTIONS On a WRITING of MR. CLAUDE'S.
YOU have seen in the Advertisement, which is at the Beginning of this Book,
That, after Mr. Claude had read my Recital, he made an Answer to the
Instruction, I had given Mademoiselle de Daras, joining to it a Relation of our
Conference, which he had drawn up, as he affirms in that Writing, the next day
after ou^ Meeting.

I received from several Places, and even from the remotest Provinces, this
Writing of Mr. Claude's with his Relation: but the perfectest and most correct
Copy, I have seen, was communicated to me by the Duke of Cheoreuse, who had it
from a Lady of Quality of the Pretended Reformed Religion. I have seen also in
the same Duke's hands a Declaration, signed by Mr. Claude, in which he owns all
the Writing; so that it cannot be doubted, but it is his.

I find many things in this Writing, which manifestly confirm all, that is read
in mine. I pretend not to repeat here all these things, nor answer to those, in
which Mr. Claude appears to me, through the weakness of his Cause, as little to
agree with himself, as with us. To make such Remarks, a Writing must be in the
Hands of all People, so that every one may see, whether the Passages are truly
related, and the Sense and Consequence well taken; in a word, it must be
public. It shall be so, when Mr. Claude pleases. In the mean time, I will make
some Reflections on things, about which I think he cannot disagree, and which
may very much assist the Pretended Reformed to take a good Resolution upon the
Matter, we have treated.

The First REFLECTION
On M. Claude's Answer to the Acts extracted from the Discipline of the
Pretended Reformed.
MY First Reflection is upon the Answer, made by Mr. Claude, to the Acts,
extracted out of the Discipline of his Churches. I made use of these Acts to
show, That 'twas so necessary for all private persons to submit in Matters of
Faith to the Churches infallible Authority; That the Pretended Reformed, who
rejected it in speculation, were at the same time forced to acknowledge it in
Practice. What is most pressing in these Acts, is, That to the National Synod
alone, excluding Consistories, Colloquies, and Provincial Synods, is attributed
the last and final Resolution by GODS Word. Discip. chapter 5. Art. 31. vid. sup.
p. 13. Discip. chapter 9. Art, 3. Observe. p. 144. vid. sup. p. 13.
But because this is the last and final Resolution, the Churches and Provinces,
sending Deputies to this Synod, swear solemnly to submit to whatever shall be
concluded in that Assembly, being persuaded, that GOD will preside in it by his
holy Spirit and his Word. Thus because they believe an entire Submission, due
to this supreme Sentence, when it shall be pronounced, they swear to it, even
before it is given; it is to act consequentially. But if after a Promise,
confirmed by so solemn an Oath, they pretend, a Liberty is still left them to
examine, I confess, I know not, what Words signify, and there never was any
mental Evasion, so full of Illusion and Equivocation.

It may well be believed without my telling it, That the Ministers find
themselves pressed by so clear an Argument: In such Occasions, where the Truth is
discovered with so much evidence, the more one perceives the Difficulty, the
more also one finds himself embarrass'd. So there is nothing more visible than
the Perplexity, which appears in Mr. Claude's Answer; I say even in his Answer,
such, as himself sets it down in his own Relation.

He is reduced to say, That they make this Oath, because one ought to presume
well of such an Assembly; and moreover, That these Words, We (...) to submit to
your Assembly, being persuaded, that God will preside in it, include a
Condition, without which the Promise, thus sworn, has not its Effect. This is
all, 1 Repl. p. 344. Chap. 35. p. 192. Nog. 2. p. chapter 23. p. 447. p. 298.
Preserv. art. 15. p. 286.
that can be answered. The Anonymus, who dedicated his Book to Mr. Conrare,
first made me this Answer. Another Anonymus, whose Book is Entitled The
Disguisement unmaske, made it after him. Mr. Noguier and Mr. de Bruyes, other
Authors, that answered the Exposition, had only this to say. Mr. Jurieux stuck
to this Answer in his Preservative, only explicating more plainly than the
rest, That all this Persuasion, which serves for a Ground to the Oath, is a
Clause of Civility, the Terms whereof must not be abused. Mr. Claude had no
other Reply, and this is the only one, which still appears in his Relation.

Thus this so serious and solemn an Oath of all our Reformed and their Churches
in a Body to their National Synod is reduced to this Proposition, which would
be in the bottom but an insignificant Complement: We swear before GOD to submit
to all, that you shall decide, if you decide by his Word, as we hope and
presume, you will.

But why then is not this great Oath pronounced in these Terms, but that they
well saw, to reduce it to these Terms, would be to say nothing, and they would
say, or at least seem to say something?

For my part, the more I consider, what is said in the Discipline of the
Pretended Reformed concerning this Oath of the Churches, the farther I find it
from the sense, they would give it.

I find first, as I have observed in the Conference, That this Oath is made
only for the National Synod, that is, for the Synod, in which the last and
final Resolution is to be made by GODs Word; and the National Synod of Castres
has declared, That there should not be used in the Letters of Mission, Disc.
chapter 9. Art. 3. Obs. p. 144.
brought by the Deputies of particular Churches to the Colloquies and
Provincial Synods SVCH ABSOLVTE Clauses of Submission, as are inserted in the
Letters of the Provinces to the National Synod. Why; but only to show the
Difference, there is between the last Decision, and all the rest?

I effect, when I sought in what this Difference consisted, I found another
sort of Submission for the Colloquies and Provincial Synods. It Is, that those,
who are accused to alter the sound Doctrine, Disc. chapter 8. Art. 3.
are antecedently obliged to make an express Promise not to seminate any of
their Opinions before the meeting of the Colloquy or the Provincial Synod. It Is
a Rule of Discipline and Policy. But when they come to the Synod, in which this
last and final Resolution is to be made, the particular persons indeed
reiterate the same Promise; but they stop not there, the Churches in Body add
this great Oath of submitting entirely to the Decision, being persuaded, that
GOD himself will be the Author of it.

A bare human Presumption, as Mr. Claude calls it, a Clause of Civility, as Mr.
Jurieux styles it, cannot be the matter and foundation of an Oath: we also see,
That not only private persons, but also Consistories and whole Provinces,
perceived in this Oath something stronger, than they will at present let us
understand in it, insomuch that they made a great Resistance against it, which
could not be vanquished but by a long time, and the reiterated Decrees of
National Synods.

I see this Resistance continue till the year 1631. In this year and before I
find almost continually in the National Synods whole Provinces censured,
because their Deputation, or, as they term it, their Envoy had not this Clause
of Submission. The Churches were difficultly brought to make an Oath, so little
agreeable to the Doctrine, they were inspired with, and to swear, against the
Principles of the new Reformation, such a Submission to an Assembly, which
after all, whatever Name might be given it, was but an Assembly of Men, still
(according to their Principles) liable to mistake: but they must pass through
it. They said, they did nothing, if they did not at last oblige men to an
absolute Submission; and that to leave them liberty to examine after the last
and final Resolution, was to nourish Pride, Dissension, and Schism.

Thus, against the Principles of the new Reformation, were they fain to give
other Idea's, and 'twas resolved to stick unalterably to the Submission and
Oath in the Terms, we have observed.

The Reason, used by the Synod of Rochel to oblige the Provinces to this Clause
of Submission to such things, as should be resolved in the National Synod, is,
That 'twas necessary to the Validity of the Assemblies Conclusions. In the
general to render the Acts of an Assembly valid, 'twould be sufficient for
those, of whom it should be composed, to have a Power of bringing to it the
Suffrages of those, that send them; and the Deputies as well of the Colloquies,
as of the Provincial Synods came always furnished with such Powers. But there
was something more strong required for the National Synod; and since the last
Resolution was to be made, to render such an Act valid, and give it all its
force, 'twas thought necessary it should be preceded by a Submission as
absolute, as the Resolution ought to appear irrevocable.

To this Decision of the Synod of Rochel that of Tonneins added, Ibid.
That the Submission should be promised in proper terms to all, that should be
concluded, and decreed WITHOUT CONDITION AND MODIFICATION. Now, this is nothing
but a Clause of Civility, and a conditional Promise, that might be made, if
they would, not only to the Provincial Synods, to the Colloquy, and Consistory,
but also to every particular Minister. Nevertheless they neither make it to
these particular Ministers, nor to this Consistory, nor to these Colloquies,
nor to these Provincial Synods: why so, but to reserve something peculiar and
proper to the Assembly, where the final Resolution is to be made, after which
there remains nothing but to obey? But if all, that is here particular and
proper, be at the bottom only Words, was this worth employing the Churches of
the new Reformation, and five or six of their National Synods?

This is, what they ought to explicate, if they would say any thing: yet they
speak not one word of it, tho this Difficulty flies, as one may say, in their
faces, and that I have started it expressly.

In fine, To reduce my Argument in few words, every Oath ought to be founded on
a certain and known Truth. Now this Promise made to the National Synod, and
confirmed by the solemn Oath of all the Pretended Reformed Churches, We swear
and promise to follow your Decisions, being persuaded, that you will judge
well; this Promise, I say, which way soever it be turned, has no Certainty, but
in one of these two Senses. The first; We swear and promise to follow your
Decisions, if we find, you judge well: a thing indeed very certain, but at the
same time illusory, since there is no person on the earth, to whom one may not
say as much; and as I observed in the Conference, Mr. Claude may say it to me,
as well as I to him. The Second, We are so persuaded, you will judge well, that
we swear and promise to follow your Decisions; in which Case the Oath is false,
if we are not thoroughly assured, that the Assembly, it is made to, cannot judge
amiss.

All, the Pretended Reformed have now to do, is to choose, which they will of
these two Senses, one of which is a manifest Illusion, and the other, which
seems also the only natural Sense, clearly supposes the Churches Infallibility.

Nor must they answer here, That this Submission respects only public Order
and Discipline; for in matter of Faith a Decision obliges to nothing less, than
what the Apostle St. Paul says, Romans 10. 10.
To believe with the Heart, and confess with the Mouth. And our Reformed
themselves understand it so, when they declare in their Discipline, That the
Effect of this their National Synods last and final Decision is, Vid. sup. p.
13.
That it may be acquiesc'd in from point to point with an express disowning of
the contrary Doctrine. He then, who swears to submit to a Decision, that shall
be made in an Assembly, swears to believe with his Heart, and confess with his
Mouth the Doctrine which shall be there decided.

But for the making this Promise, and confirming it with an Oath, it is
requisite, the Assembly, it is made to, should have a Divine Promise of being
assisted by the Holy Ghost, which is, That it should be infallible.

Mr. Claude insinuated in the Conference, That there was in effect a Divine
Promise, That those, who sought, should find; and that the Oath of his Churches
might have its foundation in this Assurance. But he will never by this Answer
get out of the Difficulty, he is in. For to render the Oath conformable to the
Promise, it must be conditional, as the Promise is: and as JESUS CHRIST said,
If you search well, you shall find, the sense of the Oath should also be, If
you do your Duty, we will believe you; which would be to fall again into the
pitiful Illusion, we have rejected.

To the end then the Oath, we treat of, may be made without rashness, it must
be founded on an absolute Promise from GOD, on a Promise, which secures us even
against the Infidelities of men, such as JESUS CHRIST makes his Church, when he
indefinitly and absolutely assures her, Mat. 16. v. 18.
That the (...) of Hell shall not prevail against her.

As long as our Reformed shall persist in denying, That the Authority of the
Churches Decisions is founded on this Promise, their Oath will be always an
Illusion, or a manifest Rashness; and they will find themselves forced either
to defer more, than they are willing, to the Churches Authority, or to
acknowledge, That they have by magnificent words imposed on the Peoples
Credulity: since that after having distinguished the Churches last Decision from
all the rest by so remarkable a Character, and so particular a Protestation of
Submission, 'twill be found in the bottom, That this Submission, confirmed by
so singular an Oath, is of no other Nature or Kind, than what is naturally due
to all Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and every lawful Pastor; that is, one may
always proceed from it to new Doubts, and still examine, after the last
Resolution, as after all the rest.

It Is thus indeed according to the Principles of the new Reformation; but the
Principles of the new Reformation have not been able to change the necessary
Condition of Humani^^, which, for the hindering Divisions, and quieting Men's
Min^^, requires a final Decision, independent of all new Examination, either
General or Particular.

The Christian Church is not exempt from this Law; and the more regular she is,
the more her Constitution depend^ on an entire Submission of Mind, the more
need she has of such an Authority. Wherefore from the very beginning of
Christianity, GOD himself has put into the Hearts of all true Christians, That
they must no longer search nor examine, after the Church has determined. This
inviolable Tradition has wrought its Effect in our Reformed, maugre their
Principles. Nor do I wonder at it. Re^. de (...) S. 29.
St. Basil very wisely and very truly said, That Tradition made men speak more
than they would, and inspired into them things, contrary to their Sentiments.
And if our Reformed will not ow to Tradition this last and final Resolution,
and this Submission so solemnly sworn: it is then Necessity and Experience, that
has forced them to it; it is because there must an End be put to the Doubts and
Examinations of private persons by an absolute Authority, if they will have
Peace, and uphold Humility; it is that if they neither have, nor exercise this
Authority, they must make a show of having and exercising it, and at least give
the Idea of it; it is in a word, because one may indeed discourse and answer
Arguments by Words, but the natural Ignorance, Infirmity, and Pride of Man's
Mind requires other Remedies.

The Second REFLECTION
On one of the Propositions acknowledged by Mr. Claude in the Conference, and
on the Examen, he prescribes after the Judgment of the Church.
I Pretended to show is the Conference, That by denying the Churches infallible
Authority, one falls into these two Inconveniences; and I said not into one of
the two, but inevitably into both of them. The first is, That every particular
person, how ignorant soever he may be, is obliged to believe, That he may
understand GODs Word better than the most universal Synods, and all the rest of
the Church together. The second, That there is a time, when a Baptized
Christian is not in condition to make an Act of Faith upon the Holy Scripture;
but that, whether he will or no, he shall find himself obliged to doubt,
whether it be inspired by GOD.

I have not seen any of the Pretended Reformed, in whom these two Propositions
have not caused an horror, and who has not told me, he should be so far from
ever believing them himself, that he should detest those, which did. Let us see
then, how it continues fixed by the Conference, that they are Consequences of
the Pretended Reformeds Doctrine, and such manifest Consequences, that they are
owned by the Ministers.

And indeed, not to depart from Mr. Claude's Relation, he himself asserts in
it: That after all Ecclesiastical Assemblies every particular Person ought to
(...) whether they have well understood GODs Word, or no When he had spoken of
human Interests, which often, is he said, (...) the Truth in the most
authentical and most universal Assemblies of the Church: For to destroy this
Answer, and show, that 'twas in the bottom nothing but a Civil, I (...) him,
whether all passing in Order, and without the appearance of any human Interest
in the Deliberation, every private Person must not yet examine. He acknowledged,
he must; and (...) it still in his own Relation, maintaining, That there is not
any Absurdity; nor any Pride in a private Persons (...) that he may understand
GODs Word better than all Ecclesiastical Assemblies, what good Order soever is
kept in them, and of whatsoever Persons they (...) be (...)

This Proposition and Doctrine will appear (...) to every docible Spirit. But to
the end the thing may be (...) let us make Application of this Doctrine in a
particular Example.

The Calvinistical Church since these (...) or (...) years from her first
beginning to be established, has not held any Assembly more (...) more (...)
than the Syno^ of D^rt. Besides all the Churches of the (...), all the rest of
the same Belief, that of England, that of (...), those of the (...) those of
(...) those of Switzerland, that of (...) and the ^est of the German Language,
were there by their Deputies, and received it; and to the end nothing might be
wanting to it, if the (...) Churches of this Realm were hindered from (...) at
it, they adopted all its Doctrine in the National Synod of (...) 1631. where all
the Articles of (...) and sworn to by the whole Synod, and afterward by
all-the Provinces and all the particular Churches Since that time none of the
Pretended Reformed (...) this Synod. The (...) alone, who were there (...)
blame is Doctrine, and relate the Cabals and the Share, Policy and the Interests
of the House of (...) had in it. All also have yielded; and if there be any
thing, that can be said (...) have been received with an unanimous Confe^^ by
all the Churches of the Pretended Reformation, it is without doubt the (...) of
this Synod. And nevertheless I will (...), Whether any private Person whatever
of his Church may rely upon an Authority, so great amongst them, as this is,
without examining any farther, if he be pressed to Answer positively Yea or No
to so precise a Question, and in a Fact so well circumstantiated, he must say
No, and that in fine, notwithstanding all this, they were but men, how able,
how illummated, how holy soever they are imagined, still subject to fail, whose
Sentiments, if one should follow blindfold and without examining, he would
equal men to GOD. Thus, according to the Maxims of the new Reformation, every
private Person, even to the most ignorant women, ought to believe, that they
can understand the holy Scripture better than an Assembly, composed of whatever
is greatest in that whole Church, which he acknowledges to be the only one,
where GOD is purely served; and not only better than this Assembly, but than
all the rest of the Church, and than all, that he knows in the whole Universe.
This is, what Mr. Claude has acknowledged to me; This is in Substance, what he
still says in his own Relation; and this is, what every Minister, whether he
will or no, shall own in a Conference in the presence of any one, that shall
desire it, unless he obstinately resolves not to answer positively: In which
case he will be seen to shuffle, and this Tergiversation will be stronger than
an Acknowledgment, since 'twill not only show, that the Acknowledgment is
inevitable, but 'twill also make appear, that he is sensible of its pernicious
Consequences.

And what I say of the Synod of Dort, Mr. Claude and every other Minister will
be forced to say of the Council of Nice, of the Council of Constantinople, of
that of Ephesus, of that of Chalcedon, and the rest, which they and we receive
with common accord: And when they shall say it, they will say nothing new, or
unusual in their Religion. Calvin said it in formal terms, when speaking in
general of all the Councils of the precedent Ages, 4. Instit. c. 9.
he writ these words: I pretend not in this place, that all the Councils must
be condemned, and all their Decrees vacated. Nevertheless, proceeded he, you
will object to me, that I so order them, as to permit every one indifferently
to receive or reject, what the Councils should have established; by no means,
that is none of my Intent. You would say, ^he were very far from it. The Majesty
of Councils, and the Authority of so great a Name, moves him at first; but the
Consequence of his Doctrine makes him soon forget, what he seemed willing to say
to their advantage: For see, how he concludes. When, says he, the Authority of
a Council is alleged, I desire first, it be considered, in what time, and for
what cause it was assembled, and what Persons assisted at it; afterward, that
the principal Point be examined according to the Rule of the Scripture, so that
the Councils Definition have its weight, and be as a Prejudice, but that it
hinder not the Examination. This is, what all this careful Enquiry after Time,
Matter, and Persons, in fine terminates in, to wit, That at what Time soever a
Council is held, what Matter soever is there treated, and or what Persons
soever it is composed, every one indifferently, for that was the Question,
should examine the principal Point by GODs Word, and believe, he can understand
that Divine Word better than all the Councils.

See, how far these Gentlemen p^sh the Examen: They drive it yet much farther,
since they will have one examine after the Apostles. This is not a Consequence,
which I draw from their Doctrine: It Is their own very Proposition and Doctrine in
formal Terms, and particularly that of Mr. Claude. For upon what I says in the
Exposition, Exp. Ar^. 19.
that after the Council of Jerusalem, Act. XV. v. 18.
and the Decision of the Apostles, where they said: It seemed good to the Holy
Ghost and to us, now had any thing more to examine, and that in effect Pa^l and
Barnabas with Silas, as it is written in the Acts, Act. XVI. v. 4.
went through the Churches, teaching them, not to examine, what the Apostles had
done, but to keep the Decrees, they had ordained: Because I concluded thence,
That they gave the Form to all following Ages, and taught us, how in all times
the Faithful ought to submit to the Churches Decisions without examining; after
several Answers, but all frivolous, they were fain at last to answer me
clearly, That one ought yet to examine after the Council of the Apostles. It Is
the (...), it is the first, that answered the Exposition, who writ in these
terms: We do not see, that the Apostles published their Decision with an
absolute Order, it should 'be obeyed: but they sent Paul, Barnabas, and Sila^
for to instruct the Faithful to keep this Ordinance, that is evidently, to
persuade them the Motives and Grounds of it, which says not, that they were
forbid to exam^^.

This is, what the Anonymus says: The Place is remarkable: you will find it in
the Nineteenth Article of the first Answer, in the fourth and last Observation
he makes on the Council of the Apostles, Page the 328 th. This is not a
particular Sentiment of this Authors, since there is placed in the Front of his
Book the Approbation of four Ministers of Charenton, of which Mr. Claude is
one, to the end he may not say, I charge him with a strange Doctrine in imputing
to him that of this Ano^^mus.

Thus it is not the unbelieving Jews and Gentiles, it is the Faithful, the
Christian Churches, that ought to examine after the Apostles; and after the
Apostles assembled, and after they have pronounced, It seemed good to the Holy
Ghost and to us: And this prodigious Doctrine is taught in a Church, which
vau^^^ of hearing nothing, but the pure Words of the Apostles, See, whither the
Ministers and the Pretended Reformed, and particularly Mr. Claude, are forced
by their Belief to carry the necessity of the Examen.

There was nothing left, but to say, we must yet examine after JESUS CHRIST, and
that with all his Miracles, and all the Authority, given him by his Father, he
had not enough to oblige men to follow him on his Word, and without examining:
Mr. Claude said it in our Conference, and says it again in his Relation.

I desire the prudent Reader to believe, that in a Matter of this importance, I
will neither impose upon him, nor exaggerate: Let him follow me only with
attention, and he shall see the Truth plainly appear.

You have seen, how I objected in the Conference, That unless there were
acknowledged a living and speaking Authority, to which every particular Person
is obliged to submit without examining, private Persons would be brought to the
Presumption of believing, they could understand the Holy Scripture better than
all the Councils together, and than all the rest of the Church.

To prove, that in this there was not any thing so presumptuous, or absurd, Mr.
Claude answered me, that in the time when JESUS CHRIST was upon the Earth, the
Case had happened, when a private Person ought to raise his own Judgment above
that of the Synagogue assembled, which condemned JESUS CHRIST: That this was so
far from being a Sentiment of Pride, that 'twas the Act of a perfect Faith.

This Answer, I confess, struck an Horror in me: For, to make it good, one must
say, That in the time, when the Synagogue judged JESUS CHRIST, and he himself
was on the Earth, there was not upon Earth any living and speaking Authority,
to which Men were obliged to submit without examining: So that one ought to
examine after JESUS CHRIST, it not being permitted to believe him on his Word. I
made this Answer to Mr. Claude, and showed him, That they were then so far from
a necessity of every ones determining himself by a particular Examen, and
setting himself above every living and speaking. Authority, that there was at
that time one, the greatest, which ever was or could be, to wit, That of JESUS
CHRIST, and of the Truth it self; to whom the Father publicly bare Witness by
a Voice from Heaven, by the greatest and most visible Miracles, that were ever
wrought, and in fine, by the most resplendent, as well as the most certain
Means, the Divine Omnipotence could make use of.

If I observe in the Conference, there was no Answer to this Argument, it is
very apparent, that in effect there ought to be none. Mr. Claude nevertheless
in his Relation says, he answered me, That JESUS Christ's Miracles made one of
the Matters in Question; That there were false Miracles, which Moses in
Deuteronomy advised the Israelites to take heed of; That the Synagogue had
judged JESUS Christ's Miracles to be done in the Name of Beelze^ub; That in fine
an Authority decides nothing, till it be first received, and that JESUS
CHRIST's was not so as yet, since 'twas in dispute, whether they should receive
it, or reject it. I am obliged to observe, That assuredly I heard nothing of
all this in the Conference; and you will soon see, that it were indeed better
to be silent, than to say such things. But since Mr. Claude will have said
them, he must then also say, that, because JESUS Christ's Miracles were rejected
as deceitful Signs by the Envious, by the Obstinate, in one word by the
declared Enemies of the Truth, These Miracles were not convincing enough to
oblige Men to believe JESUS CHRIST on his Word without examining farther; and
that, for Example, after he had raised Lazarus in express Testimony, John xi.
v. 42.
That GOD had sent him, those, who beheld, with their Eyes so great a Miracle,
were, I do not say permitted, but expressly obliged to examine, whether JESUS
CHRIST was sent by GOD. He must, I say, carry the necessity of the Examen to
this excess: Otherwise 'twill be true, as I have said, That there was then a
visible and palpable Authority, to which every one ought to submit without
examining; so that there was never any time, when Men were less exposed to the
Temptation of Pride by elevating themselves above all living and speaking
Authority, since JESUS CHRIST, the most living and most speaking, as well as
the greatest and most infallible, that ever was, was then on the Earth, and
that they preferred not themselves before the Synagogue but by submitting to
JESUS CHRIST, whose Miracles, as himself said, took away all Excuse from those,
John. xv. v. 22, 23, 24.
that believed not in him: Which the Assembly, that condemned him, knew so
well, that they found no other Answer to his Miracles, nor any other Means to
resist him, but to make him away, and with him Lazarus also, John xi. v. 47.
and xii. v. 10.
to stifle, if they could, at once with the Miracles, they had seen, the Memory
of him, that wrought them.

They must not then here think to dazzle People with frivolous Answers, and make
the Readers lose the Consequence of an Argument by bringing in unprofitable
Questions. I mean, That it is to no Purpose to start up here the Question
concerning deceitful Signs, nor to answer, That the Synagogue doubted of the
Truth of JESUS CHRIST's Miracles. The Question is only to know, whether this
Doubt was not the Effect of an evident Malice, and in fine, whether it be not
certain amongst Christians, That there was in JESUS CHRIST's Miracles so full a
Demonstration of the Divine Power, and so clear a Confirmation of JESUS
CHRIST's Mission, that every reasonable Spirit was obliged to yield without any
farther Examination, so that there was then a living and speaking Authority, to
which there was nothing to be opposed, but a gross Ignorance, and a manifest
Obstinacy. This is the matter in Debate, and if after this Explication of the
Question, they think still to escape by saying with Mr. Claude, That JESUS
CHRIST's Authority was not received, they must go farther, John viii. v. 13.
and say to JESUS CHRIST himself with the Jews: Thou bear Record of thy
self, thy Record is not true. Then we will answer with JESUS CHRIST: John viii.
v. 13, 14, 16, 18. John v. v. 36.
Tho I bear Record of my self, yet my Record is true. And again: I am not
alone, but my Father, that sent me, bears also Witness of me. And again: The
Works which the Father has given me to finish, the same Works that I do, bear
Witness of me, that the Father has sent me. And in fine: C. xv. v. 22, 24.
They have no Cloak for their Sin: If I had not done among them the Works which
none other Man did, they had not had Sin: but now they have both seen, and
hated both me and my Father. The meaning of this is, That the Miracles are
clear, the Authority is incontestable, and the Resistance can have no other
Ground but a blind Hatred.

I expect, they will yet answer me, That JESUS CHRIST added after all this:
John v. v. 39.
Search the Scriptures, they are they which testify of me; and that they will
dare to conclude from thence, how one might and ought to examine after JESUS
CHRIST, so that the Word, he pronounced, shows us not a superabundance of
Conviction in the Scripture, but an insufficiency of Authority in the Person of
JESUS CHRIST. If they make yet this Objection, we have nothing to do, but to
hold our Peace, and leave JESUS CHRIST to defend his own Cause.

In the mean time we will conclude, That it is JESUS Christ's Authority, which we
revere in his Church. If we say, the Church must be believed without examining,
it is because JESUS CHRIST, who teaches and guides her, is above all Examen. We
will not forbear to say also in imitation of JESUS CHRIST, Search the
Scriptures: We shall confound them by this Scripture, which they say, they
believe, and we shall see them also faint under this Examination, but it shall
be, after we have forced them to acknowledge, that we must submit, without
examining, to the Churches Authority, in which that Spirit, whom JESUS CHRIST
has sent to keep his place, always speaks.

There is then nothing less to the Purpose than the Example of the Synagogue,
and our Pretended Reformed, deprived of this Example, which was their chiefest
Strength, continue alone to believe themselves, every one in particular,
capable to understand the holy Scripture better than whatsoever in the Universe
has Authority to interpret it, and to judge of Doctrine, and than all the
Faithful, that appear to them in the Worl'd: Which is the Error of the
Independents, or something worse.

They will say, That this private Person, who examins after the Church, shall
always be well assured not to be alone in his Sentiment, since there will
always remain some secret elected one, who will think, as he does: As if,
without refuting this Vision, it were not a Pride detestable enough to set
himself alone above all, that is seen and heard to speak in the whole Church
besides. They will say again: It Is no Pride to believe ones self enlightened by
the Holy Ghost. But on the contrary, it is the height of Pride, That particular
Persons should dare to believe, the Holy Ghost will instruct them, and leave in
Error all the Faithful, that appear in the rest of the Church. Nor is it to any
purpose to answer, as Mr. Claude does in his Relation, John iii. v. 8.
in his Relation, That the Spirit blows, where he will: For they must show,
that this Spirit which reposes on the Humble, ceases not to breath on those,
who believe themselves alone more capable to understand the Scripture, than all
the rest of the Church, since they examine after her; and not only to breath
upon them, but himself also to inspire into them this proud Thought. But in
fine, however it is, and without disputing any farther, since this is no place
for it, we have shown, that it is a Doctrine acknowledged in the new Reformation,
That every particular Person ought to examine after the Church, and consequently
ought to believe, That he may happen to understand the Scripture better than
she and all her Assemblies. Those, that abhor this Presumption, or that upon
Examination find not in themselves this false Capacity, have no more to do, but
to seek their Salvation in another Church than that, in which so prodigious a
Doctrine is professed.

The Third REFLECTION,
On another Proposition, acknowledged by Mr. Claude in the Conference: An
Explication of the manner of Instructing Christians; and, That the Churches
infallible ^^thority is necessary for the knowing and understanding of
Scripture.
THE second Absurdity, I promised to make Mr. Claude and every good Protestant
avow, is, That unless there be acknowledged in the Church an Authority, after
which there must be no more examining nor doubting, there is a Necessity of
setting a Point of time, in which the Believer at the Age of Reason cannot make
an Act of Faith upon the Scripture, and in which consequently he must doubt,
whether it be true or false. I assigned for this Point of Doubt all the time,
in which a Christian, for what cause soever, has not read the Holy Scripture.
Mr. Claude here cries out against so detestable a Proposition; and I persist to
say, That he not only owned it in the Conference, but also that, in what manner
soever he here endeavors to turn things, he has not been able to do it so
well, but that he still confesses it in the Relation.

In truth, this is one of the Places, in which I least remember our exact
Words. But there is still enough to convince him, since if this Relation
becomes public, every one will see, he here acknowledges in formal Terms, That
he, who has not yet read the Holy Scripture, believes it to be GODs Word with
human Faith, because his Father told him so, which is the State of a
Catechumen; and when he has himself read this Book, and felt the Efficacy of
it, he believes it to be GODs Word, no longer with an human Faith, because his
Father told him so, but with a divine Faith, because he has himself immediately
felt its Divinity, and this is the State of a Believer.

It Is then true, that he has acknowledged the Time, I undertook to show, when a
Baptized Christian is not in a Condition to make an Act of Supernatural and
Divine Faith upon the Holy Scripture, since he believes it to be GODs Word only
by an human Faith, and divine Faith cannot come till after the reading of it.

In what manner soever he turns this human Faith, it is an horrible thing, that
a Baptized Christian, at the Age of Reason, cannot make upon the Scripture an
Act of that Faith, by which we are Christians. For thence it follows, That a
Christian at his first going to read the holy Scripture, ought neither to be
inclined of himself, or induced by any other, to say at opening it. I believe,
as I believe that GOD is, that the Scripture, I am going to read, is his Word.
On the contrary they must make him say: I am going to examine, whether
henceforth, during the rest of my life, I ought to read this Scripture with
such a Faith. It Is to overthrow the whole Order of Instruction; it is to lose
the Fruit of Baptism; it is to reduce Baptized Christians to instruct their
Children, as if they were not so, and that they were yet to deliberate, of what
Religion they should be.

And what Mr. Claude says concerning the Scripture, the same he must say on the
Faith of the Trinity, on that of the Incarnation, on that of JESUS Christ's
Mission, and the Redemption of Mankind. For that, which forces Mr. Claude and
every Protestant to say, That the Believer, who has not read the holy
Scripture, can believe it only with an human Faith to be inspired by GOD, is,
That otherwise they must acknowledge an Act of Divine Faith on the Churches sole
Authority: Which would be to own this Authority as infallible, and ruin the
very Foundations of all the new Reformation. But the same Argument returns upon
all the Articles of our Faith; and if the Faithful can believe with a divine
Faith, both the Trinity and the Incarnation and Mission of JESUS CHRIST on the
sole Authority of the Church, and before he has read the holy Scripture, I
shall always conclude with equal Certainty, That the Churches Authority will be
infallible. By the Consequence then of Mr. Claude's and all the Protestants
Principle, we must in reducing the Christians, who go to read the holy
Scripture, to a bare human Faith concerning this Scripture, reduce them at the
same time to the like on the most Essential Articles of our belief.

This was not the Method of our Forefathers; they did not thus teach Christians
to instruct their Children. When they baptized them in their Infancy, they said
in that young Age Credo, I believe. No matter, tho our Reformers have changed
this Form; 'twas used in the very first Ages, and will be always holy and
venerable, maugre all they can do. But this Form, used toward Children, shows
us, that when they shall have the use of Reason, they must be immediately taught
to make an Act of Faith, and time must not be lost in exciting them to it. They
will then be capable of it: they may say the same Creed, they should have said,
if they had been baptized at the Age of Understanding; and to reduce them to a
Faith barely human, is to take from them the Grace of their Baptism, and
justify the Practice, as well as the Doctrine of the Anabaptists.

And I conjure the Gentlemen of the Pretended Reformed Religion not to believe,
that I allege here the Anabaptists by way of exaggeration, or to render them
odious: these manners are not beseeming Christians. I am ready to make good,
that the Doctrine, taught here by Mr. Claude, and which all Protestants must
teach with him, introduces Anabaptism. For if the Acts of divine Faith must be
held in suspense, till such time as one has read the holy Scripture, and be
instructed by himself; if all the Acts, that precede this Instruction, are not
Acts of Christians: since they have for their foundation only an human Faith:
for the same reason Bap^^^ must be deferred till that time, and we must not
make Christians, that at the Age of Reason are incapable to produce Acts of
their Religion.

The Fourth REFLECTION,
On Mr. Claude's objecting the same Difficulty to us about the Church, as we do
to him about the Scripture.
IT IS in vain for Mr. Claude to answer us, That he will make us the same
Argument for the Church, as we make him for the Scripture: for, to do this, as
we show him a point of time, which even at the use of Reason necessarily
precedes the Reading of the Scripture, he must also be able to show us one,
that precedes the Churches Instructions: but this he will never find. Whatever
he does, we shall always mark him a a Point of time, before the reading of the
Scripture, which is that, when the Church puts it into our hand: but before the
Church there is nothing; she prevents all our Doubts by her Instructions.

It Is an Error to imagine, that we must always examine, before we believe. The
Happiness of those, who are born, as I may say, in the Bosom of the true
Church, is, That GOD has given her such an Authority, that we believe at first
what she proposes, and that Faith precedes, or rather excludes Examination.

To ask now, by what Motives GOD makes us sensible of his Churches Authority,
is to depart visibly from the Question. He wants not Motives to fasten his
Children to his Church, to which he has given so particular and so resplendent
Characters. This very thing, that of all the Societies in the world she is the
sole, to whom none can show her beginning, or any interruption of her visible
and exterior State by any averred Fact, whilst she shows all other Societies,
that environ her, theirs by Facts, which themselves cannot deny; this very
thing is a sensible Character, that gives an inviolable Authority to the true
Church. GOD wants not Motives to make his Children perceive this so particular
Character of his Church. But whatever these Motives are, not to forestall them
here, this being no place for it, it is certain, that there are some; since that
in fine we must be able to believe on the Churches word, before we have read
the holy Scripture, and that in the first Instruction, we receive, without
speaking of the Scripture, we are taught to say, as a fundamental Act of our
Faith, I believe the Catholic Church.

Mr. Claude tells us, that to authorize the Method, by which we pretend to lay
the Churches Faith as the Foundation of all the rest, the Creed should have
begun with saying, I believe the Church; whereas it is begun with saying, I
believe in GOD the Father, and in JESUS CHRIST, and in the Holy Ghost. And he
considers not, that it is the Church her self, which teaches us the whole Creed;
that it is on her word we say, I believe in GOD the Father, and in JESUS CHRIST
his only Son, and the rest; which we cannot say with a firm Faith, unless GOD
at the same time puts in our Hearts, that the Church, which teaches us,
deceives us not. After then we have on her word said, I believe in the Father,
and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost, and begun our Profession of Faith by the
Divine Persons, whom their Majesty places above all, we add an holy Reflection
on the Church, which proposes to us this Belief, and say, I believe the
Catholic Church. To which we immediately after join all the Graces, we receive
by her Ministry, the Communion of Saints, the Remission of Sins, the Blessed
Resurrection, and in fine Everlasting Life.

The Fifth REFLECTION,
On Mr. Claude's alleging here the Practice of the Greek Church, and the like:
which is only to embroil the matter, and not to resolve the Difficulty.
IT IS to show a desire of embroling matters, to allege here with Mr. Claude,
the Greek Church, the Armenian, the Egyptian, or Aethiopick, and that of the
Cophti, and so many others, which brag no less of being the true Church, than
the Roman does. Those, say they, who are bred up in these Churches, revere
their Authority, every one of these Churches has Followers, as zealous, as
ours: True and pure zeal has no sensible Mark: every one attributes his, as we
do, to the Grace of the Holy Ghost, and resting on the Authority of the Church,
in which he is, says, That the Holy Ghost makes use of this Authority to guide
him to the Belief of the Scripture and all the Verities of Christianity.

This is in a manner Mr. Claude's Objection; and thus sometimes, when Men
cannot free themselves, they endeavor to cast others into the like Perplexity
as theirs. But he will gain nothing by this Address: for in fine what cause
does he pretend to combat for? is it for indifferency of Religions? Will he say
with the wicked, that there is not a true Church, in which men indeed act by
divine Motions? And under pretense, that the Devil, or, if he pleases, Nature
can imitate, or, to say better, counterfeit these Motions, will he maintain,
that they are every where imaginary? GOD forbid: we will both of us avoid this
Rock. He will avow then with me, that there is a true Church, which soever it
is, where the Holy Ghost acts, tho by looking only on the exterior, we cannot
always so easily discern, who those are, in whom he dwells. Hitherto we are
agreed; let us see now, how far we can go together. We agree that there is one
true Church, in which the Holy Ghost acts; we agree, that he makes use of
exterior Means, to put the Truth in our Hearts; we agree, that he makes use of
the Church, and of the Scripture. Our question is to know by which he begins,
whether by the Scripture or by the Church; whether, I say, he makes us believe
the Church by the Scripture, or rather makes us believe the Scripture by the
Church. I say, that the Holy Ghost begins by the Church; and it must be so,
since it is manifestly the Church, that puts the Scripture in our hands.
Nevertheless Mr. Claude leaves me here, and begins to walk alone; but he falls
at the very first step into a Precipice. For his Fear of acknowledging an
infallible Authority in the true Church, and of believing, that on her word we
may make an Act of divine and supernatural Faith concerning the Scripture,
obliges him to say, that it is not possible to begin the reading of the Holy
Scripture by such an Act of Faith; and that every Act of Faith, which precedes
this Reading, is an Act of human Faith. See the deporable Condition, in which
he puts a Christian at his first going to read the Holy Scripture. Mr. Claude
cannot get forth of this Abyss without returning to the place, where he began
to leave me, and saying afterward with me, that there is a true Church,
wheresoever she is, the veneration of which the Holy Ghost first inspires into
true Believers; that by this Veneration, which he at first puts in their
Hearts, he fixes them to the Scripture, which this Church presents them; that
this Church requires also of all those, she can instruct, that they adore upon
her word the infallible Truth of this Scripture, and acknowledges not for her
Children those, which have only an human Faith for it.

But, say they, the Roman Church is not the sole, which attributes to her self
this Authority: the Greek, and other Churches will have one believe them on
their word, and teach, that this is the Means to read the Holy Scripture with
the Submission of a divine Faith. And well, if it be so, it remains only to
choose between these Churches. But then the Calvinistical Church is gone at the
very first brush; she degrades her self, as I may say, from the Title of the
Church, since she finds not in her self Authority enough to cause all those,
whom she begins to instruct, to make an Act of a Christian, and an Act of
divine Faith, not even on the Truth of the Scripture, whence it is supposed, she
ought to learn all the rest.

But Mr. Claude asks, how one shall choose between these Churches. Shall it be
by Enthusiasm? It would be by Enthusiasm, as I have observed in the Conference,
if the true Church had not her particular Characters, that distinguish her from
others. She has, without going any farther, or searching any deeper, her
Succession, in which none can show her by any positive Fact Interruption,
Innovation, or Change. This is, what no false Church can so clearly glory of,
as the true, because by glorying of it she would visibly condemn her self.
There will be then always in the Instruction, which the true Church shall give
her Children concerning her Condition, something, that no other Sect can, or
dare say. It Is by this, we would convince, if it were in question, the Greeks,
the Ethiopians, the Armenians, and other Sects, which seem in this respect more
deceiving because of the appearance of Succession, that they show; which also
makes them way to attribute to themselves with a little more ground the
Authority of the Church. But as for the Calvinian Church, there is an end of
her, because she has not so much as an apparent and tolerable Succession, and
that she dares not, as we have now shown by Mr. Claude's acknowledgment,
attribute to her self this Authority, without which there can neither be any
certain Instruction, nor any assured Foundation of Divine Faith, nor in fine
any Church.

'Twould be then in vain for us to lose time here in disputing with the
Egyptians and Greeks the Succession, they brag of. 'Twould be no great Labor to
show them the exact Moment of their Innovation. The Pretended Reformed know it
as well as we, and can themselves show it them, when they please: So when they
pross us to do it, it is not that they think to engage us in a thing impossible,
or even obscure and difficult: but it is in a word, that in so bad a cause there
is always something got by digressing, and making the consequence of an
Argument be lost.

Thus I had reason to tell Mademoiselle de Duras in one of the Instructions of
this Book, that, if any one, disgusted with the Calvinistical Church, was
tempted to embrace the Religion of the Cophti, or of the Greeks, 'twould be
then time to show them in these Churches that inevitable Moment of their
Novelty, which they can no more de^y, than can the other Sects: but since the
Calvinists, with whom we have to do, agree it, and that none thinks of leaving
them, but to come to us, when we oblige any one to leave them, by showing from
their Ministers own Confession the enormous Absurdities of their Doctrine, the
work is perfected, and all the rest on that occasion would be to no purpose.

And to the end the Method of the Conference, and the State of the Question,
which is there treated, may be thoroughly understood; it did not aim directly to
establish the Roman Church, but only to show, that there is some-where or other
a true Church, to which we must submit without examining; and besides, that
this cannot be the Calvinistical Church, since she will her self have one
examine after her; which makes her acknowledge the Absurdities, we have
remark't, and by this acknowledgment lose the Title of the Church.

This done, there is no more question to preach the Roman Church, that is, that
Body of the Church, of which Rome is the Head; since to him, that will choose
between two Churches, the excluding of the one is the establishing of the
other, without any need of disputing farther for this purpose. Besides that the
Roman Church so evidently bear these Characters of the true Church, that there
is scarce any man of good Sense, even amongst our Reformed, but agrees, that,
if there be in the world an Authority, to which we must submit, it is that of
this Church.

But however, when one sees the Absurdities, one is forced to own in Calvinism,
for want of having acknowledged in the Churches Authority the true Principles
of Christian Instruction, one soon retires from a Church, whose Method and
Instruction is so manifestly defective; and one is sufficiently solicited by
the Remains of Christianity, which one feels within himself, to return to the
Church, from whence he departed.

The Sixth REFLECTION,
On Mr. Claude's reducing, as much as he can, this Dispute to the Instruction
of Children.
WE see in Mr. Claude's Discourses, that pressed by this want of Authority,
which ruins all Instruction in his Church, he affects to reduce our Dispute to
the Instruction of Children, and thinks he has found an Advantage by making
this Instruction depend on Parents and Nurses, who are better known at that Age
than the Church and her Ministers. By this means he thinks to conceal from us
the Churches Authority in the first Exercises and first Acts of Faith, we make;
before we have read the Holy Scripture. But he ought first to consider, that
the Argument, I made him, regarded not only Children: Children are not the only
Christians, that have not read the Scripture. Mr. Claude is not ignorant, that
there were in the beginning of Christianity, not only particular men, but also
whole Nation, which, according to the Report of St. Irenaeus, had not the Holy
Scripture, and without reading it ceased not to be true Christians. The Debate
then between us is in general concerning all those, that have not read the Holy
Scripture, of what Age soever they may be, and what way soever they may have
happened not to have read it. For it is of those, and if they will, it is of those,
whom St. Irenaeus mentions, or of their like, that I enquire concerning the
Faith, with which they believe the Scripture, and prepare to read it, as being
inspired by GOD. If they have but an human Faith, as Mr. Claude says, they are
not Christians; and if they have a Divine Faith, as must be acknowledged,
unless we will fall into an horrible Absurdity, it is then true, that Divine
Faith, without ones having read the Scripture, immediately follows the Churches
Doctrine, and establishes her infallible Authority. It Is on this Authority, that
every Christian, who takes the Scripture in hand, begins by believing with a
firm Faith, that all, he is going to read, is Divine: and he stays not his
believing the truth of this Scripture, till he has read it all; he believes the
first Chapter, before he has read the second, and he believes all, before he
has read the first Letter, or so much as opened the Book. He forms not then his
Faith by the reading of the Scripture: this Reading finds his Faith already
formed: this Reading does but confirm to a Christian all he already believed,
and all, he had already found in the Churches Belief. He believed then before
all things, that the Church deceived him not; and by this he began to make the
Acts of a Christian. Children are not instructed in any other manner. When they
hear their Parents, it is the Church, they hear, for our Parents are our
Teachers, only as they are Children of the Church. It Is for this reason the
Holy Ghost sends us to them: Ask thy Father and he will show thee; thy Elders
and they will tell thee. St. Basil, Ep. 29.
so great a Divine, justifies himself, and at the same time confounds the
Heretics by alleging to them the Faith of his Mother and of his Grandmother
St. Macrina; and he herein imitates St. Paul, who praises Timothy for having an
unfeigned Faith, 2 Timothy 1. 5.
which dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois, and his Mother Eunice. The meaning
is that true Doctrine ought always to descend from hand to hand, and that there
shall always be a true Church, to which none can ever show her beginning, nor
find in her State those Marks of Interruption and Novelty, which all other
Sects bear on their Front. Christian Parents, joined to this Church, join their
Children to her, and put them at the feet of her Ministers to be there
instructed.

It Is not to be imagined, that Children, in whom Reason begins to appear,
because they know not how to rank their Discourses, are incapable of resenting
the Impressions of Truth. They are seen learn to speak in an Age, yet more
infirm: in what manner they learn, by what they make the Distinction between
the Noun and the Verb, the Substantive and the Adjective, neither themselves
know, nor can we, who have learnt by this Method, well explicate, so deep and
hidden it is. We learn almost in the same manner the Churches Language. A
secret Light guides us in both these States: in the one it is Reason, in the
other Faith. Reason discovers it self by little and little, and so does Faith
infused by Baptism. We must have Motives to fix us to the Churches Authority,
GOD knows them, and we know them in general: in what manner he ranks them, how
he makes these innocent Souls perceive them, is the Secret of his Holy Spirit.
However it is certain, that this is done, and by this he begins. As this is the
first Christian Act, we make, and as on this Foundation all is built, so it
subsists for ever. The time will come, when we shall know more distinctly, why
we believe; and the Churches Authority will from day to day become stronger in
our minds. The Scripture it self will fortify the Chains, which bind us to her:
but we must always have Recourse to the Original, that is, to believe on the
Churches Authority. What Age soever we are at, it is by this we begin to believe
the Scripture; we continue also on the same Foundation; and St. Augustine was
already perfect in the Ecclesiastical Science, Cont. Ep. Fudam. 5.
when he said, He would not believe the Gospel, if the Authority of the
Catholic Church did not oblige him to it. I could, were it in dispute, show
the same Opinion in the other Fathers. We must always re-ascend to the first
Principle, and this is the first Principle, that fixes us to the Church. Let
them not reproach to us this Vicious Circle: The Church makes us believe the
Scripture, the Scripture makes us believe the Church. This on both sides is
true in different Respects. The Church and the Scripture are so made for one
another, and do so perfectly suit with one another, that they support each
other, like Stones in an Arch, which mutually keep up the Building. All Nature
is full of such Examples. I bear the Staff on which I lean: the Flesh binds and
covers the Bones, which sustain it: and all things in the whole Universe
mutually aid one another. So it is with the Church and the Scripture. There was
but one Church, such as JESUS CHRIST founded, to which such a Scripture, as we
have, could be addressed; that is, such an one, as durst promise the Church, in
which this Scripture was made, an eternal continuance. If any one receives the
Scripture, by the Scripture I will prove to him the Church; if he acknowledges
the Church, by the Church I will prove to him the Scripture: but since we must
begin on one side, I have clearly enough shown by Mr. Claude's Confession,
that, if we begin not by the Church, the Divinity of the Scripture, and the
Faith, we ought to have in it, is in Danger. Wherefore the Holy Ghost begins
our Instruction by fixing us to the Church; I believe the Catholic Church.
Amongst our Adversaries one must examine, before he believes; and he must before
all things examine the Scripture, by which he examins all the rest. It Is not
enough to have read some particular Verses, some Chapters, some Books: till
such time as one has read all, conferred all, examined all, Faith continues in
suspense, since it is by this Examen, that it is formed. Amongst the true
Christians one believes at first: Thy Faith has saved thee, says JESUS
CHRIST. Thy Faith, Tertul. de Praescrip. 14.
observes Tertullian in that divine work of Prescriptions, and not thy being
verst in the Scriptures: There Is no need of passing through Opinions, through
Doubts, through the Uncertainties of human Faith. I never changed, says St.
Basil: What I believed from my Infancy, Ep. 79.
has only been strengthened in my following years. Without passing from one
Opinion to another, I have only perfected, what was at first given me by my
Parents. As a Grain, which is sown, of little, that it was, becomes big, but
continues always the same in it self, and without changing its Nature takes
only Increase: so is may Faith increased -- and this is not a Change, in which
one passes from worse to better, but an Accomplishment of a Work already begun,
and the Confirmation of Faith by knowledge: In this manner we pass not, as
amongst our Reformed, from a State of doubt to a State of Certainty; or, as Mr.
Claude loves better to speak, from an human Faith to a divine. Divine Faith is
declared at first by the Churches first Instructions; and this could never be,
did not her infallible Authority prevent all our Doubts, and all Examination.

It Is thus, Cont. ep. Man. 4.
as says St. Augustine, it is thus, I say, That those believe, who not being able
to arrive at Understanding, secure their Salvation by the simplicity of their
Faith. If we must always examine before we believe, we must begin by examining,
whether there is a GOD, and harkening for some time, with a kind of Suspension
of Mind, to the Arguments of the Wicked: That is, we must pass to the Belief of
the Divinity through Atheism, since Examination and Doubt is a Spice of it. But
it is not so: GOD has placed his Mark in the World, which is the Work of his
Hands, and by this divine Mark he imprints in Souls, before all Doubts, the
Sentiment of his Divinity. In like manner he has placed his Mark in his Church,
the most perfect work of his Wisdom. By this Mark the Holy Ghost makes the true
Church known to the Children of GOD, and this so particular Character, which
distinguishes her from all other Assemblies, gives her so great an Authority,
that without hesitating we admit before all Opinions, not only the Holy
Scripture, but also all her sound Doctrine. Thus are the Children of the true
Church instructed; those, that are educated in a strange Church, as soon as
they perceive her waver in any part whatever of her Instruction, ought to
stretch forth their Arms to the Church, which has reason never to waver,
because she has never varied nor waver'd; and they find, they ought to return
into it, because none should ever have gone out of it.

The Seventh REFLECTION,
On Mr. Claude's saying in his Relation, that I appeared embarrass'd in this
part of the Dispute.
IT may now be judged, whether I ought to be perplexed about the Promise, I made
Mademoiselle de Duras, to make Mr. Claude acknowledge a Moment, in which, by the
Principles of his Religion, a Christian had but an human Faith concerning the
Truth of the Scripture. How could I be embarrass'd about a thing, which Mr.
Claude acknowledged in the Conference, and which he acknowledges still in his
Relation, tho he has weakened both my Proof, and his own Confession? It Is true,
he cannot let go the Word Doubt; but I pretended not to make his Tongue form
this Syllable; the Equivalent is sufficient for me. It Is an Excess great enough
to reduce the Christian, who is going to read the Holy Scripture, to be
incapable of a Divine Faith: To content ones self in this Condition with an
human Faith, is always too evidently to renounce Christianity. I have then
manifestly, what I desired from Mr. Claude's Acknowledgment. And if he says,
That the Faith, he here speaks of, excludes Doubt, as resembling that which
makes us believe, there is a City called Constantinople, or that there was
heretofore a King, named Alexander the Great, tho we know it but by Men: This
indeed is not enough for a Christian, who ought to act by a Divine Faith; but
it is still enough to con^ound Mr. Claude, (...) according to this Answer, the
Church would always have an Authority, equal to that, which all Mankind, as I
may say, has, when they unanimously depose concerning a sensible Fact. Thus in
what manner soever Mr. Claude explains to us (...) Faith, the Victory of the
Truth, I asserted, will remain secured by his Confession. Since if he says, his
human Faith excludes Doubt, he supposes in it an infallible Truth; and if he
say, it leaves a Doubt, he will in fine have pronounced these fatal Syllables,
he so much shunned. In a Cause so assured, if I trembled for any thing, but the
Danger of those, into whose Hearts, I feared, that either by reason of my own
Weakness, or their Prepossession, I could not make the Truth sufficiently
enter, I ill understood the Truth I defended. In the mean time, because I said
in the Recital of the Conference, That, at Mr. Claude's objecting to me the
Greek Church and others, I trembled through the Apprehension, lest an Objection,
proposed with ^o much Address and Eloquence, might put a Soul in Peril: Mr.
Claude took this moment to make me appear vanquished. Here, says he, it may
with Truth be said, That Monsr. de Condom' s Mind was seen not to be in its
usual State, and that the Liberty, which is so natural to him, sensibly
decreased. I may truly say in my turn, That my Trembling, whence this Advantage
is drawn, was interior; and that I can scarce believe, Mr. Claude could have
perceived it, had I not my self sincerely related it in my Recital. But what
matter is it, what was either the Effect, or Cause of my Fear? They shall say,
if they please, That being put to a stand by Mr. Claude's Objection, I would
cover the Disorder, into which I visibly fell, by the Trembling, I fain, I had
for the Salvation of a Soul, that expected its Instruction from my Assistance.
I will own it, if they please, or rather, not to ly, I will let it pass without
Opposition. Let me have trembled before Mr. Claude, provided that even in
Trembling I spoke the Truth. I spoke it: They need only see, what were my
Answers, and whether I drew not from Mr. Claude's Mouth the Acknowledgment, I
pretended. After this, the more I shall have trembled, and the weaker I shall
have been, the more certain 'twill be, That 'twas the Truth, which kept me up.

The Eighth REFLECTION,
On another Proposition acknowledged by Mr. Claude in the Conference, where is
shown the manner, how all false Churches established themselves.
THere is a Part of the Conference, which Mr. Claude passes over in four Words.
It Is that, where I show him the horrible State of his Church, which set it self
up, after the Example of all false Churches, by separating from all the
Christian Churches, that were in the World, and without finding any Church,
which thought, as she did, at the time of her Establishment: So that she was
not joined by any Continuity, either to the time, that went before, or to any
Church, which appeared then in the World. This Fact passed for evident; and how
short soever Mr. Claude has been in the Recital of this Part, he says enough to
show, That in acknowledging this important Fact, he has only endeavored to
cover the Shame of such a Condition by the Example of the Apostles, when they
separated from the Synagogue.

I will not repeat, what I said on this Subject: You have seen it in the
Conference, and Mr. Claude, who relates but one Word of it, does not oblige me
to any new Exaplanation. I shall only say, That he gives a very false Idea of
this part of the Dispute. The Company, says he, was risen, and the
Conversation, which continued yet some time, became much more confused, and we
discoursed of diverse things. I know not; why Mr. Claude will have our
Conversation to have been confused; it was not so in any part; and 'twas less
so, if it were possible, in this, than in the rest. It Is true, we were risen,
and Part of the Company was withdrawn; but Mr. Claude and I stood firm before
each other. Mademoisello de Duras seemed to have redoubled her Attention, and
after so many Principles declared, the Dispute became more quick, and more
concluding than ever. If we spoke of diverse Matters, it was not ramblingly, and
all tended to the same End. It may be seen by reading it; and if Credit will
not be given to me in this behalf, when Mr. Claude shall publish his Relation,
'twill appear, that the little, he says, naturally requires all, that I recite.
So it is, that the Pretended Reformed were averred, in establishing their
Church, to have done contrary, to what the Orthodox ever did, and precisely,
what all (...) have done; and Mr. Claude, pressed upon this matter, cannot in
all the History of Christianity show one only Church, truly Christian, founded,
as the Churches of the new Reformation.

It may now be judged, what likelihood there is, that what all Heretics have
done contrary to the Practice of all the Orthodox, can ever be authorized by
the Example of the Apostles, when they separated from the Synagogue. But since
Mr. Claude places the strength of his Defense in this Example, I desire him to
add to the evident Facts, I alleged to him (...) this Subject, these short
Reflections: that tho JESUS CHRIST, authorized of himself, had no need of any
Succession, to make himself believed, nevertheless to inculcate to us, how
necessary it is for the true Religion to have a Succession always manifest, he
would at his coming into the World find there a Church actually subsisting in
its whole State: that he was born, and lived in this Church actually
subsisting, that is, in the Synagogue, and would so form his Church in the
midst of her, that even the holy Apostles after his As^^^sion, and the Coming
down of the Holy Ghost, persisted publicly in the Service of the Temple, which
was than the most (...) Mark of Communion: that they were not indeed seen,
whatever might be ordained against them, to have ever withdrawn from it, as
long as the Temple was in being, and the Synagogue could keep either its
exterior Form, or even any appearance of its ancient State: that GOD, who would
in fine have his Children entirely separated from the Jews, had first
extinguished in this ungrateful People, by a manifest Reprobation, with the
Sacrifice and Priesthood, all the Marks of the Church, so that it is apparent,
the Synagogue with its Temple fell to ruin, before the Children of GOD departed
from it: that he was then so far from leaving any hope to this People, as he
had done in the ancient Transmigration and Ruin of the first Temple, that he
had on the contrary given all the Marks of an implacable Anger: that to the end
such a Fall of his heretofore chosen People, and the Divorce, declared to the
Synagogue, formerly his Spouse, might not give the least Pretext of suspecting
any like Event in time to come, he had caused this future Fall and Divorce to
be foretold by all his Prophets, as a singular Example of his wrath: and had at
the same time protested, that no such thing should ever befall that Church, with
which he made an eternal Covenant; that besides all this, and tho the
Reprobation of the Synagogue was clearly explicated in the Scripture, and tho
the Apostles, without making any Innovation in the Doctrine, did but follow him,
who had til their time been always without any Interruption expected,
nevertheless because there was in this Action some Rupture with the Synagogue,
heretofore the true Church; to authorize them in it, there was no less
required, than JESUS CHRIST himself, present on the earth with all the
Authority of his eternal Father: and in a word, to dissent from the Sentiments
of the Synagogue, tho besides convinced by the Scriptures, 'twas necessary,
that JESUS CHRIST the Corner Stone, in whom all was to be united, should appear
visibly on the earth with the incontestable Marks of his Mission. I leave you
now to consider, whether an Example of this Nature can give any occasion of
ever separating from the Church of JESUS CHRIST, or of saying, that this
Church, founded on the Rock, must fall, or that the Succession, of which JESUS
CHRIST is the Source, could suffer any Interruption, and whether all does not
here rather cry out against such an Attempt.

The Ninth REFLECTION,
On the Visibility of the Church: that Mr. Claude opposes not the Doctrine, I
have explained, till he has first framed himself a false Idea of it.
HItherto we have seen, what concerns the Conference, and Mr. Claude's manner
of relating it. We must now consider, what he opposes against the Instructions,
that preceded it.

He answers them largely in the writing, Vid. Sup. Advert. and Ref. p. 57.
we have already mentioned. This writing has no Title, and is made in the Form
of a Letter. To make our selves better understood, let us give it a Name, and
call it Mr. Claude's Manuscript Answer. As you have seen, that the Conference
was on my part preceded by two Instructions: Vid. Sub. p. 2.
the first of which established the perpetual Visibility of the Church, Vid.
Sup. p. 16.
and the second cleared some Objections, taken from the Book of the Kings, Mr.
Claude has followed this Division. He divides also his Answer into two parts:
the first is subdivided into four questions. In the first he treats of the
Universal Church, which the Creed speaks of, and blames me for not having
comprehended in it with all the Blessed Spirits the Saints, which shall be born
even to the end of the World. In the second he examins, whether the Church can
be defined by her exterior Communion, as he supposes, I have done. He speaks in
the third of the Churches perpetual Visibility; and seeks in the fourth, to
what Church JESUS Christ's Promises belong, whether to that, I have settled, or
to that, he has established. He draws afterward eleven Consequences from the
Doctrine, he has explicated; and passes to the second Part, the Objections,
taken from the Book of the Kings. This is the Idea of his work.

It Is in these four Questions, and these eleven Consequences, that he attack's
with all his might the Doctrine, I have taught concerning the perpetual
Visibility of the Church: but you are going to see, that he could not do it,
till he had first framed himself a false Idea of it.

To show, that the Church, spoken of in the Creed, ought to be always visible,
I said, that all Christians by the Name Church understood a Society, Vid. Sup.
p. 2. and seq.
making Profession to believe the Doctrine of JESUS CHRIST, and given it self by
his Word; whence it follows, that it is visible, and linkt by an exterior and
sensible Communion. Thus I at first laid down my Position, being what I had to
make good.

'Twas not my intention, as Mr. Claude supposes, neither was there any need to
give a perfect Definition of the Church, nor to prove her interior Union by the
Holy Ghost, by Faith, by Charity: for of this we are agreed: The question then
being only about the exterior Marks of this Union, I had done all in showing,
that these exterior Marks are inseparable from the Church, and consequently
that she is always visible.

In the mean time on my having said, that by the word Church is understood a
Society, making Profession to believe the Doctrine of JESUS CHRIST, Mr. Claude
in all his Manuscript Answer, but principally in the second and fourth
Question, will persuade me, that I consider the Church, as a Society merely
exterior, constituted in its Essence by a single Profession of believing,
without believing indeed, whose whole Nature and Essence consists in bare
Exteriors and Appearances, without reality; whose Unity is only an Unity of
Profession, an exterior Unity, so that the interior is only in it by Accident;
and that tho there should be neither Faithful, nor Just in it, but that it
should be wholly composed of Hypocrites, it would not cease to be the true
Church.

Behold indeed a frightful Idea of the Church, and I wonder not, that Mr.
Claude has an horror of it: it is also as far from my Mind, and the Mind of all
Catholics, as Heaven is from Hell; and I know not, how Mr. Claude could read
my Instructions without seeing in them the clean contrary to what he imposes on
me.

Since the Reader has now these Instructions before his Eyes, I desire him to
pass them over again in this Impression. Vid. Sup. p. 6.
He will find there indeed, that it is of the Essence of the Church to be
visible by Preaching and by the Sacraments: but he will find there also that
the Elect and the Saints are the most noble Part of it; that they are there
sanctified, that they are there regenerated, often also by the ministry of the
Reprobate ^ that they must not be considered, as making a Body apart, but as
making the fairest and most noble part of it.

He will find there, Ibid.
that it is of the Essence of the Church, because she is holy, to teach always,
constantly, and without varying, an holy Doctrine; but he will find, that this
holy Doctrine, which she incessantly teaches, continually brings forth Saints in
her Unity, and that by this Doctrine she instructs and contains in her Bosom the
Elect of GOD. Do they call this a bare Profession of JESUS Christ's Doctrine
without reality, and a meet Heap of Hypocrites?

He will find, Sup. p. 7. and seq.
that Hell cannot prevail against the visible and exterior Society of the
Church: but he will find also, that it is because it cannot prevail against the
Elect, who are the purest and most spiritual part of this Church. It Is, I say,
because it cannot prevail against the Elect, that it cannot prevail against the
Church, which teaches them, in which they confess the Gospel, and receive the
Sacraments. Thus instead of believing, that this Church, which subsists
eternally, can according to our Principles subsist without the Elect: it is on
the contrary seen, that we consider the Elect, as making the most essential
Part and Strength of this Church.

He will find, that it is of the Essence of the Church till the general
Resurrection, Sup. p. 9, 10.
to have the Ecclesiastical Ministry, which renders her visible: but he will
find; also that the effect of this Ministry is to bring the Children of GOD to
the perfect Stature of JESUS CHRIST, that is, to Perfection, which, after it
has rendered them holy, will render them glorious both in Body and Soul.

In fine he will find there the exterior and interior Communion of the Faithful
with JESUS CHRIST, Sup. p. 11.
and of the Faithful amongst themselves: the interior Communion by Charity, and
in the Holy Ghost, who animates us; but at the same time the exterior Communion
in the Sacraments, in the Confession of Faith, and in all the exterior
Ministry of the Church.

Whence I concluded, Ibid.
that it is not only the Society of the Predestinate, which shall subsist for
ever: but that it is the visible Body, in which the Predestinate are included,
which preaches to them, which teaches them, which regenerates them by Baptism,
which (...) them by the Eucharist, which administers to them the Keys, which
governs them, and keeps them united under Discipline, which forms JESUS CHRIST
in them: It Is this visible Body, that shall subsist for ever.

It Is seen by this, that instead of making a Church, whose Communion is of its
own nature merely exterior, and interior only by Accident, the Foundation of
the Church is on the contrary the interior Communion, of which the exterior
Communion is the Mark, and that the Effect of this Mark is to show, that the
Children of GOD are kept and enclosed under this Seal. It Is seen also, that the
Elect are the last End, for which all is done in the Church, and those, whom
all her Ministry ought principally to serve; so that they make the most
essential Part, and, as I may say, the very Ground of the Church.

If then I have spoken more of the exterior Communion, than of the interior
Communion of the Church, it is plainly seen, that this can be only for the
Reason, I have mentioned; to wit, that the Pretended Reformed being agreed with
us, that the Foundation, as I may say, of the Church is her interior Union, I
needed only establish the exterior, the necessity of which these Gentlemen
contest.

Thus, when I said at first in my Instruction, that the Church was the Society,
which confessed the true Faith, Mr. Claude ought to have understood, that this
Confession of the Mouth excluded not the Belief of the Heart, but rather
supposed it in the Living and essential part of the Church, of which I spoke
not then, because it was not the Question, I had to propose and resolve. To
conclude from this Silence, that I admitted no other Union essential to the
Body of the Church, but this exterior Union, is the same, as if one, that
should have undertaken to explain only those exterior Ligaments, which keep
human Bodies united on the outside, and include, as I may say, in one and the
same Continent, with the living Members, the Nails, the Hair, the peccant
Humors, and even the dead Members, not yet cut off from the Body, should be
therefore made believe, that he acknowledges no other Principle of Union; and
under this Pretense it should be said of him, that, according to this man's
Principles, there might be an human Body, which should be only Hair, Nails,
rotten Members, and peccant Humors, without having any thing living in effect:
This is, what Mr. Claude does, when he concludes from my Discourse, that the
Church of JESUS CHRIST may be only an Amass of wicked persons and Hypocrites.

But this will appear farther, in what follows, by Mr. (...) own Principles;
it is sufficient for me in this place to show him, that this Church merely
exterior, which he call the Church of the Cardinals Bellarmin and du Perron,
and of M. de Candom, is a Church, that subsists only in his imagination; and
one may believe by his manner of judging my Sentiments that he no better
understood those of these illustrious Cardinals.

The Tenth REFLECTION,
On the Pretended Reformeds Confession of Faith: that it acknowledges no
Church, but what is visible, and that Mr. Claude satisfies not this Difficulty.
TO show, Vid. Sup. p. 2, 3. and seq.
that the Word Church signifies in the Creed a visible Church, I laid for a
Foundation, that in a Confession of Faith, such as this Creed was, Words were
used in their most natural and most simple Signification; and I added, that the
word Church signified so naturally the visible Church, that the Pretended
Reformed, Authors of the Chimera of an invisible Church, in all their
Confession of Faith never used the Word Church in this Sense; but only to
express the visible Church, clothed with the Sacraments, with the word, and
with all the public Ministry. See the Passages of the Confession of Faith, I
have related, with the Consequences, I have drawn from them.

I was not the first, who made this Remark; 'twas a National Synod of the
Pretended Reformed. These Gentlemen, who had so much preached the invisible
Church, and who, being pressed upon the Succession, grounded on this foundation
the invisible Succession, of which they made use, wondered, they had not spoken
one single word of it in their Confession of Faith, where on the contrary the
word Church is always taken for the Visible Church. Surpised with this
Language, so natural to Christians, but so little conformable to the Principles
of their Reformation, they made this Decree in the Year 1603. Syn. de Gap, sur
la Conf. de Foy art. 3.
in the Synod of Gap, in the Chapter, which has for its Title, On the
Confession of Faith. It Is by this, all the Synods begin, and the first thing,
that is done in them, is to review this Confession of Faith; which gave
occasion to the Printers to re-imprint it with this Title, Syn. de Privas 1612.
forbidden in the Synods: The Confession of Faith of the Reformed Churches,
reviewed and corrected in the National Synod. But let us come to the Decree of
Gap, of which these are the words. The Provinces shall be exhorted to consider
in the Provincial Synods, in what Terms the XXV. Article of the Confession of
Faith ought to be coucht: forasmuch as being to express, what we believe
touching the Catholic Church, of which mention is made in the Creed, there is
nothing in the said Confession, that can be taken but for the militant and
visible Church; as also in the XXIX Article they shall see, whether it be fit
to add the Word Pure to the Word the Church, which is in the said Article: and
in general all shall come prepared on the matters of the Church.

We have related the Substance of this XXV Article. You may in the same place
see the XXVI, Vid. Sup. p. 3.
XXVII and XXVIII Articles. And for the XXIX Article, it says, that the true
Church ought to be governed according to the Policy, which our Lord JESUS
CHRIST has established; that is, that there be Pastors, Overseers, and Deacons,
to the end the pure Doctrine may have its Course, and the Assemblies be kept in
the Name of GOD.

The Addition of the word pure Church, which they deliberated to add to that of
true, is founded on a Doctrine of the Pretended Reformed, which says, that a
true Church may not be pure, because with the essential Truths it may have
Errors mixed, I say even gross and considerable Errors against the Faith. And
this is one of the Mysteries of the new Reformation, which Mr. Claude will
explain to us by and by: but it is not here in question. What there is
important, is, that these People, who say, they are sent of GOD to raise again
the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, being to explicate, as themselves declare in
their Confession of Faith, the Church, of which mention is made in the Creed,
spoke nevertheless only of the militant and visible Church. I could easily tell
you the Reason: it is, that this Church, of which mention is made in the Creed,
is indeed the visible Church; it is, that the word Church naturally imports this
Visibility, and the word Catholic is so far from derogating from it, that it
supposes it; it is, that in a Confession of Faith one often happens to speak
rather according to the natural Ideas, the words bear with them, than according
to the Refinements and Interpretations, one has invented to free himself out of
some Difficulty. Thus the invisible Church presented not it self at all to our
Reformed, when they framed their Confession of Faith; the sense of the visible
Church appeared only in it; there was nothing seen in this but natural till the
Year 1603. In 1603 they awoke; they began to find it strange, that a Church,
which founded her Succession in the Idea of an invisible Church, and of a
Church of the Predestinate, should not have said one word of it in her
Confession of Faith, but have left it for evident, that the Natural
Signification of the word Church always imported a visible Society; so that to
speak truly, the Succession of the Church would no longer be shown without
showing the Succession of her Visibility: a thing utterly impossible for the
new Reformation. 'Twas this, inclined the whole Synod to desire the going again
over this Article, and to exhort the Provinces to come ready prepared upon the
matters of the Church, which had never been well understood amongst the new
Reformed, which are not yet understood, and which will make all those
Catholics, that can thoroughly understand them.

But the going over this Article again was a very nice Affair. 'Twas to awaken
all understandings; 'twas too visibly to mark the Defect, and give the Printers
more occasion than ever to entitle it, The Confession reviewed and corrected.
Thus in the Synod of Rochel, held in 1607, 'twas resolved not to add or
diminish any thing in the XXV and XXIX Articles, nor to meddle afresh with the
matter of the Church. By the decision of this Synod the visible Church alone
appears in the Pretended Reformeds Confession of Faith: the invisible Church
has no part in it, and one draws from it Consequences, as one can.

That, Vid. Sup. p. 4.
which I draw, pinches them: for if the Church appears only as visible in the
Pretended Reformeds Confession of Faith, and if besides they assert this
Confession of Faith, as conformable in all points to the Scripture, they must
tell us, that this manner of explicating the Church comes from the Scripture,
and that from the Scripture it has passed naturally into the ordinary Language
of Christians, into the Confessions of Faith, and consequently into the Creed,
which is not only the best authorized of all Confessions of Faith, but also the
most simple.

Mr. Claude answers us, Man. Anf. q. 1.
that the Custom changes; and that by Process of time Words often depart from
their first and natural Signification; and that besides, tho it should be true,
as I have said, that the word Church, taken simply, should signify the visible
Church, the word Universal would change this Signification. But he shall not
escape us by this Subterfuge: for we have still an Argument left to overturn
the whole pretended Reformation. See it taken from the very Principles, laid by
themselves. The word Church ought to be taken in the Pretended Reformeds
Confession of Faith, as it is naturally taken in a Fundamental Article of the
Christian Religion: else this Confession of Faith would not be conformable, as
it pretends, to the Holy Scripture: Now in this Confession of Faith the word
Church is taken for a visible Society: this Proposition is acknowledged in the
Synod of Gap, as we just now saw. It Is thus then, that the word Church is
naturally taken in Holy Scripture, and in the Creed for a visible Church, and
the Term Catholic or Universal, put in the Creed, Man. Ans. q. 1.
as Mr. Claude confesses, to distinguish the whole Body of the Church truly
Christian, spread over the whole Earth, from all false Churches, and all
particular Churches, instead of rendering the Church invisible, makes her so
much the more visible, as it more visibly separates her from all false
Churches, and puts in her Bosom all the particular Churches, so visible, and so
remarkable by their common Profession of Faith, and their common Government.

The Eleventh REFLECTION,
On Mr. Claude's own acknowledging the Churches perpetual Visibility: the
surprising Doctrine of this Minister.
BUT without disputing any farther, we need only (...) to Mr. Claude, and
(...), what he grants us in his Manuscript Answer concerning the Churches
perpetual Visibility. And would to GOD I could here transcribe all this Work!
There would be seen in it many things, very favorable to our Doctrine, which I
cannot well make understood, till it shall be public. But it is not for me to
publish it, and I am contend to transcribe at length, forasmuch as it is
necessary, the Passages, you are going to see, such as I found them in the Duke
of Chevreuses Manuscript, owned as I have said by Mr. Claude himself.

Now if he (...) found to speak of the Church after a manner new in the (...),
this m^st not be wondered at for two Reasons. The first, because it is true, he
has taught in a manner the same Doctrine in his other (...), the he has (...)
explicated it more fully, and (...) order th^^^ over. The second, because he
pretends to say nothing new; a (...) we ought to rejoice at, there being
nothing more desirable, (...) to see the Number of the Principles and Articles,
on which we may agree, increase.

Let us enter then with all our heart into this (...) Design, let us (...) in
what Mr. Claude agrees with us, and let us re^^^^ his Doctrine in the (...)
Order, th^^ he (...) it in his third and fourth Question, and afterward in his
eleven Consequences.

What I find at first, is, that it is manifest, that, the the (...) Church be
mixed with the (...) ends and (...) Confession, (...) ceases not to be visible
in the mixture, as the good (...) with the Three in one and the (...) Fields
and as the good (...) with the (...) in one and the same (...) This goes well,
let no proceed, This Mixture hinders indeed the just Discernment of Persons;
but it hinders not the Discernment or Distinction of the Orders of Persons,
even with certainty. We know not certainly, who are in particular true
Believers, nor who are Hypocrites: but we know certainly, that there are true
Believers, as there are Hypocrites; which is sufficient to make the Visibility
of the true Church. I hear this with joy: assuredly we shall advance. Mr.
Claude gives it us already for manifest, that there shall be always a visible
Body, of which one may say, There are the true Believers.

I continue to read his Answer, and I find, that he blames me for imputing to
the Pretended Reformed, that they believe not the Body, in which GOD has
placed, according to St. Paul, some Apostles, some Teachers, some Pastors, and
the rest, to be the Church of JESUS CHRIST. How glad am I to be reprehended,
provided we advance! It is then manifest, that the Body of JESUS CHRIST, which
is his Church, shall always be composed of Pastors, of Teachers, of Preachers,
and also of People: it is then consequently always very visible, and the
Succession of the Pastors, as well as that of the People, ought to be manifest
in it.

Mr. Claude confirms here his Discourse by a passage of Mr. Mestresat, who
determins, that we must not seek the Church of GOD out of the Ministry and the
Word. So much the better, and I am glad, that Mr. Claude finds in his Church
many Followers of this Doctrine.

I was afraid, Vid. Sup. p. 5.
that the Ministers would not find the visible Church in this Passage of St.
Paul to the Ephesians, where the Church is proposed to us without Spot, and
without Blemish; and I had set my self to prove, that this Church, described by
St. Paul, was the visible Church; because it was washed by Baptism, and by the
Word^ Mr. Claude enters at first into my Sentiment. He says, that in this
passage we must understand indeed the Church, which is already in Heaven, but
also the visible Church, whichis on the earth, as making together but one and
the same Body, and he cites here also Mr. Mestresat. I receive this Doctrine;
and if any of our Reformed, be it Mr. Claude himself, ever objects to me, that
I must not so much rely on the Churches Visibility, since there is at least a
Part of this Church, which is invisible, that is to say, that, which is in
Heaven, I will answer, that this ought not to trouble us, since that in fine by
this Doctrine of Mr. Mestresat and Mr. Claude, being in communion with the
visible Part of the Church, I am sure to be so also with the invisible Part,
which is already in Heaven with JESUS CHRIST: so that it is very certain, that
all is reduced in fine to the Visibility.

Mr. Claude passes thence to the Objections, that may be made, and he decides
at first, that the Visibility of the Church is a Visibility of Ministry. He
must then at last, as he acknowledges in the Church a perpetual Visibility,
come to show us a Succession in the Ministry, and in one word a Train of
lawful Pastors.

He objects to himself, that the Ministry is common to the Good and the Bad,
whence it seems, one might conclude against his Doctrine, that Good and Bad
compose the Church. And he Answers, that if the use the Ministry is common to
Good and Bad, this is only by accident, and through the Fraud of the Enemy; that
of right it belongs only to the true Believers; and that the supernatural
Destination is only for them. All this is clear, except this Expression, the
Ministry of right belongs only to the true Believers. For, as one might
understand by this, that none but true Believers are lawful Pastors, one might
fall into the Inconvenience of being to examine every one in particular, whether
the Pastors are indeed true Believers, and to believe, that they cease to be
Pastors, when they cease to be good People, tho without Scandal: this is the
pernicious Doctrine of Wicleff, which would put all the Church in Confusion!
Excepting this ill Sense, which cannot be Mr. Claude's, I grant him all; he
says; for without doubt it is not JESUS Christ's first Intent, that there should
be Ministers, that are Deceivers: this happens only through the Malice of the
Enemy. The Destinction of the Ministry is for true Believers; JESUS CHRIST did
not establish it to call into the Church Deceivers and Hypocrites: who doubts
it? But nevertheless these Deceivers and these Hypocrites may be sufficiently
of the Church, to be lawful Pastors in it: and the true Believers being to live
to the end of the World under the Authority of this mixed Ministry, he must
then, without examining, whether the Ministers are good or evil, show us a
Succession of them always manifest, under which GOD has conserved his People.

The more I continue my Reading, the more I find this Truth evidently declared.
For entering into the fourth Question, I take good notice, that Mr. Claude
pretends there to show, that the Passages, where JESUS CHRIST promises the
Church to keep her always on the earth, regard only the Society of true
Believers: but he forbears not always equally to own, that this Church never
ceases to be visible, and that JESUS CHRIST has so promised.

I pretended to show the visible Church in these words: Vid. Sup. 7, 8. and
seq. Mat. xvi. v. 18.
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church: and the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it. The Reasons, I made use of to prove it, may
be seen. Mr. Claude receives this Doctrine with its Proofs. And he acknowledges,
that the Church, which is spoken of in this Passage, is in effect a confessing
Church, a Church, which publishes the Faith, a Church, to which JESUS CHRIST
has given an exterior Ministry, a Church, which uses the Ministry of the
Keys, and which binds and looses, and which consequently has an Outside and a
Visibility. It Is such a Church, that JESUS CHRIST has promised to keep always
on the earth; Mr. Claude cannot suffer one to tell him, that she ceases to be
and thus she is always with all that Ministry, which is essential to her:
which makes Mr. Claude conclude with me, Vid. Sup. p. 9, 10. etc.
that the Ecclesiastical Ministry shall last without discontinuance till the
General Resurrection; and to grant without difficulty, that this Promise of
JESUS CHRIST, I will be always with you, respects the Perpetuity of the
Ecclesiastical Ministry. Mat. xxviii. v. 9. 20.
JESUS CHRIST promises, says he, to be with the Church, to baptize with her,
and to TEACH WITH HER WITHOUT INTERRUPTION EVEN TO THE END OF THE WORLD. There
shall then always be Teachers, with whom JESUS CHRIST shall teach, and true
Preaching shall never cease in his Church.

But shall this Ministry last for ever so pure, that none but good People
shall be admitted to it? We have seen, that Mr. Claude pretends it not. In
effect there is no Promise of this perpetual Purity: the Promise is, that
whatsoever the Manners of these Ministers may be, JESUS CHRIST will always act,
always baptize, and ALWAYS TEACH with them; and the Effect of this Ministry,
tho mixed, shall be such, that under its Authority the Church shall be always
visible, not indeed, says Mr. Claude, with a distinct view, which goes so far
as to say, Such and such are (...), which it notwithstanding CERTAIN, and which
goes so (...) say, The true (...), to (...), IN THAT EXTERIOR, PROFESSION.

Let us not call, if they will, by the Name of the Church all that exterior
Profession: let us abstain from this Name, since Mr. Claude is against it; and
like true reasonable and peaceable Christians, let us endeavor to agree on the
thing. This exterior Profession, which may be always (...) and, as I may say,
pointed to with the Finger, is mixed of Good and Evil: the Ministry, which
governs it, is also mixed. Mr. Claude agrees all this: it may nevertheless be
said, Under this Ministry and in this exterior Profession are the (...)
Believers: This is, what we just now heard from the same Ministers Mouth. If
then, according to his Doctrine, the Society of true Believers subsists for
ever, and continues always visible on the earth; if it may always be shown in
an exterior Profession, and is visible only there, as Mr. Claude says: it not
only follows, that true Believers shall always be upon the earth, but that this
Profession, mixed of Good and Bad, where there true. Believers are found, where
they are pointed to, where they are marked, shall be there also; this is, what
we agree on with Mr. Claude. But since all these Passages are dispersed up and
down his Answer, see here one, in which he has taken care to collect all
together.

It Is after his fourth Question, and in the seventh Consequence, that this
Minister, endeavoring to explicate the XXXI Article of the Confession of
Faith, where it is said, that in our days, and before the Reformation, the
State of the Church was interrupted; distinguishes the State of the Church
interrupted for a time from the Church, which is never interrupted, according
to his Principles, and th^s he defines the Church. The Church, says he, is the
true Faithful, who make Profession of the Christian Truth, of Piety, and of
true Holiness under a Ministry, which f^^nishes her with the Alments,
necessary for the spiritual Life, without depriving her of any of them. We
shall discover in its time the secret of these spiritual Aliments. In the mean
while (...) agree with Mr. Claude, that the Church always subsist, and always
subsists visible, since, by his Definition, she is nothing (...), but the true
Believers, who MAKE PROFESSION OF THE CHRISTIAN TRUTH under the Ecclesiastical
Ministry. Behold an immovable Foundation. Let us see, what we can build on
it: but before we build, we are going to see the Objections fall.

The Twelfth REFLECTION,
Two of Mr. Claude's principal Objections resolved by his own Doctrine.
MR. Claude objects to me first, Man. Aus.
that I desire in vain to establish my Society, composed of Good and Bad, and
its eternal Duration, on these inviolable Promises of JESUS CHRIST, Thou art
Peter, and I am always with you. It Is not says he, of the Wicked, that it can
be said; that Hall shall not prevail against them. It Is not with Wicked men and
Hypocrites, that JESUS CHRIST has promised always to be; and these Promises
respect none but true Believers. Let us add according to Mr. Claude's
Principles, that, if these Promises respect only true Believers, they respect
them at least in this Ministry, and in this exterior Profession, and the
Objection will be at the same time resolved. For in fine if the true Believers
ought to be always shown, and always visible, according to Mr. Claude, in this
exterior Profession, in which the Good are mixed with the Bad; it follows, that
this Composition, by what Name soever it is called, shall always appear on the
earth. Now none can be assured of a Societies subsisting always, and always in
a visible State, unless GOD has promised it. His Promises regard then even this
Mixture; and not only the true Believers, but with them all the Society, in
which they ought, according to his Decrees, always to appear. By Consequence we
must understand these Promises of JESUS CHRIST otherwise, than Mr. Claude
teaches. The Promises of JESUS CHRIST respect not the Wicked alone, nor were
made for their sake; if he said only this, he would have Reason: but these
Promises, which JESUS CHRIST made to his Faithful, comprehend also the Wicked,
who are mixed with them. When GOD by his Prophets promised the ancient People to
give then plentiful Harvesh, with the Corn he promised also the Chaff; and to
preserve the Harvest is to preserve the Chaff with the Corn. So to promise the
Church and her eternal Duration, into promise with the Elect, the Wicked, in
the midst of whom GOD encloses them. The wicked also in the Church are for the
Just, as the Chaff in the Harvest is for the Corn; and as GOD promises not the
Chaff, either alone, or for it self, so he promises not the wicked, either
alone, or for themselves. But nevertheless all this Composition shall subsist
in virtue of the divine Promise till the last separation, when the Wicked, as
the Chaff, shall be cast into the Fire, that shall never be quench. In the mean
time JESUS CHRIST shall be always with the whole Composition, keeping there in
all the Exterior the sound Doctrine, which he knows how to carry into the
Interior, even into the Hearts of those, that live: in the same manner as the
Nourishment, presented to our whole Body by the same way, quickens only the
Members, which are disposed to receive it.

A second Objection of Mr. Claude's will fall by the same Principle.

He objects to me, Man. Ans. 1. q.
that in defining the Catholic Church, mentioned in the Creed, I speak only of
the Church, which is actually on earth, instead of comprehending in it all the
Elect, which have been, are, and shall be, and in fine with the holy Angels all
the heavenly Jerusalem. I have already answered him, that I neither would, nor
was obliged to define the Church but in relation to our Subject, and her
Visibility. But I add, that in saying this, according to Mr. Claude's own
Principles I said all: for, according to him, in the exterior Profession, that
is, in what renders the Church visible, may be marked the true Believers, with
whom all the Saints, in what time and place soever they may be, not excepting
the holy Angels, are united. The Church, which is on the Earth, says Mr.
Claude, is one with that, which is already gathered in Heaven, and with that,
which GOD will cause to spring up even to the end of the Generations, all which
three together make but one, which is called the Universal Church. GOD be
praised: when I shall have found the exterior Profession, which renders the
Church visible, Mr. Claude has already told us, that I shall have found the
true Believers, that is according to him, the true Church actually present on
earth: and he now tells us, that with this Church I shall by the same means
have found both that, which is already in Heaven, and that, which GOD will
cause to grow up in all following Ages. We need then only enquire after the
Church, which is on the earth, and the exterior Profession, which shows her to
us, being assured to have found there, without enquiring any farther, the
Perfect Communion of Saints, and the Society of all the Elect.

Besides when under the Name of the Catholic Church I understood the Church,
which is upon the Earth, I spoke with all the Fathers. They ordinarily join to
the Title of Catholic Church that of spread over all the earth, toto orb
diffusa. To this Title of Catholic they join also the Title of Apostolic, and
thus is it put in the Nicene Creed, where is seen the most authentical, as well
as the most perfect Interpretation of the Apostles Creed. This Title of
Apostolic makes part of the Churches Catholicity, and shows us among other
things, that she is descended from the Apostles by the perpetual Succession of
her Pastors, and by the Episcopal Chairs, established over all the earth. All
the Saints, whose blessed Souls are with GOD, were conceived in this Church;
all those, that are to come, shall likewise be regenerated in it: so that there
shall never be any one, who has not made an essential Part of this Body, of
which JESUS CHRIST is the Head. For the Angels, if we respect only the direct
Signification of the Words, they never made Part of this Church, founded by the
Apostles, and spread over all the earth, where she ought to make her
Pilgrimage; and tho JESUS CHRIST is their Head, he is in a more particular
manner that of the Faithful, washed in his Blood, and renewed by his Word. But
the Angels, tho united to JESUS CHRIST in another manner, are our Brethren, and
are not Strangers to the Catholic Church, of which on the contrary they are
established after their manner Co-opperators and Ministers. It Is an evident
Truth, but with which I had nothing to do in this place: it is sufficient to
remark in the Creed, what our Fathers found there expressly and immediately
signified by the word Catholic Church, by adding to it the Title Apostolic,
so natural to her Catholicity, and the Elegium of being spread over all the
earth. To know the Doctrine of th^^ Church, is to know the Doctrine of all the
Elect. There is seen in Heaven and in the Brightness of the Saints, only what
is believed in this Church; and the Holy Angels, who, as the Apostle Saint Paul
says, Ephesians. iii. v. 10.
have learnt by the Church such high Secrets of the Divine Wisdom, respect her
Beller. Thus all being reduced, as I have already said, to the Visibility, Mr.
Claude will only make me lose Time, and digress, when he will have me treat
here any thing else, to make known this Catholic Church, which is confessed in
the Creed.

The Thirteenth and last REFLECTION.
Mr. Claude's Doctrine shows the Gentlemen of the Pretended Reformed Religion,
that there is no Salvation for them, but in the Roman Church.
I Have now nothing left to do, but to exhort the Gentlemen of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, and Mr. Claude himself, if he will permit me, to draw
manifest Consequences from the Principles, he has laid: then they will no
longer be able to resist the Truth, and will remain convinced, that there is no
Salvation for them, but in returning to the bosom of the Roman Church.

We have seen that, Vid. Sup. XI. Ref. p. 99. and. seq.
to verify the Promises of the Gospel, Mr. Claude is obliged to acknowledge a
Church always visible, since the Church, which is not visible, is no Church,
and that according to the Definition, Vid. Sup. p. 103.
he has given us, the Church is the true Faithful, who make Profession of the
Christian Truth under a Ministry, which furnishes her with the Aliments,
necessary for the Spiritual Life. These Faithful then are not a Body in the Any
since they make PROFESSION OF THE TRUTH under an Ecclesiastical Ministry
always subsisting; and that, as we have seen, there must be without any
Interruption an exterior Profession, of which it may be said, There are the
true Believers.

Thus it is not sufficient to allege at random to us concealed Believers, they
are obliged to show us without Interruption, first a visible Society, of which
may be said, They are there; it is there, they serve GOD in Spirit and Truth;
it is there, they confess the Gospel.

Nor will it be enough to show us these Believers dispersed: they must secondly
show us them gathered together under the Authority of an Ecclesiastical
Ministry, with preaching of the Word, with the Administration of the
Sacraments, with the use of the Keys, and all the Ecclesiastical Government.

By consequence they must show us a Society of Pastors and People: whence it
follows in the third place, that they must be able to name us these Pastors,
since the Succession of them is manifest.

To seek all this in the Pretended Reformed Church, as it is now separated from
the Roman Church, that is, from that Body of the Church, which acknowledges the
Roman Church, and the Pope for its Head; is what Mr. Claude does not so much as
dream of: it is enough for him, that to the time of the Pretended Reformed's
Separation he finds all this in the Roman Church it self. The true Believers
were there, as long as those, that composed the Pretended Reformation, were
there, when they went forth, or were driven forth, Vid. Sup. p. 46.
they carried the Church with them, as Mr. Claude said in the Conference.

This Discourse, more like a Raillery than a serious Discourse, is nevertheless
that, which is seriously held in the new Reformation. Till the Separation of
these new Reformed, the Succession of the true Believers, that is according to
Mr. Claude, of the true visible Church, Man. Ans. q. 4. seq.
was perpetuated in the Roman Church, and it is since their Separation, that she
ceases to contain them. Such is the Succession of the visible Church, which Mr.
Claude establishes in his Manuscript Answer: till the Separation the true
Faithful, which the Roman Church contained; after the Separation the Pretended
Reformed, which came forth of her Bosom.

But whence came their Pastors? Were they also detacht with these pretended
Believers from the Body of the Roman Church, to perpetuate in the Church thus
Reformed the Ecclesiastical Ministry? Ibid.
In no wise: Mr. Claude does not understand it so. The Faithful, detacht from
the Roman Church, all on a sudden deposed all the Pastors, which were before;
that is to say, that before the Catholic Bishops and Priests with the Pope at
their Head were the Pastors, established by JESUS CHRIST; for there must be such
for the true Believers, which they contained in their Unity: in the Moment,
that the Reformation appeared, they were all on a sudden deposed, and the
Ministry taken out of their Hands.

But what right had private persons thus all on a sudden and in one moment to
dispossess all their Pastors? It Is, because they are the true Believers, Man.
Ans. q. 4. and seq.
to whom the Ministry appertains of right, who might consequently dispose of
it, take it from some, and give it to others. Man. Ans. 4. q. toward the end.
We must not, says Mr. Claude, imagine the Succession of Pastors in this
ordinary transmission, which the Ministers make from one to another, and which
is called the exterior and personal Succession: the Question is, whether it may
not sometimes happen, that the Church, that is the true Believers, shall take
her Ministry out of the hand of those, who have too visibly abused it, and
give it to others.

This is the Question in general, Cons. 8, 9, 10.
as Mr. Claude proposes it; and the Application, he makes of it in particular,
is, That the Latin Prelates, who enjoyed the Ecclesiastical Ministry in the
time of our Fathers, and who were assembled in the Council of Trent, having
made Decisions of Faith incompatible with Salvation, and having pronounced
Anathemaes against these, who submitted not to them, the Pretended Reformed had
Reason to regard these Prelates, as Ministers, who had stripped themselves of the
Ministry, and to give it to other Persons.

They should then at least, according to these Principles, have expected the
Decisions of Trent; and since before these Decisions so many Churches,
separated from Rome, had already given themselves Pastors, the Reformation will
have begun by a manifest Usurpation. But let us not so much press. Mr. Claude,
and without insisting rigorously on the Council of Trent, let us desire him
only to mark us some day a little near the Time, in which he will permit the
true Believers to have continued under the Ministry of the Roman Church. And
in the mean time let us content our selves to observe this new Doctrine: that it
may happen, that all the Pastors of the Church, dispossessed all on a sudden, may
become in one moment private men; and that, without their establishing any
other Pastors to succeed them, the true Believers, in no wise Pastors, but
private persons, separated from every Church actually existing, may of their
sole Authority confer the Ministry on others, establish them, ordain them,
instal them. This is, what Mr. Claude afterward farther explicates by these
words; that these Pastors, before alone in Function, are of right deprived, and
the Ministry returned of right to that part of the Society, Cons. 10.
in which are found the true Believers, that is to say, the Pretended Reformed,
separated from the Roman Church, and from every Church, then subsisting in the
world. What an Authority and Privilege does the Separation give!

Such is Mr. Claude's Doctrine: if I change, if I exaggerate, if I diminish, let
him without delay publish his writing to confound me. But if this be his
Doctrine, I conjure our Reformed to consider, what Prodigies of Doctrine must be
taught to defend their Reformation,

For first, where do they read, in what Gospel, in what Epistle, in what
Writing of the Old or New Testament, that all the Pastors of the Church should
in a moment fall from their Chair, and become private persons, whom one might
and ought freely disobey.

Has JESUS CHRIST hidden this great Mystery from us? and would he not have
precaution'd us against this horrible Temptation of his Church? But this is not
all: after he has shown us in the Scripture this universal Fall of all the
Pastors, he must also find there this Ministry returned of right to the
private Persons, that were never vested with it. And what is Mr. Claude's
Meaning? Is it, that these private Persons become of right Ministers, without
any Bodies having ordained them; or that, without being Ministers, they have
Right of their sole Authority to set up Ministers in the Church? Let them show
me it in the Scripture, or let them for ever renounce the Pretense of having
the Scripture alone for Guide.

I find in the Scripture, that JESUS CHRIST said to his Apostles: As my Father
sent me, I also send you. I find in the Scripture, that the Apostles thus send
others, and consecrate themselves Successors. But that, all their Successors
being on a sudden fallen, and deprived of the right of their Ministry, this
Ministry should of right return to the Faithful, to whom none had ever given
it, to dispose of at their Pleasure: neither has the Scripture said, nor
following Ages imagined: It Is then a Monster, the Birth of which was reserved
for the time of the new Reformation.

The Ministry, say they, belongs of right to the Church. It does without doubt
belong to the Church, as the Eyes do to the Body. The Ministry is not for it
self, no more are the Eyes: The Ministry is established to be the Light of the
Church, as the Eyes are the Light, or, as JESUS CHRIST calls them, the Torch of
the Body. Does it follow, that, when the Body has lost its Eyes, it can remake
them of it self? No without doubt; it will have need of the Hand, which made
them at first, and there will never be any thing but a new Creation, which can
repair the Work, that the first Creation had formed. In this manner, if the
Catholic Church could, as they would imagine in the new Reformation, lose all
on a sudden all its Ministers, without their having given themselves Successors
according to the Order of JESUS CHRIST, JESUS CHRIST must come again on Earth,
to reestablish this sacred Order by a new Creation.

They will indeed find in the Bosom of the Roman Church these true Believers,
of which the Reformed Church was at first composed; why will they not in the
same manner detach the Pastors of this Reformed Church from the Pastors, which
were in Office in the Roman Church? The Ministry is to be mixed as the People,
and is to have always good Pastors amongst the Bad, as there are always true
Believers amongst the false Christians. Why then were they fain to say in the
new Reformation, and in the XXXI Article of their Confession of Faith, that the
State of the Church was interrupted? Why were they fain to have recourse to
these People, extraordinarily raised to build anew the Church, which was in
ruin and desolation? It Is, that they were fain to speak, not according to what
ought to be done in the Order, established by JESUS CHRIST, but according to
what was done against all Order. It Is, that the new Reformation was made of
Pastors, who in effect held nothing from the Pastors, that were before, and
therefore they were necessitated, even against their Wills, to attribute to
them, tho without proof, an extraordinary Vocation. But in truth, Reason
required something else: and why then did they not speak according to Reason,
except it were once again, that they were fain to accommodate, not what was
done to the Rule, but the Rule to what was done?

But, will they say, if any Church, for example the Greek Church, shows us the
Succession of her Pastors, will you hold it for a true Church? By no means, if
I can show in it Marks of Innovation, which it cannot deny; as I should do
without much trouble; if it were in question. But with our Reformed the Proof
is made, since themselves confess the Interruption, we charge them with.

Mr. Claude palliates, as well as he can, this interrupted State of the Church,
so punctually acknowledged in her Confession of Faith. We distinguish, After
the 4. q. 7. Conseq.
says he, the Church from her State. The Church are the true Believers, who
make Profession of the Christian Truth, of Piety, and of a real Sanctity, under
a Ministry, which furnishes them with the Aliments, necessary for the
Spiritual Life, without depriving them of any one. Her natural and legitimate
State is to be discharged, as much as the Condition of militant can permit,
from the impure mixture of prophano Persons and Worldings, not to be covered,
and as it were buried by this Chaff, and these Tares, whence a thousand Evils
come upon her, as to have a Ministry, free from Errors, from false Worships,
from superstitious Practices, a Ministry possessed by good People, who keep at
by good ways, and serve themselves for good example. It Is this State of the
Church, which we say was interrupted. Why does he load himself with so many
Words, and, because they are pompous, not observe, that they are vain, not to
say deceitful, and manifestly contrary to the Gospel? For can one more clearly
impose on People, than by exaggerating, as is here done, this Ministry possessed
by good people, who keep it by good ways, and serve themselves for good
Example? Is it, that the Authority of the Ecclesiastical Ministry dupends on
the Discussion of the Life and good Example of those, who are vested with it?
and that, tho they should be as scandalous and perverse, as the Scribes and
Pharisees, we must not still say, not with JESUS CHRIST, they sit in Moses
Chair, but what is much more august, Matt. 23. v. 2.
they are in the Chair of JESUS CHRIST, and his Apostles? Let us leave
nevertheless these things, and come to this interrupted State of the XXXI
Article, which Mr. Claude undertakes here to explicate to us. This interrupted
State of the Church is alleged here, to found the necessity of an
extraordinary Vocation in the Pretended Reformers: for let us hear, how this
Article speaks. It has been sometimes necessary, and namely in our days, in
which the State of the Church was interrupted, that GOD should raise up people
after an extraordinary manner to set up the Church anew. You see Gentlemen,
this interrupted State of the Church is alleged only to found the
extraordinary Vocation of your Pretended Reformers. But to found the Necessity
of an extraordinary Vocation, it is not sufficient, that the Ministry is
impure; it must have ceased. When you came, Gentlemen, had this Ecclesiastical
Ministry ceased? By no means, will Mr. Claude answer you, for then the Church
would have ceased, since the Church, according to him, as you just now heard,
is nothing else, but the true Believers, who make Profession of the Truth UNDER
A MINISTRY, which furnishes her with necessary Aliments. And he has already
told us, that the Church is never without the Ministry. Wherefore in this
place, where he endeavors to give an Account of this interrupted State, after
he has by so many fine Words set forth the Impurity, which he imagins in the
Ministry before the Reformation; The Church, adds he, ceased not, She did not
entirely lose her Visibility or her Ministry. GOD forbid. See, how he cries
out against this Abomination, to say, that the Ministry can be lost in the
Church. There is never then any Necessity of an extraordinary Vocation in the
Ministers, since to transmit the Ministry after the ordinary manner, it is not
requisite for the Ministry to be pure; it is sufficient, that it is. And tho
for the transmitting of it there should be required, as Mr. Claude speaks, not
only Ministers of good Doctrine, but also of good Life and good Example, it is as
sure, that there will be always such in the Society of GOD's People, as it is,
that there will be always true. Believers, since that all, the Ministry as
well as the People, must be there mixed of Good and Bad, till the final
Separation at the last Judgment. Thus the extraordinary Vocation is on all
sides excluded from JESUS Christ's Church, and can be only a weak Refuge for a
deplored Cause.

And to see, what an Overthrow to JESUS Christ's Order Mr. Claude here
introduces, we need only consider the Promises of JESUS CHRIST, and see, in
what it has pleased him principally to establish the Strength of his Church.
She is strong, she is invincible, because JESUS CHRIST has said, Mat. xvi. v.
18.
that Hell should not prevail against her. But he did not say, that Hell should
not prevail against her, till after he had said, Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock I will build my Church, adding presently after, I will give unto thee the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. It Is then in the Ministry, confessing and
declaring JESUS CHRIST, and using the Authority of the Keys, that JESUS CHRIST
has principally established the Strength of his Church. And to whom did he say,
I am with you even unto the end of the world; Matt. xxviii. v. 20.
but to those, to whom he said, ^^ach and baptize? All the Church is
comprehended in this Promise; who knows it not? But JESUS CHRIST would show the
Truth of this Doctrine, Ep. 69. ad Flor. Pap.
so well explicated by St. Cyprian: The Church forsakes not JESUS CHRIST; and
this is the Church, the People united with their Bishop, and the Flock joined
to their Pastor: where it is clear, that we must understand, as he says
elsewhere, Ep. 45. ad Corin. 4. and Tr. de unit. Ecc. etc.
this Pastor united with all his Colleagues, and with the whole Unity of the
Episcopacy, so often established in his Writings. It Is then with reason, that
JESUS CHRIST would show the Succession of his Church by that of the Ministry,
and it is manifestly seen, that it is to those, who teach, he would say. I am
always with you. And what is here more admirable, is, that these Promises are
so evident, that Mr. Claude (against the Prepossessions of his Religion) was
forced to acknowledge them such, as I have now explicated them. For we have
heard him tell us, that it is in effect of a confessing Church, of a Church,
which publishes the Faith, of a Church, which uses the Ministry, that JESUS
CHRIST has pronounced, that Hell should not prevail against her. V. sup. xi.
Ref. p. 99. seq.
And because JESUS CHRIST, after he had said, Teach and baptize, adds, I am
with you; Mr. Claude concludes, as we do, that JESUS CHRIST in effect designs a
Church, that he affirms he will be with her, baptize with her, and teach with
her even unto the end of the world. It Is then the Succession and Perpetuity of
the Ministry, which is principally comprehended in this Promise; it is
principally in this, that JESUS CHRIST establishes the Strength and eternal
Duration of his Church. In the mean time, against all this Order we are shown
the Ministry so weak, and so forsaken by JESUS CHRIST, that it falls all
together in one moment, and on the contrary particular Believers so strong,
that they alone establish all the Ministry extraordinarily raised, without
having regard to the Succession or Authority of all the precedent
Administration. Who does not then see, that all is overturned in the new
Reformation? and that to say with them, that GOD would preserve true Believers
in his Church, to depose by their means all the Pastors, and afterward set up
others extraordinarily in their place; whilst he would not preserve good
Pastors to transmit the Ministry by the common ways, established in his word,
and always observed in his Church: is to say, that he would set up a Church in
a manner, contrary to that, he has revealed, and has always caused to be
followed by his Church? Or rather it is to say, that he would have this Church,
formed after a manner so new amongst Chri^^^ans, bear in its Original, without
ever being able to efface it, the manifest Character of its Falsity.

But let us come to these true Believers, of whom Mr. Claude brags to us. I am
not contented to dispute with them the Power, he has given them to depose all
their Pastors, and make others: I say, that these true Believers never were.
There must notwithstanding, according to this Minister, have been true
Believers, even in the Bosom of the Roman Church: for since, according to his
Doctrine, there must be acknowledged, without any Interruption, an
Ecclesiastical Ministry, and an exterior Profession, of which might have been
said, There are the true Believers, they were true Believers under that
Ministry, and in that Profession, whence they went forth. I ask, did they
communicate in the Sacrifice, where Saints are invocated, where their Relics
and Images are honored, where the Pope is named as the Head of the Orthodox,
where JESUS CHRIST is adored, as present in Body and Soul, where he is offered,
where the Holy Sacrament is received under one Kind? Not to communicate in this
Sacrifice, and to refuse the receiving of the Eucharist there, were manifestly
to separate, and they are supposed not to have done that yet: but if they
communicated there, continuing true Believers, in what an Error are now all our
Reformed, who believe not themselves to have been true. Believers, till since
they left communicating there?

Thus these true Believers are People in the Air: 1 Kin. xix. v. 18.
these seven thousand, so much bragged of in the new Reformation, and by Mr.
Claude, Man. Ans. 2 part.
are so far from appearing, that they are not in nature, since before the
Separation there was not any one, who communicated not in the Sacrifice and
Host, which our Reformed look on as Baal, before whom one must not bow the Knee.

They say, that these true Believers, who by their actual separating composed
the Reformation, were before separated in heart from the public Idolatry. But
first, this is not sufficient: secondly it is not so.

This is not sufficient according to Mr. Claude, since he will have a Church
always visible; since he has just now defined the Church to be the true
Believers, who make Profession of the Truth, of Piety, of real Sanctity. Where
then the Profession is wanting, there are neither true Believers, nor a true
Church.

But moreover, this is visibly not so; else, when Luther appeared, and
Zuinglius innovated, their Disciples must have made this Declaration: This is,
what we always believed; we always had our Heart averse from the Roman Faith,
and from the Pope, and from Bishops, and from the Real Presence, and from
Confession, and from Communion under one Kind, and from Relics, and from
Images, and from Prayer to Saints, and from the Merit of Works. Where are
those, who spoke in this manner? Can Mr. Claude name us any one of them? On the
contrary, are not all these Reformed seen in all the Pages of their Books to
speak, as newly retired out of the Darkness of the Papacy, and does not Luther
glory at their head, that he was the first, who declared the Gospel? All the
Reformed grant it, except Zuinglius, who disputes this Honor with him. He in
the mean time acknowledges, that he was the sincerest Monk, the Priest most
intent upon his Sacrifice, and in a word the zealousest of all the Papists. Do
not the others use the same Language? Where are then these true Believers of
Mr. Claudes, who not only durst not declare their Faith, whilst they were in
the Bosom of the Roman Church, but after they were gone out of it, durst not
say, they had always held in their heart the same Faith?

But see here the entire Ruin of the new Reformation. In the Definition, that
Mr. Claude just now gave us of the true Church, he says, It Is the true
Believers, who make Profession of the Christian Truth under a Ministry, which
furnishes her with necessary Aliments without depriving her of any one. If
before the Refomation there was no such Church, the true Church against Mr.
Claude's Supposition no longer was; and if there were such a Church, where
Profession was made of the Truth, and which by her Ministry gave necessary
Aliments to the Children of GOD without depriving them of any one, what need
was there of the Pretended Reformeds Separation?

Is it perhaps, that they bethought themselves all on a sudden to say Mass, and
teach all the Doctrins, which our Reformed have alleged for the Cause of their
Rupture? To think it only, would be the greatest of Absurdities. But it may be,
in teaching all these Doctrins they had not yet thought of excommunicating
those, that opposed them. Whence then come so many Anathemaes against
^erengarius, against the Waldenses and Albigenses, against John Wickcliff and
John Hus, whom our Reformed will count amongst their Ancestors? What then, had
not those, who before the pretended Reformation made Profession of the
Christian Truth, that is, according to Mr. Claude, of the Reformed Doctrine, yet
found the Invention of making a Schism, and was all the World agreed to suffer
them? But should all this be true, the Affairs of the Reformation would not be
a jot the better: since still, before it had any Existence, there must be
acknowledged a Ministry, where without teaching, either that the Sinner is
justified by Faith alone and the sole Imputation of JESUS CHRIST's Justice, or
that GOD in the new Testament abhors Sacrifices celebrated in a sensible
matter, or that he alone would be invocated to the Exclusion of that inferior
and subordi^ate Prayer, which is addressed to Saints, or in fine without any of
those Articles, which distinguish our Reformed from us, although they place their
Salvation in them; they ceased not to furnish the Children of GOD with all the
Aliments necessary for the Spiritual Life, without depriving them of any one.
What has the Reformation wrought, if all these things are not necessary
Aliments; if even the Sacred Cup, and consequently the Supper, which, according
to our Pretended Reformed, cannot subsist without the Cup, is none of these
Aliments, necessary to the Christians Faith? How they have tormented themselves
in vain, and how unadvisedly they have caused so many Troubles, and shed so
much Blood, if these things are not necessary!

Perhaps these necessary Aliments must be reduced to the Apostles Creed, or in
general to the Scripture. But the Socinian Church remins this Creed, and this
Scripture: so that the Ministry of a Socinian Church would, according to this
Rule, have furnished the Children of GOD with all necessary Aliments, without
depriving them of any one. What then at last will these necessary Aliments be;
and if they are furnished, without the Substraction of any one, only by
proposing the Creed and the Scripture, in what Heresy have they been wanting?

The more Mr. Claude endeavors here to disengage himself, Man. Ans. 4. q.
the more he is entangled. For after he has established as a Fundamental Truth,
that GOD always preservos in the Ministry all, that is necessary to nourish
there the true Believers, and bring them to Salvation, he says, it does not
thence follow, that the Ministry is exempt from all Error, even in its
Decisions; but that, whether they concern not sensibly the Conscience, or even
concern Salvation, the Conscience is made use of to reject the Evil, and
preserve Purity. Thus all would be reduced to Liberty of Conscience; and what
Error soever is taught in the Ministry, provided they force none to follow
their Decisions, and suffer all contrary Doctrine good or bad, it is enough to
make Mr. Claude say, that the Ministry furnishes the Children of GOD with all
necessary Aliments without depriving them of any one. But according to this
Pretention, there would be no Society, whose Ministry should more furnish all
necessary Aliments, than a Society of Socinians, who brag, that they will not
damn any one. If it be said amongst our Reformed, that a Socinian Church
overthrows the Foundation by denying the Divinity of JESUS CHRIST, it is also
said there, that 'twas no less overthrown before their Reformation by the
Idolatries, which, as they say, reigned every where. And if they will in fine
imagine, that it is more dangerous to destroy the Foundation by Substraction with
the Socinians, than with the Roman Church by these pretended Additions, which
they call Idolatry, besides all the Substractions, we have just now shown there
according to the Principles of the Reformed, and even before their Reformation;
it were an unheard of Extravagance to believe, that it would be more easy for
these true Believers, who ought to make the Distinction of Doctrins under a
Ministry full of Errors, to cut off, what is superfluous, than to supply, what
is defective; or that the Foundation of the Faith is more certainly overthrown
by diminishing, than by adding, the Scripture having so often comprehended
under one common Malediction as well those, that diminish, as those that add.

'Twould be better then for (...) to set also (...), and the perpe^^al
Visibility of the Church, and (...) it is in fine sufficient, all this
Visibility being (...), that GOD has preserved the Holy Scripture, where the
Faithful, whether concealed, or open, whether dispersed, or reunited, whether
always subsisting, or sometimes wholly extinct, shall clearly find, according
to his Principles, without any need of the Ministry, all necessary Aliments.
For also of, what use is a Ministry to them, in which Error prevail? And would
not the Scripture alone be more commodious and more instructive to them? This
is, what the (...) should say, to avoid the Inconveniences, into which we cast
them. But Mr. Claude neither durst, nor ever will dare to do it; because he
would find in it Inconveniences, yet more insupportable, and more visible. It Is
in a word, because he sound, that by pushing the Authority and sufficiency, as
I may say, of the Scripture independently of all Ecclesiastical Ministry, they
must at last destroy the Scripture it self.

In effect, Romans 1. ^. 10.
he found in the Scripture, that the Scripture ought not to be, Vid. Sup. p. 50.
as the Philosophy of (...) the Rule of (...) Republic in Idea, but of a
People always subsisting, which this Scripture calls the Church. He has found,
that this People ought to be always visible on the earth, since they ought not
only to believe with the Heart, but also to confes^ with the Mouth, and, to use
his Terms, make Profession of the Christian Truth. He has found, that the
Scripture was entrusted in the hands of such a People, to be their unchangeable
Rule; that there should be always Interpreters established by GOD, the Author of
this Scripture, as well as the Founder of this People; and that so the
Ministry, destined by GOD to this Interpretation, was as eternal, as the
Church it self.

If he writ these great Words, GOD always preserves in the public Ministry
all that is necessary for the guiding true Believers to Salvation, Man. Ans. 4.
q.
he cannot found this Assurance on any human Industry. Let GOD leave the
Ecclesiastical Ministry to it self, it must fall. If then it be certain, that
GOD will always keep there all, that is necessary to Salvation, GOD himself
must have promised it, and the Eternity of the Ministry cannot be founded but
on this Promise. Mr. Claude also finds it in those Words, Thou art Peter, Matt.
xvi. v. 18.
and the rest. It Is thence he concludes with us, that JESUS CHRIST, in speaking
to a Church, that confesses* and confesses without difficulty by her principal
Ministers, since it is by St. Peter in the Name of the Apostles; to a Church,
joined to an exterior Ministry, and using the Power of the Keys, has promised
her, that Hell should not prevail against her; consequently supported by this
Ministry: and therefore he affirms, that GOD preserves always in the public
Ministry all, that is necessary to the Salvation of GODs Children.

Another Promise of JESUS CHRIST's, Matt. xxviii. v. 19, 20.
directed to those, that baptize, and those, that teach, and concluded by these
powerful Words, And, lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the World,
makes Mr. Claude as well as us say, that JESUS CHRIST promises the Church to be
with her, Ibid.
to baptize with her, and to teach with her, without interruption, even to the
end of the World. Thus, according to this Minister, this Promise regards the
Church, as joined to the Ecclesiastical Ministry, which makes him also
conclude, that JESUS CHRIST promises, the Corruption shall never be such in the
Ministry, but that there shall still be enough to entertain the true Faith of
his Elect even to the end of the World.

In fine, Ephesians. iv. Man. Ans. Ibid.
a third Passage, to wit, that of St. Paul to the Ephefians, makes him conclude
with us, that the Ministry shall last even to the end of the World, and
continue in a degree and in an Estate sufficient to edify the Body of CHRIST,
and bring all the Elect to the Perfection, of which St. Paul speaks. GOD then
must concern himself with it, without whose Assistances continually present
neither such a Stability nor such an Integrity can be expected in the Ministry.

After he had thus begun to believe, he should have finish^ the Work, and given
Glory to GOD even to the end. Mr. Claude was not far from the Kingdom of GOD,
when he said, that GOD would render himself superior enough over human
Infirmity, to preserve always, manger the Efforts of Hell, a Church, which
should confess the Truth, and an exterior Ministry, which should furnish true
Believers with the Aliments, necessary to Salvation. He ought then to proceed
to the end, and believe, that the same Hand, which would hinder Hell from
prevailing so far against the Ministry, as to deprive it of these necessary
Aliments, would hinder it also from prevailing so far, as to make any Error
have dominion in it; and that so much the rather, as what he believed,
manifestly comprehends, what is left to believe. For if he believed on the
Faith of the Divine Promise, that there should be always a Church, with which
JESUS CHRIST would not cease to teach that is without difficulty, that he would
not cease to teach with the Doctors of this Church? he ought by the same means
to believe, that he would teach there all Truth, JESUS CHRIST not being come,
Joh. xvi. v. 13.
nor having sent his Holy Spirit to his Apostles to teach them some Truths, but
to teach them all Truth, as himself declares in his Gospel.

Nor would it be to any purpose to say, that Mr. Claude Promises in the
Ministry only sufficient Aliments; which can comprehend no more than the
Fundamentals of the Faith, as our Reformed find them amongst the Lutherans. For
JESUS Christ's Doctrine containing nothing but what is profitable, Is. 48. v. 17.
agreeably to this Word, I am the Lord, which teaches thee profitable things;
if we find not in the Ministry JESUS Christ's Doctrine entire, we shall never
find that Degree required by Mr. Claude, nor that Estate sufficient to bring
all the Elect to the Perfection, of which St. Paul speaks.

'Twould be then something, to believe, that by the Promise GOD would always
keep without interruption in the Ministry all essential Truths: for 'twould be
to acknowledge in the Church, with which JESUS CHRIST teaches, a beginning of
infallible Authority, by acknowledging this Authority at least in respect of
the first Truths of Christianity. But to finish the Work, and not to believe by
halves, we must also believe, that JESUS CHRIST, in teaching, teaches all, and
confess in his Church an absolute Infallibility.

Thus we must not say with the Ministers and their incredulous Flock: This
Ecclesiastical Ministry is of men subject to fall: one may doubt after them:
for this would be to yield to the Temptation, and no longer to believe the
Promise. We must say, it is of men, with whom JESUS CHRIST promises to be, and
teach always: then manger human weakness, and all the Endeavors of Hell, Romans
iv. v. 18.
against hope we believe in hope, that we shall find eternally in their common
Preaching, not some Truths, or only the principal Truths, but the entire
Fullness of Christian Truths. Whatever they say, it is not to believe blindly to
believe thus, or it is to believe blindly, like Abraham, on the word of GOD
himself, and the Faith of his Promises.

How insupportable then is the Doctrine of Mr. Claude, who, after he has
acknowledged so many magnificent Promises of JESUS CHRIST's in favor of this
sacred Ministry: plunging again all of a sudden into the Darkness of his Sect,
whence he was beginning to get out, shows us the Ministry so abandoned by
JESUS CHRIST, that there is no Remedy for its Errors, but by deposing all at
once all those, which are in the Chair. What agreement have these Promises, so
well acknowledged, with so universal a Corruption?

Mr. Claude then needs only hearken a little to himself, for to come unto us:
after having acknowledged, in virtue of the divine Promises, the Eternity of
the Ecclesiastical Ministry in this Estate, he represents to us; to find there
always all Truth, he needs only consider, that this imperfect Assistance, and,
as one may say, this half Succor of JESUS CHRIST to his Church, is neither
beseeming his Wisdom, nor his Power; being moreover assured, that there is no
true Sufficiency in the Ministry, but by the full manifestation of the Truth;
revealed by GOD, agreeably to this Word of the Apostle By manifestation of the
Truth we commend our selves to every man's Conscience in the sight of GOD. 2
Cor. iv. v. 2, 3, 4.
Whence he concludes presently after, that if our Gospel, that is most
certainly our Preaching, be hid, it is hid to them, that are lost; to the end
he may make us understand, that the Preaching always clear and always sincere
in the Catholic Church, has no obscurity but in Rebels, in whom the Devil, the
God of this World, and the Spirit of Pride, has blinded the minds, as the same
Apostle proceeds, l^st the Light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto them.

It Is now easy to see, that all Mr. Claude's Subtilties serve only to confound
him. What avails it him, that, acknowledging the Churches Visibility, he
endeavored to elude the Consequences of this Doctrine, by reducing the Church
to the true Believers? I am contented: wherever he finds Church, let him
understand the true Believers; let him even explicate if he will, these Words,
Mat. xviii. v. 4.
Tell it unto the Church, Tell it to the true Believers; single them out
amongst the Troop, and judge before the Lord: or because, as himself
acknowledges, here is too apparently meant the Church represented by her
Pastors, Man's. Ans. 4. q.
let him say, that these Pastors represent the true Believers, which are not
known, and act in their Name. What will these Explications after all advantage
him, since that in fine, according to his own Doctrine, this true Church shall
always be (...) visible, and these true Believers always under a public
Ministry from which JESUS CHRIST so little permits his Church to be separated,
that even after these Words, Tell it unto the Church, but if he neglect to hear
the Church, let him he unto the^ as an (...) man, to show how redoubtable the
Churches Judgment is, he immediately expresses the efficacy of the Ministry by
these Words: Matt. xviii v. 18.
Whatsoever you shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and the rest,
which every one knows. Thus I conclude always equally, that the Church, which
we must show without interruption, whether it be only the true Believers, or if
they will, only the Elect, or whether it be in a certain Sense the wicked mixed
with them, Matt. xiii. v. 21.
and those, that believe for a while, according to the expression of the
Gospel, is a Church always gathered under a visible Ministry, and a Body
always subsisting of People with their Pastors, where the Truth is preached, not
in secret, Matt. x. v. 27.
but upon the house tops. Let them turn, as much as they will, it is a Church of
this Nature and this Constitution, we must at all times show, by Mr. Claude's
Confession. To make her disappear for one sole Moment, is utterly to annihilate
her, and to overthrow the Promises of the Gospel, in what they have most
sensible, and most apparent: to make her appear always, is invindibly to
establish the Roman Church. Thus what Mr. Claude explicates to us with so much
care, besides that it is false, leaves the Difficulty entire, and his Cause in
as had a Condition, as it was before his Defense. But to the end they may not
say, we are contented with refuting him, let us tell him the Truth in few words.

The Foundation of the Church is the true Believers, and those principally, who
persevering to the end, abide eternally in JESUS CHRIST, and JESUS CHRIST in
them, that is to say, the Elect. The Wicked, which envinron them, are after
their manner comprehended under the Name of the Church, as the Nails, as the
Hair, as an Eye put out, and a withered Arm, which perhaps receives no more
nourishment, is comprehended under the Name of the Body. All is for these true
Believers. The Ministry, under which they live, is theirs in the Sense, 1 Cor.
iii. v. 22.
that St. Paul said: All is yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas. Not
that the Power of their Pastors comes from them, or that they alone can set
them up, and depose them. GOD forbid: This Pastoral and Apostolic Power comes
from him, Joh. xx. v. 21.
who said: As my Father has sent me, I also send you. This is, what makes St.
Paul say in the same place, 1 Cor. iii. v. 4, 5.
Who is then Apollos? and who is Paul? The Ministers of him, whom you have
believed, and to every one, as our Lord has given; to you to be Believers, and
to us to be Pastors. Wherefore he adds farther: v. 9.
We are GODs Laborers, or to say better, Cooperators. These Ministers and these
Workers, established by GOD are also the Ministers of the Faithful, and in this
Sense are theirs, because they are their Servants by JESUS CHRIST, established
in the Chair, not for themselves, for as to their own part it would suffice
them to be simple Believers, 2 Cor. iv. v. 5.
but for to edify the Saints. He that desires to be in the Communion of these
Saints, need not torment himself to distinguish them from others: for, tho they
are not known and perfectly discerned but by GOD alone, we are sure to find
them under the public Ministry, and in the exterior Profession of the
Catholic Church. We need then only stay there, for to be assured to find the
Saints; because this Profession, and the ever fruitful Word of the Preachers,
which never fails to engender some, keeps them always inseparably united to the
holy Society, where they received it. Wherefore when JESUS CHRIST promises to
teach always with his Church, he comprehends all in this Word, and rendering by
virtue of this Promise the Church infallible exteriorly in the manifestation of
the Truth, renders her interiorly always fruitful. If the Preachers of the
Truth are by their corrupt Life unworthy of their Ministry, GOD ceases not to
make use of them for to sanctify his Faithful, for he is able to vivify, even
by the Dead; and a putrified Arm may become active in his hands. Besides, these
true Believers, known to GOD alone, animate all the Ecclesiastical Ministry: a
small Number of these concealed Saints often suffices to render the Prayers of
a whole Church efficacious; the Conversion of Sinners will be often as soon the
Effect of their secret Groans, as the Fruit of the most illuminated Preachings.
Wherefore St. Augustine attributes the wholesome Effects of the Ministry to these
good Souls, for whom and by whom the Holy Ghost is f^lly in the Church. But
that the Ecclesiastical Power depends on them, is what neither St. Augustine,
nor any of the Orthodox Doctors ever taught; and Mr. Claude, who cites them,
understands them not. I will be fully seen, when he shall publish his writing;
it is sufficient for us in the mean time, to have shown, that he is of those and
GOD grant he be not so to the end, Tit. iii. v. 2.
that he is, I say, of those, of whom St. Paul speaks, that condemn themselves.

It Is in effect according to this Apostle, the true Character of all Heresies;
and never any Society more visibly bore this Character set down by St. Paul,
than the Pretended Reformed Church.

She condemns her self, Vid. Sup. 1. Ref. p. 58.
when not daring to affirm, that she is infallible, she sees her self
nevertheless constrained to act, as if she were, and to bear witness to the
Catholic Church by imitating her.

She condemns her self, 2. Ref. p. 64.
when she raises all the particular persons, she teaches, above her own
Judgment; and forcing them, how ignorant soever they find themselves, to examine
after her, without rendering them capable, she renders them indocil and
presumptuous.

She condemns her self, 3, 4, 5, 6. and 7. Ref. p. 73. and seq.
since Vaunting of the Scripturus, she finds not in her self Authority enough
to make them be received by her Followers on her Word, but leaves her own
Children, to whom she presents them to be read, in the Uncertainties of an
human Faith.

She condemns her self, 8. Ref. p. 88.
when forced to own, that she was not established but by breaking with all the
Christian Churches, which were in the World, she gives her self the proper
Character of all false Churches.

In fine she condemns her self, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Ref. p. 91. and seq.
when forced to acknowledge the perpetual Visibility of the Church in the
Indefectibility of the Ministry, she cannot maintain her self without
acknowledging, besides in the Ministry an universal Corruption, nor without
authorizing private persons against all the Succession of the Apostolic Order.

Now if she condemns her self in so many manners, how happy would it be for her
to condemn her self in fine, by returning into the Bosom of the Catholic
Church, which never ceases to recall her to her Unity.

Let these Gentlemen no longer speak to us of the Abuses, which make us groan.
The Evils of the Church are badly remedied by adding that of Schism. Are they
so happy, or, to say better, so haughty and blind, that they find nothing to be
lamented amongst themselves? and will they authorize so many Sects, gone forth
of their Bosom, who, complaining of their Disorders in the same Spirit of Pride
and Discontent, with which they heretofore so much exaggerated ours, daily
separate from them, as they did from us? Why do they not rather hear Charity it
self, Unity it self, and the Catholic Church, which tells them by the Mouth of
St. Cyprian: Cyp. Ep. 43. ad. Confess.
Persuade not your selves, our dear Brethern and dear Children, that you can
ever defend the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST by separating from his Flock, from his
Unity, and from his Peace. Good Soldiers, that complain of the Disorders, they
see in the Army, ought to stay in the Field, to remedy them by common advice
under the Authority of the Captain, and not go thence, to expose the Army thus
disunited to the Invasions of the Enemy. Since then the Ecclesiastical Unity
ought not to be broken, and that beside we cannot leave the Church to go to
you, Return, return rather to the Church your Mother, and our Fraternity: to
which we exh^rt you with all the earnestness of a true brotherly Love. Amen.

FINIS.

