AN EXAMINATION OF Mr. John Colbatch HIS BOOKS, viz.

I. Novum Lumen Chirurgicum. II. Essay of Alkalies and Acids. III. An Appendix
to that Essay. IV. A Treatise of the Gout. V. The Doctrine of Acids further
Asserted, etc. VI. A Relation of a Person Bitten by a Viper, etc.
To which is added, An Answer to Dr. Leigh's Remarks on a Treatise concerning
the Heat of the Blood.

Together with Remarks on Dr. Leigh's Book entitled Exercitationes Quinque
Printed at a private Press in Oxford, without the License of the University.

AS ALSO A short View of Dr. Leighs Reply to Mr. Colbatch, etc.

By RICHARD BOULTON, of Brazen-Nose College in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed for A. and J. Churchill, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row, School.

Liber Coll. Omnanim. Fidel. defunct. in Oxon.



TO THE Learned and ever Honored CHARLES GOODALL Doctor in Physic, Physician
to the Charter House AND CENSOR to the COLLEGE of Physicians London.
Learned SIR,
AS no one can be more concerned than your Self, in Vindicating Learning, and
discouraging it is Opponents; so without Presumption, I may say, no one is more
able to take upon him such a Task; of which You have long ago satisfied the
World, by appearing Publicly in the Defense of That College, of which You are
now a very worthy Member.

And as you have given a very full Proof, that you are sufficiently qualified
to Defend Learned Men from the Attempts of those who endeavor to Oppose them;
so it consequently follows, that I could not possibly make choice of a fitter
Patron for this Book, which is a Vindication of all Learned Physicians, from
the vain and false Pretenses of an ignorant Man.

And though, I presume, to ask your Patronage of this Book, yet it is not because
I think the Adversary I appear against, nor all his adherents formidable
Opponents; but because, any thing that carrys with it a Vindication of that
Learned Society, of which you are a Member, cannot have a more proper Name
prefixed to it than Yours, who have so signally appeared in their Defense.

But though it be an Honor to appear in such a Cause, yet it is not that which
bears the highest Place in your Character: For Religion and Virtue which are
the Measures and Rules of all your Actions, make you Useful both to the Church
and State, it being Part of your continual Care to instill into young Men a just
Veneration for a Deity and noble and great Notions of the extraordinary Merit
of so great a King.

And your Prudence is not more remarkable in respect of the Public, than your
own Private Affairs, where Judgment and Learning are the sure Guides of
successful Practice, and Virtue and Tranquillity extend themselves throughout
your Family.

These are but short Hints of so great a Character as the Conduct of your Life
affords materials for; a Character which claims a better Pen, than mine to take
a Draught of, and which one that is intimately acquainted with those Virtues,
in their utmost Extent can only describe.

For which Reason I fear, that whilst I only endeavor to show my self sensible
of those Obligations your Favors have laid upon me, and for which Gratitude
can be the least Return, I shall rather be condemned by those who know how far
I come short of your Merit, for undertaking to mention any thing that belongs
to a Character so much above my Reach.

Yet from your self I can easily hope for Pardon, since you are so free to give
it to all those that transgress not too far Divine and Human Laws, nor
unreasonably triumph in their Ignorance, to the Dishonor of Learning and
Learned Men, for all which you have so great a Veneration, and therefore I am
more hold humbly to subscribe my self,

Learned SIR, Your most Obliged Servant at your Command, R. BOULTON.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Doctrine of Acids and Alkalies has been so long since rejected, as False
and Erroneous, by the Famous and Honorable Robert Boil Esquire; and others, that
it is a wonder, any Man should have so much Impudence, as to advance it afresh;
without answering those Objections, which have sufficiently proved the
Insufficiency of it, much more to dare with so much Boldness to Contradict all
Learned Men, upon such false Grounds as Mr. Colbatch has done.

And therefore I think it fit to acquaint my Reader briefly, with the true
State of the Controversy, that he may more clearly judge, how far he is from
Truth in what he has writ; and what Reason I had to write in the Method I have.

In short then, they must understand, that Mr. Colbatch has endeavored to
Account for, and to cure most Distempers, upon so false a Bottom as the Doctrine
of Acids and Alkalies, which has been long since rejected and laid aside, by
all the most Rational Physicians; and that herein he has been so bold, as not
only to tell all the World, that they were mistaken; but has taken upon him to
call University-Learning, nothing but fusty Philosophy, and all Rational
Physicians all the ill Names he could invent, impudently complaining, that he
was sorry to see Physic a Scene of Slaughter.

These Imputations, with a great many more, has he laid upon the World, and if
we look into his Books we shall see very little Reason for it; for he has not
only Erred with the Vulgar, in building all his Writings on a false Doctrine;
but to show how grandly he is mistaken, he has proved himself two Removes from
Truth; for granting the Doctrine of Acids and Alkalies true, what he has said
will not hold, so that he must needs be doubly mistaken.

And therefore in Answering his Books, and laying open his Faults, I all along
proved, that granting the Doctrine of Acids and Alkalies true, what he says it
false. And here it is not amiss to declare a little more clearly, that though I
have argued against his Books, as if the Hypothesis he built upon were true;
yet, I don't at all grant it to be so, only to show how widely he is distant
from Truth; for to have shown that he only Erred in assuming the Doctrine of
Acids and Alkalies, would but have proved him guilty of a Fault, that has been
common to others as well as himself; but his Faults are of a more absurd kind;
for which Reason, it is excusable, that I have treated him in such a proper
Manner, as to represent the Man, as well as the Physician.

However, I must confess, that though I have proved him guilty of such grand
Faults, both in Physic, and his Behavior toward the Learned World, yet it
wants an Apology, and perhaps may be no small Disadvantage to my Arguments, to
mix such Remarks as I have amongst them; for which Reason I desire my Reader to
consider the State of the Controversy, and the Person against whom I write; it
is not a Man who has the good Opinion and Approbation of Learned Men, but
(like a Mountebank) the Cry of a few of the Rabble, and one that has done his
utmost, to cast all the Aspersions he can upon Learning and Learned Men, and
therefore he ought to be used in his kind; to be serious with such weak
Nonsense, would be to betray Learning, and to expose my own Understanding to
the Censure of the Learned; and to Compliment such a vain Person would be to
make no distinction betwixt Men of Sense and Merit, and the most notorious
Block-heads, which would be a greater Affront to Learned Men, than any he has
given: But without doubt Men ought to be Used according to their Merit; and it
would be Ridiculous as well as Unjust to put Learned and Ingenious Men upon a
Level, as to treat a common Offender and a just Man alike; how Ridiculous and
Weak would it be for a Lawyer, when a Prisoner is indicted for heinous Crimes,
to moderate his Pleading, as if he were a just innocent Man?

But that what just Reflections I have made, may be no Disadvantage to my
Arguments, I would desire my Reader to consider the Arguments, and them apart,
and so he will have the Advantage to see how my Arguments confute him, and how
my Remarks are grounded upon Conviction of his grand Errors, and though it be
common to say, that Remarks, though Just, cloud Arguments, and prejudice the
Readers, yet I would not lay such things to their Charge; I believe, Rational
Men who have the Use of their Reason, can distinguish betwixt Remarks and
Arguments, and can without prejudice consider the former as the Merit of the
Man, and the latter as against his Books.

And here I think it necessary to let the World know that Dr. Coward having
lately writ a Book against some Part of Mr. Colbatch his Books, Mr. Colbatch
has been pleased to put an Advertisement in the latter End of a Book published
soon after, wherein he says Dr. Coward's Book is not worth an Answer; I
therefore shall tell him, that he only says so because he cannot answer it; and
for that Reason, I shall conclude, that if he does not Answer Mine, he really
cannot; and because I have made so many Remarks on him, which perhaps may be
too severe, I shall put him in a way to prove, that he does not deserve them,
which will be by showing, that the Reasons I have given against his Books are
not valid, but if he does not do that, the Remarks properly belong to him,
being grounded upon his Errors.

There is one thing more which I must acquaint my Reader with, which is, that
in Answering his Novum Lumen Chirurgicum, his Essay of Alkalies and Acids, his
Appendix to that Essay, and his Book Entitled The Doctrine of Alkalies and
Acids further Asserted, etc. I have all along quoted the first Impression of
those Books, that the Reader may, if he pleases, turn to those Quotations,
which will save those that have the First Impression the Trouble of looking
into the Second.

All that I have further to say is, that if there be any Faults in the
following Sheets, I must beg the Reader to ascribe them to the haste in which
they were writ, the whole being writ in a Month's time when I was in London the
last Spring, except the last concerning the Person bit by a Viper, which Book
of his being not published before I returned to Oxford, a few vacant Hours
there were employed in an Examination of it.

And now least the Reader should think that I publish the haste they were writ
in, rather to be taken for a quick Writer than to excuse my Faults, it may not
be amiss to tell him, that my chief Reason, is, that I would not have the World
to think that the Confutation of so weak an Adversary required longer time than
was necessary to write it; for I would by no Means have the World to think the
following Sheets the Product of a longer Consideration, Mr. Colbatch his Faults
being easily discerned at the first Sight, by any one that has made a Progress
in Physic sufficient to enable him to distinguish betwixt Truth and Error, and
therefore I humbly submit them to the impartial Reader, hoping they will
convince the World of his Mistakes, and deter young and less judicious
Practioners from following his Absurd Methods, in doing of which, if they may
be serviceable to young Physicians, I have my Desire, I say young ones, because
Men of riper Judgment are already convinced of his Mistakes. Candid Reader,

Your very Humble Servant R. BOULTON.

AN EXAMINATION OF Mr. John Colbatch HIS Novum Lumen Chyrurgicum.

Wherein his Absurdities and False Opinions in Physic and Surgery are truly
Represented and fully Confuted.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1699.

AN EXAMINATION OF Mr. John Colbatch, HIS Novum Lumen Chirurgicum, etc.
PRIDE and Incivility are such Natural Concomitants of Ignorance and
Self-conceit; that wherever the Latter and Naturally imbred in a Man void of
common Sense; the former unavoidably flow from them, as Natural Consequences of
a depraved Reason.

It is on this Account, that I have undertaken to correct the Insolence of this
Author, by showing how weakly he manages his erroneous and invalid Assertions;
and also how widely and uncivilly he his mistaken, contrary to Experience and
Reason, and the Authority, as well as the private Opinions of Learned and
Judicious Men.

But before I proceed to lay open his Absurdities, I must make an Apology to
the World, for taking that Liberty in my Expressions, which most properly
represents him in his Character: As for himself, all I shall say is, that if
what I shall write of him displeases him, he must blame himself for it, and
not me; it is from what he has published that I draw his Demerits, and if he
has published Asurdities, he can best Apologize to himself; and must not blame
me, for saying only, what he himself has laid public Grounds for.

However, it is not without some Reluctance, that I engage my self in such a
Cause, where the Ignorance and base Designs of a self-conceited Man obliges me
in Justice to his Character to make use of Language I should otherwise be
ashamed of. But the undoubted Merit of that very unlearned Mr. Colebatch, never
too much admired for his wonderful Genius, in scribbling Nonscence, and his
Dogmatical Positiveness in laying down Falsities, to the great Satisfaction of
all those who love Nonsense in a homely Dress, I say, this mighty Hero has
taken such Pains to write down such Specimens of his profound Disabilities, and
his assuming Boldness, that should I not study for such Expressions, I should
be guilty of Misrepresenting him.

But before I engage my self in a Confutation of such mean and indigested
Nonsense, I think it may not be unfit to let the World know, that it is not
with a design to get Victory, Credit, or Applause, that I oppose such a mighty
Champion, since all Judicious and Learned Men laugh at his Childish, Crude and
Shallow Notions; and are amazed at his Impudence; but it is partly to undeceive
those People, who are overcome by his weakness and misled by him, who want
Judgment and Knowledge to perceive his Errors, and to arm themselves against
large Pretenses. For the greatest Part of Mankind know so little of Physic,
nay are so Ignorant of it, that when a Man is bold and positive, they cannot
imagine that he can have so much Impudence, to pretend to Knowledge, if he was
really Ignorant: that this is the Case of Mr. Colbatch I shall take Pains to
show, what he writes being an Inconsiderate piece of confused and incoherent
Assertions.

I shall therefore lay open his Errors so fairly, that the World may be no
longer imposed upon, in a Matter that is of such Consequence, as the Health or
Destruction of some, though a small Part of Mankind; for if such fatal
Absurdities, as those which Mr. Colebatch has broached, were not corrected;
what Mischief might be done? Or rather what might not be done? By such Methods
as he irrationally and injudiciously asserts, and practices, by his own Hands,
as well as other Physicians who are too easily credulous, and misguided by him.

But it is not only to undeceive the Vulgar and Unlearned, that are thus easily
imposed upon, that I engage my self in this Cause: But to defend and vindicate
the Royal Learned and Judicious Society, the College of Physicians, and all
other Learned Men, from his ungrounded Impudence, his rude assuming Behavior,
and the Aspersions he has boldly cast upon all rational and regular
Physicians; daring to assert without Reason or Foundation, what is repugnant to
the most Celebrated Writers, whose Writings are backed and confirmed by the
daily Experience and Universal Consent of those Members, who are not biased by
Interest, or that don't value the Cry of the Vulgar, above the Approbation of
Learned Men; and that have not engaged themselves to cry up one another, though
by never so dishonorable Methods or absurd Means.

And the Consideration of the Greatness of such a Design, encourages me to
slight and contemn all the Aspersions that may be made by such bold Impertinent
Pretenders; for I am so far from valuing the displeasure of half a Dozen of
such, above the meritorious Cause of a whole Body of Learned Men; that I
profess I had rather deserve the good Opinion of one ingenious Learned Man,
than oblige a hundred Block-heads.

And now if a Reason should be asked, why I should be so zealously concerned,
in defending a Body of Men, who are much more able to vindicate themselves; I
must also answer for them, that it is below them to take notice of such mean
and weak Assaults; and to appear in Disputes with such impotent Assailants;
where so little is contained, that the most suitable Answer to such an insolent
vain Person, from Men placed by eminent Learning and Judgment so far above him,
would oblige them in Justice to themselves, and him, as well as the Cause they
Defend, to reprimand him and correct his Folly, with Words and Language more
severe, perhaps, then what their Manners and Civility would permit them to make
Use of.

For if such Men as the greatest Part of that Learned Society is made up of,
should so far condescend as to use Civil Language to him, where he deserves the
contrary, they would by that means bring Reflections by the Learned, upon their
own Judgments; and too much demean themselves in such sordid Company, for
should they convince that small Part of Mankind (who are so easily captived by
Mountebanks and such vain Pretenders,) that his Methods and Practice were never
so distructive, the Conquest would be no Advantage to them, nor tend to their
Honor; it being below them, to take notice of a Man Unlearned, Ignorant and
Vain; yet Rude, Self-conceited, and Impertinent. And truly had I any great
Opinion of my self, I should think my self no Gainer by such a Victory; which
the least Degree of true Sense and Reason can assure any Body of: And as the
Matter now stands, I should think my time ill spent, and should blame my self,
for making no better Use of it; if the Reasons I have already given did not
prevail with me, viz. To undeceive the Vulgar, and to Vindicate the Honor of
so many Learned Men; for what strange Notions must those that admire him frame
of the College of Physicians and Him; and what hard Thoughts must they beyond
Seas have of our English Physicians, to see such a poor Patch of a Philosopher,
that has but three Words of any thing that looks like Philosophy in all his
Scribbling, and those Nonscence, set up for a Champion; and one that boldly
asserts without Reason or any show of it, undertake to be a Reformer of Physic
in England; a Nation, that has always abounded with the most Sagacious Learned
Men and the greatest Improvers of Physic. I say, what must these think? Should
not his Vanity be corrected and deservedly exposed; so that the Honor of such
a Profession will yet be another Addition to my Apology for using him according
to his Desert: And it will be yet more excusable when by Representing truly his
Character and Behavior to all Learned Men, and his Erroneous Absurdities, in
Contradiction to all Reason and Experience, it appears how ill he deserves not
only of Physicians, but Mankind; and how Impudently he is mistaken.

I shall therefore give a true Account of his Character and Behavior, which I
shall do by way of Remarks on his Writings, that they may not seem to be
without Grounds; and I shall unvail his Weakness and Mistakes, in what he has
asserted and writ, and shall prove that he has more Reason to be ashamed, than
boldly fond of such Mistakes; in which, all I have said of him already or can,
will be but the same Measure that he has Measured others; and though he did not
at all deserve it, I might have more Reason to take any Liberty, in the worst
Sense, with him, and might make a better Apology for it, than he can, for what
he has said to Men to such his Superiors.

But this being a public Accusation, and the Charge I have laid to him being
also Public, it is fit the Proof of it should be so too; to which End, it is
necessary to take a View of those things he has wrote; wherein the Grounds of
this Charge is laid by his own Pen.

The First Elaborate Piece of Service this famous Author was bold enough to do
the World, was, to pass away two or three hours time for those that had two
much leisure, in Reading about six sheets of Paper to which he perfixed a
Title, and would have the Book to be thought Novum Lumen Chirurgicum, a Title
that made very fair Promises, and might probably raise ones Expectation; but
when I looked a little further upon the Title, And saw his Name writ in Latin,
and withal his Book in English, I was very impatient to read it over; which
when I had done, I began to think, that there was more Sense and Learning in
the Title Page than the whole Book; for it was not only a neat Composition of
Capitals; but Learnedly writ in Latin, and which signified something, though very
insignificant, I mean HIMSELF, whereas his whole Book was but a Composition of
a greater Number of Letters, which signify nothing at all but incoherent
Blunders.

But he was not only Cheat enough to set a false Light in the beginning of his
Book, to mislead People in their Expectations, and to second that, with his
Name in Latin; but also, had the Pride and Vanity to fix the Name, of so GREAT
and ILLUSTRIOUS a MONARCH, as our present KING before it; either because he
thought it a Noble Present, or that the GREATEST of Princes, and the Patron of
all Europe would be pleased to take notice of such erroneous and grand
Mistakes; which Dedication was sufficient to show, that he had very ill
Designs, or very foolish and vain Thoughts. But to come to the Treasure, and to
lay open this Fountain of Light, we may take Notice, that Page 2d. He
acknowledges his Account of his Discovery maimed and imperfect, without
premising an Account of Nutrition. So that if his Account of Nutrition be false
by his own Mouth, his own Discovery is confessed Maimed and Imperfect, that he
may first then be judged by the Words of his own Mouth, I shall now show him
that that is not only False, but Ridiculous. For,

Page the 3d. he says, The solid Food we eat, being well chewed in the Mouth,
is the remixed with a Juice contained in the Glands, dispersed all over the
Mouth.

Before I go any further, I shall here observe, that he neither understands
what he says, or that Nonsense is so homogenous to him, that his dull Sense can
taste nothing else; for how can we suppose, that the Saliva in the Glands, can
possibly be mixed with Meat in the Mouth; he might as well say, that Water in a
Cestern being mixed with Meat in his Stomach, would dilute it; for before that
Saliva can be mixed with Meat in the Mouth, it must be forced out of those
Glands, into the Mouth; for as long as it is in them, it is kept from mixing
with the Meat, by the Mediation of those Parts that lie betwixt the Glands and
the Mouth; but this is only a Lapsus Liguae, and an Absurdity in Speech: I
grant it, but then, is not he the greater Blockhead that understands a thing no
better, than to speak one thing, when he should say another: Had the Notion
been his own, he might indeed have misexpressed it, by being too intent and
thoughtful; not that the difficulty or abstruseness of the thing, would have
inclined him to such a Fault, but his Dullness of Apprehension, it being easy
for any one to think, that the Saliva must be in the Mouth or could not be
mixed there without much Intentness; but since it was, not his own, and he had
only borrowed it from others he might have easily expressed it, as those had
done before him, without turning Sense into Nonsense, in Order to a well
Performance as he calls it Page 2d.

Page 4th. The Meat being well chewed, and afterward conveyed to the Stomach,
and there diluted with a proper Vehicle (the more Generous the better) is by
means of the aforesaid Spirituous Saline Liquor, divided into such minute
Particles, which constitute that viscid Liquor, we call Chile. That a hard
Crust of Bread, is usually well chewed before it is swallowed, and then goes
into the Stomach, is no Discovery, but what a Plowman, or a Ballad-singer might
have made, and as for his (more Generous the better) it is what all hot Heads
usually argue for; they had rather have the (more Generous,) though any one that
understands Reason, will say, Moderation is better: and yet further Physicians
will tell him, that too high a Digestion raised by the (more Generous --) is
dangerous, and is the cause of some very Violent Distempers: And then, here he
has committed just such another Absurdity, as he did before; for instead of
saying Chyle is made or compounded of solid Meat dissolved, and a proper
Vehicle, he says, it is made of solid Meat dissolved, which is diluted by a
saline Humor and a Vehicle, and that those Particles so dissolved, constitute
Chyle; so that Chyle consists according to him, of solid Particles, and that
Chyle, is only diluted by a Vehicle; but this is a Fault against his Will, he
meant it as it should be, I warrant; but still that shows, what simple, clowdy
Notions he has of things, that he cannot tell a story after another Man,
without misrepresenting it, and is he, vain silly Creature, a Reformer of
Physic? is this his Novum Lumen? in one Sense indeed it may be said to be a
Novum Lumen, it being the first of this kind of Sense, obscured by Nonsense,
and he may call it Light made New, by being made Obscure and Ridiculous.

But he goes on and says; Which Chyle is discharged out of the Stomach so fast
as it is made, by means of the Liver. But here he is to learn, that that which
he calls Chyle, is properly called Chymus, and that becomes Chyle by being
further digested by a Mixture and mutual Fermentation of the Pancreatick Juice
and Choler with it, in the Guts; he is also to be taught, that the Chymus is
not forced into the Guts by the Liver, but by the muscular Coats of the
Stomach, and partly disposed to that Protrusion, by it is own Weight; for the
Liver is so far from pressing upon it, since it is suspended to those Parts to
which it is Ligaments are fixed, that the Stomach rather presses upon the Liver,
when it is distended, by taking up more Room in the Abdomen.

Page the 5th. he says, it is Carried by a large Vessel from the Receptacle of
Chyle to the subclavian Vein; here again, Poor Man! our Author Mr. Colbatch
has gravely in the midst of his dull Dogmatical Positions, forgot himself; for
the Chyle is not carried thence by one, but by two Vessels, which communicate
with one another in their Ascension; so that all he has hitherto said is made
a Novum Lumen or new kind of Light by his unlucky Lapsus Linguae or rather
Errores Calami, but here for once, his Memory has failed him.

He says further, that it is driven by the systole of the Heart, through the
Arterial Vein into the Lungs; where by the Contraction and Dilation of the
Lungs it is there mixed with the Blood, and that part which is fit for that
Purpose is made Blood. He did well to say, that Part which is fit for that
Purpose, but I am persuaded none is fit for that Purpose as soon as mixed with
the Blood. Neither is mixing with the Blood enough to turn fresh Chyle into
Blood, if it were, we should never be so long recovering lost strengh after
great Evacuations; but here our Novum Lumen has found out too quick a way to
make Blood; for Chyle requires a long Digestion and Fermentation, and undergoes
many considerable Changes, before it is turned into Blood.

Page 6. he says, the Remaining Part of this Serum is made use of for
Nutrition. I shall not here inform him how Nutrition is carried on, neither
shall I spend time in making Remarks upon it; but all I shall say is, that
since he says it is so, I think it a sufficient Answer to say it is not so, and
had he given Reason for what he says, I would have likewise given Reasons for
what I say, but as it is, my Word may be taken for it, as well as his.

But here I cannot but admire how he has demonstrated Nutrition, since like an
Injudicious Ignoramus, he has only given a False, Simple Imperfect Account of
what others have given clear and intelligible Accounts; neither can I imagine
how we must understand any thing that is to come after, the better for this
dull Praeludium; since none that can pretend to the least Degree of Knowledge,
can be so ignorant of what he foolishly thinks he demonstrates, as he himself
is.

Having laid his Absurdities open to the View of the most short sighted thus
far, I could willingly decline traceing this Ignis Fatuus any further; and
conclude, that since he has not explained Nutrition, what he has further to
say is Lame and Imperfect, being tired with such dull and impertinent Stuff.
but least he should vainly think, (since Vanity so essentially belongs to him,)
that I declined it upon any other Consideration, I shall show him, that what is
behind, is altogether as obscure, as what has gone before.

Page 7. He is not ashamed to say, That he kept Blood as it came warm out of
the Veins, in a continued violent Motion, and instead of hindering, it
facilitated it is cooling. This is so ridiculous an Experiment, and so much
below a rational Creature to make, that one would never suspect any one that
pretends to Sense or Reason, should ever be guilty of trying such; for the
Circumstances of the Blood agitated in an organized Body are so different, from
those of Blood agitated in an artificial Vessel, that there is not the least
Probability of the Success of it; but as it shows what a deep profound
Blockhead he is, and what good Anatomist he is, so from hence we may gather,
what a fit Man he is to advance Hypotheses in Physic, and search into the
secrets of Nature; and as one would never think one so eminently dull, should
have a Face to appear in Public; so one would scarce believe that one guilty
of such an Absurdity, should pretend to Sense or Reason.

He goes on. That Fire which I judge to be in the Blood, I suppose is quite
different from Culinary Fire. A pretty supposition for a Judge to make: But he
must consider, that his Judgment will pass but a little way, since he is only a
Judge of his own making; but with a less degree of Judgment and Supposition
too, one that is Ignorant of Physic would agree in the same Opinion with him;
but I suppose there is no such Fire as he supposes, and the Reason I shall not
give; because I see he gives Reason for nothing that he says; which makes me
believe, he scarce knows what Reason is.

Page 8. There is an Old Maxim, nihil dat quod in se non habet, which is very
pertinent to the Point in hand, from whence he Infers, that if there were not
Fire actually in the Blood before, he cannot understand how a Fiery substance
can be obtained from it. Truly that old Maxim is no where more verified than in
himself; for as I see nothing of Sense come from him, so I really believe he
has nothing in him, and I think it very Pertinently pointed at him, but before
he inferrs any thing from it, I must tell him, that he ought not to make any
Advantage of a Maxim, that is Learnt in Universities, where nothing is taught
but fusty Philosophy, as Mr. Colbatch has learnt to call it, in his Preface to
his Treatise of the Gout; but as fusty Philosophy as Aristotle's if he did but
understand how to limit that Maxim a little better, he would not be so
ignorant; for it implies, that nihil de novo creatur, but Mutatio Formae non
est Creatio, and the Form of Matter may be changed so as to make even Water
combustible, which if he had read the famous Mr. Boil or Cartesius, he needed
not be ignorant of, or did he understand Aristotle; but he owns he does not
understand it, and truly I am sorry one that understands so little, should
pretend to so much; but if he will take Pains to read those Books I recommend
to him, or come to me, I shall be willing to inform him; provided he does it
with a Desire to learn. I say, come to me; because it is scarce worth any
Bodies while, to take the trouble upon them of teaching one so dull of
Understanding; so that I may more boldly bespeak such a Scholar, as one too
mean for Great Masters.

In the next Place, he supposes a simple Objection, and makes as simple an
Answer, which I think not worth my while to take notice of. There are some
things in the same Paragraph he says he does not understand, and indeed I
believe him, but why is he so ignorant, and is bold enough to say so, yet
pretends to Knowledge? but if he will take Advice, he may understand all these
things with a little Pains.

Page 10. He says, The confused Mixture of Blood and Serum, is carried back
from the Lungs, by the Venal Artery, into the left Ventricle of the Heart. Here
he is again mistaken; for I must tell him, that Blood cannot be properly said
to be carried back to the left Ventricle, except it was carried from the left
Ventricle to the Lungs; for carrying back implies. A Motion of the same Blood,
through the same Vein, contrary to the Tendency of that Blood before; but this
is a Fault, whith is perhaps but Metaphorically spoken, and in respect of the
Heart.

He goes on, and from thence protruded by means of the Great Artery, which is
immediately divided into a great many Branches, to all the Parts of the Body.
Here he has again forgot himself; for the Aorta is not distributed to all the
Parts of the Body, and consequently cannot carry Blood to all the Parts, since
the Liver is chiefly supplied by the Vena Porta.

Page 11. He pretends to explain Nutrition, of which Account, nothing belongs
to him, except one Sentence, which is, That the Parts of Bones are discharged
by insensible Transpiration; but to sweat Bones is so ridiculous, that with the
whole World I cannot forbear laughing at him, and I hope every Body is
satisfied, that he either does not express and explain himself right, or that
he is not only a bold, but very harsh Asserter, of what his Cobbler would laugh
at him for. But P. 12. He says he has not Arrogance enough to pretend to, etc.
though he had Impudence enough for it the Page before.

From Page the 12. to the 17. he has filled his Book with Quotations, unworthy
to be placed in his Book, all which prove, That the Maxim, nil dat quod in se
non habet, as he used it before, is false; and that several sorts of Liquors
are made out of one; but he confesses, Page 12. he knows not how.

Page 17. (I think there is no difference, only secundum majus and minus,
between those Wastes made by Transpiration, which are Natural, and a Wound made
by Force, which is Preter-Natural.) What he has hitherto writ, I have proved
to be made up of nothing but Mistakes in Speech and Memory, but here we have an
Instance, that his Memory is not only very bad, and his Tongue worse, but
withal, he is worse at thinking, and these Imperfections must needs qualify an
Apothecary for an Eminent Physician; but as for his Thought, I think it as
foolish a one as ever I reard, and truly if it had not been placed in his Book,
I should have guessed, it could have been properly applied to no Body but
himself, it essentially agreeing with him secundum majus and minus; for the
difference betwixt a Consumption of the Parts of the Body by Transpiration, and
a Wound, is so great, that there is no Comparison to be made betwixt them.
Besides Wastes by Transpiration are not Natural, but Preternatural.

Page 18. Suppose a Wound be made, and it is no matter where it is, for what
will cure a VVound in one Place will do it in another. Indeed Imaginary Wounds
are as easily cured in one Part as another, and it is no matter where they are;
but with real Wounds it is not so; for in some Parts they are incurable, and
that the same thing that will cure one Wound will not cure another, any old
Woman that knows how to plaster a cut Finger, would have told him.

Page 19. He says, There is no Wound made by Incision, but may as properly be
called a Contused one: But here I must inform him, that as the Word Incision is
only proper to signify a Wound made by a sharp Instrument; so Contused,
signifies a Wound made by a blunt one, and the Distinction is proper and
necessary; for when I say a Wound is made by Incision, it implys, that the
Labia of the Wound are not jagged and torn; but when I say a Wound is a
Contused one; it signifies that besides a Division of Parts, there is a sort of
Dilaceration of the Parts so separated; and the Difference betwixt a Contused
Wound and a Wound by Incision, is more than what he says, viz. a larger space
betwixt the Labia, for in a Contused one the Labia are not only more separated,
but are hindered from growing together again, by the bruised Parts that lie
betwixt them; but indeed, if he would signify a Bruised Wound by the Word
Incision, and a Wound commonly called by Incision, by the Word Contused, then
it would but be the same thing as to call him an Ass instead of a Man, and an
Ass a Man, and both those Wounds cannot with so great Convenience be signified
by one Word, viz. Incision, as an Ass and a Man, as far as the latter relates
to him, might be expressed by the Word Ass. But as by the Word Ass being
applied both to Mr. Colbatch, and a Pedlar's Ass, there would follow some
Difficulties; and it would be a hard thing to know by that Word, whether of
them was meant; so it would be inconvenient to signify a Wound by Contusion,
and an Incised Wound, by one Word without Distinction.

Page 20. I stick not to call a Fiber a Vessel. Truly it is manifest, that he
will stick at nothing, that would go down with one, that has lost both their
Sense and Taste; but he ought if he had understood any thing, to have stuck at
it; for a Fiber is used to distinguish those Vessels, that are subordinate to
others, and of which others are made; but if he will make no Distinctions
betwixt things, He may stick at nothing, be it never so absurd, but call black
white, and white black.

Page 21. He very Learnedly tells People, That whenever they receive any Wound
it presently pains them. This is such a mighty Discovery, such a wonderful
piece of his Novum Lumen, that it is scarce to be thought, he was in his
Senses, when he wrote it; for if he were, could he ever imagine, that he made
any Discovery, when he tells People they have Pain, which they know themselves
better than he does.

Page 22. he says, that A Fever in the terms of many great Men, is nothing else
but a Nixus Naturae or endeavor of Nature, or a Sanguipurgus and Purifier. But
here I must tell him, that those great Men are mistaken, and speak improperly
when they say so; for instead of being a Nixus Naturae, it is rather a
preternatural affection of Nature; and sometimes it is such a Sanguipurgus that
it leaves the Mass of Blood, a dull effete Mass; the best Spirits being spent,
and the Sulphurous Particles of the Blood almost consumed; for which Reasons,
some People after long Fevers, are subject to Abscesses and hard Swellings.

He in the same Page says, A late Learned Author in his Treatise of
Intermitting Fevers, the One only Rational Piece, in my Opinion, that ever was
writ upon that Subject, plainly makes it appear, that the Seat of Agues is in
the Cortex of the Brain. Here I must tell him, that his Learned Author will do
him very little Service toward his Nova Lumina, should he use all the Flattery
he can think of; but as for that very Rational Piece, it is never the more so,
for being so in his Opinion; for it appearing from what he has hitherto said,
that he is always mistaken in his Opinion, it will be but a sorry
Recommendation to that Book, that it has his Opinion along with it; but to say
it is the only Rational Piece, is to say, he knows not what Reason is; for the
very Learned and most ingenious Dr. Willis has writ a far more Rational Piece
on that Subject; and the Learned Dr. Morton has said more on that Subject,
than his Learned Author; who has not demonstrated the Seat of it; but suppose
he had, what is that to his Credit? he bears no share in the Performance I
suppose.

Page 23. He says, I could bring many more Arguments to prove that not only
Symptomatick Fevers, but all sorts of Continued Ones, do proceed from
Heterogeneous Particles. Truly, what Arguments he could bring, prove nothing
till they are brought; but I have not seen any One yet; for before the 22.
Page, he said, a Fever was nothing, but a Sanguipurgus and a Nixus Naturae; but
now in contradiction to that, it is come to Heterogeneous Particles; but if his
Memory is bad, who can blame him, yet one would think he might easily have
looked back to the Page before; but there is yet an Excuse to be made for him,
That empty and shallow Heads, like hungry Dogs, who have empty Stomachs, so
eagerly pursue, and are so taken up with what is before them, that they scarce
take notice of what they have swallowed.

Page 24. I don't at all see or understand, that she (i.e. Nature) is assisted
by the Medicines they afterward use. Really I don't know how he should; for
the Methods the Generality of Prudent Surgeons use, are above his
Understanding; but because he does not understand them, are they ever the worse
for that? Is that an Objection?

Having given an Account of Nutrition after a simple and incoherent Manner; an
Account made up of nothing but Mistakes; and Forgetfulness; and having made
some rude Reflections on a Body of worthy and experienced Surgeons, from
Page 26, to Page 40. He goes on to applaud and cry up a Medicine to that
Height, and to endeavor to cry down a whole Body of ingenious Men, that all
the World might think him the only valuable Man in his Trade; and would fain
make the World believe, that he can do more with his Medicines than all of
them; and this most ridiculous Piece of Insolence, he endeavors to confirm by
a few pretended Instances of Cures.

As for his Account of Nutrition, I have sufficiently laid it open; so that it
plainly appears to be nothing, but a confused, dull Lump of Mistakes and
Blunders; so that for such a Man, that cannot write common Sense, in a Matter
too where he needed only to follow what was ready to his hand, for such an
ignorant, short-headed Man, to pretend to huff and abuse, and set himself above
Experienced Men in their Business, is a Piece of Insolence, so unpardonable,
that I can scarce be blamed for using him no harder than he deserves; for had
he had Reason to boast of his Medicine, might he not have taken a fair and
honest Method to make the best Advantage of it, without endeavoring to
captivate the Common People, and to raise in them a great Opinion of him, by
being saucy and rude to his Betters. Ingenious Men are so far from discouraging
Improvements in the Arts they profess, and have always such an Esteem for them
that make them, that they give them all the Honor and Applause due to their
Merits; so that he might, though civil and modest toward his Superiors, had
Justice done him without so much Noise and Impertinence; but he himself being
conscious of his own Weakness, and of the small Value of his Medicine, takes
all the Pains he can to applaud himself, and because he knows it would not
answer what he pretended, and might of consequence be justly exposed for his
vain Pretenses; he takes care to tell the World, the Surgeons were all his
Enemies, when at the same time himself alone was to be blamed for giving them
just Reason; but this was only done, that People might think them so much his
Enemies as not to believe what they said: But can he think that the World will
be long so imposed upon, and so easily? Perhaps a sort of People, that are
easily drawn aside by a Parcel of Mountebanks and vain Pretenders may, but
surely wise People will sooner believe a great Number of honest and sober Men,
than one silly, vain, conceited Man, that has Folly enough to contradict them.

As for his Medicine, that he so much boasts of, it is but an old Preparation
new vampt up; whose Effects are so small, that Sea Water and Urine have
oftentimes done greater Cures, and Common Salt, or a Solution of Vitriol will
as soon cure a fresh Wound, where no large Vessels are cut, as his Powder.

And though in some fresh Wounds, where Musculous Parts are divided, it is of
use; yet I am assured by a very ingenious Chirurgeon's own, as well as the
Experience of others, that it is of no use, or very little, where Tendons are
divided, in which and such like Cases, they are furnished with better Medicines
of their own, than any he can pretend to.

I need not say any thing to those Experiments, he fills up his Book with,
since they have been sufficiently confuted, and the Falsness has been proved
in a Book called Novum Lumen Extinctum, etc. He would indeed endeavor to
defend them, by a few more, as notoriously false as the former, which he has
laid together in his Vindication; but one Falsity is altogether unable to prove
another true; and though he pretends, they have always succeeded, when he had
fair Play, yet since when he tried his Experiments before Witnesses, they did
not succeed, the World has Reason to believe, that he used the Joint
Assistance of some common Medicine, when he used it by himself.

But I have sufficiently tired my self, with such nauseous Stuff as this Book
is filled with; and when I reflect on it, cannot imagine, how much Conceit and
Vanity he must have to call such Rubbish and weak Inconsistences, a Novum
Lumen; and I wonder how he could boast so much, since the weakest in that
Profession might be ashamed, that they knew no more.

As for his Medicine, there was no need to write a Book about it; since a
Gazette was too good for it; but if he would needs let the World know, that he
had found out something of some small Use, to Surgeons, he might have taken
the same Method as Daffy has with his Elixir, and People would have made as
much Use of it as they do now, provided it answered Expectation; but there was
no need for Impudence, except in a bad Cause, and he had no Reason to boast of
a thing, that cures nothing, but what was cured by the Use of other Medicines,
equally as good as his.

AN EXAMINATION OF Mr. John Colbatch HIS ESSAY OF Alkalies and Acids. Wherein
his Absurdities and Erroneous Opinions, In the Small Pox, Scurbey, Gout,
Rheumatism, Consumptions, etc.



Are Demonstrated to be very Dangerous and highly Prejudicial; and are
therefore truly Represented and fully Confuted.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1699.

AN EXAMINATION OF Mr.John Colbatch His ESSAY of ALKALIES and ACIDS, etc.
CHAP. I.
Contains Remarks on his Preface to this Essay.
HAving gone through his Novum Lumen Chirurgicum, clouded and stuffed as it is,
with nothing but incoherent Mistakes and notorious Blunders; I should now go on
to show, that he not only has the Impudence to boast of, and value himself
upon, the most unreasonable Grounds in Surgery; but also, finding that the
World will not be imposed upon one way, he endeavors to do it another; but he
must expect that Physicians are not to be more easily deceived with Pretenses
then Surgeons.

He has pretended to such Miracles in Surgery, as might justly encourage
Ingenious Men to make Trials of his Skill, but his Pretenses being but Vain and
False, and all that plentiful stock of Impudence which he made use of in
vindicating his Folly, being not sufficient to procure him Business amongst
Surgeons, he now is resolved to turn Physician, and use all the base and
insolent Means he can, to make himself taken notice of by those that are too
easily credulous to specious* Promises, cloaked with Dogmatical and Resolute
Positiveness.

But from what he has already said of Nutrition in his former Book, any one
that understands common Sense so much as to be able to distinguish it from
Nonsense, will be satisfied, that he is by no means qualifyed for a Physician:
Yet though he has given the World, one would think, a clear Specimen of his
Ignorance, and that he is a mere vain pretending Emperick; he has still the
Face to appear not only against Surgeons, but a whole Body of Learned
Physicians, and tell the World, that no Body knows any thing besides himself,
when it plainly appears, that he is altogether ignorant, shallow and widely
mistaken in those things he most pretends to.

To make it appear, I shall in the next place take a View of what he says of
Acids in the Cure of Distempers, and shall show, that he neither understands
the Nature of Alkalies, nor of those Acids he so much extols, and also, that
what he irrationally and so dogmatically asserts, contrary to all Learned
Writers and common Experience, is very foolishly advanced; and that the
consequences of such absurd Practice are very dangerous as well as the Practice
it self very pernicious, and not to be followed without the greatest hazard of
the Lives of those that are so much misled as to make use of him, and to commit
themselves to the irregular and unreasonable Methods of such an absurd
Practicer.

And before I examine the grand Mistakes of his Book, I shall take notice of
some things he has premised in his Preface, which will lay open his Design;
and the Method he takes to impose upon those, that want Judgment to discover
his Faults.

The first thing I shall there take Notice of, is, that in the fifth Page of
his Preface he says, There are some particular Preparations of Steel and
Antimony, the which giving as Alkalies, and as they are generally believed to
be, did me very great Service; but since I have well examined them instead of
Alkalies I find them to be most noble Acids, and the Distempers cured by them
did not proceed from Acid, but Alkalious Particles.

Here we may see what Methods this short sighted Reformer intends to take; for
where he has not the least Pretense that Acids are useful in the Cure of
Distempers, there we must expect that rather then he will not promote his
Doctrine of Acids, he will change the very Names of Things, and call Alkalies
Acids and Acids Alkalies; for those Medicines that are used in the Cure of
Distempers, and now called Alkalies, he must needs call Acids; by which Rule, I
would think him never the wiser, if he could prove, that Bitter Medicines will
cure such Distempers as Alkalies are generally used in; for it is but calling
those Alkalies Bitters, and then the Business is done, and by the same sort of
Reasoning (for it is all the Reasoning he can pretend to,) I might prove to the
World, that he is worse then the very Beast of the Field; for it is but
changing his Name and instead of calling him Mr. John Colbatch, A Wooden
Statue: but this is a way to raise new Opinions indeed; If a Man must be no
longer called so, but a Horse, and a Horse a Man; it would not be an
Improvement of Knowledge, but an unnecessary Alteration of the Names of
Animals; at this Rate there might be as many Books writ, as foolish Men could
invent Names for Things. But that Steel is not an Acid when it is used for an
Alkalie, I shall hereafter show, and that Alkalies are not the Causes of those
Distempers, that are cured by such Medicines; in the mean time it is altogether
sufficient for me barely to Contradict him, since I have all Learned and
Judicious Men to confirm what I say, and he barely asserts without Proof or
Authority.

A little after, having made a Confession that he was an Apothecary in
Worcester, a little after that he endeavors to give an Account of the
Qualifications of that Profession; that People may judge whether he was not by
that means qualified for a Physician; but who would he have to judge; if he
describes the Qualifications of an Apothecary, that Physicians might judge,
whether that Profession had qualified him for a Physician or not; he might have
saved himself the trouble; for they know better what will qualify one for an
Apothecary, and how far that comes short of a Physician, than he can tell them;
but if he designed those that do not understand Physic should judge of him, he
ought also to have informed them what Qualifications are necessary for a
Physician, otherwise they are not capable of judging; but by his Writings it is
plain, he is not acquainted with those Qualifications; neither indeed if we
must judge of him by those Rules he has laid down, as Qualifications for an
Apothecary, is he qualified for an Apothecary; for,

First, he says; An Apothecary must be well acquainted with the Vegetable
Kingdom, not only to know the Faces of Plants, but their Natures and Manner of
Operation upon Human Bodies: Otherwise how can they tell how to handle them, so
as to make Compositions as they ought to be. Now that he wants this first
Qualification is very plain; for if he does not understand human Bodies, it is
impossible he should know how they operate upon those Bodies; that he does not
understand human Bodies is manifest from the Account he has given in his Novum
Lumen, which I have showed to be False and Absurd.

But under this first Qualification he further says; Every Physician supposes
the Apothecary so Qualified, when he prescribes to his Shop. But here I must
tell him he is mistaken; for as it is not necessary that Apothecaries should be
so Qualified, so such Qualifications are not expected by Physicians that
prescribe to them; for an Apothecary may compound Medicines without knowing the
Nature of those Medicines that he compounds; for all Apothecaries make up their
Compositions according to Receipts in which they are directed, how to mix them,
and what Quantity of each is to be mixed; so that it is enough for one that
makes up a Receipt to know Weights and Measures, and what Directions are writ
before him, and to be acquainted barely with the Faces of things: For it not
belonging to Apothecaries, to apply or prescribe any Medicines, except by the
Order of a Physician; it is enough for them to know how to follow a Physicians
Directions; which they are enabled to do, by knowing how to choose Simples and
Compounds, so as to distinguish them by their Names, and how to mix them
according to Art.

He further says, Let a Physician prescribe like an Angel, etc. I would
willingly know how he comes to be acquainted with Angels Prescriptions; and
whether he has learnt them or not: I am afraid they are seldom catched in
Apothecaries Shops, and consequently he has been very little acquainted with
them. But, as I believe, Angels are always employed in Divine Affairs; so they
chiefly are concerned in Spiritual Prescriptions; and here Mr. John Colbatch
has fetched his Metaphor too far.

Secondly, he says; The second Qualification for an Apothecary, is, that he
understand the Nature and Operation of Minerals and Metals.

To understand the Nature of Minerals is the Business of a Chemist, not of an
Apothecary, and as for their Operations, that chiefly belongs to a Physician;
whose Business it is to apply them: But he would needs have Apothecaries to
understand every thing, because he has been one himself.

Thirdly, he says, They must understand the Nature of Animal Bodies; but I am
sure they may be as good Apothecaries, though they do not; for what Business has
an Apothecary with Human Bodies, since it only belongs to him to be serviceable
to Physicians in preparing his Medicines and obeying his Orders, and not in
administering: He might as well say a Clerk who only writes according to the
Directions of his Master, and whose Business it is to do nothing else, must
understand those things that don't belong to him, viz. His Masters Business.
What some Apothecaries know I will not say, but I am certified by his Writings,
and also by the Rules he has given for the Qualifications of an Apothecary,
that he is so far from being qualified for a Physician, that he is by no means
qualified for an Apothecary.

But to understand how faintly he is qualified for either, I shall pass on to
his Book, and show what grand Mistakes he is positively and boldly guilty of.

CHAP. II.
Of the Smallpox.
THe first Distemper he there takes upon him to give an Account of, is, the
Smallpox; and here contrary to Truth and all Experience he would suggest, that
the Smallpox do not proceed from Acids but Alkalies. And,

Page 4th, he says, Now I could never hear of any one, that by Analizing the
Blood of Persons in the Smallpox, could ever find the least Footsteps of
Acidity in it; though on the contrary, it does appear, after many Trials, that
the Blood of such Persons does more abound with Alkalious Particles, than that
of sound People. That no Acidity can be found by Analizing the Blood of Persons
in the Smallpox, is not sufficient to determine, whether there be Acids in the
Blood before Analized or not; for in Analizing Blood, as the Chemists call it,
the Volatile Particles of the Fire, which is the Agent in the Operation, may
soon destroy those Acidities; for if when our Stomach abounds with Acids we
find by taking of Volatile Alkalies, that that Acidity is soon destroyed; and
if we find that those Effects, which are produced in our Blood, upon a
plentiful Use of crude Acids, or Astringents which are Acids in Potentia, are
taken away on the contrary by the Use of Alkalies; we have much Reason to
believe, that the Particles of Fire, being more powerful when in Action than
those Alkalies, will soon destroy that which is called Acidity in the Blood; so
that the Fire Volatilizing that Acid Matter, and exalting it to a higher Degree
of Maturity, it quite looses it is pristine Qualities, the Fire and it being
united into a Quid tertium, and that united and again embodied in a Vehicle,
looses it is old Form, and is modified anew.

But to determine, whether there be Acidity in the Blood or not, there would be
no need to analize it, though by that means it would not be destroyed; for when a
Person in the Smallpox is let Blood, we may see a manifest Ropy Viscocity in
the Blood, which is a certain Sign of Acidity, it being the Nature of Acids to
coagulate and thicken those Humors with which they are mixed.

And to understand in what Sense the Blood may be said to have more Alkalies
than the Blood of healthful People, we must consider what is the Cause of that
Distemper; but as my Design here is not to give an Account of the Cause of this
Distemper, any further than tends to show how far he is mistaken, and how
little he understands it; so I shall only take notice, that the first Onset of
this Distemper is accompanied with the Initia of a Fever; where we may observe
that the Mass of Blood being naturally impregnated with a great deal of
Sulphur; and that Sulphur being as if it were depressed, or rather inviscated
in a Viscous Mucus (whose Viscocity proceeds from Acids) these Sulphurous
Particles are by some accidental Cause (whether it be Internal, or by the
Influence of circumambient Bodies, I shall not now determine) exalted in some
Measure, and caused to exert themselves; by which Exertion they endeavor to
clear themselves of that Mucus Phlegm; which being separated from them, the
whole Mass does, as if it were, run into two Parts; just as we see sweet Milk
and Eggs mixed together, and heated over a Fire, begin to break, as it is
usually termed; I mean just when it begins to break so little that we can
scarce discern it with a Microscope; and then that Mass in some measure cleared
from the Viscocity, has more Sulphur in it, and more fierce Volatile Parts in
it, than the Blood of a healthful Person. But as for Alkaly, I cannot find any
in it, except Alkalies are Sweet and Balsamic.

But yet if the whole Mass of Blood, and Serum together, be compared with the
whole Blood, and Serum of a healthful Person; there is more Acid in the Blood
of a Person in the Smallpox, and less Alkaly, than in a Person that is
healthful.

But this new Reformer of Physic sets about his Work, like one that neither
understood common Sense nor Reason; all that he says against a truly rational
and confirmed Opinion, is, that it is not so as they say; and the Grounds upon
which he concludes so, are an Observation nothing at all to the purpose; but to
show that he neither understands the Works of Nature nor Art; so that thus far
he wants the Qualifications of an Apothecary. But to proceed;

Page the 5th. He says; The cause of the Smallpox, I suppose, to be from a
Quantity of such Particles, being some way or other admitted into the Blood;
which being of a quite different Texture from that of the Blood; and so not
capable of being mixed with it, cause a Hurry and Disorder there. What a very
fine Account this is of the Reason of the Smallpox; and who will be the wiser
for it, by such a Method as this; we may answer all the Questions that can be
asked in Physic, Geometry, Mathematics, Astronomy, Navigation and Geography
without any other Qualification than the Assistance of Nature; and a common
Plowman, if this be Knowledge, might give as good an Account of things as he
does: For ask a Plowman what is the Cause of the Smallpox, and he will give
just such an Account as he has done, viz. That the Smallpox proceed from
something that causes them, and disorders the Person that has them; nay, a
Nurse knows more than he can pretend to; for they will give a Physician a
better Account of a Distemper, than Hurry and Disorder. But there are two Words
in what he says; that Women perhaps are not well acquainted with, viz.
Particles and Texture; but taking away those (which he does not understand, and
which only serve to amuse People that are ignorant) and then what he says will
come to no more but what I just now expressed in Words different from his only
in Sound, not in Signification, as he has used them.

And here again, I could willingly pass by a great many of his Faults, being
almost tired with so many, and such gross Mistakes; but should I not trace his
Impertinency and Ignorance, he is so apt to be proud of his Folly, that it
would make him but fonder of what he already is so zealously panting after, as
one scarce able to make his way through Clouds and Obscurity.

Page the 6th, He says, Now to assist Nature in throwing these Heterogeneous
Particles out of the Blood, to the extreme Parts; which they pretend to be
mightily hindered, by a great Quantity of Acids in the Blood: They give repeated
and large Quantities of Testaceous Alkalious Powders, which indeed seldom fail
of answering their Intentions, in throwing out large Quantities of Pustles,
even more than Nature is able to supply and bring to Maturity. Here he only
has put Sense into his own Philosophic Dress; so that when first I read it, I
could scarce imagine what he meant, till I had put that Mask of it; and then it
appears to be that Physicians usually give Acid-Absorbers, to attenuate that
Viscid Distempered Humor, that it might be thin enough to pass off by the Pores
of the Body, in order to carry it out of the Mass of Blood; and that this they
endeavored to do by such Medicines as correct its Acidity; which Method truly
is, if used with Moderation, very reasonable. For since by the Viscocity of
Blood, it appears that Acids cause that Coagulation of the Fomes Morbi, which
we see in the Habit of the Body; what can be more reasonable, than to use such
Means as promote the carrying off of this Fuel, by attenuating it, and
correcting that Acidity which makes it too thick to go off. But he says it
throws out too much of this Humor to which I answer (though it is so simple and
inconsiderate, that it deserves Correction, rather than a Rational Answer) that
no more of this Distempered Humor can be driven out, than there is in the whole
Mass, and the less is left behind the better; for it is not that Matter in the
Habit of the Body, that kills those that suffer by this Distemper; but that
which is not driven out; and the reason why some dye, notwithstanding a great
deal is driven out, is because a great deal is still behind; for that in the
Habit of the Body, which he, like a Block-head, calls the Extreme Parts, is out
of the way of Circulation, and is less offensive to Nature, than that which is
left behind, which consumes and mortifies the Spirits before it can be driven
out.

But this Method, it seems, spoils Angelic Faces: This endearing Expression
must certainly oblige the tender Parents of pretty Children to make use of Mr.
Colbatch by all means; that pretty Gentleman that loves them so passionately,
will be so careful of their Beauty, and spoiling of Angelic Faces; that before
one of his Patients shall have its pretty Face spoiled with Heterogeneous
Particles, he will resolutely give Acids, and so thicken that Heterogeneous
Humor, that very little shall be driven out. But then let good Mr. Colbatch
(since he must be a Master, right or wrong) consider what the Effects of his
Tenderness toward Angelic Faces will be; for if that Heterogeneous Humor be
thickened and not thrown out, and the Quantity of it be so great, that Nature
cannot conquer it, the poor Child out of Tenderness to it is Beauty must submit
to common Fate, and unavoidably dye; whereas, if he endeavored to drive it
out, it might more reasonably hope for Life; though the Quantity of that Matter
is sometimes so great, that the Habit of the Body is not able to receive it all.

And let him know, that if by his Tenderness, or rather foolish Ignorance, his
Patients dye, he must once answer for it, and might as well be guilty of
cutting their Throats. And here I have taken a little Pains to give Reasons
against his, and in Vindication of the contrary Practice; not because what he
says in Defense of his own requires it, since he only possitively asserts
without Reason; but because in a Matter of this consequence, I should almost in
some measure think my self guilty of the Death of those that suffer by him, if
I did not give such Reasons against his Method, as People might plainly see the
Absurdity of it.

But before I proceed any further, I shall make bold to ask my Gentleman one
Question; whether he by the Use of his Glass, has in some Critical Enquiry or
other, found to his great Regret; that this Distemper has spoiled pretty
Features or not in his own Face? If it has, then there is one sort of an
Excuse to be made for his adhering to such Practice, and just such a one as
there is for those People, that had rather keep Poison in their Stomachs, than
spoil their Mouths by taking a Vomit.

But there is another Question I would ask him, but dare not; and therefore
shall only submit this weighty Matter to his profound Judgment, by way of
Supposition, viz. Suppose a Man should be an Ill Man, and frequent Ill Houses;
whether in the Enjoyment of his Pleasures, he might not pity, that so many
Faces should be spoiled by this Distemper, and in that soft Humor, take such a
Sting against all Rational Practice, as ever to abhor it.

Page the 7th. He says, The spoiling of Faces is not all, but besides they
throw out the (Distemper, which he calls) many Pustles by breaking of the
Globules of the Blood, etc. Here I need give him no other Answer, but that I
pity him; he fain would be a Philosopher; and for all his stretching and
straining he cannot reach it; but he ought to have tried his Strength in
private, and not to have exposed himself with his Philosophical Scraps, for
breaking the Globules of the Blood is such Nonsense, that had he not made a
simple Experiment, by mixing Oil and Water, to explain his Notions of Globules,
no body could know what he meant by it; and it looks so awkward; that
Philosophers cannot but wonder what the Man thought of, when he wrote it; for
his Mechanical Head sure could never hope to explain any thing, by breaking of
Globules, too large to circulate through capillary Vessels. For what Mischief
would breaking of those Globules do; since the Blood without any damage, must
needs be divided into much more minute Particles, to circulate through the
Vessels. All he says, Page 8, 9, 10, is to enlarge what he here so obscurely
delivers, to which I need give no other Answer.

Page 10. He says, In like manner, the Globules of the Blood being broken by
means of Alkalious Medicines, together with too great a Quantity of Alkalious
Particles, being before admitted into it, are, by that means made capable of
being received into the cutaneous Glands, which is the only Occasion of those
Purple Spots upon the Surface of the Skin. What Effects Alkalies have upon the
Coagulated Humors, I have before shown, viz. They thin them and make them
capable of passing through those Pores, they would otherwise be too thick for,
and as for his Globules, if he means only, that the Mass of Blood is dissolved
and attenuated; I Answer, That the Blood being so dissolved, would circulate
through it is Vessels only with more ease; so that it would be less subject to
be coagulated in the Vessels of the Skin; but since by taking notice of the
Blood in such People, it appears to be more clammy than it is usually in
healthful People; and since that Clamminess depends on a Mixture of Acids, we
have reason to believe that it would be less apt to run into Vessels* that it
ought not; and it is also Rational to conclude, since the Distemper depends on
Acids which coagulate the Blood; that when the Distemper is more violent, it
abounds with more Acids; and consequently that they don't only cause the Serum
to coagulate in the Pores of the Skin, but also sometimes the Blood in the
Capillary Vessels; which coagulated, causes those Purple Spots.

But least I should not seem sufficiently to prove, that those Symptoms are
caused by Acids; I shall further observe, that, since it is the Nature of Acids
to coagulate, and of Akalies to prevent and hinder Coagulation, and those
Symptoms appear to be Coagulated Humors; we must needs conclude, that they do
proceed from Acid, and not Alkalizated Humors.

Page 11th. He says, But this is not all; for by the aforesaid breaking of the
Globules of the Blood, these small broken Globules getting into the small
Meanders of the Brain, hinder the Motion of the Animal Spirits through the
Nerves. But I here ask him, has he ever found any of those Globules in the
Brain? if he has not, there is no reason to believe what is contrary to Reason
and Experience. For Deliriums are more likely to proceed from Viscid Matter
affecting the Brain; it being plain, that there is not only a great deal of
Viscid Matter in the Blood, but that there is a Viscid Phlegm observable in all
People inclinable to Lethargies, and such like Distempers of the Brain.

From Page the 11th to the 16th. He keeps a long Harangue to no purpose, and
about nothing at all to this Distemper; where he begins to preamble about the
use of Acids, to the 19 Page, to which I need not say any more, having said
enough of the Use of Acids and Alkalies at the beginning of this Chapter. But
here he tells us that, he has retrieved a great many from the Jaws of Death by
Acids; but he has told so many downright Falsities in the beginning of his
Book, that we have the same reason to believe he does now; what he says, being
contrary to Reason and Experience; and I rather believe so, because he mentions
not one that Acids cured, where he had used Alkalies.

Page 20. I shall proceed to the Method I take in the Cure of it; which being
according to Natures Dictates, is short and easy. Here he would persuade us,
that Nature is short and easy, because there is very little to the Purpose in
what he says about her; but as easy and short as she is, she is too long and
too difficult for him to trace; but now he begins to give us an Example of his
Dexterity in the Cure. And,

Page 21. Tells us, that he begins with a Vomit. But here he ought to confess
what Learned Men's Examples he has followed. For so, if the Stomach be soul;
those Learned and Experienced Men, Dr. Sydenham, and Dr. Morton begin,
therefore for this the World is not obliged to him; he not being the Author of
that Method.

Page 22. At Night he gives Sir. de Meconio; For this still he ought to make an
Acknowledgment to Dr. Sydenham, it being what he has learnt from him.

But sometimes in the beginning, Page 25. He lets Blood; for this likewise he
must make a thankful Acknowledgment to Dr. Sydenham; it being nothing of his
own Invention.

Page 23, and 24, 26, and part of the 27th, he reckons up a Parcel of Acids
which he makes use of; but he mixes so much simple Waters with the Acids, that
what he gives is scarce more cooling than Small-beer; and truly, if they had
not worse Effects in the Blood, I should commend him for following so good a
President as Dr. Sydenham; but here he varies from Dr. Sydenham, to the
Disadvantage of his Patients, and the Destruction of their Lives, though
Preservation of the Beauty of them.

And he so much depresses their weak feeble Spirits, that Page 27. He is forced
to give them a Cordial again to take off the ill Effects of his bad and absurd
Usage.

Page the 28th, He Purges them several times. And truly, if he abuses them with
Acids at this rate, he had need to purge them soundly, to carry off those Dregs
that he hindered from going off before; whereas did he manage them as those
Learned Men Dr. Sydenham or Dr. Morton do, once Purging does as much good and
more, than his five or six times.

Page 29 and 30. All he says is to deter People from Using any other Means than
his; and to tell People that know better how to manage Children than he does,
that they may safely use his Method, if they will not send for him, but let him
know that it is Experience that is valuable, above a Method that has neither
Reason nor Success; and surely they had rather depend on those that have their
Characters from Judicious Men, than one that only commends himself.

Page 31. He begins with his former Supposition concerning the Cause of the
Smallpox, and giving a short Account of what Effects he laid to the charge of
Alkalies, and continues a Repetition of his Complaint to Page 36. But I having
already answered that sufficiently, there is no need I should repeat it here
again now, and indeed all the Reason he has, is only to lengthen his Book; for
he cannot think other People are so forgetful as himself, as to need to have it
over again so soon; and if they had, it would have been the same thing to have
read the first Account over again, for it was altogether as large as this, and
this is equally void of, and without, Reason or Proof,

Page 36, He assigns but one general Cause of Fevers, yet owns the Particles
causing them, may be somewhat different. Which is to say and unsay, and at the
same time to contradict himself, for if the Cause differs it cannot be the
same, and that the Cause is not the same is plain, because the same Cause would
have the same Effects, I mean the same formal Cause.

Page 38. He says; in most continued Fevers I have found Alkalies equally as
pernicious as in the Smallpox, and Acids equally as Beneficial. That Acids are
useful in most continued Fevers, is not of his finding, it being the common
Practice of most Physicians: And it is as generally known, that strong
Alkalies, except in Malignant Fevers, are very hurtful and not at all used,
except by absurd Practisers; but that Alkalies are highly to be preferred
before Acids, in the Cure of the Smallpox, I think I have given Reason enough
to prove, except People value Beauty before their Lives* and had rather hazard
their Children in the Hands of a Fool, than commit them to the Care of sober
and wise Men.

CHAP. III.
Of the Scurvey.
HAving therefore run over what he has said of the Smallpox, and showed, that
it is neither consonant to Reason nor Experience; I shall in the next place
make it plain, that he has also mistaken in the Scurvey, which will yet be a
furthor Demonistration, that he is not qualified for an Apothecary.

Page 42. But here I expect the Cry of all Mankind against me: What Say there
is no Acidity in the Blood in the Scurvey? What* Is it but an Acidity in the
Blood that is the occasion of Breaking out of Scabs etc. upon the Skin? What!
But a Sharpness and Acidity in the Blood occasions those wandering Pains, etc.

And Page 43. Says he; My Friends, have a little Patience, and I will presently
make it appear to you that those Symptoms are not occasioned by Acids, but from
Acrid Lixivious and Alkalious Particles.

Behold! How sharp Witted he is grown of a sudden? And, it lasts for a whole
Page together; what a true Picture of a short Head? And what an excessive
Rapture of Zeal, my Friend Mr. John Colbatch is falen into? Truly, if I could
believe he were of any Religion, I should persuade my self, he were inclining
to Quakerism, as well as Quackerism* for here he seems to have a mighty glimps
of the Spirit, and speaks in a very agreeable Form. But I wonder why he should
expect all Mankind to cry against him; he must either have a very ill Opinion
of all Mankind or himself; if he thought he had Reason for what he did, then he
spoke very harshly of all Mankind; for to say they would cry against, was in
effect to say, they either did not understand Reason, or that they were such
Enemies to Learning, that they could receive nothing but what was suited to
their own Heads: A very heavy Charge, and much becoming such an Ignorant Man to
lay upon all the World; But I rather think he had a Self-consciousness of his
own Falsness, and, like guilty Persons, did not know how to conceal it.

But the Scurvey, he says, proceeds from Alkalious! Particles, and not from
Acids, to which I answer, that it being the Nature of Alkalies to thin and
attenuate those Humors, that cause Coagulations in the Skin, it is unreasonable
to say, that Alkalies cause those Things, which their own Nature inclines them
to cure: But those Bloches which appear in the Scurvy, rather proceed from
Acids joined with Acrimony; the Acids cause the Humors to stagnate in the Skin,
and the Acrimony by causing a Ferment there, makes that Matter corrupt and
corrode.

Page 43. He says, The Blood of Scorbutic People abounds more with Alkalious
Parts than Healthful Peoples when Analized. But as I said before, what is drawn
from Blood Analized, proves nothing what was the Temper of that Blood before it
was Analized: Of which, if he would but take Pains to look into the famous Mr.
Boyl's Skeptical Chemist, he may be fully satisfied. For those Acrid Acid Parts
of the Blood, being Spiritualized by the Fire, loose their Pristine State, and
are carried along and embodied with other Alkalious Particles.

Page 45, and 46. He tells a Story of a parcel of Seamen, that landing at
Cadiz, were cured of the Scurvey by the Use of Lemmons and Oranges. The less
Reason then has he to be fond of, or value himself, where he owns his
Knowledge to Seamen; but it is no news in Physic, that Acids joined with
Alkalies cure the Scurvey, it being common Practice to mix Acids and Volatile
Salts in Scorbutic diet Drinks, and a Method long used by the famous Dr.
Willis and others; so that there was no need for him to have said any thing
here of the Scurvey, since it is only what others have done before, to more
advantage, and incomparably better.

Page 47. He says; As for Alkalies, I don't believe that any was ever cured by
them of this Distemper. But I am sure that a great many are, and though a great
many are cured by a Mixture of Alkalies and Acids, yet as many are cured by
Alkalies alone.

Page 48, 49, and 50. He mentions a Preparation of Antimony and Spirits of
Tartar, and would have these which Page 51, and 52, he says are Panaceas, to be
Acids; but as they have been generally termed Alkalies, and are known to be so
by their Effects; he must not think to change their Names, since he cannot
change their Natures: For by their Effects we know that they correct Acids,
because they take away Obstructions, and dissolve coagulated Humors which are
thickened by Acids.

But as I took Notice in his Preface, we see he will use all the means
imaginable to make his Design good; and having said enough on this purpose
there, I shall not need to repeat it again.

Page 53. He thinks he answers an Objection against him, which is, That there
is a manifest Saltness in the Blood of Scorbutic People. But he like a Man as
dull as ignorant, cunningly would turn it off, and says, if they will strictly
enquire into it, they will find it not an Acid but an Alkalious Taste. But does
he think no Body can taste besides himself* People are sensible, that for the
sake of his own Cause, his Reason, if he may be said to have any, will bias
his Taste; whereas other People in such Cases have their Reason steady and
their Taste too. But to conclude this second Specimen of his Ingenuity: He must
be informed that the Blood of Scorbutic People does not only taste Salt, but
those that spit much, and who know what a Salt Taste is, find a manifest Salt
Taste in that Saliva.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Gout.
THe next Thing, that this eminent Man undertakes to give an Account of, is,
the Gout. And truly, this I must needs say in his Praise: That though his Merit
be extraordinary, and cannot place him amongst those Men who are eminent for
good Works, yet he has this mighty Chance, that it will undoubtedly eternalize
him for an eminent vain pretending Impostor, and an Emperick extraordinary. For,

Page 54. He says; -- Though I must confess the Gout to be a Distemper, I have
not had much to do with; but by that little I have seen of it, I am fully
convinced that it is not from Acids, etc.

He does well to make an ingenuous Confession, and be modest in some things, in
order to expose himself the more effectually. For if this Man can make a
Conclusion contrary to all the Learned World, upon a little that he has seen,
which he does not understand; it shows, that he is very bold and unreasonable;
for will he pretend by a little to contradict a great deal; and will he pretend
to write Universal Rules, from a little and singular Observations; but it seems
by this little he is convinced fully, which to me only signifies he has a very
narrow Head. But that this Distemper does not proceed from Acids, I shall
easily evince; and first let us see, what he says in Proof of his own
Assertion, and what Reasons he gives for them.

Page 55. I have observed considerable large Nodes in which are sometimes
contained a hard chalky Substance, which by many Experiments I have found to be
as much an Alkaly as either Carbs-Eyes, Corral, etc.

This is an Argument indeed would persuade one to believe much, upon a very
little Observation, and really, if we may believe he writes in this Point as he
does in all the rest, it will be feared, That little is none at all for he has
hitherto so magnified a little, as to make it a great deal of Nonsense; that
here we may suspect, if what he has seen in this Distemper be little when
magnifyed, (...) must be very little in truth. And as for this Argument it
shows that his head is a lump of Clay without any distinction; for though (...)
might be admitted, that the Nodes in the Gout were like a Chalky Substance, yet
would they not be as much Alkaly, as Crab Eyes, there being a great deal of
difference betwixt Chalk and Crab's-eyes, as to the Muchness of Alkalie; but
what if I should say it is neither an Alkaly nor Acid, but sort of mealy Mucus
hardened by Acids, are made porous by the Heat, causing those Parts of it to
close and condense so as to leave Pores betwixt them. I shall not he(...)
enlarge nor bring Arguments to prove the Possibility, but shall leave him to
consider (...) it, and also desire him or rather advise him in order that he
may comprehend this, that is so much above him, to read and consider Mr. Boil
of Alkalies and Acids; and if he does not understand that Book, if he will come
to me I Will explain it to him; for I would spare no Pains to undeceive and
instruct him, I see he has a mind to learn, and perhaps, if he were put into a
good way, though he be dull Industry might make something of him; so that I
would not have him discouraged, though he has lost his Labor in travailing so
boldly and so far in a bad Way.

In the next Paragraph. Page 55, He says, Now it being granted that the Matter
contained in the aforesaid Nodes to be an Alkaly, how is it possible for this
Distemper to proceed from Acids? He does well to ask Questions; for that is the
way to be informed; and that he may learn, I shall tell him, that though that
crusty Substance were an Alkaly, which I only suppose, that the Answer may be
direct; it is possible that Acids may be turned into Alkalies; for all the
Difference betwixt Acids, being as far as relates to our present Purpose, that
the one has no Pores, and that the other has Pores, to imbibe and receive the
Parts of the other into them; it will be very easily conceived, that a great
many of these being embodyed in a Mucilage, and that Mucilage being hardened, so
as to link the Acid Particles together; I say, it will be very easily
conceived, that that Substance being made Porous, has so far the Nature of an
Alkaly.

Page 56. Says he, But if Men will still persist to assert, that this Distemper
proceeds from Acids, and at the same time own the chalky Substance
beforementioned, which is only, etc. they must tacitly believe the Doctrine of
Transmutation, though they openly are ashamed to own it; that Noble Sentence,
Doctrine of Transmutation had so raised his Phansy, that truly he has expressed
this Paragraph very Nobly; but I see he cannot speak in fine Words, but he must
express Nonsense, for where Men assert the Doctrine of Transmutation, how can
they be said tacitly to believe it, except asserting be holding ones Tongue;
but though, my Gentleman, thinks it a thing, that one ought to be ashamed of,
and to be laughed at for and ridiculed; I am not ashamed nor afraid to say* I
own the Doctrine of Transmutation, and so does he, or else he has quoted no
less than three Experiments in his Novum Lumen Chirurgicum (which I have proved
to be Obscurum) Which he does not understand; and which fill that Book from
Page 12. to the 17. But perhaps the Gentleman means, the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation and has wittily called it Transmutation, least he should
strain his Mouth, with such a thundering Word; but there is a great deal of
difference betwixt owning Transmutation in Philosophy, and that which is called
Transubstantiation in Divinity; the former only asserting the Texture of Matter
to be modifyed anew, when it visibly appears to be so; and the latter when it
is apparent, that it is not; so that if any Body has Reason to be ashamed he
wants none, and he alone deserves to be ridiculed.

Page 57. Supposing the Acid Matter causing this Distemper to be transmuted
into a chalky, alkalious Substance, the Distemper must never more pretend to
come near that part; this is a very good Argument indeed, and truly when I
looked upon the whole Page together, here seemed to be a Fault with an ominous
Index over it, viz. Ashamed, laugh and ridicule, which Words begin the Page
just before this Paragraph. But to answer his Supposition, we know, that the
best Alkalies cannot operate beyond their Power, and though that Substance were
an Alkaly, it would soon be so impregnated with Acids, as to loose it is Power
of absorbing more; for such Alkalies no longer correct Acidity, than their
Pores are open, and ready to receive acid Particles into them, and then they
can correct no more, which is plain by putting of Alkalies into any acid
Liquor, which as soon as their Pores are filled, have no further Effects.

But he says further; Page 57. and 58. Nay, the Blood at times, must all, or at
least great part of it, pass through the Part or Parts, where this chalky
substance is lodged, by which means, a Man would think it should be
sufficiently guarded from any more growing Acid; and so by Consequence, when
the chalky Nodes are once settled, People have not the least Reason for the
future, to be in fear of the Return of the Distemper. To this, though what I
said in the last Paragraph is a sufficient Answer, I shall add, that though the
Blood should sooner than he can suppose it, run through that Part, yet the
Substance he calls Alkaly, when it is once sufficiently impregnated, could
cause no Alteration in the Acidity of it; besides, though it had it is full
Force active and vigorous so much as makes up the Nodes, would no more prevent
the Acidity of the Blood, than a Grain of Alkaly would prevent a Hogshead of
Drink from growing stale. Moreover, so little Blood could be laid down at once
in those Parts, that the whole Mass being depraved, we must conclude, that that
little Blood, as soon as it was mixed with the Ma^^ of Blood again, would be
again depraved and tainted; all these Objections, I say, would occur, if we
would suppose, what he says to be true, concerning the Blood circulating
through those Parts; but he should take notice, that the Blood Vessels have no
Communication with those Nodes, they being, as it it were, Matter extravasated,
and out of the way of Circulation; but one has always more Trouble to confute
one Blockhead that three ingenuous Men (I don't mean convince one, for that is
a thing not to be expected but the Reason why it is so difficult to confute
such a one, is, because Fools make such Blunders, that have neither Sense nor
Meaning, and are so widely absurd, that one must run out of Method, and Order,
to trace them.

Page 59. He says, It may not be amiss to take Notice, that few People are
troubled with the Gout, but those who drink large quantities of Wine or some
other generous Liquors, abounding with Vinous Spirits, so that the Blood and
other Juices, being impregnated with the said Vinous Spirits, these Spirits
meeting with the Volatile Alkalious Salt, of which, even the Blood of sound
People, is never destitute, by means of which Salt the Vinous Spirit is
Coagulated, etc. What is the Reason that drinking of Wine is so hurtful, I
shall not here explain, but shall only show, that he is so far from explaining
it that, he confutes himself, and that he is at a loss how to make even
trifling Explanations of it. And first I ask him, if it be caused by drinking
of much Wine, and that being Coagulated by the Alkalies in the Blood, why does
not those Alkalies also Coagulate his Acids, that he would cure it by; and how
comes it to pass, that they sooner Coagulate Spirituous Acids than more crude
ones? But this Objection he did not foresee, and truly no body can blame a Man
to be thus bold, that is so short sighted and inapprehensive of Danger, but
certainly if an Alkaly in the Blood would cause so Spirituous an Acid as Wine
to Coagulate, it would much sooner Coagulate a more crude one, and consequently
his Medicine must do more harm than Wine; so that here I leave him to condemn
himself. A second Question I ask him, is, whether it is not impossible to cure
this Distemper by Acids, if Acids cause the Alkalies in the Blood to Coagulate,
to which, the true Answer is, that it is impossible; for as long as the Blood
is so impregnated, according to him, all the Acids we can take, must be
Coagulated, so that they would increase Coagulations, and not cure them.

But not to ask a Man any more Questions, who does not understand common
Reason, I shall prove from what he says, and also from Reason, that Acids cause
this Distemper, and first, from what he says it is plain; for if he says upon
taking of Acids the Alkalies Coagulate them, it implies there was no
Coagulation in the Blood before those Acids were taken, now if our Blood when
so full of Alkalies can be without Coagulation, and upon the taking, of Acids,
it presently thickens; it must needs follow that those Acids cause this
Distemper, there being no Coagulation before those were taken; so that the Acid
Coagulates the Alkalizated Blood, and not the Alkaly the Acids; for that is
said to be the cause of a Distemper, or a Coagulation, whose Mixture with the
Blood produces such a Distemper, and in whose Absence there is no such Effect,
so that here he is judged by his own Words. For as a Man's head is not the
cause of it is being cut off, till the Instrument is applied that separates it
from his Body; and when Water is thrown in the Fire, the Water is properly said
to extinguish it, so Acids taken into the Body, cause the Coagulation and not
those Humors that are vitiated by the mixture of it, and these Instances I have
given, that it may be plainer to People that understand not Physic, I mean
those Gentlemen he so often makes his Appeal to.

Besides, Acids being of a cold Nature, and cool Bodies Naturally Coagulating
those Bodies, that are subject to Coagulation; and it being the Nature of
Alkalies to take off Coagulations, and to prevent them, it would be absurd to
say that they cause such Effects as are quite different from their Nature. And,

That it is the Nature of Acids to Coagulate, is not only plain from what he
has said, but it is also manifest, that Phlegmatic Constitutions are injured,
and that Indisposition increased by them; whereas by Alkalies, that Phlegm is
attenuated and made fit to be carried off.

The next Page he would suppose, that the Coagulations in the Stone proceed
from Alkalious Particles Coagulating Acids; but it appearing from-what I have
already said, that Alkalies are not, and that Acids are the Causes of such
Effects; I need not say any more to this, the same being an Answer to both.

I shall only here take Notice of the Strain and Humor of our Philosopher, who
when he found it would be necessary for his purpose, does not only change the
Names of things; but also calls those Humors that are Passive, Active; and on
the contrary.

CHAP. V.
Of Rheumatisms.
THe next Distemper that he gives us an Instance of his weakness in, is, A
Rheumatism, where Page 74. he says, Having by the Fire Analized the Blood of
Rheumatic Persons, I have found it to abound more with Alkalious Particles than
that of sound People. But as I said before, the Analized Blood is not
sufficient to determine what Blood was, before it was Analized; but if by
mixing those Substances together, which he draws from Blood, by Analizing it,
they will make just such a Composition, as Blood; then I will believe he takes
the right Method to discover the Causes of Distempers, but if they will not,
then it is evident that the Fire modifies the Parts of the Blood anew, and
rather destroys than discovers it is Principles.

Page 75, and the 76. he would suggest, Acids are not the Cause of the Bloods
Viscocity, and says those that affirm that they are, don't prove it; And I say,
neither does he prove, that Acids are not; But it appearing from what I have
said the Chapter before, that Acids cause Viscocity, there is no need I should
make a Repetition here.

Page 77. By what I have said, I hope, I have freed Acids from occasioning the
Viscousness of the Blood in Rheumatisms; which Viscocity if it can be once
taken of, every one knows that the Distemper immediately vanishes, but this is
not done by Alkalies but by Acids as Tincture of Antimony and Chalybeates. What
he has said, he hopes is sufficient, but truly I don't see that he has said
any thing to the purpose, as Grounds of such hopes; but if we believe him, that
Rheumatick Peoples Blood abounds with Alkalies more then healthful Peoples,
which is false, it does not therefore follow, that this Distemper is caused by
Alkalies, because Alkalies according to him, cannot Coagulate without Acids; so
that it thence follows, that as Acids differ in quantity more or less, so the
Blood is accordingly Coagulated, and then we must conclude, that the
Coagulation depends on the Acids, and then as I said before Acid Medicines
would increase it: But here to prove that Acids cure this Distemper, he calls
two Medicines eminently Alkalious Acids, by which Rule he may say with as much
Reason, that a company of Statues took Barcellona from the Spaniards, and if
any Body should contradict him and say that they were Men, he must Answer but
they ought to be called not Men but Statues, as I call them, and this is just
his Case, to which, I having before said enough, I shall here say no more to
it, but refer the Reader to what has gone before.

Page 79, 80, and 81. He makes an Harangue, that Steel is turned into a
Vitriol, before it can be carried into the Blood, and consequently acts as an
Acid upon it. But granting it so, I have already shown what would be the
Effects according to his Supposition, viz, To increase the Distemper, but as he
is not the first that has supposed it to work upon the Body by that means; so
he is not the first mistaken in that Point, for Chalybeats don't cause such
Effects, as we see they do, by being turned into a Vitriol, but by absorbing
those Acids in the Stomach and Pancreatick Juice; by which means, the Ferment
of the Liver is more powerful, and helps to correct the Acidity of the Chyle;
and the Blood not being supplied with Acid Chyle, those Acidities in it is Mass,
are soon altered and digested to a higher Degree of Maturity; by a long
continued Circulation and Fermentation.

Page 82, 83, 84, and 85. are filled up with two preparations of Steel which he
account Acids, and a story to tells us, that Cinnaber which he once thought an
Alkaly proves to be an Acid. But it only proves so for his Convenience, for
there is no Reason that he gives for it, and therefore we have Reason to
believe that it is, what all Learned Men know it to be; for it does not only
correct Acids in the Stomach, but is of very great Use almost always where the
Mass of Blood has a manifest Viscidity.

And here, before I leave this Chapter I shall observe, that those Acids in the
Stomach which he says Page 80, cannot get into the Blood till vitriolized, is a
Mistake; for we may take notice, that some People, if not most, that are
subject to Rheumatick Pains and the Gout, feel a manifest Acidity upon their
Stomachs sometime before their Paroxysms; and when that Acidity is carried off,
they feel the dreadful Effects of it in the Mass of Blood.

But supposing it to be turned into a Vitriol, a Vitriol is but a stronger
Acid, than that in the Stomach, and consequently would do more Mischief than if
it were not turned into a Vitriol as I have elsewhere shown.

CHAP. VI.
Of Consumptions.
THe last Distemper that this Gentleman pretends to give an Account of, is,
Consumptions; but if he had considered and understood what an Ingenious and
Learned Tract Dr. Morton has writ on this Subject, he might have been ashamed
to offer such a small Parcel of Nonsense. But as there is no Reason in what he
says, so there is as little he had in Writing.

Page 89. He says, my Reasons in short for the Use of Acids are as follow. The
Globules of the Blood being broken, and confusedly mixed with the Serum, by
Reason of so many Acrid Alkalious Particles mixed with it, and together with
the Serum, admitted into the small Glandules of the Lungs, and not being
capable of being discharged, cause Inflammations there, and by consequence
Hectic Fevors. What he means by broken Globules thrown into the Glands, I
profess is such a Piece of Philosophy, that I neither see that it has any
Meaning or Sense in it; for I have already showed, that those Particles of
Blood, which he takes Notice of, swim in the Serum confusedly, must be divided
into an innumerable small Particles before they can pass through the capillary
Vessels, and consequently can do no Prejudice by being broken; but suppose they
were forced into Vessels which they ought not; Acids by Coagulating the Alkaly,
would rather fix them there, than remove them. Nay allowing his own way of
Assertion, which I have before confuted, viz. that Alkalies coagulate Acids, it
would not help him, because those Alkalies in the Glands could not be removed,
according to his own Assertion, but by Acids, and what a Removal would it be,
when as his Acid Medicines were laid down in the Glands, the Alkaly would
coagulate the Acid and so fix it there, as much as the Alkaly.

As for what he says Page 90, and the 91, of the Use of Alkalies, I don't
believe any rational Physician would ever give any Alkalies in such a Case; so
that here he might have kept this Advice to himself.

Page the 92, and 93, he makes a very simple Objection against his foolish
Assertion, and makes an Answer to it agreeable to so great a Piece of Nonsense;
but both of them being not worth while to take notice of, I shall leave them to
the consideration of those, that think they deserve any thing else, besides a
sharp Reprimand.

Page the 94, He tells us a story that Riverius cured one of a Consumption by
Conserve of Roses and Oil of Sulphur by the Bell, but any one may guess what a
Consumption it was, since the same Remedy, will scarce cure an ordinary Cough.

From Page the 94, to the 100. He tells a long story of an old Man and a Pot of
Oil of Sulphur: But that being nothing at all to this Distemper, but a Story by
the by, to fill up his Book; and least he should seem to say, not only, nothing
to the purpose, but to little for a Chapter of Consumptions; I shall take
Notice of it no further.

Page the 100, 101, and the 102, he tells another story of a Man, who that
being bit with a Viper, could not be cured by Alkalies and no wonder; for no
rational Man would depend upon a Medicine he knew not the Effects of, in such a
Case, but would have immediate Recourse to a proper Medicine.

But to conclude this Chapter, it will give us no little Light into the strange
Insolence of this Man, who notwithstanding such ingenious Books, as the Learned
Dr. Willis, Dr. Morton, etc. have writ concerning Consumptions; and what the
ingenious and truly Honorable Theod. Mayern, and Dr. Willis have wrote of the
Gout, and also Dr. Lister, with a great many more, who have largely handled
those Subjects, this Man can have the Impudence to write, not only contrary to
them, but also common Experience; and that too neither with any Method or
Reason; for whereas those Learned Men have observed a great deal of Variety as
to the Cause and Cure of those Distempers, and that the Cure is to be varyed
according to the different Tempers and Constitutions of Men; he boldly and very
irregularly says little or nothing to the purpose, but that, without any regard
to the difference of Causes, or the several peculiar Constitutions of Men's
Bodies; but it is not strange, that one that has so much Ignorance, should
have an equal share of Impudence; for vain pretending Quacks and Mountebanks
have no other way to cheat the World, but by incredible Relations of Cures,
that were as unlikely as false.

But I shall not here enlarge on a Subject so copious as his Vanity and
Boldness makes this; but shall go on to consider the remaining Part of his
Book, there being Matter enough and too much, for me to mispend my time upon.

CHAP. VII.
His Conclusion Examined.
PAGE 103, he says, For all sort of Flesh abounding with large Quantities of
Volatile Alkalious Salts, if the said Alkalious Salts were in some measure
locked up and mortified by means of the Sea Salt; What then* Nothing at all of
a Conclusion, I here expected some Inference or other would be drawn from it;
but his profound Phansy, being lost and overwhelmed in a Salt Rock in Cheshire,
no less than twenty yards thick, he forgot himself, or rather overlooked what
he was writing; so that this Page and the next is a Speech, without applying it
to any thing.

Page 105. There is some Reason to believe, that People before the Flood did
not eat Flesh, but lived altogether upon Vegetables, as Fruits, Herbs and
Roots, which I suppose was one great Reason of their Longaevity, and it may be
observed in Herefordshire, and other Countries abounding with Fruit, the People
are longer lived then in those Countries that want them. This truly is a Sign
the Man's Thoughts have run a little further then his Wit, and then his shallow
Head is capable to go with any steadiness; and truly by the incoherent Style of
his Book, one would guess, he was no little way out of his Depth; But I suppose
this Noble Addition to Dr. Burnet's Theory was no otherwise designed, but that
People might know he had heard of such a Book; whose Arguments, he says, are to
him unanswerable; but why so? Because they are too Noble and Curious for him to
understand, and much more to answer; but however ingeniously that Book is writ
(which truly I think, for the Nobleness of the Thought, the Elegancy of his
florid Style, and the Command which he seems to have of his Thoughts, and
Expressions, with the greatest Ease, and without straining, for them, makes it
one of the most valuable Books our English Language is adorned with) yet it is
not exempt from that Fate, which all Books on that Subject have hitherto had;
and it is only a sign of Mr. Colbatch his shallowness, and not of the reality
of what is contained there, that makes the Arguments unanswerable to him, though
this must needs be said of them; that though they are not really true, yet they
are delivered in such a Method, that they would Insensibly wind one into a
favorable Thought of 'em, if one were not sufficiently Armed with Judgment and
Reflection; but so Ingenious and so Learned a Man, as Dr. Burnet is, being too
good Company for such Ignorance as he is Eminent in; I shall not mix their
Names together any further, least the Luster of Dr. Burnet's Name should so
dazzle Peoples weak Eyes, as not to perceive the Obscurity of the others, and
shall only consider the latter separately; that the Light, which might be
borrowed from the former, may not increase the faint Obscureness of his; but
that he may appear in his proper Colors.

And how absurd and ridiculous it is; for to assert that eating Fruit preserves
Peoples Lives, and is the Cause of Longaevity; whereas the generality of our
English People, as well as Physicians, are certain, that Fruit causes more
Distempers in Children; than any one thing amongst Non-naturals besides.

From Page 107, to Page 112. He tells a long story of a Child that was cured of
a Tympany by being Bathed in Sea Water, but what is that to his Credit? Or what
does this signify to the Use of Acids in the Smallpox, Scurvey, Gout,
Rheumatisms and Consumptions? The common People certainly would laugh at him
should they hear him affirm, that they all proceed from the same Cause; he
might as well expect Fire to cool, heat, moysten and to dry the same Body: But
as for that Case of the Child's, had he had the Luck to have advised, that Girl
to Bath in Seawater, it would have been something for him to have talked of,
but as it is, an old Woman would have told a story that she had heard from
another, as well if not better than he has done, and now should he cure one by
that same means, it would be no Credit for him, since he would do no more, than
what had been done in HEREFORD-SHIRE.

Page 112, He tells us what Helmont has found by Experience in the Strangury,
viz. to cure it by cool Diuretics, and what Discovery is this pray, any
rational Physician would have given either that, or a Medicine much better in
the same case, but Helmont's Observations are none of his; and he has no share
in the small Credit of it.

Page 113, He says, An eminent Man took off Heart of Urine by Juice of Oranges;
and what then, do not other Physicians give cold Diuretics upon the like
occasion, neither do they value themselves upon such things at all, as are
common and every where practiced, but this it seems induced him to try Tincture
of Antimony in the like case; which since I have already showed to be an
Alkaly, and that he only calls it an Acid to serve his turn, I need not enlarge
any more now. But the Reason why he thinks it Acid, I believe, in this case,
may be, because he observed that Acids cured this Distemper, and could give no
other Reason why Tincture of Antimony should, except it were an Acid, and
therefore concluded it was not an Alkaly; but to help him over that difficulty,
I shall tell him, that whether that Acrimony, which causes Heat of Urin, be
corrected by Acids, or dispersed and carried off by Sweat upon the Use of
Alkalies, it is all one, and since a Decoction of Diaphoretick Wood will cure
that Acrimony as well as Diaphoretick Antimony, there is the same Reason to be
given for both, and as Acids correct the Humor, and alter it, by dulling and
taking off the Edges of it; so Antimony carrys it off by Sweat, and the
Acrimony by being so diverted, the Symptom ceases.

Page 125, He says, I have only brought my Doctrine of Acids upon the Stage as a
general one in Opposition to the general and pernicious Doctrine of Alkalies. A
very fine Man truly, and much to be admired! He asserts only for the sake of
contradiction, and really in this Point he speaks Truth; for with what other
Design would he change the very Names of Things, but to seem to differ from
others, in trivial Matters; for the Names of Things are so indifferent, that it
matters not what they are called, so they have but a Name to distinguish them,
and when he says Tincture of Antimony will take off such a heat of Urin,
whether the Name of it be Alkaly or Acid, it matters not, if it were generally,
as well as all other things of the same Nature, known by that Name, but when
the Names of things are given them, and generally received, it is absurd to
alter them without Reason.

From Page 116, to 132, He heaps up a parcel of incoherent Stories, of
specific Medicines; but to what end, except to fill up his Book, I cannot
imagine; for he neither gives Reason for them, neither can they any ways confirm
the Truth of any thing he has asserted; but, if to tell a Parcel of Tales is
sufficient to make a Man an Author, Old Women are fitter to write Books, then
he, being stocked with a greater Variety of Storys.

As for what he has said of the Cortex Peruvianus, I shall take another
opportunity to give my Thoughts of it, when I have time to propose something
concerning the Reason of Agues, and to examine what his worthy Friend has said
on this Subject.

But to Apologize for telling us all these Stories, he furnishes us with many
more; which may indeed be grounds for an excuse for him; if we would change
that old Maxim (which is all relating to the Aristotelian Philosophy, which he
understands,) Nihil dat quod in se non habet; in English what can one expect
more in a Calves Head than Brains, or as the Proverb usually runs, what can one
expect more of a Cat than her Skin.

Page 136, He says, that Acton, Epsom, Dullage or Northall Waters, etc. are
allowed to be Acids, and according to the Difference of the Acid contained in
them, they have different Operations, but I must ask him, by whom they are
allowed to be so? By no Body that I know of; for Dr. Grew has extracted that
Salt and it appears to be so far from an Acid, that it is evidently in Taste a
bitter pene trating Salt, and I never heard that a bitter Salt could be allowed
to be an Acid, except Gall differed not in Taste from Sevil-Oranges.

AN EXAMINATION OF Mr. John Colbatch HIS APPENDIX TO HIS ESSAY.

Wherein his Absurdities and False Opinions in Physic, are truly Represented,
and fully Confuted.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1699.

AN EXAMINATION OF Mr. John Colbatch HIS APPENDIX TO HIS ESSAY, etc.
THUS far I have showed the Absurdities of what this Man delivers, and what
little Reason he has, to be so insolent, and saucy with his Superiors,
infinitely so in Knowledge and Learning, as well as Fortune: But it is but
common for Fools to think themselves Wise Men; whereas wise Men are more
subject to suspect themselves; and not to appear, especially in Print, with
that Impudence, which is the only Support of Ignorance.

I shall now proceed to examine his Appendix to this Essay, and all that I shall
take Notice of in his Preface to this, is, that he says, I don't at all pretend
to arrive at so much certainty, as by the Methods I take, to make People
immortal, and that no Body shall die. Here methinks he begins to be sensible of
his Weakness, and is conscious, that he wants to make an Apology for the
frequent Departures of his Patients; which Guess of mine is confirmed by the
large strain of Divinity that follows it. But to proceed;

The Pretense of this Appendix, is, to explain and make his Terms Alkaly and
Acid more Intelligible, and to answer some Objections made against his Essay:
As for the Terms, they have been explained sufficiently already, every Body
knowing what is meant by Alkaly, and what by Acids, and what Medicines are
ranked under each; though some Ignorant Men have misused those Words: But,
without doubt, to serve a Particular Turn, we must expect from him, a
Particular Explanation.

But before he goes about his Explanation, Page the 3, He says, I have not
published the Doctrine of Acids and Alkalies, out of any design of appearing
singular, or of being the Head of a Faction, but out of mere pity and
compassion to Mankind, my fellow Creatures, whose deplorable Circumstances
under mistaken Methods, I have long bewailed, to see Physic made the Scene of
Slaughter, etc. But if he does not write out of a Design of being singular,
there is no such thing as being singular; for does he not cure some Distempers
by Medicines that have been all along used in Rheumatisms, and the Scurvey; and
only varies from others by a foolish Method, and boast of a New one, and only,
because he has changed the Names of those Medicines: But this is done out of
compassion to his Fellow Creatures; pray, where sies the Compassion? Might not
Steel and Antimony do as much good, when called Alkalies as when called Acids?
Does changing Names alter the Virtue? Or increase the Value of a Thing? Is not
a Dog as valuable or contemptible equally, whether it be called a Dog or a
Horse? But he said a little before he has advanced this general Method, in
Opposition to Alkalies; but I Will assure him he has not; for though in the
Smallpox he has altered Dr. Sydenhams Practice absurdly enough; yet in the
Scurvey, Rheumatism, etc. he has only altered the Names of some Medicines: And
come short of others by the help of his Ignorance, and yet bewails Physic to
see it a Scene of Slaughter; but if it was, it would be so still; will Steel or
Antimony cure a Distemper, nay and the same Distemper, better for being called
an Acid, than if it were an Alkaly? and how can this Man with such Boldness,
reproach Reason and Experience, and tell the World, that they are sent to their
Graves, by that which he in some Cases follows as well as he can, like a Man
that has lost his way by running into the Dark, and only masks it, with a new
Name.

Page the 4, and 5, He begins to explain the Term Alkaly, and says; It derives
it is Name from the Herb Kaly, from the Ashes of which is extracted a large
quantity of Salt, and the Ashes of most Herbs affording a Salt of the same
Nature with those of the Herb Kaly are equivocally called Alkalies, and all
other things of the same Nature, as Crab's-eyes, Oyster-Shells. Now what he here
says being granted, it is plain, that those Medicines, that he alters the Names
of, and calls Acids, are properly by this Rule of his own, to be called
Alkalies; they being of the Nature of Crab's-eyes, Oyster-Shells; and that they
are of the Nature of Crab's-eyes is very evident, because as Crab's-eyes cure
Acidity in the Stomach, so do they, only more powerfully, and also Acidities in
the Blood; so that he here undermines himself, and contradicts his own
Judgment, but it is a good while since he wrote the last, and his treacherous
Memory, as he calls it, is to be blamed; but yet one would think that the same
that is Truth now, would have been so then, when he thought of the same Matter.

Page the 6, He supposes Acid to be derived from the Arabian Word Acaid, which
signifies Acetum. Upon my word a mighty profound Scholar! He understands no
less than a whole Word of Arabic, and it is a wonder he did not write his whole
Book in it; but lest he should be too proud of himself, and value himself too
much upon this mighty Piece of Scholarship; I shall do him a kindness, as to
keep his Stomach from rising, and tell him; that Vinegar or Acetum is not Acid,
but Acrid, and had he understood one word of Latin, along with his Arabian
Word, he would have found that Vinegar takes it is Name from Vinum Acre, or
sharp Wine, and that Acrimony is derived from Acre; so that he is mistaken if
he calls those things that are like Vinegar, Acid; for they are Acrid* And,

As for Fruits and the Natural Juices of Plants, there are but very few Acid
Ones, like Acrid except that sweet be like bitter.

Page 7. All metaline Sulphurs are to be ranged amongst the Number of Acids.
But if we compare the Effects of Sulphur, with the Effects of Acids, there is
so little Reason to call Sulphur Acid, that Acid is as like Alkaly; as Sulphur,
is like Acid, the Effects being quite contrary; for whereas Acid cools and
abates the Heat of the Blood, Sulphur exalts and increases it; so that Sulphur
is a Body of as distinct a Nature from Acid, as Bitter and Sour.

But to what purpose would it be to reason with a Man, who calls Oils and
Balsoms and Bread Acids; since any Body that can Taste, will tell, that Balsam
has a different taste from Juice of Lemmons. And one might as well say, Iron
is Wood, because one may make a Chair of it, as that Bread is Acid; because an
Acid Spirit be made of Part of the Substance of it.

Page the 10th. in order to a well Performance of I know not what, he begins to
compare Sal Kaly, as he calls it, with Vinegar, and here Page 11 and 12, he
takes care to mention a mischievous sort of Alkaly, to represent the whole
Class of Alkalies, which is never at all used in Physic; and takes no notice
of all those Alkalies, as Steel, Antimony, Cinnaber, etc. with many more, which
are the best and most valuable Medicines supplied by Nature or Art, for their
universal Success in Physic; and then he says, Alkalies by breaking the
Globules of the Blood, cause Scurvey, Rheumatisms, Gout, etc. whereas, before
in his Essay, he told us, that the Coagulations of the Blood in these
Distempers proceeded from Alkalies Coagulating those Acids, which were taken
into the Blood? But Contradictions, Forgetfulness, and Mistakes are so Natural
to him, that he must not be blamed poor Man! That this is a Mistake of the
first Magnitude is as plain, as that Coagulation and Dissolution, two
Opposites, can make it.

Having thus represented Alkalies from Page the 12, to Page 17, he takes all
the care he can, to represent Acids with all possible Advantage, by Vinegar, of
which he takes care to say all the Good he can, but not a word of the Mischief
it does, to Scorbuticks, Phthisicks, and sore Throats, etc. so that if we
reckon up but what Mischief Vinegar might do, if it were made ill use of, they
would outballance all the Good, and more than the ill Effects of Alkalies do
their Good ones.

But now he has made his Comparison betwixt Alkaly, and Acid, I might take the
same Liberty, and compare the best of Alkalies with the worst of Acids; which
would represent his Acids worse than he can do Alkalies; but we are not to
judge of any thing, by the ill Use that may be made of it, but by the good
Effects; and every thing is valuable for the Good which it does, though in
different cases; and by the same Method he takes to persuade People from using
Alkalies, we might persuade People from the Use of Fire; for it will burn and
cause ill Effects, worse than the Sal Kaly; yet if moderately, is almost of
universal Use: So that though Sal Kaly should have such Effects, there are a
great many Alkalies; as Steel, Crab's-eyes, etc. which do as much Good.

But by the Method he takes, Christians would be represented worse than
Heathens, for if he should compare Seneca with a Christian who is a Thief, a
Murderer, and the worst of Men; how odiously must Christians be, if all were to
be judged, by that one; but what Ill will not a Man do to carry on a bad Design?

From Page the 17, to the 21, he reckons up all the ill Effects he can of
Arsnick, as an Alkaly, but what poysonons Design he has in it, he best knows;
for this can signify nothing to the crying down of Alkalies, though it were
Alkaly, since none are so wicked, as to give, such without a Design to poison
People.

But since he thinks it a way to cry down Alkaly, by showing that Arsnick is an
Alkaly I shall hear only two Witnesses against him, who writ long before his
simple Books were writ, to prove that it is a dangerous, and a pernicious Acid.

And first the Ingenious Sir John Floyer, in the first of his (...), Page 27.
says, Arsenick is like common Sulphur, and is compounded like it of an Oily
part (which in Arsnick is more peircing) and an Acid. And again Page 231, of
the second Part. Arsnick is corrosive by a particular Texture of Sulphurous
Particles and Acids.

And Secondly, the Famous Ettmuller in his Schroderi dilucidati Mineralogia
says, Arsenicum quod revera est minerale volatile and Sublimatione exaltatum.
Recte vocatur Arsenicum ab authore, fuligo quaedam Mineralis pinguis and
inflammabilis. Nam revera est Sulphur sum Volatile, and propter
Volatilitatem, valde corrosivum and valde venenosum. Arsnic, which is really a
Volatile mineral Sulphur, and exalted by Sublimation. Arsnic is truly called by
the Author, a kind of mineral soot, fat and inflamable; for it is really a most
Volatile Sulphur, and by it is Volatility very corrosive and a strong Poison.
Now by the former of these Authors it is asserted to be an Oily Acid, and by
the latter, who was a profound Judicious Man, it is affirmed for the most Part
to be a Mineral Sulphur; from which two, according to Page the 7. of his own
Appendix, it is proved to be an Acid; because he there Classes all Balsams and
Sulphurs amongst Acids; so that all the Prejudice that a Sublimed Acid can do,
may be done by Mr. John Colbatch his Acid.

From Page the 21, to the 25. He reckons up all the good Effects of Oil of
Vitriol; but mentions not the Mischief, that might be done with it, which is a
great deal more, for it corrodes and eats away the Flesh, causes an intolerable
Heat.

Page the 28, He says As for Balsams if I should take upon me to describe their
Excellencies, it would be fitter for a Volum than an Appendix; but if he had
cast out a great deal of his stuff, that he has put in, and which was brought
in by the Head and Shoulders, and has no Relation to his Discourse, only to
fill it up, he might have had room enough for Balsams, which makes me believe
he had very little toward a great Volum.

From Page the 39, to 71. He lays down several Objections, to show, that he
cannot Answer them; and that it may appear, he has not done it, I shall take
notice of them in that Order, he has laid them.

The first Objection is how comes it to pass those People that live upon
nothing almost but highly Salted Meat, are more troubled with the Scurvey.

To this he Answers, That it is not because they eat more Salt, but because
they eat more Flesh than other People, which abounds with Alkalious Particles,
and as for the Sea Salt is most carried off by Urin.

But to this I answer, that if it were not the Acid Sea Salt, then fresh Beef
would sooner create the Scurvey than Salt; because according to him, it being
Alkalious altogether, and not being tempered with the Sea Salt, it would
increase the Alkalies of the Blood I think more; But, for my Part, I am sure
Beef is nothing like an Alkaly, (for as much as I, and all the World besides,
can discern,) it abounding with a sweet Balsamic Juice, the Mass of Blood; but
that Mass of Blood abounds with Alkaly, he will say; but then he must remember
what he said the seventh Page of his Appendix, viz. that all oleaginous
Balsamicks are to be reckoned amongst Acids, and then it will follow that the
Taste of the Blood being sweet and Balsamic, it must be reckoned amongst Acids,
so that our Quick-sighted Reformer of Physic, has once more contradicted
himself.

But suppose Beef to be Alkaly, it will be no more for his purpose, because
Page 59, of his Essay he says, that a Mixture of Acids with Alkaly causes a
Coagulation; so that Acid and Alkaly thus carried into the Blood together must
thicken the Blood; but then, that this Distemper may by all means proceed from
Alkaly, he will suppose the Accid to run off by Urin; still he is never the
better; for in that same Page of his Essay, it appears, that as long as the
Alkaly is not mixed with Acid, there is no Coagulation, till it is impregnated
by drinking Wine; from whence it appears, that if the Acid were so carried off,
there would be no such Coagulation in Scrobutic Serum.

Having shown how he contradicts himself backwards and forwards, in Answer to
this first Objection, I shall pass to the second;

The second Objection is, how it comes to pass, that when the Stomach abounds
with Acids, the Blood does not.

He Answers, The meat we eat being dissolved by a Spirituous Acid Juice, it is
turned into a Substance for the Nutrition of our Bodies, and that this, in
People that live a Sedentary Life, lying too long in the Stomach, is turned
Acid: But this is no Answer to the Question; it only tells us, how the Stomach
becomes full of Acids; but how comes it to pass then, that when the Stomach is
emptyed of this Acid stuff; part of it is not squeezed through the Lacteals
into the Blood? Truly he can give no Reason for it; so that the Blood must
needs, according to the course and tendency of Chyle, be tainted with that
Acidity.

The third Objection is, That this Acid being kept from going into the Blood
would, according to him, prevent Distempers.

He Answers, That People who are troubled with Acidity in their Stomach, make
great quantities of Water, are very lean and costive, which he will prove to
be, because Acids are not carried into the Blood. And first when we make Water,
much, the attenuated Chyle runs off by Vessels, which carry it from the Stomach
to the Kidneys through the Omentum, which prevents it from going into the
Blood. And from Page 39, to the 40, he would suggest, that there are such
Vessels for it to pass off by. Secondly, the Reason why People are so lean, is,
because the Acid Chyle so diluted is carried off, and the Oily Particles of the
Blood want Acid to thicken them, and to turn them into Fat. Thirdly, the Reason
why they are costive, is, because, so much Moisture turning off by Urin the
excrements are hardened, and the Guts want Moisture to Lubricate them.

To this Objection he gives no direct Answer, no not so much as a false one;
for what he offers for an Answer, is so far from being one, that it has not the
least Relation to the Objection, as he explains it; for the Objection relates
to Distempers in the Blood; whereas, as he explains those three Phenomenon,
they are not Distempers of the Blood; for he makes Acidity in the Stomach, the
Cause of too much Urin, and of Costiveness; and as for Leanness, the more Oily
and Sulphurous the Blood is, the Fatter is the Body; and according to him, in
the beginning of this Appendix, Page the 7th, the more Acid it is, and
consequently cannot find any Inconveniency by his new Reason of making too much
Water; for though the Acids run off by Urin and never come into the Blood, yet
since the Blood abounds with Fat Particles, accoding to him it would not want
Acids.

But as I have often taken notice of him already, so I may still, that
Contradictions and Incoherency are natural to him, and we may expect nothing
else from him; but I shall not only show, how that his Answer is not direct to
the Objection; but that he explains those Symptoms he mentions very falsely.

And first the Reason, why People who have Acidity on their Stomachs, make much
Water, cannot be, because, the Acid Chyle is carried off, by such Passages, as
he supposes, because there are no such Passages, to be discovered; for not all
the Anatomists, nor Glasses, could ever as yet discern the least Footsteps of
them; and if there were such Vessels, as he supposes, to convey so much Urin
into the Bladder; they must be of a considerable size; but should we suppose
such Vessels, I am afraid he would scarce explain how Acid Chyle comes to be
Lixivious, and to have an Urinous Taste barely by running through a short
Vessel; for Urin and Chyle are Bodies so distinct from one another, that such a
Conveyance would scarce turn the Acid Chyle into Urin, but that People whose
Stomachs abound with Acids, make much Urin, shows that this Acid is really
carried into the Blood; for the Chyle being tainted and impregnated with this
Acidity, as soon as it comes into the Blood, the Acidity presently precipitates
the watery Part of the Serum, which is the Reason, they make so much Limpid
clear Water.

Secondly, As for his Reason, why such People are lean, this is as unlikely as
the former; for how can we think that Chyle is carried off, since such Peoples
Urin is as clear as Water, whereas, if what he says were true, it must be as
thick as Milk; but this he has borrowed from Dr. Willis his Reason of a
Diabetes, only he lept upon it, and forgot where he found it; and also what Use
to make of it; but perhaps I wrong him, it may be he will say he did not read Dr.
Willis; should he give me that Answer, I could almost believe him, and then I
should think, that some Body had told him the Reason of a Diabetes, and that
upon such a Deep hint as that, he framed this wonderful Hypothetical Nonsense.

That such Peoples Blood does not want Acids, I have already showed, and that
what he says is false, were he to be judged by this 7th, Page of his own Book,
but Justice has not always thought fit, that a Man's own Confession should be
evidence against him, except at his Trial; and therefore I shall show him that
Leanness does not follow for want of that Acid; but is caused by the Blood
being too much impregnated with it; For the Fat of an Animal is not a Concrete
of Oil, and such a crude Acid, as that which abounds in distempered Peoples
Stomachs, is the common Observation, and Suffrage of Learned Men; but from a
more Nitrous and Spirituous one; for that Acid is so far from being a Part of
Fat, that nothing more powerfully checks the Preter-natural Fermentation of the
Blood, than Acids; and the more the Blood abounds with Acids, the more it is
Sulphur is depressed, and consequently cannot yield Oily Parts, for an
ingredient of Fat; since it scarce supplies Nature with sufficient Refreshment.
Besides, this Acid, which he supposes would cause the Chyle to run off by Urin,
through some private Ducts, would have the same Effects in the Blood, and by
that means cause a continual Diabetes, by forcing away the Nutritious Juice
along with it.

But Thirdly, The Reason he gives, why such People are costive, is also false;
for, the Intestines don't so much want Moisture, as something to raise the
Peristaltick Motion sufficiently, and by irritating their Nervous Coat to put
the Musculous Parts into a stronger Nixus; for when Acids too much abound, the
Ferment that is laid down by the Ductus Colidocus, is always too small in
Quantity, or else too mild in Quality, and the Reason why they are costive is,
because they have too little Choler, and that too, is tempered and depressed by
the Preter-natural Acidity of the Stomach, and Pancreatic Juice, so that the
Intestins want their natural Stimulus.

The next Objection he pretends to Answer is, why, if Acids cause such a
dissolution of the Chyle, Steel does not also make it run off by Urin.

The Answer he gives to this, is, that Iron cannot be conveyed into the Blood,
before it be turned into a Vitriol.

But to this, I answer, that the Attenuation of the Chyle, he supposed just
before, was in the Stomach, and that it was conveyed through Vessels from
thence to the Kidneys; but here he has forgot, what he had before said: and
like one that had neither Memory nor Knowledge, but always talked, like a
Parrot, what was next his Tongue, and what was immediately in the View of his
Fancy, without considering what it was; but supposing Steel to be an Acid, I
don't then see what difference there is betwixt the effects it would have to
his Advantage, though altered, as he says, in the Stomach; for Vitriol is an
Acid and a very strong one; so that if Steel would have such ill Effects, if
Acid, he, instead of Answering the Objection, and removing the Difficulty,
makes it stronger against himself; for by being turned into a Vitriol it would
be a stronger Acid, and consequently do more Mischief by being so changed; But
I have before shown, that he is mistaken; for Steel is not an Acid but an
Alkaly, and the good effects it has are by absorbing the Acidities of the
Pancreatick Juice.

And now having gone through his Appendix thus far, and showed the
Inconsistency of this Part of his Book, with what had gone before; and also,
how he is incoherent and mistaken throughout the whole, I come next to examine
two or three Cases which he brings to close up his Book; as to the truth of the
Cures we have Reason to suspect him; being already assured, that he will tell
the World he cures, though those same Persons dyed; which we have sufficient
Instances of in his Novum Lumen Chirurgicum: But as to that Point, one that
will tell Lies, may say what he will, yet People know how to trust him; and
therefore, I shall examine the nature of those Medicines, and show, that he is
mistaken, and that those he cured, he did not know how, for he says he cured
them with Acids; but the Nature of those Medicines is so far from Acidity, that
they are quite opposite, and appear to be what he so much rails at, viz.
Alkalies; or other Medicines, which are generally used to destroy Acids.

The Medicines mentioned in the first Case are, Cinnaber of Antimony, Gum
Gujaci. Bad. Bardan. Sem. Bardan. Fraxin. Bacc. Junip. Sassafras. Tartar.
Vitriolat. as for the first, viz. Cinnaber it is by all the Learned* World and
the most eminent Writers found to be of Use, where the Blood and Serum have a
manifest Viscidity; and it is by Experience found to take off such Viscidity,
which is caused by Acids; but this Learned Loger-head has the confidence to
think, that the World will be imposed upon, and believe him before Men of Sense
and Learning, who could have no Prejudice to him, nor did not do it to oppose
him, they having given the World an Account of what it was, before he was old
enough to understand them, or knew what it was to go to School. And as for the
rest, they so far differ from Acids, that they manifestly taste Oily, Sweet,
and are Odoriferous; and since I write this for those that do not understand,
whether he writes Lies or Truth, I shall tell them, the English Names of those
Medicines, and then let them taste Sevil-Oranges, and see, whether Juniper
Berries, Burdock and Ash Seeds or Sassafras, which almost tastes like Mace, be
of the same Taste with those Oranges; the same Method they may take with all
the Medicines he uses; and if they find Juniper Berries, etc. taste like
Oranges, then Mr. John Colbatch is in the right, otherwise they know he is
mistaken. But the last Medicine he mentions is Tartar. Vitriolat. but there is
so little in that Medicin of it, and the Effects of it will be so small, that
it is not much matter whether it be Alkaly or Acid.

In his Third Case, for Convulsions he gives Vitriolated Tartar. Crem. Tartar.
and Costor Ag. Paeon. Rorismarin. and Puleg. all of which are known to be
Absorbers of Acids, and Correcters of them, except the two first; for they
manifestly abound with a Volatile and Spirituous Oil; and if the two former
were Acids, yet the latter being of a quite contrary Nature, and more in
Quantity, all that can be said of this Medicine is, that it neither did good
nor harm, the one part of it answering the other, and obstructing the Force of
it, and it was all one, as if one should mix hot and cold Water together to
cool ones thirst, and if that Patient recovered, it was not to be ascribed to
the Virtue of his Medicine, but the Mildness of the Cause of that Distemper;
which would have gone off as soon without it.

The remaining Pages of this Book are filled up with a Catalogue of Distempers
sent to him by Dr. Jones (who, because Colbatch has Imposed upon some part of
the Kingdom, would needs be seen in so Meritorious a Cause; but what will not
some Men do, when they value a private Design before Truth and Honesty,) and an
Account of the Use of Beverage at Sea; but this being not at all to the
purpose, but to fill up his Book.

I shall only further take notice, That Page the 86th. He says, he could never
hear, that the Peruvian Bark cured one Consumption, neither from Apothecarys
nor Phisicians, but I can tell him, that I knew more than one cured of a very
Violent Hectic Fever, only by the Use of that Bark, and Balsamic Syrup in
which it was given, and a Composition of Laudanum Pil. de Styrace, with Safron;
which the Learned Dr. Morton has in this Phythiologia.

Having hitherto travailed through Clouds, Ignorance and Absurdities, through
Contradictions, Mistakes and Forgetfulness, through an indigested Mass and a
confused Congeries of incoherent Rubbish; which, though it is nauseous, yet I
shall not think a little time ill spent, to undeceive the World, from such a
vain pretending Impostor; that knows nothing but Nonsense, and who, and whose
sole Support, is Impudence and Boldness. All that I have now to do is to examine
his Treatise of the Gout, and to show what Absurdities and Mistakes he is
guilty of there, and the ill Consequences of his Erroneous Practice.

AN EXAMINATION OF Mr. John Colbatch HIS TREATISE OF THE GOUT.

Wherein his Absurdities and False Opinions in Physic are truly Represented,
and fully Confuted;

AS ALSO, It is made evident, that the EXPERIMENT he there alleges, in
Vindication of his Hypothesis, is strong Proof against himself.

AND LASTLY, That his Practice is very Dangerous (though his ill grounded and
erroneous Hypothesis were allowed.)

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1699.

AN EXAMINATION OF Mr. John Colbatch HIS TREATISE Of the GOUT etc.
CHAP. I.
In which are contained Remarks on his Dedication and Preface with an
Application to Dr. Cole.
THE next and last Part of this nauseous Task, that I have undertaken, is, to
examine and lay open the Mistakes of his Book, concerning the Gout; but before I
set about that, there are two Things which lie in my way, and which I must take
notice of, viz. a Dedication and a Preface. The first thing I shall take a View
of, is, his Dedication where he begins and says;

My Love to Truth and the Good and Welfare of Mankind, have engaged me in
Publishing of the following Piece. But however specious this Pretense is, it
appears, that it is not for the Good nor Welfare of Mankind; but on the
contrary, will tend to their great Destruction and the Ruin of their
Constitutions; since it will easily appear, that it is made up of the same
Materials that the rest of his Books are, viz. notorious Mistakes and Blunders,
and such plain ones too, that one can scarce think, but that he was either
conscious of them or very ignorant; But as I would not have him thought to be
quite so ignorant; so I rather think, that he was conscious of the Falsness of
what he asserted, and only did it with a Design to get a Reputation amongst the
Injudicious, which he designed to impose upon; how much soever he exposed
himself, to the Ridicule and Contempt of the Judicious and Learned, by his weak
and inconsistent Falsities.

And truly, thus far he is in the right, It wants a much better Champion (though
he is pleased to call himself a Champion) to assert and defend a false Cause
against so many Potent Adversaries, who have Truth on their side; for were he
in the right, all that could be said of his Book is, that he is dully and
foolishly in the Right; but since it will presently appear, that he is so much
mistaken; he is much less to be valued, for daring and endeavoring to impose
on the World.

But the remaining Part of his Dedication, being most of it a Compliment to Dr.
Cole, which were it true would but sorrily recommend Dr. Cole to the Learned
World: I shall make Remarks on what follows, and then make my Apology to Dr.
Cole, for presuming to show the Absurdities of a Book, which the Author tells
the World, though I believe falsely, is agreeable with his Practice; The
Compliment bestowed on Dr. Cole, is,

I presume to prefix your Name before it, knowing, that if you but please to
espouse it, my Business is done and the Conquest gained: But I dare venture to
say, that though Dr. Cole should espouse his Cause, which I believe he will
not, the Victory would not be gained; since the Cause has neither Truth nor
Reason on it is side, and here I shall, for some Reasons, make a short Apology
to Dr, Cole.

An Apology to Dr. COLE.
Learned Sir,
IT is now almost a Year and half ago, since I was brought into your Company by
a very Ingenious and Experienced Surgeon, Mr. Geeke, living in
Salisbury-Court: And Sir, that Civility you were pleased to show me, and the
Freedom you took in Conversation with me, who was both a Stranger, and so much
Inferior to your self, both in Learning and Judgment, as well as Reputation,
gave me Reason to entertain such Thoughts of you, as, I believe, one of your
Years and Character might deserve: And truly I had such an Opinion of you, that
I could not then imagine, that you would ever be concerned in Patronizing of a
Book, that is not only False and Absurd, but Weak and Inconsistent, and not
only so, but rudely contradictory to all Learned Men, whose private Designs do
not bias their Sentiments; and what is more, without any show of Reason, or
appearance of Truth.

And I could rather have believed that you would not be concerned, in such a
Cause, for this Reason; because it is below any Man of Sense or Learning, to
appear at the Head of such a Cause, which is against both.

And I fain would have such Thoughts of you still, and conclude, that you only
did it to satisfy the Importunities of one, that had been formerly your
Apothecary in Worcester.

This Sir, is the Interpretation I would willingly put upon it, in Favor of
your Reputation, which must needs be lessened otherwise, especially amongst the
Learned, by Patronizing any thing which directly and manifestly is repugnant to
Learned Men and Truth; since the common Interest of the former, so far as it is
consistent with the latter, should incline you rather to defend both, than
Patronize their Opponents, viz. Ignorance and Falsity; upon any consideration
whatever.

This, I say, is the Interpretation I should put upon it (though if it were so,
it would not be blameless to oppose Truth and Learned Men, to serve a Friend or
your Self) were there not something in that Dedication, so plain and evident,
as to suggest some other Reason for your Patronage.

For Mr. Colbatch says, the Doctrine advanced in his Book, is not new to you, it
being what you long ago Practiced, even before he knew you, how he came to know
what your Practice was before he knew you, looks to me like Contradiction, and
I am inclined to believe he strained to say so much beyond Truth, only that
your Name might the better recommend his Book; so that it seems, if your Name
will serve him by adding Authority to his Book, he will tell an Untruth to serve
you; so that I am apt yet in Favor of your Reputation, to understand, that you
have permitted him to say, it is your Practice, to recommend it to the World,
that his Applause of you might go the farther.

And the Truth is this, either your Practice agrees with what he says, or you
can make no good Excuse for permitting him to say so.

And truly Sir, if what he says be not true, you would do your self Justice to tell
the World, in Vindication of your Judgment and Practice, that he has imposed
upon you; but if you allow what he has said, I am sorry the Absurdities and
Falsness of his Book obliges me to lay open the groundless and unreasonable
Assertions there laid down; because they are, though falsely said to be, so
agreeable with your Practice.

But in this particular, I must beg your Pardon, for as I shall never write for
the sake of Writing, but Truth; so I shall always endeavor to detect
Falsities, and vindicate the latter; And though I shall ever have all that
Respect for you, and all Learned Men, that I think due to Learning and
Qualities, so I must ever show as little Respect to those, that make it their
Business to run down Learning, Learned Men, and Truth, and without Reason, though
not some base and private End, for though I have Learning or Knowledge little
enough, to make me so zealous in their Defense, yet I shall ever think it worth
my while to Defend that, which I am willing to spend my time in the search of.

And were I in your Case, I should never condescend so far, as for Interest, to
Patronize that, which I could give no Reason for. But,

Sir, The simplicity and falsness of his other Books, I have already shown, and
when I have laid open this, I hope the World will see the shallowness of Mr.
Colbatch, and the Falsness of what he says, so plainly, that it will be no
longer misled by him, in a Matter that relates to the future Ruin of their
Constitutions.

And Sir, it, at the best, will be but little Credit to profess your self of
the same Opinion with Mr. Colbatch, an Apothecary, and much less is it
Honorable, to join in a Cause with such a one, that has neither Knowledge nor
Learning, but Arrogance and Boldness to support his Ignorance; and to forsake
the Cause of Truth and Learning to make a Party with such.

For all the Cry and Noise he can make of you, will tend less to your Honor,
than your Reputation amongst Learned Men; though it may help to captivate those
who are easily deceived.

But Sir, as I had formerly a great Opinion of your Merit; so I would fain
persuade my self still, that you only permit him to say, what he does, in
compliance with his too earnest Requests, than any Opinion you have of the
Truth of what he says, and therefore when I have run over his Preface without
any other Apologies, I shall proceed to detect his Errors, and show the
Falsness of what he there asserts, without entituling you to so weak and open
Errors; and profess my self as ever,

Your very Humble Servant R. Boulton.


The next thing that comes in view after his Dedication is his Preface; where
Page the 11th he says, The History of the Blood is to be fetched out of the
Fire, there being not one Page in it, that does not cost me near a days Labor
and Attendance at home in my Laboratory. That he fetches it out of the fire, I
am afraid is ominous; and that it will scarce be fit for any thing else, but to
return to that Element; for there is so little Analogy betwixt Chemical
Preparations, and the Parts of a Man's Body, that he will discover little to the
purpose there, to make the Use of them more intelligible; and sorry I am, he
takes so much Pains to no purpose.

Page the 12 He says, The following Piece is a Composition of Observations and
Speculations at Coffee-Houses, and such Places. A very fit Place for such
Compositions; for any thing may serve for a News-House, for want of better; but
it would have been better for him, to have considered it at home in his Study;
for I am afraid he drank his Coffee so hot, that he was scarce qualified for
what my Lord Bacon says, viz. That a cool Head is fittest for Consideration.

But how came he to take Observations of the Gout in Coffee-Houses? Those I
thought had been only to be made with his Patients; but perhaps he had as many
Patients there, of that Distemper, as any where else; and consequently it might
be as fit a Place to make Observations in.

But why not rather in his Study? I warrant he had taken notice, that the
Ingenious Sir Richard Blackmore had writ his Heroic Poems in Coffee-Houses, and
such like Places; and because he thought it sounded well to say so, he must
needs be a Wit too; nay in time he may do well; but I would have him think of
the old Saying, Nosce teipsum; for if he were sensible of his own Weakness, it
would be better for him to take a private Thought at it, if he knows how to
think.

In the same Page, He says, the Expense of his Experiments is so chargable,
that it would be fitter to be carried on at the Expense of the Nation. Nay, and
he states the Charge too, a Thousand Pound a Year would not be felt by the
Nation: O! what a mighty Projector? He has a Thought as extensive as the
Nation; it is a Wonder he is not sent for to Court, he would put them upon Ways and
Means with a Witness, if not to raise Money, yet to lay it out. But O! Vanity
of Vanities, verily every thing in Mr. John Colbatch is Vanity; No less than a
Thousand a Year must be spent upon Experiments, made by a Man, who has neither
Discretion nor Judgment to make them, nor Philosophy to direct him how to make,
and how to apply, them; Truly it is a Wonder, and a great one too, that the
Nation does not take Notice of him; for he would be a mighty Jest were he known
to the bottom.

Page xvth. He says, we do now grope most miserably in the dark, and it grieves
me to the very Soul, when I see People in Distress, and know not how to help
them. Poor Soul! But I hope he has a Cordial, and a most noble Acid by him, to
take a Lick of now and then, or else he might pine away; for he looks very
thin; and what must then become of all those Angelic Faces, that brought such a
mighty Qualm over his Stomach, in the Smallpox; Ah! Beauty and Distress are
two great Causes of his Grief; but I believe Money is the Root of all the Evil.
Really, if turning his Books would do good, poor Man! though he does not
understand them, he would never cease to do it; but it has proved in vain, and now
he confesses himself ignorant; and truly, I think not without reason, for
through all his Books, I have yet examined, he has groped so miserably in the
dark, that I had sometimes much ado to find where he was, or what Cloud he was
lost in, he was so far from Truth, and the Light which ought to be in his
Expressions; but (God be thanked) he is come to Moonshine at the last; but his
Misfortune is, that glimmering Light has led him into a Wilderness, where he is
no better then in the dark, having lost his Way in Experiments, that he
misapplies and makes bad Use of, because he does not understand them. But why
must it be, we grope in the dark? Is Mr. John Colbatch more then one, or does
he speak for his Companions? As for rational Physicians, they are not so
miserably in the dark, but that they have Reason for what they do, and know
what to do, though Distempers are sometimes so violent, as not to yield to proper
Medicines. But well may Apothecaries grope in the dark, when they pretend to
things they don't understand, since even in the Light they mistake their Way
most miserably.

Page xvi. He says, He has grounded his Hypothesis upon plain Experiments, and
he expects an Answer should be backed with Experiments. And so far I shall
satisfy his Curiosity by and by.

Page xvi. He says, he remembers he said in his Essay of Alkalies, he had not
had many Patients, and really the Number has not been much increased yet; what
little Reason then has he to write upon a Subject; where, were what he says
true, as to his Pretensions in the Cure of Distempers, general Rules are not to
be made by a particular Constitution; but since what he says is false, he had
much less Reason to be so bold; and it is but a sorry Recommendation to his
Book, that he grounded it upon such small Reason.

Page xvii. If People are once satisfied, that the Bloods abounding with
Alkalious Particles is the Cause of the Gout and other Distempers, it
necessarily follows, that Acids are only proper to correct the said Alkaline
Particles. And further, Page xviii. He says, I do assert, that the Cause of the
Gout is not the Bloods abounding with Acids but Alkalies. But in Opposition to
this Assertion, I say, I assert, that it is not from Alkalies, but Acids; and
this I shall prove, from what he has said of the Gout in his Book of Alkaly
and Acids; and because he desires that Arguments against this Book, should be
backed with Experiments, I shall bring as substantial Experiments against his
Hypothesis, as he has for it, to wit, the same, and shall show, that he has
so overlooked these Experiments, and understands them so little, that he has
drawn false Conclusions from them, and this I shall do, when I come to his Book
in its proper Place.

Page xix. He asks, if Acids abound in the Blood, how comes a Dead Body to
stink so soon; every Body knows that Acids preserve Animal Substances from
Stinking and Corruption. But this relating to the Cause of the Gout, I should
answer it when I come to that Cause, which he has laid down in his Book.

But for once I shall answer this Question, where it is asked; for that a dead
Body stinks so soon, only shows, that a Body in a Natural State abounds with
Alkalies; for a Body that is killed by some sudden Accident will stink, as soon
as one that dies by a Distemper; so that this proves nothing at all in Relation
to Distempers.

Page xxiij. He says, He has had wonderful and astonishing Success in the Cure
of Fevers. And truly, It is astonishment to me; for I wonder how any Body ever
escaped with their Lives, considering the Methods he takes in most Distempers;
but perhaps he used his Acids moderatly, so that the Mischief might be less
conspicuous.

Page xxv. He says, I must needs confess, that I have been the warmer in some
of my Expressions; that thereby I might exasperate those, who are my professed
Enemies, to convince me of my Errors; and if so, he did well; but he only says
this to suggest to his Friends; that they must take all that write against him
to be his Enemies, lest they should believe what they say; but I profess I am
so far from being exasperated toward him, or being his Enemy, that I write
only to detect such notorious Errors, and for Truth sake, and did it lie in my
Power to make Interest for him in his own Trade, I would do all I could to set
him in it, as far as he deserves it; for I am sorry to see him grope in the
Dark so miserably, in a way he has no Understanding to lead him; and were I
his Friend, I should cordially advise him, to follow Light rather than
Darkness, and like an honest Man to fall to his Trade again; now he has broke
that Impostume in his Head, that filled him so much with Vanity, and a
corrupted Mass of dismal dark Thoughts: But I am afraid he is not capable of
Advice, being so much blown up with Conceit, that though a Wise Man would hear
Instruction, yet a Fool hates Knowledge, as the Wise Man says.

Page xxxij. He says, If any one will by well grounded and substantial
Experiments, convince me of the contrary; instead of being angry with him, I
shall never cease to Love and Admire him; Indeed, I had once about a year and
half ago, at the College of Physcians, a little Discourse with him; and he was
so complacent as to tell a Friend of mine, he had a great Opinion of me, but
truly, as I believe, I neither did then, nor deserve it now, so I was sure I
had no such Opinion of him; for all that he said, was nothing, but what a
Parrot might have learnt by conversing with Dr. Cole: But whatsoever good
Opinion he had of me then, I dare say he will turn his Note now, though I shall
take the way to deserve his Love and Admiration, by showing him by substantial
Experiments, that he is mistaken.

CHAP. II.
Contains Remarks on his Introduction.
HAving gone through his Preface, and made my Remarks on what is Material, I
shall now proceed to his Introduction; where,

Page Is It. He says, This Book will fall into the Hands of many Ingenious
Gentlemen, who are not Physicians; for whom it will be very Natural to say, you
here pretend to advance a new Hypothesis, in opposition to almost all Mankind
-- and we therefore would be glad of some more familiar Demonstration, whereby
we might be satisfied without being put to much Trouble.

For the satisfaction of whom, I will here lay down a Method -- whereby every
Man is capable of being Judge, whether my Hypothesis be true or false.

Here I must needs say, he is in the right; for it will be very Natural for
them to say so; and I am glad he has the Luck to make use of so plain an
Experiment, which, without much trouble, will very easily let People see, that
his Hypothesis is false; and therefore for the Satisfaction of those Gentlemen,
I shall show, that this familiar Experiment will prove he is mistaken; and that
he has drawn false Conclusions from it, because he did not understand it;
which I shall make so plain, that every Man may be capable of being a Judge,
that what he asserts is false; for,

In the latter End of Page Is It. and Page 2d. He mentions his Experiment, viz.
It is well known that all Acids being poured upon Syrup of Violets, or into a
Solution of it, will immediately turn it from a Blew into a very Red Color;
and as the Acid is more or less strong; so will the Red Color be of a deeper
or paler Dye. On the other hand, all manifest Alkalies will turn Syrup of
Violets, or a Solution of it, from a Blew into a Green Color; from whence he
infers, that if the Serum of the Blood will alter the Color of Syrup of
Violets, from Blew to Red, it would then be plain, that the said Serum did
abound with Acid Particles. But if, on the otherhand, the Serum of the Blood be
mixed with Syrup of Violets, instead of changing it is Color from Blew to Red,
as Acids do: It changes it to Green, as Alkalies do, it must abound with
Alkalies: And this Experiment, He puts Page 3. into a Logical Form, to show how
much Logic he has got.

But to wave his Logic, and come to the Experiment; that all Acids will turn
Syrup of Violets Red is false; but I shall take notice of that further, when I
come to his 8th. Page, and here I shall show, that granting, that all Acids
will turn Syrup of Violets Red, and that all Alkalies will turn it Green, yet
this Experiment is not for him, but against him.

And though all Acids will not turn Syrup of Violets Red, yet it is true, a great
many will, and a great many Alkalies will turn it Green; this is all plain, and
I allow it to be true, I likewise grant, that the Serum of the Blood mixed with
Syrup of Violets will turn it Green, which I take to be a Sign, in his Sense,
that the Serum of the Blood abounds with Alkalies; so that I grant, both that
the Experiment is true, and that allowing the Doctrine of Acids and Alkalies, it
proves what he would have it, viz. That the Blood abounds with Alkaly. But for
all his Logic, it does not therefore follow, that Alkalies are the Cause of
Distempers; for the Blood of healthful People abounds with Alkalies, as appears
by the same Experiment; nay, the Blood of those that have no Distempers at all,
abounds with Alkalies, and will turn Syrup of Violets Green; so that to say
Alkalies are the Cause of Distempers, because the Blood abounds with them, is
to prove that healthful People abounds with Distempers, because, it appears by
this Experiment, that their Blood is full of Alkaly; but healthful People do
not abound with Distempers, Ergo Mr. John Colbatch is mistaken.

And this I hope is so plain, that any Gentleman may see he is mistaken; for
this is so far from showing, that Alkalies are the Cause of Distempers, that it
shows they cause Health; for healthful Peoples Serum abounds with Alkalies, and
turns Syrup of Violets Green; so that this Experiment does him no Service, that
he so much depends upon, but on the contrary, shows his Error.

And since he so much depends on this Experiment: And since this is to qualify
every Gentleman to judge; I have laid the Insufficiency of it open, so plainly,
that they may be certain, if what he says be true, there is no such thing as a
healthful Person; because every Bodies Blood abounds with Alkaly.

But to make it clearer to every Gentleman, that he not only alleges an
Experiment, that proves nothing for him; but also to make it appear, that he
does not understand what he is about, and that the Gout proceeds from Acids, we
are to consider, what is the Temper and Constitution of the Blood in a Natural
State, and how it differs from that in the Gout.

And first, in a Natural and Healthful State, if a Person be let Blood eight or
ten Ounces, any Gentleman may take notice, that, if it be of a right Healthful
Person, when that Blood has settled, and the Serum and Blood are parted, the
Blood will be pure and Red on the outward side, and if pressed with ones
Finger, or any thing else, will be moderately tender; and the Serum of the
Blood will turn Syrup of Violets Green.

Secondly, If one that has the Gout be permitted to Bleed; when that Blood is
separated, the Blood will be more Viscid, and the Serum will turn Syrup of
Violets Green.

So that the difference between the Healthful, and Distempered Blood, will
appear to any Gentleman to be this, viz. That the Distempered Blood is more
Viscid.

Again, Those Gentlemen may observe, that whereas the Healthful Blood is
nothing but pure thin Serum, and Blood; the Distempered Blood will have a thick
Viscid white Skin over it, which is part of the Distempered Matter.

But perhaps, Mr. Colbatch will misguide his Friends, in making this
Observation; wherefore I foretell them, that the Persons must not be let Blood,
after a full Meal, and that the Sick, or Healthful Person, must be let Bood at
an equal space of time, viz. 5 or 6 hours after a moderate Meal.

Now to any Ingenious Gentleman, it appearing thus by observing Nature, that
the Gouty Blood differs from Healthful thus, by such Viscidity of the Blood,
and some white Coagulated Matter, which swims upon it, we must consider, what
is the Cause of that Viscidity, and then we know, what is the Cause of the
Distemper.

The Cause then of this Viscidity, is either Acid or Alkaly, if it were Alkaly,
then the whole Serum of the Blood would be Viscid, like that white Viscid
Matter, that sticks to the Blood; because it appears, the whole Serum abounds
with Alkalies, by mixing it with Syrup of Violets; so that here, his own
Experiment confutes himself; but that the Cause of that Viscidity is Acid, is
plain, because drinking much Wine, which is Acid, or any thing which causes
Acidities in the Stomach, brings a Fit of the Gout on sooner, and more violent;
and any Gentleman may be further satisfied, that Acids are the Cause of
Coagulated Serum, because all Acids curdle and thicken Milk, which is much of
the same Nature with Chyle.

For a further Confirmation, that this Viscidity proceeds from Acids, I might
here bring all those Arguments, I used, in Answer to what he said of the Gout,
in his Book of Alkalies and Acids; but what he said there I have already
Answered `and I have here showed, that he has alleged this Experiment against
himself, and therefore I need not repeat what the Reader may easily turn to
before.

From what I have said here, it appears, that the Result is this, that in a
Natural State, the Blood abounds with Alkalies, that is, that it has a great
deal of Alkaly, and but a little Acid; so as to make it moderately tender; and
that in a Distempered State, it also abounds with Alkalies, but has too much
Acid mixed with it, so as to make it preternaturally Viscid; from what I have
said, it also appears, that the Experiment he has alleged, is only in
reference to the thin Serum, and makes no Proof of that Viscid Matter, which is
the Cause of the Distemper; and in both Natural and Preter-natural Blood, it
only proves, that there is no Cause of this Distemper perceivable in the Serum,
because it abounds with Alkalies; and consequently Alkalies cannot cause the
Distemper, because they cannot cause Coagulation, the Serum of the Blood being
full of Alkalies in a Healthful State; so that the Conclusion from the whole
is, that Acids, abounding too much, cause Coagulations, and consequently
thicken that Matter, which is the Cause of the Gout. So that, though there is
more Alkaly than Acid in Gouty Blood, and in Respect of the Acid, the Alkaly
abounds, yet since Alkaly in a Healthful Body does not cause the Gout, but it
is the superabundant Acid by Coagulating that Serum, and Blood, which causes
those ill Effects in the Gout; and because there is more Acid in Gouty than
Healthful Blood; the former in Respect of the latter, abounds with Acids, and
the Gout consequently must proceed, from too much Acid, which causes those
Coagulations.

Now from hence it appearing, that his Experiment is not only invalid to his
purpose, but very strong against it; and that he has drawn false Conclusions
from it; and that too, by an Observation, equally as easy as the Experiment, I
shall proceed to take Notice, how upon this fair Demonstration of his
Ignorance, he boldly values himself; and not only so, but imperiously, and with
Contempt, rails at the whole Learned World; as if he alone had gained the
Victory, when alas! It is he alone that gropes so miserably in the Dark. And
what Usage must this Man deserve? Who upon Grounds so slight, though true, and
much more since they are false, takes occasion to huff the whole World, and to
tell them, no Body is in the Right but himself.

But, that I may not pass too severe a Sentence upon him, I shall take notice,
how he has condemned the World without Grounds, and then sure it cannot be
thought unreasonable, that he should have as severe a Sentence, who has given
such just Reasons for it.

Page the 3. He says, Every Gentleman is able to Reason thus with himself, my
Physician tells me my Blood abounds with Acids, and upon that score gives me
Alkalies to Mortify and Correct those Acids in my Blood; But if my Physician
should be mistaken and instead of Acids my Blood abounds with Alkalious
Particles, his giving me Alkalies must increase the Matter of my Distemper,
etc. -- therefore since I have so fair an opportunity put into my Hands, and by
so easy an Experiment am capable of being Judge my self, what Particles my
Blood abounds with, my own Eyes shall be the Judge whether Acids or Alkalies
are to be blamed -- if the Blood abounds with Acids, he ought to be kicked out
of the Commonwealth, for endeavoring to impose upon Mankind. This is the
Sentence he thinks good enough for himself, if it could be proved, that he was
mistaken; I having therefore proved, that he is in an Error, may venture to
enlarge a little, and say, he does not only deserve to be kicked out of a
Commonwealth, but out of all Ingenious Men's Company; and this Paragraph can no
otherwise be answered than thus,

Every Gentleman is able to Reason with himself, Mr. John Colbatch tells me the
Cause of my Distemper is Alkalies, and upon that score gives me Acids, to
Mortify and Correct those Alkalies in the Blood: But if Mr. John Colbatch
should be mistaken; and instead of Alkalies, the Cause of my Distemper should
be Acids, his giving me Acids, must increase the Matter of my Distemper, --
therefore I have so fair an Opportunity given me, to see the Insufficiency of
this Experiment by an easy Observation, am capable of being a Judge my self,
and my own Eyes shall be the Judges, whether Acids be not the Cause of my
Distemper, and truly it so plainly appears, that Mr. John Colbatch is mistaken,
and that my Distemper proceeds from Acids, that Mr. John Colbatch deserves to
be kicked out of the Commonwealth, for endeavoring to impose upon Mankind.

Page. 4. He says, He hopes from Gentlemen he shall have Justice, though
Physicians have endeavored to expose him. As for Physicians, they surely have
Reason to expose him, for a vain Pretender, since he has given such pregnant
Proof of it, and as for Gentlemen, I have made it plain enough to them, by an
Observation as easy as they can wish, that he has no worse Usage than he
really deserves, and then what he pronounces is his own Merit.

And now the Reason is plain, why Physicians have endeavored to expose him, to
wit, because he has endeavored to expose Mankind, when himself alone deserves
it.

Page the 6th. He goes on to value himself upon this Experiment, and says, an
Ounce or two of Blood is to be spared in any Case, and pray let People see with
what Reason Alkalies have been hitherto given in Small Pox, Rheumatism, etc. It
will plainly appear by this Experiment, that the Blood of such Persons abounds
with Alkalies, and if so, why should we crowd in more Alkalies, unless it were
to prolong the Distemper, or to increase the Number of Fees. All that I need to
say to this is, since I have manifestly made it appear, that Acid is the Cause
of those Distempers, and that the Serum of healthful Peoples Blood will turn
Syrop of Violets green, and that the only observable Difference, betwixt
Distempered Blood and Healthful Blood, is, that the Distempered Blood, as well
as some Part of the Serum, is Viscid, and that Viscidity proceeds from Acids;
and since an Ounce or two of Blood is so easily spared, in those Cases, Pray
let People see, with what great Reason Alkalies have been given, and with what
danger Acids are given; for in his Chapter of the Gout, I have showed, that
since the Blood in a Natural state abounds with Alkalies, even what he
confesses about Drinking of white Wine, which is an Acid, proves, that the more
Acids we take, the more that Alkalious Serum will be coagulated, and
consequently the Distemper increased, and it plainly appears by the Experiment
he alleges, and the Observation I have laid down, to satisfy Ingenious
Gentlemen, that Acid is the Cause of Distempers; and since it is so plain, why
should Mr. Colbatch crowd in more Acids, unless it were to prolong the
Distemper, to increase the Number of Fees.

He goes on, People must long since have known the Truth of this Hypothesis, or
they must not, if they have not known it, it is plain they have groped in the
Dark, and they have cured Diseases with as much Certainty as a Blind Man can
catch a Hare; if they have known it before, then the giving of Alkalies at the
rate that has been done is a plain Argument against them, that they have not
acted like honest Men: but I dare acquit them from this Charge, I do believe
they have sworn in Verbo Magistri. Wonderful! what close arguing and what
sensible Expressions of a blind Man, and groping in the Dark; this groping in
the Dark is such a familiar Expression with him, that one would think he were
used to nothing else, and the Absurdities his whose Books are made up of,
prove, he is the only Blind Man in the Proverb, or has not Acted like an
honest Man; but though he were not an honest Man, he is a mighty Piece of a
Scholar, and has put in two Latin words here, In verbo Magistri, to show, that
either he did not go to School long enough, or has forgot what he learnt
there; for that Piece of a Verse in Juvenal, that he has catched by groping in
the Dark is not in verbo Magistri, but in verba Magistri; and indeed, the Sense
of in verba Magistri, is so much different from in verbo Magistri, that it is
plain he was groping in the Dark most miserably, when he wrote it; for first,
it shows, he knew not what he wrote, or secondly, that he did not understand
it, for what greater Mark of his Ignorance, than instead of saying, they were
sworn to maintain the Words of their Master, he says, they were Sworn, in
maintaining the Words of their Master, as if to defend the Words of their
Master, were to take an Oath.

He says further, And because a few Book Learned Gentlemen, have Dreamed, that
the Bloods abounding with Acids, has been the Cause of Diseases, therefore
right or wrong it must be so, though it be contrary to the most obvious and plain
Experiments.

What a Block-head is this, to tell all Learned and Ingenious Men, they have
Dreamed, what has been confirmed and certified by all the Experience of
learned Practioners in Physic; but he would have those Gentlemen, that he
writes thus plain for, to think, that is, only because Physicians are his
Enemies; but I ask those Ingenious Gentlemen, that have been so imposed upon,
whether they think, Men that writ their Observations 30, or 40 years ago, and
ever since, could write what they did, in opposition to him, before he made his
Pretenees, and though all Physicians now were his Enemies, those were not; so
that I would have Gentlemen consider, that Physicians, now in Opposition to
him, only confirm by daily Experience, what was the Universal Observation of
all Learned Men, before his time; and as for his most obvious Experiment, I
have showed, that it does him no Service at all, but is against him; so that we
have Reason to think, he alone has Dreamed, being in the Dark, for want of Book
Learning.

He goes on; When I appeal to the Analizing of the Blood by the Fire, my Appeal
is then made to Physicians only, and this I have already done, but they have
refused to do me Justice. As to his Appeal to Physicians, I have, where he has
made it, sufficiently answered it, and proved, that his Analizing the Blood, as
he calls it, will do him little Service; but that Physicians may do him no
Injustice, I shall refer Ingenious Gentlemen to a Book of the most famous and
ingenious Mr. R. Boil, called his Skeptical Chemist, which was writ before
his, and which will satisfy them, that the Blood is turned into Substances,
very much different from any thing observable in the Blood, by Chemical
Analize; and that Author, who had such good Designs in all his Writings, cannot
be called his Enemy (nor Truths,) having writ before him.

Page the 6th. He says, Now since Justice has been refused me by my Brethren,
they cannot be angry with me for making my Appeal to those whose Interest it is
to do Justice to me, and encourage me in my Honest Undertakings, I really don't
see any Reason his Brethren have to envy him, nor to be angry with him, but
whom does he call his Brethren? The Apothecaries? Physicians are not to be
ranked with Mr. Colbatch yet, except those as Ignorant as himself: But as for
those Gentlemen, who value the World to come, above this, and the Happiness of
a better Life, above Mortality, their Interest it undoubtedly is, to encourage
him, by all means; I shall not envy their Happiness in another World, but may
the Number of the Elect be soon accomplished! but those that have a mind to
live, deserve to give him no other Encouragement, but what Substantial
Shoo-leather will, according to his own Sentence, Page the Fourth, in kicking
him out of the Commonwealth.

In the same Page he says, None can blame him for writing in that warm Manner
he has done; because he has not reserved one Secret to himself. But for good
Reason, because there is not one thing worth Reserving; but he is more to be
blamed for his warm Writing, except he had made some Secret known, that would
have shown he had Reason, sawcily to contradict all Mankind.

But in the latter End of his Page he complains, He has been too much
meal-mouthed, and too modest. His Modesty indeed is of a new kind, and very
remarkable; and as for his meal mouth, I cannot well interpret it, except his
disrespectful Behavior toward his Betters, be the Meal, that fouled it.

Page 7. He says, The following Treatise of the Gout is built upon my
Hypothesis of Alkalies and Acids, upon which Score, I thought it necessary by
way of Introduction to Publish the foregoing easy Experiment, that thereby the
whole World might be satisfied of the Truth or Falsehood of his Hypothesis.

Having therefore showed, that his Hypothesis of Alkaly and Acid is False, and
Incoherent, his Treatise must need be so too; his easy Experiment, together
with my easy Observation, showing that his Hypothesis is Erroneous; so that, I
might save my self the Trouble of a further Examination, were it not for the
sake of Ingenious Gentlemen, who are not competent Judges.

Page the 8th. He says, Were there any one Acid that would turn a Solution of
Syrup of Violets from a Blew Color to that of Redness, etc. I should not
insist so much upon the Experiment, as I have done. To what purpose he has
insisted upon the Experiment, I have already shown, but that he may insist upon
it the less in his own Thoughts, I shall instance one Acid, that turns Syrup of
Violets Green, as well as Arsenick, his exalted Alkaly, as he calls it, which
is Mercurius Sublimat. but perhaps he will call it an Alkaly; and therefore I
shall satisfy Ingenious Gentlemen, if two Witnesses against one Man will be
Evidence.

The Ingenious Sir John Floyer, in the Second Part of his (...), or Touch Stone
of Medicines, Page 232. Has this, Mercury Sublimate is Corrosive by a
particular Texture, made by the Particles of Quicksilver, dissolved by an Acid:
and this vomits, corrodes and produces Convulsions; but this going into the
Blood coagulates it, and produces Salivation: This Acid is absorbed by Fixed
and Volatile Salts, and so the Corrosive Texture is destroyed.

And Page the 19th before, Sublimate has the Acid of Spirit of Salt joined with
it by Sublimation; and a little after he says, it is a kind of Vitriol. And,

What he says is confirmed by the Famous Etmuller, who Schroderi Dilucidati
Mineralogia Page 260. says, Mercurius Snblimatus quocunque modo preparatus,
nihil est aliud nisi Mercur, qui se conjunxit, cum (...)ibus Corrosivis
admistis, and beneficio (...) fortioris secum sublimavit, adeo utut etiam
(...)ia sint fixa and Mercur. Volatilis nihilominus Acida (...)ia fortiter
aggrediuntur Mercurium and cum eodem se uniunt, etc. And just after he says, Et
quidem utut Mercur. sublimatus fiat cum (...) communi and Nitro, nihilominus
nihil secum in Sublimatione assumit, quam (...) commune. From whence it
sufficiently appears, that Sublimate is, for the most Part, an Acid, most of
the Ingredients which are used in it is Preparation being Preparations of the
same Vitriolated Acids, as Mr. Colbatch uses in the Cure of Distempers.

But undoubtedly, he will tell them, they are mistaken, Nobody can see besides
himself: But these Men's Opinions will be taken before his, since he cannot at
all pretend, they were his Enemies, both their Books being wrote before his
Time.

Page the 8th, and 9th. He says, Physicians he owns have been able to Cure some
few Diseases, but how they have done it, themselves could never tell; they,
without inquiring nicely into the Natures of them, or being at the trouble of
Analizing, have given Steel, Antimony, etc. -- By means of which they have
Cured several Diseases, but they have given them as Alkalies, when they will
appear to an Inquisitive Person to be Acids, etc. Now their giving of these
Things has stood them in some stead, and cured many Distempers by a way they
were ignorant of. How unreasonably he has changed the Names of these
Medicines, I have already shown, and therefore I shall not repeat it again, I
shall only here take notice, how he contradicts himself, no less then three
times in one Page. For, First, He says, they have been able indeed to cure a
few Distempers: And then they have cured several Distempers; and last of all, a
many Distempers; and those Distempers, he says, they have cured no Body knows
how; because they were not at the trouble of Analizing: but if he were not
forgetful, he would scarce think himself the only Chemist in the World; for
would he allow any Body a small share of Knowledge, besides himself, he would
know, that much more Pains has been taken by wise and able Chemists, Men that
knew better how to make Observations, than he does, who wants Natural
Philosophy to direct him, as well as Judgment and Skill; and there are now Men
so qualified. And though Chemistry be of great Use in Philosophy, as well as
Physic, when cultivated by Ingenious Men, yet notwithstanding all the Pains
they had taken, it proved in vain, to enable them the better to discover the
Principles, or rather Texture and Complexion of those several Humors in a Man's
Body; and their Insufficiency, the famous Mr. Robert Boil has sufficiently,
showed; and therefore we may well think, since we have Reason, his Pains will
prove to no more purpose; for let him spend more time than he has, or never so
long; it will still be in Vain; for Bodies loose their former Complexion, when
Chymically dissolved, every Particle, being modified anew. But it is no
Disparagement to Chemistry* neither is it the less valuable, because it will
not discover ultra terminos, and beyond it is Bounds, no more than a Plow,
because it is of no use at Sea.

But he says, Physicians have cured some Distempers they know not how. Here I
shall take Occasion, to propose one thing to the Consideration of those Honest
Gentlemen, who have had the ill Fortune to be deluded by him; they being
induced to think, he has Skill and Ingenuity, because some People recover,
whom he misuses, viz. whether (since I showed he is mistaken in all he has
asserted,) they may not reasonably conclude he cured them he knew not how? I,
for my own Part, am sure he knew not how; but as for those Ingenious Gentlemen,
I leave it to their own consideration; whether one Man may not sooner be
mistaken, than one Thousand, who agree in the same Opinion, which Number, though
it be not in London, yet it is double in Europe, whose Practice agree in
Success and Reason, in Opposition to his, and two or three Adherents.

Page 11. He says, I have all this while been talking as a Physician, but not
as a Naturalist; for though I account for the Cause and Cure of Distempers from
Alkalies and Acids, yet I don't pretend to account for all the Phenomenon of
Nature, from those two Principles, those there have been those that have
undertaken so to do, but I conceive they have been very much mistaken. Truly,
many have undertaken Things, that they have been much mistaken in; but for one
that has undertaken no more than he has done, to be so grandly mistaken, is a
sign of his great Weakness: And he has all this while, I rather think, been
talking as a Naturalist, than a Physician; a Naturalist I mean, because what he
says looks, as if it came from one that knew no more of what he was about, than
what he had from the glimmering false Light of a dull Nature.

He goes on; There are many Phenomenon in Natural Bodies, that are not to be
accounted for by the Mutual Conflict of those two Principles (if I may so call
them) such as Motion and Rest, Light and Darkness, Magnetism or the Loadstone,
and a great many others too many here to insert. Here he is extraordinary
modest, and having groped in the Dark so far, is loath to make any further
Progress in it. But what need was there here for him, after a long tedious
Blunder, about the Cause of the Gout, to give a Hint at these Phenomenon
belonging to Natural Philosophy, which he understands nothing of; but by his
smattering of Philosophy, he would have People think, he knows something of it:
This puts me in mind of a Dunghill Cock, that vapors and struts over a Heap of
Rubbish, as if he were Master Controuler of all his little Head can take a View
of; and from thence take a flight to some gilded Pinnacle, where with a mighty
Crow, he seems to proclaim himself Master of that noble Edifice; when alas! He
takes Possession of no more, than he covers with his Claws; and this Instance,
I think, as truly represents Mr. Colbatch, as a Picture can represent a Man in
his absence, for as the Cock values himself upon his Dunghill, so does he upon
his Mistakes and Blunders; and knows less in Philosophy, than the Cock does of
the Pinnacle.

Page the 12th and 13th are filled up with a Letter from Dr. Jones: I shall
take no Notice of the Letter, since it is only a Story, wherein he may affirm
what Falsities he pleases, but only the Conclusion of it, which shows Dr. Jones
his Design in it, viz. Make what use you please of this Catalogue to Print or
what you will, it is intended for your Service. For since he wrote it, only
with a Design to serve the Eternal Mr. Colbatch, no doubt, but he would strain
to deserve a Compliment from Mr. Colbatch again; but I am sorry Dr. Jones wants
Mr. Colbatch's good Word, which will go but a little Way.

CHAP. III.
An Examination of his first Chapter.
I Have now sufficiently answered his Introduction, and showed that his
Experiments and my Observation, make the Foundation he has built this Book
upon, void; and that he is but mistaken: I now proceed to his Book, and shall
examine what he has said as to the Cause of this Distemper, in his first
Chapter.

Page the 15th. He says, The Gout is called Articularis Morbus, because it
generally affects some of the Joints, and according to the Name of the Joint
affected, it has a different Denomination, when it affects the Hand or
Fingers, it is called Chiragra, when it affects the Hip Sciatia, when the Feet
Podagra, etc. Now if according to the different Denomination of the Gout, it
affects a different Joint, and takes it is Name from that; I would know whether
there be a Joint called the Hand, whether there be a Joint called the Hip, or
another Joint called a Foot; if there be not, then Mr. Colbatch has started in
a wrong Way, and the Distemper has not it is Denomination from the Name of a
Joint affected, but from the Parts affected, for Podagra signifies the Gout in
the Foot, where there is no Joint called by that Name, but in which are
contained a great many Joints; and likewise in the Hands, there is no Joint
called Chiragra, but that Part contains in it a great many Joints; and the Gout
is not called Morbus Articularis, because one Particular Joint is affected, but
because it is circa Articulos, so that the first thing he says, in this
Elaborate Piece, is, a Piece full of Mistakes; and truly I think very ominous,
for as the Gout is an Index of it self, so I think this is an Index of the
whole Work, for to start in a wrong Road, is scarce the way to the Journeys End.

In the same Page He says, It sometimes exercises it self with so much Cruelty
and Tyranny, that those that are troubled with it, are almost ready to lay
Violent Hands upon themselves. O Tyrant! O Cruelty! That would make Men murder
themselves for nothing but Pain: But is not this a strange Imposition and
Charge laid to ingenious Gentlemen, to tell them, they are ready to murder
themselves; but for this Fault, if they can pardon him, I can.

Page the 16. The Gout may be divided into two Species, viz. Hereditary and
Adventitious. What a Judicious Division of the Gout is this, but he stoped too
soon, for each of those Species are again divided into Species of another Rank;
as Podagra, Chiragra, etc. But a Man that gropes in the Dark, may well be
afraid of stepping too far.

Page the 16. The Gout is an Index of it self; and no one that feels the Pain,
but is capable of discerning the difference between it and all other Pains. But
this is false, for one that has the Pain of the Gout, no more knows what other
Pain is, than one that is acquainted with England and not France, knows France;
for to distinguish the Pain of the Gout, from another Pain, the same Person
must have that Pain too; for how does a Man in a Gouty Fit know, what Pain it
would be to have his Leg cut off, or does a Child that has cut his Finger,
know what Pain it would be to have the Gout; one that never had the Tooth-ake,
wonders, it can be so violent, and never knows, till he has had it, what Reason
others had to complain.

Page 16. The Pain of the Gout being a deep distending, piercing, throbbing,
continual, bitter Pain. This is a Description of Pain, as suitable in the
Cramp, as Gout; for I have heard one, that I am very well accquainted with,
make it just such a Complaint; but why should Mr. Colbatch call Pain bitter?
Except he is resolved to agree with old Women, in calling Pain a Taste.

Page 16. I do apprehend the Parts most immediately affected to be the
Glandules immediately joining to the Periostium. But I apprehend he is much
mistaken; for the Glandules are neither sensible, nor are they capable of
swelling on a sudden, so as to distend the parts to that degree, as they are in
the Gout; but I here refer the Reader to what the Ingenious Dr. Havers and
others have said on this Subject. After this,

Page 17. He says, Father Malbranch tells us, that our Senses are given us to
guard our selves from Injuries, and that they never fail to answer the end for
which they were given us; they are never guilty of deceiving us. This
Quotation, I suppose, is only to let us know, that he has seen Malbranch, and
must needs have a scrap out of him, though nothing to his Purpose, for what
signifies it to tell People, to what end their Senses were given them, when he
is only endeavoring to discover what Pain is; but he and his Father are here
for once mistaken; for they fail to guard us from Injuries, and very often
deceive us: they fail to guard us from Injuries, so much, that they are the
only Causes, that make Things Injuries, that otherwise would not be offensive,
as every small Blow or bitter Taste, every terrible Sound, and threatening Word;
it is true, our Senses are the only things, that make us capable of Pleasure,
yet are those the Instruments, which lay us open to as many Injuries; and that
they are guilty of deceiving us, is plain, since we have such an Instance in
himself.

Page 17th. He goes on; As for Instance our Taste never tells us, that bitter
is sweet, or sweet bitter, our smells never fail of distinguishing heat from
cold, and cold from heat, and so on: and all these proceed from a Placid
Vellication of the Membranes. Pain proceeds from a Contraction of the fibers,
and Pleasure from a pacid Relaxation of them. What he means by a placid
Vellication, and a placid Relaxation, I believe is scarce common Sense; but I
cannot but take notice here, how prettily and considerately Father Malbranch
presides his Contradiction: for, first, He says Pleasure and Pain proceed from
a Placid Vellication of the Membranes; and then, that Pain is a Contraction,
and Pleasure a Pacid Relaxation; but the Pain that Cold causes, can scarce be a
Vellication and a Contraction too, there being as much Difference betwixt
stretching of a Rope, and twisting of it, when they make them, as there is
betwixt hanging and not hanging; whether he deserves it or not.

The latter End of the 17 and the beginning of the 18. He says; And I do lay it
down as a possitive Assertion, that all Pain is caused by a Stagnation of the
Juices, which causes a Compression of the Membranes: But here He is positive a
little too soon, for though it were granted, that there were a Stagnation of the
Juices, yet Pain is not caused by a Compression of the Membranes, but by
Preternaturally affecting that which is the Sensitive Being, which Membranes by
no means are; but since he does lay it down as a positive Assertion, that all
Pain is caused by a Stagnation of the Juices; I (that being granted) lay it
down as another Assertion, that were there Reason to draw such a Conclusion
from the Pain of the Gout proceeds from Acids; for since it is the Nature of
Acids to thicken the Blood, and it is Serum, and since the more Acid it is, the
thicker it will be, and since Acid will thicken the Serum, and Alkalies will
not; and again, since Coagulation make the Serum subject to obstruct, it must
needs follow, that those Obstructions in the Gout proceed from Acids; but
because he appeals to ingenious Gentlemen, I shall give an Instance, that Acids
thicken the Serum, and consequently cause Obstructions; and so pain, that those
ingenious Gentlemen may see the Truth of it; and because he shall have no way
to persuade Gentlemen, that the Instance is not true, I desire them for their
own satisfaction to look back to the first Page of his Introduction, where they
have his own Confession, that Niter is an Acid; now almost any Gentlemen (and I
dare Appeal to them;) knows, that upon taking cold, some Peoples Heads will be
stuffed with Phlegm, or else they will spit a great deal of Phlegm; which
shows, that Acids cause the Serum of the Blood to thicken, and consequently
obstruct, and sometimes cause Pain in the Head; but some People are not subject
to spit Phlegm, nor to the Pain of the Head, and for those Gentlemen, I have
another Instance, viz. that the Niter of the Air thickens most Liquids with
which it is mixed, as Blood, etc. And in Frosty Weather, when it is, Violent
enough, even Milk and Water will be Frozen which is a fort of Coagulation by a
Mixture of Acids.

And here, I shall let all ingenious Gentlemen, nay and all knowing Women,
understand, that Acid causes most Distempers; for any Observing Woman out-does
Mr. Colbatch so far, that she knows taking cold (which is caused by Acid
Nitrous Particles) causes People to fall into Rheumatisms, etc. And they know
likewise, that taking cold, often occasions Stitches up and down in the Body,
in which there is Pain; and consequently (by Mr. Colbatch) confessed to proceed
from Obstructions.

And that they may know Alkalies do not cause Obstructions, they must remember,
that the Serum of the Blood in Healthful People turns Syrup of Violets Green,
and consequently according to Mr. Colbatch, abounds with Alkalies, yet they are
not troubled with Pain or Obstructions; in the Pleurisy it is also observed,
that their Blood abounds with a siezy Gelly; which Distemper happens often upon
taking great Colds; the Blood being thickened by the Acid Nitrous Particles of
the Air: and these Observations I have laid down; because they are suited to
the Apprehensions of ingenious Gentlemen, and discerning Women who are imposed
upon by him.

And I have another plain Observation, that will satisfy all Observing Women,
that Acids cause Distempers; for nothing is more common, than that taking cold
stops Women's Courses, the Acid Particles of the Air coagulating their Blood,
and causing Obstructions, and nothing is more common, that that Children and
young Women drive themselves into the Green Sickness, by eating Fruit, which
Mr. Colbatch in his Appendix of Alkaly and Acid, owns are Acids; so that it
appears very plainly to all ingenious People, that are not Physicians, that all
Pain and Obstructions proceed from Acids, and not Alkalies; and consequently
not only the Gout, but Rheumatisms, Scurvy, Small Pox, etc. proceed from Acid;
and consequently are to be cured with Alkalies; so that all that he has said,
or has to say, about the Use of Acids must be false and dangerous; and I need
not go any further in the Proof of it, for all ingenious People are already
satisfied; only for the Authors sake, I shall show him what little Reason he
has to be so proud of himself; for I would fain have him humble, because
Humility may correct a Multitude of Sins, and God knows how much need he has
of it, who alone can tell.

Quot -- aegros Autumno occiderit uno, Or in other Words, how many such a one,
as Mr. Coblatch, has sent to their long Home; but truly, Mankind takes less
Notice of it, because, as he says, Page 26. of this Treatise.

Quoniam successus ejus Sol videt; Errores autem tellus opperiret. In other
Words, those he has not killed, cry him up, but those he has overcharged with
most noble Acids, lie silent in the Grave.

Page the 19th. He says, The Gout may in general be defined to be a Pain of the
Joints and Parts adjacent, occasioned from an extravasated Alkaline Humor,
which irritates the Membranes of the Joints and Parts adjacent. A very Learned
Definition of the Gout! How can it properly be called a Pain of the Joints,
when it is an Irritation only of the Membranes of the Joints, except a Membrane
were a Joint; but he might as well call an Acron an Axle Tree. But the Gout he
says is nothing but a Pain; he forgets how the Parts adjacent are swelled, and
that an Obstruction accompanyes it: But no wonder! when such a short sighted
Man turns Definition maker, that his Definitions are so defective.

But further He says, The Pain is occasioned from an extravasated Alkaline
Humor, which irritates the Membranes of the Joints. But truly he is to be
excused, he only contradicts himself; either he knows not how, or he forgets
himself; for the Page before he said, He laid it down as a positive Assertion,
that all Pain is caused by a Stagnation of the Juices; which causes a
Compression of the Membranes. But supposing it were, as he here says, an
Irritation of the Membranes, and the first Account he gave were false, yet an
Alkalizated Humor, such as the Serum of the Blood, would be incapable of
causing Pain; if it were not, Healthful People would never be without Pain; but
here I will appeal to those Ingenious Gentlemen, that he has so often made his
Appeal to, and shall instance another easy Observation, whereby they may be
satisfied, that an Acid Juice is capable of causing very violent Pains; whereas
Alkalizated Humors are not at all subject to irritate the Membranes, and to
this end, let them take a little Vinegar, and wash but a cut Finger with it, so
that the sensible Membranes may be irritated by it, and it will cause a most
violent Heat and Pain, yet it tastes cool on the Tongue; from whence we may
gather, that an Acid sharp Humor, when extravased so as to fall upon the
sensible Membranes* will cause a violent Heat and Pain in the Gout; this is a
very plain and obvious Experiment, and any Body may be assured of the Truth of
it very easily.

Now as this proves, that Acids will cause Pain and Heat, and consequently
inflame; so if those ingenious Gentlemen will but take a little Vinegar, and
put an Alkaly into it, as Chalk or Crab's-eyes, and put that Alkalizated Vinegar
upon a cut Finger, they will find, that it will not cause much Pain; but they
must be sure to put none of the Powder upon the Wound along with it; and this
shows not only that an Alkalizated Humor will cause less Pain, than an Acid;
but also, that Alkalies will abate the pain of the Gout; for if Alkalies take
ocff the sharpness of Vinegar, why will they not from those Humors, that
corrode the Membrances in the Gout?

And here I would desire ingenious Gentlemen to taste Vinegar, and then that,
into which they put Chalk; and they will plainly perceive the good Effects of
Alkalies in correcting sharp and irritating Humors.

Page the 20th. He says, Now Acids being the only things that hinder
Fermentations and prevent Fevers, it is impossible they should be in the Fault,
but Alkalies exciting Fermentations, and by consequence causing Fevers, they
are necessarily here to be blamed, and were timely Care taken to correct the
Luxuriant Alkalious Particles, I am sure it would be no difficult Matter to
prevent a Fit. But what is curing these Luxuriant Particles in Fevers to the
Gout, he might as well say, if Dogs were kept from pulling the Hedges in Pieces
on the Highway; there would not be such Wars in the World, nor Countries
spoiled and plundered; for Fevers and Gout, ingenious Gentlemen know, are two
different things; and he might as rationally conclude, that Killing a Mouse
would Kill a Man; as that curing a Fever would prevent the Gout.

The remaining Part of the 20 Page, the 21, 22, and Part of the 23, are taken
up with a Description of the Manner of this Distemper's Invasion, transcribed
from Dr. Sydenham, amongst which, some simple Sentences of his own are
interspersed, which already have been sufficiently answered. In the latter Part
of that Page, He says; There are several Things occur in order to this
Distemper. But what he calls Things; he should have called accessory Causes; in
the delivering of which I shall proceed to observe his Dexterity, and then make
Remarks upon the whole collectively.

Page the 24. the first of the Things, as he calls them, is, Too moist a State
of Air, which hinders free Transpiration; by which Means the Excrementitious
Alkaline Particles, which should be thrown out by the Cutaneous Pores, are
retained, and the Quantity of Excrementitious Alkaly, which is thrown out that
way, those Passages being free, is not inconsiderable; which Particles being
retained in the Blood do greatly contribute toward the Raising of this Unruly
Devil, which the wisest of Physicians hitherto have not been able to lay, which
has been the occasion of that Saying.

Solvere Nodosam nescit Medicina Podagram. But here I must tell him, that if
the Moistness of the Air only produced such ill Consequences, by preventing
Transpiration; all People would be equally prejudiced by it, and we should as
soon see poor People troubled with it, who labor continually in moist fenny
Countries; and how dangerous would it be, for poor Country Men to encompass
their Ground with Ditches, if the Dampness and Moisture that affects their
Bodies there, should throw them into the Gout by stopping Transpiration, and
hindering Nature from throwing off Excrementitious Alkaline Particles; but were
stopping Transpiration all the Prejudice moist Air could do, that would be
easily helped another way; for as it is observed by the Famous Dr. Lower, that
which supplies Transpiration in Bed, runs off by Urin, when we are out of Bed;
so although in moist Weather Transpiration should be stopped, more then in dry
Weather, it would do them no harm; because the less runs off by Transpiration,
the more does by Urine, and a converso.

But the Reason, why moist Air is so prejudicial, is, because the Circumference
of our Body is so Relaxed by that Moisture, as to leave the Pores open; which
by admitting too much Niter into the Mass of Blood, (the Natural Heat of our
Bodies being depressed) Crudities are bred in the second Concoction, as the
Ancients called it; which External Accessory Cause, concurring with a Natural
Predisposition, and the Acid Particles of the Air joined with those Predisposed
Humors, cause such Coagulations, as the Obstructions in the Parts affected (in
this Distemper) are accompanied with; so that besides the Moisture of the Air,
there is a Natural inclination and predisposition in our Bodies, which makes
that Moister Air prejudicial to Gouty People, the Acid Coagulating their Blood,
and disposing them to Crudities; and not, because insensible Transpiration is
stopped.

But the wonderful Discoveries of this Mr. Colbatch are not a little to be
Admired! For he is the first Man that ever perceived the Devil to appear in the
shape of the Gout; I heard indeed when I was a Boy, that the Devil was to be
distinguished from a Man by a great Cloven Foot, but I could never have thought
that Mr. Colbatch would have compared his Gouty Patients, to so many Devils,
except he had Dreamed he was a Physician to such, before he wrote this Page in
his Book.

He says, The Wisest Magicians being not able to cure the Gout was the occasion
of that Saying.

Solvere Nodosam nescit Medicina Podagram. But why they should say Physicians
cannot Cure the Gout, because Magicians cannot, I see not any Reason, except a
Physician and a Magician are equally the same.

Page 23. But this is one of those Devils which are not to be cast out, but by
Prayer and Fasting, that is Nature her self, without help, is not able to get
the Mastery of it, to rid her self from it. It seems it is a Devil in earnest,
and truly I believe they are worse than Possessed, that make Use of such a
Physician; but he has too soon concluded, that this kind is to be cured by
Prayer and Fasting, I scarce think he ever cured any by such Prescriptions: And
I cannot but admire, what a pretty sort of a Divine he would have made, who
has such an excellent knack at interpreting Scripture; who calls Prayer and
Fasting. Nature.

Page 24. Nature has hitherto been rather Oppressed than Assisted, this Hydra,
being not to be overcome, but by pouring in of fresh Battallions armed with
pointed Spears and Lances upon him, viz by giving large Quantities of
Medicines, whose Particles are pointed. O what a strange Metamorphosis! The
Devil is turned Hydra? And what is more ingenious, Gentlemen must swallow whole
Battallions of Armed Men with pointed Spears and Lances: Truly a hard Task,
and a very strong Prescription; this sure was a Dream in Flanders, where he had
reason to think of such terrible Medicines; but he unriddles this, and calls
Acids Armed Men and Spears, and really not without reason; but Gentlemen have
reason to fear, that such pointed Medicines would rather increase, than ease
their Pains, since I have showed them what ill effects Vinegar has, when
applied to any Sensible part.

Page 24. Secondly, The use of many sorts of Meat, and the too great
Ingurgitation of them; and then he says, The Stomach being put out of order, a
foundation is laid for Distempers; and for that reason, Page 25. he says, As
his Predecessors have explained Distempers by Acids, so he will by Alkalies. A
very noble design, and upon very good Grounds; but it were unreasonable, for
either him or his Predecessors to ascribe Acids or Alkalies for the Cause of
Distempers, merely because the Stomach was foul; but he ought first to
consider, whether of these two were predominant in the Stomach, when the
foundation of such Distempers was laid, which is the way to make it appear,
whether Alkaly or Acid be the cause of that Distemper.

So that in order to a right knowledge, whether of these two are predominant,
we are to consider how Digestion is carried on naturally, and then it will
appear, what is the reason, that two much Meat hinders it.

I shall not here go about, to explain Digestion any further, than is necessary
to our present Purpose, and shall therefore refer the Reader to his own
Observation, who cannot but take notice, that the better his Meat and Drink is,
the better he digests it, if what Mr. Colbatch says were true, in his Novum
Lumen Chirurgicum, viz. The more generous our Drink is, the better; so that
were he to be judged by his own Words, (which I have showed how far they are
false) Indigestion, when we eat too much, must proceed from the Fermentation in
the Stomach, being too low, and consequently Crudities, or raw undigested
Chyle, must be carried into the Blood, to lay the Grounds of a Distemper; now
in all Crudities, it must needs be acknowledged, that Acids abound, so that
according to Mr. Colbatch his own canting Scraps of Philosophy, there wants
Alkalies to break the Globules, and consequently the Gout must proceed from too
much Acids.

Page 25. he says, The same Alkaly which being thrown upon the Joints, cause
the Gout, -- being thrown upon the Membranes of the Brain, may cause a
Staggering, and may occasion an Apoplexy. Really since Mr. Colbatch said it, it
is very much to be wondered at; that Alkalies should be so mischievous, as to
coagulate the Morbifick Matter of the Gout, and cause Apoplexies, and yet in
the Small Pox break Globules, and be guilty of a contrary mischief, by thining
the Blood, and throwing it out through Vessels, through which it was before too
fine to pass; but any thing that is mischievous, has such a kindness for him,
that it will be black or white, as he would have it, otherwise one would think,
to thin, and to thicken, are widely different Actions for Alkalies to do, but I
have before shown the Absurdities of what he said, as to these Distempers, and
shall not now enlarge upon them.

The remaining part of Page 25. and Page 26. he fills with a Repetition of an
Account, he formerly gave of the Reason, why drinking Wine does Men that are
inclined to the Gout, so much harm, which I having in his Chapter of the Gout,
(published in his Essay of Acids and Alkalies,) and also in this, showed to
prove, that the Gout proceeds* from Acids, there is no need to repeat what I
there said: Again,

Page 27. He says, Fourthly, The immoderate use of Venereal Exercises -- every
Body experiences, that by a few Venereal Embraces, his Spirits become more
Languid. Poor Man! one may see what comfort his poor Wife has, if he has one;
if he has not, one may learn how he came to be so compassionate to Angelick
Faces in the Smallpox, he speaks so sensible in the case, but he says, every
Body experiences it; truly, then the World is worse than I thought it had been,
for one might reasonably expect a Boy at Ten had never experienced such things,
but one may see, he begun to enervate himself betimes: But to be serious,

If Alkalies were the cause of the Gout, then Venery would cure the Gout;
because it draws off the Alkalies of the Blood and Spirits, by taking away
those parts that invigorate the heat of the Blood, but since taking away
Alkalies, makes Men subject to the Gout, by leaving the Blood weak and flaggy;
it follows, that the Gout proceeds from Acids, which always most abound in
Blood that is least Spiritous, as more in Old People than Young.

Page 27. Few or none are ever troubled with the Gout before Marriage, or the
use of Venery, and yet the Roman Priests who abjure Matrimony, are frequently
troubled with this Distemper. O strange! What a mighty stickler for the Church
of England? That only defends it by calling Roman Priests Whoremasters; but it
is a Wonder Mr. Colbatch did not quote Hypocrates his Aphorisms, for this
Observation.

Page 28. He says, Fifthly, Overmuch Sleep, and to explain how overmuch Sleep
does Gouty People so much prejudice, he tells us, that his Worthy Friend Dr.
Cole has made it appear, that the Nervous Fibers, during Sleep, are relaxed,
and receive a large quantity of Nutritious Juice, the Superfluities of which
are thrown off when awake, but when we sleep too long, so much is heaped up,
that Nature cannot throw off the Excrementitious Particles, Page 30. This is
the substance of what fills part of his 28th, 29th, 30th and most of the 31st
Page only repeated in a different Form three or four times over: I shall not
here dispute, what he inserts as Dr. Cole's Opinion, but shall show, that
granting it were true, it would not be of any service to him; for as it is
remarkable in that Observation of Dr. Lowers, that Transpiration is much more
plentiful when we sleep, than when we are awake; and more particularly may be
observed by any Ingenious Gentlemen, that more of the substance of our Bodies
is consumed by lying in Bed three Days, than we can recover in six; so it
evidently from thence appears, that Alkalies are not the cause of Distempers;
because it Alkalies were, according to what Mr. Colbatch said, a little before,
Sleeping much, would cure the Distemper; for he there would have that Juice
that is carried off by Sweat, to be Alkaly, and Page 24. says, moist Air does
harm, by hindering the Evacuation of that Alkaly; but if that were true, the
more we sleep, the less subject we should be to the Gout, because more of that
Alkaline Humor would be carried off, by Insensible Transpiration, and
consequently we must be induced to believe, that the Blood is made more dull
and gross, for want of Moisture and Alkalies to dilute it; and it would be more
reasonable to say, that the reason, why People are so sluggish after so much
Sleep, is, because the Humors are more gross and thick, and circulate through
the parts with less ease, so much alkalized Serum being carried off by Sweat in
Sleep, and the gross parts being left behind, in which Acids abound. But one
may see, that not only Alkalies turn Acid, and Acids Alkalies, to do him a
kindness, but when he has a mind. Transpiration being stoped, promotes the
Gout, Page 24. But now in contradiction to that, Sweating much, has the same
effect; so that his Alkaly is so mischievous, that whether it be in the Body or
not, it has the same Effects there.

Page 31. He says, Sixthly, Overmuch Watching, and Fasting, and Study, and
Sorrow, and Care, and much Labor -- occasions the Gout, -- the Nerves and
nervous Fibers being kept in a state of Laxity too long, by being overcharged
with slimy moist Particles. Here he has coupled no less than six words in a
Gang, with a whole Troop of and's to link them together, perhaps in Imitation
of, and Compliance with, a late Act of Parliament, in which it was ordered,
that not above six Horses should be linked together in Service, upon the High
Road, but whether that was his reason or not, I shall here take notice, that it
being allowed, that the Fibers are overcharged with a slimy Moisture, proves
nothing to his purpose, but against him; for since I have already so plainly
shown, that Acids are the cause of Coagulations, and that Alkalies are not, it
must needs follow, that the cause of that slimy Juice is acid; and that Acids
do cause Coagulations, is further plain, by applying of Vitriolick Acids to
stop Bleeding, which presently obstructs a small Orifice, by coagulating the
Blood.

Page 32. He says, Seventhly, Overmuch Rest and Ease do greatly contribute
toward the producing this Distemper, etc. And then he says Eighthly, Sudden
Rest and exposing the Body to cold or moist Seasons. And then Page 33. Ninthly,
A total bearing off of any accustomed Exercise. But his Seventhly and Ninthly
being both comprised under what he said Fifthly, and what he says Eighthly; but
the same he said First, these are to be carried to their proper Heads, to
receive the same Answer; and I can see no reason why his Tenthly should not be
comprised with the First, since keeping the Feet too hot, or too cold, would
not influence our Bodies much otherways, than moist or dry Weather, only a
little more violently; and he had no need to have proceeded so far as
Eleventhly, since what he said, might be comprised under six Heads answerable
to the six Non-naturals: But I remember Page 24. the Devil turned Hydra, and so
he was resolved to give his Hydra, as many Heads as he could, tho they were all
like one another, and perhaps, he did it, to imitate Nature in the forming of
that Creature.

But Eleventhly, Since an odd Number is lucky, let us see how Fortunate he is
with it. Page 34. The stopping of any usual Evacuation, as the Monthly Courses
in Women, and a Flux of the Hemorrhoids in Men. Poor Man! Here according to his
usual Failings, and his laudable Custom of contradicting himself, and mistaking
his own meaning, he is safe; but has the ill Fortune to mistake in another
Method, and judiciously takes the Cause for the Effect; for the stopping of the
Courses and Hemorrhoids, is not the cause of the Gout, but that vicid acid
Juice, that causes the Gout, also causes the obstructions of Courses and
Hemorrhoids; for as long as the Blood is in a Natural State, the Courses never
are obstructed, but when it is thickened by Acids, it obstructs in those parts;
so that that vicid Matter which causes the Gout, also precedes a stoppage of
the Courses, and causes both.

Having showed you how he has furnished his Hydra with eleven Heads, he now
comes to another, and says, Secondly, That the Blood and Juices, during the
time of the Fit, abound not with Acid, but Alkalious ones.

I abominate Tautologies, etc. Truly there is great sign that he abominates
Repetitions, since this has been repeated in almost every Page of his Book;
and I have so often showed, that these Distempers proceed from Acids, that
should I repeat what I have so often confuted, it would be but unnecessary
Repetition: I shall therefore refer the Reader to what has gone before.

Page 35. He says, It will raise ones Admiration to see how we have groped in
the dark for want of making Experiments. I have often found the quantity of
Alkaly that is obtained from the Blood of People laboring under a Fit of the
Gout, to exceed that obtainable from People in a state of Health. Now supposing
this were true, and I only suppose it; (for he that has told so many Untruths
in his Novum Lumen Chirurgicum, may very well be suspected any thing that he
says;) still Mr. Colbatch can by no means leave off his groping in the Dark,
and showing People that he is got out of his way, in a thing he does not
understand; for did he understand common Distillation, nay, or what he said
himself, he would know, that the more Acids there are in the Blood, the more
Spirits are drawn from it: And first to satisfy him, if any thing that is
Reason will satisfy him, I shall do it from his own Words, for in his Appendix
to his Essay of Alkaly and Acid, he says, All Herbs abound with Acid; yet most
of them are known to yield a considerable quantity of Alkalious Salt; and did
he but know what common Distillers observe, he would then learn a reason, why
the Blood yields most of that he calls Alkaly, when it most abounds with Acid,
for I have often taken notice, and it is the common Practice of Distillers, who
draw Spirits from Brewed Wort, that the sowerer it is, the more Spirits it
yields; whereas if they Distill it sweet, it affords very little, and the reason
of it is plain, because when the Blood is sweet, its Parts are more smooth and
alkalizated, according to him; but when the Texture of that sweet Mass is
altered, and it degenerates into an acid Mass, whose parts are sharp, those
sharper Particles being raised up by Distillation, form a Spirit which affects
our Taste more sensibly; and whereas the Depressed Spirits easily fly away,
this more gross and compacter Acid incorporates with less loss, than if the
Matter from whence it is drawn, were more volatile; so that it appears upon
what uncertainty Men draw Conclusions from chymically analizing the Blood,
where the least alteration in the Mass of Blood, makes so great difference in
the Spirit, that is drawn from it: And here, because I would have Gentlemen
satisfied that his analizing is of no use, I desire they would but enquire of
Distillers, whether in distilling of Wort to get a Spirit from it, it is not
necessary to let it be a little sour, which when they know, they will also
know, what a deceitful Agent the Fire it self is; for what different Effects
has it upon the least alteration of the modification of that substance, it
works upon; and we see then, what a Mathematical Demonstrator Mr. Colbatch is,
who is more ignorant than Common Distillers, and what a fit Man is this, to
draw Conclusions from Experiments that he does not understand.

Page 36. He asks, What is this Cretaceous Body, but a Collection of
Homogeneous Particles? I say of one determinate Figure, by a Collection of
Particles reason that the fire will not totally destroy its Texture, which were it
a Body composed of Particles of different sizes and figures (which is that we
Chemists call heterogeneous) and the fire would destroy it. What this
cretaceous Substance is, I have before told him, and how it is made up of a
great many acid Particles, lodged in a Mucus, and hardened into the form of a
Stone; but for his Explanation of homogeneous and heterogeneous Particles, it
appears, that he does not understand what is meant by homogeneous, nor what by
heterogeneous; and therefore I shall tell him that a Liquor is called
homogeneous, not because it is made up of Particles of one determinate figure,
since in the Language of the Chemists, a Liquor which is made up of Particles
of a different shape and size, may be homogeneous, but because it is simple, or
so compounded, as to agree with that Body, of which it is said to make a part;
and so, that the Liquor, whether compound or simple, exactly suits in all
Circumstances, that Body with which it is mixed; and so the Blood, which is
made up of several Principals, if it be in a Natural State, and of a right
Texture, is called homogeneous; but if another Liquor be mixed with it, which
is not exactly so modified; tho it be a compound Body, yet it is not called
heterogeneous, in respect of the different Ingredients, of which it is made up;
but because it is not exactly like Blood in all Circumstances, in respect of
Blood, it is called heterogeneous; and this he would have understood, had he
known the derivation of those two Words, for homogeneous comes from (...) and
(...), which is to say of a like kind, and heterogeneous from (...) and (...),
of another kind; so that every Body is homogeneous, in respect of it self, and
its own Kind, and every homogenous Body is heterogeneous, in respect of another
kind. But he says, Were it of Particles of a different kind, fire would destroy
it; but he is mistaken, for the different Texture of Gold, Iron and Brass, does
not make them more easily dissolve, tho they were mixed together, for a Body
never the more easily dissolves, because it is a compound; every one of these
Bodies requiring as much force to dissolve them, whether mixed or not.

Having mistaken the Meaning of these two Words, from Page 36. he goes on to
Page 38. to make the mistake a little more conspicuous, all along he proceeds
to repeat what he has several times doubled and trebled before, and all to
tell People, that Alkalies are the Cause of the Gout; but tho this be the
Gentleman that abominates Tautologies, he either knew he had often repeated
this stuff before, or has an extraordinary bad Memory; but tho he so easily
forgot, that he had said the same things before, I think I have sufficiently
answered them, and made it fully appear, that what he has said all along in
defense of his Hypothesis, and in explication of the Distemper, is so far from
proving the Distemper to proceed from Alkalies, that all he has hitherto said,
is very strong and evident proof that it proceeds from Acids.

But here I had almost passed by a very notable Piece of his Scholarship, and
which shows him to be a mighty Man for Antiquity: A Man of a vaste Soul, and of
a strong Comprehension, Page 40. He says, The Ancient Romans -- feigned two
Goddesses, the one called Volupia, the Goddess of Pleasure, the other Angeronia
the Goddess of Anguish, Names fitted to their Natures, and the Priests of
Angeronia did serve at the Altar of Volupia, to signify that in this Life
Pleasure and Sorrow were mixed together. But what is this Goddess to the Gout,
truly nothing at all, but to show what a great Lump of Antiquity he had cast up.

Page 41. He says, I shall continue to assert, that the Excrements of our
Bodies are all Alkalious, such as Sweat, Tears, etc. but what is voided by
Stool, is not properly to be called the Excrements of our Bodies, but the
Excrements of our Food. O admirable! What a piece of Wit has Mr. Colbatch laid
here? But notwithstanding his Wit, it will do him very little Service, for I am
afraid he has so much, he does not know how to use it, which is observed in
Calves-Heads, where a great deal of Brains is found, but no Ingenuity; for by
the same reason, he says Stools are the Excrements of Food, and not of the
Body; Sweat, etc. may be said not to be Excrements of the Body, but of the
Blood; but that Sweat and Tears are not Alkalies, but Acids, any Body that has
acquaintance with Mr. Colbatch's Goddess Angerona, may taste Tears evidently
tasting Salt; and likewise when People sweat much, their Sweat does not only
taste Salt, but People that work hard, have a strong sour Smell about them,
when their Heads sweat much, which are sufficient proofs, that Mr. Colbatch is
mistaken, and Angerona has done him very little Service.

Thus I have gone through all that Mr. Colbatch has said, relating to the
cause of the Gout; from which, I think I have made it plain, that in every
particular, he is egregiously mistaken; and I have not only showed, that he is
mistaken, but that what he alleges in his own Defense, is strong Proof against
him; and I have also added a great many plain and obvious Observations, whereby
it is manifest, how little he understands what he has gone about; and as he
has often been bold to tell Learned Men, they grope in the Dark, so it now
appears how miserably he is lost in it; which I hope is so evident, that
Gentlemen will be no longer imposed upon by him, tho he make his Pretenses with
never so much Impudence, since the Method he takes is so pernicious; and, as I
have showed from his own words, increases the Distemper, and procrastinates its
Cure.

CHAP. IV.
Contains Remarks on his Second Chapter.
HAving thus run over what he has said in his first Chapter, concerning the
Gout; and showed upon what false Conclusions he has grounded his Method of
Practice, for want of Judgment to understand those Experiments he made, and
what gross and erroneous Accounts he has given of the Abuse of Non-Naturals: I
say, having so fairly detected his Grand Mistakes, and so plainly made it
appear, that he has not only very short, but false Notions of things; and
having all along laid him open so fairly to the View of Mankind, that they may
discern his very Essentials, to be nothing but Mistakes, Blunders, Oversights,
Pretense, Impudence, and Inconsistency; I might spare my self the Trouble of
going any farther in laying open his intolerable Absurdities, it being certain
that whatever is built upon such false Bottoms, must not only be very false,
but dangerous to Mankind, and of very ill consequence; but since I have gone so
far, with no other design but to lay open his Faults the clearer, that
Gentlemen might be forewarned how much they hazard their Health, if not their
Lives, by putting themselves in such Hands; so, that they may be, if possible,
more fully convinced, what danger they lay themselves open to by so doing; I
shall for their further satisfaction, show them the ill Consequences of his
Practice, by laying open its Faults there committed.

The remaining part of his Book is made up of three parts, the first he calls
the Dietetick Cure, the second is levelled against Rational Practice, and the
third is to lay open his own ill Practice, which I shall examine in the order
he has laid them in; and first I shall observe his wonderful Dietetick Rules:
Where,

First, He says, Page 44. It is said by some Body, that plus Aere quam cibo
vivimus, we live more by Air than Meat, and that Air does assist in the
Nutrition of Animal Bodies; the famous Instance of Vipers, so well known, is
sufficient to evince; for let a young Viper be put into a Glass Receiver, and
let the Receiver be covered over with a Bladder with holes pricked in it, and
the Viper will become as large and fat as if it were in the open Fields. What
the design of this part of his Dieteticks is, he best knows; I for my part
cannot tell what he would have by his instance, we live more by Air than Meat,
except he would have People to eat no Meat, but gape for Wind continually; but
why breathing of Air is so necessary, I have elsewhere showed in my Treatise of
the Heat of the Blood, and of the Use of the Lungs, and that People cannot live
without Meat, a little Experience tells them. But he has given an Instance of
a Viper, that does not only live without Meat, but grows fat; but to what
purpose does he mention this, except he would persuade his Patients they can
live better without Meat, than with it; sure he would not persuade his Gouty
Patients to be closed up in Receivers, as the Viper was; but if he would, they
are a little too cunning for him yet, I doubt not; and how much soever he can
impose upon them with his Medicines, they will sooner be pinned up in a Coffin
by his Medicines, than closed in a Glass Receiver to suck Air, till he has
been in it himself.

Page 45. He says, People who are troubled with the Gout, should endeavor to
live in a clear and most serene Air, that possibly they can, and avoid that
which is thick and foggy and full of Extraneous Particles. That a clear Air is
better than a foggy one is no news of his finding out, it being always
delivered in Dietetick Rules; but would he have Gentlemen to overrun their
Countries? Should they go into France, or some warmer Country, perhaps they
would be less troubled with it; but this is such a piece of old Advice, that
few can take, and therefore he might have left it in those Books he found it
in, where it was delivered with Judgment and Learning.

All that he further says from Page 46. to 50, is but a Reduction to six Heads,
what in the Chapter before to make his Hydra more formidable, he extended to
Eleventhly; and as what was there contained, was so many Blunders and Marks of
his Ignorance, in reckoning up the Misuses of Non-Naturals: so here he repeats
those Faults in less compass, and extenuated by extending them only in falsely,
and as simply prescribing Non-Naturals; which, tho he had the Dieteticks of
Judicious and Learned Men writ ready to his Hand, yet fancying himself a great
and able Man, he must needs mould them anew, and turn them into his own simple
Form, that he might interpose two or three Sentences to recommend the use of
Acids; but I having already showed the dangerous Consequences of the use of
Acids, and that, even according to his own supposition, viz. that the Blood
would be coagulated by the use of Acids, and consequently the Distemper
increased, I hope Gentlemen will be so cautious of their own Safety, as not to
be misguided by such a Man, who throughout his Book has so egregiously given
us lasting Patterns of his Ignorance.

CHAP. V.
Contains Remarks on his Third Chapter.
I Come now to his Third Chapter, which is irrationally levelled against all
judicious and experienced Practice; where from Page 50, to 58. he has set down
a Method which was taken with Sir J. G. and Page 58. He says -- Instead of
being any way serviceable, it exasperated the Symptoms: But I here leave it to
the Consideration of those Ingenious Gentlemen who are troubled with this
Distemper, since they, by dreadful Experience find, that when they take
Medicines, the Symptoms are almost Intolerable, whether it be not more
reasonable to think the violence of those Symptoms proceeded from the violence
of the Distemper; since I have so plainly made it appear, all along in answer
to his Books, that Acids are the Causes of this Distemper; and what more plain
and obvious an Experiment can there be, to prove the Reasonableness of using
Alkalies in the Cure of this Distemper, than that which I have before
mentioned, viz. by applying Vinegar it self to a fresh Wound, and at the same
time, to another, Vinegar whose Acrimony is dulled by the use of Chalk, or some
other Alkaly; for if the strength of so sharp a Liquor as Vinegar, is taken off
by the mixture of Alkaly, this is the strongest and plainest proof in the
World, that Alkalies are very useful in the Gout, and always to be made use of
by Rational Physicians, since I have so evidently and beyond Rational
Contradiction proved, that the Gout proceeds from Acids; for Alkalies do not
only take off the Acrimony of that Humor, which irritates the sensible Parts,
but also by absorbing part of the superabundant Acid, attenuates that matter,
which by coagulating the Humor, fixes it in the part affected, and conseqently
dispose that Matter to be absorbed into the fluid Mass of Blood again, to be
carried off by proper Excretories, so that nothing can be plainer, than that
the use of Alkalies in the Gout, is highly reasonable, since it so evidently
appears, from so many Instances, as I have throughout this Book given, that
Acids cause Coagulations, and consequently are to be taken off and corrected by
the proper Use of Alkalies.

Page 58. He says, The Medicines here prescribed, are those that are generally
used by most Physicians; and if any Body ever received Advantage by them, I
dare be Burned* and that ever Men should have such dull Phansies, as not to
vary from a Method that has never once stood them in any stead, looks very
odd. And as for Alkalious Medicines in general, I dare be positive that they
never yet cured any one Distemper, but very frequently have done a great deal
of Mischief, they being given in Foul Distempers. What mischief they do when
used by absurd Practicers, as himself, that know not how to manage them; I
don't now dispute, that being nothing at all to the Gout; but since I have so
manifestly made it appear, that this Distemper proceeds from Acids, and that
Alkalies are of very great Use, I think it is all the Answer I need to give to
this, that the Medicines he prescribes, are never given by Rational Physicians,
and never by Quacks, without ruining Men's Constitutions in a little time, and
except he leaves of such ill Practice, he really deserves what he so zealously
dares, viz. to be Burned; and I am amazed, that this Man should have such a
dull Fancy, as all the reason in the World cannot persuade him from it, tho it
be so very pernicious and dangerous, and truly it looks odd enough to use his
elegant Expression, that Peoples Constitutions must be ruined, to please his
dull Fancy, and as for his Acid Medicines, I am positive, they have ruined
more Constitutions than he is aware of; but some People are lead into their own
Destruction by blind Promises, which they know not how to perform, which is the
reason he does so much Mischief.

Page 59. He says, In Chronical Distempers* such as the Gout, etc. there poor
Mortals are let alone to languish under their Oppression, and the Physician --
will be for putting the poor Wretch into a Course of Alkalies, to correct those
luxuriant Acid Particles, which he would fain persuade his Patient that his
Blood abounds with (but yet he never found any such thing there) to the pauling
of his Stomach, and exasperating his Distemper; and if ever the poor Patient
finds relief, it is from Opium, that is between whiles given; and if from that
he has any little intermission of his pain, they are generally so ungrateful,
as not to set the Saddle upon the right Horse, to give the Opium its due, but
presently hug themselves, and cry, God a Mercy Alkalies, and so go on with a
repetatur pulv. e chelis, etc. Now as this was to be laid upon all Rational
Physicians, upon condition that their Practice was false, so having all along
in answer to him made it appear, that their Practice is Rational and Good; and
that his is false and erroneous; it must needs fall to his own share, and in
his own words, to lay the Saddle on the right Horse, I must say, in Chronical
Distempers, such as the Gout, etc. there poor Mortals, are let alone to
languish under their Oppression, and Mr. Colbatch neither understanding their
Distemper, nor the true Method, that he should take with them, would be for
putting the poor Wretches into a Course of Acids; and would fain persuade his
Patient, that his Blood abounds with Alkalies, contrary to Truth and
Experience, to the Detriment of his Constitution, depressing of his Spirits,
and increasing of his Distemper: And alas! If ever the Patient he imposes upon,
finds relief, he may thank God for it; and the strength of his Constitution,
which helps to carry off, and abate the Distemper: But what a tender
compassionate Creature is Mr. Colbatch, who has such a tender Love for poor
Gentlemen, that will give him Money? For he is so enraged at that Hydra! That
Devil! That Gout, that he calls it all the ill Names he can, and has such
esteem for Opium, that gives them all the ease they must hope for from him;
that he is offended they don't fix some Mark of Honor upon it, it has such an
excellent stupifying Quality; and truly no Body knows how much he is engaged to
be zealous for the Honor of any thing, that relates to dullness and stupidity,
he has so much of it himself; and indeed he may well hug himself, and cry, God
a Mercy Stupidity! O, the wonderful Effects of Opium, where Acids would
increase the Distemper.

Page 60. He says -- If we do not look about us, and regain our Reputation, we
may chance to be laid aside in other Distempers as well as the Gout. This is a
mighty considerable piece, and shows the honest Endeavors of the Man, who is
so much afraid of being laid aside, that he uses all the means he can only to
get Patients; and truly without this, by his whole Writings one would guess,
that the Man only Huffs, and Contradicts, and Writes, that People might think
he has something in him; but alas poor Man! He has so much ill luck along
with it, that he cannot long impose upon People, for those very Writings show
(according to the old Maxim, Nil dat quod in se non habet) that he has nothing
at all in him, but Pretense.

Page 60. He says, What I have said is not to reproach the Physicians of our
own Nation, who are many of them as great Men as ever were of the Profession,
and generally this City abounds with such, but my design is to undeceive Young
Physicians, who are imposed upon by Foreign Authors. But our Author Mr.
Colbatch must think himself a strange sort of a Wit, or the Physicians in
London very easily imposed upon, to be flattered with such a dull pretense as
this; for if he did not reproach the Physicians of this City, who does he mean?
When Page 58. He says, The Medicines here prescribed, are those that are
generally used by most Physicians; surely most Physicians must needs comprize
the generality of this City; but if he would pretend only to undeceive Young
Physicians, why did he in his Preface to this Book, call Physic a Scene of
Slaughter, since Young Physicians scarce kill, before they have Practice enough
to be Subjects of Slaughter? But this is to let us know, that he is Conscious,
that he has laid that to Physicians Charge, which properly belongs to himself,
and would thus stop their Resentments with this dry Complement. But did he not
say what he has done was only to reproach -- as great Men as ever were of the
Profession, but those that are imposed upon by Foreign Writers, why did he not
then direct his Book against those Writers? But we must give him leave to
contradict himself, to say and unsay, as odd as it looks, for his Head is made
up of nothing but short Raptures without thought, or foresight: Besides, were
what he here says true, it had been his best way to have gone amongst his
Adversaries, where by a total Conquest, he would have got Credit, more than he
must expect by thus weakly exposing himself amongst Men he has nothing to say
against, as he here says.

Page 61. He goes on, If the Blood's abounding with Alkalious Particles, be the
Primary, or Fundamental Cause of the Gout, how can the giving of Alkalies be of
any Use? Of no other Use than the throwing of a Company of dried Fagots upon a
House that is on fire, would be to extinguish the Flame; and whoever should
attempt such a thing, would, I suppose, be accounted little less than a
Madman. To this I answer, that since I have so often made it appear, that the
Acidity of the Serum, from whence its Viscidity proceeds, is the cause of this
Distemper, and it has been plainly proved, by evident Observations and
Reasons, that giving more Acids, is the way to increase the Distemper: He alone
is the Madman, that can give no reason for what he does, but what is plainly
contradictory to his own Practice; but this is a strange sort of a Man, to call
all Physicians Madmen. Page 61. and Page 58. He says, He will be Burned if
ever they did good; yet Page 60 says, He does not do it to reproach the
Physicians of our own Nation: Whether does he talk like a Wiseman, or like Mr.
Colbatch now?

But Page 61. further to let the World know that he has a mighty Insight into
a Glover's Trade, he tells a Story of a Philosophical Glover, from whence he
seems to draw his Conclusions, and upon which, one would guess he had built his
Hypothesis; He says, -- They first throw their Skins into a Pit, filled with a
strong Alkalious Lixivium, which makes them in a manner rotten; afterward they
make a strong Acid Solution, into which they throw their almost rotten Skins,
which again reduces them to their Texture; nay, makes them firmer than they
were at the first. Truly Mr. Colbatch was very happy in so Philosophical a
Companion, for doubtless he received wonderful hints, from one that was used to
grope Philosophically in Lime-Pits; and had he been Seven Years an Apprentice
to him, without question, Mr. Colbatch would have been a very notable Man at
the Trade, and would have handled Hides very Philosophically; nay, and for
ought I know, might have made as Ingenious a Man at it, as Mr. Yardly, for he
would have got wonderful Improvements, by such weighty Debates as would have
passed betwixt them two; but of what advantage soever it might have been to
him, to have improved his Knowledge in that Trade, I am sure Mr. Yardly's Story
does him little service here; for it directly proves, that Acids are most
pernicious in the Gout, and that Alkalies are the only Remedies to be depended
upon; for if Alkalies so softened the Skins, there is a great reason to hope
that they will also dissolve, and soften those Humors that swell the Parts
affected, being hardened and obstructed there; but if Acids will harden the
Skins, when soft, consequently they must harden that Alkalious Matter, lodged
in the Gouty Parts, and so do more harm by fixing it there. But,

Page 62. He is happy, Quoniam successus ejus sol vidit, oneres autem tellus
operiret; otherwise, because those he does not Kill, think he Cures them, but
those he sends packing to another World, have not the advantage of telling
their Friends the dismal Cause of their Departure, and how they were sent to
another World by Mr. Colbatch his Acids.

From Page 62. to Page 67. he tells a long Story of a Man that was troubled
with an Iliack Passion, but why that comes in this Chapter, I cannot tell,
except he wanted something to fill it up with.

Page 67. he says, -- The Skin abounds with Receptory as well as Excretory
Pores, which I have frequently observed in the Skins of many Animals, by the
means of my Optic Glasses. Really he seems to be mighty inquisitive into the
Skins of Animals, since he has been acquainted with the Ingenious and
Philosophical Glover Mr. Yardly, but it seems he is not content with Mr.
Yardly's Enquiry into Skins, but has got his Optics to them, as if he had a
mind to be the Author of some new Discovery, and would help his weak sight by
Spectacles. But perhaps he remembered that Malpigius and others, who had made
great Discoveries in Anatomy, made use of Microscopes; and so he being a great
Man in his own Conceit, must needs peep through a Glass too; But to what
purpose? Truly, he has discovered Receptory Pores as well as Excretory Pores:
But I ask him how he knew which were Receptory Pores by looking at them? Which
is utterly impossible. And I am afraid he has stared so much on the outside,
that he has scarce looked enough within, or he would have understood things a
little better than he does; and I am sorry to see one that has so little
Reason, pretend to be so saucy with all Learned Men, and not only so, but
Dogmatical and Positive, where he ought to be humble, and repent of what ill
Practice he has hitherto followed, endeavoring to impose upon Mankind.

CHAP. VI.
Contains Remarks on his Fourth Chapter.
I Come now last of all to his Method of Cure, to undeceive these Ingenious
Gentlemen, that he has hitherto imposed upon; and for their sakes, I shall
take pains to be a little more large upon this Point, than I otherwise need to
be; for I having already shown the grand Blunders and Mistakes of his Book, and
that he is so notoriously mistaken in the Cause of this Distemper, and in all
he has said relating to it; and also that the Method he uses is so far from
curing, that it increases the Distemper; it must be allowed, that what he here
delivers is false also; but to make it more evidently appear that he is
mistaken, I shall take a brief View of this Chapter: And first,

Page 68. He says, -- When my Patient complains of a Crudity and Rawness of his
Stomach, with a Windy sort of Distension and Heaviness of his Body, which are
certain Arguments of an approaching Fit: If he be of a Sanguine Complexion, and
a Plethorick Habit of Body, I first of all prescribe Blood letting, from 12 to
20 Ounces. Whether those Gentlemen he thus uses find themselves very much
weakened or not, after such immoderate Bleeding, they themselves are best
Judges; but twenty Ounces is a great deal too much to take at one time, and if
they find themselves very weak and faint after it, they had better follow the
Advice of able and Judicious Physicians, and not to exceed twelve Ounces; but I
am afraid those that are so much imposed upon as to send for him, will be also
prevailed upon to submit to his irrational Method, and therefore it is in vain
to advise them, they must reap the dangerous Consequences of such absurd usage,
and may thank themselves for it; I shall only here forewarn them, that when
they find their Stomachs Raw, and filled with Crudities, that is sufficient to
satisfy them, that their Bodies abound with Acids, all Crudities proceeding
from Indigestion, and Indigestion from too great a quantity of Acid Particles
depressing and overpowering the Alkalious Parts, by which means, the Meat
contained in the Stomach, being not sufficiently dissolved and broke in pieces,
but (in the sense of our Philosophical Glover and Mr. Colbatch) being too much
hardened and kept to a Consistence, remains crude and undigested. But if
nevertheless they will let Mr. Colbatch pour in more Acids, and by increasing
the Acidities of the Blood, so oppress Nature, that she cannot powerfully expel
the Morbifick Matter; all that I can further say, is, that I am really sorry
that Ingenious Gentlemen are so imposed upon by a Man that has Impudence to
stare them in the Face, and contradict Reason and Experience. But to proceed;

Page 69. and Page 72. amongst his Acid Medicines, as he calls them, an Hour or
half an Hour before Dinner, he orders his Patients to take a Medicine made of
Cremor Tartari, and Tartar. Vitriolat. But for what end, except to increase the
Distemper, I can scarce imagine; for the Nature of Cremor Tartar* being
Purgative, it must needs do a great deal of Mischief, by raising the
Peristaltick Motion, and forcing the Meat out of the Stomach before it is
digested, which is the only way to fill the Blood with Crudities, and
consequently to increase the Distemper; so that this Method, which forces their
Meat out of their Stomach undigested, and fills their Blood with Crudities,
must needs recommend Mr. Colbatch; and he must needs be a very fine Man, who
has Impudence to boast of such Absurdities; really I cannot but admire him,
and wonder that he has such success, as not to ruin People more frequently.

Page 70. He orders the following Medicine to be given for a Month twice a Day,
viz.

. Lapidis hoematitis. Unc. Semis. Crem. Tartar. Unc. unam.

And really his wonderful Skill in Compounding, considering the Advantage of
Mr. Yardly's Company, the Glover, and his own, being bred an Apothecary, is not
a little to be admired; for there is no less than Contradiction in this very
Receipt; for as Crem. Tartar* is Purgative, so Lapis hoematitis is no less a
stopper of Purging, and to give one thing to Purge, and another at the same
time to stop Purging, is as absurd as if it were really Mr. Colbatch: And in
his own Words, Page 58. of this Treatise, That ever Men should have such dull
Fancies -- looks very odd, and shows the Ignorance of the Man so plainly, that
no Wiseman would ever hazard his Life in his Hands.

Page 74, 75. and part of 76, He tells a long Story out of Polemanus, but that
being nothing at all to the Gout, I shall take no notice of it, but leave him
to restore it to Polemanus again, it being not able to do him any other
Service, than to fill up two Pages in his Book.

Page 76. He says, I have hitherto but just entered into the Porch, etc. and
really had he gone no further than his Porch, he had gone too far in such a bad
Way, for every Page, except those Polemanus has taken possession of, are
filled with a Recipe Crem. Tartar. and Tartar. Vitriolat. over and over again,
and all the Elegancy that is to be observed in what he says, is, that whereas
sometimes he puts Crem. Tartar. before Tartar. Vitriolat. in others the order
is changed, and Tartar. Vitriolatum comes before Crem. Tartar. and sometimes he
has been so ventersome as to set Crem. Tartar. by it self, and this wonderful
Variety observed in his Compositions, must needs argue him a profound Man
indeed, and he may well value himself upon it, for it is nothing at all, but
what Carters commonly imitate, sometimes setting one Horse behind, and
sometimes another.

But really this Porch appears to be nothing but a Continuation of his
Notorious Mistakes and Blunders, and only differs from the remaining part of
his Book, as a Cloud from Rain; for as his whole Book hitherto, was nothing but
a parcel of Rubbish, and confused Blunders in Theory; he now is as absurd in
Practice, and as the other only prejudiced their Minds, this does their Bodies,
and makes them (to use his own Words in Page 3. of this Treatise) run the Risk
of losing their Lives, which to every Man is the valuablest thing in the World.

Page 76. I shall now proceed to the Cure of the Distemper it self; the taming
of this fierce and angry Lion, the expelling of the raging Tyrant, the cutting
off this Hydra's Heads. O this Mighty Champion! That can tame the fierceness of
Lions, expel raging Tyrants; and (Page 24. of this Treatise) Poured whole
Battallions, armed with Spears and Lances, upon a Devil, which is not to be
cast out but by Prayer and Fasting; yet did no more Service in Flanders, where
he might have had work enough for his Battallions: What Punishment does he
deserve? Is this the Man that would have a Thousand a Year for to spend in
Experiments from the Government? But yet he is to be admired, for he has
almost equaled Hercules in his Labors, only he is not come to the Eugean
Stables yet, but truly it is a Pity, for I think that is the fittest Work for
him.

But it seems we are come through the Porch, and must now proceed to the Cure,
and to see how this Champion performs his Exploits, where we shall take a View
of the Aedifice this Porch has led us to: Where,

Page 77. He says, I first of all -- prescribe Blood-letting, from twelve to
twenty Ounces. Strange! There is no difference betwixt the Porch and the House!
They are both alike exactly so far; and the same Answer that I gave him in his
Porch, may serve in his Parlor, so I shall not repeat it here again; but this
is a mighty step toward eternalizing him for a Champion.

Page 78. He goes on with a Recipe, Crem. Tartar and Tartar. Vitriolat. and all
he further says, to Page 80. is nothing but a repetition of what he had said
before, when he had but just entered into the Porch (as he terms it) except a
Plaster and a Salve to dabble their Gouty Toes in, to as much Purpose as the
Magicians of old sounded a Kettle to turn the Course of the Sun, which would
have run its Course without all that noise.

Page 80. He says, Till the Violence of the Pain is somewhat abated, I every
Night give an Opiate. Very ingeniously done! as long as he finds his Acids will
do no good, but rather exasperate the Distemper, he gives an Opiate to dull the
Pain, so that People cannot feel how much Mischief he does them. But here I
shall make use of his own Words again, Page 59. And say still he -- Will be for
putting the poor Wretch into a Course of Acids, to correct Luxuriant Alkalies,
which he would fain persuade his Patients, their Blood abounds with, to the
spoiling of their Constitutions, and exasperating of their Distemper: And now
we may see, if ever the poor Patient finds any Relief, it is from the Opium he
gives every Night; and tho his Patients only find Relief from the Opium, he is
so Ungrateful, as not to saddle the right Horse, and give the Opium its due,
but presently hugs himself and cries, God a Mercy Acids, and so goes on with a
repetatur Crem. Tartar. and Tartar. Vitriolat.

Page 82. He says, When the Violence of the Distemper is abated, then the
foregoing method must be altered, and the following Medicines used. Truly Mr.
Colbatch is a rare Man, when the Distemper begins to go off, and he dare give
his Acids no longer to prolong the Distemper, and to increase the Number of
Fees: Then he lays them aside, and gives a few Medicines, that neither do good
nor harm, and which in answer to his Appendix to his Essay, I have showed, are,
by no means Acids, and have laid down the English Names of them there; so that
Ingenious Gentlemen may taste them, and compare their Taste with Sevil-Oranges,
which is an Acid; by which means they will easily know whether those be like
Oranges, but if Gentlemen would be satisfied without so much trouble, they may
ask those that are imposed upon by him, whether all the Medicines he gives
taste sour, or sharp, which will satisfy them that he is mistaken.

Page 83. He says, Upon the going off of this Distemper -- a Course of
Calybeats is very proper, and rarely fails doing good Service. Here Mr.
Colbatch, in the latter end of his Treatise, has taken care to confute all
that he said before in this Chapter, most effectually; for as soon as he can
get no more Money by his Patients, he takes care to give them Steel, Antimony,
etc. which in his Essay of Alkaly and Acids, I have proved to be Alkalies: Nay,
he does not only give his Patients those Alkalies, but Castor, Nutmegs,
Cardamoms, Cloves, and even Century and Gentian, all or most of which, he sets
down in Page 84, 85; and which the Reader may find, in those Receipts he laid
down, and condemned as Alkalies in the Chapter before this; and there he says,
He dare be Burned, if they ever stood in any stead; yet here he says, They
rarely fail of doing good Service; so that here I leave him to confute himself.

But were his Doctrine of Acids and Alkalies true, which I have so fairly
showed, and proved to be false, and were what he lays to the Charge of all
Rational Physicians true, these Alkalies would cause the Distemper to return;
for if, as he said before, the Gout proceeded from Alkalies, so great
Quantities of Alkalies as he here uses, must needs increase the Morbifick
Matter, and cause a Relapse; but since they do not, we have reason to believe
the Distemper proceeds from Acids, and that consequently Acids would increase
it. I have now at the last, tho not without surprise, taken a View of his
Mighty Battallions which were to tame the Lion, to drive out the Tyrant, and to
cut of the Hydra's Heads. But alas!

Parturiunt montes, nascitur Ridiculus mus. His Promises were large, and
Pretensions great, but his Performance small; and now I cannot without Wonder
and Amazement behold the Hero, the Mighty Man of War, whose Battallions are
nothing but Tartar. Vitriolatum, Cremor. Tartar. Oranges and Lemmons, those
being all the Acid Medicines used throughout his Book internally, all the rest
being already in his Essay, and its Appendix proved to be not at all Acids; and
must this Man huff and hector? Must this Ignis Fatuus mislead and impose upon
People? Must he call Physicians Fools and Madmen? What Usage does he deserve?
And what Punishment too great for him?

But, Page 87. He says, Had I prescribed much and Violent Purgings, Vomits,
etc. wherein there was any danger, then People would have all the Reason in the
World to be cautious and fearful. It Is true, they would have had very great
reason to be so; and tho their Reasons are not quite so great, yet the
Difference is small; for tho the Proverb only says, It is ill venturing a Sword
in a Mad-man's Hands; yet People are certain, a Dagger, tho not so large, is
equally as dangerous, since those that are not armed against them, may as soon
be killed by one as the other; so that in effect Acids are as dangerous as
Vomits, etc. because they do mischief, with this difference, that the ill
Effects of Vomits are ascribed to Vomiting, but the ill Effects of Acids are
attributed to the Violence of the Distemper, and on one Consideration, Acids
are more dangerous, because People take them without Suspicion, and ruin their
Constitutions without their Knowledge, or a possibility of Caution; and as that
Person is most dangerous which is not known to be so, so that Medicine is of
the worst sort, whose ill Effects are not taken notice of; for which reasons I
have taken pains to run over his Books, not because I thought them worth
Consideration, but to lay open the Mischievous Effects of such absurd Practice,
that Ingenious Gentlemen might be no longer imposed upon.

From Page 88. to Page 96. He relates two Stories, in which he gave his Acids;
but what he there says being only a Repetition of the same Medicines he had
given before, what I have said sufficiently answers them.

As to the first, He says, he had his Patient in a Fit about a Month, in which
I shall observe that Page 93. He says, This was the most dreadful Fit of the
Gout I ever saw -- And had not the Medicines well suited with the Distemper, to
have abated the Violence of the raging Pain, I believe he had certainly never
got over it. To use the Words of Mr. Colbatch the Champion, I believe he had
certainly never got over it, had not his Distemper been very mild of it self,
for from what I have already said, it most evidently appears, the Gout is
caused by Acids, and consequently that they will be so far from abating the
Distemper, that they are the Causes of that Pain; so that we have strong reason
to believe, that the Distemper being mild, was increased by his Acids, for the
Reasons which are up and down in this Book; and also, because notwithstanding
the Use of his Acids, or rather by reason of them, it was the most dreadful Fit
that ever he saw, and continued for a Month.

In the second Case, he thinks it not for his Credit to tell how long the
Distemper continued; but from what has gone before, I am satisfied it would
have gone off sooner without his Crem. Tartar. and Tartar. Vitriolat.

I have now gone through his Treatise of the Gout; and have fully laid open the
grand Blunders and Absurdities, the Unpardonable Mistakes, and Falseness of
every thing he asserts throughout his Book; and have proved, by plain
Experiments and Observations, both that the Foundation of his Practice is
false, those Experiments that he builds upon, being strong Proof against him;
and also, that the Practice he builds upon that Foundation, is also Absurd and
Dangerous.

I might now go on to his next and last Book, wherein he further asserts his
Doctrine of Alkalies and Acids; but the latter end of this Book containing a
Relation of Fevers, I shall first make some brief Remarks upon the same.

And here all that I need to take notice of is, that whatever Credit may be got
by the Use of Acids in Fevers, is not to be attributed to him; it having always
been the constant Practice of Physicians, to use Acids in Fevers, except
Malignant, in which Experience and Reason pleads against him; so that did he
lay down any thing, as to the Cause or Cure of Malignant Fevers, by Acids, I
should lay open his Ignorance by Reason, and back my Reasons with the success
of Alkaly used in those Distempers, by Physicians, for above an hundred Years.

But since here he only gives the History of five Persons, in which he has the
liberty to tell as many Falsities as he did in his Novum Lumen Chirurgicum; and
since he only tells how he managed those Patients, without laying down the
Reasons of those Distempers, and may say what he will, Truth or Falsities, as
to the success of his Medicines; all that I shall say to these is, That since
all that we have to judge of in these Cases, is, his own Account of himself,
which may be very likely false, since we have found him notoriously guilty of
such Faults before, that we have reason to suspect him to give false Account of
Distempers now, and to make them worse than they were, to applaud himself. I
say, all I need to observe, is, the Absurdities in those Methods he here lays
down, and how much the Patients might suffer by his irregular Practice, and how
injudiciously and ignorantly he manages those Acids, that have all along been
used in Fevers; only with more Discretion, and Judgment, than one of his
Dullness can pretend to: This, I say, might be the Subject of my Remarks, but
as he always affirms that he had good Success, and is afraid to tell the
Persons, least he should be disproved: I shall only say, that if they
recovered, it was more to be attributed to the Mildness of the Distemper, than
his Management; since he as an ill Painter, who abuses his Colors, makes an
irregular Use of Medicines, which by a prudent Hand, might be of more use.

I shall therefore in the next place proceed to examine and lay open the
Mistakes and Injudicious Blunders of his next Book, having so truly represented
this, that Ingenious Gentlemen may very easily be satisfied of the Falseness of
his Assertions, and how egregiously he has imposed upon Mankind; which since
it was writ for their sakes, I hope they will so far consider, as may prevent
them from exposing themselves to his irregular Usage, and the dreadful
Consequences of it.

But all that he says in his Attempt to prove what Life is, being nothing but
as if it were incoherent Scraps, and broken Thoughts, which seem to be partly
stolen from Dr. Willis; I shall refer him for an Answer to my late little Book
of the Heat of the Blood, and of the Use of the Lungs; and shall first examine
this Book as far as relates to a further Assertion of the Use of Acids. and
shall then show how absurdly he used Esquire Turner.

AN EXAMINATION OF Mr. John Colbatch HIS DOCTRINE of ACIDS IN THE Cure of
Diseases, Further Asserted, etc.

Wherein his Absurdities, and Erroneous Opinions, are truly Represented, and
fully Confuted.

AS ALSO, A VINDICATION of the Proceedings of the Learned Dr. Fry of Oxford, in
a late Case of Edmund Turner Esquire; in Opposition to the Irrational Usage of Mr.
Colbatch.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1699.

AN EXAMINATION OF Mr. John Colbatch HIS DOCTRINE of ACIDS IN THE Cure of
Diseases, Further Asserted, etc.
I Come now to the last part of my Task; and truly, were it not my sole Design
to detect such grand Errors, and to vindicate Truth, established by long
Observations of Ingenious and Learned Men, and confirmed by daily Experience, I
should never prevail with my self, to spend any more time with such nauseous
and abominable Mistakes, as his Book abounds with, but for Truth's sake, and
for the Good of those that are imposed upon by him, I shall proceed to an
Examination of what is contained in this Book.

And first I shall take notice that this Book is made up of three Parts.

First, A further Assertion of the Use of Acids.

Secondly, An Attempt to prove what Life is. And

Lastly, An Account of Mr. Turner's Case, which I shall therefore examine in
three distinct Chapters.

But before I proceed to an Examination of his Book, I shall first take notice
of some things which are premised to the Reader; where,

Page iii. He says, I am every Day pestered with Objection of one kind or
another, and therefore to save my self the labor of writing Pacquets of
Letters every Post-Day, I have thought fit to answer those Objection that are
worth taking notice of in this public manner. A very fair Confession upon my
word! This I hope will satisfy Ingenious Gentlemen; nay, and all knowing
Women, what a slippery Hypothesis Mr. John Colbatch, who was late Apothecary in
Worcester, has advanced; for it seems, not only those that write against him,
are endeavoring to detect his Errors, but whole Pacquets of Letters come daily
to convince him; so that Gentlemen may see, that his Hypothesis is not only
cried down by those, which he would represent as his Enemies, but a vast Number
of his Private Friends, are satisfied of his Faults; and those Letters, I hope,
will be stronger Arguments; because, since they are private, they cannot be
thought to be writ out of a design to expose, but to convince him: But he says,
He has thought fit to answer those Objections, etc. very cautiously done,
since it was Mr. Colbatch that takes this Method; he does well to think it only
worth his while to answer those which he thinks he can deal with; and to keep
those in private that are too hard for him; but here I would advise those that
write to him, to be cautious; for if it be Nonsense, he will expose them; if
their Objections be sound, they lose their labor; for he is resolved not to be
convinced by any means, knowing that as boldness in a bad Cause has supported
him hitherto, so that is all he depends on for the future.

Page vi, and vii. He says, I never yet pretended to make People Immortal, my
endeavor having all terminated in this, viz. to be serviceable to my fellow
Creatures in distress as much as I am able. The Wiseman says, That no Man has
Power in the Day of Death, and that there is no discharge in that War: The
Issues of Life and Death being only in the Hands of the Almighty. This is the
second time he has thought himself bound to Apologize for the frequent
Departures of his Patients; and, God knows, not without need, for how
serviceable he may be to his Fellow Creatures, I have already showed, viz. in
hastening the Number of the Elect; and as it is never usual except upon the
Death of Persons, to fall into such strains of Divinity, so I am induced to
believe, nothing else could bring him to his Bible.

Page viii. After a Confession of his own Deficiency, He says, I dare almost be
confident, that even in my own Time the Cudgels will be taken up, and the
Hypothesis maintained and asserted, by one who is able to go throughstitch with
it, better than I can. To this I say that let him be who he will that will take
up a Cudgel, I have taken up one; and tho I will not be confident, yet I dare
promise to engage my self his Opponent in this Cause, being here he will have
neither Truth nor Reason on his side; but before I leave his Preface, I cannot
but take notice of a very Philosophical Word he here makes use of, viz. Through
Stitch; and here I make bold to ask Mr. Colbatch one Question, Whether through
would not have expressed as much without stitch? Truly it would, but we must
remember, Mr. Colbatch has had the Honor to be intimately acquainted with the
Philosophical Glover Mr. Yardley, of whom he makes an Honorable Mention in his
Treatise of the Gout; and no wonder that amongst the rest of his Improvments in
his Critical Enquiry into the Skins, he learnt this Learned Phrase,
Through-Stitch from him, it being common for Glovers to Stitch through and
through again.

Having made these brief Remarks, to give Ingenious Gentlemen a Light in our
Author from his own words, I shall now proceed to examine what he says for a
further Assertion of the Use of Acids; and shall only first briefly take notice
of the occasion of it; which is this: One Dr. Tuthill of Dorchester writ a
Letter to Mr. Colbatch this last Winter, dated August 9. 97. in which he raised
some weak Objections, which Mr. Colbatch finding to be of no force, writ this
Answer to; and in his Preface, dates it October the 8th. 1697. And in Answer to
this again, Mr. Tuthill has writ about three Sheets in Vindication of his
Objections, where he exposes his own Weakness more than in this Letter,
bringing very weak or false Arguments in proof of what he had ill grounded
here; but as Mr. Tuthill was brought into Print at the first, perhaps without
his Consent, so he now is forced to say something in Defense of what he might
carelessly write to Mr. Colbatch, in a private Letter, and therefore he is to be
a little excused for the Faults of his Letter; and consequently what he has
said in this last Answer, may be thought only as a Flourish, to repair or save
his Credit; and truly had he not submitted to use mean and servile Flattery, to
a Man that is so far from deserving such Complements: I should have had a
little better Opinion of him, but to complement a Man, that is more Ignorant
than himself, and to call what Mr. Colbatch has writ in this Book, Ingenious
Solutions; and to tell one that has endeavored to impose upon all the World,
that all the World is obliged to him, looks as if Mr. Tuthill had a Mind to
flatter Mr. Colbatch, to stop his Mouth, least he should spit at him again; and
I rather believe so, because Mr. Tuthill in the beginning of those Sheets,
says, he would not have writ them, had he not been pressed, and urged to it by
some Friends; and truly, one would think by what he writes, that it was with
much ado squeezed out of him, and like Drops of Blood almost stuck by the way;
and he had done better, had not it been pressed out of him, because it is a
very bad Sample of what is in him: But as the Dispute betwixt these two
Warriors, is inconsiderable, so I shall pass them by without any other notice,
than as they afforded me half an Hours Diversion; for when I read them I
thought indeed they were very hard matched, and complemented as prettily as a
Pedlar does on a Holiday, and could compare them to nothing more properly, than
to two Drunken Men, who fight in the Dark, and strike at random, without
understanding what they are about, or giving one another many Blows.

I shall therefore in favor of Mr. Tuthill, who, I think, was brought into the
Scuffle against his Will, examine what Mr. Colbatch here says in favor of what
I have already shown to be notoriously false; and shall lay open what he here
says, so fairly, that it will, instead of Vindicating what he said before,
prove against him: The first thing that offers it self to be taken notice of,
is this;

Page 4, 5. He says, Whilst I was fairly jogging on, in the ordinary Method of
Practice, a certain Gentleman recommended to me a powerful Acid, which he told
me, I might rely upon in the Cure of some sort of Fevers. When I considered the
Thing as an exalted Acid, I could scarce give the least Credit to what he said
-- However, considering the fatal Success that frequently attended the Use of
Alkalies, and Alexipharmicks (which, however, at that time, I durst not
attribute to the Medicines, but the Malignity of the Distempers) I was resolved
upon the first Poor Patient I had in a Fever, to try what the forementioned
Acid would do; and upon a Multitude of Trials -- I found by my Acid, I could
Cure most sorts of Fevers, much more effectually and certainly than ever I
could before, by the Means of Alkalies, and Alexipharmicks. The Effects of this
Medicine -- backed with some other Observations, put me upon thinking, that
Fevers and other Distempers did not proceed from the Blood's abounding with
Acid Particles, but on the contrary with Alkalious ones. Truly, whatever Mr.
Colbatch may think, it is scarce to his Advantage; for whatever Good he did,
with that Acid, it was not to be ascribed to him, but the Gentleman. But why
should he not give Credit to it? Since he was jogging on in the ordinary
Method, for Acids were always used in most sorts of Fevers before his time, tho
highly prejudicial in the Gout, Rheumatism, Smallpox, Consumptions, etc. but
it seems he was as ignorant in those Days, as he is now; and most absurdly gave
them Alkalies, and Alexipharmicks, which are never to be used in Fevers, except
Malignant; which I have more fully taken notice of, in my Answer to his Book of
the Gout. But to proceed, it seems being instructed by a Gentleman, he fell to
use Acids, as other Physicians did, and as long as he kept within bounds, had
the like success; but he at the last, finding that Physicians were in the
right, and he had been all along mistaken; not only gave Acids in most Fevers,
but transgressed the bounds of Reason and Experience, and boldly gave Acids, in
Malignant Fevers; which by all the Learned and Experienced Physicians, for an
hundred Years past, and also at this time, are known to be very dangerous. But
this was not all; those that are Ignorant fear nothing, because they are not
apprehensive of danger; he went on boldly in a false way, and wittily drew this
Conclusion; Acids do good, and have good Effects in Fevers, and therefore other
Distempers proceed from Alkalies: Very strange! and worthy of Mr. John
Colbatch; and it must be a very great Specimen of his Wonderful Judgment, for
he might as well say, Water will set a House on Fire, because Fire will, as
that Alkalies cause the Gout, Rheumatism, Smallpox, etc. because they cause
some sort of Fevers; were it allowed that those Fevers proceeded from Alkalies.

From Page 6. to Page 21. is filled up with a Parcel of Stories, nothing at all
to his Purpose; but to tell us, that he has distilled the Blood of eleven
Persons to no purpose, but to get so much Spirit as will turn Syrop of Violets
green; and what Service that will do him, I have already showed, viz. that he
does not truly ascribe the Cause of the Gout, etc. to Alkalies, but that they
proceed from Acids, and I shall make it appear more fully by and by in its
proper place; I shall in the mean time take notice, that Page 21. It would be
almost impossible for any Private Man, to make a sufficient number of
Experiments without the Assistance of the Public, which occasioned me in the
Preface to my Treatise of the Gout, to propose a Public Stock to carry on this
Work. O strange! Has this mighty Projector this Thought in his Head yet? Sure
it makes him very uneasy, to see the Public not take notice of him? Alas!
Poor Man! It Is a most Noble Acid that keeps up his Spirits, or how would such a
mighty Champion dispense with such Slights? He that in his Book of the Gout,
has the sole Faculty of casting out that Devil, which is not to be cast out
without Prayer and Fasting; who tamed the Raging Lion, cut off the Hydra's
Heads, and expelled the Mighty Tyrant: Why are they not afraid of his
Resentments?

Page 23. He says, Now if such a Substance as this be not to be called an
Alkaly (meaning the Spirit which he draws from Blood) I should be glad to be
informed what is. I shall not here inform him, what Medicines are truly called
Acids, and what Alkalies: It is sufficient to show, that he does not know,
which I have already done, since he calls Steel and Antimony Acids, which have
always been found to correct Acidities, and by their Effects to be Alkalies;
but he asks, whether this Spirit be not an Alkaly? To this I shall give him
this brief Answer; That if all Substances were either Alkalies or Acids, it
would be more properly called an Acid, than an Alkaly; but since all Substances
are not to be classed under those two Heads, it is neither an Acid nor an
Alkaly, and because he knows not what else to call it, I shall tell him, he
must call it a Spirit; and since it is drawn from an Oily Substance the Blood
(according to what he says Page 7. of his Appendix to his Essay of Alkalies and
Acids) it must consequently be an Acid, all Oily Substances, according to him,
being Acids. But he says, it is an Alkaly, because it turns Syrop of Violets
Green; if for that reason it were to be called an Alkaly, then what he says in
his Appendix, is not only proved false, by what I have there said, but by his
own Words here also; but that it may appear he is mistaken here also, I must
put him in mind, that Acids will turn Syrop of Violets Green, as well as
Alkalies, viz. Arsnick, and Sublimate, the first of which I have proved to be
an Acid in his Appendix to his Essay, and the latter in the beginning of his
Book of the Gout, and indeed it is the most unreasonable thing in the World,
thence to conclude any thing either to be an Acid or Alkaly, because both
Alkalies and Acids will turn Syrop of Violets Green; and we may not only
observe different Substances to have the same Effects in respect of Color, in
this Experiment, but even throughout Nature; for Aloes and Cinnamon are much of
the same color, but different in all other respects; Sugar and Sublimate are
of the same color, yet the one is innocent, and the other strong Poison; but
tho all are not to be esteemed Alkalies, that turn Syrop of Violets Green, yet
it is certain, a great many will; and I have therefore in Answer to his Book of
the Gout, granted, That allowing the Doctrine of Acids and Alkalies to be true
(which is by no means) his Experiment was good, and upon those Grounds I showed
also, that the Experiment is very strong proof against what he builds upon it;
I shall also here upon the same terms grant, that this Spirit is an Alkaly, and
also show, that though it be allowed to be so, it will prove against him, viz.
that Acids are the Causes of Distempers: In order to which I shall further take
notice, that Page 23. He says, In examining the foregoing Experiments, it
plainly appears, that the Blood of People laboring under the Distempers there
mentioned, does afford a much greater Quantity than that of the Healthy Person.
But this, I say, proves, that there is a great deal more Acids in the Blood of
those Distempered People, and does not at all prove, that there is more
Alkalies; for the Blood of Healthful People has as much Alkalies in it, as
distempered Blood, as I have showed in answer to his Introduction, in his
Treatise of the Gout; and the difference of the Blood and Serum in respect of
the Distemper, is only this, that the distempered Mass abounds more plentifully
with Acids, by which means it is more viscous and soapy, and is subject to
those Coagulations, that healthful Peoples Blood is free from: And this being
already proved, the reason why distempered Blood yields more of that Spirit,
than healthful Blood, is very plain, from that Observation I, in another part
of my Answer to that Book, have laid down: For I there observed, common
Distillers, who draw Inflamable Spirits from Wort, take notice that before it
is sour, and degenerated into an acid Liquor, it yields less Spirit than after
it has acquired that acidity; those acid Particles being a more compact
Subject for the Fire to work upon; and as that Wort yields more Spirit, the
more it degenerates from its Sweetness to an acid State; so the sweet Mass of
Blood, the more it is impregnated with those Acids, that cause it to coagulate;
the more it yields of that Spirit; the Volatile Parts of the Blood being made
sharper by the Union of those more compact pointed Particles, and also being
more plentifully yoked together and kept from flying away, by which means
greater Quantities of that Alkaly is raised by the Fire, and carried off by
Distillation.

All that is contained further in favor of his Hypothesis, from Page 24. to
Page 29. is, That the Fire produces no new Substances, which were not existent
in Bodies before, and if any one will demonstrate such a thing without Fallacy,
he will own himself his humble Servant. How far he will be my humble Servant, I
value not, I would only desire him to be humble where he has reason, and then
he would, like an honest Man, follow his Trade again; for he cannot long make
People believe that giving two or three Medicines without Reason or Judgment,
is cutting off Hydra's Heads, or performing any such Exploits; and if he does
not draw in his Horns in a little time, he may expect, that Ingenious Gentlemen
will be undeceived, and laugh at his Knight-Errantry; but if he has a mind to
be my humble Servant, I shall demonstrate it to him from his own Words, that
new Substances are produced, which were not existent before, not only by Fire,
but without it. For Page 12. He says, That Bodies of very different Natures may
and do receive Nutrition, and increase from one and the same Substance, which
in it self seems to be simple and homogeneous: And this is what he had learned
from Mr. Boil; and that not only the Honorable Mr. Boil, but all
Philosophers of any Note, have agreed, That tho Fire cannot create a new
Substance, yet by Fire the Form of Matter may be so changed and modifyed anew,
as to produce a new Substance out of any Body, which in respect of its Form is
a new Body different from all others, and not existing in that Body from whence
it was drawn; and I appeal to all those Gentlemen he has so often appealed to,
whether those Substances, which he draws from Blood, by analizing it, be not
different in color and taste from Blood it self, from whence it is drawn.

All that is further contained in what he says from Page 27. to Page 32. is,
That the Inferences he draws from the Serum of the Blood turning Syrop of
Violets Green, prove the Blood to abound with Alkalies; and to show that two or
three, besides himself, have used the same Experiment to as little purpose as
he has done. How far that Experiment pleads against him, I have already
sufficiently shown in the beginning of his Treatise of the Gout, so that there
is no need I should repeat it again so often: And as for what he says of Dr.
Fran. Andre of Caen. and Swalve, the same Answer I gave to him, will be an
Answer to them; so that all the Service these two Doctors will do Mr. Colbatch,
is to show that the Experiment he there laid down was none of his own, he only
having borrowed it from another Man, as much mistaken as himself in this Point.

Page 34, 35. He says, That the Blood of sick People, in all or most
Distempers, does abound with such Particles, more than that of those that are
in a State of Health; and if you take an equal proportion of the Serum of the
Blood of a Healthy Person, and that of a Person in a Fever, Pleurisy, etc. and
pour them into equal quantities of Syrop of Violets of the same Strength, you
will find that whereon the sick Person's was poured, will be much greener than
the other; and if you commit the Blood of a distempered and a healthful Person
to Distillation, the former will yield more Alkaly. How distempered Blood comes
to yield more Spirit, I have already showed, viz. because there is more acid to
inviscate and embody the Spirit, and how in some Cases, as the Gout, etc. the
Serum of the Blood comes to turn Syrop of Violets greener, notwithstanding the
Distemper proceeds from Acids, I shall here briefly explain; and to make it
more intelligible, we are to consider, what State the Mass of Blood of a
distempered Person is in, taken collectively, and with respect to the whole,
and how it differs from healthful Blood; and here we may remember, that I
observed before, that the Essential Difference betwixt healthful Blood, and
distempered, was that Viscidity observable in the whole Mass of Humors; from
whence it appeared, that this Experiment had no power in trying the different
degrees of its Viscidity, but only showed the difference betwixt the thin
Serum, which our Author says, turns Syrop of Violets greener, when distempered;
and as I there showed of what little force his Experiment was, except against
himself, I shall now show, that tho it turns Syrop of Violets greener than
healthful Peoples Blood, it is of no use to him; for we are to observe, that
wherever there are fiery acid Salts in a State of Fluidity in the Blood, these
meeting with the Spirits at the Extremities of the Vessels, where the Blood and
Spirits are mixed together, cause a preternatural Ferment, by which means the
Volatile, and most Spirituous parts, are put into a more brisk and violent
motion, than what is consistent with the Natural Temper of the Blood; and thus
accidentally being put into motion, too much exagitate the Mass of Blood, by
which means it is volatile parts are dissolved; and as the Learned Dr. Willis
expresses it, carried forth into a State of Fluidity or Exaltation, the
distempered Matter being partly or wholly thrown off into some Part or the
Habit of the Body; but the coagulated distempered Matter, is not only thrown
off by this preternatural Ferment, seperating it from the purer Mass, and
leaving it in these Parts; but the Serum of the Blood is also, by that means,
more plentifully impregnated with those Spirituous Particles, which turn Syrop
of Violets green: From whence it appears, that tho the Viscidity which causes
the coagulated Serum to obstruct, proceeds from Acids; yet the volatile parts
of the Blood being thus accidentally exalted by fermenting with more Spirituous
Acids, accidentally cause the Serum of the Blood of such Persons, to turn Syrop
of Violets greener than that of healthful People does.

But perhaps Mr. Colbatch may have it put into his Head, That if the Cause of
the Distemper should proceed from Acids; the Alkalies thus exalted, would
correct those Acids, and cure the Distemper without Medicines: To this I should
answer, that it would, and does so; which is the reason so many of those
Distempers go off without the Assistance of Physic, that acid coagulated
Humor being at the last digested, and by destroying the Acids, reduced to a
State of Tenuity, and as in a Pleurisy, etc. the Mass of Blood is apparently
more clammy than healthful Blood; so it is observed, that when that acid that
causes it thus to coagulate, is conquered, it again becomes thin, and tho
alkalious, yet healthful, that Viscidity being taken off, which caused the
Distemper, as in the Gout, Rheumatism, etc. But if the quantity of acid be so
much, that the volatile Parts of the Blood thus exalted, cannot overpower it,
then that is never conquered without the assistance of Medicines which correct
and carry off the Acidities of the Blood. But to proceed;

Page 36. He says, If there were not a Principle of Death within us, how is it
possible for a Man one Hour to be in a good State of Health, and the very next
to be expiring? What Mr. Colbatch means by a Principle of Death, no Body on
this side the Grave can well tell; for amongst all the Philosophy I have yet
read, I never heard of such a Principle; but Poor Man he writes like one that
groped in the Dark; and since all along throughout his Books he has been in
it, we must not think strange that he is so now.

From Page 37* to Page 42, He makes a long Speech, in which all that is
contained, is, That all the Alkalies in the Blood, are Excrement, and are in
the way to be carried off, but being hindered by Obstructions, or by taking
cold, and so preventing these Excrements from being carried off. What
Excrements are Alkalies, according to his Notions, and what are not, or whether
any are, I shall not now determine; but granting that they all were Alkalies, I
shall show that those Distempers are caused by Acids; for we must take notice,
that as long as this alkalizated Serum is carried off, so long our Bodies are
healthful, and free from Distempers; but as soon as this Alkaly is hindered from
going off, then our Bodies are distempered; from whence it appears, that
whatever hinders that Alkaly from going off, is the Cause of those Distempers;
which, he says, are either Obstructions, or taking Cold. As to the first, viz.
Obstructions: Whatever causes Obstructions, must hinder the Excrements from
going off that way; and that Alkalies cannot cause those Obstructions, is
plain, because all that goes off that way in a Natural State, according to him,
is Alkaly, and yet does not obstruct; so that all Substances (if what he says
were true) being either Alkalies or Acids, from the first to the last it
appears, that Acids must cause those Obstructions which cause the Distemper,
and that Acids will thicken and coagulate is plain from his own Words; and also
because taking Cold occasions such Obstructions as prevent the Alkaly from
going off, which taking Cold can no otherwise do, but by the Acid Nitre of the
Air coagulating and obstructing those Humors: So that granting the Excrements
to be Alkalies, all Distempers must proceed from Acids coagulating those
Alkalies. And Mr. John Colbatch has Vindicated his Hypothesis prettily; here
we may see what a penetrating Judgment he has, and what vast short Foresight;
And is not this a fit Man to have Peoples Lives entrusted in his Hands? How
must he give Medicines with any certainty as to the Event, who speaks thus
without understanding the Consequence of his Words?

Page 42. He says, All Alkalies that I know off, will presently cause
Rottenness and Putrefaction in Animal Substances, as may be seen in making of
Glovers Leather, an Instance of which I have given in my Tract of the Gout,
etc. This truly is very ingeniously done, who would ever have thought he could
have kept any thing in his Head so long, who throughout his Book has been so
forgetful; but to speak the Truth, he has reason to remember his Philosophical
Companion, who furnished him with such a neat Phrase as through-stitch in the
beginning of his Book, and communicated to him also that Wonderful Observation
of the Skins of Animals; but why will all Alkalies presently cause Rottenness,
and we who are so full of Alkalies live a great many Years, and are no more
Rotten than himself? But in his Preface to the Gout, he has observed, that
when we Die, our Flesh presently rots; but what advantage is that to him? It
only shows, that in a Natural State, our Bodies ought to have more Alkalies in
them than Acids, and consequently if Alkalies Naturally abound in our Bodies,
Acids must be most prejudicial which are quite contrary to the Natural,
Constitution of our Blood.

From Page 43 to Page 64, all he says being an Attempt to prove, that Life is a
Flame and also what supplies it, I having already in a late Treatise Of the
Heat of the Blood, and of the Use of the Lungs, made it appear, in Answer to
Dr. Willis his Opinion (of which his seems to be but scraps) that there is no
such Thing as Flame in the Blood, I shall not here repeat, that but refer him
and the Reader to that Book for an Answer, and shall here proceed to consider
what he further asserts in favor of Acids, all that is contained in those
Pages being already answered.

From Page 64 to Page 89, his Book is filled up with nothing but an Answer to
some Objections raised by Mr. Tuthil, but as there is nothing Material either
in the Objections or the Answers to them, they being inconsiderable and simple
I shall pass them by, and leave them two like Children to squabble it out,
since in such Nonsense it is no great matter which overcomes.

Page 90, Mr. Colbatch says, But supposing Acids to be the most proper
Medicines in the World to ease Pain, as I believe they are, yet it is not
improbable but upon giving a small Quantity of Acids in such Cases, where there
is a large Quantity of Alkaly lodged up in any Part, so as to cause Pain, it
may only in Part dissolve the Alkaly, which was more fixed, and so by
continuing the Use of the Acid, the Alkaly would be perfectly dissolved and
extirpated, and so the Pain would altogether vanish: But Pain being sometimes
exasperated, upon the first giving them in too small Quantities, has, I doubt
not, been one great Cause of deterring People from proceeding in the Use of
them. What stronger Proof could be brought by any one against Mr. John Colbatch
then what Mr. John Colbatch brings: For this confirms what I said against the
Use of Acids in the Gout, where I proved that those Acid Medicines, in the
first Case he mentions did so exasperate the Pain as to make it the most
terrible Fit he ever saw, and now he himself confesses, that Acids do really
cause the Pain in the Gout to be more sharp; but then he says, the Acids only
cause pain by dissolving the Alkaly, but that the Acids do not cause Pain by
dissolving the Alkalies is plain, because Acids according to what he said in
his Essay of Alkalies and Acids, will not dissolve but confirm the Texture of
those Coagulated Acids; for he there says in his Chapter of the Gout, that by
drinking much Wine, the Alkalies of the Blood Coagulating those Acids, the
Matter of the Gout is increased; from whence as I before observed it follows
that when his Acids come to the Part affected and there mix with those
Alkalies, the Alkalious will according to him Coagulate the Acid, and
consequently instead of dissolving will increase the Obstruction, and that
Acids are thus pernicious, is also proved from what the Philosophical Glover
Mr. Yardly communicated to him; for if Acids hardened the Skins that were
softened by Alkalies, it therefore follows that Acids will also hearden that
coagulated Matter, and that consequently Alkalies are proper Medicines to
dissolve it.

Thus I have gone over all that is Material relating to a further Assertion of
the Use of Acids, and have showed that all he said is false and so far from
being a further Assertion of what he has said before, that it is but a
Repetition of what he said before in his other Books, and now I have gone over
all his Books I cannot but reflect and think, that I have spent a whole Month
in such intolerable Absurdities as his Books are made up with, and could
almost condemn my self for spending so much time upon such stuff, were it not
to undeceive that Part of the World that is imposed on by so Grand an Emperick,
a Man ignorant and unlearned in Knowledge, dangerous and erroneous in Practice,
and now can any ingenious Gentlemen reflect on these grand Mistakes, notorious
Blunders that his Books are filled with, together with his Insolence and rude
insulting Behavior, daring to cast Aspersions on the whole Learned World, I
say can they reflect on these things and not think him very Vain and Impudent?
What Usage must this Man deserve? Who reproaches all Physicians upon such false
Grounds, when there is such evident Proof that he is miserably Mistaken, what
Punishment great enough and what Scorn and Contempt equal to his Demerits?

But if Gentlemen love to be imposed upon, if they had rather retire into
another World and are fatigued with this; I shall not envy them, in their
choice of such a Physician, but pity their hard Fortune, nay if they must needs
admire him, I desire they may, as they value another World, before this; and
let them consider what I have said, and if they can pardon such Absurdities, if
they can extenuate his Ignorance and dull Faults, if they can look over so dark
a Character as his, and be pleased with it, and think well of such a Man, may
they ever admire him till they find the fatal Consequences of such Absurd
Practice.

A VINDICATION OF Dr. FRY of Oxford, In a late CASE OF Edmund Turner Esquire,
etc.
I Shall to close up this Book last of all proceed to a Vindication of that
Learned Dr. Fry, against the unreasonable Proceedings of Mr. Colbatch, and
shall show that in the case that they were concerned in, Dr. Fry proceeded like
a rational judicious Man, and Mr. Colbatch like a mad Man without
Consideration, Reason, or Moderation, and here I shall not wholly transcribe
all the Passages he here relates, wherein it appears, that he who is made up of
nothing but Ignorance and Conceit, was Insolent and Sausy toward a Man of no
less Learning and Judgment than Dr. Fry; but I shall draw the Matter in as
little Compass as I can, and shall only take notice, though Mr. Colbatch here
has the liberty to state the Case according to his own Mind, true or false, as
it will best serve his turn, yet it will be nothing at all to his Credit but
expose his weakness and Infirmities. The Case as he states it was thus.

On Saturday night Mr. Turner with two other Gentlemen sat down to Drink and
continued at it, till seven or eight next Morning -- at which time they all
went to bed, the other two Gentlemen lay in Bed the whole Day, and eat nothing
but Watergrewel; but Mr. Turner in the Afternoon got up and eat boiled Mutton,
with a great deal of strong Broth and Mushrooms in it, and drank plentifully
both of Wine and prodigious strong Beer, and then went to bed again and
presently fell a Sleep, but early next Morning, he awaked in the most dreadful
condition imaginable. When I came to him, his Circumstance were as follow;

He had a violent Pleurisy and Peripneumony upon him, a most sharp Pain in his
left side and a prodigious shortness of Breath, he also complained of a
wonderful Nausea, and Sickness of his Stomach, and had a Fever upon him, etc.

This was Mr. Turners Case as Mr. Colbatch states it, and likely it might be
true, but how Madam Turner and her Relations will dispense with Mr. Colbatch
his Publishing, that Mr. Turner killed himself with Drinking I know not; but if
she is pleased with it, with all my Heart. My Design being only to show, how
like a Rational Physician Dr. Fry acted, and how absurdly Mr. Colbatch
prescribed, I shall briefly take notice of the Cause of this Distemper, that it
may more clearly appear whether of them was in the right.

The Distemper then was a Pleurisy joined with a Peripneumony and Nausea at his
Stomach, now it being observed, that in all Pleuritick Blood, the Mass of Blood
abounds with sizy clammy Serum, and that the Blood it self is also too thick,
it is plain, that the Obstructions in the Pleurisy must proceed from that
Viscid Matter, and consequently from a mixture of Acids which caused that Blood
to Coagulate, which I have sufficiently made evident in Opposition to him
throughout his Books, it being also observed that in all Peripneumonies, the
Lungs are inflamed, and it being most certain that those Inflammations proceed
from hot fiery Particles, which circulate through that Part. And Lastly, that
all Nausea in Surfeits proceed from something that lies upon the Stomach, and
affects it Preternaturally, we have Reason to believe, and that his Fever and
Inflammation proceeded from those hot Liquors he had Drank, and that the
Obstructions of Pleura was caused by that Mutton which he eat; for his Stomach
being surfeited with Drink and unfit to digest what he eat, and those Crudities
being carried along with those Liquors into the Capillary Vessels of the
Pleura, would undoubtedly be subject to Obstruct there, and were, together with
the Liquors he drank, the Cause of his Distemper, and as for his Nausea it is a
common Symptom after a Surfeit.

Thus I have briefly taken a view of the cause of this Distemper and shall now
with all the Brevity, the Case will admit of, proceed to consider whether of
them took the true Method to remove these Symptoms, and for that end I shall
take a View of the Medicines prescribed by each. And First, I shall show how
Rationally and Judiciously Dr. Fry ordered Mr. Turner, which Method, had it
been continued, might undoubtedly have saved his Life. The Medicines prescribed
by Dr. Fry were according to Mr. Colbatch his Account as follow;

For Mr. Turner August 31. 1697.

. Ol. sem. lin. rec. (sine igne) extract. lib. semis.

. Sir. Balsam* Tolut. unc. quatuor.

What more Rational could any Physician have prescribed, than by Balsmatick
Medicines to heal the Stomach and Lungs, and to guard them from the sharpness
of those Liquors, but Mr. Colbatch was afraid the Oil would increase the Nausea
at the Stomach, but what a groundless Fear was that; for nothing is more common
than for common Drunkards after a Surfeit to drink great Quantities of Oil to
heal their Stomachs, and that Balsamicks are proper when the Lungs are so
affected, is found by Experience, nothing being more common than to take
Balsams for to heal the Lungs, and to correct those humors that inflame them,
so that so far Dr. Fry proceeded according to Reason and Experience, the next
Prescriptions were;

. Antimon. Diaphoret. Coral. Rub. pp. Margarit. pp* ana Drach. duas. m. f.
pulv. in Chart. 12. aeq. reponend.

. Aq. Hyssop. cichorei. an unc. sex. Limacum. Mag. Lumbricor. Mag. an. Unc.
unam sem. Cinnam. hord Unc. unam. sir. Capill. ven. Violar. an. Drach. sex. m.
f. Julap.

. Emp. de Cicut. cum Ammon. uncias duas.

. Sem. Cum. Pulv. Unc. sem.

But for what end Mr. Colbatch has set down those Medicines is plain, viz. for
the honor and credit of Dr. Fry, for considering the cause of Mr. Turner's
Distemper, viz. that it proceeded from hot Liquors inflaming his Lungs and
crude raw Chyle obstructing his Pleura, what more Rational Method could be
taken than by Coral and Pearl, prepared to attenuate and dissolve that crude
indigested Matter, which obstructed the Pleura, and at the same time by
Diaphoretick Antimony to carry off those hot Liquors by a moderate Sweat; for
as long as they remained in the Mass of Blood, the Inflammation could never be
taken off, the Cause remaining in it. But Dr. Fry not only prudently gave these
Medicines to attenuate the Coagulated Matter, and to carry those hot Liquors
out off the Mass of Blood, by a moderate Sweat; but at the same time gave the
aforementioned Balsamicks to heal the Lungs in the mean time, and to abate the
Inflammation of the Pleura.

And that those might be the more serviceable to Mr. Turner, Dr. Fry, along
with the Powder gave also the Julep, which is made up of extraordinary good
Pectoral Medicines: The Hysop and Succory Water, together with the Syrup,
contributing to heal his Stomach and Lungs, and the Aq. Limac. and Lumbricor.
Mag. help to dissolve that Matter which caused his Pain, and also to carry off
Part of his Distemper, if possibly it might, by Urin, and again, that nothing
might be wanting, that could relieve Mr. Turner, Dr. Fry also used outward
Applications, applying Empl. de Cicut. cum Ammon. to dissolve that Matter that
obstructed the Pleura, that it might be carried off with less difficulty.

And now what Fault can be found with this, since there was all the Reason that
can be expected to make one hope for Success, from Good Medicines judiciously
prescribed? And what were the Effects? Mr. Colbatch himself truly confesses;
when he came to him, the Pain in his side was gone, and that he sweat
prodigiously, with a shortness of Breath; little Reason then had they to
discharge Dr. Fry, and Mr. Turner deservedly fell a Victim to Ignorance and Mr.
Colbatch; for had he been continued under the Care of Dr. Fry undoubtedly he
was in a fair way of Recovery; for the Pain in his side being taken away, was a
good sign that Dr. Fry's outward Application together with the Medicines he
gave inwardly had all the success could be hoped for, and now all that was to
be done was to carry off those hot Liquors that he had drunk, which were
discharged by Sweat, and had Dr. Fry been there who had Judgment and Skill to
manage him, without Question, after that Sweat, the Matter of his Distemper
being carried off, his Peripneumony with his shortness of Breath would have
gone off, and as for his Pulse it would have easily been raised by a moderate
Cordial.

But for as much as I can guess by the Account that Mr. Colbatch himself gives,
all the Reason that Dr. Fry was discharged was because Mr. Turner was so weak
with Sweating; but that was a Reason too small to part with a Physician that
had his Expectation so far in the removing of his Pleurisy. For what is more
common than for an Healthful Person, if he takes a Sweat to almost faint under
it, if it be violent, yet after that Sweat is over they presently recover and
find themselves better in a short time, and weakness in Mr. Turner's Case was
nothing but what might be expected in two such severe Distempers.

But one that would be cured in two Days, would not have Patience to stay
three, and therefore Mr. Colbatch was in all have sent for to be his Physician.

Accordingly Mr. Colbatch came and finding Nature throw off the distempered
Humor by Sweat, he presently poured in Acid Medicines, and was not content with
this but presently ordered him to be laid in clean Linen, by which means he
endeavored all he could to stop that Sweating, so that the distempered. Humor
that ought to be carried off, was in great measure prevented, which oppressing
Nature with it is Quantity, Mr. Turner from that time by degrees began to yield
to the Distemper, and submit himself Mr. Colbatch's Victim.

But that it may more plainly appear, that Mr. Turner's Death might rationally
be laid to his Charge, let us consider how Mr. Colbatch his Acid inwardly, and
his exposing his Body outwardly, would influence him, and first it is plain,
that let them be never so cautious, when his Body was in such a Sweat, and all
his Pores open, the Circumambient Air must needs affect it, and a great many of
it is Nitrous Particles, getting into the Pores of his Body (for as Mr. Colbatch
with his Spectacles perceived in his Treatise of the Gout, the Skin has
Receptory Pores) must needs thicken and coagulate the Serum of his Blood, which
in that Temper was capable of receiving the least Impression from without. Now
the Serum of the Blood being thus impregnated with Nitre, and at the same time
his Spirits being fixed and depressed by an internal Use of Acids, and withal
the Distempered Humor by that means kept in his Body: Death was all that could
be expected from such barbarous Usage; but that Mr. Colbatch may be condemned
by his own Words, I shall here to close up this Chapter, bring his Words to
witness against him, which prove, that his giving of Acids inwardly, and his
exposing him to the Ambient Air in such a condition was enough to kill, had he
been in a better Condition then he was; for P. 39 of this Treatise he says,
Sweat is an Alkalious Excrement and Page 37. All the Alkalies that there is to
be found in the Blood, is most certain an Excrement, and in a way of being
carried off by some of the Emuctories, and if any one of the Emuctories be
stopped, that this Excrementitious Alkaly has not room to pass out by them,
then there is a Distemper of some kind or other caused, the Blood being over
Charged with this Excrementitious Matter. How many Distempers are occasioned by
what we call taking cold, which is nothing else but a Constipation of the
Pores. And now from these Words it appears that whatever keeps this Excrement
from going off causes a Distemper, I having therefore from those Words in the
beginning of his Book showed, that Acids by Coagulating keeps it from going
off, it must needs follow Mr. Colbatch by this Usage stoping that Sweat,
hindered this Excrement from going off, and caused some Distemper, which joining
with his other Distempers, which he was scarce able to bear before, so
overcharged and oppressed Nature that the Poor Gentleman was forced to dye for
it.

Thus I have briefly taken a View of Mr. Turner's Case, wherein I have showed
the reasonable Proceedings of Dr. Fry, and the most absurd and fatal
Consequences of Mr. Colbatch his Acids, I shall now leave Mr. Colbatch to value
himself over his Nonsense, and like a Dunghill Cock to strut over his Rubbish,
he has Reason to be proud without Question, when he can perform such Exploits
as these in the midst of his Knight-Errantry without Control.

AN EXAMINATION OF Mr. John Colbatch HIS RELATION OF THE CURE Of a Person
Bitten by a VIPER, etc.

Wherein it is proved, That he neither Understands the Nature of those
Medicines he applied, nor the Cause of the Distemper.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1699.

AN EXAMINATION OF Mr. John Colbatch HIS RELATION OF THE Cure of a Person
Bitten by a Viper, etc.
WHilst the former Sheets were in the Press, Mr. Colbatch having published
another Specimen of his Ignorance, I shall in the next place proceed to an
Examination of it; and though one would think, what he has said was sufficient to
make the World cautious, yet I shall not think it too much trouble, to
undeceive it a little further; and to show, that the Person whom he pretends to
have cured by Acids, was by no means cured by Acids, but such Medicines as are
generally used to correct Acids, and sharp corroding Salts.

Which that I may do with all possible Brevity, I shall take the substance of
what he says; passing by all those unnecessary Tales which have no Relation to
the Cure: For his Book from the beginning to Page the 6th is filled up with an
Account, how foolishly the Man came to be bit with the Viper, and how
inconsiderately he was hurried about the Town afterward, which being nothing
to the purpose, I shall pass to his Method of Cure.

And here, First, it will be necessary to consider, wherein consists the Poison
of that Creature, and then we shall be better able to determine what were his
Proceedings in the Cure of it.

And because I don't only write to satisfy the Public, who are not competent
Judges; but also to undeceive Mr. Colbatch himself, I shall here confute what
he has said, by his own Words, we are therefore to believe, that all Bodies,
from which can be drawn by Chemical Analization, a Volatile Oil, are Acids, it
appearing from his Appendix of Acids and Alkalies, that all Oleaginous Bodies
are Acids; now if Mr. Colbatch will believe himself, he must disbelieve himself
also; for from what he says Page 12, viz. he affirming, that the Poison of
Vipers is not Acid, he denis what he said in his Appendix, where it is by his
own Words pronounced an Acid, because it contains an Oleaginous Substance; but
well may Mr. Colbatch go on to contradict himself, who has so often done it
before; for from his Writings it is plain, that the longer he writes, the worse
he manages what he pretends to.

But I shall not here urge, that the Poison of Vipers is an Acid, from what he
says in his Appendix; having in answer to that, made it appear, that what he
there says is false.

But we have great Reason to believe that the Poison of Vipers, is an Acid
corroding saline Humor, since in respect of the Blood, it causes for the most
Part, the same Symptoms with Mercurius Sublimat. which I have there proved to
be an Acid; for by that subtle corrosive Salt, with which it abounds; it
corrodes and corrupts the Mass of Blood, and by that Sulphurous Oil, which is
mixed with it at the same time, raises a Preternatural Ferment; those Parts
fermenting preternaturally with each other; and that it is an Acid, is further
evident: Because it has the same Effects which Acids generally have; for as it
is commonly known, that all Acids as Spirit of Vitriol, Alum, etc. dispose the
Mass of Blood to Coagulation, and that when the Stomach abounds with Acids, as
in Childrens Stomachs it curdles, so does this Poison curdle the Blood.

Page 14* He Instances Lemery's Concessions to prove it an Alkaly; but we have
so much Reason to believe, that it is an Acid, that except Lemery, or Mr.
Colbatch prove it, and disprove what I have said, we deny what he so willingly
grants. But,

Page 16, Mr. Colbatch says, Hoffman ridicules Charras for afferting, that it
is an Acid; for says he, if it were so, how could the Juice of Citrons (which
is an Acid) afford the Patient any Relief. But if this be all the Reason that
Hoffman, or Mr. Colbatch have to ridicule Charras; I am afraid they have very
sorry grounds for it; for it may very easily be understood, how a Volatile
Salt, though Acid, may be corrected by a crude Acid, for Volatile Salts consist
of Parts so minutely rarefied, that they are easily dissolved, and put into so
brisk a Ferment, as to penetrate and corrupt the whole Mass in a small time;
whereas fixed crude Acids, whose Parts are unapt for Motion, are not so easily
dissolved, but mixed with those more fierce volatile Salts, take off their
force, and dull the Edges of them, and stop their Motion by lying in their way,
and from hence appears the Reason why Elixir Vitrioli, abated the Symptoms, for
the present, which he mentions Page 6, not because that Elixir expelled the
Morbifick Matter, but yoked up the more Volatile Parts of the Poison, for a
while.

But to prove more fully, that the force of this Poison depends on a corroding
Acid Salt, let us consider the Method of Cure, where he gives. Fol. Rutae. Rad.
Angelic. Hyspan. and Rad. Serpenter. Virginens. in great Quantities. Now if we
look into Sennertus, the Medicines which are there are of the same Nature with
these, which are all used to expel Poison, and to correct Acidities, which
coagulate and thicken the Mass of Blood; yet these Medicines Mr. Colbatch must
needs call Acids; but from hence it appears, that they are so far from being
Acids, that they are indeed quite opposite, and although, as I have often taken
notice, Mr. Colbatch takes the Liberty to change the Names of Things, and calls
them what he pleases, yet he might with equal Reason call Sower, Bitter, as
Bitter Acid; but since it is evident from the Taste of these Medicines that
they are by no means Acids, and from the Books of Learned Men, that they are
used amongst those Antidotes, which expel Poison and correct Acids, it
consequently follows, that they cannot be Acids themselves, but we have Reason
to believe the Poison is Acid, because these which are of a contrary Nature to
Acids expel it.

But Mr. Colbatch will say, that though these be not Acids, yet since he gave
Acids along with them, it could not have been cured without those, but we are
rather thence to understand, how sorrily Mr. Colbatch understands the Practical
Part of Physic; who gives one Medicine to expel, and another to to hinder it is
Explusion, and that Acid would hinder, and not promote the Expulsion of the
Poison is plain, from Mr. Colbatch his Method, which he took with Esquire
Turner; for there to the Gentleman's great Disadvantage, he acknowledges, that
the design of his giving Acids was to stop Sweating, and to keep the
Distempered Matter from going off by Transpiration, and if Acids there would
stop Transpiration, and hinder the Distempered Matter from going off; by the
same Rule also, it would hinder the Poison from being expelled; and it must
needs contribute much to the Honor of the Ingenious Mr. Colbatch, that he
gives one thing to expel Poison, and at the same time another thing to prevent
the good Effects of that; Contradiction is one of his greatest Qualifications,
and therefore he ought to be looked upon for it, withal the Respect due to such
Merits.

And Mr. Stringer may thank God, that he had such a Prudent Man as Dr. Slone
along with him, who knew how to manage so Dogmatical an Impostor, as Mr.
Colbatch; for had there not been enough of Virginian Snake Weed, to overpower
the Acids, and to expel the Poison, it would have soon returned with it is full
Force, the Acid only being able to check it, and keep it under for a while, and
by no means to prevent it is ill Effects, for the future; for as it is an old
Maxim so it is as true.

Sincerum nisi Vas quicquid infundis acescit. And thus much may serve in Answer
to what Mr. Colbatch says concerning a Viper; for though he has troubled himself
to tell a Parcel of idle Tales, which are so much unfit to appear in Print,
that they ought not to be mentioned even in Conversation, yet I shall not think
it necessary to take notice of them, all that he says in relation to the Cure
of the Viper being contained in three Leaves.

An EXAMINATION of what Mr. Colbatch says further in Vindication of his
Hypothesis.
HAving already proved, that what he says concerning the Cure of the Person bit
by a Viper, so far from being any thing to his Credit, that it only shows his
Ignorance, I shall now proceed to examine what he says further, in favor, of
his Hypothesis.

And having before in my Examination of his last Book, given my real Sentiments
of this Controversy betwixt Mr. Tuthil and Mr. Colbatch, viz. That they are
both out of the way, and are so far mistaken, that neither of them says any
thing to the purpose, I shall not enlarge here, but shall only take Notice of
what Mr. Colbatch has said further in favor of his Absurdities; and shall
pass by all those impertinent and frivolous Stories, which are rather a Scandal
to Physic, than themselves, because any Body that has Judgment, and reads
their Nonsense, are certified nothing better can be expected from them.

Yet notwithstanding their Ignorance, they compliment one another very
prittily, and Mr. Colbatch declares his design in so doing, is, only to show
his respect to one, that he hopes can do him no service in convincing him.

But to examine what relates to his Absurdities concerning Acids and Alkalies
Page 25* He says; In very many Consumptive Cases, it is usual for the Patient
to spit up perfect Chalk, and that in great quantities: Now if the Blood were
overcharged with Acids in Consumptions, the whole mass passing so frequently
through the Lungs, could not fail of being sweetened by the Chalky Alkaly. How
absurd it is to call tough Phlegm, Chalk, will be so evident to any one that
mispends their time in reading his Book, that it would be unnecessary to say
any more concerning it: and that, though it were an Alkaly, it would not at all
contribute to sweeten the Blood, will appear from what I have already said,
when he asserted the same Absurdity, about that Coagulated Matter which makes
up the Nodes in the Gout, viz. that it lies out of the way of Circulation, or
if it did not, it could absorb Acids no longer, when once it is Pores were
filled, which would be in a Moment; but it is evident, that it is so far from
being an Alkaly, that it is only crude Serum too much thickened by Acids, and
hardened into Phlegm, the Watery Parts being evaporated by Heat. And that it is
the Nature of Acids to thicken such Humors has sufficiently appeared from what
I have said, and from himself in Mr. Turner's Case, where he gives Acids, which
thickning the Serum of the Blood made it incapable of going off by
Transpiration.

Page 27* He says; The Phosporus is a true Animal fire, and is to be extracted
from all Animal substances; and if it did not exist in them, how is it
possible, for it to be extracted from them. To this one that does not
understand Physic may answer, as possible as for a Cart Wheel to be made of a
Tree, which People don't therefore conclude existent in the Tree in the Form of
a Wheell; but this is an Instance which a Coach-Maker may give against his
Book, and therefore I shall give him a Philosophical One, and shall leave him
to consider, whether there be fire in a green and growing Tree, and if it be,
how comes it not to show it self, when we are certain most of it is Substance
may be turned into Fire.

Page 31* He says, I do still affirm that Fevers in general do proceed from a
Constipation of the Emunctories. And this Affirmation is very little to his
purpose, for since he elsewhere says, that all the Excrements of our Bodies are
Alkalies, Alkalies cannot hinder their Evacuations, but only Acids, which by
contracting the Pores of those Emunctories, and withal thickning the Serum,
make it unfit to be carried off.

Page 34* He says, By the way I beg of you that you will not rank the Rad.
Serpentariae with the Pulv. e chelis and Spr. CC. for the Rad. Serpentariae
belongs to me. Truly Mr. Colbatch does well to claim his Privileges, but there
is no other Reason why it should not be classed with Pulv. e chelis, but this,
that it corrects Acids abundantly more powerfully, and if that which evidently
tastes Bitter and destroys Acids can be an Acid, then Acid is Bitter, and Black
is White, but till Mr. Colbatch can prove that, Rad. Serpentariae will be no
Acid.

Page 35* He says, I do boldly assert, that in no Fever that ever I have yet
met with, let them be either Benign or Malign, have I ever yet observed, that
the Patient has been in the least Sensible of any Acidity in the Stomach or
Mouth. But notwithstanding Acidity is not perceivable in the Mouth, yet it is
probable and true, that Acidity is the occasion of the foulness perceived
there, by making it too thick and clammy to go off, by other proper Passages,
and Mr. Colbatch so far is Block-head-like in the Right of it; for sometimes
they have a clammy bitter Taste in their Mouths, but yet according to his own
Confessions, Acids are the Cause of that Bitter Taste; for he says Acids are
Bitter, Namely, Rad. Serpentariae. Again if Acids are Bitter, perhaps he will
say Choler is an Acid, and no doubt, but if it were for his purpose, he would
say so, had he not elsewhere called it an Alkaly. But that it may be more
evident, that Acidity is the Cause of all those ill Tastes, which Feverish
People have, we are to remember, that he often asserts, that all the Excrements
of our Body are Alkalies, and if so, Acidity is the Cause of those ill Tastes
in the Mouth, because they alone, according to the Doctrine of Acids and
Alkalies, can hinder these Alkalies from going off by their proper Emunctories,
which I have sufficiently proved before, and therefore need not say any more
here.

Page 41. First He says; The Life of Man is Flame, etc. And Page 42 he asks, If
Fire is not actually existent in Animal Bodies, how is it possible it should be
extracted from them? As for the first of these I have Answered it sufficiently
in my Treatise of the Heat of the Blood, and therefore I shall refer the Reader
to that for an Answer, it being not necessary to transcribe all that I have
there said in Answer to Dr. Willis his Opinion.

All that he further says from Page 42 to 54, is to assert, that there is Flame
in the Blood, and that there is no Fermentation. But it being only Dr. Willis
his Opinion, I shall also refer the Reader for an Answer there, and I wonder
Mr. Colbatch did not think fit to Vindicate Dr. Willis from those Objections,
but the Reason I believe is, because he could not; for when I was lately in
London, he told me he had writ something to this purpose, and when I asked
whether he had answered my Book, he told me he did not love to mix his Notions
with other Men's, and that he would not read my Book till his was printed,
which I conceive was only an Excuse, because at that time he had writ most of
this Book, against Tuthill, and was willing to print it, against him, though at
the same time he knew my Book contained a Confutation of it, all that he says
coming to no more, than that the Blood grows hot by Accension and not by
Fermentation; the former of which is sufficiently confuted in my Answer to Dr.
Willis, and though I have asserted, that the Blood grows hot by Fermentation, yet
any one that reads my Book, and compares it with what he says, will see, that I
don't mean by Fermentation, such a Fermentation as he here denies, but only
such a Degree of Motion, of the Minute Particles of Matter, as are able to
cause a Sensation of Heat upon our Sensory.

Page 44. To prove that Heat is not produced after the Cartesian Hypothesis, He
says; I can assure you I know several Fluids the more brisk they are moved, the
colder they are; as for Instance, a River is always colder in that Place where
there is a quick Current, than where the Water stands still: The Air is always
more or less cold, according as the Motion of it is greater or lesser, and I
can assure you, I have been almost starved when forced to Travel in the high
Winds in the Winter time, at which Season the Air is most full of Nitrous
Particles. And again Page 50, He says; If the progressive Motion from the Heart
to the Extremities gives it it is Heat, by the same Reason, I think the Water
which runs from our Cocks should be warm also. Now from hence we way easily
gather, what an extraordinary Philosopher Mr. Colbatch is, who attributes the
Heat or Cold of Fluids, to a collective Motion of a whole Mass, instead of the
Particles which constitute that Mass; for he says a River is Coldest where the
Current is greatest, and to this I Answer, that I, having given the Reason of
Heat, in my Treatise of the Reason of the Heat of the Blood, I need not repeat
it again; but least Mr. Colbatch, when he finds it there, cannot apply it, I
shall tell him, that the Reason why Wind and Water, tempestuously moved, cause
Cold, is, because those Parts are more forcibly driven upon the Sensory; and
how they cause a Cold Sensation there, is plain from what I have said
concerning the Use of the Lungs, in admitting Nitre into the Blood, where I
have asserted, that, though Nitre be in a gentle Motion it self, when Fluid in
the Air, yet it is Naturally inclinable to rest, and disposes those Humors to a
rest with which it is mixed; for which reason Water freezes in the Winter; and
though the Water and Air in which this Nitre swims be in Motion, yet that is not
such a Motion as causes Heat; for a Sensation of Heat depends on Matter in such
a degree of Motion as is a little above Nature, which preternaturally affecting
us, causes Heat, and that Motion, is not a Motion of a whole Mass collectively,
but a swift intestin Motion of the Parts of that Matter subtilized and rarefied
to a certain Degree; from whence it appears, that tho Water and Air be in
Motion, yet the Nitre which swims in them, being laid down upon the Sensory,
disposes those Fluids about it to rest, by which means there being a lower
degree of Motion, than is requisite to preserve a Natural Temper, we feell a
contrary Sensation to Heat, and if so, the more these Nitrous Parts are forced
upon our Body, the greater must be the Cold.

And as for what he says of the Progressive Motion of the Blood in the Vessels,
I never heard that any ever affirmed it to be the Cause of Heat; so that there
he might have spared what he has said against no Body; but though Water in a
River moved by some accidental Cause in a whole Stream, does not grow hot, yet
if it be set over a Fire where it has an Agent subtle enough to work upon
it is Minute Parts, and to put them in Motion, it soon changes it is Temper.

Page 61* He says, I am very glad you own Alkalies to abound in Pleurisies and
Rheumatisms and other Inflammatory Distempers. But Mr. Colbatch must not think,
that all the World grants it, because Mr. Tuthill cannot defend Truth, and
therefore I having proved, that all those Distempers proceed from Acids, I
expect he should confute what I have said, or he gives up his Cause.

Page 64, He says; Now for want of a due Secretion by the Excretory Vessels,
the Blood is clogged with too great a Quantity of Serum, which Serum being
admitted into the Lymphatick Vessels, and being impregnated with Alkaline
Particles, cannot freely pass along these Vessels by Reason of it is gelatinous
Quality, etc. And again Page 65 and 66 He says; Such are the Excretory Glands
of the Skin, the Glandulae Renales, the Glands of the Liver, etc. all which
separate an Alkaly from the Blood to be thrown off by Excrement, and if by any
Accident these Glands are made incapable of performing their Office; so that
the Blood cannot be rid of it is Excrements then a Distemper of some kind or
other must necessarily follow, and Page 69, This damnable Distemper (really a
very pretty Epithet) which although it be rately cured in a confirmed State,
yet in the beginning, nay after it has made some progress, is frequently to be
done, and that as effectually by Chalybeats and Bitters, as by any sort of
Medicines. But here for want of making Experiments, you say that Steel, and the
Bitter Herbs are Alkalies. And again, Page 72. He says, As for Bitters I will
be bound to lay a good Wager with you, that if you put a Pound of Centuary, or
Wormwood into a Retort, and distill it with an easy Fire till all be come off
that will, and afterward calcine the Caput Mortuum, and extract the fixed
Alkaly from the Ashes, if you don't find a much greater quantity of Acid than
Alkaly, etc. And from hence he would infer, that Bitters are Acids.

But he has rather taken an effectual way to prove the Insufficiency of
Chemistry, in discovering the Principles of Bodies; for if it will alter
Bitter, and turn most of it Acid, who can be so stupefied as to believe, that
this discovers the Nature of Bitter? Can Aloes be turned into Juice of Oranges,
and Aloes not be destroyed? It Is in vain to reason with such Idiots; yet this
is not all, we may throughout these Quotations see, how miserably the dull Soul
forgets himself, having repeated the same things often in other Books; and also
how blindly he contradicts himself here, according to his Custom; and how fully
he confutes himself. For first, Page 64. He says, The Serum being too much
impregnated with Alkaline Particles, cannot pass free through the Vessels, by
reason of its Gelatinous Quality; as if the Gelatinous Quality depended on a
Mixture of Alkalies, whereas it appears from the Experiment he mentions in his
Treatise of the Gout, that the whole Serum of Healthful People is Alkaline, and
abounds with Alkalies, where there is no such Gelatinous Quality; and therefore
as I have often taken notice, we are to conclude, that the Gelatinous Quality
depends on a mixture of too much Acid; because, as I before said, that is said
to be the Cause of an Effect, in whose Absence there is no such Distemper, but
on the contrary when mixed with it.

From whence it appears, that the Reason why the Excretory Glands cannot
perform their Office in evacuating Excrementitious Alkaly, as he says, Page 65,
66, is, because Acid is mixed with it; and this is certain from his own Words;
for if the Excrements be Alkalies naturally, they would not obstruct, were
there no Acids to coagulate them.

But let us see how coherent Mr. Colbatch is in his Thoughts. Page 69. He
asserts, That the Distemper, which in a Passion he calls Damnable, if curable
is to be cured by Chalybeats and Bitters, the former of which I have before
proved an Alkaly, and that Bitter is not Acid, any Body knows, that can
distinguish betwixt Tastes; but if Mr. Colbatch can persuade People, that
Wormwood is Acid, he may make any thing go down with them, but since Children
have too nice Palates to be so deceived, I hope those of riper Years have not
lost their Taste.

All that I need further to take notice of Mr. Colbatch his Productions in
these Quotations, is another Wonderful Confutation of himself: For Page 66, He
says, The bitter Excrement of the Liver, to wit, Choler, is an Alkaly: Yet Page
72. Bitters are Acids, and consequently Choler, as may be seen in the Words I
have quoted. I might take notice of other Absurdities and Falsities contained
in the foregoing Quotations, but what I have said being sufficient, I shall not
extend a Book of this kind to too large a Compass.

Page 91. He says, The Blood cannot super abound with Acids -- Because the
Stomach will not receive or retain more than it has occasion for. The Reason
he gives a little before, is, If at any time People are not sufficiently
cautious of that Matter, but load the Stomach with more manifest Acids than the
Body has occasion for, she will not fail of rejecting them by Vomit. That this is
false, every Body knows that have but lived in the World long enough to take
notice of what occurs daily; for nothing is more common than for Children to
bring Distempers upon themselves, by eating of unripe Fruit, and not only
Children, but grown People; and these Mr. Calbatch cannot deny to be Acids
surely, if he remembers what he ascribed long Life in Herefordshire to, viz.
eating Fruit; besides, it is too commonly known, that many People almost ruin
their Constitutions by drinking Vinegar, the very same Acid he mentions.

And thus I have gone through all that he further says, concerning the Use of
Acids, and proved it to be as absurd and ridiculous as the rest of his
Incoherences, and now shall leave him to consider when he writes again, whether
it will not be prudent to read his former Books over again, lest he, since he
is so forgetful, should be guilty of too much Repetition; for in what he has
already writ, he has repeated the same thing so many times over, that were the
Repetitions taken out, his Books might all be writ in half the Compass: And
now, since I have answered them all, I shall give him this Caution, That if he
repeats any thing again, which he has already writ, without necessity, I shall
only need in answer, to show where I have already confuted it.

FINIS.
AN ANSWER TO Dr. LEIGH's Remarks ON A TREATISE Concerning the Heat of the
Blood. Together with Remarks on Dr. Leigh's Book, Entitled Exercitationes
Quinque Printed at a Private Press in Oxford, without the License of the
University.

AS ALSO, A short View of Dr. Leigh's Reply to Mr. Colbatch, etc.

Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit Odorem Testa diu. --

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1699.

AN ANSWER TO Dr. Leigh's Remarks, etc.
SOON after I returned from London to Oxford, I received a Sheet of Paper
entitled, Remarks on my Book, concerning the Heat of the Blood; to which there
being no Name prefixed, I could not imagine who it should come from; but
presently after being informed by a Friend at Chester (who was concerned to see
that you had lost the Use of your Reason) that it was the elaborate Work of
such an unfortunate Author, and also having received a Letter from one in
Manchester, to whom I am obliged for acquainting me, that you are so fond of
it, as to own your self the Author of so polite a Piece; I had Reason to
ascribe the Praise and Honor due to a Work of so extraordinary Merit to the
inconsiderable Author; A Title, which I profess, I, by no means envy you for,
and therefore with all the Submission due to a Man so mighty in his own
Conceit, and so contemptuous in the Opinion of the Learned, I beg your Pardon,
if I am too forwards in contributing to your Character, by letting the World
know, to whom I am obliged for such a signal Token of Favor, and they for
sharp Wit and such a wonderful Strain of Fancy; Fancy! Below the common
Strain of rational Creatures, yet the strongest Efforts of Dr. Leigh's
Understanding; and what I hear is according to your laudable Custom, whenever
you meet with any thing that is contrary to your own wild Notions or a Subject
of your Envy.

I was indeed told by some Friends, that nothing which Dr. Leigh could write,
would be worth my taking Notice of; therefore this, by no means was:
Nevertheless, taking a Survey of your Remarks, and finding throughout the
whole, terrible strong Symptoms of a sick Brain, and not in the least Motives
to any thing but Pity, I thought it a piece of Charity to let you see your own
Infirmities; for your Understanding is not only very much distempered, but
withal your Reason so depraved, if not altogether lost, that I fear your
Distemper is scarce curable; your Remarks being nothing but a heap of
Incoherences, which are strong Arguments that you are very foul within, and
very far gone; for would any Man in his Senses ever yoke a Pig and an Elephant
together in opposition to a Treatise of the Heat of the Blood? Or could a Man
who had not quite lost his Reason, compare a Mouse and a Cheesmonger together?
I warrant, you thought my Book was two hard a Task for an Animal of your Size,
except it had sharper Teeth than your self, or of a greater Bulk, otherwise
your depraved Cockloft which you call a Head, would scarce have thought of an
Elephant or a Mouse to devour it.

But to what Purpose it is to talk to a Man so strangly depraved? Since it is
an impossible to persuade you that you are not in your Senses, as to cure you?
Nevertheless give me leave to tell you, you will scarce be cured till made
sensible of your Malady; and though Crazy Men are usually angry at those that
tell them so, and not apt to believe it, I desire you to be convinced for your
own sake.

Yet it would be more advantage to me, could I persuade the World that you are
in your Senses, because it might be presumed that you, who in your Passion,
have expressed so much Zeal against me, would also here have produced Reason
against my Book had it lain in your Power; and therefore your Remarks would be
a Recommendation to my Book, they showing that Dr. Leigh can give no Reason
against it.

For which Reason I would persuade the World, that you are neither crazed nor
mad, because you never arrived at such a Degree of Wit to go mad, which though a
strong Argument, will not prevail; they think it is impossible any Man in his
Senses should rave out such stuff; and truly, a Man in his Senses, would scarce
think ill Words without Argument sufficient to confute a Rational Hypothesis.

But I confess, I can have little satisfaction in talking to a Madman, and
therefore, for my own sake, I shall only conceive all this proceeds from
Passion and Ignorance, and though it be not much better to talk to an Ignorant
Man than to a Madman, yet it is a little more excusable, and I may make a
better Apology to the World for it, because one that is ignorant may be
instructed.

But the Town of Manchester perhaps may ask, Can Dr. Leigh be ignorant, who
tells News so prettily? Should such a Question be asked, I should desire them
to read his Quinque Exercitationes and Remarks, and they will find Physic
requires more sound Judgment and Reason than News, or than Dr. Leigh has there
laid down. But they say he does some Cures in the Neighborhood? To which I
answer, that a serious old Woman with two Receipts would exceed him to
admiration; and that he is very ignorant in Physic will appear by and by; for
first his Remarks are only made up of Remarks on Pigs, Mice, Elephants,
Cocklofts, etc. and Questions concerning my Book, which are rather an Effect of
his own Ignorance than any Fault in my Book; for some things he says he does
not understand, others he asks how can they be so, and that other things cannot
be so: But I am to be blamed for taking no more notice of the Doctor than to
neglect to direct my Discourse to him, especially, when I talk of Ignorance,
with which he is so well acquainted; and therefore Doctor when you say that
such things as I have proved cannot be, I conceive it proceeds from rashness of
Judgment rather than Reason; because you have given none, and therefore I would
advise you to look into the first Chapter of the general Epistle of St. James
v. 5. If any Man ask Wisdom, let him ask it of God: And when your Prayers have
proved effectual, you will be more capable of understanding those Questions
which you ask, by which means your Judgment will be better Qualified in respect
of the latter.

And that your Neighbors may judge what a Judicious Physician you are, I shall
take a View of your Remarks, and see in what sort of subjects your Excellency
lies in. And truly Sir, were it not the Wise Man's Advice to answer a Fool
according to his Folly, lest he should be wise in his own Conceit, I should
abhor the Thoughts of spending a Minute upon what you think witty: But to make
you sensible what reason you have to be humble, I shall run over briefly the
Subjects of your Thoughts; And,

First, We may take notice that Page the 4th you have been a mighty Man at
making Observations among the Pigs, where by the strength of imagination, the
sight of a Pig has put you in mind of an Elephant; and according to your
profound Judgment you have distinguished betwixt these Animals; and in
imitation of the Pigs, Page the 11th, you have condescended to take a C -- T --
d in your Mouth, flattering your self there was a Rose in the Surface, your
disappointment wherein, I suppose, made you spit it out at me: But this is
beastly Manners, truly Doctor, and had you not been a subtle Pig indeed, you
might have disgorged the Materials of your Understanding another way, without
fouling Paper with such Stuff; but perhaps your brutal Observations have not
quite degenerated you into that Species of Animals, and that glimmering of
Reason you had left, directed you to put C -- T -- d in your Remarks, to put
People in mind what use to make of them, and if so, you have your Desire; for
most People that read them, presently lay them up for a Bog-house Use, only say
it is a pity, but Dr. Leigh should have the Office of a Bog-house-Door-keeper at
Brazen-Nose to make public Use of what he has provided; for most People are
afraid of fouling their Fingers with a Piece of Paper the Doctor has dirty'd
already.

But Secondly, This is not all, you have not only been a great Critic amongst
the Pigs, but have pried closely amongst the Dairy-maids, where you have
metaphorically called the Mouse a Cheesmonger. Poor Animal! Alas! that the
Mouse who has long enjoyed a Freedom from the Press, should be trapp'd,
remarked upon, and miscalled by Dr. Leigh. A very fine Subject for so subtle,
so cunning an Author!

Page the 8th you have put us in Mind, that you are a Learned Man amongst the
School Boys, who have not yet forgot to play at Ball; but Doctor, for my part,
since I have left off such things, I shall leave Fools and Children to play
together.

Fourthly, Amongst these Niceties you have acquainted the World, that the
Pudenda of a Salt Bitch has been a mighty Subject of your Admiration, and
perhaps you have sometimes envyed the Dogs Felicity in the Enjoyment, and it is
a wonder you never proved Rival. Poor Man! Man did I say? Poor Childish,
Peevish Creature! Who is it but pities you, that you should employ your
Thoughts on no better Subjects.

But it seems these poor Animals are not only the Subjects of your Revenge, but
Irish-Men and a whole Nation must have a Jest upon them, for Laughter's sake,
and be called Fools. Pray Doctor, what wrong have Irish-Men done you? surely
you don't think me one; No, you are sensible I am your Country Man; but since
no Body can stand out of the reach of such Poisonous Air as your Remarks were
made in, give me leave to tell you in your own Words, that some such Air has
influenced you, or your Wit might have been a little more cleanly.

Thus far Doctor, I have Answered you according to your Folly, lest you should
be Wise in your own Conceit; but none but Dr. Leigh can be fond of such
Remarks, and you have so little Reason that I shall also take the Wiseman's
Advice, who says, Answer not a Fool according to his Folly, lest thou should be
like unto him; for indeed the Learned World has got such an Opinion of you,
that of all the crazed Men, or Men in their Senses I know, I would not choose to
be like you. I shall only therefore let you know, that the Cook and Skulleon of
Brazen-Nose, having held a Debate concerning the 5th Page of your Remarks; they
fell into a Passion, because you have laid their Scotch Scollops in such Dirty
Language; ill Words being no good Sauce.

Thus far Doctor, I have traced the Symptoms of your Distemper, and taken a
View of some of the profound Observations you are excellent in; I might indeed
go on and take notice of your Remarks on Bog-houses, Duck-shot, Roger of
Caverly, the Wise Men of Gothan, and Diego with his Spanish Geese; but leaving
these I shall make my Remarks on a Manchester Goose, and shall proceed to give
you a little Information of those things which you are Ignorant of; and since
your Understanding is so far vitiated may I endeavor to make you a Man of a
little more Understanding.

Page the 3d you say, You find I think, Fire is not actually Hot in it self,
but as it affects the Sensory: What a quicksighted Man that can find a thing at
the first sight, when it is before his Eyes! It is a Wonder, that one that
raves of Spanish Geese and such Creatures, should have a Tallent at discerning,
for Doctor you have found it right, for really I think Fire is not actually Hot
in it self, but as it affects the Sensory; and I, having given my Reasons for
it in my Book, shall think so still till you have answered those, and given me
Reasons to the contrary.

Page the 6th you ask, How comes it to pass that a Nerve will not swell above
the straitest Ligature, or any of this Mucilage distill upon Section, or cannot
by Pressure be squeezed from it? I am glad a Man in your Condition desires to
be so informed; and therefore I shall tell you that why it will not distill upon
Section nor be squeezed out by Pressure, you might have learnt in my Book from
Page the 86th to the 91st, which I need not repeat here; and as for the Reason
why a Nerve will not swell above the straitest Ligature, it is very plain; for
any one that does but understand, how the Nerves are branched up and down the
Body, and how they communicate with each other, and withal how gentle the
Motion of the Spirits is through the Nerves, in comparison of the rapid Motion
of the Blood through the Sanguiferous Vessels, will easily understand what a
little thing stops the force of them, if a Passage be denied, and how their
Passage being stopped that way, they flow more plentifully into other Parts;
and you might with as much Reason ask why a Leaden Pipe through which Water is
forced, does not swell upon the straitest Ligature? For considering the
Strength of the Nervous Coats, and that small Quantity of Spirits which
circulates through them, the Force cannot be sufficient to distend them so
powerfully, as is requisite to make them swell upon a Ligature; for though the
Spirits, when mixed with the Blood, violently ferment, yet when kept separate
in their proper Vessels they do not.

In the same Page, you say, I take a great deal of Pains to show, that the
Animal Spirits heat the Blood by the Glandules, those Emunctories of the Body.
But here Doctor, you have only showed your Parts so far, that you will tell
Lies to make your self merry; for I am sure I have no such Words in my Book,
therefore you must be very much out of Order, and it is a bad Symptom in all
hot Distempers, especially Fevers, of the Brain, to rave so strangely; but
truly I pity you, you not only fancy Things to be in my Book, which are only in
your own Head, but are mightily affected with the Fumes of a Bog-house, which
you mention Page the 7th, which is another Memorandum what use to make of your
Remarks.

Page the 7th you say, There is not one Notion in my Book -- but what is taken
either from Dr. Gibson, Dr. Willis, Mr. Boil, Dr. Mayow, Dr. Connor, Monsieur
le Grand -- -- or the Exercitationes Quinque lately Printed (at a Private
Press) in Oxford. But Doctor, though you think fit to tell the World I have read
so many good Books (except the last) I challenge you to show my Notions were
taken out of any of them, or any others, and had you been in your Senses you
might have shown me where what I have said was to be found in those Books; but
I question, whether you have read them your self, except the Exercitationes
Quinque which I suppose is the Cause of your Passion, because it is not taken
notice of by the Learned; for which Reason I have taken care to place a
Distance betwixt it and those Authors, too good to be named with such Company.

Page the 9th, you quote two Sentences out of my Book, and at the same time
dream (for surely you are not awake) except you rave of Contradictions; but
since no body can see any Contradiction there, I shall in short tell you, that
those two Sentences differ only in Words not in Signification.

In the same Page you say, I have not fully replied to Diemerbroek nor Dr.
Henshaw, and that I am the first Man that ever discovered cold Chyle in the
Body of a living Animal. As for what I said to Diemerbroek and Dr. Henshaw,
though I might have said a great deal more, yet what I have is sufficient, and as
for my discovering cold Chyle in the Body of a living Animal, when your
Indisposition is a little abated, look into my Book and you will see how wild
you were in your Fit, for I don't say there is cold Chyle in the Body of a
living Animal, but only Page 66 of my Book, He might as well have said, that
there is so great a Dissimilitude betwixt hot Blood and cold Milk, that as soon
as, etc. which is as much as to say it is impossible. And which is only spoke
in reference to such a Liquor without the Body; besides, Milk is not Chyle, nor
is Chyle called Milk in the Body of a living Animal.

Page the 10th you say, All the Names in Europe cannot give me the constituent
Parts of a Philosopher. Strange! How peevish, crazy Pates are sometimes! Truly
Doctor, you have hit the Nail on the Head: Men's Names contribute very little to
their Understandings, and I suppose Children at Baptism are scarce
Philosophers; but whether I am one or not I suppose you are not capable of
judging; but whatever I am now, were my Name Charles Leigh I should in vain
hope to be one.

Page the 10th you say, I assert Attrition to be the Cause of Fermentation, and
Fermentation the Cause of Nutrition, etc. This is another Symptom of your
Distemper, and no Wonder that you, who employ your Thoughts on Pigs, Mice, etc.
should be so short-sighted in Physic; but since Page the 5th you let us
understand, that you are a little acquainted with Cookery, you had made a
nearer Comparison, if you had said, that when a Pot boils over, the Fire acts
on the Water, and the Water, by that Means being forced out of the Pot, acts on
the Fire by putting it out, or to give you a plainer Instance of mutual Action
and Passion, suppose you in one of your Fits should knock your Head against a
Post for writing such Remarks, would not your Head act upon the Post, and the
Post upon your Head? Pray think of it, when your Fit is a little off, and
consider, that all I say comes to no more, than that there is a mutual Action
and Passion, as I otherwise expressed it.

Page the 12th you pretend to quote some Words of mine, where you affirm that I
say, I have explained an Account of the Heat of the Blood without any manner of
Proof. But had Dr. Leigh's Morals been as good as his Will was prejudiced, you
might have used my Words, and taken notice of what followed; for my Words are,
Having premised an Account of the Heat of the Blood, etc. I shall now proceed
to a Proof of what I have proposed collectively, etc. But alas! no wonder that
one under the Influence of the Moon, in the Company of Diego, should be out of
the way.

In the same Page and Page 13. you say, I have mistaken an Experiment, for
instead of Spirit of Wine, it should be Spirit of Nitre; But Doctor, had I said
Spirit of Nitre and Oil of Turpentine would have done so, it would be nothing
but what was commonly known; and the Reason why I said Spirit of Wine would do
so, was, upon very good Grounds, it being told me by a Friend whose Sincerity I
did not question and I the sooner believed it, because Dr. Willis in his Book
de Fermentatione says thus, Spiritus Vini Phialae inclusus nulla
Effervescentiae signa prodit, sin vero Spirtiui huic parum Olei Terebinthinae
adjiciatur Particulae Liquoris adeo exiliunt, ut hinc Vitrum hermetice
obsignatum effractum viderim; which was some Grounds to think so, but suppose
he that communicated it to me was imposed upon; it takes up but two Lines in my
Book, upon which the Proof of nothing in my Book depends, and if it did the
common Experiment would supply it; and that, Doctor, you might have easily seen
had you not been too intent upon your curious Observations of Diego, and his
Spanish Geese, and hedging in the Cuckoo; but one that had Roger of Coverly in
his Head, the Truth is, is very unfit to consider any thing that requires more
Atention than your Curiosity amongst the Pigs, Mice, Dogs and Bog-Houses.

Page the 14th you take notice, that I have in my Book, hinted at the common
Indications in Fevers, and are angry, because I take no further notice of the
Method generally used in the Cure: But as it was not my Business in that Place
to give a fuller Account of Fevers than to hint at the curative Indications; so
it is more sufficient to satisfy the World that I know what Method to take in
the Cure of Fevers, than any thing you have said in your Remarks can vouch for
you; for to know the curative Indications is one half of the Cure. But pray
Doctor, why should you be angry that I have said no more of Fevers than I have?
were you sensible of any such Distemper in your Brain? if you were, you might
have writ to me, and in Compassion to your Infirmities, I should have advised
you; but it seems the Distemper admitted of no Advice, but when you were angry,
you must show your Passion with sending Geese, Mice, Dogs and Elephants amongst
us; pray what Reason had you to think these Creatures would take your Part,
except you had used them a little more gently than to call them ill Names?

Page the 15th you say, You would gladly know what I mean by Acidity joining
with Acrimony; and how I will make it out, that in Fevers the Blood is too much
exalted with Sulphur, when in malignant Fevers it is plain, the Pulse is most
commonly depressed and languid. Doctor, I was glad to find this Remark amongst
the rest; for had it held for any time I should have thought that there had
been more hopes of you, because you seem glad of Information; but it made me
pity you when I remembered that it is a common Observation, that People seem a
little better some time before Death; and really when I found by your last
Page, that it was but a short Remission, I was afraid it was only an Omen in a
short time your Lodgings would be at Bethlem; but I beg of and earnestly
entreat all your Friends, Neighbors and Acquaintance, that if your Distemper
should continue, they would close you up in some private Apartment there; for
should you be sent to Bethlem you might infect the Place, and drive those that
are indifferent, stark mad; pray good Dr. keep at home for Bethlem's sake, and
I Will tell you what I mean by Acidity, joining with Acrimony, and if your
Indisposition will permit you, look upon that Page again, and you will find I
mean a Liquor compounded of a Mixture of Acids, mixed with sharp Scorbutic
Salts; and as for malignant Fevers, I need not now give you my Opinion of them,
the Words in my Book being these, Although in Fevers where the Blood abounds with
too much exalted Sulphur, etc. where I only speak of such Fevers, in which too
much Sulphur does abound, namely in sanguine Constitutions and such as diary
Fevers.

In the same Page you say, Dr. Morton allows the Expansion of the Spirits, and
so does Dr. Willis, and there was no need of you to mention your Exercitationes
quinque only you would promote the Sale of it; for though so many Authors have
allowed the Expansion of the Spirits, yet his Opinion was nevertheless new,
neither was he said to steal it from others, such things as those being common
to the Philosophical Part of the World, and every one supposed to know them.

Page the 16th, You ask, What are the Bladders of the Lungs impleted with? And
if so, how come some Airs to be pestilential, others scorbutic? it is plain
they would not be if the Particles of Air mixed not with the Blood. Poor Man!
In what a sad Condition! What Is become of his Understanding! Good Doctor, give
me leave to say it is plain you are mistaken, and don't be angry if for once I
speak a little roughly; for Men in your Condition ought to be checked
sometimes; but I have very little Reason to be angry with you, and therefore
calmly let me tell you, that I don't deny in my Book, but that the Bladders of
the Lungs are impleted with Air, and that mediately it is mixed with the Blood;
because those Vessels are mixed with the sanguiferous Vessels; but I say it is
not immediately mixed with the Blood, and though it be not, we may easily
understand, how some Airs become pestilential, others scorbutic; for though I
deny Air to be mixed with the Blood, yet since I say, the Nitre of the Air is,
your Questions are easily answered; because as that Nitre is differently
impregnated with heterogeneous Parts; so it will differently affect the Mass of
Blood.

And now, good Doctor, I have taken a View of your Noble Performance, and have
answered all those Questions, which your Passion and Indisposition, together
have prompted you to ask, and I hope I have assisted your Understanding in
those Points, which before you seemed Ignorant and Incapable of. And since you
have been pleased to tell me (whether it was the Effects of a Dream, or not I
cannot tell) that I had better sat still, may I like a Friend venture to ask
you one Question, Whether it had not been better for you to have sounded a
Bethlem-Man's Horn about the Street, than to have made your self ridiculous by
your Remarks? for had you done so, People would have imagined you were past the
worst and cured, but as it is, it is feared you are in a very bad condition.

Yet for ought I can see, I am obliged to you; for I dare be bold to say, you
have a good Opinion of my Book, or you would not have thought it worth your
Notice, for Men in your condition have usually very high flown Thoughts of
themselves,

And now Doctor, besides your Indisposition, since it appears that you are also
in a Passion, laying aside for a while your Distemper, let us consider the
Cause of your Passion, and really Doctor, if may guess, you could have nothing
else to incense, you but that I am your Country Man, and that your Book, I mean
the Quinque Exercitationes, is not taken Notice of by the Learned World. It Is
true, you have spent a great deal of Money in making Experiments to no Purpose,
and your darling Notions which have no dependence on Experiments, are of no
value. But why should you be angry with me? it is none of my Fault; I wish you
well with all my Heart, and did not envy you in the least, but pitied you.

But it seems you are offended at my Age, and think I have not been trimmed
often enough; but.

(...)
(...).
Which if applied to your self will signify that the Goat is Wiser than your
self, because it has a longer Beard: And though I be Young, it is not the Custom
of good Husbandmen to cut down those Trees that bear Fruit betimes, for though a
young Tree bears not Fruit in abundance, yet wise Men know what it is, and how
to value it.

And since the Tree is known by the Fruit and not the Fruit by the Tree; you
are to take my Age in Physic from my Books, and if by comparing (...) Book
with your own, you find I have given less Reason than your self, then I am a
young Man; but if yours be Irrational then you are the Younger of the two, for
mistake not, an Man may be an old Man and a young Physician, and a ingenious
Man and no Physician at all: And therefore don't think your self the Wiser
because you have lived longer than others, except it appears from your Works
that you have made greater Improvements and better Use of your Time.

But lest you should be too Partial on your own side, and that those may know
what a valuable Piece the Quinque Exercitationes are, who don't think fit to
Buy them; I shall take the substance of what is there, and satisfy you that
whatever you may think of your self, you are really a Youth in Physic, and
here I shall not take notice of every little Fault, but of the main Things
which you lay down as the foundation of your Books, which if they be False or
not your own, you must blame your self, and only ask me to pity you.

And first, I shall take a View of your whole Book together, where we may see
that your Head has not been out of order just upon Writing of your Remarks,
but your Distemper is of a longer standing, and has been coming on you a long
time, for in this Treatise, I mean, Quinque Exercitationes, all that you can
properly call your own, is scarce worth owning.

In your Remarks, you tell me I dictate like a Professor of the Chair (which is
a sign that you have good Thoughts of what I have Writ) but if we look into
your Book and compare it with Mine, your own Modesty will be very remarkable,
for in my Books I have offered nothing but what I have given my Reasons for,
and that with submission to the Learned not to you, mistake not your self; but
you have laid down every thing without giving the least Reason at all; and though
your Distempered Head has forced you to fall out with your own Reason pray
don't be angry that I use mine; for if that be the distinguishing Faculty
betwixt a Man and a Brute, Men ought to use it or they are worse than those
Creatures that have it not; and though you have in your Remarks equalled your
self in Observations with the Beasts of the field, I would not be classed
amongst the Pigs and Elephants whilst I have Reason to tell me, I am of another
kind of Animals.

But to show that your Head has been long out of Order, let us take a View of
your Exercitationes Quinque where we shall trace the first Symptoms of your
Distemper.

And truly Doctor, as for your first Exercitation de quis Mineralibus, I have
as slight an Opinion of it as of the rest of your Book, and should not think it
worth my while to take Notice of what Dr. Lister scorns to trouble himself
with, only for your own you may see what Reason you have to be humble, and how
far your Intellectuals are vitiated.

The First Thing I shall take Notice of in this Exercitation is, your
Absurdities in Respect of Dr. Lister himself, for First Page 2 you say, Ingenue
fateor etc. i. e. I confess ingenuously, I have always had the greatest Respect
for him, for his sharp Wit, and again, Lubens quidem agnosco quod Hypothesis
ista est Ingenio plena. i. e. I acknowledge willingly that that Hypothesis is
very witty, and again Page 2 you say, Quos itaque Verborum praestigia, etc. i.
e. Let those that are pleased with the fallacies of Words -- delight themselves
with the sound of them, they neither hurt one that is Ignorent, nor help one
that has Knowledge. Now Doctor were you right in your Senses, I should ask you
these Questions, whether if what Dr. Lister writ, were Witty, or had you a
Respect for him, it would be a token of Respect due to one that deserved it, to
tell him, he takes a delight to be deceived with Words and with their Sounds,
and that he cannot inform a Man of Sense, which is signified by Scientem,
certainly you either don't think what you say, or don't care, for if you
thought he deserved respect you ought to have showed it him, and if you thought
his Book Witty, how comes it to be only a Sound of Words; Doctor, are these
Things consistent? with your own Brain Perhaps Contradictions and Inadvertency
may agree well enough, but amongst Men of Sense these Things must expose you;
besides though you, even Dr. Charles Leigh, have said it, and in the Form of a
Proverb too, Ignoranti nec nocent nec Scientem juvant, betwixt Friends let me
tell you, your Proverb, though of your own making, will not hold, for it is rather
to be thought that to be delighted with sound of Words only, and to be pleased
with he Fallacies, Ignoranti nocent, and do it greatest hurt to ignorant
Persons, because they make them loose their time without information, when
ignorant Men have least Reason to do so; and this may put You in mind to mind
your Business.

But to proceed, let us see a little further how your Carriage answers the
Character you gave of Dr. Lister, Page 7 you say, Pro me itaque etc. that is,
for me let them dispute with Zeno against Autopsie, and look at the Sun with
Spectacles at midday. How now Dr. are you as angry at Dr. Lister as you are at
Me, and can you, were you in your Senses, tell a Man, that you respect and
think Witty, that he cannot see the Sun at Midday, without Spectacles* Dr. how
does short Sighted, and Acerrimum agree? But perhaps you will suppose the Sun to
be beyond a Cloud on a foggy Day, and then indeed a Witty Man may put on his
Spectacles before he sees it, but if you don't suppose the Sun to be beyond a
Cloud, I am afraid you may put on your Spectacles before you see, how to
reconcile Short-sighted and most Acute; but perhaps when you say you Respect
Dr. Lister, Propter ingenium acerrimum, you may say Acerrimum signifies, most
Sower as well as most Acute, and then indeed Short-sighted and Acerrimum may be
in the same Man; but then I should ask you how came you to respect a Man that
is Short-sighted and Acerrimum i. e. most Sower, was it for your own sake?
Truly I believe so, for there are too many instances in your Book as well as
Remarks, that you are a shroud Short-sighted Man. But perhaps you will challenge
me to show you one! If so you are more Short-sighted than I thought you was,
good Doctor, read over this Answer from the beginning, and you will find enough,
and if you will stay a while you shall have more than you can wish for.

But before we go any further let us see what other Methods you take to express
your Respect to Dr. Lister, Propter ingenium acerrimum. Page 9 you respectfully
say, that the Pyrites haud plus vegetat, quam triticum istud etc. i. e. The
Pyrites no more grows, than that Wheat which fell out of the Clouds from the
middle Region, of which trifling Philosophers rave so much; O fie Doctor! By no
means call your self the trifling Philosopher, for the World will Judge you are
much mistaken; for they are so far from thinking you are a trifling
Philosopher, that they positively say in London that you are no Philosopher at
all: But perhaps you will ask me where do you call your self a trifling
Philosopher, if you do, I shall ask you, whether if you call those that rave of
this Wheat, trifling Philosophers, you don't call your self one since it is
plain you rave beyond measure: And here Doctor let me ask you how you came to
throw a show of Wheat upon Dr. Lister, it seems you serve him and me alike,
only since you writ against Dr. Lister, you have mightily improved your self,
for this shower of Wheat has put you in mind of Diego and his Spanish Geese,
and the Wise Man of Gotham, Pigs, Dogs and Elephants, they all come thundering
upon my Head.

Page the 11th, you have given another Token of your Respect to Dr. Lister,
where you say, Haec Hypothesis est gratis dicta, and Fabula tantum de lana
caprina, i. e. This Hypothesis is not proved, and only a Story of Goats Wool;
is this Doctor the Hypothesis that Page the 2d you said was full of Wit, Good
God! Goats Wool is full of Wit, according to Dr. Leigh, O acerrimum! Now I see
why in your Remark you fell out with my Age, I have not Bread enough, and
consequently not Wit, to Dr. Leigh, -- (...).

Thus far I have showed you Dr. and you may see it, if you will put on your
Spectacles, how bravely you have reverenced Dr. Lister, and if these be Tokens
of Respect to Dr. Lister, I may say you have an extraordinary Respect for me,
for you only tell him, you have a great Reverence toward him, and all the
Reasons you have given for it is acerrimum Ingenium, most sour Wit, and
because he is delighted with Sounds, and can do an ignorant Man no harm (so
that you are secure) and again, because he talks of Goats Wool, in which you
suppose a great deal of Wit is lodged; these sort of Qualifications you say he
is stocked with, and to show your Respects to him you reproach him with them,
and if it be your Method of reverencing, to throw foul Words at one, I find you
reverence me extremely; for you have set the Elephant upon me, the Mouse, the
Cheesemonger, and Diego with his Spanish Geese, you have also presented me with
a Boghouse, and one of your Country Nosegays, surely you thought a ^aghouse was
the fittest Place to read your Book in; and all these are to be taken for
Tokens of Reverence.

And really I take them as such, for I find that, like Children, you throw Dirt
at those that you play with, and frown upon those you love, otherwise you would
never have told me in your Remarks, that I took my Notions out of your Book,
and then throw so much Dirt at them, for this was to undervalue your own Book,
had you considered, but either it was your Kindness for your own Notions that
made you be so foul upon them; for by Dr. Lister one may see you abuse what you
reverence, or you cannot endure to see your own Picture, but that you may not
fall out with my Book, because you think it has something out of yours, I tell
you plainly there is nothing out of yours Book, and I should be so far from
taking any thing out of your Book, that I should burn my Book, if I could find
any such Nonsense in it as yours is full of.

But pray Doctor, let us consider what is the Substance of this Exercitation
against Dr. Lister, Page the 4th you say, In Puteis juxta Haigh, etc. i. e. in
the Wells near Haigh in Lancashire; for there is a true vitriolated Fountain,
which if any, runs with a gentle Current, which by repeated Experiments I have
demonstrated to be full of Vitriol, etc. and again Page the 5th you say, Sum
Aquam acidulam eam puta prope Boulton -- etc. i. e. Take the vitriolated Water,
near Boulton in Lancashire -- etc. from thence you will obtain Shoots of
Vitriol; from whence and the rest of this Exercitation, it appears that you
have argued very strongly to prove that acidulated Waters have Acids in them,
and you had need to be a mighty Disputant to gain such a Point, and surely Dr.
Roe could not choose but laugh to see you so busy to prove nothing, certainly
Smiglicius qualified you for such Discoveries; for to prove methodically and
convincingly, that Water acidulated has Acids in it, is really a Matter as
difficult as to prove that the Well near Haigh in Lancashire has Water in it,
and truly no wonder that you convinced Dr. Floyer; for the thing is plain
enough, for Example, if the Well have Water in it, there must needs be Water in
the Well, and if the Water be Acid there must needs be Acid in the Water, what
Reasoning can be stronger? What Evidence more clear? Strike up Doctor, for the
Credit of Bethlem and the Town of Manchester; and be it published to the World
that by Parity of Reason Dr. Leigh effectually proved, that all Malt Drink has
Malt in it, for Example, if acidulated Waters consist of Water and Acids, all
acidulated Waters have Acids in them, and therefore by Parity of Reason it
follows, that if Ale be made of Malt and Water, all Ale must have Malt in it, a
Discovery of great Use to Brewers, Doctor, who would ever here thought of such
a Discovery as this besides your self, I mean who would ever have thought it a
Discovery, and are you to value your self upon this, because you have proved
that acidulated Waters are acidulated, Good Lord! News from Bethlem.

Thus much Doctor may suffice for your first Exercitation, now pray let us
unfold the Secrets of your next Exercitation de Thermis calidis, and here
Doctor, I shall not take notice how angry you are with those that are not of
your Mind, having in this and your Remarks given Instances enough of that, all
that* I shall further do is briefly to take notice of your Mistakes, in your
second Exercitation you have reckoned up a great many Opinions of the Reason of
Hot Baths, and I wonder how you could remember the Names of so many, but why
should I wonder, I have heard one in Bethlem repeat a whole Chapter; and why
may not you recount how many Authors ^^ve writ de Thermis, but to take a View of
this Excitation; The Substance of which is in Chapter (...), all the rest being
filled up with the Opinions of other Men, where Page 41 you say, Supponimus
(...) Particulis sulphureis in semetipsis collidentibus (...) quaecunque calida
incalescere, i. e. we suppose all (...) Baths to grow hot by sulphurous
Particles striking one against another; this Doctor is the Substance of your
Opinion, all the rest of the Chapter being only to prove this, and to
contradict those that had writ on the Subject before, and now good Doctor be
pleased to turn to Dr. Willis de Fermentatione. where Chap. 11. Paragraph the
4th you will (by the Assistance of your Spectacles at Midday) see these Words,
Rei cujusque Temperies quoad Calorem a Sulphur imprimis dependet, i. e. The
Temper of all hot Bodies in Respect of Heat chiefly depend on Sulphur, where
you see you are of the same Opinion with Dr. Willis exactly, and it is good
Luck to agree with such an Author, but pray Doctor, did you take this Notion of
Heat from Dr. Willis* or did he take it from you, think of it and when you do
remember, that his Book was writ long before yours, but again, look back to
Page the 32 of your own Book, where you quote these Words from Monsieur le
Grand, Provenit ergo Thermarum calor a Bituminis and Sulphuris Mistura, quae
dum inter se confunduntur, per quandam Fermentationem Calorem concipiunt, i. e.
The Heat therefore of hot Baths proceeds from a Bitumen and Sulphur, which
whilst they are mixed acquire Heat by Fermentation, now Doctor, what does this
differ from your Opinion, you say Heat depends on a Mixture of sulphurous
Particles, so does le Grand; for a Mixture of Bitumen and Sulphur is but one
sulphurous Body with another, now it is strange that Dr. Leigh should be so
angry at me when he has so much more Reason to be angry at himself, and really
he is so; for when Dr. Willis says, Heat proceeds from Sulphur, and le Grand is
of the same Opinion, Dr. Leigh cannot bear it, he contradicts them, and keeps
the Reasons to himself, yet when he himself affirms the same thing as his own,
he thinks he has done well; phy! Doctor, I thought you had not been quite so
crazy, if you go on at this Rate Bethlem will not hold you.

And now Doctor, must not this argue that your Brain is extremely hot, that you
cannot discern your self of the same Opinion with these Men; but there are
further Instances than this, nothing will serve you but my Notion of the Heat
of the Blood must be taken from Dr. Willis, le Grand and the Exercitationes
Quinque truly had it been taken from one it had been taken from all; because
there is no Difference betwixt them, but no body that pretends to Knowledge
will pretend to say that my Notion of the Reason of the Heat of the Blood is to
be compared to yours, I mean Dr. Willis his; for the formal Cause of the Heat
of hot Baths is widely different from the formal Cause of the Heat of the
Blood, for the Heat of Baths according to Dr. Willis depends on a Mixture and
Fermentation of sulphurous Parts, but the Heat of the Blood (I say) depends on
a Mixture and mutual Fermentation of animal Spirits and Blood, which Account in
my Treatise is different from all others yet laid down, and which I believe I
have sufficiently proved, and if what I have said will not be sufficient to
prove Truth, I conceive I am furnished with Reasons which will, which I did not
lay down in my Book, because what is there is enough.

N. B. That where I have said the Heat is caused so, or otherwise, I mean a
Power to cause such a Sensation upon our Sensory; for Fire is not actually hot
in it self, but as it affects our Sensory, as I have proved in my Treatise of
the Reason of the Heat of the Blood.

But how came I to forget I was talking to Dr. Leigh, Doctor, I beg your Pardon
for being so serious and for talking of Reason, I did not remember such Talk
would disturb your Head, come, come, Doctor, let us divert you, a Windmill,
Diego and his Spanish Geese, Roger a Coverly, the Elephant, Cheesemonger, or
what you please, choose your Subject; and pray talk to your self, for it is usual
for one in your Distemper, I for my part shall pass my time on Subjects, which
are more proper Objects of Reason.

Your next Exercitation, Doctor, contains an imperfect Account of a Fever in
Lancashire; which since it only appeared in a small part of Lancashire, it
would be as impertinent to trouble the World with a Refutation of what you say,
as it was useless for you to write it, had you done it ingeniously; I shall
therefore only take notice of the first Page of it, which seems to be very
ominous. Page 54. Vix datur Lunae Circuitus quin Febris quaedam exaestuans --
populariter grassatur, ac si Ignis elementaris (sub concavo Lunae hospitans)
etc. i. e. There is scarce a Month, but some burning Fever is abroad, as if
that Fire (in the Concave of the Moon) continually broiled Mankind, etc. But
you should rather have said, as if Men's Constitutions and Way of living were
the Cause of it, then Fire in the Concave of the Moon, for to say, as if Fire
in the Concave of the Moon caused it, is as much as to say, as if there were no
Cause for it, because there is no such Fire, but poor Man! Diego and his
Spanish Geese, and the Moon have influenced you, the one has made you a Goose,
the other a Madman.

In the next Place, let us consider the Substance of your fourth Exercitation
de Febribus intermittentibus, where Page 87* you say, Supponimus Febres omnes
intermittentes Particulis salinis esse ortis, i. e. This is your Opinion of the
Cause of intermitting Fevers, now pray Doctor turn to Dr. Willis of
intermitting Fevers, Chap. 4. Paragraph the 4th, where you will find these
Words, Haec Sanguinis Constitutio in hac sita est, quod Sulphuris ac Salis plus
debito impregnatur. And again, Chap. the 6th he says, Quod in hoc Morbo
Sanguinis Liquor a Natura dulci, spirituosa and balsamica in acidam and
nonnihil austeram instar Vini acescentis transierit, nimirum adest Sanguinis
Penuria, and Sanguinis Pars terrestris seu tartarea, quae constat imprimis Sale
and Terra, nimis exaltatur. Where you see Dr. Willis and you both agree, that
there is too much Salt in the Blood in intermitting Fevers, and now you see how
much you are mistaken, for in your Remarks you told me, that I had taken my
Notions from Dr. Willis, but it seems you are still under the Influence of the
Moon, for instead of me it is your self; bless me! Who could imagine you so much
out of your Senses, to take me for Dr. Leigh, does not Dr. Leigh know himself?
No, alas! Tertius e Coelo descendit (...). but though you don't know your self,
Doctor, one would think you might know your own Book, but how should you, when
it is plain you don't know your Name at all times, for in your Exercitation de
Thermis calidis in a heat, you cry experto creed Roberto, i. e. believe
experienced Robert, instead of Charles, but perhaps you thought no body would
believe Charles Leigh, and therefore you cry Creed Roberto, but perhaps there
may be another Reason why you cry experto creed Roberto, because Carolo would
not stand in the latter end of the Verse, if this Doctor was your Reason you
might have put a Negative before it, and then it would have stood in Prose,
viz. ne experto creed Carolo -- Leigh. Why? Because he is under the Influence of
that Fire in the Concave of the Moon.

I come last of all, to your last Exercitation, and could really wish the first
had been the last; for how much soever you may be pleased with your own Book;
sure I am, it is an ungrateful task to me to read over such Stuff. Page 119*
you say, In duas itaque tantum species nos Hydropes dividimus etc. i. e. We
divide Dropsies into two Species, to wit Choleric proceeding from thick
Choleric, obstructing the Pores and Glandules of the Liver, etc. Bless me! Dr.
I wonder at you that you should trust to your own Head, as long as you borrowed
from Dr. Willis and le Grand, you were pretty safe and came off pretty well;
But now we find a Notion of your own, and really it belongs to you, this
Exercitation I never suspected you for, but Dr. is this a Production of yours,
that in your Remarks could divide betwixt the North and Northwest side of a
Hair, and can you divide Dropsies no better, nay Doctor look as gruff, as you
please, you are basely mistaken, though you don't know where, and therefore in
compassion to you I shall show you your Faults; for the obstruction of the
Glandules of the Liver are an Effect of an Hydropical Disposition, and by no
means the Cause of it, for as long as the Humors are in a right State, they
pass through those Parts without Obstruction, but when for want of Spirits and
good Blood, an Hydropical Disposition is brought on, then the Blood
degenerating into a more phlegmatic State, consequently obstructs the
Glandules, so that it is evident, if the Indisposition proceeds the
Obstruction, the Obstruction cannot be the Cause of what went before.

And now Dr. I have taken a short View of your Remarks, and also of your
Quinque Exercitationes, and if we reflect on the whole, we may see there is
little difference betwixt your Exercitationes and them, and now Doctor you may
see how ridiculous your Exercitations would be, were they Printed in English,
but is is well they are in Latin, because none can read them but those that
think them not worthy to be taken Notice of.

And here Doctor, I cannot but admire, why you should be so angry with every
Body that is not of your Mind, and of Dr. Leigh's Opinion; for we may observe
that you are not only very angry at me, but even with Dr. Lister whom you
Reverence; but why should I wonder at it, it is the Nature of Men in your
Condition, and truly I pity it withal my Heart, and am sorry that you have lost
the Use of your Reason.

And Doctor, may I ask you this Question, what Reason have you now to complain
of my Age? And pray who is the younger Physician, I don't say the younger Man,
you have long enjoyed a head which I by no means envy you for, may the Pudenda
of a salt Bitch divert you, make your Observations on Pigs, Mice and
Bog-houses, I shall not in the least envy, no not if you should take a Voyage
with Diego and his Spanish Geese to the Moon, for they would be very agreeable
Company, only consider whether you are not too near it already. Pray do, and
keep out of Bethlem if you can.

But Doctor, how came you to write your Remarks in English, I thought you had
too great Thoughts of your self to writ any thing in English was it because
when you were peevish and cross in Latin no Body took notice of you, if so,
really you have got your self taken notice of with a Witness, for when I
received your Remarks at Brazen-Nose, having never seen such stuff in Print
before, I was very inquisitive to know what Part of the World liked it, and
what they said of it, wherefore I asked the Opinion of a fevv of the Younger
sort, and truly they told me they thought such things had never been Printed,
but it made them Laugh heartily; but when I consulted Men of Sense, they
advised me not to take notice of such Nonsense, and truly Doctor, I had taken
their advice, but when about a Month ago I came to London and heard that Dr.
Leigh was the Jest of the merry Philosophers of the Town, and that you had so
miserably exposed your self as to be taken for a Madman, I thought it
necessary to let the World know that Dr. Leigh was in Manchester without
Bethlem or a Keeper.

But I have Reason to think, that there is another Reason why you writ your
Remarks in English, viz. Ob defectum alterius to Use your own Phrase. This Dr.
Perhaps may startle you, but for all you have writ a Book in Latin it is true;
and you have Reason enough to write in English for the future, for when your
Book was Printing at Oxford, there was such obscure Latin in it, that several
People could not tell what you meant, for which Reason, you may remember there
were several things sent down to you to alter before they could be understood;
and pray let us see what a polished Piece it is at the last.

Page 2 you have this Piece of Latin, at hanc semper vellet esse veram, quia
desiderium pati non potest; adeoque Dogma tenacissimum (ni fallor usque ad
Iracundiam) eorum quae annis prioribus edidit (quod in Philosophia est maximum
malum) se in numerum plurium adduxit; truly Doctor, it is as like a Letter
which I saw a Madman write to his Physician as any thing could be; for the
meaning is so Dark that one can scarce see what you aim at, and it so posed two
or three Scholars in Brazen-Nose, that there were as many Opinions about the
meaning of it, as standers by, and therefore Doctor for the future write
English, that People may understand your meaning, and never let Ambition make
you write in a Language you know so little of.

Page 3 and 4 you say, Qui se solum intuetur matter Philosophatur, and opinioni
haud Naturae se credidit, O the wonderful Obscurity observable in Dr. Leigh!
And how well he understands Latin, Opinioni haud Naturae se credit, pray Doctor
have you forgot what you Learnt at School, quem casum regunt verba credendid? A
Dative, but you had forgot, and writ false Latin against your Will, poor Man!
But let me tell you, were you at School you would be taken up and Whipped soundly
for such a Fault, what Credidit se? Phy Doctor, I thought you had been too old
to be Whipped, but it seems not too old to deserve it, but suppose it did not
deserve Whipping, it is not Sense, for credidit se Opinioni haud Naturae, is
most absurd, and sounds worse in English than Latin, for how ridiculous is it
for to say, He believed himself to his Opinion not Nature, truly Doctor it
looks as if it came from Bethlem, and by no means ab Agro Lancastrienst.

And should I run over your Book, it is so full of Faults of this kind, that
there would be no end of it, these therefore may suffice to show what Reason
you had to write in English, but if you are not content with these you shall
have a few more of your elegant Phrases and Idioms to chew on; for Page 5 you
have this, Nullo modo capiam. I can by no means take, instead of Understand, so
Capio and Intelligo are synonimous Words with Dr. Leigh, again Page 7 your
Idioms are not less elegant, where you have pro me, i. e. for me, this puts me
in mind of a piece of Latin in the beginning of Walkers Particles, where, but
for you, is by the School Boys elegantly rendered, sed pro te, and this Doctor
is another bald Piece for which a School Boy would have been Whipped severly:
But we must pass by some of your Faults, or the Child will be Fleed alive,
there are a many pretty Idioms behind yet, would deserve Rod or Ferule were you
at School, as abservatu in proclivi est instead of in promptu, but your
Thoughts Doctor perhaps were more in proclivi than in promptu and so you
thought it the prettier Expression.

Again, Page 64 and 66, we may observe, what a vast variety of synonimous
Expressions you are stocked with, viz. ad secundum, ad tertium sic respondemus
ad quartum sic regero, here besides your stock of synonimous Terms, we cannot
but observe the very Symptoms of a Madman; and Doctor, certainly you cannot but
rave, for first ad secundum, comes from no Body, but when you come to tertium,
you that ad secundum were no Body, are become double; for it is respondemus, we
answer, but when you come to Quartum, you fancy your self, but one again, and
speak in the singular Number, viz. sic regero, Again, here we may observe that
Dr. Leigh, hot in the third degree, at tertium, only fancies himself double,
but when crazed modo Quarto he talks Nonsense, for sic regero in English is, I
carry back and not I answer.

And now Doctor, don't you see what a fit Man you are to write a Book in Latin,
who are fitter to go to School again, did I know the Master of Manchester
School, I Will assure you, I should write to him about you, to take you into
Correction. What a Boy at Forty or Fifty and write false Latin? And false
Idioms? To School for shame, and let your Wife buy you a Sachel to lug your
Books to School in, and get a Grammar speedily and learn what Case Verba dandi
govern, and how the Nominative Case and the Verb agree, and never write,
Credidit se, Ego Respondemus, and sic regero.

But what do I talk of going to School, when you have learned past Grace
already, and are horn Mad, mistake me not Doctor, I do not say horned and mad
too, but mad enough to wear a Bethlem-Man's Horn, for I suppose your Wife has
not learned past Grace, though you have crazed your self.

But I shall leave this Subject, least I should drive you madder than you are,
and shall only take notice of one thing more, which seems to intimate, how long
you have been distempered in your Head and how you came to be so.

Page 24 you say, Nihil severiori scrutinio dignum, reperiri potest, nec quid,
quod Philosophorum mentes adeo distorsit, ac Thermarum calidarum Phenomenon, i.
e. nothing deserves a more severe search, nor has any thing distracted Men's
Minds more than the Phenomena of hot Baths; truly Doctor Severiori is a very
strange Epithet for Scrutinio, but it, to speak the truth, has been a little
too severe upon you, if you by your search after these Phenomenon have
distracted your self.

And really Doctor, I cannot but pity you, for Reason is a very valuable
Faculty, and, like Credit, when once lost hard to be got again, however we must
use the Means, and now I having throughout your Remarks and your Exercitationes
Quinque traced the Symptoms of your Distemper, and now at last found out the
Cause of it, and having endeavored to make you sensible of it, I hope we have
made a good step toward a Cure, and therefore to close up this occasional
Enquiry, I shall transcribe a Piece of Advice for you, from a very good Author,
but shall not tell you the Name of it, least you should Burn it; for Mad People
are very apt to throw away their Medicines. The Words are these, I believe you
are quite out of your Wits, and are run away from your Keepers, and therefore
-- I advise you to Shave all the Hair very close off your Crown. Then take away
fifty or threescore Ounces of Blood, at several times, according as it shall be
found, that you come to your self, and to the Use of your Reason, if you make
use of Leaches be sure they be well cleansed, if you Purge, use very gentle
things, such as Manna and Syrup of Roses, which they give to Madmen, till your
Distemper abates, avoid all strong Meats, Tobacco, hot Spices and especially
Coffee, for the Powder has sometimes been observed to settle into a Saracens-
head in the bottom of the Dish, and above all things have a great care of
Studying, or of Writing Books, till your Head is better, and of Sleeping on
your Back; for Vapors will be apt to rise and you will Dream of nothing but
Elephants, Mice, Bog-houses, Diego and his Geese, and Roger a Coverly. When you
have followed these Directions for a while, you will be better able to
understand my Book, to see your own Errors, and will be fitter to go to School
again; for in the Condition you are in, you are fit for nothing; pray Doctor,
don't refuse to take Advice, for your Condition is desperate, you need not fall
out with the Directions, because they are mine, for that you might not make
that Objection, I have taken care to transcribe Advice from one that I hope you
have no Reason to fall out with: But not to detain you too long Doctor, wishing
you a good Recovery, and the Use of your Reason, if God give a Blessing to the
Means, I subscribe

Your Humble Servant To instruct you R. BOULTON.

Postscript.
SOON after I had writ the preceding Sheets, wherein I have traced the Symptoms
of the Doctors Distemper: I heard that Dr. Leigh had writ a Reply to Mr.
Colbatch his Piece concerning the Cure of a Person bit by a Viper, and
therefore considering the Doctors, and his Adversaries Conditions both
together, I thought it advisable and prudent to take a View of it, before the
Publishing of what I have before writ, for several Reasons: For since I have
made it appear how much the Doctor is distempered, and in order to his Recovery
have prescribed Rules, I thought it not amiss to see whether his Distemper was
either abated or increased, that I might accordingly, if there was occasion,
alter those Rules laid down for his Recovery; but I find that the Symptoms are
yet as strong and the Method prescribed by no means to be neglected.

The First Symptom is a Copy of Verses, which fills the sixth Page, where both
by his Rhiming and the Excellency of his Poetic Strain, it appears he is
almost, if not quite, past hopes, for what more evident Symptom can there be of
Madness than for a Man to turn Poet, who cannot write good English; indeed, had
his whole Book been filled up with such Poetry I should have thought him much
wiser, for he would get more credit by writing Ballads than scribbling Physic,
it being a more fit Employment for him, besides a considerable Number of them
might have gone off throughout the Kingdom, and especially this St.
Bartholemews Fair in London.

But it is in vain to advise the Doctor, a crazy Pate has as indeterminate
Faculties as a neutral Spirit, a Spirit of Dr. Leigh's Denomination; Spirits
which I suppose the Doctor converses with in agro Lancastriensi; but I would
willingly be certain, what the Doctor means by a Neutral Spirit, and how he
came to give Spirit such an odd Epithet as Neutral, but I cannot expect an
Answer from one that knows not the difference betwixt Questions and Answers,
and one that is in such a raving Condition too, for after his Poetry, the next
Remark is upon the Owl in a Crab-tree; O Ingenium Acerrimum! Nihil severiori
scrutinio dignum reperiri potest, nec quid quod Philosophorum mentes adeo
distorsit, Quinque Exercitationes Page 24, The Doctor having distracted himself
with hot Baths, has fallen foul upon the Crab-tree, and perhaps respects it
for it is sower Qualities, or in the Doctors own Words propter Ingenium
Acerrimum, but why should the Doctor Remark upon the Owl, has it been too
Ominous to his Patients in agro Lancastriensi, poor unhappy Bird, that for it is
good Service and Prognostics, where the Doctor's Judgment failed him, should
have such hard Fate as falling into the Hands of Dr. Leigh, but who can
otherwise think of its Usage in such Hands. He that against Dr. Lister brought
a Shower of Wheat and Goats Wool, and in his Remarks on ME raved of nothing,
but Elephants, Pigs, Mice, Cheesemongers, Diego and Spanish Geese, etc. may
well take a Touch with the Owl and Crab-tree.

But these Symptoms are not all, Page 12. He has brought the Grand Seignior
into a Jest, and well then may he fall foul upon the King's Subjects, Dr.
Lister and I, may well be afraid of a Man that dare jest upon the Grand
Seignior, but, like stormy Weather, sometimes he is at the Top of the House, and
presently as low again; for Page 14 he ridicules the poor Mouse again, a
peevish Creature, that was never brought into the Press before without Wit and
Ingenuity, is now pressed upon without either Sense or Reason.

Page 15, Amongst the rest of his Symptoms he raves again of his Exercitationes
Quinque and since no Body will quote it besides himself, he is resolved to name
it as often as he can think of it, alas! Hinc ille Lachrymae.

And after all this, Page 24, He reckons himself amongst the thinking Part of
Mankind, but surely he does not mean Physicians, but Hawkers, Cheesemongers,
Mice and Rat-chatchers, and Sowgelders, the Wisemen of Gotham, and Lunaticks,
for from his Remarks, his Reply and his Quinque Exercitationes, it is plain,
that he has employed his Thoughts most on such Subjects as those Tradesmen are
employed about.

But notwithstanding those Symptoms which are still Arguments of the Doctors
Distemper, yet this I must needs say, the Combat betwixt Mr. Colbatch and him
may be diverting; for Folly and Madness at variance will be hard matched, and
really were not Dr. Leigh's Condition very desperate, it would be advisable to
let him enjoy his Distemper a little longer, otherwise Mr. Colbatch will be too
hard for him; for though I have so slight an Opinion of Mr. Colbatch as to think
him mistaken in every thing he writes, and very unfit for an Author, yet by all
means he is to be preferred before Dr. Leigh; for Folly is not so dangerous as
Madness; but as for Mr. Tuthil and Mr. Leigh let them go together with all my
Heart.

And I have only this more to observe, that Mr. Colbatch, Mr. Leigh, and Mr.
Tuthil in this respect are all alike, for first Mr. Colbatch has cast a great
many of base Reflections on the College of Physicians; for which he deserves
worse Usage himself, because they gave him no Reason for it, but he has given
them Reason, because he has abused them: To be even with him; Mr. Leigh has
reflected on the College and the University, because they would not License his
Quinque Exercitationes, and has reflected on me, and is angry, because I have
had better Fortune than himself; where he has reflected on me without Reason,
for which I have just Cause to pity him; again Mr. Tuthil, to be even with
them both, has complemented Mr. Colbatch most unmercifully, as if Complements
were made for such Creatures, and Pearls to be cast before Swine.

Secondly, The Similitude betwixt Mr. Colbatch and Dr. Leigh runs farther: For
Dr. Leigh in his Preface to this Reply, pretends to stand up for the Honor of
Physic, yet in his Remarks reflects on the most Honorable of them. Again Mr.
Colbatch in his Treatise of the Gout, tells the World, Physic is a Scene of
Slaughter, and yet pretends to complement our English Physicians, or at least
the Physicians of London, as Men of the greatest Merit, and the Parallel runs
so far betwixt these two, that I may well say Folly and Madness will never be
more conspicuous, and therefore I wish the one the Use of his Reason, and the
other Sense enough to discern his Errors, and shall only add, that I beg Pardon
of the World for taking notice of either of them, and I hope my Compassion to
them will not by the Judicious be mistaken for a Fault, since I hope I have
writ nothing, but what the Ignorance of the one, and the Ignorance and Envy of
the other, have given just Grounds for.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page. Line. For these Errors, Read these Corrections. 10 1 reard read 38 8 to
Physicians to a Physician. 70 2and 3 Alkalious Acids Alkalious, Acids. 90 3
Bitter and Sower Bitter from Sower. 92 8 Odiously odious. 92 21 I shall here
only bring. 99 14 lept Slept. 134 5 Syrop Syrup. 137 20 Analiz Analization. 149
21 injuries injurious. 151 5 dele from conclusion. 151 12 make makes. 153 Vlt.
correct cover. 158 8 Physicians Magicians. 200 11 Nascitur Nascetur. 258 16 ask
Wisdom lack Wisdom. 269 14 an Man a Man. 270 30 your own sake, that 271 28 with
sound with the sound, dele he. Ibid. 29 and do the greatest hurt. 273 9 a
Shower of Wheat. Ibid. 25 Bread Beard. 276 35 do remember do, remember.


