The Wise and Ingenious COMPANION, FRENCH AND ENGLISH: OR, A COLLECTION OF THE
WIT, OF THE Illustrious PERSONS, BOTH Ancient and Modern: CONTAINING Their wise
Sayings, noble Sentiments, witty Repartees, Jests and pleasant Stories.
CALCULATED For the Improvement and Pleasure of the English and Foreigners. By
Mr. Boyer, Author of the Royal Dictionary.

Omne tulit Punctum qui miscuit utile Dulci. Horat. London, Printed by G. C.
for Tho. Newborough, at the Goldenball in St. Paul's Churchyard, and J.
Nicholson at the Kings Arms in Little Britain. 1700.

A Prefatory INTRODUCTION;
CONCERNING The Excellenc^, Nature and Use of wise Sayings witty Repartees,
Jests, and pleasant Stori^s.

SEntences, witty Repartees and Jests, have ever been esteemed by all civilized
Nations: The ancient Greeks and Romans have shown what account they made of
them, by their care of Collecting and Quoting them. Julius Caesar made a
Collection of the Jests of his Contemporaries; the famous Historian Pl^tarch is
very exact in recording all those os the illustrious Men of whom he writes the
Lives: Wherein he has been imitated by Diogenes Laertius, in his lives of the
Philosophers; and among the Moderns, my Lord Bacon, Guichardin, and several
others have enriched their Writings with them.

These Testimonies carry so much weight with them, that we cannot but join our
Approbation with that of so many illustrious Persons: The only Question is how
to make a good Choice, and not confound true Wit and Sense with abundance of
low Thoughts, and dull, and vulgar Jests which are imposed upon the World; and
this I have proposed to do in the following Collection.

The Ancients under the names of Apophthegms, comprehended what we call wise
Sayings, generous and noble Sentiments, Jests and witty Repartees: However,
according to our Notions, the Apophthegm thus differs from a Jest or Repartee,
that the first is generally Grave and Instructive; whereas Jests and Repartees
instruct us and make us merry at once; nay, sometimes these are merely
diverting, and sometimes sharp and Satirical.

The French call Bons Mots all those witty Sayings and ingenious Replies which
are the result of a true Judgment, and of a happy and quick Imagination.

Now the first and most certain Rule to know a true Jest from a false Thought,
is that it may be translated into another Language, without losing any thing of
its Sense and Pleasantness; for then it is certain that it runs upon the Thing
expressed in it, and not upon a Pun or Quibble.

Puns and Quibbles are what we call playing upon Words, or Equivocations; they
are known by this, that being turned into another Language, they loose that
resemblance of Sound wherein their subtilty consist^; and as they affect the
Ear more than the Mind, we must take care not to mistake them for true Jests.
The pretended Beauty of Equivocations is only owing to Chance, which makes one
and the same Word to signify several Things, and therefore their double
Application is generally forced; but suppose it were true, a Jest is still
imperfect when it runs upon the Expression, and not upon the Thought. I confess
an Equivocation may be allowed of when it offers two different Ideas to our
Mind, one of which is in a Proper, and and the other in a Figurative Sense. But
as for those miserable Puns and Quibbles, which are nothing but an empty gingle
of Words, the French have branded them with the infamous Name of Turlupinades;
and they ought to be banished the Conversation of polite and well-bred Persons,
as only fit to encertain the vulgar Sort.

Jests and wity Repartees have ever been more frequent among the ancient
Grecians than any other Nations: Which may be ascribed, first to the quickness
of their Wit, their deep Learning, and good Education; secondly, to the
constitution of their Government; for living for the most part in
Commonwealths, they were not constrained in their Fancy by the Respect due to
Sovereigns, and those whom they make sharers of their Authority in Monarchical
States; wherein the different degrees established among Men, do often keep
Inferiors from speaking their Thoughts about the Ridiculum of those above them.

We may draw a double advantage from true Jests, for besides that they serve to
make us merry, and revive now and then a fainting Conversation: Several of them
are full of good and wholesome Instructions, applicable to the different
Exigencies of Life, both in a public and private Fortune.

As for Stories they differ from Jests, in that they express their Subject in
its full Latitude, and generally leave nothing to be guest at, as Jests do;
they are sometimes divertingly Instructive; but their chief aim is to make the
Hearers merry by relating sometimes a concurrence os Comical Accidents;
sometimes a piece of Simplicity or Ignorance, and sometimes Malicious Tricks
that have been put upon any one, to make Sport for others: In all these we must
use the same Caution as we have mentioned about Jests, that is, we must take
care not to confound good Stories with many pieces of low Buffoonry, which
tickle mean and vulgar Ears by their smutiness, daubed over with paltry
Equivocations.

Now the use a Gentleman ought to make of Jests and Stories is, never to quote
them but when they come pat and a-propos to the Subject, and before those who
are disposed to hear and be merry with them; without courting the occasion of
being thought a pleasant and jocose Man, for Persons of a nice discernment will
presently take notice of those nauseous Affectations: And as the judicious La
Bruyere has it; That Man who endeavors to make us Merry, seldom makes himself
to be esteemed.

We must also observe never to usher in Jests or Stories with formal
Commendations, which will prevent our hearers from being agreeably surpised;
for it is by this surprise that the Pleasure they give is principally excited.
Likewise when we begin to tell them, we must not begin to laugh our selves, if
we intend to make the Company laugh; for those who promised us Mirth
beforehand, are seldom so good as their Words; and how silly and ridiculous
does that Man look who laughs by himself, at a cold and threadbare Jest,
whilst the rest can hardly force a Smile to keep him in Countenance? Lastly, we
must avoid telling a Jest or Story several times over to the same Persons, an
Impertinence which makes the Conversation of old People so very distateful.

Before I make an end of this Introduction, I shall obviate an Objection which
some supercilious Critics will be apt to make against this Work, viz. That
most of these Apophthegms, Jests, Repartees and Stories, are already known to
Persons of good Education, and to Men of Learning: To which I answer, That
granting this to be true, yet it is hoped they may be glad to find them here
again, just as we are pleased to hear a fine Tune over and over, provided it be
well Sung: But besides, this Collection is so vastly Rich, that it is hard, if
not impossible, for any single Reader to know all it contains, and not be
either instructed or diverted by something that will be new to him. To which I
must add, That my chief Design in this Collection is to facilitate the Learning
of the French Tongue to the English; and that of the English Language to
Foreigners, and upon that score I have taken particular care to make both
Languages answer one another, as near as their different Idioms would allow.

THE Apophthegms OF THE ANCIENTS,
BEING

Their wise Savings, fine Thoughts, noble Sentiments, Jests and witty
Repartees, etc.

I.
A Rich Man of Athens desired the Philosopher Aristippus to tell him how much
he must give him to instruct his Son: Aristippus asked him a Thousand Drachms.
How! said the Athenian, I could purchase a Slave for that Money: Do so,
answered Aristipus, and thou shall have two; giving him to understand, that his
Son would have the Vices of a Slave, if he did not bestow a liberal Education
upon him.

2
The famous Philosopher Anacharsis was a Scythian by Birth, and a Grecian who
had no other Merit than that of being born in Greece, looking upon him with
Envy, reproached him with the Barbarousness of his Country; I confess, replied
Anacharsis, that my Country is a Shame to me; but thou art the Shame of thy
Country. This Saying may be very well applied to those shallow Wits who despise
Strangers, merely because they are Strangers; not confidering that Learning,
Wit and Merit, are of all Countries.

3
When Theopompus was King of Sparta, one was saying in his Presence, that it
now went well with their City, because their King had learned how to Govern: To
which the King very prudently Replied, That it rather came to pass, because
their People had learned to Obey; intimating that Popular Cities are most
injurious to themselves, by their fa^tious Disobedience; which while they are
addicted to, they are not easily well governed by the best of Magistrates.

4
Dionysius the elder, Tyrant of Syracuse, reproving his Son, for that he had
forcibly violated the Chastity of one of the Citizens Wives, asked him amongst
other Things, if he had ever heard that any such thing had been done by him;
No, said the Son, but that was because you was not Son to a King: Neither, said
Dionysius, will you ever be a Father to one, unless you give over such Pranks
as these. The event proved the truth of what he said; for when this young Man
succeeded his Father, he was expelled the Kingdom of Syracuse for his ill
Behavior and manner of Life.

5
King Antigonus came to visit Antagoras a learned Man, whom he found in his
Tent busied in the Cooking of Congers, Do you think, said Antigonus, that Homer
at such time as he wrote the glorious Actions of Agamemnon was boiling of
Congers? And do you think, said the other, that Agamemnon when he did those
great Actions, was wont to concern himself whether any Man in h^s Camp boiled
Congers or not,

6
Socrates was asked, why he endured his Wifes Brawling; says he, Why do you
suffer your Geese to gaggle? because, answered one, they lay us Eggs; and my
Wife brings me Children, said he.

7
Apelles the famous Painter, drew the Picture of Alexander the Great on
Horseback, and presented it to him; but Alexander not praising it as so
excellent a Piece deserved, Apelles desired a living Horse might be brought,
who seeing the Picture, fell to pawing and neighing, taking it to be a real
one; whereupon Apelles told him, his Hors^ understood Painting better than
himself.

8
Virgil, the famous Poet, was much in favor through* his great Wit and Learning
with Augustus, insomuch that he daily received his Bread from him; Augustus one
Day knowing his deep Discretion, asked him privately, If he could guess what
was his Father; to which he replied, Truly Sir, I do verily believe he was a
Baker, a Baker, and why so? says Augustus; because says Virgil, you always
reward me with Bread, which Answer so well pleased the Emperor, that he
rewarded him afterward with Money.

9
Alexander the Great, having defeated the Army of Darius King of Persia, Darius
sued to him for Peace, and proffered him one half of Asia, with ten thousand
Talents. Parmenio, one of his Favorites, charmed with so advantageous a
Proposal, Sir, said he to his Master, I vow were I Alexander, I would gladly
accept these offers; and so would I, answered Alexander, if I was Parmenio.

10
The same Alexander being at Delphos, dragged the Priestess of Apollo to the
Temple, in order to make her consult the Oracle upon a forbidden Day: She
having resisted him in vain, cried out, Alexander thou art invincible. I desire
no other Oracle but this, replied he.

11
Leo the Bizantine, a Disciple of Plato, and a very famous Philosopher, going
to meet Philip King of Macedon, who came with a great Army against his Co^ntry,
told him, Sir, why do you come to attack our City; because, said Philip, I am
in Love with her, and am come to enjoy her. Ah! Sir, replied Leo, Lovers don't
come to their Mistresses with Instruments of War, but of Music. This agreeable
and witty Repartee so pleased Philip that he changed his Resolution, and
leaving Byzantium at liberty, passed on to other Conquests.

12
One asked Pythagoras why he had married his Daughter to one of his Enemies;
because, answered that Philosopher, I thought I could do him no greater injury
than give him a Wife.

13
Diogenes seeing an ill Marks-man drawing his Bow, he put himself just before
the Mark, and being asked why he did so, because, said he, he will be sure not
hit me there.

14
Alexander going to see Diogenes the Cynick, He found him in a Field basking
himself in the Sun; and accosting him, followed by all his Court, h^ said to
him, I am Alexander the Great: And I, answered the Philosopher, am Diogenes the
Cynick. Alexander made him several offers, and asked him what he desired of
him; nothing, said Diogenes, but only that you stand a little aside, and don't
hinder the Sun to shine upon me. The King surprised with his Manners, cried out
were I not Alexander, I could be Diogenes.

15
Pompey being Sick of a Fever, one of his Friends came to see him, and as he
came into his Room, he spied a handsome Woman Slave, whom Pompey loved, going
out, he asked Pompey how it was with him, the Fever, said Pompey, left me but
just now: Very like, replied his Friend, for I met her a going from you.

16
The Emperor Augustus endeavoring to find the reason of the great likeness
which a young G^ecian bor^ to him, asked him whether his Mother was ever at
Rome: No, Sir, answered the Grecian, but my Father has many a time.

17
Pisistrates, a Tyrant of Athens, having resolved to marry a second Wife, his
Children asked him whether he did it out of any discontent he had received from
them. On the contrary, answered he, I am so well pleased with you, and find you
to be such fine Men, that I have a mind to have other Children like you.

18
Thales the Milesian, one of the Seven Wisemen of Greece, being asked what was
the oldest Thing? He answered, God, because he has been for ever; what was the
handsomest Thing? he said, the World; because it is the Work of God; what the
largest Thing? Place; because it comprehends every thing besides; what the most
convenient? Hope; because when all other Things are lost that remains still;
what the best Thing? Virtue; for without it nothing that is Good can be said or
done; what the quickest? a Man's Thoughts; because in one Moment they run over
all the Universe; what the strongest? Necessity; because it surmoun^s all other
Accidents; what the easiest? to give Council; what the hardest? to know ones
self; what the wisest Thing? Time; because it brings all Things to pass.

19
A certain Soldier came in a great Fright to Leonidas and told him, Captain,
the Enemy are very near us; then we are very near them too, said Leonidas.
There was another that came to tell him that the Enemy were so numerous that
one could hardly see the Sun for the quantity of their Arrows; to whom he
answered very pleasantly, will it not be a great Pleasure to fight in the shade?

20
Alexander the Great asked Dionides, a famous Pirate, who was brought Prisoner
to him, why he was so bold as to rob and plunder in his Seas, he answered, that
he did it for his Profit, and as Alexander himself was used to do; but because
I do it, added he, with one single Gally, I am called a Pirate: But you Sir,
Who do it with a great Army are called a King. That bold Answer so pleased
Alexander that he gave him his Liberty, at that very instant.

21
Darius King of Persia sent great Presents to Epaminondas, General of the
Thebans, with design to tamper with him: If Darius, said this great Captain to
those that brought those Presents to him, has a mind to be Friends with the
The^ans, he need not buy my Friendship; and if he has other Thoughts, he has
not Riches enough to corrupt me; and so he sent them back.

22
Corax promised Tisias to teach him Rhetoric, and Tisias on his side engaged
to give him a Reward for it; but when he had learnt it, he refused to satisfy
him: Corax therefore called him before the Judge; Tisias trusting to the
subtilty of his Rhetoric, asked him what Rhetoric consisted in: Corax
answered in the Art of Persuading. Then said Tis^as, If I can persuade the
Judge that I ought to give you nothing, I Will pay you nothing, because you will
be cast; and if I do not persuade them, I shall not pay you neither; because I
have not learnt how to persuade, therefore your best way is to relinquish your
enterpriz^. But Corax, who was more subtle than he, resumed the Argument in
this Manner, if you perswad^ the Judges you ought to pay me; because you have
learnt Rhetoric; if you do not persuade them, you must pay me likewise,
because you will be cast; so let it be how it will you ought to satisfy me.

23
Mecenas, Augustus's Favorite, being entertained at Dinner by a Roman Knight,
toward the end of the Meal, began to take some Liberties with his Wife; the
Knight, to make his court to him, instead of showing any jealousy of it,
counterfeited Sleep; but seeing one of his Slaves going to take away something
from the Cup board, Sirrah, says he, do thou not see that I only sleep for
Mecenas?

24
There was at Rome, in the Time of the Emperor Augustus, a poor Greek Poet who
from time to time, when the Emperor went out of his Palace, presented him with
a Greek Epigram; and though the Emperor took it, yet he never gave him any
thing; on the contrary, having a mind one Day to ridicule him and shake him
off, as soon as he saw him coming to present him with his Verses, the Emperor
sent him a Greek Epigram of his own Composing, and writ with his own Hand. The
Poet received it with joy, and as he was reading of it, he showed by his Face
and Gestures that he was mightily pleased with it. After he had read it, he
pulled out his Purse, and coming up to Augustus, gave him some few Pence,
saying, take this Money, Caesar, I give it you, not according to your great
Fortune, but according to my poor Ability; had I more, my liberality would be
greater. The whole company fell a laughing, and the Emperor more than the
rest, who ordered him a hundred thousand Crowns.

25
Young Scipio was at four and twenty Years of Age a Man of consummate Wisdom;
and although his warlike Achievements terrified his Enemies, yet he made still
greater Conquests by his Virtue than by his Valor. For as they brought to him
the Wife of Mando a Spanish Prince, with two of her Nieces extreme Beautiful,
he sent them back with these fine Words, That it not only became his own, and
the Roman Peoples integrity not to violate any thing that is Sacred; but besides
the regard he had for them, obliged him to do them Justice; since in their
Misfortune they had neither forgot themselves, nor their Honor. And having
done the same to another Spanish Prince, whose Wife, (a Woman still more
accomplished in her Beauty than the other) ^ad been presented to him, he sent
her back to her Husband with a great Sum of Money which was offered him for her
Ransom. This Prince highly pleas^d with this Favor, proclaimed through all the
Land, That a (...) (...) Roman was come into Spain, who made himself M^ster of
all not so much by the Power of his Arms, as of ^is Virtue and obliging Nature.

26
The same Scipio being accused before the Roman People, by Q. Petilius, for
embezl^ng part of the Spoils of King Antiochus* he made his appearance at the
Day appointed by his Accuser. But this great Man no less admirable by his
Virtue than by his Courage, instead of clea^ing himself from the Charge, and
proud of his own Innocence, he made a Speech to the People assembled to condemn
him, and told them with a bold and u^daunted Look, and the Tone of a
Conqueror, 'Twas upon such a day as this is I took Carthage, defeated
Hannibal, and vanquished the Carthaginians; let us march to the Capitol, and
return the Gods Thanks for it. The People surprised by this Magnanimity left
the Informer, followed Scipio, and that Day got him a thous^nd times more
Honor than that on which he tritumphed over King Siphax, and the Carthaginians.

27
Plato invited one Day to Supper Diogenes the Cynick wi^h some Sicilians his
Friends, and caused the Ban^eting Room to be adorned, out of respect to those
St^angers. Di^genes who was displeased with the fine^y o^ Pla^o, beg^n to
t^ample upon the Carpets and other Goods, and said v^ry bru^ishly* I trample
upon the Prid^ of Plato: But Plato answered wisely, Tru^, D^ogenes* but you
trample upon it through a gr^ater Pride.

28
Cineas was in great Honor with Pyrrhus King of Epirus, who made use of him in
all his weighty Affairs, and professed that he had won more Cities by the Charms
of his Eloquence, than he had taken himself by the strength of his own Arms. He
perceiving the King earnestly bent upon his Expedition into Italy, told him in
private, Sir, the Romans have the Reputation of a Warlike People, and command
diverse Nations that are so, but suppose we overcome them, What Fruit shall we
reap by the Victory? That Is a plain thing, said P^rrhus; for then added he, No
City will presume to oppose us, and we shall speedily be Masters of all Italy.
And having made Italy our own, returned Cineas, what shall we then do? Sicily,
said he, is near, reaching out her Hand to us, a rich and populous Island, and
easily to be taken. It is probable, said Cineas; but having subdue^ Sicily,
will that put an end to the War? If God, said Pyrrhus gives us this success,
these will be but the Flourish to greater Matters; for who can refrain from
Africa and Carthage, which will be soon at our beck? And these overcome, you
will easily grant that none of those that now provoke us, will dare to resist
us: That Is true, said Cineas; for it is easiy to believe that with such Forces
we may recover Macedon, and give Law to all Greece. But being thus become Lords
of all, what then? Then dear Cineas, said Pyrrhu^ s^iling, we will live at our
ease, and enjoy our selves* When Cineas had brought him thus far; and what
hinders, replied he, but that we may now do all this, seeing it is in our
Power, without the expense of so much sweat and Blood?

29
Chilo said, one ought to be young in his old Age, and old in his youth; that
is, an old Man ought to be Cheerful and Good-humored, and a young Man Wise.

30
Artaxerxes being routed in a Battle, and put to flight, after his Baggage and
Provisions had been plundered, he found himself so pressed with Hunger, that he
was reduced to eat a piece of Barley Bread, and some dry Figs. He relished them
so well, that he cried out. O Gods! how many Pleasures has Plenty deprived me
of till this instant?

31
Those of Cyrene desired Plato to make Laws for them, I cannot, said he,
dictate Laws to those whom Plenty and Prosperity has made incapable to obey.

32
Archidamus besieging Corinth, saw a great many Hares starting from under its
Walls: Then turning presently to his Soldiers, These my Friends, said he, are
the Enemies we are to fight withal, we ought to be more afraid of their Heels
than of their Hands.

33
Julius Caesar landing on the Shore of Africa, happened to get a fall as he went
out of the Ship. This fall which seemed to be an ill Omen for his Design upon
that Country, was by his ready Wit turned into a lucky Presage; for as he fell
he embraced the Earth, and cried, Now I hold thee Africa.

34
Timotheus being accounted lucky in his Undertakings, was by some envious
Persons drawn with a Net in his Hand, into which Cities fell of their own
accord while he was asleep. Timoth^us without expressing the least discontent
upon it, said to those who showed him that Picture, If I take such fine Cities
while I am asleep, what shall I do when I am awake?

35
Sylla who robbed the Temples to pay his Soldiers, was told that as they were
going to plunder that of Apollo at Delphos, a noise of some Instruments was
heard there; so much the better, answered he, for since Apollo plays on his
Lyre, it is a fign he is pleased, and is not angry with us.

36
Alexander's Generals complained to him just before the Battle of Arbella, that
his Soldiers had been so insolent, as to demand a Promise that the whole Booty
should be theirs: Come on, said he, that is a sign of Victory; those that speak
with so much assurance do not design to run away.

37
Diogenes came to Cheronea when Philip his Army was there; he was taken by the
Soldiers and carried before the King, who not knowing him, told him that
without doubt he was a Spy, and came to observe him. Thou say right,
answered Diogenes, for I came hither to observe thy Folly, in that not being
contented with the Kingdom of Macedon, thou s^kest at the hazard of thy
Dominions, to Usurp the Province of thy Neighbors. The King admiring the
boldness of this Man, commanded him to be set at Liberty.

38
Julius Caesar going through a little Village, some of his Friends took notice
of the Tranquillity of the Inhabitants, and asked him whether he thought there
was any great canvassing and interest made for the Magistracy: I had rather,
answered Caesar, be the first Man in this Village, than the second at Rom^.

39
Darius's Mother, then Prisoner of Alexander, excusing her self to him, ^or
that in one visit wherewith he honored her, she by a mistake, had paid to
Ephestion, who accompained him, the Respect due to the King: said Alexander
comforting her, be not concerned at it, Madam, you were not mistaken, for he
whom you saluted is another Alexander.

40
Chilo, one of the seven wise Men of Greece, to give us to understand, that one
ought to be moderate and cautious in ones Affections, said, We must love a
Friend ^o as we may one Day hate him; and we must hate no Body but with a
regard that we may afterward unite Friendship with him.

41
One comforting King Philip upon the Death of Hipparchus, told him, that his
Friend being stricken in Years, Death was not come upon him before his time:
True, said Philip, Death is come in time for him; but since I had not yet
honored him with Benefits worthy of our Friendship, his Death, as to me, is
untimely.

42
A Criminal sentenced to Death, was bailed out of Prison by one of his Friends,
who remained Prisoner till the other had settled some Business, which a^soon as
he had done he surrendered himself again; Dionysius the Tyrant surprised at the
Assurance of the one, and the Faithfulness of the other, pardoned the
Malefactor: And in requital of my Pardon, said he, I beseech you to admit me as
a third into your Friendship.

43
Memnon King Darius's General, in his War against Alexander, hearing one of his
Soldiers be^ch out many injurious Words against that great Enemy, he gave him a
great blow with a Halbert, and told him, I pay thee to fight against Alexander,
and not to abuse him.

44
The Physician of Pyrrhus having offered to Fabricius, the Roman General, to
Poison his Master, Fabricius sent back that Traitor's Letter to Pyrrhus, with
these Words, Prince, know better for the future, how to choose both your
Friends and Foes. To requite this Benefit, Pyrrhus sent back all the Prisoners:
But Fabricius received them only upon Condition that he would accept of as many
of his, and writ to him: Do not believe Pyrrhus, I have discovered this
Treachery to you, out of a particular regard to your Person, but because the
Romans shun base Stratagems, and will not triumph but with open Force.

45
Diogenes being asked of what Beast the biting was most dangerous, answered, if
you mean wild Beasts, it is the Slanderer's, if tame one's, the Flatterer's.

46
Antigonus hearing a Poet call him Son of Jupiter; My Valet de Chamber, said he
smiling, who empties my Close-stool, knows but too well that I am but a Man.

47
Whereas Kings are surround^d with Flatterers, and that Horses have no
particular regard for them, Carneades used to say, That Princes learn nothing
well, but to ride on Horseback.

48
Sesostris King of Egypt, having caused four of his Captive Kings, instead o^
Horses, to draw his Triumphal Chariot, one of these four cast his Eyes
contiually upon the two foremost Wheels next him, which Sesostris observing,
asked him what he found worthy of his Admiration in that Mo^ion; to whom the
Captive King answered, That in those Wheels ^e beheld the mutability of all
worldly Things; for that the lowest part of the Wheel was suddenly carried
above, and became the highest, and the uppermost part was as suddenly turned
downwards; which when Sesostris had judiciosly weighed, he dismissed those Kings
^om their Servitude.

49
Some Body twitting Hiero the Tyrant with a stinking Breath, he chid his Wife
for not telling him of it before: I thought, answered she, all Men's Breaths
smelled like yours.

50
One asked Charillus, why at Lacedemon Maids went barefaced, when Married
Women were veiled: Because, answered he, the first look for Husbands, and the
others are afraid to lose them by Jealousy and Divorce,

51
Diogenes seeing over the Door of a new Married Man, these written Words, Hence
all Evil; said he, After Death the Physician. The same Philosopher perceiving
one Day some Women hanged on an Oliv^tree: Would to God, cried he, all other
Trees bore the like Fruit.

52
Paulus Aemilius divorced a Wife, who seemed to be Mistress of all the
Qualifications necessary to make her beloved. This Divorcement surprised a
great many; but he told them, showing them his Shoe, You see that this Shoe
fits me, and is well made, but you don't see where it wrings me.

53
Diogenes said to a young hare-brained Fellow, that threw Stones at a Gibbet;
Well, I see thou wilt touch the mark at last.

54
C. Popilius, who, as Ignorant as he was, set up for a Lawyer, being one Day
summoned to be a Witness, answered he knew nothing: You think, perhaps, said
Cicero to him, that you are asked Questions about Law.

55
Melanthus, a Parasite of Alexander King of Pheres, being asked how his Master
died, made this pleasant Answer: he died by a Sword that run through his Thigh,
and my Belly at once.

56
Plato, said, that Hopes are the Dreams of those that are awake.

57
As two Men courted Themistocles's Daughter in Marriage, one of which was a
Fool, but rich, the other Poor, but wise and honest; he chose this last for his
Son-in-l^w, and aswered to those who wondered at it: I est^em more a Man without
Riches, than Riches without a Man.

58
Alexander the Great, took in the Wars a certain Indian, who had such a skill
in Shooti^, that he could pa^ his A^ows thro^gh a ^ing placed at a certain
distance. He commanded him to make a trial of it before him; and because the
Indian refused, he ordered he should be slain. Those that led him to his
Punishment e^quiring into the Reason of his refusal, the Indian answ^ed, Having
for a l^ng time left off the Exercise of my Art, I choose to suffer Death rather
than to venture the loss of my Reputation, if I should miss before Alexander:
Which being told again to that Emperor, he not only commanded he should be set
at Liberty, but also gave him many Gifts, admiring his great Spirit and
R^solution.

59
The Favorites of the Emperor Trajan, taking notice that he received every
Body with great Familiarity, told him he forgot the grandeur of his Majesty: I
will take care, answered he, That my People shall find in me such an Emperor
as I could wish to have one my self, if I was a private Man.

60
Agath^cles from a mean Fortune, being advanced to the Royal Dignity, would be
served at Table with Ea^then-ware, and being asked the reason: I intend,
answered he, that the remembrance of my Extraction from a Potter, shall check
that Pride which the vain Pomp of ^oyalty may raise in me.

61
Alexander sitting on the Judgment Seat to decide Criminal Causes, kept always
one of his Ears stopped, ^ile the Accuser was pleading; and being asked the
(...): I keep, said he, the other Ear entire to hear the (...) accused.

62
^ng Philip being drowsy, and not having well heard (...) (...) of Machetes,
cast him contrary to the Laws: (...) cried out presently that he appealed; the
King in a Passion asked him to what Judge? I appeal, said he, from Philip
asleep, to Philip awake. This reply made Philip recollect himself, and ordered
the Cause to be tried over again, who acknowledging his Error, he did not
revoke his Sentence, but paid out of his own Pocket the Sum which he had
adjudged Machete, to pay.

63
Two Criminals accused one another before the same King: This Prince having
patiently heard them both, said, I condemn this Fellow presently to depart my
Kingdom, and the other to run after him.

64
In the Trial of a Cause, whereof Aristides was Judge, one of the Parties
related several Abu^es which the same Aristides had received from his adverse
Party: Let that pass, said Aristides, I am not here to be my own Judge, but
yours only.

65
Marcus Aurelius said to some Persons who would keep his Son from weeping for
his Tutors death; Suffer my Son to be a Man before he be an Emperor.

66
Dionysius seeing that his Son had gathered a great quantity of Gold and Silver
Vessels, out of the Gifts he had made him, told him: I do not find in thee a
Royal Soul, since thou have neglected to get thy self Friends by the
distribution of those Riches.

67
The same Dionysius asked Diogenes what Brass he should take to make himself a
Statue: Take that, answered he, of the Statues of Harmodius and Aristogiton.
These were two famous Murderers of Tyrants, to whom Statues had been erected.

68
An old Soldier having a Suit at Law depending, desired the Emperor Augustus
to come and support him with his Interest: This Prince gave him one of his
Attendance to take care of his Business; whereupon the Soldier was so bold as
to tell him: Sir, I did not use you the same way; for when you was in danger at
the Battle of Actium, I my self fought for you without a Deputy.

69
The Poet Simonides asked of Themistocles something contrary to the Laws; he
dismissed him with these Words: If in thy Poems thou should make Verses
without Measures, would thou be accounted a good Poet? And if I should do
Things contrary to the Constitution of the Laws, should I be accounted a good
Prince?

70
The Ambassadors the Athenians had sent to Philip, being returned to Athens,
commended that Prince for his Beauty and Eloquence, and his being able to drink
much: These Commendations, said Demosthenes, are little wortby of a King; the
first of those advantages is proper to Women, the second to R^etoricians, and
the third to Spunges.

71
Bion being asked whether one should marry a Wife, answered, if you marry an
ugly one, you will marry a torment; if you take a handsome one, you will have a
common Woman.

72
Hipparchia being desperately in love with Crates t^ Philosopher, courted him
for a Husband, and neither her Relations, nor that Philosopher himself could
dissuade her from it: But, said Crates to her, do you know what you are in love
with? I will be plain with you: Here is your Husband, said he, pulling off his
Cloak; then throwing off his Bag and his Stick: Here is, ad^d he, showing his
crooked-back, my Wife's Jointure; see whether you are contented with it, and
whether you can like this way of living. She accepted of all those Conditions,
and so he married her.

73
The Hebrews say that when a Man takes a Wife, he must go down a Step; and that
to make a Friend, he ought to go up one; because the one must protect us, and
the other be obedient to her Husband.

74
A cowardly and unskilful Wrestler being turned Physician, Diogenes told him:
What! have you a mind to lay on the Ground those who used to fling you down?

75
Alcibiades cut off the Tail of his Dog, which was extraordinary fine, and of
great value; and as the People who saw that Dog go about the Streets without a
Tail, wondered at the oddness of the thing, he said: I have done it with design
that the People talking about this Trifle, may not censure my more important
Actions.

76
Smicythus accused Nicanor of speaking ill of Philip. This Prince who had an
esteem for Nicanor, sent for him, and understanding that he was provoked by the
Kings not relieving his extreme Indigence, he ordered him a Sum of Money. Some
time after Smicythus relating to Philip how Nicanor proclaimed his Bounty every
where: Well, said he to him, you see we are Masters of our own Reputation, and
that we may turn Calumnies into Commendations.

77
As one asked Zeno whether wise men ought not to love: If wise men did not
love, answered he, nothing in the World could be so wretched as the Fair, since
none but Fools should be in Love with them.

78
One of Agesilaus his Friends having found him playing with his Children, and
riding on a Hobbyhorse, seemed to be surprised at it; but the King told him:
Pray tell no Body what thou see till thou have Children of thy own.

79
Philip King of Macedon, designing to make himself Master of a Citadel, was
told by his Spies that the thing was impossible, by reason that there was no
way to come at it. Is the way so difficult, asked the King, that a Mule laden
with Gold and Silver cannot go to it? and being answered no, then, replied he,
it is not impregnable.

80
The Night before Darius disposed his Troops to the fight, Alexander was in so
profound a sleep, that it lasted still several Hours after Sunrise; his Men
frighted at the approach of the Enemies Army, awaked him; and as they wondered
at his Tranquillity: Be not surprised, said he, at my sleeping so securely:
Darius has rid me of a great many Cares, since by gathering this Day all his
Forces into one Body, he has given to Valor an opportunity of deciding in one
single Battle the fortune of us both.

81
Dionysius Tyrant of Syracuse being told that one of his S^bjects had buried a
Treasure in the Earth, commanded him to bring it to him. The Syracusan gave him
but part of it, and having secretly kept the other; he went into another Ci^y,
where he lived more plentifully then he did before; which being related to
Dionysius, he restored him the remainder of his Treasure. Now, said he, that he
knows how to use riches, he deserves to enjoy them.

82
^hilip King of Macedon being a Hostage at Thebes, Philo the Theban received
him into his House, and entertained him with great Kindness; some time after,
this Prince would have acknowledged his Benefits by P^sents; but the generous
Philo obstinately persisting to refuse them: Oh* dear Philo, said he, do not
rob me now of the honor I have hitherto preserved, of having never been
^vercome in point of Benefits.

83
Taxillus King of the Indies came to meet Alexander, and spoke to him thus, I
challenge thee to fight, not with Arms, but Benefits; if thou art inferior to
me, thou shall receive some from me; but if on the contrary thou art more
powerful, thou shall honor me with thy Favors. I accept the noble Challenge,
answered Alexander, embracing him, We shall see which of us two shall get the
better in Courtesy. Thus instead of taking his Kingdom from him, he enlarged
the extent of it.

84
The Emperor Titus remembering once at Supper that during that Day he had done
no Body a kindness: My Friends, said he, I have lost this Day.

85
Julius Caesar divorced his Wife Pompeia because her Reputation was not
altogether without blemish, and that she was suspected of having an Amor with
Clodius: Clodius was accused upont that account; and Caesar being summoned to
depose against him, said, he never could find that he had done any ill thing
with his Wife: Why then did you part from her? asked somebody; Because,
answered he, Cesars Wife ought to live with so much reserve as to be even
beyond the reach of Calumny.

86
Attalus upon a false report that his Brother E^menes was dead, made himself
Master of the Kingdom, and married his Widow: Some time after, hearing that
Eumenes was returned into his Dominions, he left the Crown, and without any
other Attendance than that of a private Man, went to meet him. Eumenes was
contented to wisper him by way of Expostulation: Brother, I hope another time
you will not be so hasty to marry my Wife before you have seen me buried.

87
Pompey having found several important Letters from Rome among Sertorius's
Papers, he burnt them all unperus'd; I ought, said he, to give an opportunity
of Repenting, to those who have failed by disobliging me.

88
Antigonus's Soldiers being angry because he had made them incamp in a very
incommodious Place, spoke very saucily of him near a Tent, where they did not
think he was. Antigonus, who overheard them, con^ented himself to take up the
Curtain of his Tent with a Stick, and tell them: If you do not go further off
to rail at me, i will make you repent it.

89
Athenodorus the Philosopher having upon account of his Age, got leave of Caesar
Augustus to go home; he told him at parting, as an important piece of Advice:
Sir, whenever you are in a Passion, remember not to do what it suggests to you,
before you have pronounced the four and twenty Letters of the Alphabet.

90
Augustus having mad^ a Law for the Trial and Punishment of those that were
accu^ed of Adultery, did no sooner hear that a young Man had committed the same
Crime with Julia, Daughter to that Emperor, but he rushed upon him, and beat
him with great fury; whereupon the young Man cried out: Caesar, you have made a
Law. At which Words Augustus acknowledging his Passion, he contained himself,
and was so vexed at it, that he would not eat a bit all that Day.

91
Diogenes said, that to become perfect, a Man had need of faithful Friends, or
great Enemies; because the one by their good Advice, and the other by their
sharp Reproaches, made him sensible of his defects.

92
Alexander the Great coming into Apelles's Shop, and speaking improperly of
some Pictures that were there exposed to view, Apelles told him frankly: Sir,
as long as you did not talk about our Art, every one here had an admiration and
Respect for your Majesty; but as soon as you have pretended to judge of our
Works, my very Prentices, who grind my Colors, could not forbear laughing.

93
The same Prince being Wounded in a Fight with an Arrow, said to those who were
about him: Every one calls me ^mmortal, and Son of Jupiter: What do you think
on it? does not this wound give the lie to all those Flatterers? This Blood that
runs is of the same color with that of my Subjects, and puts me in mind that I
am but a Man.

94
The Emperor Augustus feeling approaching Death, told those Friends who were
about his Bed: Well, my Friends, what think you, have I not during my Life
pretty well acted my Part upon the Stage of the World? And as every one confessed
that no Man's life could ever be more Illustrious, and better governed than
his, he added these Words, which were usually spoke to the People after the
Play: Farewell then, my Friends, and clap Hands.

95
Somebody came to Socrates the Philosopher, to tell him the Athenians had
sentenced him to Death: Nature, said he, has long since condemned them to
suffer the same punishment as well as I.

96
When King Philip came with his Army into the Peloponesus, one told Damidas,
that in case the Lacedaemonians did not make their Peace with him, they must
suffer a great deal: You Coward, answered he, What can those Men suffer who are
not afraid of Death?

97
One told Anacharsis that the Ship he was in was but four Inches thick: Then,
said he, we are within four Inches of Death.

98
Stratonicus being asked what sort of Ships were safest, answered: The safest
are those that are taken out of the Se^ and laid up on firm Land.

99
The Emperor Tiberius seldom changed the Officers, Governors and Magistrates
of his Empir^, and being asked the reason, he answered: When Flies are full
they don't sting so much as they did before.

100
A Painter showing an ill Picture, bragged that he had finished it in a very
little Time: you need not tell us of it, said Apelles, your Picture speaks it
planly enough.

101
Melanthus hearing the Philosopher Gorgias exhort in Public the Grecians to
Concord; This is a fine *Man indeed, said he, thus to endeavor to persuade all
these Grecians to that Peace and Unity which he cannot settle at home ^etwixt
himself, his Wife and his Maid.

102
Demetrius Phalereus used to exhort Ptolo^eus to gather Books about Civil and
Military Politics: Because, said he, Kings will find in such Books those
Things that their Friends dare not to tell them. To which purpose Alphonsus
King of Aragon said: Books are the Counselors I like best; it is not either
Fear or Hope that will hinder them to tell me what I ought to do.

103
Dionysius the Tyrant had made great Promises to an excellent Musician, who
sung before him, and as the Musician found that they came to nothing, he
complained to the Tyrant, who answered him: Friend, What reason have thou to
complain? I paid thee the same way as thou servedst me: Thou have tickled my
Ear with pleasing Mu^ick, and I have entertained thee with the Pleasure of fair
H^pes, and so we are quits.

104
One of the Ancients said: That the Great ones used all their endeavors to
lose the use of their Hands and Feet, because they get others to dress and
carry them.

105
Diogenes wrote upon the Foot of a golden S^atue which the Curtezan Phrine had
erected to Venus, in the Temple of Delphos, these Words: The Incontinency of
the Grecians has raised this Statue.

106
Adrian the Emperor asked Epictetus why Venus was represented Naked: Because,
answered he, She strips those Men of every thing who court her Pleasures too
much.

107
Vespasian finding himself dying, to ridicule the silly Custom of the Heathens
in those Times, (who ranked the Emperors among the Gods, after they were dead)
said, I feel I become a God.

108
Portia the Wife of Brutus, gave her self a great wound with a Knife, the Night
before Caesar was to be murdered by her Husband, and said to those who asked her
how that Misfortune was befallen her: I did it on purpose, to try with what
Resolution I shall suffer that Death I prepare to my self, if the design of the
Conspirators miscarries.

109
Epictetus a Slave of Epap^rodites, one of Nero's Officers, having one Day
received from him a great blow on on his Leg, told him coldly: Pray have a
(...) you don't break my Leg. But that cruel Man redo^b (...) b^ow with such
force, that he broke his Shin-bon^ ^ell, said then Epictetus smiling, did not I
tell you you we^ like to break my Leg?

110
Antipater having defeated King Agis, demanded fifty Lacedemonian Boys, as
Hostage^ to secure his Conquest. E^eocles, who then was Ephorus, answered: That
he would give him no Boys, lest being no more under the Spartan Discipline,
they should contract vicious Inclinations; but that they were ready to give him
double that number of old Men and Women.

111
An Jonian Woman made a show of a piece of Work very rich, and well wrought,
but a Lacedemonian showing four Children whom she had well brought up: These,
said she, are the Works that a Virtuous Lady ought to value her self upon.

112
The Emperor Theodosius committing his Sons to be instructed by the learned
Arsenius, told them: Children, if you take care to ennoble your Souls with
Virtue and Knowledge, I will leave you my Crown with Pleasure; but if you
neglect that, I had rather see you loose the Empire, than haza^d it into the
Hands of those that are unfit to govern it: It Is better you should suffer the
loss of it, than occasion its ruin.

113
Philip was told that his Son Alexander complained of his get^ing many other
Children by different Women, whereupon he spoke thus to him: Since thou see,
Alexander, that thou have several Competitors in the Empire, endeavor to
become so good and so brave, that thou may obtain the Kingdom rather by thy
Merit than my Favor.

114
After the defeat of Pompey the Great, the Troops which followed Scipio into
Africa, having run away, Cato, who saw the Victory in Cesar's Hands, killed
himself out of spite: Caesar having received the news of his Death, cried out:
Oh! Cato, I envy thy Death, since thou have envied me the Honor of giving thee
thy Life.

115
Socrates having for a long time endured his Wifes brawling, went out of his
House, and sat down before the Door, to rid himself of her Importunity. This
Woman enraged to find that all her Scolding was not able to disturb his
Tranquillity, flung a Chamber-potfull upon his Head. Those that happened to see
it laughed at poor Socrates; but that Philosopher told them smiling: I thought
indeed after so much Thunder we should have some Rain.

116
Zeuxis contending with Parrhasius about the Excellence of their Pictures, drew
some Grapes so much to the Life, that Birds came to peck at them. As for
Parrhasius he exposed to view a Curtain so well done, that Zeuxis proud of the
sucess of his Work, told him hastily, that 'twas not a time to hide his
Picture, and offered to draw the Curtain himself; but perceiving his Mistake:
Well, said he, I have done with thee; I only cheated Birds, but thou have
cheated the Painter himself.

117
Pericles being accused for laying out the Public Revenues upon Buildings,
Public Ornaments, and Offerings to the Gods: Will you give me leave, said he,
to the People, to get my name ingraved upon all those things instead of yours,
and I Will be at the charge of them out of my own Pocket. At which Words, the
People out of a point of Honor, refused to accept his Proposal, and permitted
him to go on with his Magnificence in the Name of the People.

118
Some Romans wondered that Caesar should continue perpetual Dictator, by which
he seemed to affect Monarchy; whereas Sylla had renounced that Title, to whom
Caesar answered: Do not wonder at that, Sylla could not read well, and so was
not able to dictat^ long.

119
Dion^sius the Tyrant of Sicily caused the Statue of Jupiter Olympius to be
stripped of a Cloak of massive Gold, worth above fifty thousand Crowns, and
instead of that gave him one of Wool, saying This Clock is too Cold in Winter,
and too heavy in Summer; we must take care of Jupiter, this Woollen one will
sit him much better.

120
The same King caused in Epidauris the golden Beard of Aesculapius to be
plucked off: It is neither becoming nor rational, said he, to represent
Aesculapius the Son with a long Beard, whilst we see by him Apollo his Father
with a smooth and beardless Chin.

121
A Roman Knight, who was above two Hundred thousand Crowns in debt, and yet
enjoyed his Pleasure, and lived in great Tranquillity, being dead, the Emperor
Augustus commanded that when his Goods were Sold, his Bed should be bought for
him, adding this Reason: That must needs be the best Bed in the World, since he
who was so deeply indebted could repose in it so long at his ease.

122
Alexander the Great sent a Hundred Talents as a Present to Phocion. This Man
asked those that brought it, why Alexander sent this Present to him alone,
among so many Persons that were in Athens: Because, answered they, the
Athenians esteem you the wisest man among them: Why then, replied he, will he
not suffer me to keep that Quality, and why does he desire me to cease to be
wise by accepting his Presents?

123
Cato of Utica, perceiving that Caesar had filled the Temple of Castor, and the
Marketplace with armed Men against him: What a great Coward, said he, is
Caesar, thus to arm so many Soldiers against one single Man.

124
One of Artaxerxes's Officers asked an unjust thing of him: The King being
informed that he was promp^d to do it only upon a Promise of a great Sum of
Money, ordered the like Sum to be brought (...) him, and presented him with it,
saying, Take (...) Money Friend: this Gift cannot make me poor; but (...) I
grant thy request, I should become very unjust.

125
Aristippus gave fifty Drachms for a Partridge, and a^ some body censured such
an Expense in a Philosopher, Aristippus told him, would you not buy it if it
cost but a Farthing? he answered, with all my Heart: Well, replied Aristippus,
fifty Drachms are no more to me than a Farthing.

126
The same Aristippus begged a Favor of King Dionysius for one of his Friends,
and not being able to obtain it, he cast himself at his Feet, with design to
embrace them, and pray him, as he loved to be entreated. Some body found fault
with this Action, as unworthy of a Philosopher; to whom he pleasantly answered:
You ought not to lay the blame upon me, but upon King Dionysius, who carries
his Ears at his Feet.

127
The Ambassadors of Greece grumbling because King Philip slept in the Daytime,
and made them wait too long for an Audience: Do not wonder, Gentlemen, said
Parm^nio, if he sleeps whilst you wake, for whilst you slept he was awake.
Giving them to understand, that his Master had got the start of the Grecians,
whilst their divisions hindered them from minding their own Affairs.

128
Mecenas seeing Augustus in the Senate House ready to pass Sentence of Death
upon a great many Persons, and not being near enough to advise him to modera^e
his severity, he flung a Note to him, at the opening of which Augustus found
these bold Words: Rise, Butcher, and come out of that Place. Augustus, who knew
his Affection to him, was not in the least offended, but on the contrary
commended this extreme Liberty.

129
Dionysius the Tyrant asked Aristippus what made Philosophers make their Court
to Rich Men, and Rich Men never visit Philosophers: Because, answered he,
Philosophers know their wants, but Rich Men are not sensible of theirs.

130
One who was declaiming against Philosophers, said, that for all the contempt
they expressed for Riches, yet they were always to be seen at the Rich Men's
Doors: I don't wonder at it, answered Aristippus, for Physicians are very
assiduous in visiting their Patients at their Houses: And yet no body had
rather be a Patient than a Physician.

131
The same Aristippus being a Shipboard, and finding that the Ship belonged to
some Pirates, began to count his Money, and dropped it on purpose into the Sea;
and then with counterfeit Groans made the rest believe that it slipped by chance
out of his Hands. By this dexterous piece of Policy he avoided the danger to
which his Life was exposed; which made him say with a low Voice as he was
dropping of it: ' It Is better I should lose thee, than thou be the occasion of
my Ruin.

132
The Samnites, laden with Riches, which they came ^o offer to Marius Curious
their Conqueror, found him (...) about cooking of Turnips for his Dinner. He
(...) their Presents, and told them for his Reason: A Man who can be contented
with so course a Fare, has but ^ittle occasion either for your Gold or Silver.

133
Simonides being asked which was most to be desired, either Riches or Wisdom: I
am, answered he, very much in doubt about it; for I see a great many Wisemen
make their Court to the Rich.

134
King Pyrrhus taking notice that his Son used his Subjects with too much Pride
and Severity, rebuked him in these Words; I perceive well enough, my Son, by
your haughty way of Proceeding, that you are ignorant that the Royal Dignity is
but a creditable Slavery.

135
Philip was asking King Antigonus his Father, before several Persons, when he
designed to decamp. The King surpised at his Sons indiscretion, which was like
to disclose a design he had a mind to keep secret: What, said he to him, are
you afraid to be the only Man that shall not hear the sound of the Trumpet,
which is to give you notice of it.

136
As one was showing Diogenes the Vows fixed in one of the Temples of the false
Gods, by such as had escaped the Dangers of the Wars, the Sea, or Sickness,
this Philosopher, ridiculing their Superstition, answered: There would be a
much greater number of them, if those that have perished in those Dangers had
sent their Presents instead of those that have been saved from them.

137
A Man who had been instrumental in making King Philip Master of the City of
Olynthia, of which he was a Citizen, complained to him that those of Lacedemon
called him Traitor: Do not wonder at it, said that King, the Lacedaemonians are
naturally rustical and clownish; they call all things by their Names.

138
One asked Diogenes the Cynick, which way he might be revenged of his Enemy:
the best way, (...) he, is to make thy self illustrious by thy Vi^tue, thus
thou shall gain a great advantage to thy self, and cause a great vex^tion to
thy Foe.

139
Cato the Elder, reflecting upon the eager desire of several Romans, of
indifferent Merit, of having Statues erected to them: I had much rather, said
he, that People should ask why no Statues were rais^d to Cato, than that the^
should ask why they have been raised to him.

140
King Pyrrhus having beat the Romans in two Battles* wherein he had lost a
great many of his Men, said to his Friends: If I win a third battle at the same
rate, we are undone without hopes of Recovery.

141
Epaminondas viewing the sumptuous Preparations which were making for a Fea^t
in a Sacrifice, to which he had been invited, he went his way, and said: I am
called to a Sacrifice, and I find my self in a Debauch.

142
The Captain Chabrias said, That an Army of Hearts commanded by a Lion, is more
formidable than an Army of Lions commanded by a Heart.

143
A Cripple going to the Wars, some People that saw him walk, laughed at his
design: Do not wonder at me, said he to them, I do not go to the Wars with
design to run away, but to encounter the Enemy, and die in the same Rank
wherein I shall be placed.

144
King Philip seeing his Son Alexander extreme active and nimble, encouraged him
to run a race in the Olympic Games: I would willingly undertake it, answered
he, if those that were to run with me for the prize were Kings.

145
In the War which Marius was waging against the Teutones, his Soldiers
complaining of extreme Thirst, he showed them a River that was very near the
Enemies Camp: Thither, said he, you must go to quench your Thirst.

146
As one was disuading Marcus Brutus from fighting, he said: What harm can I get
by it? I can but overcome or die. And as some advised him after his defeat to
save himself by flight: A Man, said he, ought to save himself with his Hands,
and not with his Feet.

147
King Agis, said: One ought never to ask how many, but where the Enemies are.

148
Augustus hearing that Alexander having conquered the best part of the World,
was at a loss how to spend the remainder of his Days, he was surpised at that
Thought: Why, said he, was Alexander then ignorant that the well governing a
conquered State, is a more important Employment than the making of new
Conquests?

149
The Beginnings of Augustus's Reign were fatal to the Roman Empire, by reason
of his Cruelties, and the disorders he occasioned. But as the latter end of his
Reign was quite different, and rendered the Empire more flourishing than ever,
'twas said of him: That it were to be wished, either that he had never come
into the World, or never gone out of it.

150
Scilerus, who had many Children, being at the point of Death, gave every one
of them a bundle of Arrows, and commanded them to break it. And as they all
made answer, that the thing was impossible, he pulled out the Arrows, and broke
them one by one; and from thence took occasion to tell them: By this, my
Children, you ought to learn, that as long as you are well united together, you
shall ever be invincible, and formidable to your Enemies: But if on the
contrary you let divisions creep in amongst you, you will grow weak and easy to
be overcome.

151
Pytho a Rhetorician of Byzantium, offered in a Sedition to exhort the People
of that City to Concord; and because he was extraordinary fat, the People fell
a laughing as soon as they saw him. But this subtle Orator taking from their
laughter the beginning of his Speech: You laugh, said he, at my bigness: I have
a Wife bigger yet than my self; nevertheless, when we agree, one Bed is enough
for us; but when we are at odds, the whole House is too little to hold us.

152
Diogenes the Cynick, seeing some Magistrates leading to the place of Execurion
a Fellow who had stolen some little Vessel: Here are great Thieves, cried he
presently, that carry a little one to the Gallows.

153
King Philip's Wife, Mother to Alexander the Great, hearing that her Son gave
himself out to be the Son of Jupiter, and made himself to be worshipped as a
God, did put a shrewd Jest upon his Vanity, in these Words: I conjure you, said
she, in a Letter which she wrote to him, do not make any difference betwixt
Juno and me any more.

154
A wicked M^n, among the chief of Athens, asking a Lacedemonian, who was the
best Man in Lacedemon, received this ingenious, but tart return: It Is he who
least resembles thee.

155
Timo the Misanthropist, being invited to Dinner by one who affected to imitate
him in his hatred for all Mankind: Here is, said that Man, a very fine Dinner;
True, answered Timo, if thou were not at it.

156
Diogenes being banished by those of Sinope, his Birth place, he wrote to them:
You have banished me your City, and I confine you to your Houses. You live at
Sinope, and I at Athens. I daily converse with the best Men of Greece, while
you are in bad Company.

157
Bias the Philosopher, being a-board a Ship in a Storm with wicked Men, who
called upon the Gods: Hold your Tongues, said he to them, that they may, if
possible, forget that you are here.

158
Some of Socrates his Friends, expressing their Anger against one whom he had
saluted, and had not returned him his Civility: Why should you be angry, said
Socrates to them, because that Man is not so civil as my self?

159
When they came to give the same Socrates notice of his being condemned to
Death by the Athenians: They are also condemned by Nature, answered he. But
they have unjustly condemned thee, said his Wife to him: Why would thou have
me justly condemned? replied Socrates.

160
Philoxenes the Poet, being condemned by Dionysius to work at the Quarries, for
disliking some Verses of that Tyrants making, Dionysius sent for him, to show
him other Verses of his own Composing, in hopes to get his Approbation, being
passionately desirous to be esteemed a good Poet. But Philoxenes unwilling to
commend his new Verses, because they were bad ones, Let me go back to the
Quarries, said he. The Tyrant however was this time so good-humored as not to
be angry at it.

161
Diogenes seeing young Dionysius reduced to the Profession of a Schoolmaster,
fell a sighing before him: Do not be concerned, says Dionysius to Diogenes, for
my bad Fortune; it is the effect of the inconstancy of humane Things. I am not
troubled for what thou imaginest, answers* Diogenes, but rather to see thee
happier than either thou wast or do deserve to be.

162
King Philip contending with an able Musician about the fineness of an Air:
'Twere great pity, Sir, said the Musician to him, you should be so unfortunate
as to know these Things better than I. Which Jest teaches the great ones not to
affect excelling in Arts of this Nature, because they are only proper to such
as make a Trade of them.

163
An Athenian Lady asking by way of Derision a Lacedemonian Matron what Portion
she had brought her Husband: Chastity, answered she.

164
An Athenian telling a Lacedemonian by way of Reproach, that the Athenians had
often repulsed them from before their Walls: We cannot reproach you with any
such thing, answered the Lacedemonian; which was a fine way of telling him,
that those of Athens durst never appear before Lacedemon.

165
Another Athenian said, that the Lacedaemonians spoiled themselves in Foreign
Countries: True, answered a Lacedemonian, but no Body spoils himself in
Lacedemon.

166
Phocion used sharply to rebuke the Athenians, whereas the Orator Demostthenes
flattered them in his Speeches: This People will murder thee, if ever they grow
furious, said Demosthenes to Phocion; So they will thee, if ever they grow
wise, replied Phocion.

167
Alexander being at the point of Death, and his Domestics having received his
last Orders, they asked him where his Treasures lay? You will find them, said
he, in my Friends Purses.

168
During the War betwixt Caesar and Pompey, a Roman Knight fled from Cesar's
Camp, but left his Horse behind him the better to conceal his flight, and get
into Pompey's Camp. Cicero seeing Cesar's Party was the strongest, and that the
Knight had made an ill choice in siding with the weakest, said very pleasantly:
That Knight has taken more care of his Horse than he has of himself.

169
Metellus, who was born of a Woman of great Liberties, pretending to joke upon
Cicero about the meanness of his Birth, asked him, Who his Father was? Cicero
instead of giving a direct Answer to the Question, waved it cuningly, by
telling him: Thy Mother has made that Question harder for thee to answer.

170
A Leader of revolted Slaves was taken in Fight with many of his Party, by the
General of a Roman Army; this General asked him what treatment he thought he
and his Companions deserved: The same, said he, which brave. Men deserve, who
think themselves worthy of being Free; which answer so pleased the General,
that he Pardoned them, and employed them in his Troops.

171
Some Roman Judges being to try Clodius, demanded a Guard, that they might, as
they pretended, pass their Verdict upon his Crime with freedom; however they
acquitted him, though he deserved to be condemned; which made Catulus, speaking
to those Judges, say: Were you afraid the Bribe Clodius had given you, should
be taken away from you?

172
Pyrrhus King of Epirus, being informed that some of his Soldiers had spoke ill
of him at a Feast, he sent for them, and asked them whether that report was
true; whereupon the boldest of them, seeing all was discovered, made him this
subtle Answer; Sir, had not our Wine failed us, we would have said a great
deal more. This comical Excuse, and plain Consession, made the King laugh, and
pacified his Anger.

173
Perillus having asked of Alexander the Great, who had a Friendship for him,
some Money to marry one of his Daughters, Alexander ordered him fifty Talents.
Perillus told him that ten were enough: I believe, replied Alexander, 'twould
be enough for Perillus, but 'twould be too little for Alexander.

174
Marcus Terentius Varus would have the Guests at Feasts to equal the number
either of the Muses or of the Graces; that is, that they should not be more
than Nine, nor less than three. Upon a certain Day he made a Feast, and a
Buffoon coming to it without invitation, the Steward seeing he was
supernumerary, would go to turn him out: But the Buffoon told him, Thou art
mistaken, Friend, count over again, and begin with me, thou will find I am not
above the number.

175
Zeno the Humorist being a Trader, was told upon a Day, that the Ship on whose
bottom he had ventured his whole Estate, after having been beaten by a great
Storm, perished at last at the entrance of the Haven: But he was so far from
being concerned at this sad News, that he said with a serene Countenance, I
thank you Destiny for taking me from Merchandise, which is a mean and painful
Employment, and carrying me back to Philosophy, which is a noble and salutary
Exercise; adding, that he had rather met with a Port in the Wrack, than with a
Wrack in the Port.

176
Hermon was so Covetous, according to Lucilius's Testimony, that dreaming one
Night he had spent some Money, he was so troubled at it that he hanged himself.
Dinarches Philo was also such another Miser that he quitted the design he had
of hanging himself because he would not be at a Halfpenny charge for a Rope,
seeking Death at a much cheaper rate. And Hemocrates grew such a Fool by his
extreme Avarice, that when he died, he made himself his own Heir to all his
Estate: From whence the Philosopher Bias took occasion to say, That
Covetousness is the Mother of the Madness and Malice of Men.

177
Those of Numantia, a very warlike People, having been defeated and put to
flight by Scipio, the old Men reproached them severely with Cowardice, saying,
Are not these the same Roman Sheep which we have so often beaten and drove
before us? Yes, answered a young Man, these are the same Sheep, but they have
changed their Shepherd.

178
Cicero said, That as the Swallows appear in Summer, and disappear in Winter,
so false Friends crowd about a Man in his good Fortune, but go from him in his
Adversity.

179
One asked Aristotle what Liars got by telling lies? He answered, That the only
thing they got by it, was not to be believed even when they spoke Truth.

180
The Tyrant Hiero having asked Simonides what God was? the Philosopher desired
a Days Consideration for his Answer; then two, and then four, and so put it off
from Day to Day: At last Hiero asked him why he did not answer his Question,
but always deferred it to another time? because said Simonides the more I think,
the more I Am at a loss to find out this dark and obscure Thing.

181
Socrates advised young Men to look themselves in a Glass, that if they were
fine and handsome they might take care not to do any thing unworthy of their
Beauty, and if on the contrary they were ugly and deformed, they should
endeavor to drown the defects of the Body by the Virtues of the Mind.

182
A Man who was ne^ married would persuade Epictetus the Philosoph^ to take a
Wife, showing him by many Arguments that Marriage was a State both becoming and
necessary for a Philosopher: If it be so, give me then one of your Daughters,
answered Epictetus.

183
Servius Geminus going one Day to see Lucius Mallius, a very skillful Painter,
and seeing his Children who were extreme ugly, he could not forbear telling him
that he wondered he did make so fine Pictures and get such ugly Children. To
which Mallius pleasantly replied, don't be surpised at it, for I draw the
Pictures in the Day, and get the Children in the Night.

184
King Antigonus retiring from the Presence of the Enemy, who then were more
powerful than he, some took his Retreat for a Flight; but he told them he did
not fly, but rather followed his Profit and Advantage,

185
The same Prince being asked how one might overcome his Enemies, answered, by
Strength and Policy: And that if the Lions Skin would not do, it must be ek'd
out by the Fox's Case.

186
A young Man, who was a very great Talker, making a Bargain with Isocrates to
be taught by him, Isocrates asked double the Price his other Scholars gave him;
and the reason, said he, is, that I must teach you two Sciences, the one to
hold your Tongue, and the other to speak.

187
The Philosopher Anacreon having received a Present of ten thousand Crowns of
Policrates King of Samos, was taken with so great a fear of being robbed, that
he could not sleep for three Nights and Days, which made him carry back the
Present to that Prince, telling him that he preferred his Repose before the
Disquiets which attend Riches.

188
One asked Chrisippus why he would not apply himself to the Government of the
Commonwealth? Because, answered he, if I do ill, I shall displease God, and if
I do well, I shall displease Men. But Sidonius, his Disciple, turned cunningly
that Argument upon him, and told him: You cught on the contrary, by all manner
of Reasons, to take upon you the Administration of Affairs; for if you do well,
you will please God, and if ill, you will please Men.

189
Solon being in Company, and holding his Peace, according to his Custom, there
was a young Giddy-brain'd Fellow who told him he was silent because he was a
Fool: Solon, without any concern, answered him wisely, That there never was a
Fool that could hold his Tongue.

190
Cambyses a very severe and rigorous King, caused a Judge, though his Friend, to
be flead alive, because he took Bribes, and did not administer Justice
according to Law and Equity: And having afterward ordered the Judgment Seat to
be covered with his Skin, he placed his Son upon it, to succeed his Father in
his Employment.

191
Irene repairs with great cost and charge to Epidaurus, visi^s Aesculapius in
his Temple, and consults with him about all her Ailments. First of all she
complains, That she is weary, and spent with Fatigue: And the God declares,
This is befallen her by the length of her Journey. She says, She has no Stom^ch
at Night; the Oracle prescribes her, To eat but little at Dinner. She asks him,
What makes her so heavy, and what Remedy for it? The Oracle answers, She must
rise early in the Morning, and use Exercise. She tells him, That Wine is
hurtful to her; so the Oracle bids her, To drink Water. That she cannot digest
what she eats, and he adds, she must keep a strict Diet. My Sight decays, says
Irene; use then Spectacles, says Aesculapius. I grow weak, says she farther,
neither am I so healthful as I have been; the reason of it, says the God, is
because you grow old. But which way shall I recover my self? The best way,
Irene, is to dye, as did your Mother and Grandmother. Is this, answered Irene,
all that Wisdom which Mankind proclaims, and which makes you to be reverenced
by all the World? What a rare Mystery you learn me? Did I not know before all
those Remedies you prescribe? Why then did not you use them, answers the God,
Without coming so far to me, and shortning your Days by so long a Journey?

The Ephesian Matron.
192
THere was at Ephesus a Lady in so great repute for Chastity, that the Women of
the neighboring Parts flocked thither out of curiosity to see her. This
discreet Lady upon the Death of her Husband, was not contented to assist at the
Funeral, according to Custom, with dishevelled Hair, and beating her Breast
before the Assistants, but she must needs follow the deceased to the very
Monument, and having laid him in a Sepulcher according to the Grecian Manner,
watched the Corpse; and wept over it Night and Day, she was in such Desolation,
and so fully resolved to starve her self, that neither Relations nor Friends
could persuade her from it. The Magistrates themselves used also their
endeavors to no purpose, and so gave her over. And now so illustrious a Woman
lamented by all, as one that is dead and gone, had been five Days without
tasting any Food. A faithful and affectionate Maid waited still upon this
wretched Creature, mingling her Tears with hers, and repairing the light of a
Lamp, as often as it happened to go out. She was therefore the only Discourse
of the City, and every Body confessed that this was the greatest instance of Love
and Chastity that ever they heard of.

It happened at that very time that the Governor of the Province caused
certain Thieves to be crucified near that Vault where the virtuous Lady kept
such desperate Mourning over the Corpse of her dear Husband. The Night following
a Soldier who was set to guard the Crosses, for fear the Bodies should be
stolen away, having seen a light in the Tomb, and hearing the Sighs and
Complaints of one in Sorrow, out of a curiosity incident to all Men, grew
desirous to know what this might be, and what passed there; thereupon he
descends into the Monument, and beholding a very beautiful Woman, he stood both
amazed and frighted, as if it had been a Phantom: But then viewing a dead Body
stretched before her, and observing her Face bathed with Tears, and injured by
her Nails, with all the other marks of solemn Woe, he judged of the Matter as
it was, that an afflicted and disconsolate Woman that was not able to bear her
loss, had abandoned her self to Grief and Despair. A moment after he brought
his small Supper to the Tomb, and begins to exhort her not to persevere any
longer in fruitless Groans and an unprofitable Sorrow; adding withal, that all
Men have one common Exit; that we must all come at last to that long Home, and
such other Reasons with which we generally use to cure the most distempered
Minds. But she still more exasperated by so unexpected a Consolation, redoubles
her Grief; tea^s her Breast with more violence, and pulls off her Hair, which
she throws on that woeful Corpse. The Soldier is not in the least discouraged by
all this, but (...) still the same Exhortations, and endeavors to persuade her
to take some Meat, till the Waiting Woman wrought upon, as it is probable, as
much by the smell of the Wine, as by his Discourse, reached her Hand to him who
so obligingly invited them, and having recovered some strength with Meat and
Drink, began her self to attempt upon her Mistresses obstinacy. And what will
your Ladyship get, said she, by starving your self to Death, burying your self
alive, and giving up to Destiny that Breath which she does not demand from you?

Think you the Ghosts or Ashes of the Dead,
Regard what Tears their Supervivers shed?
What! Do you expect to restore a dead Body to life again, contrary to the
Decrees of Nature? Believe me, give over a weakness which Women alone are
capable of, and enjoy the sweets of Life as long as you can. This Corpse that
lies here before you, shows you too too well how precious Life is, and bids you
to be more tender of it: Every Body is willing to lend an Ear to one that
presses him to eat upon such occasions; and so this Woman, faint and weak by so
long an Abstinence, suffered her obstinacy to be prevailed upon, and filled her
self with Meat with as greedy an Appetite as the Waiting Woman, who had yielded
before. Now, you know that Temptations come generally upon a full Stomach, and
those Arms which the Soldier had employed to combat her Despair, the same he
used to attack her Chastity: And the young Widow seeing he was neither
disagreeable nor without Wit, the Waiting Woman still playing her Part to
further his design, and then repeating to her Mistress ever and anon,

What will you still a pleasing Love withstand? What makes me keep you any
longer in suspense? The good Lady used the same Abstinence as to the other Part
of her Body, and the Soldier fully satisfied, remained conqueror of both. Thus
they continued together not only the first Night, but also the next Day, and
the Day after that; the entrance of the Tomb being all this while so well
closed, that had any body come to it, they must needs have supposed that the
most honest Woman in the World had expired over her dear Husband.

The Soldier charmed with the Beauty of his Lady, and the secresy of his
amourous Intreague, bought Provisions as far his small stock would let him, and
brought them to the Tomb as soon as Night begun to approach. In the mean time
the Relations of one of those that hanged on the Gibbets, perceiving that there
was no Guard to look after them, took down the Corpse one Night and buried it.
As for the poor Soldier detained from his Duty by the Allurements of his
Pleasure, seeing the next day one of those Crosseswith out its Carcass, he went
to his Mistress full of apprehension of Punishment, and told her what had
happened: That for his part he would not wait his Condemnation, but was
resolved to do himself Justice, and punish immediately his neglect with his own
Hand: That the only favor he begged of her was to take care of his Burial, and
bestow it upon him in the same Sepulcher, equally fatal to her Husband and her
Lover. The good Dame no less charitable than discreet: Oh! may the Gods forbid,
said she, that I should live to see at once the Funeral of two Persons so very
dear to me, I have rather hang the Dead than be the ruin of the Living. Then
according to this fine Speech, she takes the Corpse out of the Coffin, and
having disfigured its Face, gives it him, in order to fix it to the empty
Cross. The Soldier was so wise as to improve the ingenious Advice of so prudent
a Woman: And the next Day all the People admired which way the dead Thief was
got again upon his Cross,

A Story taken out of Apuleius' s Golden Ass.
193
A Laboring Man that workt hard for his Livelihood at the Forges, had a very
handsome Wife, though none of the most virtuous. This Poor wretch going out one
Morning as he used to do, gave opportunity to an extravagant young Blade to
slip into his House, where being in close conflict with his Wife, the Husband
unexpectedly returned, but finding the door fast, little suspected what had
been done in his absence; he therefore within himself began to extol his Wives
Chastity, and by a Whistle gave her notice of his coming. She in Cases of this
Nature, being not a little Politic, soon disengaged her self from her Sparks
embraces, and with a great deal of unconcern, hid him in an old empty Tub that
stood in the corner of the Room; which done, opening the Door in a fury, she
accosted her Cuckold after this manner.

Is it thus, thou senseless Drone, that thou providest for the wants of thy
Family? thus sauntering with Arms across, whilst I must labor both Day and
Night to supply the wants occasioned by the Idleness: Oh! how much happier is
my Neighbor Daphne, who has nothing else to do but be merry with her Lovers?

To which the frighted Husband replied, What great harm is there, poor Chicken?
though our Master has no work for me to Day, by reason of attending his
Lawbusiness, yet I have provided for thy Dinner? Do thou see that old Tub
there, that serves for nothing but to encumber our Room, why I have sold it,
Honey, for Fifteen-pence, and the Man that bought it will be here presently to
fetch it away. Come, lay aside thy Work and help me to cleanse it, for I would
not by any means but deliver it sweet and wholesome into his Hands.

Hereat the Wife began to laugh heartily, and being furnished with a Stratagem
from the occasion, cried out, bless me! what a rare Stock-jobber have I got to
my Husband, that could find in his Heart to let that go for 15 Pence, which I,
though a Woman, that never stirs abroad, have made shift to get half a Crown for.
The Husband not a little pleased with his Wife's Bargain, forthwith demanded
what Sot it was that had offered so much? A Codshead you may be sure, replied
the Wife, and to prove him such, he is just now got into it to see what Profit
he is like to make. Here the Gallant finding his Cue, peeped out, and cried,
good Woman, would you have me tell you the Truth? this Tub is exceeding old,
and very full of Cracks, you ought not in Conscience to have so much for it as
I bid you. Then turning to her Husband, quoth he cunningly, and you, honest
Man, whosoever you are, Prithee lend me a Candle a little, that I may scrape
out the ^lth, and know whether it be for my turn or no, before I pay my Money,
if you think I come honestly by it. Hereupon our subtle Vulcan, little
dreaming of the design upon him, presently fetched a Candle, and coming up to
him said, Prithee stand aside a little, Friend, and let me see what I can do,
for it is but reason you should have it as clean as may be: Then stripping
himself, and delivering the Candle to his Wife, he crept into the Tub, and
begun to work amain on the dried Lees, whilst the crafty Lover did as much on
his Consort, whom he had laid athwart the Vessel.

All this while the good Woman, leaning over her Head to light her Husband,
amused the poor Man by sh^wing him that here and there and there were places to
be cleans'd. But at length both labors being ended, the contented Cuckold
having received the half Crown, thought himself further obliged to take the
Hogshead on his Back, and carry it to his Friends House.

A Story taken out of Theophilus.
194
LArissa loved to tell Stories, and being one Day in Company, she was pleased
to entertain them with the follies of her Youth, in this manner,

I served once a Roman Citizen, together with a young Grecian Slave, whom the
Storm had also obliged to serve, though born Free. Nature had engraven in the
Face of this young Man all the marks of Nobleness, and of that good Education
which he owed to his Birth and the care of his Parents; and one might easily
see that he was not born for the Condition to which his hard Fortune had
reduced him; if he was to carry any Burden, he sunk under the lightest; yet he
would needs do every thing, and forgot his Birth, to adapt himself to the
present State of his Fortune. But not being able to bear hard labor, nor the
course Food of Servants, he grew insensibly very weak, and neglected himself to
that degree, that he did not so much as comb his Hair, which was the finest in
the World. In a little time he became lean and full of Wrinckles, his Eyes grew
hollow and languishing, his Hands black and course; in fine, he was not the
same Man: Melancholy had sunk his Spirit, as much as Fatigue had impaired his
Health. he sighed often, and his affliction moved my Pity; I thought Fortune
was very unjust to him; I endeavored to comfort him under it; wept for his
Misfortunes; taught him what he must do, and did part of it my self to ease
him. His wretched state did not take away from him a noble Air, and I know not
what pre-eminence over my Birth, which made me sensible of the difference of
his, to which I willingly submitted. He knew well enough how much he was
obliged to me, and returned me thanks with the politeness of a Courtier. In
short, I was so much affected with those Accomplishments, that thinking I had
only Pity for his Misfortunes, I found my self in Love with his Person; and
indeed I loved him desperately.

This Story of Larissa had drawn to her the attention of the whole Company, but
especially of two young Maidens, who counterfeited sleep, lest decency should
oblige them to retire, if they seemed to hear what she said. One of them having
opened her Eyes, and cast them upon Lariss^, as though it were by Chance, closed
them again immediately. As for the other, making as if she was just awake, is
it Day already? Said she, with a blush. The Company took notice of their
cunning, and fell a laughing; in the mean time Larissa had done speaking,
alleging that she was unwilling to go through with this Adventure, for fear of
making the young Ladies uneasy, and begun to threaten the Company with some old
and grave Stories. But Eugeni^s impatient to know the rest of this Tale, Alas!
Larissa, said he, these young Maids have all this while counterfeited sleep
only to hear you speak with more liberty; and I assure you, they long more than
any of us to know the end of your Story. Go on I beseech you, said he embracing
her. She consented, promised to end the Story as modestly as possible, and
calling the young Maids she told them.

Though Maids be tied to Modesty,
Yet youth allows some Liberty.
And thus resumed her Discourse.

One while I complained of Love, and another while I prayed to him: Great God,
said I often to him, either cure me or make me beloved of him I love. All this
while I could neither eat nor sleep. Gison, (for that was the name of my Dear)
recovered his Beauty every Day; for Time, which conquers all, had alleviated
his Sorrows. For my part, I was no more the same Woman, and the more Glison's
charms increased, the more my secret Passion altered my Mind, my Face and
Humor. I had not the assurance of disclosing my Passion, and yet was mad to
conceal it: As for Glison he was u^acquainted with my Disease; he was sorry for
me, and only repaid with thankfulness the Obligations he had to me, and
contented himself to ease me in my Business of a Slave, as I had done him in
his. But at last being no longer Mistress of my Passion, I saw my self forced
to discover it; therefore upon a Friday, Oh! happy Day, which I shall never
forget, having found Glison upon my Bed, where he used sometimes to take his
Repose after Dinner, I desired him, melting into Tears, to take pity on me. He
granted my requ^st, and seemed very well pleased to have saved my Life.

Now you, my Children, be merry whilst youth permits you; for the remembrance
of past Pleasure^ will be the only ones of your old Age.

The ingenious Thoughts, noble Sentiments, Jests and witty Reparties of the
MODERNS. With some pleasant STORIES, ENGLISH and FRENCH.
1
HEnry the Eighth King of England, being at odds with Francis I. King of
France, resolved to send him an Ambassador with a very haughty and threatening
Message, and to that purpose made choice of Bishop Bonner, in whom he reposed
great Confidence. The Bishop told him, that his Life would be in great danger,
if he should over such Language to so high-spirited a King as Francis the
First. Be not afraid, said Henry VIII. for should the French King put you to
Death, I would take off many a Head of those French Men that are here in my
Power: I believe so, answered the Bishop, but of all those Heads, added he with
a smile, none would fit my Shoulders so well as this, pointing to his own. This
witty answer pleased the King, and made him reform the Instructions of his
Ambassador.

2
Sir Thomas More, a famous Chancellor of Englan^ being in Prison by Henry the
Eights Order, let both his Hair and Beard grow; and as a (...) came to trim
him, Friend, said he, the King and I have a Suit for m^ Head, and I Will spend no
cost upon the trimming of it, till (...) know which of us i^ to have the
disposal of it.

3
Bacon, another renowned Chancellor of England, received a Visit from Queen
Elizabeth at a Country House which he had built before his Preferment: How is
it, said the Queen to him, that you have built so little a House? Madam,
replied the Chancellor, it is not I that made my House too little, but your
Majesty that made me too great for my House. Besides the Wit and Pleasantness
of this answer, it carries with it such an Air of Modesty and Gratitude as
ought to recommend it to our esteem.

4
In Spain Love seems to be the only business of Life; whereas what they call
Love in France, is most commonly nothing but speaking of Love, and adding to
the Sentiments of Ambition the Vanity of amorous Intrigues: Wherefore a Spanish
Lady, reading not long since the Romance of Cleopatra, and after a long recital
of Adventures being come to a nice and tender Conversation between a Lover and
his Mistress, both passionately in Love: Bless me, said she, how much Wit is
here lost, to what purpose are all these fine Speeches when they are together
and alone?

5
A Spanish Lady young and beautiful, went to confess to a Friar of that
Country. The Father Confessor after many Questions about the Heads of her
Confession, grew desirous to be acquainted with her, and asked what her Name
was. The Lady who felt no Temptation to gratify his Curiosity, answered,
Father, my Name is no Sin.

6
Another Spanish Lady went to the Church belonging to a Monastery of Friars, in
order to Confess, and finding a Friar of that House alone in one of the
Chapels, she kneeled down by him, and told him all her Sins; and as he
answered nothing, she asked him his Absolution. I cannot give it you, said the
Friar, for I am no Priest. You are no Priest? said the Lady, very much
surpised, and in a great Passion: No, Madam, answered coldly the Friar. Well,
replied she, I go and complain of you to your Superior, for hearing my
Confession: And I, returned the Friar, I go and tell News of you to your
Husband. Whereupon, being entered upon a compensation of Threatenings, they
parted upon even Terms; the Lady having wisely considered that it was not for
her interest that this Adventure should be made public.

7
The Count of Orgaz, a Grandee of Spain, being willing to have with him a Man
of Learning for the Pleasure of Conversation, one of his Friends presented him
one, of whom he asked at first sight, whether he could make Verses? The Scholar
answered, he might judge of it by the Composures he would show him of his own
making, and so the next Day brought him many Romances or Ballads, and other
Spanish Poems of all Kinds. The Grandee having read them over, told his Friend,
this Man did not fit him: And why, asked his Friend, Because, replied he, I
hold that Man for a Dunce that cannot make two Verses, and for a Fool, him that
makes four. The Spanish runs thus, Tengo por necio al que no sa^e hazer una
copla, y por loco al que haze dos.

8
A Chemist having dedicated to Pope Leo X. a Book; wherein he pretended to
teach the way of making Gold, expected to receive a magnificent Present: But
the Pope sent him only a great empty Purse, with this Complement, That since he
knew how to make Gold, he wanted but something to put it in.

9
A Gentleman of the Court of France, went to one of his Friends to wish him joy
about a Dignity to which he was lately raised: This Man puffed up with his new
Preferment, asked who he was? the other, without discomposing himself, speaks
to another tune, and tells him, That he came to condole the Misfortune that had
befallen him, and that he was extreme sorry to see him both Deaf and Blind,
since he knew not his best Friends.

10
A bad Italian Preacher made one Day a Sermon upon the Panegyric of a Saint,
and in the hea^ of his Discourse asked with a great Motion, where shall I place
my Saint? Where shall I place my Saint? A merry Fellow who happened to be one
of his Hearers, being tired with his Preaching, resolved to be gone, and cried
to him in a loud Voice: Here is my room that I leave for him.

11
The famous Moliere being dead, many Poetasters writ Epitaphs upon him. One of
them went one Day and presented one of his own making to a Prince much renowned
for his Wit: Would to God, Sir, said the Prince, receiving the Epitaph, that
Moliere presented me yours.

12
A French Courtier was suspected of defect, but would never own it; one Day
meeting the Poet Benserade, who had often jeered him about it; Sir, said he,
for all your silly Jests, my Wife was brought to Bed two Days ago: Faith, Sir,
replied Benserade, I never questioned your Wife.

13
A petty Prince of Italy being in^ormed that a French Gentleman who was at his
Court, had made a jest of him and his designs, sent one to bid him depart his
Dominions within three Days: He does me too great a Favor, answered the French
Man, in granting me so much time: I don't want above three quarters of an Hour
to obey him.

14
The Mother of a young wanton Lady designed to send her to the Nunnery of the
Repenting-Maids: I am not of that Mind, said a Lady of her Relations; and why?
asked the Mother, Because she is neither, answered the other.

15
The French King said some Days ago to Racine and (Boileau) Despreaux, I am
sorry you did not come to this last Campaign, for you had seen the War, and
your Journey had not been long: Sir, answered Racine, we had no Clothes but for
the Town, and bespoke some for the Camp; but those Places you attackt were
sooner taken than our Clothes made.

16
Three Gentlemen playing together, a mad Bull ran into the Place where they
were: So one hid himself under a Bed, another went into a Hogshead, and the
third under an Asses Pack-saddle. Now as they told their Friends how they
escaped, they all laughed at him who had hid himself under the Packsaddle; but
one of them said: Truly he was in the right on it, for he had a mind to die with
his Clothes on.

17
One asked an old Man what he had done to live to so great an Age; answered he,
when I could sit I never stood, I married late, was soon a Widower, and never
married again.

18
A Fellow whom the Hangman whipped through a Town, walked so softly that one of
the Spectators came near him and told him: Thou Wretch! thou go so slowly,
that thou will have many a lash to tell before thou come to thy journies end:
Go, mend thy pace, that thou may the sooner get out of this Torment and
Ignominy. The Malefactor answered him: When thou art whipped, thou may go as
thou think fit, for my own part, I will go at my ease,

19
A Man of Perusa was in great despair, and melted into Tears, because his Wife
had hanged herself on a Fig Tree that was in his Yard. One of his Neighbors
seeing him in this sad Condition, came to him, and whispered softly in his Ear:
What a Fool thou art to grieve at this rate, when thou have so much reason to
rejoice, prithee give me a slip of that Fig Tree, that I may set it in my
Garden to try what my Wife will do.

20
Laurence, Prince Palatine, found fault with the Emperor Sigismundus, because
instead of putting to Death his conquered Enemies, be loaded them with Favors,
and put them in a Condition to hurt him: Why! don't I put them to Death, said
he, when I make their hatred cease, and gain their Friendship?

21
A Lord having pitched upon an ignoramus to be his Library Keeper, That Is the
Seraglio, said a very witty Lady, committed to the Custody of an Eunuch.

22
Balzac having occasion for some Money, sent to his Friend Voiture to desire
him to lend him four Hundred Crowns, and charged his Valet-de-Chambre to give
him a Note for the like Sum. Voiture told the Money, and being offered the
Note, which ran thus, I promise to pay to Mr. Voiture the Sum of four Hundred
Crowns, which he has lent me, etc. He takes it, peruses it, and underwrites
these Words, I promise to pay to Mr. Voiture the Sum of eight Hundred Crowns,
for the Favor he has done me of borrowing four Hundred of me, etc. And so he
gives the Note to the Valet-de-Chambre to carry it back to his Master.

23
Henry IV. King of France was so generous, that he ordered Vitri, Captain of
his Life-Guards, to take into his Troop the Man that wounded him in the Battle
of Aumale. The Marshall d' Estrees being one Day in his Coach, and this
Life-Guard-man riding by the Boot, There is, said the King, pointing to him,
the Soldier who wounded me at the Battle of Aumale.

24
One was telling to the same Prince, that though he had pardoned and bestowed
many Favors on one of the Captains of the League, yet he was not well-affected
to him, he answered: I will do him so much good that I Will force him to love me
whether he will or no. Thus this Prince won the most rebellious, and was used
to say, that more Flies were caught with a Spoonful of Honey, than with twenty
Hogsheads of Vinegar.

25
An Archbishop of Florence said to a Cardinal: Men are very unfortunate, all
their happiness consists in the Goods either of the Soul, the Body, or Fortune,
and yet they are always plagued by too subtle Lawyers, Ignorant Physicians, or
bad Divines.

26
A Spaniard being a Board a Ship in a Storm, the Captain commanded that the
most cumbersom and heavy Things should be thrown overboard to ease the Vessel.
Thereupon the Spaniard took his Wife, and would have thrown her into the Sea,
and as the Captain asked him the reason of it, he answered: I have nothing
that is more heavy and cumbersom to me than my Wife, and so I perform your
Command upon her.

27
Alphonsus King of Aragon, seeing a Gally full of Soldiers ready to be cast
away, commanded she should be succored; and as he was slowly obeyed, by reason
of the danger, he was going himself to its relief; and because every Body told
him what danger he exposed himself to: Nay, said he, I had rather be a sharer
than a Spectator of the Death of my Soldiers.

28
King Henry the IV, hearing that a famous Protestant Physician had quitted his
Religion, and turned Roman Catholic, said to the Duke of Sully, who was then
with him: My Friend, thy Religion is very desperate, since it is given over by
the Physicians.

29
The same King viewing one Day his Arcenal, a Lord asked him whether one could
find any Canons in the World as good as those there: Cods-fish, answered the
King, I never could find better Canons than those of the Church.

30
As one considered the losses which the City of Milan had occasioned to France,
he said, It were to be wished that City had been quite destroyed: No, no, said
Chancellor du Prat, the War of Milan is like Physic to France, to cleanse her
of abundance of lewd and deb auched Men that would be apt to infect her.

31
Lewis the Eleventh, afterward King of France, in fear of his Father Charles
the Seventh, retired into Burg^ndy, where he contracted a Familia^ity with one
Conon a Peasant. Succeeding his Father in the Kingdom, Conon took his Journey
to Paris, to present the King with some Turnips, which he had observed him to
eat heartily of, when he sometimes came weary from Hunting; in the way, Hunger
constrained him to eat them all up, save only one of an unusual bigness. The
King delighted with the Simplicity of the Man, commanded him a Thousand Crowns,
and the Turnep, wrapped up in a piece of Silk, to be reserved amongst his
Treasures. A greedy Courtier had observed this, and and having already devoured
a greater Sum, bought a very handsome Horse, and made a present of him to the
King, who cheerfully accepted the Gift, and gave order that the Turnep should
be given him; when unwrapt, and that it was seen what it was, the Courtier
complained he was deluded: No, said the King, there is no delusion, thou have
that which cost me a thousand Crowns for a Horse that is scarce worth a Hundred.

32
Alphonsus King of Spain, said to those who told him that his Clothes were so
plain that they did not distinguish him from his Subjects: I had much rather be
distinguished from my Subjects by my Honor and Virtue, than by my Crown and
Purple,

33
The Hungarians, who had conspired against Sigismundus, being entered into his
Palace with design to either to seize or kill him, the Emperor perceived them
and ran to them with a Dagger in his Hand: Which of you, said he to them, will
be so insolent as to abuse me? What have I done that deserves Death? If any one
designs to strike me, let him come forward, I Will defend my self. These bold and
resolute Words frighted the Conspirators to that degree, that they run away at
that very instant.

34
A Modern Sage used to say, That to he an Hypocrite was to go to Hell by the
Road of Heaven.

35
A Pope, before he was raised to the Sovereign Pontificate, out of a feigned
and politic Humlity, caused his Table to be spread with a Fishing-net instead
of a Table cloth; but as soon as he was advanced to that high Dignity which he
courted, he told his Officers who would have served him as before: Let me be
served with Linen, I have no more occasion for a Net now the Fish is caught.

36
A Buffoon told one Day King Francis the First, that he had a Book of Fools,
wherein he had writ the Name of the Emperor Charles the V. the King asked him
the Reason; because, said he, by passing through France, he exposes himself to
be stopped. But what will thou say, continued the King, if not only I let him
pass, but likewise deliver up to him those Places I have promised him: Do you
know, said the Buffoon, What I will do? I Will blot Charles the V' s. name out of
my Book, and writ yours instead of his.

37
Alphonsus King of Aragon was so liberal, that he some times gave away whole
Cities and Dutchies, and took away great part of the Taxes from his People,
which gave him the Surname of Bored-hand, and as one told him that his
Donatives were excessive, he said, The chief care of a King ought to be to
enrich his Subjects, and let these be never so rich, the Prince is never the
poorer.

38
The same King used to say: To live quiet in Marriage, the Husband ought to be
Deaf, that he may not hear his Wifes Brawling and Impertinence: and the Wife
Blind, that she may not see her Husbands Debauchery.

39
King Alphonsus being Sick, and having tried several Remedies to no purpose, He
left them all, and betook himself to the reading of Quintus Curtius's History:
He was so much delighted with it, that by degrees his Disease abated, and at
last being fully recovered, he said, Farewell Hypocrates, farewell Avicenna, and
all Physic; long live Quintus Curtius my true Physician.

40
King Henry the IVth. having a Book of some Regulations for the State, shown
him by his Tailor, and composed by him, said to one of his Officers: Let my
Chancellor come to me this minute to make me a Suit of Clothes, since my
Tailor will pretend to make Regulatians.

41
Alphonsus King of Spain, hearing that those of Sienna, who during the War of
Italy remained Neuter, had been Plundered by the Soldiers of both Parties, as
soon as the War was ended, said, That they were like those who live in the
middle Stories of a House, that are incommoded by the Smoke of those beneath,
and by the Noise of those above them.

42
A Lord, who during the troubles of the League, had a long time been a Trimmer,
came one Day to the Court of King Henry the IVth. whom he found playing at
Primero; as soon as the King saw him he told him: Come Sir, you are welcome; if
we Win, no doubt but you will be on our Side.

43
A Man of War crying up before Sigismundus Military Employments, and vilifying
Magistracy: Hold ^our T^ngue, said the Emperor to him, and learn that if all
Magistrates performed their Duty, we should have no occasion for Military
Officers.

44
Adolphus Count of Nassau, being newly raised to the Empire of Germany, sent a
very abusive Writing to Philip King of France, with many ridiculous Threats.
The King, who was Master of more Temper, contented himself to give the Courrier
a whole Sheet of Paper, wherein he had writ in Capitals only these Words for an
Answer, TOO MUCH A GERMAN.

45
Charles the Vth. said: To make up a good Body of Soldiers, I would have the
Italians to be the Head, the Spaniards the Arms, the Germans the Breast,
because of their Faithfullness and Strength; and the other Nations the Belly
and Feet.

46
Certain Soldier^ who were near the Coach of Catherine of Medicis, said a
^housand abusive Things of her; and as the Cardinal of Lorrain told her that he
was going to see them hanged: No, no, answered she, let them go: I will this
Day show to After-ages, that in the same Person a Woman, a Queen, and an
Italian, have known how to command their Passion.

47
King John being taken in a Battle which he fought before Poitiers against the
English, was conducted to their Camp, where the Prince of Wales waited upon him
bare-headed at Supper. The King desired him several times to sit by him, but
the Prince excused himself with these Words: It does not become a Subject to
sit by his Lord, Afterward the King told him: I designed to have treated you
to Day at Supper, but Fortune has been willing that you should treat me.

48
A Painter having promised the finest of all his Pictures, to one who had no
skill in them, this Man came and told him cunningly, that his House was on
Fire: The Painter cried presently to his Prentice, Be sure you save such a
Picture: By that means he found that this must be the best, and he asked it of
him as soon as his Trouble was over, and that he was satisfied that it was but a
false Alarm

49
Certain Peasants complaining to a Captain, that his Soldiers had Robbed them,
he asked them whether they had left them any thing? they answered Yes, Well,
said the Captain, then they are none of my Soldiers, for they would certainly
have taken all away.

50
King Alphonsius answered certain Persons, who pressed him to give Battle when
he must have run a great Danger: It Is the Duty of a General, not only to Fight,
but also to Conquer.

51
Dragut, a Turkish Pirate, caused Ibrahim to be put to Death; just after he had
delivered up to him the Town Aphrodisium, which the Moors call Mahudia; and
because he had promised him his Life: and great Rewards, he said for his
Justification: That no body is obliged to keep his Word, with one who had been
Traitor to his own Country.

52
Alphonsus King of Aragon, drunk so little Wine, that his Friends wondering at
it, he said: Alexanders excessive Love of Wine, was a great Blemish to his
Glory, for it obscures Reason and Virtue: He said likewise: Wine has two very
ill Daughters, Fury, and brutish Love.

53
King Lewis XI. hearing that Nicolas Raulin, Chancellor to the Duke of
Burgundy, had founded a rich Hospital at Beaune, said: It is but reason that
the Chancellor of Burgundy, who in his Lifetime has made so many Beggars,
should in his latter Days build an Hospital for them.

54
Charles Duke of Calabria, having Condemned a Gentleman to pay a Hundred
Florins of Gold to a Maid whom he had abused, commanded him to follow the Maid,
who had the Money about her, and make as if he would take it away from her. The
Maid knew well enough how to keep it, and being come back, complained of his
Violence to the Duke, who told him: Had you been as careful of keeping your
Honor, as defending your Money, you would not have lost that, Go Sweetheart,
do so no more.

55
An Astrologer advised a Prince to settle his Affairs, because within three
Days he was to die a violent Death; the Prince asked him, whether he had
foreseen what kind of Death he himself should die? and he assuring him that he
was to die of a Fever he told him, that to let him see the vanity of his
Sciaence he should be hanged that very Hour. Now as the Astrologer was seized
to be led to the Place of Execution, he said to the Prince: Pray see, my Lord,
whether my Prediction be not true: Feel my Pulse, and you will be sensible that I
have got a Fever. Which subtle Answer saved his Life.

56
The Duke of Guise, aster a Battle fought betwixt Francis Is It. and Charles Vth.
reproached one Villandri, that though he was in complete Armor yet he had not
been seen in the Fight: I Will make it out, answered boldly Villandri, that I was
there, and in that very Place where you durst not be seen: The Duke nettled by
this Reproach, threatened to punish him severely for it, but he appeased him
with these Words: I was my Lord, with the Baggage, where your Courage would not
have suffered you to sculk.

57
Lewis XII. King of France, said: Most Gentlemen have the same Fate with Acteon
and Diomedes; they are devoured by their Dogs and Horses; intimating that
Hunting, and the being curious of fine Horses ruined abundance of People of
Quality.

58
One that walked before King Alphonsus, having given a thrust to a Branch of a
Tree, it flew back, and struck the Kings Eye black and blue, and made it swell.
As every one expressed how much they were sensible of his Pain: I have no Pain
said he, that more sensibly affects me, than the Sorrow and Fear of him that
hurt me.

59
A Man who had married an ugly Woman, upon account of her great Fortune, having
one Day surp^iz'd her with a Spark, he told her, Since thou have one that
Kisses thee for nothing, What need thou get a Husband at the Expense of thy
Fortune.

60
A Plough-man seeing the Archbishop of Cologn go by attended with a great many
Soldiers, could not forbear laughing: The Archbishop pressed him to tell him the
reason: It Is because I wonder, said the Plough-man, to see an Archbishop
armed, and followed not by Churchmen, but Soldiers, like a General of an Army.
Friend, answered the Archqishop, know that I am a Duke as well as an
Archbishop; In my Church I perform the Office of an Archbishop with my Clergy,
but in the Field I march like a Duke, accompanied with my Soldiers: I
understand you my Lord, replied the Peasant, But pray, tell me, when my Lord
Duke goes to the Devil, what will then become of my Lord Archbishop?

61
The Duke of Milan being Besieged, and hard put to i^ in a Castle by the
Florentines, could find no manner of Meat that pleased his Palate when he was
at Table, and as he often quarreled with his Cook about it, this cunning
Servant after many other Excuses, told him at last: My Lord, will you give me
leave to be plain with you? The Meat is good and well dressed, but, Faith, the
Florentines have taken away your Stomach-

62
The Life of Pope Bonifacius VIIIth. was so irregular that it was said of him:
That he came to the Sovereign Pontificate like a Fox, lived like a Lion, and
died like a Dog.

64
King Henry the IVth. being importuned by a man of Quality, who begged a Pardon
for a Nephew of his guilty of Murder, answered him: I am sorry I cannot grant
your Request; it becomes you to act the Part of an Uncle, and me that of a
King: I excuse your Demand, excuse my Denial.

63
An Impertinent Poet, having begun to read to one a Poem of his own making,
asked him, Which of those Verses were the best? Those, answered he, thou have
not yet read, for they have not made my Head ache.

65
A man of Note, coming from a great Dinner, and his Head full of the sweet
vapors of Wine, signed an Order that was brought to him, which had starved a
whole Province, had not the thing been prevented. He is to be excused, said a
Jester upon it, for how can a man imagine in the first hour of Digestion, that
People can starve any where.

66
When the Doge of Genoa was at Versailles (where he was come to make
Submissions to the King in the name of his Commonwealth) and was viewing all
the Beauties of the Place, a Courtier asked him what he found there most
extraordinary; To see my self here, answered he.

67
Odo, Bishop of Bayeux in Normandy, and Brother to William the Conqueror, by
his Mothers side, was created Earl of Kent by the Conqueror. Some time after
the Bishop happened to fall into Disgrace, so that he was cast into Prison. The
Clergy in those times were free from the Secular Power, and the Pope espousing
the Bishop's Quarrel, writ a sharp Letter to the King about it. The King gave
no other answer, but That he had imprisoned the Earl of Kent, and not the
Bishop of Bayeux.

68
A Venetian Ambassador at Rome, went through Florence, and waited on the late
Duke of Tuscany. This Prince complained to the Ambassador, that the Republic
had sent him a Venetian, whose Conduct during the time of his Residence at his
Court he was not satisfied with. Your Highness, said the Ambassador, ought not
to wonder at it, for I can assure you, that we have abundance of Fools at
Venice: So have we at Florence, answered the great Duke, but we don't send them
abroad to treat of public Affairs.

69
A Prince jeered one of his Courtiers, who had served him in several Embassies,
and told, him, he looked like an Ox: I know not who I am like, answered the
Courtier, but this I know, that I have had the honor to represent you upon
several Occasions.

70
A Courtier taking his leave of the King, who sent him upon an Embassy to
another Prince: The chief Instruction I have to give you, said the King to him,
is that your Conduct be entirely opposite to that of your Predecessor: Sir,
replied the Ambassador, I will so behave my self that your Majesty will have no
occasion to give the like Instruction to him who shall succeed me,

71
A Domestic of King Henry the Great, and a Confident of his Amors, obtained a
Grant of him, and went to the Chancellor to make it pass the Seals. The
Chancellor finding some difficulty in it, the Courtier pressed him and offered
to prove, that there could be no difficulty in the Case. Every one, said the
Chancellor, must meddle with his own Trade. My Trade, replied the Courtier,
who thought himself reflected upon about the confidence of his Masters Amors,
is so good an Employment, that, were the King but twenty Years younger, I would
not change it for Four such as yours.

72
A Man whose Head was full of a Stage Play of his own making, was explaining
the Plot and Design of it to a Courtier: The Scene, said he to him, is in
Cappadocia, and to judge rightly of the Play, a man must transport himself into
the Country, and get acquainted with the Genius of the People. You say right,
answered the Courtier, and I think it were best to have it acted there.

73
Monsieur de Vaugelas, having obtained a Pension of the King by the means of
Cardinal Richelieu, this Cardinal told him: Sir, I hope you will not leave out the
word Pension in your Dictionary: No my Lord, answered Vaugelas, nor the word
Gratitude.

74
Benserade being come to the Academy, took the Place of the Abbot Furetiere,
whom he had no kindness for, and as he sat in it, he said, Here Is a Place where
I am like to say many a foolish Thing; Very well, answered Furetiere, you have
made a very good Beginning.

75
The Marquis du Chatelet, another Academician, being got out of the Bastille,
where he had been imprisoned upon a Slight occasion, appeared before the late
King of France. The King who cared not to see a Man he had not well used, made
it his business to turn off his Eyes from him. The Marquis perceiving it, drew
near the Duke of S. Simon, and told him: My Lord, I beg of you to tell the King
that I forgive him, and wish he would do me the honor to look upon me. Which
had the effect he de^'d; For the Duke having told the King of it, his Majesty
fell a laughing, and afterward spoke to him very graciously.

76
Lewis XII. King of France, while he was Duke of Orleans, had several times
been difoblig'd by two Persons in Favor in the foregoing Reign. One of his
Confidents would persuade him to show them his Re^entment: No, answered the
King, it is below the King of France, to revenge injuries done to the Duke of
Orleans.

77
John II. Duke of Bourbon being a Hostage in England for King John, several
Gentlemen, Vassals to the Duke, caballed against him in his. Absence, and
encroached upon his Rights. One of his Officers kept an exact account o^ all,
and upon the Duke's return* presented him with a great Volume of it, that he
might cause justice to be done. The Duke ask d him, whether he had kept
likewise a Register of all the good Services they had ^ormerly done him, to
which the Officer answering, No: Then, replied the Duke, it is not fit for me to
make any use of this, and so threw it into the Fire, without giving it the
reading.

78
The late Duke of Guise's Steward was telling him the necessity he lay under of
regulating his domestic Affairs, and gave him a List of several Persons, that
were of no use in his house. The Prince having examine d it, It Is true, says he,
I might make shift without them all; but did you ask them whether they could
make shift without me?

79
A wanton Gentlewoman reproached her Brother with his strong Passion for
Gaming, which was the ruin of him: When will you leave off Gaming? Says she to
him: when you will cease to Love, answers the Brother. Oh! Unhappy Man, replied
the Sister, then you are like to game all your Lifetime.

80
A Man of Quality, traveling in Spain, went to see the Escurial, and as he
viewed the Rich and Magnificent Convent of the Monks of the order of St. Jerome,
called the Cloister of St. Laurence, the Superior, who Conducted him, told him
the Particulars of its foundation; and how King Philip II. had caused it to be
built to perform the Vow he made on that Day the Battle of St. Quentin was
fought, which was on St. Laurence's Day, in case he should come off Victorious;
whereupon the Traveller, admiring the Magnificence of that Building, said:
Father, that King must needs be in great Fear, when he made so great a Vow.

81
All the Teeth of a certain talkative Lady being loose, she asked a Physician
the cause of it, who Answered, It proceeded from the violent shakings she gave
them, with her Tongue.

82
A bad Painter who could not put off his Pictures, went into another Country
and turned Physician; one who went that way knew him again, and asked him for
what reason he went in the habit of a Physician; I have a mind, said he, to
profess an art, wherein all mistakes are covered by the earth.

83
Certain Young Ladys walking in the fields met in their way, a Shepherd, who
carried a Lamb to the Market, one among them coming near, stroak'd it, and said
to her Companions, Look how pretty he is, he has yet no Horns; the Shepherd
hearing that, replied, it is because he is not yet married.

84
The Kings Court being at a certain Town, two Gentlemen walking together met a
Clown beating his Ass unmercifully; they said to him harkee friend, have you no
conscience to abuse that poor beast at this rate? the Man pulling off his Hat,
presently replied, Cry Mercy good Mr. Ass, I did not think you had relations at
Court.

85
A Citizen said to a Courtier, that he had eased himself of a heavy Burden, by
paying a Sum of Money he owed; and that he could not apprehend how one could
Sleep that was deeply indebted. And I, answered the Courtier, who was in Debt
over Head and Ears, do very easily apprehend it; but I cannot imagine how my
Creditors can Sleep, when they think I shall never pay them.

86
The Baron des Adrets, one of the Generals of the Huguenots, took during the
Wars a Castle belonging to the Catholics, and condemned all the Soldiers that
had defended it, to leap out at a Window of that Castle; one of them advanced
twice to the brink of the Precipice, and still he shrunk back; whereupon the
Baron told him, Come, take your Leap without any more ado, for I Will make you
suffer greater Torments if you go back a third time. Sir, answered the Soldier,
since you take the thing to be so easy, I lay you don't do it in four times.
Which so pleased the Baron, that as cruel as he was, he pardoned the Soldier
upon account of this Repartee.

87
A young Lady being in Company with her Husband, they began to tell merry
Stories, and every one had his own; when it came to the Ladies turn, she was
pleased to relate all the Stratagems that a Spark had used to get one Night
into the Room of a Woman he loved, and whose Husband was absent; but it fell
out unluckily as they were together, very well pleased with one another, that
the Husband comes and knocks at the Door. So you may imagine, said fhe, what
Trouble I was in. This preposterous Reflection cast her Husband into another
sort of Trouble, by giving him to understand what share he had in this
Adventure; and how his Wife had blurted out a Truth, which she never designed
to let him know.

88
Count Mansfelt having received three Routings in Germany, went to the French
King for new Recruits. As he was seeing the two Queens one day at Dinner, the
Queen Mother said, They say Count Mansfelt is here among the Crowd. I do not
believe it, said the young Queen, for whenever he sees a Spaniard he runs
away.

89
A Captain that had a wooden Leg booted over, had it shattered to pieces by a
Cannon Bullet; his Soldiers crying out, A Surgeon, a Surgeon for the Captain.
No, no, said he, a Carpenter will serve my turn.

90
A Secretary of State in France, passing the Pont-neuf, or New Bridge at Paris,
between Nine and Ten a Clock in a Winter-night, with his Lacquey carrying a
Flambeau before him, o're-heard a noise of clashing of Swords and Fighting, and
looking under the Flambeau, and perceiving they were but two, he bid his
Footman go on. They had not gone many paces, but two armed Men, with their
Pistols cocked, and Swords drawn, made pushing toward them: One of them had a
Paper in his Hand, which he said, he had casually took up in the Streets, and
had occasioned their difference; therefore they desired the Secretary to read
it, with a great deal of Complement. The Secretary took out his Spectacles, and
fell a reading the said Paper, whereof the Substance was, That it should be
known to all Men, that whosoever did pass over that Bridge after Nine a Clock
in Winter, and Ten in Summer, was to leave his Cloak behind him, and in case of
no Cloak, his Hat. The Secretary started at this, one of the Rogues told him,
That he thought that Paper concerned him; so they unmantled him, and my
Secretary was content to go home in Cuerpo.

91
The Duke of Ossuna, Viceroy of Naples, passing by Barcelona, and having got
leave to release some Slaves, he went aboard the Cape Gally, and passing
through the Crew of Slaves, he asked diverse of them what their Offenses were;
every one excused himself upon several pretenses, one saying, That he was put
in out of Malice; another by Bribery of the Judge, but all of them unjustly.
Among the rest, there was one sturdy little black Man, and the Duke asking him
what he was in for. My Lord, said he, I cannot deny but I am justly put in
here, for I wanted Money, and so took a Purse hard by Tarragona to keep me from
Starving. The Duke, with a little Staff he had in his Hand, gave him two or
three blows upon the Shoulders, saying, You Rogue, what do you do amongst so
many honest, innocent Men? Get you out of their Company. So he was freed, and
the rest remained still to Tug at the Oar.

92
James I. King of England, asking the Lord Keeper Bacon, what he thought of the
French Ambassador; he answered, that he was a tall, proper Man. Ay, replied the
King, What think you of his Headpiece? Is he a proper Man for an Ambassador?
Sir, said Bacon, Tall Men are like high Houses, wherein commonly the uppermost
Rooms are worst furnished.

93
Christopher of Placentia, a merry Gentleman, and a good Companion, but very
poor withal, finding one Night some Thieves in his House, told them without
putting himself in a Passion, I cannot imagine what you expect to find in my
House in the Night, since I can find nothing in it my self in the Daytime.

94
An Italian Earl, about Naples, of a hundred thousand Crowns a Year, married a
common Laundress; whereupon Pasquin the next Sunday Morning, had a soul and
most dirty Shirt put upon his Back, and this Tart Libel beneath: Pasquin, how
now? A foul Shirt upon a Sunday? The answer in Pasquin's behalf was, I cannot
help it, for my Laundress is made a Countess.

95
It was a tart Jest, which was in this manner put upon the Pope, and one of his
Nephews, at the latter end of the Year 1649. It seems, the good old Father had
advanced the Spark srom a poor ignorant Tailor, to the Dignity of a Roman
Baron: All the Ancient Nobility were disgusted at this, and some arch wag was
set at work to ridicule the Pope's Conduct, and the new Barons honor.
Wherefore on Christmas Day early in the morning, Pasquil was observed to be
apparelled in Rags, and a very nasty habit, with a Schedule of paper in his
hand, wherein was writ. How now, Pasquil, what! All in Rags on a Christmas day?
the answer for Pasquil was, Alas, I cannot help it, for my Tailor is become a
Baron.

96
One day a Thief was carried to the Gallows, and as his Confessor asked him
whether he was not sorry for having committed the Theft for which he was going
to suffer, Yes, replied the Malefactor, But I am still more sorry that I did
not steal enough to bribe my Judges.

97
Two Ladies playing at Picquet, a young Lord came to them, and asked them what
they played for. They answered that they only played for honor, then there
will be nothing for the Cards, replied he.

98
A Lawyer told his Client, his adversary had removed his suit out of one Court
into another; to whom the Client replied, Let him remove it to the Devil if he
pleases: I am sure my Attorney, for money, will follow it.

99
A Usurer had constantly two dishes brought to his table, but eat of but one;
his Man once brought but one, and left the other behind. Sirrah, said his
Master, Where Is the other Dish? (...), said he, It has come so often, I thought
it would have found its way hither without my assistance.

100
A Lawyer being Sick, made his will, and gave away all his Estate to Lunatic,
Frantic, and Mad People: And being asked why he did so, he replied, From such
he had it, and to such he would give it again.

101
A Tailor carried his Bill to the Duke of Buckingham, who faid he could not
then pay him, but made him ^up a Mess of his Broth, which having done, he
humbly thanks his Grace, and takes his leave. He had not been at home
exercising his Shears, but he was sit for the Bodkin, for his Broth began to
operate, and provoked him to call up his Wife, who presently attended his
Motion, being easily prevailed withal. So as the Potage began to work with him,
he worked with her, and having highly pleafed his Wife, as well as himself with
a Kiss dismissed her Within a quarter of an Hour he calls her up again, and ^o
he did to the third and fourth time* At last she asked him, how this strange
and sudden Alteration came* So he told her* My Lord did not pay him his Bill,
b^t gave him a Porrenger of his Broth, which had wrought these vigorous
Effects. To which she replied, Prithee, Hus^and, if my Lord is willing, take
out all thy Bill in this Broth.

102
A Tailor, blind of one Eye, was come home sooner than his Wife expected; and
because, during his absence, she had entertained her Lover, and could not tell
how to convey him out; she bethought her self of this Stratagem, she goes to
her Husband, and takes him about the Neck, claps her Hand upon his good Eye,
and told him she was a dreaming last Night he could see with the other Eye, in
the mean time her Spark slipped out.

103
A Tailor having a young and handsome Wife, went into the Country to his
Customers; in the mean time a lusty young Journey-man follicited her, but she
refused; at last he vow d, when she was in Bed, he would come into the Chamber; she
vowed if he did, she would have a great Knife in Bed with her to cut his Throat. At
Night, he opens the Door softly, but remembering the Knife, was stealing out
again. She hearing a noise, asked, who was there? It Is I, says he, and was
resolved to lie with you, but that I remembered your Vow of the Knife. Oh! what
a Fool was I, says she, to leave the Knife below in the Kitchen?

104
One at a Lord's Table, told him of a Piece of Chemistry, which he saw in
Flanders, which was a general Cure for all Diseases; nay, I confess my self,
says he, I could not have believed it, if I had not seen it; at which the Lord
wondered much, and asked a Grave Philosopher at the Table, what he thought of
it, Why truly my Lord, says he, that Gentleman has spoken my Sentiments, for he
said he could not have believed it unless he had seen it, and truly no more
will I.

105
A Gentleman came into an Inn in Chelmsford, upon a very cold Day, and could
get no room near the Fire, whereupon he calls to the Ostler to fetch a peck of
Oysters, and give them to (...) Horse presently; will your Horse eat Oysters,
replied the Ostler, I pray, try him, says the Gentleman; Immediately the People
running to see this wonder, the fire side was cleared, and the Gentleman had
his choice of Seats. The Ostler brings the Oysters, and said the Horse would
not meddle with them; why then* says the Gentleman; I must be forced to eat
them my self.

106
A Gentleman wanted two resolute Ruffians, to do some Exploit on one that had
abused him, his Man b^ings him two whose Faces were slash^d and Cut: No, says
he, I Will have none of you: but if you can bring me them, who gave you those
Wounds, they are for my turn.

107
Two Friends, who had not seen one another a great while, meeting by chance,
one asked the other how he did? he said he was not very well, and was Married
since he saw him. That is good news indeed, says he; Nay, not so much good
news, neither, replies the other, for I have married a Shrew; that is bad, said
the other; not so bad neither, said he; for I had two Thousand Pounds with her;
that is well again, said the other; not so well neither, for I laid it out in
sheep, and they died of the Rot; that was hard indeed, says his Friend; not so
hard neither, says he, for I sold the Skins for more Money than the Sheep cost;
that made you amends, says the other; not so much amends neither, said he, for
I laid out my Money in a House, and it was burned: That was a great Loss
indeed; Nay, not so great a Loss neither, for my Wife was Burnt in it.

108
One told his Wife, that he heard for certain, that they were all to be counted
Cuckolds in their Town, but one man: W^o do t^ou think that should be? says
he, Faith, says she, Husband, I cannot think who it is for my Life.

109
A Cheat coming into an Inn, sent for a Shoemaker to bring some Boots, where
having tried on one pair, they fitted him very well; so he asked him the price
of them, and told him he could not pay him for them this Week. The Shoemaker
then told him, he must have the Boots again, the other perceiving there was no
good to be done, takes to his heels, and runs through the Town, and the
Shoemaker after him, crying out, stop him, stop him; Some going to stop him,
pray do not stop me, for we two run for a Wager, I in Boots and he in Shoes;
then they cried, Boots wins the Wager, if it were for a Hundred Pounds.

110
A debauched Fellow was brought before a Justice of Peace for swearing* the
Justice commanded him to pay his Fine, which was two Shillings for two Oaths;
whereupon he pulls out half a Crown, and asked the Justice the price of a
Curse, who told him Six pence: Then a Pox take you all, says he, for Knaves and
Fools, and there is half (...) for you: Who the Devil would stand changing of
Money.

111
One Pace, a bitter Jester in Queen Elizabeth's time, came to Court: Come, said
the Ladies, Pace, we shall now hear of our faults; No, says he, I don't use to
speak of that which all the Town talks of.

112
A Gentleman riding, had a Dog named Cuckold, which run after a Bitch into an
Entry; upon which he, called Cuckold, Cuckold; the Woman of the House came out
and said he was a Rogue to call her Husband Cuckold; you mistake, says he, I
don't call him, I call my Dog; The more Knave you, says she, to call a Dog by a
Christian bodies Name.

113
It was the saying of Alphonsus, Surnamed the Wise, King of Aragon, that
amongst so many things as are by Men possessed, or eagerly pursued in the Course
of their Lives, all the rest are Bawbles, besides dry Old Wood to Burn, Old
Wine to Drink, Old Frinds to converse with, and Old Books to read.

114
A Gentleman who had a handsome Wife, used to come very osten to London, and
leave her in the Country; Now in his absence a lusty Fellow, a Carter, was
familiar with her, which came to the Gentleman's Ear; Who vowed he would kill the
Rogue, whenever he met him: and being one Day in the Field, one told him that is
the Fellow has made you a Cuckold; So to him he goes, Sirrah, says he, I hear
in my absence, you are familiar with my Wife, and have made me a Cuckold: Well
then, Sir, I have done so, and what then? What then, says he? Why if you had
not confessed it, I would have broke your Pate.

115
A Young Fellow, told his Wife the sirst Night he lay with her, that if she had
consented to have laid with him before Marriage, he would never have made her
his Wife, Faith, says she, I did imagine as much, for I have been cozened so
three or four times before, and was resolved not to be cozened so now.

116
A modest Gentlewoman being compelled to a^cuse her Husband of defect, and
being in the Court, she humbly desired the Judge, that she might write what she
durst not speak for Modesty; the Judge gave her that liberty, and a Clerk was
presently commanded to give her Pen, Ink, and Paper; Whereupon she took the Pen
without dipping it into the Ink, and made as if she would write. Says the Clark
to her, Madam, there is no Ink in your Pen, Truly, Sir, says she, that is just
my Case, and therefore I need not explain my self any further.

117
An Excise-man walking by a River, ^espy'd a Boy fishing, who knew him to be of
that honorable Profession. My pretty Lad, says he, what do thou fish for? I
fish for the Devil, replied the Boy, but I want the right Bait to catch him.
What Bait is that, says the other? Indeed, Sir, I have been told, there is no
better Bait in the World, than an Excise-man.

118
One having been a long Journey, and to make the more have, rid Post, being
come home very weary, desired his Wife to excuse him from embracing of her that
Night: She seemed pretty well contented, but cursed those in her Heart that
invented riding Post. The next day walking with his Wife into the Yard, he
espied the Cock a^leep in the Sun, by the Hens* then he asked his Wife, what
made the Cock so dull and sleepy. Truly, says she, I don't know, unless he has
rid Post.

119
A Sea-Captain was saying his Great Grandfather's* Grandfather, and Father die d
at Sea. Says one ^o him, If I were as you, I would never go to Sea for that
trick. Why, says he, where did all your Relations dye? He answered, In their
Beds. Well, replied he, If I were a^ you, (for the same ^son) I would never go
into Bed.

120
An English Merchant in Amsterdam, was to sell a Thousand Pounds worth of
Gloves to some ^ews, who recanting of the Bargain when they brought their
Money, would have but half; the English Merchant desired a little time to sort
them, and told them they should have half; so he commanded his Men to put all
the Right-handed Gloves in one Parcel, and the Left in another. Then, when the
^ews came, he bid them take their Choice, which being done, and the Money paid,
they began to pack up, but perceiving at last they were all for one Hand, they
were forced to take the rest at the Merchant's Rates.

121
A Gentleman ordered his Man to call him in the Morning at Six of the Clock,
but he awaked him at Four: Being asked the reason, he replied, He came to tell
him he had two Hours more to Sleep.

122
A Cook serving a miserly Man, said he would go from him; being asked the
reason, says he, If I stay here long, I shall forget my Trade.

123
A Lady having two Suitors, one Tall, and the other Short; a Gentleman asked
her, Which she liked best? Says she, Indeed, Sir, I like the tallest, if all
things are proportionable.

124
One asked why Men sooner give to Beggars than Scholars? Another replied,
Because they think they may sooner come to be Beggars than Scholars.

125
One was asking another his Opinion, What the World thought of him? Why,
replied the other, you appear to the Wise, foolish; to Fools, wise; and pray,
what do you think of your self.

126
A Father chid his Son for rising late, and gave him an instance of a certain
Man, who being up betimes, found a Purse full of Gold. Answered the Son: He
that lost it, was up still before him.

127
A Physician having sent for a Farrier to cure his Mule; the second time he
came, the Physician put Half a Crown into his Hand. The Farrier returned it,
and told him, Sir, We never take any Money of those of our own Profession.

128
A Man said that Impertinencies resembled Misfortunes, which never came by
themselves, and that when ever he heard any spoke, he would bid it welcome,
provided it came alone.

129
Two young Men demanded a young Woman in Marriage of her Father; one of which
was Rich, and the other Poor; the Father having given her to the last, some of
his Friends asked him, why he did not bestow her on the rich Man? Because, says
he, the rich Man has no Wit, and so may grow Poor; but the other, who is a wise
and sensible Man, may easily grow Rich.

130
A Man that had but one Eye, met early in the Morning one that had a crooked
Back, and said to him, Friend, you are laden betimes. It Is early indeed,
replied the other, for you have but one of your Windows open.

131
A certain Man said, That Wine had two bad Qualities: First, If you mix Water
with it, you spoil it. Secondly, If you mix none with it, it will spoil your
own self.

132
Two riding from Shipton to Burford, and seeing a Miller riding softly before
them on his Sacks, resolved to abuse him; so one went on one side of him, and
the other on the other side, saying, Miller, now tell us, which art thou, more
Knave or Fool? Truly, says he, I don't know, which I am most, but I guess I am
between both.

133
In Flanders by accident, a Flemish Tyler ^ell from the Top of a House upon a
Spaniard and Killed him, though by good luck, he escaped unhurt himself; the
next of the Blood, prosecuted his Death with great Violence against the Tyler;
and when he was offered Pecuniary Recompense, nothing would serve him but Lex
Talionis; Whereupon the Judge said to him, that if he did urge that kind of
Sentence, it must be that he should go up to the Top of the same House, and
from thence to fall down upon the Tyler, and so to put him to Death the same
way he had killed his Kinsman.

134
The Spaniards sided with the Duke of Mayenne, and the rest of those Rebels in
France, which called themselves the Holy League; and a French Gentleman being
asked the Cause of their Civil Broils, with an excellent Allufion he replied,
they were Spania and Mania, seeming by this answer to signify (...), Penury,
and (...), Fury; but covertly therein implying the King of Spain, and the Duke
of Mayenne.

135
Thomas Aquinas came one Day to Pope Innocent the Third, in whose Prefence they
were at that time telling a great Sum of Money: Thou see Thomas, said the
Pope, that the Church need not say now as she did at the biginning, Silver and
Gold I have none. Thomas, without study replied: You say true, Holy Father, Nor
can the Church say now, as the Ancient Church said to the Cripple, Arise, walk
and be whole. Note by the by that some relate this story of Pope Sixtus IV. and
a Cordelier, or Franciscan Friar.

136
Pope Alexander the sixth was asking Jerome donatus, Ambassador of Venice, of
whom the Venetians held those Rights and Customs of the Sea, the Ambassador
answered him presently, Let your Holiness show me the Character of St. Peter' s
Patrimony, and you shall find on the back thereof, a Grant made to the
Venetians of the Adriatic Sea.

137
It was the saying of a merry conceited Fellow, that in Christendom there were
neither Scholars enough, Gentlemen enough, nor Jews enough: And when answer
was made, that of all these there were rather too great a Plenty than any
scarcety, he replied, that if there were Scholars enough, so many ignorant
Dunces would not be beneficed; if Gentlemen enough, so many Plebeians would not
be ranked amongst the Gentry; and if Jews enough, so many Christians would not
profess Usury.

138
In Queen Elizabeth's time, when the Wars were hot betwixt England and Spain, a
negotiation was resolved upon to treat of Peace between these two Crowns, in
order to which Commissioners were appointed on both sides. They met at a Town
of the French King's. And first it was debated in what Tongue the Negotion
should be handled. A Spaniard thinking to give the English Commissioners a
shrewd gird, proposed the French Tongue as most fit, it being a Language the
Spaniards were well Skilled in, and for the Gentlemen of England, I suppose,
says he, that they cannot be ignorant of the Language of their Fellow Subjects,
since their Queen is Queen of France as well as of England. Nay, in Faith, my
Masters, replied Dr. Dale one of the English Commissioners, the French Tongue
is too vulgar for a business of this Secrecy and importance, especially in a
French Town; Let us therefore rather treat in Hebrew, the Language of
Jerusalem, whereof your Master is King; and I suppose you are therein as well
skilled as we in the French.

139
Poggius the Florentine tells a merry Story condemning the Folly of such,
especially mean Persons, as spend their Time and Estates in Hunting and
Hawking. Mr. A --. Physician of Milan, says he, that cured Madmen, had a Pit
of Water in his House, in which he kept his Patients, some up to the Knees,
some to the Girdle, some to the Chin, as they were more or less affected. One
of them, that was pretty well recovered, stood by chance in the Door, and
seeing a Gentleman ride by with a Hawk on his Fist, and his Spaniels after him,
would needs know to what use all this preparation served? He made answer to
kill certain Fowl; the Patient demanded again, what his Fowl might be worth
which he killed in a Year. He replied, nine or ten Crowns; and when he urged
him further, what his Dogs, Horses, and Hawks, stood him in? He told him four
Hundred Crowns; with that the Patient bid him be gone as he loved his Life and
Welfare; For, said he, if our Master come and find thee here he will certainly
put thee into his Pit amongst Madmen up to the very chin.

140
An Amourous Lady having granted an Assignation to a Man who had expressed a
Passion for her, she received him in her Chamber all alone, and very finely
dressed. The Lover fell on his Knees to her, and after many fine Speeches, Oh!
Madam, says he to her, Why have I not got you in the midst of a Wood! What, you
design to Cut my Throat, cried the Lady in a Passion: And thereupon called her
Women, to rid her of so cold a Lover.

141
Two Brothers, who lived together favored extremely one another, and bore the
same Name. A Man desired to speak to one of them. Which do you ask for? Said
the Porter, The Counselor, answered the Man, They are both Counselors. Him
that Squints a little; they both Squint. Him that has a handsome Wife; both
their Wives are handsome. Well then, him who is a Cuckold. By my Faith, Sir,
answered the Porter, I take them both to be Cuckolds. Well, said the Man, these
two Brothers are strongely fated to resemble one another.

142
The Players acting at Paris before King Lewis XIII. a Play against the Men of
the Long Robe, had placed among the Spectators one of their Company in a
City-dress. This Player, who by his Habit appeared like a Counselor at Law,
stood up at the merriest part of the Play, and said with a loud Voice, That it
was intolerable to see Lawyers thus played upon, and that they should have
Satisfaction for it. In short, he charged the Player to desist immediately, and
forbear going on with so insolent a Play. I will have them go on with it,
answered the King, who took him to be a Counselor, that broke in upon the
Respect due to him, by threatening them in his Presence. Which created a new
Diversion in the Audience, when they came to know that he was a Player in
Disguise. And the King, who understood Raillery, was one of the first that
laughed at his mistake.

143
The Ingenious come off of Richard I. King of England, for excusing to the Pope
his keeping Philip, Bishop of Beauvais his Prisoner, is to be admired. This
Bishop was a Warlike Man, very troublesome to the English, who possessed the best
part of France. Being at last fallen into their Hands, the Pope not knowing how
it came to pass, wrote to the King for his Freedom, as being a Clergyman, and
one of his beloved Sons. Whereupon the King sent to the Pope the Armor, in
which the Bishop was taken, having first caused these Words to be engraven upon
it: Vide an haec sit Tunica Filii tui vel non: See if this be the Coat of thy
Son, or not. Which are the very Words that Jacob's Children used, when they
brought to him the Coat of their Brother Joseph. The Pope viewing the Armor,
did ingenuously own, That this Bishop was more like the Son of Mars, than of
the Church; and so left him wholly to the King's Mercy.

144
A poor Country-woman of Poitou fell into such a Lethargy, that her Husband,
and all the Women of the Neighborhood, gave her over for Dead. In order to
bury her, they only wrapped her up in a Sheet, as it is usual with the poor People
of that Province. As she was carried to the Churchyard, they passed so near a
Thorn-bush, that being pricked to the Quick by the Thorns, she came out of her
Lethargy; but some Years after she died in good earnest. Her Husband
apprehensive of another Resurrection, remembered the Thorn-bush. And when his
Wife's Corpse came near it, he failed not crying several times, Take heed of the
Thorn-bush, do not come too near the Hedge.

145
Sixtus V. being made Pope from a Cordelier, (or Gray-Friar) did not change his
Humor by changing his Fortune, but kept still the Character of a facetious
Man: And he loved to run over in his Mind all the cunning Tricks he had played,
and the Adventures of his first Condition. He remembered, amongst other things,
that when he a Cordelier, he had borrowed Money of --, and had not repaid it to
him. He therefore inquired about him, and hearing he was still living, he sent
him Orders to come, and give him an Account of his Actions. The good Father,
who found no Guilt upon him, went to Rome with that Tranquillity of Mind, which
is the result of a good Conscience. And being come before the Pope, We are
informed, says the Holy Father to him, that you have misimployed the Revenues
of your Monastery; and we have sent for you, to give us an Account of the
Matter. Holy Father, answer^d the Monk, I think my self altogether Innocent as
to that. Consider well, said the Pope, Whether you bave not indiscreetly lent
Money to any Body, particularly to a certain Cordelier, who came to you such a
Year. The good Man having thought upon it a while: It Is true, said he, Holy
Father, He was a great Knave, who got that Money from me upon idle Pretenses,
and a Promise he made me of repaying it in a little time. Well, said the Pope,
we are that very Cordelier you speak os. We are willing to return that Money,
according to Promise, and advise you at the same time never to lend any more to
Men of that Coat, who are not all cut out for Popes, to be in a Condition to
pay you again. The good Man, very much surpised to find his Cordelier in the
Person of a Pope, offered to b^g his Pardon for calling him Knave. Never
trouble your self about it, said the Holy Father, that might be true enough at
that time; but God has furnished us with means to retrieve our past Offenses.
Thus he dismissed the good Monk, having paid him the Money he owed him, and
expressed to him great Demonstrations of Favor.

146
A Divine, preaching before a great Prince, who had taken up Arms against his
own Country, compared him to Coriol^nus, that famous Roman Captain, who having
well deserv^d of his Country in the Insancy of the Commonwealth, was banished
out of it, w^ch piece of Ingratitude he so highly resented, that he came and
laid Siege to Rome, assisted by the Volsei. That great Captain, cried the
Preacher, justly provoked by the Ingratitude of his Countrymen, was in a
Condition to take a cruel Vengeance of them. But at last he was prevailed upon
by the Tears of his Mother and Wife; and those two Ladies obtained from him,
what neither the Sacred College of Cardinals, nor the Pope himself, who were
gone to meet him, could not obtain.

At these Words the Prince fell a laughing, and could not forbear crying out to
the Preacher, Sir, you know not what you say, for in those times there were
neither Popes nor Cardinals.

But the Preacher unconcern^d, stoutly maintained to the Prince, that he was
under no mistake: And for a Proof, my Lord, added he, of what I say, I my self
have seen the History of it represented in a Suit of Tapistry, in a Castle of
yours at such a place. The Authority of that Tapistry brought in so pat^
increased the Laughter. Which discomposed the ignorant Preacher to that degree,
that he duckt, as they call it, in the Pulpit, and went his way without making
an end of his Sermon.

147
A Bishop entertaining several Prelates at Dinner, had a Side-board Table
covered with a Set of large and fine Plate, made by the best Artists; and as
his Brethren admir^d the Magnificence of it: I bought it, said he to them, in
order to (...) the Poor of my Diocese. My Lord, answered one of the Prelates,
You might very well have saved them the making. Giving him to understand by
this answer, that he had purchased that Plate not so much out of Charity, as
out of Pride and Vanity.

148
A Monk going to preach about the Country, staid at Dinner with a poor Parson
of a Country Town; But finding neither the Bread nor the Wine good enough to
his Palate, he sent one to buy better, with other necessary Provisions to make
a good Meal. As he sat at Table, he called, for a Box full of Utensils
Si^ver-gilt, which he used in his Travels. The Parson, amazed at his
Magnificence, asked him, Whether he had made his Vows? Yes sure, answered the
Preacher. Then Father, replied the Parson, You and I could make a good Monk,
for you have made a Vow of Poverty, and I observe it.

149
An Italian Parson, Il Piovano Arlotto by name, going through the City of
Naples, went to pay his Respects to King Alphonsus, who was told by one of his
Courtiers, that this Parson was a jocose sort of a Man, who freely and
pleasantly delivered his Thoughts to Persons of the highest Quality, and had a
Book wherein he used to write down all the Follies of the Chief Men in his
time. The King, being disposed to be merry, Messer Piovano, said he to him, Am
I set down in your Book? You may see, answered Piovano, and having given him
the Book, he found there amongst other things: A Piece of Folly committed by
Alphonsus King of Naples, in sending to Germany, a German that was in his
Court, with two Thousand Ducats to buy him Horses. How do you find that I have
done amiss, said the King a little moved, in giving that Commission to a
German? Why! answered Piovano, because he will stay in his own Country with
your Money; What if he returns with Horses, or brings me my Money back again,
what will thou say then? Said the King: Well then, replied Piovano, I Will blot
your Name out of my Book, and put the German's instead on it.

150
An Italian Parson, one Day invited to Dinner Il Piovano Arlotto, with many
other Parsons; and having a mind to show his Wit, took these aside and told
them, Gentlemen, it is my opinion that we should make our selves merry to Day
with Piovano, who, you know, sets up for a jester, and drolls upon every Body;
Being my Clark lies Sick, and that I no Body to wait on us, I will propose to
draw Cuts, to see which of us shall go to the Cellar to draw the Wine, and wait
on the Rest whilst they are at Dinner: And I will contrive it so, that it shall
fall to Piovano's Lot; which being thus concluded amongst them, was put in
Execution accordingly. Piovano smoked the Plot, and resolved ^o make his Host
Repent it. Down he goes to the Cellar to fill the Bottles, whilst the others
fell to, and being come up again with the Bottles, You see, Gentlemen, said he,
How I have performed what I had to do; let us now draw Cuts to see which of us
shall go down into the Cellar to stop the Hogs-heads I left running. Now the
Landlord talked no more of casting Lots, and know^ng Piovano to be a Man that
would as soon do it, as say it, leaves presently his Dinner, and runs to the
Cellar, where he finds his Vessels running, and part of his Wine spilt; which
as he afterward expostulated with Piovano, You have no Reason to Complain of
me, answered he, since I have punctually satisfied the Conditions of the Play,
which indeed obliged me to draw the Wine and fill the Bottles, but not to stop
the Vessels of a Host who entertains his Guests so scurvily.

151
A Courtier playing at Picket in a Gaming Ordinary, and finding by the Cards he
took in, that he had discarded amiss, I am a downright Goussaut, cried he. Now
Goussaut was the Name of a President, who was none of the greatest Wits of his
Time; but who happened to be there behind the Gamester, unperceived by him. This
President nettled to hear himself quoted upon such an Occasion, told him, He
was a Coxcomb: You say right, replied the Gamester, that is it I meant.

152 Marriage is sometimes a Cure for Love.
CLitander having seen by chance Celimene, stood both surprised and charmed
with her Beauty. However because she had but a very mean Fortune, and that he
was Master of a vast Estate, he reflected upon an Engagement which he found no
less strong, than Sudden. He had quite lost his Repose; he felt himself in
continual agitation, and feared lest a Passion, so very violent in its first
rise, should prompt him at last to gratify his Heart at the Fxpence of his
Fortune. In order to banish so dangerous a Tenderness from his Heart, he went
to serve a Campaign in Flanders, but came back deeper in Love than he was at
his Departure. Then accusing his own Weakness, he made a second attempt and
resolved to travel into Italy, but the Diversions of Rome, and the Carnaval of
Venice, proved as useless as the Siege of Namur. Clitander returned more ardent
and passionate than ever, and as his Friend Philantes came to visit him, Dear
Philantes, said he, I lead a lingering wretched Life; I cannot forget C^limene,
I fancy her always present to my view with all her Charms. At last, added he,
at last I must marry her, to cease to love her. He did so, and a Months
Marriage changed his violent and boisterous Love into a gentle and quiet
Friendship.

153 Of the Queen of Spain and her Parrots.
THe Camerara Major, or first Lady of Honor and Groom os the Stole, to the
last Queen of Spain, was a Woman of a mighty sour angry Humor, who took upon
her rather to govern than to serve her Mistress; She mortally hated two
Parrots, the Queen had brought along with her from France, be ause they could
talk French. One Day her Majesty going abroad, the Camerara took the Parrots
from their keeper, wrung off their Necks in co^d Blood, and then went her way.
As soon as the Queen came home, she asked for her Parrots, that were her chief
Diversion in a Country, where she scarce enjoyed any other. Her Women amaz^d,
discovered Surprise in their Faces, and not being able to answer a Word at
first, confess^d the whole Matter at last. This struck ^er Heart, but she
thought convenie^t to conceal her Resentment. Some time after, the Camera^a
coming back, and seeing her Majesty calm enough, offered to kiss her Hands, as
she used to do, but was received by the Queen with two great Boxes on the Ear.
The Confusion of that haughty Woman, upon so sensible an Affront, can hardly be
expressed; she went out in a Passion, and gathered all her Kindred and Relations:
applied her self to the King, with a Train of Four hundred Ladies, and was so
importunate with him for the Reparation of her Honor, that he was fain to come
and ask the Queen her Reasons. Sir, replied readily that Ingenious Princess,
^twas but to save a Woman's longing. Do you then think two enough, Madam?
answered the King; else, pray, let her have two Dozen. And as one Misfortune
comes upon the neck of another, the Camerara lost her place to boot. A well
deserved Reward for such as keep not the Respect due to so Sacred Persons.

154 Of an Old Impotent Lord.
AN Old Lord fell in Love with a young Gentlewoman that waited upon his Lady:
The Frailty which is pretty common in Waiting-women, being happily supported by
the Defects of an Old Man, she found strength enough in her self to resist his
Solicitations: Moreover, she told her Lady of it, and confirmed by a Shower of
Tears those Proofs of her Chastity. It is not possible, Madam, said she, for me
to bear it any longer: What does my Lord make of me? And how can he have the
Thoughts that I can be wanting in my Duty, either to your Ladyship, or to my
Honor? If he goes on at this rate, I beseech your Ladito let me be gone. The
good Lady very much incensed against her Husband, and no less pleased with her
Woman's Honesty, told her, Child never trouble thy self, neither think of
leaving me, as long as thou art assured of my kindness to thee. Then Madam,
returned she, be so kind as to free me from my Lord's Persecutions. Well, said
the Lady, there comes now in my Thoughts an expedient very fit for that
purpose: Thou must dissemble a kindness for him, and afterward give him an
Assignation in thy Chamber. I, Madam, give him an Assignation? said the
Waiting Woman. Hear me out, replied the Lady, When thou have set the time, and
left the Door open, I Will go in thy place into thy Bed, and thou shall slip into
my Room, and then, when he comes, I Will make him so ashamed, that he will have no
more Thoughts of tormenting thee. The Waiting Woman performed with care her
Lady's Orders: And the Night being come, the old Dotard crept into the Chamber,
and eagerly went to that Bed where his Wife waited for his coming. She did not
think it convenient to quarrel with him at first; but this Adventure being
carried on more chastely than she had expected, she grew weary on it, and
resolved to give her Tongue its liberty, What! is it only for this, said she,
that you have been at so much pains? The Husband acknowledging his Error by his
Wife's Voice, I vow, Madam, said he, my Body has been wiser than my Mind, for
it has known you, when my blinded Mind took you for a handsome Maid.

155 The Widow's Exchange.
A Young Lady having lately buried her Husband, whom she called Old Simon,
ordered a Carver to make her a Statue of Wood, as near his Figure as he could,
which was laid by her Side every Night in remembrance of him. In the mean time,
a young Gentleman that had a great Passion for her, by the Intercession of some
Guineas, prevailed with her Maid to lay him one Night in the place of Old
Simon. The Widow went to Bed, and after her usual manner cast her Arms over her
dear Husband's Statue, and finding it very warm, she crept closer and closer to
it, till at length they came very close together, by which she perceived it was
not her Wooden Bed Fellow. In the Morning the Maid called at her Chamber Door,
as she used to do, Madam, What will you please to have for Dinner? She replied,
Roast the Turkey that was brought in Yesterday, Boil a Leg of Mutton and
Colley-flowers, and get a good Dish of Fruit. Madam, says the Maid, we have not
Wood enough to dress so much Meat. If not, replied she, you may burn Old Simon.

156 The Foolish Confession.
A Simple Fellow in Lombardy, had a great Love to a young Maid, as he thought
she was, and that they might live peaceably and quietly together, he thought of
this Expedient; one day he told her, that it was his full intent to marry her,
and to prevent future Quarrels, he said, he would tell her all the Secrets of
his Heart, that their Alliance might be the stronger. Among many other things,
he told her, That in the Heat of his Youth, he got a Son on a Friend of his,
which Friend was yet living, and desired her not to take it amiss. No, no, said
she, I am very well pleased, for a Friend of mine got me with Child, and it is
a Daughter; and if you intend to fortify our Alliance, it may be done with
another Marriage, between your Son and my Daughter.

157 The Gascon punished.
A Young Widow, rich and beautiful, was beloved by a young Gascon, both poor
and proud. This Gascon had a mind to be thought very intimate with the Lady,
and boasted of more Favors than he received. The Lady, who loved to be Merry,
resolved to punish him for it after a new manner: I know, said ^he to him, you
have an Affection for me, and doubt not but you will give me proofs of it upon
an Occasion that now offers it self. The Gascon assured her he was ready to do
any thing to serve her. You know, added the Widow, such a Lady of my
Acquaintance, who has a Cross and Jealous Man to her Husband, that will never
give her leave to lie abroad; now it is necessary, for some private Reasons,
that she should lie with me to Night; and what I desire of you, is to lie in
her place, that her Husband, who will come home late, finding you in his Bed,
may take you to be his Wife: And as he rises earlier than she, to go about his
Business, he will take no notice of any thing; for though he be Jealous of his
Wife, he seldom disturbs her Rest at Night. The Gascon consented to every
thing, and suffered himself to be carried to his Mistress's Friend; they
dressed his Head in Women's Night-Cloaths, and afterward he laid himself in the
Bed of the Jealous Husband, who the young Lady knew would not be at home that
Night. The two Ladies left the Gascon alone in Bed, and a little while after
the young Widow came in in her Night Gown, and without a Light, and went to Bed
to him. The Gascon, who took her for the Jealous Husband, was in great Pain and
Trouble; he lay extremely close, and turning his Back to the young Widow, put
himself as near the other side of the Bed as possible. Thus he spent a whole
Night more restless and uneasy than any in his Life, being still apprehensive
of some preposterous Caresses from the Jealous Husband; but his Trouble
increased when at break of Day, the young Widow rung a Bell, at the noise of
which he heard some body coming into the Room; he covered his Head with the
Bed-Cloaths, and such was his fear of being known, that he wished he could have
buried himself in the Bed. Now 'twas the Widow's Friend that came in, and
opened the Curtains, and at that very instant the Widow rose from Bed adorned
with all her natural Beauties, which made almost the Gascon die with Regret,
Spite, and Shame, for making such ill use of so favorable a Night.

FINIS.
LE COMPAGNON Sage and Ingenieux, ANGLOIS and FRANCOIS. OU Recueil de L'ESPRIT,
DES PERSONS Illustres, TANT Anciennes que Modernes: CONTENANT Leurs
Sentences, Pensees nobles, genereux Sentimens, Reparties fines, Bons Mots and
Contes plaisans. COMPOSE Pour l'Utilite and le Plaisir des Anglois and des
Etrangers. Par Mr. Boyer, Autheur du Dictionnaire Royal Anglois and Francois.

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci. Horat. A Londres. Chez Tho.
Newborough a la boule d'Or, au Cimetiere de S. Paul; Et John Nicholson aux
Arms du Roy, dans la petite Bretagne, 1700.

INTRODUCTION En form de PREFACE,
TOUCHANT L'Excellence, la Nature, and l'Usage des Sentences, Reparti^s fines,
Bons Mots, and Contes Plaisans.

LES Sentences, les Reparties fines, and les Bons Mots ont toujours ete estimez
de toutes les Nations policees: Les anciens Grecs and Romans ont fait voir le
cas qu'ils en faisoient, par le soin qu'ils ont eu de les recueillir and de les
citer. Jules Caesar fit un Recueil des Bons Monts de se^ Contemporains; le
celebre Historien Plutarque est fort exact a rapporter tous ceux des Hommes
illustres don't il ecrit les Vies; en quoi il a ete imite par Diogene Laerce
dans ses Vies des Philosophes; and parmi les Modernes mylord Bacon,
Guicharchin, and plusieurs autres en ont enrichi leurs Ecrits.

Ces T^moignages sont d'un si grand Poids, que nous ne saurions nous dispenser
de joindre notre approbation a celle de tant d'illustre^ Persons: Il s'agit
seulement de fair un bon choix, and de ne pas confondre l'Esprit and le bon
Sens avec quantite de Pensees basses, and de Plaisanteries froides and
vulgaires qui se debitent dans le monde, and c'est ce que je me suis propose de
fair dans ce Recueil.

Les Anciens sous le nom d' Apophthegmes comprenoient ce que nous appellons
Sentences, Sentimens nobles and genereux, Bons Mots, and Reparties fines:
Cependant, selon nos Idees, l'Apophthegme differe d'un Bon Mot, ou d'une
Repartie, en ce que le premier est ordinairement grave and instructif, au lieu
que les Bons Mots and les Reparties nous instruisent and nous rejouissent en
meme tems; quelquefois meme ceux-ci sont purement divertissants, and
quelquefois piquans and satiriques.

Les Francois appellent Bons Mots, toutes ces Sentences and Reparties
ingenieuses qui partent d'un bon Jugement and d'une Imagination prompte and
heureuse.

La premiere and la plus certain Regle pour distinguer un veritable Bon Mot
d'avec une fausse Pensee, est qu'il puisse etre traduit en une autre Langue,
sans rien perdre de sa justesse and de son agreement; car alors il est certain
qu'il roll sur la chose qui y est exprimee, and non pas sur une Point, ou sur
une Rencontre.

Les Points and les Rencontres sont ce qu'on appelle des jeux de Mots ou des
Equivoques; on les connoit par ceci, c'est qu'etant traduites en une autre
Langue, else perdent cette ressemblance de son dans laquelle leur subtili^e
consiste; and comme else regardent plus l'Oreille que l'Esprit, nous devons
prendre guard de ne pas les confondre avec les veritables Bons Mots. La
pretendue beauty des Equivoques n'est qu'un effet du hazard, qui fait qu'un
meme Mot signify plusieurs chooses; ainsi leur double application est presque
toujours forcee; mais suppose qu'elle fut just, le Bon Mot est imparfait lors
qu'il ne roll que sur l'Expression, and non par sur la Pensee. J'avoue que
l'Equivoque peut etre supportable lors qu'elle offer deux Idees differentes a
notre Esprit, don't l'une est dans le sens propre and l'autre dans le sens
Fignre: Mais pour ce qui est de ces mechantes Points, qui ne sont qu'un vain
son de Mots, les Francois les ont notees d'infamie sous le nom de Turlupinades,
and else doivent etre bannies de la Conversation des gens polis and bien
elevez, n'etant propres qu'a divertir le Vulgaire.

Les Bons Mots and les Reparties fines ont ete plus frequentes parmi les
anciens Grecs que parmi les autres Peuples: Ce que l'on peut attribuer,
premierement a la vivacite de leur Esprit, a leur profond scavoir, and a leur
bonne Education; secondement: Car la pluspart vivant dans des Republipues leur
Esprit n'etoit pas retenu par le respect deu aux Souverains, and a ceux aux
quels ils font part de leur Autorite dans les Etats Monarchiques; ou les diverse
degrez qu'on y a etablis parmi les Hommes, empechent souvent les inferieurs de
dire ce qu'il pensent sur le Ridicule de ceux qui sont au dessus d'eux.

On peut tirer un double avantage des Bons Mots, car outre qu'ils servent a
nous diver^ir, and a ranimer une Conversation languissante, il y en a plusieurs
qui sont remplis de belles Instructions, qu'on peut appliquer aux differents
Etats de la Vie, dans une Fortune public ou privee.

Pour ce qui est des Contes, ils different des Bons Mots en ce qu'ils exposent
leur sujet dans toute son etendue, and ne laissent d'ordinaire rien a deviner
comme font les Bons Mots. Ils instruisent quelquefois en divertissant, mais
leur principal but n'est que de rejouir leurs Auditeurs en rapportant tantot
quelque rencontre d'Accidens plaisans; tantot quelque rencontre d'Accidens
plaisans; tantot quelque naivete ou quelque Ignorance; and quelquefois des
Tours malicieux, don't on s'est servi pour divertir les autres aux depens de
quelqu'un. Dans les Contes il faut user de la meme precaution don't nous avons
parle touchant les Bons Mots, c'est a dire, nous devons avoir soin de ne pas
confondre les bons Contes, avec plusieurs Bouffonneries basses, qui
chatouillent les Oreilles du Peuple par leurs ordures, cachees sous de
mechantes Equivoques.

L'Usage qu'un ho^nete homme doit fair des Bons Mots and des Contes, est de ne
les citer que lors qu'il viennent a propos and naturellement au sujet, and en
presence de ceux qui sont disposez a les entendre and a s'en divertir; sans
rechercher l'occasion de fair le plaisant and l'enjoue, car les gens d'un
discernement delicat connoissent d'abord ces sorts d'Affectations; and selon
le judicieux Mr. de la Bruyere: Il n'est pas ordinaire que celui qui fait rire,
se fasse estimer.

Il faut aussi observer de ne pas introduire les Contes and les Bons Mots par
des louanges etudiees, qui empechent nos Auditeurs d'etre agreablement surpris;
parce que c'est par cette surprise que le plaisir qu'ils excitent est
principalement cause Il faut encore que lors que nous les racontons nous n'en
rions pas les premiers, si nous voulons fair rire la Compagnie; Car il arrive
souvent que ceux qui nous o^t assure qu'ils vont nous fair rire, ne tiennent
pas leurs promesses; and rien n'est si sot ni si ridicule qu'un homme qui rit
seul d'une Pensee froide and usee, pendant que les autres tachent en vain de
sourire pour l'empecher de perdre Contenance. Enfin, il faut eviter
l'inconvenient de dire un Conte ou un Bon Mot plusieurs fois aux memes
Persons, ce qui est un Ridicule qui rend la Conversation des vieilles gens si
desagreable.

Avaunt que de finir cette Introduction, je previendrai une Objection que
quelques Critiques de mauvaise humeur pourront fair contre cet Ouvrage, qui
est, que la pluspart de ces Apophthegmes, Bons Mots, Reparties and Contes sont
deja seus par les Persons bien elevees, and par les gens de Lettres; a quoi
je repons, que quand cela seroit, on espere pourtant qu'ils seront bienaise de
les retrouver ici, de meme qu'on entend avec plaisir un bell Air, quoi qu'on
l'ait deja entendu, pourveu qu'il soit bien chante. Dailleurs ce Recueil est si
grand and si rich, qu'il est difficile, pour ne pas dire impossible qu'un meme
Lecteur sache tout ce qu'il contient, and qu'il ne soit instruit ou diverti par
quelque chose qui aura pour lui la grace de la nouveaute. A quoi je dois
ajouter que mon dessein principal dans ce Recueil est de render la Langue
Francoise facile a apprendre aux Anglois, and l' Angloise aux Etrangers; and
c'est pour cela que je me suis attache avec soin a fair repondre ces deux
Langues l'une a l'autre autant que leurs differens Idiomes l'ont pu permettre.

LES Apophthegmes DES ANCIENS,
C'est a dire

Leurs Sentences, belles Pensees, nobles Sentimens, bons Mots, and Reparties
fines, etc.

I
UN Rich Athenien pria le Philosophe Aristippe de lui dire ce qu'il desiroit
pour instruire son Fills: Aristippe lui demanda mill Drachmes. Comment, dit l'
Athenien, j'acheterois un Esclave de cet Argent la; Achetes en un, lui repondit
Aristippe; and tu en auras deux; lui faisant entendre que son Fills auroit les
defauts d'un Esclave, s'il ne faisoit pas la depense necessaire pour le bien
elever.

2
Le fameux Philosophe Anacharsis etoit Scythe, and un Grec qui n'avoit d'autre
Merit que d'etre ne en Greece, le regardant avec envy, lui reprochoit la
barbary de son Pais: I'avoue, lui repliqua Anacharsis, que mon Pays me fait
honte, mais tu fais honte a ton Pays. Ce mot peut etre fort bien applique a ces
petits Esprits qui mepris^nt les Etrangers seulement parce qu'ils sont
Etrangers, sans considerer que le S^avoir, l'Esprit and le Merit sont de tout
Pays.

3
Lors que Theopompus etoit Roy de Sparte, quelqu'un di^ en sa presence, que
leurs Ville etoit florissante, parce que leurs Rois avoient appris a gouverner,
a quoi le Roy repondit fort sagement, Que cela venoit plutot de c^ que le
Peuple avoit appris a obeir; donnant a entendre que les Villes ou la Populace a
du credit, se font beaucoup de tort par leurs Factions and leur desobeissance,
and qu'alors il est difficile, meme aux meilleurs Magistrates de les bien
gouverner.

4
Denis le vieux, Tyran de Syracuse, grondant son Fil^ de ce qu'il avoit viole
la Chastete de la Femme d'un des Bourgeois, lui demanda entr'autres chooses,
s'il avoit jamais entendu dire, qu'il eut fait de pareilles Actions; Non, lui
dit le Fills, mais c'est parce que vous n'etiez pa^ Fills de Roy: Tu n'en seras
jamais Pere, lui dit Denis, si tu fais pl^s de ce^ Folies. L'evenement justifia
la verite de ce qu'il disoit; car ce jeune Homme ayant succeed a son Pere, il
fut chasse du Royaume de Syracuse a cause de sa mechante Conduite and de sa
mauvaise Vie.

5
Le Roy Antigonus alla voir Antagoras, Homme savant, lequel il trouva dans sa
Tente occupe a appreter des Congres; Croyez vous, lui dit Antigonus, qu'Homere
fit bouillir des Congres lors qu'il ecrivoit les glorieuses Actions
d'Agamemnon? Et pens^z vous, lui dit l'autre, que lors au'Agamemnon faisoit ces
belles Actions, il se mit en p^ine si quelqu'un dans son Camp fais^it bouillir
des: C^ngres ou non?

6
On demanda a Socrate pourquoy il enduroit les Criailleries de sa Femme, and
vous, dit il, Pourquoy souffrez vous le bruit de vos Oyes? Parce, repondit
quelqu'un, qu'elles nous pondent des Oeufs; and bien, dit il, and ma Femme me
fait des Enfans*

7
Apelles le fameux Peintre, fit le Portrait d' Alexandre le Grand a Cheval, and
le lui presenta, mais comme Alexandre ne louoit pas assez un si excellent
Ouvrage, Apelles demanda qu'on fit venir un Cheval en Vie, sequel a la veue du
portrait se mit a trepigner des Pieds, and a hennir, le prenant pour une
r^alite; surquoy Apelles, lui dit, que son Cheval s'entendoit mieux en Peinture
que lui.

8
Le ^ameux Poet Virgile s'etoit si bien acquis les bonnes Graces d' Auguste
par son Savoir and par son Esprit, qu'il en recevoit son Pain ordinaire;
Auguste connoissant la profondeur de son jugement, lui demanda un jour en
particulier, s'il pouvoit deviner ce qu'et oit son Pere? Seigneur, lui
repliqua-t-il, je crois fermement qu'il etoit Boulenger; Boulenger, and
pourquoy cela, lui dit Auguste; parce, dit Virgile, que vous me recompensez
toujours en Pain. Cette Reponse plut si fort a l'Empereur, que dans la suite il
le recompensa en Argent,

9
Alexandre le Grand ayant rempor^e la Victoire sur l'Armee de Darius Roy de
Perse, celui-ci lui demanda la Paix, and lui offrit la moitie de l' Asie, avec
dix mill Talents. Parmenion, un de ses Favoris, charm d'une Proposition si
avantageuse, Seigneur, dit-il a son Maitre, je vous proteste que si j'etois
Alexandre, j'accepterois ces offres avec joye; and moy aussi, lui ^epondit
Alexandre, si j'etois Parmenion.

10
Le meme Alexandre, etant a Delphes, entraina la Pretresse d' Apollo^ dans le
Temple, pour lui fair consulter l'Oracle en un jour deffendu; Elle, s'ecria,
apres lui avoir resist en vain, Alexandre, tu es invincible. Je ne veux point,
dit-il, d'autre Oracle que celui-la.

11
Leon le Bizantin, Auditeur de Platon, and Philosophe fort fameux, etant all
au devant de Philippe Roy de Macedoine qui venoit avec une gross (...)
attaquer sa Patrie, il lui dit, Seigneur, Pourquoy venez vous attaquer notre
Ville? parce que j'en suis amoureux, dit Philippe, en raillant, and que je
viens pour ^n jouir. Ah! Sire, reprit Leon, les Amans ne vont point chez leurs
Maitresses avec des instrumens de Guerre, mais avec des instrumens de Music.
Cette agreeable and subtle reponse plut si sort a Philippe qu'il changea de
resolution, and laissant Bizance en liberte, il passa a d'autres Conquetes.

12
On demandoit a Pythagore, pourquoy il avoit marie sa Fille a un de ses
Ennemis, ce Philosophe ^epondit, que c'estoit, parce qu'il croyoit ne pouvoir
lui fair un plus grand mal que de lui donner une Femme.

13
Diogene voyant un Homme que tiroit de l'Arc, and qui en tiroit fort mal, se
mit devant le but, on luy demanda, pourquoy il s'en mettoit si p^es, c'est,
repondit-il, afin qu'il ne me touch point.

14
Alexandre allant voir Diogene le Cynique, il le trouva dans un champ expoze au
Soleil, and l'abordant suivi de toute sa Cour, il luy dit, je suis le grand
Alexandre; and moy, repondit le Philosophe, je suis Diogene le Cynique:
Alexandre luy fit plusieurs offres, and luy demanda ce qu'il souhaitoit de lui?
rien autre chose dit Diogene, ^i-non que tu te mettes un peu a cote, parce que
tu empeches le Soleil de donner sur moy. Le Roy surpris de ces Manieres,
s'ecria, si je n'etois point Alexandre je voudrois etre Diogene.

15
Pomp^e etant Malade de la Fievre, un de ses Amiss le vint voir, and vit en
entrant dans sa chamber une belle Escalve, don't Pompee etoit amoureux, qui en
sortoit: il demanda a Pompee comment il se portoit, la Fievre vient de me
quitter, lui dit Pompee, je l'ai rencontree qui sortoit de chez vous, lui dit
son Ami.

16
L'Empereur Auguste cherchant des Rai^ons de la grande ressemblance qui etoit
enter lui and un jeune Homme Grec, lui demanda si sa Mere avoit jamais e^e a
Rome? Non, Seigneur, lui repondit le Grec, mais mon Pere y est venu plusieurs
fois.

17
Pisistrate, Tyran d' Athenes, ayant resolu de se remarier, ses Enfans lui
demanderent si c'etoit a cause de quelque mecontentement qu'il eut receu d'eux.
au contraire, leur repondit-il, je suis si content de vous, and je vous trouve
si honnetes Gens, que je veux avoir encore d'autres Enfans qui vous ressemblent.

18
Thales Milesien, l'un des sept Sages de Greece, etant interroge quelle etoit la
chose la plus ancienne? ^epondit que c'etoit Dieu; parce qu'il a toujours e^e;
quelle etoit la chose la plus belle? il dit que c'e^oit le Monde; parce que
c'est l'ouvrage de Dieu? quelle etoit la chose la plus grande? le lieu; parce
qu'il comprend toute autre chose; quelle chose etoit la plus Commode?
l'Esperance; parce qu'apres avoir perdu tous les autres biens, elle rest
toujours; quelle chose etoit la Meilleure? la virtue; parce que sans elle, on ne
peut rien dire, n'y rien fair de bon; quelle chose etoit la plus promte?
l'esprit de l'homme; parce qu'en un moment il parcourt tout l'Univers; quelle
chose etoit la plus forte? la Necessite; parce qu'elle surmonte tous les autres
A^cidens; quelle chose etoit la plus facile? de donner conseil; quelle chose
etoit la plus difficile? de se connoitre soy meme; quelle chose etoit la plus
Sage? le temps, repondit-il, parce qu'il vient a bout de tout.

19
Un certain Soldat fort epouvante, se presenta devant Leonidas, and luy dit,
mon Captain les Ennemis sont fort prez de nous; and bien, nous sommes donc
aussi fort pres d'eux, ^epondit Leonidas. Il y en eut un autre qui luy rapporta
que le nombre des Ennemis etoit si grand, qu'a grand peine pouvoit on voir le
Soleil par la quantite de leurs dards; il luy ^epondit fort agreablement, ne
sera-ce pas un grand plaisir de combatre a l'ombre?

20
Alexandre le grand demandoit a Dionides fameux Corsaire qui luy avoit ete
amene prisonnier, pour quelle raison il avoir ete si hardy que de pirater and
de fair des courses sur ses Mers; il repondit, que c'etoit pour son profit,
and comme Alexandre avoit coutume de fair lui meme, mais parce que je le fais,
ajouta-til, avec une seule Galere, l'on m'appelle Corsaire; mais vous,
Seigneur, qui le faites avec une grande Armee, l'on vous appelle Roy. Cette
reponse hardy plut tant a Alexandre, qu'il lui donna aussi tot la liberte.

21
Dari^s Roy de Perse, envoya de grands Presents a Epaminondas, Chef des
Thebains, pour tacher de le corrompre: Si Darius veut etre Ami des Thebains,
dit ce grand Captain a ceux qui les lui portoient, il n'est pas necessaire
qu'il achete mon amity; and s'il a d'autres sentiments, il n'est pas assez
rich your me ^orrompre. Et ainsi il les renvoya.

22
Corax promit a Tisias de luy enseigner la Rhetorique* and Tisias de son cote
s'engagea de lui en payer le Salaire; mais l'ayant apprise, il ne vouloit point
le satisfaire, c'est pourquoy Corax l'appella en justice. Tisias se fiant sur
la subtilite de sa Rhetorique lui demanda, en quoy consistoit la Rhetorique:
Corax repondit, qu'elle consistoit dans l'art de persuader. donc dit Tisias, si
je persuade les juges, que je ne te dois rien donner, je ne te pay^ray au^une
chose, parce que je gagneray le procez; and si je ne l^s persuade pas, je ^e te
payeray pas non plus, parce que je n'auray pas appris a p^rsuader; ainsi tu
feras mieux d'abandonner l'entreprise. Mais Corax qui etoit plus fin que luy,
reprit l'argument de cette maniere; si tu persuades les juges, tu me dois
payer, parce que tu auras appris la Rhetorique, si tu ne les persuader pas, tu
me dois payer de meme; parce que tu perdras ton procez, ainsi de quelle facon
que ce soit tu dois me satisfaire.

23
Mecene Favori d' Auguste, etant regale par un Chevalier Romain, sur la fin du
repas il commenca a prendre quelque libe^tez avec sa Femme. le Chevalier pou^
lui fair sa Cour, au lieu d'en paroitre jaloux, fit semblant de dormir; mais
voyant qu'un de ses Esclaves alloit emporter quelque chose du Buffe^, Coquin,
lui dit-il, ne vois tu pas que je ne dors que pour Mecene?

24
Il y avoit a Rome, du tems de l'Empereur Auguste, un pauvre Poet Grec qui de
temps en temps, lors que l'Empereur sortoit du Palais, lui presentoit une
epigramme Grecque, mais quoy que l'Empereur la prit, il ne luy donnoit pourtant
jamais rien; au contraire, voulant un jour se moquer de lui, and le congedier,
lors qu'il le vit venir pour presenter ses Verse, l'Empereur lui envoya une
epigramme en Grec de sa composition, and ecrite de sa main; le Poet la receut
avec joye, la leut, and fit voir en la lisant par son Visage and par ses gestes
qu'elle lui plaisoit beaucoup: l'ayant leave, il tira sa bourse, and
s'approchant d' Auguste, il lui donna quelques Sols, lui disant, prenez cet
argent Caesar, je vous le done, non selon votre haute fortune, mais selon mon
petit pouvoir, si j'en avois davantage ma liberalite seroit plus grande; tout
le monde se mit a rire, l'Empereur lui meme plus que les autres, and lui fit
donner cent mill ecus.

25
Le jeune Scipion a l'age de vingt quatre ans etoit deja d'une Sagesse
consommee: and quoy qu'il fit des Exploits d'Armes qui etonnoient ses Ennemis,
il fit encore de plus grandes Conquetes par sa Virtue, que par sa Valeur. Car
lors qu'on lui eut amene la Femme de Mandon, Prince Espagnol, and deux des ses
Nieces d'une excellent Beauty, il les renvoya avec ces belles Paroles:
Qu'outre qu'il etoit de son integrite, and de celle du Peuple Romain de ne rien
violer de saint, leur propre consideration l'obligeoit encore a leur fair
justice: puis que dans leur malheur, else ne s'etoient pas oubliees d'elles,
ni de leur Virtue. Et ayant fait la meme chose a un autre Prince Espagnol, don't
on lui avoit present la Femme, d'une Beauty encore plus accomplie que l'autre,
il la renvoya a son mary avec une grande sum d'Argent qu'on lui offroit pour
sa rancon. Ce Prince charm de cette Grace publia dans le Pais, qu'il etoit
venu en Espagne un jeune Romain semblable aux Di^ux, qui se rendoit Maitre de
tout, moins par la force de ses A^mes que par celle de sa Virtue and de son
humeur bienfaisante.

26
Le meme Seipion etant accuse devant le Peuple Romain par Q. Petilius, d'avoir
distrait une party des depouilles du Roy Antiochus a son profit, parut au jour
marque par son Accusateur. Mais ce grand Homme, admirable par sa virtue and par
sa valeur, au lieu de se justifier de ce qu'on l'accusoit, fire qu'il etoit de
son innocence, parlant au Peuple assemble pour le condamner, dit d'un air hardi
and intrepide, and d'un ton de vainqueur. C'est a tell jour qu'aujourd buy, que
j'ay pris Carthage, que j'ay defait Hannibal, and vaincu les Ca^thaginois,
allons au Capitole en remercier les Dieux. Le Peuple surpris de cette
Magnanimite, quitta l'accusateur, suivit Scipion, and ce jour lui fut mill
fois plus glorieux, que celui auquel il triompha du Roy Siphax, and des
Carthaginois.

27
Platon invita un jour a souper Diogene le Cynique avec quelques Siciliens de
ses Amiss, and fit orner ^a sale du Banquet pour fair honneur a ces Etrangers.
Diogene qui ne pouvoit souffrir la proprete de Platon, commenta a fouler aux
Pieds les Tapis and les autres meubles, and dit fort brutalement: je foul aux
Pieds l'orgueil de Platon: and Platon lui repondit sagement, il est vray,
Diogene, mais vous le foulez par un plus grand orgueil.

28
Cineas etoit en grande estime aupres de Phyrrus Roy d' Epire qui se servoit de
lui dans toutes ses Asfaires importantes, and avouoit qu'il avoit gagne plus de
Villes par les charms de son Eloquence, qu'il n'en avoit pris lui meme par la
force de ses Arms. Comme il vit que le Roy avoit turn toutes ses Pensees
verse l'expedition d' Italy, il lui dit un jour en particulier: Sire, l^s
Romans passant pour un Peuple Guerrier, and commandent a plusieurs Nations qui
le sont aussi, mais suppose, que nous les vainquions, quel fruit retirerons
nous de cette Victoire? La chose parle d'elle meme, dit Phyrrus, car alors,
ajouta-t-il, aucune Ville n'osera nous refister and nous serons bien-tot
Maitres de toute l' Italy. Et quand nous aurons l' Italy, repliqua Cineas,
que ferons nous alors? La Sicile, dit-il, est p^es and nous tend les Bras: Isle
rich and peuplee qui sera facilement ^eduite il y a quelque appearance, dit
Cineas; mais apre^ avoir subjugu^ la Sicile, cela mettra t-il fin a la Guerre?
Si Dieu, dit Phyrrus, nous done ce bon succez, ce ne seront que les Preludes
de plus grandes chooses; car comment s'empecher de passer en Afrique and d'aller
a Carthage, qui sera bien tot a notre commandment? Et etant venus a bout de
tout ceci vous m'avouerez aisement qu'aucun de ceux qui nous bravent
maintenant, n'osera nous resister. Cela est vray, dit C^neas; c^r il est assez
croyable qu'avec de tells Forces nous pourrons recouvrer la Macedoine, and
fair la loy a toute la Greece. Mais apres nous etre ainsi rendus Maitres de
tout, que ^erons nous alors? Alors, cher Cineas, lui dit Phyrrus, d'un air gay,
nous vivrons a notr^ aise, and nous nous donnerons du bon tems. Cineas l'ayant
fait venir la, and a quoi tient-il, repliqua-t-il, que nous ne le fassions des
a present puis que cela d^pend de nous sans tant de sang and de peine?

29
Chilon disoit il faut etre jeune en sa vieillesse, and vieux en sa jeunesse;
c'est-a dire, qu'un vieillard doit etre sans chagrin, and qu'un jeune homme
doit etre sage.

30
Artaxerces, dans un combat, ayant ete oblige de prendre la fuite apres que son
bagage and ses Provisions eurent ete pillees, il se trouva si fort press de la
faim qu'il fut reduit a manger un morceau de pain d'orge and quelques figues
seches. Else lui parurent de si bon gout qu'il s'ecria: O Dieux! de combien de
plaisirs l'abondance m'a-t-elle prive jusqu' a ce moment.

31
Ceux de Cyrene prierent Platon de leur dresser des Loix; je ne puis, leur
dit-il, prescrire des Loix a ceux que l'abondance and la prosperity rendent
incapables d'obeir.

32
Archidamus, assiegeant Corinthe, vit sortir plusieurs Lievres de dessous ses
murs: aussi-tot se tournant verse ses Soldats: Voilaa, dit-il, Compagnons, les
Ennemis que nous avons a combattre, nous devons plus craindre leurs pieds que
leurs bras.

33
Jules Caesar qui abordoit au rivage d' Affrique tomba en descendant du
vaisseau: cette chute qui sembloit de mauvais augure pour les desseins qu'il
avoit sur ce Pais, fut par son adresse changee en un presage heureux; il
embrassa ^a Terre en tombant, and il s'ecria; c'est a present, Affrique, que je
te tiens.

34
Timotheus, qui etoit estime heureux dans ses entreprises, fut par quelques
envieux represente avec des filets en main, ou les Villes venoient se jetter
pendant qu'il dormoit; Timotheus, sans en temoigner le moindre chagrin, dit a
ceux qui lui montroient cette Peinture: Si je prens de si belles Villes en
dormant, que ferai je quand je serai eveille?

35
Sylla qui depouilloit les Temples pour payer ses Sold^ts, fut averti que comme
on alloit pillar celui d' Apollon a Delphes, on y avoit ouy le son de quelques
Instrumens, Tant mieux, repondit-il, puisqu' Apollon joue de sa Lyre, c'est une
marque qu'il est de belle humeur, and qu'il n'est point irrite contre nous.

36
Les Capitaines d' Alexandre se plaignirent a la journee d' Arbelles, que ses
Soldats avoient l'insolence de vouloir qu'on leur promit tout le butin:
Courage, leur dit-il, c'est un presage de la victoire: quand on parle avec
cette asseurance la, on n'a pas envy de fuir.

37
Diogene vint a Cheronee lorsque l'armee de Philippe y ^toit: il fut pris par
^es Soldats, and conduit au Roi qui ne le connoissant pas, lui dit que sans
doubt il e: oit un Espion, qui venoit pour l'observer: Tu as raison, repondit
Diogene, ^ar je suis venu en ce lieu pour observer ta folly, qui fait que non
content du Royaume de Macedoine, tu (...), au peril de ta vie, and de tes
Etats, a usurper les Provinces de tes voisins. Le Roy admirant la hardiesse de
cet homme commanda qu'on le mit en liberte.

38
Jules Caesar passant dans un petit bourg, quelques uns de ses amiss qui
remarquoient la tranquilite des habitans, lui demanderent, s'il croyoit qu'il y
eut la de grandes brigues pour le gouvernement: J'aim^rois mieux, repondit
Caesar, etre le premier dans ce village, que d'etre le second a Rome.

39
La Mere de Darius prisonniere d' Alexandre, lui faisant ses excuses de ce
qu'en une visit don't il l'honora, elle avoit par meprise rendu a Ephestion,
qui l'accompagnoi^, les respects dus a ce Roy: Alexandre, lui dit en la
rasseurant, ^e vous troublez point, Madame, vous ne vous etes pas trompee,
celui que vous avez salve est un autre Alexandre.

40
Chilon un des sept Sages de la Greece, pour nous fair entendre qu'il falloit
etre modere and prudent dans ses affections, disoit: Il faut aimer un ami comme
le pouvant hair quelque jour, and il ne faut hair person, qu'^n vue qu'on
peut ensuite nouer amity avec lui.

41
Quelqu' un consolant le Roi Philippe de la mort d'. Hypparchus, lui disoit que
cet ami etant deja fort age, la mort ne l'avoit point attaque avaunt le temps.
Il est vray, repondit Philippe, que la mort est venue a temps pour lui, mais
puisque je ne l'avois pas encore honnore des Biens faits dignes de notre
amity, sa mort, a mon egard, est prematuree.

42
Un Criminel condamne a la Mort, sur le cautionnement d'un de ses Amiss qui
demeura en sa place sortit de Prison pour aller regler quelques Affairs, and
revint aussi-tot qu'il les e^t achevees: Denis l^ Tyran surpris de l'asseurance
de l'un, and de la fidelite de l'autre, pardonna au Criminel: En
reconnoissance, dit-il, de ma grace, j^ vous conjure de me recevoir pour
troisieme en votre amity.

43
Memnon Captain de Darius, dans la Guerre qu'il avoit contre Alexandre,
entendant un de ses Soldats vomir insolemment beaucoup d'injures contre ce
grand Ennemi, il lui donna un grand coup de Hallebarde; en lui disant, je te
pay afin que tu combattes contre Alexandre, non pas afin que tu l'injuries.

44
Le Medecin de Phyrrus s'etant offert a Fabricius general des Romans,
d'empoisonner son Maitre, Fabricius renvoya la lettre de ce Traitre a Phyrrus
avec ces Mots; Prince, songez a l'avenir a fair un meilleur choix de vos Amiss,
and de vos Ennemis. En reconnoislance de ce bienfait, Phyrrus lui renvoya tous
les Prisonniers: Mais Fabricius ne les recut qu'a la charge de lui en render
auta^t des siens, and lui manda: Ne crois pas, Phyrrus, que je t'aye decouvert
cette Trahison, par une consideration particuliere de ta Person, mais parce
que les Romans fuyent les laches Artifices, and ne veulent tri^mpher qu'a
force ouverte.

45
Diogene interroge quelle Beat mordoit le plus dangere^sement, repondit: Si
vous parlez des Betes farouches, c'est le medisant; si des animaux domestiques,
c'est le flateur.

46
Antigonus en^endant un Poet flateur l'appeller Fills de Jupiter: Mon Valet de
chamber, dit-il en souriant, qui vuide ma chaise percee scait trop bien que je
ne suis qu'un Homme.

47
Comme les Rois sont environnez de Flateurs, and que les seuls Chevaux ne
gardent point avec eux de mesures, Carneades disoit: que les Princes
n'apprennent rien comme il faut qu'a bien manier un Cheval.

48
Sesostris Roy d' Egypt, ayant fait tirer son char d^ T^iomphe par quatre Rois
Captifs, au lieu de Che^aux, un d'eux tenoit l^ veue attachee surles Roues de
devant qui e^oient pres de lui, ce que Sesostris remarquant, il lui demanda ce
qu'il trouvoit digne d'admiration dans ce mouvement. A quoi le Roy Captif
re^ondit: je contemple dans ces Roues l'inconstance des chooses humaines,
d'autant que la party la plus basse de la roue est tout d'un coup portee en
haut, and devi^nt la plus elevee; and la plus haute est portee en bas avec
autant de vitesse; Sesostris ayant meurement reflechi la des^us, mit ces Rois
en liberte.

49
On reprocha au Tiran Hieron qu'il avoit l'haleine puante, il reprit sa Femme
de ne l'en avoir jamais averti; Je croyois, repondit-elle, qu^ tous les Hommes
eussent l'haleine de meme odeur que vous.

50
On demandoit a Charillus pourquoi a Lacedemone les Filles marchoient le visage
decouvert, veu que les Femmes etoient voilees, c'est repondit il: parce que les
unes cherchent un mari, and que les autres ont peur de le perdre par la
jalousie and par le divorce.

51
Diogene voyant sur la port d'un nouveau marie ees Mots ecrits, loin d'ici le
Mal, il dit, Apres la Mort le Medecin. Le meme Philosophe apperceut un jour des
Femmes pendues a un Olivier: Plut a Dieu, s'ecria-t-il, que tous les autres
Arbres portassent un semblable fruit!

52
Paulus Aemilius repudia une Femme qui paroissoit avoir tous les avantages
capables de se fair aimer. Ce divorce etonnoit bien des Gens, mais il leur dit
en montrant son Soulier: Vous voyez que ce Soulier est propre, qu'il est bien
sait: mais vous ne voyez pas ou il bless.

53
Diogene dit a un jeune e^ourdi qui jettoit des Pierres verse un Gibet: Courage,
je vois bien qu'enfin tu toucheras au but.

54
C. Popilius qui tout ignorant qu'il etoit s'erigeoit en Jurisconsulte, etant
un jour appelle en ^emoignage, ^e^pondit qu'il ne savoit rien: Vous pensez peut
etre, lui dit Ciceron, qu'on vous Interroge sur des questions de Droit?

55
Melanthus Parasite d' Alexa^dre, Roy de Pher^s, interroge comment son Maitre
etoit Mort, repondit plaisamment: Il est mort d'un coup d'Epee qui lui perca la
cuisse and mon ventre en meme tems.

56
Platon disoit, que les Esperances sont les songs des Persons eveillees.

57
De deux hommes qui recherchoient la Fille de Th^mistocles, l'un sot, mais
rich: l'autre pauvre, mais sage and honnete homme, il p^it ce dernier pour son
gendre, and repondit a ceux qui s'en etonnoient: J'aime mieux un Homme sans
richesses, que des richesses sans Homme.

58
Alexandre le grand prit en G^erre un Indien, si adroi^ a tirer de l'Ar^, qu'il
faisoit passer ses Fleches par un anneau place a une certain distance, il lui
commanda d'en fair l'essai devant lui, and sur le refus qu'^n fit l' Indien,
il ordonna qu'on le fit mourir. Ceux qui le conduisoient au supplice,
s'informant du sujet de son refus, l' Indien repondit: Comme j'ai ete long t^ms
sans exercer mon art, j'ai mieux aim souffrir la Mort, que de m'exposer a
perdre ma Reputation, en manquant devant Alexandre. Ce qui etant rapporte a cet
Empereur, non seulement il* le fit mettre en liberte, mais meme il lui fit de
grands Presents, admirant son courage and sa fermete.

59
Les Favoris de l'Empereur Trajan le voyant recevoir tout le monde fort
familierement, lui remontroient qu'il oublioit la grandeur de sa Majeste: je
veux, reponditil, que mon Peuple trouve en moy un Empereur, tell que je
souhaiterois en avoir un si j'etois Homme prive.

60
Agathocles etant parvenu de bas lieu a la dignite Royalle, vouloit qu'on le
servit a Table en Vaisselle de Terre, and quand on lui en demandoit la cause:
je veu^, repondit-il, que le souvenir de l'Origine que je tire d'un Potier de
Terre, rabatte l'orgueil, don't le vain appareil de la Royaute pourroit me
surprendre.

61
Alexandre etant assis sur le Tribunal pour juger les Causes criminelles,
tenoit toujours une O^eille bouchee pendant que l'Accusateur plaidoit, and
comme on lui en demandoit la raison* je reserve, dit-il, l'autre Or^ille
entiere pour entendre l'Accuse.

62
Le Roy Philippe assoupi, ayant mal entendu la cause de Machetes, il le
condamna contre les Loix; Machetes s'ecria aussi-tot qu'il en appelloit. Le Roy
en colere lui demanda a quel Juge? j'en appelle, ^epondit-il, de Philippe
endormi, a Philippe eveille. Ce Mot fit rentrer Philippe en lui meme; il fit
derechef plaider la cause, and voyant en effet son erreur, il ne cassa pas a la
verite son arrest, mais il paya lui meme de ses deniers la sum a laquelle il
avoit condamne Machetes.

63
Deux Criminels s'accusoient l'un l'autre devant ce meme Roy: Ce Prince apres
les avoir ecoutez patiemment, dit: je condamne celui ci a sortir promptement de
mon Royaume, and l'autre a courir apres*

64
Dans une cause ou Aristide etoit juge, une des Parties rapporta plusieurs
injures que ce meme Aristide avoit receu de sa party adverse: Passez cela, dit
Aristide, venez au fait: je ne suis pas ici mon juge, je ne suis que le votre.

65
Marc Aurele dit a quelques Persons qui vouloient empecher son Fills de
pleurer la Mort de son Precepteur: Souffrez que mon. Fills soit Homme, avaunt que
d'etre Empereur.

66
Denis voyant que son Fills avoit amasse une grande quantite de Vases d'Or and
d'Argent des dons qu'il lui avoit fait, il lui dit, je ne connois point en toi
une Ame Royale, puis que tu as neglige de te fair des amiss par la distribution
de ces Richesses.

67
Le meme Denis demanda a Diogene quel Cuivre il prendroit pour se fair une
Statue: Prenez, lui repondit-il, celui des Statues d'Harmodius and
d'Aristogiton. C'etoient deux fameux tueurs de Tyrans a qui on avoit dress des
Statues.

68
Un ancien Soldat ayant un procez a soutenir, pria l'Empereur Auguste de le
venir secourir de son credit. Ce Prince lui donna un de ceux qui
l'accompagnoient pour avoir soin de son afsaire; la dessus le Soldat fut assez
ose pour lui dire: Seigneur, je n'en ai pas use de la sort a votre egard:
quand vous etiez en danger dans la Bataille d'Actium, moi-meme, sans ^chercher
de Substitut, j'ay combatu pour vous.

69
Le Poet Simonide demandant a Themistocle quelque chose de contraire aux Loix,
il le renvoya avec ce Mot: si dans tes Poemes tu faisois des Verse contre la
mesure, passerois tu pour un bon Poet? Et si je faisois des chooses contraires
a la disposition des Loix, devroit on m'estimer un bon Prince?

70
Les Ambassadeurs que les Atheniens avoit envoye verse Philippe, etant retournez
a Athenes, louoient ce Prince de sa beauty, de son Eloquence, and de sa force a
boire beaucoup: Ces louanges, ^epondit Demo^thene, sont fort peu dignes d'un
Roy; le premier avantage est propre aux Femmes, le second aux Rhetoriciens, and
le troisieme aux ^ponges.

71
Bion interroge s'il falloit epouser une Femme, repondit. si vous en prenez une
laid, vous epouserez un supplice; si vous en prenez une belle vous aurez une
Femme public.

72
Hipparchia eperduement amoureuse du Philosophe Crates, le rechercha en
marriage, sans qui ni les Parens, ni ce Philosophe meme, pussent la detourner de
sa poursuite. Mais, lui dit Crates, connoissez vous bien ce que vous aimez? je
ne veux rien v^us cacher, voila l'Epoux, dit-il otant son manteau; puis jettant
son sac and son baton; voila, ajouta-t-il en montrant sa bosse, le Doiiaire de
ma Femme: Voyez fi vous en etes content, and si vous pouvez vous accommoder de
cette facon de Vie. Elle accepta toutes ces conditions la, and il l'epousa.

73
Les Hebreux disent que pour prendre une Femme, il faut descendre un degree; and
que pour fair un ami il faut en monter un; parce qu'il faut que l'un nous
protege, and que l'autre obeisse a son mari.

74
Un Lache and mal a droit Luitteur s'etant fait Medecin, Diogene lui-dit: He
quoi! vous avez donc envy de coucher par Terre ceux qui vous ont renverse?

75
' Alcibiade coupa la queue a son Chien, qui etoit d'une beauty and d'un prix
extraordinaire, and comme le Peuple qui voyoit ce Chien marcher en cet etat
dans les Rues, s'etonnoit d^ cette Bizarrerie, il dit, je l'ai fait afin que le
Peuple s'entretenant de cette Bagatelle, ne s'arrete point a contr^ller mes
autres Actions plus importantes.

76
Smicythus accusa Nicanor de parler mal de Philippe. Ce Prince, qui avoit
quelque estime pour Nicanor le fit venir, and ayant appris qu'il etoit indigne
de ce que le Roy ne songeoit point a soulager son extreme indigence, il lui fit
distribuer quelque sum. Peu de tems apres Smicythus rapportant a Philippe que
Nicanor publioit par tout ses bontez: He bien, lui dit-il, vous voyez que nous
sommes Maitres de notre Reputation, and que nous pouvons changer toutes les
Calomnies en (...).

77
Comme on demandoit a Zenon si les Sages ne devoient point aimer: si les Sages
n'aimoient point, repondit-il, il n'y auroit rien au monde de plus malheureux
que les belles, else ne seroient aimees que des sots.

78
Agesilaus pour jouer avec ses enfans marchoit a califourchons sur un baton; un
de ses Amiss le trouvant en cet etat temoigna de la surprise; mais ce Roi, lui
dit: je te pry de ne rien dire a person de ce que tu vois, jusques a ce que
tu ayes des Enfans.

79
Philippe Roi de Macedoine ayant resolu de prendre une Citadelle, les espions
lui rapporterent que cela ne se pouvoit pas, parce qu'elle etoit inaccessible.
Le chemin, demanda-t-il, est il si difficile qu'on n'y puisse fair entrer un
mulet charge d'Or and d'Argent? and comme ils lui ^epondirent que non, elle
n'est done pas imprenable, repliquat-il.

80
La Veille que Darius disposa ses troops au combat, Alexandre dormoit d'un si
profond somm^il, qu'il dura encore plusieurs heures (...) le leve du Soliel;
ses gens, effrayez de l'armee Ennemie qui s'approchoit l'eveillerent, and comme
ils s'etonnoient de sa tranquillite: ne soyez pas surpris, leur dit-il, si je
dors si paisiblement: Darius m' a delivre de beaucoup de soucis, puisqu'en
ramassant aujourdhui toutes ses forces en un corpse, il a done a la valeur le
moyen de decider, en un combat, de toute notre fortune.

81
Denis Tyran de Syracuse, ayant appris qu'un de ses suj^ts avoit cache dans
Terre un tresor, il lui commanda de le lui apporter. Le Siracusain ne lui en
donna qu'une party and en ayant retenu l'autre secrettement, il s'en alla dans
une autre ville ou il vecut plus liberalement qu'il n'avoit fait. Denis l'ayant
appris, lui rendit le rest de son treso^: A present, dit-t-il, qu'il scait
bien user des richesses, il merit de les posseder.

82
Philippe Roy de Macedoine ^ant en otage a T^ebes, Philon le Thebain le rec^ut
en sa Maison, and l^i fit de grandes Amitiez. Ce Prince voulut quelque tems ap
e^ par ses Presens reconnoitre ses bontez, and voyant que le genereux Philon
les refusoit obstinement: Ah! cher Philon, lui dit-il, ne me derobez, pas
aujourd hui la gloire que j'ai toujours jusques-ici conservee precieusement, de
ne voir ^ersonne au monde qui me surmonte ^n matier^ de Bien faits.

83
Taxille Roy des Indes vint au devant d' Alexandre, and lui parla en ces
Terms: je t'appelle au Combat, non pa^ des Arms mais des Bienfaits; si tu
m'es inferieur, tu en recevras de moy, si au contraire tu es le plus puissant,
tu m'honoreras de tes faveurs: j'accepte ce noble defi; repondit, Alexandre en
l'embrassant, nous verrons en Bienfaits qui de nous l'Emportera; ainsi bien
loin de le depouiller de son Royaume, il en augmenta l'etendue.

84
L'Empereur Titus se souvenant une fois en soupant, que pendant ce jour la il
n'avoit fait du bien a Person: Mes Amiss, dit-il, j'ay perdu cette journee.

85
Jules Caesar repudia Pompeia sa Femme, a cause que sa reputation n'etoit
pasfort honnete, and qu'on la soup^onnoit d'avoir commerce avec Clodius; comme
on accusoit celui-ci de Crime, Caesar appelle pour deposer contre lui, dit,
qu'il n'avoit pas reconnu qu'il eut fait au^un mal avec sa Femme; pourquoy donc
l'avez vous repudiee, lui dit on, parce que, ^epondit-il, il faut que l'Epouse
de Caesar, vive avec tant de Modesty, qu'elle soit meme horse des atteintes de
la Calomnie.

86
Attalus sur un faux bruit que son Friar Eumenes etoit decede, s'empara de
l'Empire, and meme epousa sa veuve: quelque tems apres, comme il apprit qu'
Eumenes revenoit en son Royaume, il quitta la couronne, and sans autre equipage
que c^lui d'un homme prive, ^'en vint au devant de lui. Eumenes pour tout
reproach, se contenta de lui dire a voix basse: Une autre fois, mon Friar, vous
ne vous haterez pas d'epouser ma Femme, avaunt que vous ne m'ayez veu enterrer.

87
Comme enter les Papiers de Sertorius, Pompee eut trouve plusieurs Lettres
considerables de Rome, il les brula toutes sans les vouloir lire; il faut,
dit-il, donner moyen de se repentir, a ceux qui ont failli en me desobligeant.

88
Les Soldats d' Antigonus, fachez de ce qu'il les avoit fait camper dans un
lieu fort incommode, parloient de lui en des terms fort insolens pres d'une
Tente ou ils ne croyoient pas qu'il fut: Antigonus qui les entendit, se
contenta de lever le rideau de sa Tente avec un Baton, and de leur dire; si
vous n'allez pas plus loin d'ici medire de moy, je vous en ferai repentir.

89
Le Philosophe Athenodorus ayant, sous pretexte de sa vieillesse, obtenu de
Caesar Auguste la permission de se retirer chez soy, pour avis important, il lui
dit en prenant conge de lui. Quand la colere vous surprendra, Seigneur,
souvenez vous de ne rien fair de ce qu'elle vous suggerera, qu'apres avoir
prononce les vingt quatre Lettres de l'Alphabet.

90
Auguste qui avoit etabli une Loy, de la maniere de juger and de punir ceux
qu'on accusoit d'Adultere, n'eut pas plutot oui qu'un jeune homme avoit commis
le meme crime avec Julia fille de cet Empereur, qu'il se jetta sur lui, and le
frappa tout furieux; alors le jeune Homme s'e^ria: Caesar, vous avez fait une
Loy Auguste a ce Mot, reconnoissant son emportement, se retint, and ressentit
tant de deplaisir, qu'il ne voulut rien manger de tout ce jour la.

91
Diogene disoit, qu'un homme pour devenir parfait ^voit besoin de fideles Amiss,
ou de *grands Ennemis; parce que les uns par leurs bons avis, and les autres
par leurs reproaches piquans, lui faisoient sentir ses defauts.

92
Alexandre le grand etant enter dans la Boutique d' Apelles and parlant, en
mauvais Terms de quelques Tableaux qui y etoient exposez, Apelles lui dit
franchement: Sire, ^ant que vous ne parliez point de notre Art, chacun n'avoit
ici pour votre Majeste que de l'admiration and du Respect: Mais aussi-tot que
vous avez voulu juger de nos Ouvrages, mes Apprentifs memes, qui broyent mes
Couleurs, n'ont pu s'empecher de rire.

93
Le meme Prince, ayant receu un coup de Fleche dans un Combat, dit a ceux qui
l'environnoient: Chacun m'appelle immortel, and Fills de Jupiter: qu'en dites
vous? cette bl^ssure ne done t-elle pas le dementi a tous ces Flatteurs l^? ce
sang qui coule n'est point d'une autre couleur que celui de mes sujets, and il
m'avertit que je ne suis qu'un Homme.

94
L'Empereur Auguste, sentant que sa Mort approchoit, dit s'addressant a ^es
Amiss qui etoient autour de son Li^: He bien, mes Amiss, que vous en semble,
n'ai-je pas pendant ma vi^, assez bien joue mon Personnage sur le Theater du
Monde? Et comme chacun avoua que jamais vie ne pouvoit etre plus illustre, and
mieux conduite que la sienne, il ajouta ce Mot, qu'on avoit cou^ume de dire au
Peuple apres la Comedy: Adieu done, mes Amiss, frappez des Mains.

95
Quelqu'un vint dire au Philosophe Socrate, que les Atheniens l'avoient
condamne a la Mort: Il y a long tems, dit-il, que la Nature les a condamnez a
la meme p^ine aussi bien que moy.

96
Lorsque le Roy Philippe entra avec son Armee dans les Terres du Peloponese,
quelqu'un dit a Damidas, que si les Lacedemoniens ne rentroient en grace avec
lui, ils auroient beaucoup a souffrir: He Poltron, ^epondit-il, que peuvent
souffrir ceux qui ne craignent point la Mort?

97
On dit a Anacharsis, que le Navire qui le portoit n'avoit que quatre doigts
d'epaisseur: Nous ne sommes done, dit-il, eloignez de la Mort que de quatre
doigts.

98
Stratonicus etant interroge quelle sort de Vaisseaux etoient les plus seurs,
il ^epondit: les plus seurs sont ceux qu'on a tire de la Mer en terre ferme.

99
L'Empereur Tibere changeoit rarement les Officiers, les Gouverneurs, and les
Magistrates de son Empire, and quand on lui en demandoit la raison, il repondit:
quand les Mouches sont saoules, else ne piquent plus si fort qu'auparavant.

100
Un Peintre montrant un mauvais Tableau, se vantoit de l'avoir acheve en fort
peu de tems: tu n'as que fair, dit Apelles, de nous en avertir, ton Tableau le
dit assez.

101
Melanthus entendant le Philosophe Gorgias exhorter publiquement les Grecs a la
Concord: Cet homme a bonne Grace, dit-il, de vouloir persuader a to^s ces
Grecs la Paix and l'Union, qu'il ne sauroit etablir chez soy enter luimeme, sa
Femme and sa Servante.

102
Demetrius Phalereus avoit coutume d'exhorter le Roy Ptolomee de ramasser des
Livres qui traitassent de la Politic Civil and Militaire, Parce que,
disoit-il, les Rois trouvent dans ces Livres des chooses don't leurs Amiss
n'oseroient leur parler. Alphonse Roy d' Aragon disoit a ce sujet: Les Livres
sont les Conseillers qui me plaisent d'avantage: la crainte ni l'esperance ne
les empechent point de me dire ce que je dois fair.

103
Denis le Tyran avoit fait de grandes promesses a un excellent Musicien qui
avoit chante devantlui, and comme le Musicien vid qu'elles n'etoient suivies
d'aucun effet, il se plaignit au Tyran, qui lui repondit: Dequoi te plains tu,
mon Ami? je t'ai pay de la meme sort que tu m'as servi: tu m'as chatouille
l'oreille par le plaisir de la Music, and moi je t'ai fait gouter l^ plaisir
des belles Esperances; ainsi nous voila quittes.

104
Un Ancien disoit, que les grands faisoient tout leur possible, afin de perdre
l'usage des ^ieds and des Mains, parc^ qu'ils se font chausser, habiller, and
porter par les autres.

105
Diogene ecrivit sur le pied d'une Statue d'Or que la courtisane Phryne avoit
presen^ee a Venus dans le Temple de Delphes, ces Mots: l'Incontinence des Grecs
a dress cette Statue.

106
L'Empereur Adrien demandoit a Epictete pourquoi on representoit Venus toute
nue: C'est, repondit-il, parce qu'elle depouille de tous les biens ceux qui
recherchent trop ses Plaisirs.

107
Vespasien qui se sentoit mourir, disoit en se moquant de la sotte coutume des
Payens de ce tems-la, qui mettoient les Empereurs, apres leur Mort, au nombre
des Dieux: je sens bien que je deviens Dieu.

108
Portia, Femme de Brutus, se fit une grande pla^e avec un Couteau, la veille
que Caesar devoit etre assassi^e par son mari, and dit a ceux qui lui
demandoient comment ce malheur etoit arrive: je l'ai fait a dessein d'essayer
avec quel^e constance je pourrai souffrir la Mort que je me prepare, si le
dessein des Conjurez vient a manquer.

109
Epictete Esclave d' Epaphrodite, Of^icier de Neron, ayant un jour receu de lui
un grand coup sur la jambe, lui dit froidement: Prenez guard, je vous pry de
ne me pas casser la jambe. Mais ce cruel redoubla son coup d'une tell force
qu'il lui brisa l'Os: He bien, lui dit alors Epictete en souriant, ne vous
l'avois je pas dit que vous (...) a me casser la jambe?

110
Antipater, apres avoir vaincu le Roy Agis, demanda pour seurete de sa conquete
cinquante Enfans Lacedemoniens en otage. Etheocles, qui alors etoit Ephore,
repondit, Qu'il ne lui donneroit point d'Enfans, de crainte que ^'etant plus
soumis a la Discipline de Sparte, ils ne contractassent de vicieuses
Inclinations: Mais qu'ils etoient pret^ de leur donner le double de Vieillards,
and de Femmes.

111
Une Femme Jonienne faisoit parade d'un ouvrage de Main fort rich and bien
travaille: Mais une Lacedem^nienne faisant paroitre quatre Ensans qu'elle avoit
fort sagement elevez: Voila, dit elle, les Ouvrages don't une Dame Vertueuse
doit tirer la veritable gloire.

112
L'Empereur Theodose donnant ses Enfans au savant Arsenius, pour les instruire,
leur dit: Mes Enfans, si vous avez soin d'ennoblir vos ames de la virtue and de
la Science, je vous laisserai avec plaisir ma Couronne: Mais si vous le
negligez, j'aimerois mieux vous voir per^re l'Empire, que de le hazarder a la
conduite de gens incapables; il vaut mieux que vous en souffriez la perte, que
de le ruiner.

113
Philippe apprit que son Fills Alexandre se plaignoit de ce qu'il engendroit
plusieurs Enfans de diverses Femmes: la dessus il lui parla ainsi; Puis que tu
vois, Alexandre, que tu as plusieurs Concurrens a l'Empire, fais en sort que
tu deviennes si honnete and si brave, que tu puisses obtenir le Royaume par ton
merit, plutot que par ma faveur.

114
Apre^ la defaite du Grand Pompee, les Troops qui suivoient Scipion en Afrique
ayant p^is la fuite, Caton qui voyoit Caesar Victorieux se tua de depit: Caesar
appren^nt sa Mort s'ecria: Ah! Caton, je port envy a ta Mort, puis que tu
m'as envy la gloire de te donner la Vie.

115
Socrate, apres avoir long tems souffert la Criaillerie de sa Femme, sortit de
sa Maison, and s'assit devant sa port pour se delivrer de son importunite;
cette femme indignee de voir que tous ses cris n'etoient point capables
d'ebranler sa tranquillite, lui versa sur la tete un Pot de Chamber. C^ux qui
apperceurent-cette Action se rioient du pauvre Socrate; mais ce Philosophe
souriant aussi, leur dit: je me doutois bien qu'apres un si grand Tonnerre nous
aurions de la Pluye.

116
Zeuxis dispu^ant avec Parrhasius de l'excellence de leurs Tableaux, peignit
des Raisins si fort au Naturel, que les Oiseaux venoient les bequeter.
Parrhasius de son cote exposa en vue un rideau si bien-fait, que Zeuxis enfle
du succez de son ouvrage, lui dit impatiemment, que ce n'etoit pas la le tems
de cacher son Tableau, and voulut tirer le rideau lui meme, mais appercevant
son Erreur: Ah! lui dit il, je te quitte; je n'ai trompe que les Oiseaux, and
tu as trompe le Peintre meme.

117
Comme on accusoit Pericles de depenser les Denie^ publics en Batimens, en
Decorations publiques, and (...) offrandes qu'il faisoit aux Dieux: voulez vous
permettre, dit-il au Peuple, que je fasse graver sur toutes ces chooses-(...)
mon nom en la place du votre, j'en payerai la depense d^ mes propres Deniers. A
ce Mot, Ie Peuple pique d'honneur, refusa d'accepter sa Proposition, and lui
permit de continuer ses magnificences au nom du Peuple.

118
Quelques Romans trouvant etrange que Caesar demeurat Dictateur perpetuel, en
quoi il sembloit affecter la Royaute, vu que Sylla avoit quitte cette
qualitela, Caesar leur repondit: Ne vous etonnez pas d^ c^la, Sylla ne
savoit'pas bien lire, il ne pouvoit pas dicter long tems.

119
Denis, Tyran de Sicile, fit oter de dessus la Statue de Jupiter Olympien, un
manteau d'Or massif, qui valoit plus de cinquante mill ecus, and au lieu de
celui-la, il lui en donna un de Lain, disant: Ce manteau est trop froid en
Hyver, and trop lourd en Ete, il faut avoir soin de Jupiter, celui de Lain l^i
sera bien plus commode.

120
Ce meme Roy fit dans Epidaure arracher une Barbe d'Or qui etoit au menton d'
Esculape: Il n'est pas, dit-il, de la bienseance ni du bon sens, de representer
Esculape fills avec une longue barbe, pendant qu'on voit aupres de lu^ Apollo^
son Pere, sans un seul poil au m^nton.

121
Un Chevalier Romain, qui charge de plus de deux cens mill ecus de Dettes ne
laissoit pas de mener une Vie delicieuse and tranquille, etant decede,
l'Empereur Auguste commanda qu'on lui achetat son Lit, (...) on vint a vendre
ses Meubles, difant pour raison: Il faut que ce soit le meilleur Lit du Monde,
puisque celui qui etoit accable de tant de dettes a pu si long tems y reposer a
son aise.

122
Alexandre le grand envoya cent Talents en present a Phocion. Celui-ci demanda
a ceux qui les apportoient pourquoi Alexandre adre^soit ce present a lui seul,
enter tant de Persons qui etoient a Athenes. C'est, lui ^epondirent-ils,
parce que les Atheniens t'estiment etre le plus Sage d'entreux: Que ne me
laisse-t-il done, repliqua-t-il, conserver cette qualite, and pourquoi veut il
qu'en acceptant ses presens je cesse d'etre Sage?

123
Caton d Utique, voyant que Caesar avoit rempli le Temple de Castor, and la
place public, de gens armez contre lui: O que Caesar, dit-il, est un grand
Poltron, d'armer tant de Soldats contre un seul homme!

124
Un Officier d' Artaxerxes lui faisoit une injuste d^mande. Le Roy etant
inform^ qu'il n'^etoit port a la fair que parce qu'on lui avoit promis une
grande sum d'Argent, se fit apporter une pareille sum, and la lui presenta
en lui disant: Prens cet Argent l^, mon ami, ce don ne sauroit m'appauvrir;
mais si je t'accordois ta demand, je deviendrois tres injuste.

125
Aristippe avoit fait acheter une Perd^ix cinquante Dragmes, and quelqu'un
condamnant une tell depense en un Philosophe, Aristippe lui dit, ne
l'acheteriez vous pas si elle ne coutoit qu'une Obole? il lui repondit, tres
volontiers: Et a moi, repartit Aristippe, cinquante Dragmes ne sont pas plus
qu'une Obole.

126
Le meme Aristippe demandoit au Roy De^ys une grace pour un de ses Amiss, and ne
pouvant l'obtenir, il se jetta a ses pieds, and les embrassa pour le prier en
la maniere qu'il aimoit a etre pry. Quelqu'un lui reprochant cette action,
comme indigne d'un Sage, il ^epondit plaisamment: La fault ne m'en doit pas
^tre imputee, mais au Roy Denis, qui met ses Oreilles a ses Pieds.

127
Les Ambassadeurs de la Greece vo^ant le Roy Philippe dormir pendant le jour,
murmuroient de ce qu'il tardoit trop a leur donner Audience: Ne vous etonnez
pas, Messieurs, leur dit Parmenion, s'il dort tandis que vous veillez, car
pendant que vous dormiez ils veilloit. Il vouloit leur fair entendre que son
Maitre avoit pris ses avantages sur les Grecs, pendant que les Divisions les
empechoient de songer a leurs Af^aires.

128
Mecenas voyant Auguste dans le senate pret de condamner a la Mort un grand
nombre de Perso^nes, and ne pouvant s'approcher as^ez pres, pour l'avertir de
moderer sa severite, lui jetta un billet, a l'ouverture duquel Auguste trouv^
ces Paroles hardies: L^ve-toi Bourreau, and sors de la; Auguste qui connoissoit
son affection ne s'en offensa pas, mais au contraire estima cette excessive
Liberte.

129
Denis le Tyran demandoit a Aristippe, d'ou vient que les Philosophes venoient
fair la cour aux Riches, and que les Riches, n'alloient point visiter les
Philosophes? C'est, ^epondit-il, que les Philosophes connoissent leurs Besoins,
and que les Riches ne sentent point les leurs.

130
Une Person, declamant contre les Philosophes, disoit que quelques mepris
qu'ils montrassent pour les Richesses, on ne laissoit pas de les voir toujours
aux Ports des Riches. Je ne m'en etonne pas, ^epondit Aristippe, les Medecins
sont assidus a visiter leurs Malades dans leurs Maisons; toutefois Person
n'aimeroit mieux etre malade que Medecin.

131
Ce meme Aristippe s'etant embarque and ayant reconnu que le Vaisseau
appartenoit a des Pirates, se mit a conter son Argent, and le laissa tomber a
dessein dans la Mer, faisant croire par de feints gemissemens qu'il lui etoit
ech^ppe des Mains sans y penser. Il evita par ce tour adroit le danger ou sa
Vie ecoit exposee, cequi lui fit dire a voix basse en le jettant: Il vaut mieux
que je te perde, que si tu etois cause de ma perte.

132
Les Samnites chargez de richesses qu'ils venoient offrir a Marius Curious leur
vainqueur, le trouverent occupe a fair cuire des Navets pour son diner. Il
refusa leurs presens, and leur dit pour raison: Un homme qui se content d'une
si maigre chere, n'a pas grand besoin de votre Or, ni de votre Argent.

133
Simonide interroge ce qui etoit le plus a souhaiter, les richesses ou la
sagesse? Je suis, repondit-il, fort en doubt la dessus: je vois b^aucoup de
sages venir fair la cour aux Riches:

134
Le Roy Pyrrhus voyant son Fills qui traitoit ses sujets avec trop de fierte and
de rigueur, le reprit en ces terms: Je voi bien, mon Fills, a votre maniere
arrogante d'agir, que vous ignorez, que la dignite de Roy est une servitude
honnorable.

135
Philippe demandoit au Roy Antigonus son P^re, en presence de plusieurs
Persons, quand il vouloit decamper: Ce Roy surpris de l'indiscretion de fon
Fills, qui alloit decouvrir un dessein qu'il vouloit tenir secret: quoi donc,
lui dit-il, craignez vous d'etre le seul qui n'entendiez pas le ^on de la
Trompett^, qui vous en doit avertir?

136
Comme on faisoit voir a Diogene les voeux attachez en un Temple des faux
Dieux, par ceux qui etoient echappez aux perils de la Guerre, de la Mer, and de
la Malady, ce Philosophe raillant leur* Superstition, repondit: Il y en auroit
un bien plus grand nombre, si ceux qui sont peris en ces dangers la avoient
envoye leurs presens, ^u lieu de ceux qui en ont ete delivrez.

137
Un Homme qui avoit contribue a render le Roy Philippe Maitre de la Ville d'
Olynthe, don't il etoit Citoyen, se plaignit a lui que ceux de Lacedemone
l'appelloient Traitre: Ne vous etonnez pas de cela, dit ce Roy: les
Lacedemoniens de leur Naturel sont rustres and grossiers: ils appellent toutes
chooses par leur nom.

138
Quelqu'un demandoit a Diogene le Cynique, le moyen de se bien venger de son
Ennemi: C'est, repondit-il, de te render illustre par ta virtue; tu te
procureras ain^i un grand avantage, and un grand deplaisir a ton Ennemi.

139
Caton l'aine, considerant l'empresseme^t de (...) Romans, de peu de merit, a
se fair eriger des Statues* j'aime bien mieux, disoit-il, qu'on demand
pourquoi on n'a pas eleve des Statues a Cato^, que si on demandoit pourquoi on
lui en a dress.

140
Le Roy Pyrrhus, apre^ a^oir gagne contre les Romans deux Batailles ou il
avoit ^erdu beaucoup de Monde, dit a ses amiss: Si je gagne encore de meme une
(...) Bataille nous sommes perdus sans ressource.

141
Epaminondas voyant l'appareil somptueux d'un Festin qui se faisoit en un
sacrifice ou on l'avoit invite, il se retira, disant: On m'appelle a un
Sacrifice, and je me trouve a une Debauche.

142
Le Captain Chabrias disoit, qu'une Armee de Cerfs conduite par un Lion est
plus formidable qu'une Armee de Lions commandee par un Cerf.

143
Un Boiteux allant a la Guerre, quelques-uns qui l^ voyoient marcher, se
rioient de ^on dessein: Ne vou^ etonnez pas, leur dit-il, je ne vais pas a la
Guerre a dessein de fuir, mais pour fair tete aux Ennemis, and mourir dans le
meme rang ou l'on m'aura place.

144
Le Roy Philippe voyant son Fills Alexandre extremement souple and agile,
l'excitoit a combattre a la course dans les jeux Olympiques: Je le ferois
volontiers, lui repondit-il, si ceux qui me disputeroient le prix etoient des
Rois.

145
Dans la Guerre que Marius fit aux Teutons, ses Soldats se plaignant d'une
extreme soif, il leur montra un Fleuve qui etoit fort proche du Camp des
Ennemis: C'est la, leur dit-il, qu'il vous faut aller eteindre votr^ soif.

146
Marcus Brutus, qu'on vouloit detourner d'aller a^ Combat, dit: Quel mal
peut-il m'en arriver? je ne puis que vaincre ou mourir. Et su^ ce que quelques
uns lui conseilloient apres sa defaite de se sauver par la fuite: Il se faut,
dit-il, sauver avec les Mains, and non pas ave^ les Pieds.

147
Le Roy Agis disoit: Il ne faut jamais demander combien, mais ou sont les
Ennemis.

148
Auguste entendant dire qu' Alexandre, apres avoir conquis la plus grande
party de la Terre, etoit en peine de s^avoir a quoi il pourroit occuper la
rest de ses jours fut surpris de ce sentiment la: He quoi, dit-il, Alexandre
ignoroit done que bien gouverner un Empire conquis, est un Emploi plus
considerable, que de fair de nouvelles Conquetes?

149
Les commencemens du Regne d' Auguste furent pernicieux a l'Empire Romain, a
cause de ses cruautez, and des desordres qu'il causa; mais comme la fin de son
Regne toute differente, rendit l'Empire plus florissant que jamais, on dit de
lui: Qu'il eut ete a souhaiter, ou qu'il ne fut jamais venu au monde, ou qu'il
n'en fut jamais sorti.

150
Scilerus, qui avoit plusieurs Enfans, etant sur le point de mourir, leur donna
a chacun un faisseau de fleches and leur commanda de le rompre. Apres que tous
eurent fait reponse que la chose etoit impossible, il ti^a les Fleches, and les
rompit l'une apres l'autre, and prit de la occasion de leur dire: Ceci vous
doit apprendre, mes Enfans, que si vous demeurez bien unis ensemble, vous serez
toujours invincibles, and redoutables a vos Ennemis: Que si au contraire vous
admettez chez vous la divifion, vous de viendrez foibles and faciles a vaincre.

151
Python Rhetoricien de Bysance, voulut en une Sedition exhorter le Peuple de
cette Ville a la Paix, and comme il etoit extraordinairement gros, le Peuple se
mit a rire des qu'il le vit paroitre. Mais cet adroit Orateur prenant de leur
risee le sujet de son Exorde: Vous riez, leur dit-il, de ma grosseur, j'ay une
Femme encore bien plus gross que moy; cependant quand nous sommes d'accord, un
seul Lit nous suffit, mais quand la division se met enter nous, t^ute la maison
est trop petite pour nous contenir.

152
Diogene le Cynique, qui voyoit des Magistrates conduire au supplice un homme
qui avoit derobe quelque petit vase: Voici, s'ecria-t-il aussi-tot, de grands
voleurs qui menent un petit Larron a la Potence.

153
La Mere d' Alexandre le grand, Femme de Philippe, apprenant que son Fills se
disoit Fills de Jupiter, and se faisoit adorer comme un Dieu, en railla finement
la Vanite dans ces Mots: Je vous conjure, lui manda-t-elle de ne me plus
brouiller avec Junon.

154
Un mechant homme des Principaux d' Athenes, demandant a un Lacedemonien, qui
etoit le plus homme de bien de Lacedemone, celui-ci lui repondit for^
adroitement, mais d'une maniere bien aigre, C'est celui qui te ressemble le
moins.

155
Timon le Misanthrope ayant ete invite a diner par un homme qui affectoit de
l'imiter dans la haine qu'il avoit pour tout le Genre humain: Voici, dit cet
homme, un Repas bien agreeable. Oui, lui ^epondit Timon, si tu n'y etois pas.

156
Diogene ayant ete chasse par ceux de Sinope, lieu de sa naissance, leur manda:
Vous m'avez banni de votre Ville, and moi je vous relegue dans vos Maisons.
Vous demeurez a Sinope, and je demeure a Athenes. Je m'entretiens tous les
jours avec les plus honnetes gens de la Greece, pendant que vous etes en
mauvaise compagnie.

157
Le Philosophe Bias etant dans un Vaisseau durant une Tempete avec des
mechantes gens qui invoquoien^ les Dieux, Taisez vous, leur dit-il, afin qu'ils
oublient, s'il se peut, que vous etes i^i.

158
Des Amiss de Socrate temoignant etre irritez de ce que quelqu'un qu'il avoit
salve ne lui avoit pas rendu son salut: Pourquoi se facher, leur dit Socrate,
de ce que cet homme n'est pas si civil que moy?

159
Lors qu'on vint annoncer au meme Socrate qu'il avoit ete condamne a la Mort
par les Atheniens: Ils le sont par la Nature, repondit-il. Mais ils t'ont
condamne injustement, lui dit sa Femme: Voudroits tu que ce fut avec justice?
lui dit Socrate.

160
Le Poet Philoxene ayant ete condamne par Denis a travailler aux Carrieres,
pour avoir blame des Verse que ce Tyran avoit faits, Denis l'en rappella, pour
lui montrer de nouveaux Verse de sa facon, dans l'esperance de les lui fair
approuver, souhaitant avec Passion d'etre estime bon Poet. Mais Philoxene, ne
voulant point lover ses nouveaux Verse qui etoient mechans, Qu'on me remene aux
Carrieres, dit-il. Le Tyran neantmoins fut pour cette fois d'assez bonne humeur
pour ne pas s'en facher.

162
Diogene, voyant le jeune Denis reduit a fair la fonction de maitre d'Ecole,
se mit a soupirer devant lui. Ne t'afflige point, dit Denis a Diogene, de ma
mauvaise Fortune, c'est un effet de l'inconstance des chooses humaines. Je ne
suis pas afflige de ce que tu penses, lui repondit Diogene, mais de te voir
plus heureux que tu n'etois and que tu ne merits.

162
Le Roy Philippe disputant de la beau^e d'un Air avec un habile Musicien: Ce
seroit grand Dommage, Seigneur, lui dit le Musicien, que vous eussiez ete assez
malheureux pour savoir cela mieux que moy. Ce bon mot apprend aux hommes elevez
de ne pas affecter d'exceller dans les connoissances de cette nature, parce que
cela ne convient qu'a ceux qui en font Profession.

163
Une Dame d' Athenes demandant a une Dame Lacedemonienne, par maniere de
reproach, ce qu'elle avoit apporte en Dot a son mari: La Chastete, lui
reponditelle.

164
Un Athenien reprochant a un Lacedemonien, que ceux d' Athenes les avoient
souvent repoussez de devant leurs murailles: Nous ne saurions vous fair un
pareil reproach, lui dit le Lacedemonien. C'etoit une maniere delicate de lui
dire, que jamais les Atheniens n'avoient ose se presenter devant Lacedemone.

164
Un autre Athenien disoit que les Lacedemoniens se corrompoient dans les Pais
etrangers: Il est vray, repondit un Lacedemonien, mais person ne se corrompt
a Lacedemone.

166
Phocion reprenoit aigrement les Atheniens, au lieu que l'Orateur Demosthene
les flatoit par ses Harangues. Ce Peuple te tuera, s'il enter en fureur, dit
Demosthene a Phocion; Et toi, s'il enter en son bon sens, lui repliqua Phocion.

167
Alexandre etant a l'article de la Mort, ses Domestiques, apres avoir receu ses
derniers Ordres, lui demanderent ou etoient ses Tresors? Vous les trouverez,
leur dit-il, dans la Bourse de mes Amiss.

168
Durant la Guerre de Caesar and de Pompee, un Chevalier Romain se sauva du Camp
de Caesar, and y laissa son Cheval, pour mieux couvrir sa fuite, and se jetter
dans le Camp de Pompee; Ciceron voyant que le Parti de Caesar etoit le p^us
fort, and que ce Chevalier avoit fait un mechant choix en se (...) du cote du
plus foible, dit fort plaisammant: Ce Chevalier a eu plus de soin de son
Cheval, que de lui-meme.

169
Metellus, Fills d'une Mere qui avoit ete fort galante, voulant railler Ciceron
sur la bassesse de sa naissance, lui demanda qui etoit son Pere? Ciceron, au
lieu de de repondre just a la Question l'eluda adroitement, en lui disant: Ta
Mere a fait en sort qu'il te seroit bien plus difficile de dire qui etoit le
tien.

170
Un chef d'Esclaves revoltez fut pris les Arms a la Main, avec plusieurs de
son Parti, par le General d'une Armee Roman; Ce General lui demanda quel
traitement il croyoit que lui and ses Compagnons avoient merit: Celui que
meritent de braves Gens qui s'estiment dignes de la liberte, lui ^epondit-il.
Cette reponse plut si fort a ce General, qu'il leur pardonna and les employa
dans ses Troops.

171
Des Juges Romans, devant juger Clodius, demanderent des Gardes pour opiner
librement, disoient-ils, touchant son Crime: Cependant ils le renvoyerent
absous, quoi qu'il eut merit d'etre condamne. Ce qui fit dire a Catulus,
parlant a ces memes Juges: Est-ce que vous aviez peur qu'on ne vous otat
l'Argent que Clodius vous avoit done?

172
Pyrrhus le Roy des Epirotes, ayant sceu que quelques uns de ses Soldats
avoient fort mal parle de lui dans un festin, les fit venir, and lui demanda si
ce qu'on lui avoit rapporte etoit veritable? Alors le plus hardy d'entr'eux,
voyant la chose decouverte, repondit subtilement, Seigneur, si le vin ne nous
eut pas manque nous en aurions bien dit davantage. Cette plaisante excuse, and
cet av^u veritable, fit rire le Roy, and appaisa sa colere.

173
Perillus ayant demand a Alexandre le grand, son ami, quelque Argent pour
marier une de ses filles, Alexandre lui fit donner cinquante talens; Perillus
lui dit, que dix suffisoient, je croy, repliqua Alexandre, que ce seroit assez
pour Perillus, mais ce seroit trop peu pour Alexandre.

174
Marcus Terentius Varus vouloit que les conviez aux Banquets egalassent le
nombre des Muses, ou des Graces; c'est a dire, qu'ils ne fussent point plus de
neuf, ni moins de trois. faisant donc un jour un festin, un bouffon y survint
sans etre pry, le Maitre d'Hotel le voyant supernumeraire, le vouloit chasser;
mais le bouffon luy dit, tu t'es trompe mon amy, compte une second fois, and
commence par moy, tu verras que je ne suis point de trop.

175
Zenon le fantasque faisant commerce de Marchandises, apprit un jour que son
Vaisseau sur lequel il avoit charge tout son bien, apres avoir ete battu d'une
grande tempete etoit enfin peri a l'entree du Port, mais bien loin de se
chagriner a cette triste nouvelle, il-dit, avec un visage serain, je te
remercie Destin de ce que tu me retires du Commerce, qui est un Art bas and
penible and que tu me ramenes a la Philosophy qui est un exercice noble and
salutaire, ajoutant, qu'il avoit plutot trouve le Port dans le naufrage, que le
naufrage dans le Port.

176
Hermon fut si avare, selon le temoignage de Lucile, que revant la nuit qu'il
avoit depense quelque Argent, il en eut tant de douleur, qu'il s'^trangla.
Dinarques Philon fut aussi tellement avare, qu'il quitta le dessein de se
pendre pour ne pas depenser deux liards a acheter une cord, cherchant la Mort
a meilleur march; and Hemocrate devint si fou par son extreme Avarice, qu'en
mourant, il se constitua luy meme heritier de tous ses biens. d'ou le
Philosophe Bias prit sujet de dire, Que l'Avarice est la Mere de la folly, and
de la Malice des Hommes.

177
Ceux de Numance, gens fort belliquex, ayant ete defaits and mis en fuite par
Scipion, les viellards, leur reprochoient avec aig^eur leur lachete, en leur
disant, Ne sont ce pas ces memes brebis Romans que nous avons vaincues, and
battues tant de fois? Oui, ^epondit un jeuno homme, ce sont a la verite les
memes brebis; mais ^lles ont change de Pasteur.

178
Ciceron disoit que de la meme maniere que les hirondelles paroissent l'E^e,
and disparoissent en Hyver, de meme les faux Amiss se presentent dans la bonne
fortune and s'eloignent dans la mauvaise.

179
On demandoit a Aristote ce que gagnoient les Menteurs a debiter leurs
mensonges? il repondit, qu'il ne leur en revenoit autre chose que de n'etre
point crus, quand meme ils disoient la verite.

180
Le Tyran Hieron ayant demand a Simonide ce que c'etoit que Dieu, ce
Philosophe prit un jour de delay pour y repondre; puis deux, ensuite il en
demanda quatre, and ainsi differoit toujours. Hieron a la fin luy demanda
pourquoy il ne repondoit pas, and qu'il le remettoit toujours a un autre temps?
parce que, repondit Simonides, plus j'y pense, plus je m'y perds, and trouve la
chose obscure.

181
Socrate conseilloit aux jeunes gens de se regarder dans un miroir, afin que
s'ils etoient beaux and bienfaits, ils prissent guard de ne rien fair qui fut
indigne de leur beauty; and qu'au contraire, s'ils e^oient laids and difformes
ils tachassent d'effacer les defauts du Corpse, par les vertus de l'Esprit.

182
Un Homme qui ne s'etoit jamais marie vouloit persuader au Philosophe Epictete
de prendre une Femme, lui faisant voir, par plusieurs raisons que le Marriage
etoit bien-seant and necessaire aux Philosophes: Si cela est, donne-moy done
une de tes Filles, lui repondit Epictete.

183
Servius Geminus allant un jour render visit a Lucius Mallius, Peintre tres
habile, and voyant ses Enfans qui etoient fort Laids, il ne se peut empecher de
lui dire Qu'il s'etonnoit de ce qu'il faisoit de si beaux Portraits, and des
Enfans si laids. Mallius lui repondit agreablement, n'en soyez point surpris,
je fais les Portraits pendant le jour and les Enfans pendant la Nuit.

184
Le Roy Antigonus se retirant de la presence des Ennemis, qui pour lors etoient
plus puissans que luy, quelques uns prirent sa retraite pour une fuite; mais il
leur dit qu'il ne fuyoit point and qu'il alloit seulement ou etoit son profit
and sou utilite.

185
Ce meme Prince interroge de quelle maniere on pouvoit vaincre ses Ennemis,
repondit que c'^toit, par la force and par la ruse; and que si la peau du Lion
n'etoit pas suffisante, il faloit y coudre celle du Renard.

186
Un jeune homme, fort grand parleur, voulant convenir du prix avec Isocrate
pour etre enseigne; Isocrate lui demanda le double de ce que lui donnoient ses
autres Ecoliers: Et la raison, dit-il, est qu'il faut que je t'enseigne deux
Sciences, l'une de te taire, and l'autre de parler.

187
Le Philosophe Anacreon ayant receu de Polycrate Roy de Samos un Present de dix
mill ecus, il entra dans de si grandes apprehensions d'etre vole, qu'il fut
trois jours and trois nuits sans dormir; ce qui l'obligea a rapporter le
Present a ce Prince, lui disant qu'il preferoit son repos aux inquietudes que
les Richesses trainent apres else.

188
On demandoit a Chrisippe pourquo^ il ne se donnoit pas au gouvernemeur de la
Republique? Parceque, repondit-il, si je fais mal je deplairai a Dieu, and si
je fais bien je deplairai aux hommes; mais Sidonius son Disciple retourna
finement cet Argument and lui dit, vous devez au contraire par toutes sorts de
Raisons entrer dans le Ministere, car si vous faites bien vous plairez a Dieu,
and s^ vous faites mal vous plairez au^ Hommes.

189
Solon etant en Compagnie, and se taisant, selon sa Coutume, il y eut un jeune
Etourdi qui lui dit qu'il se taisoit par^e qu'il etoit sou; Solon, sans
s'emouvoir, lui repondit sagement, qu'il ne s'etoit jamais trouve de Fou qui
put se taire.

190
Cambyse Roy fort severe and rigoureux, fit ecorcher tout vif un Juge, quoy que
son Ami, parce qu'il se lais^oit corrompre par Presens, and qu'il
n'administroit pas la Justice selon les Loix and l'Equite: Et ayant fait
ensuite couvrir le Tribunal de sa Peau, il y fit asseoir son Fills, pour
succeder a la charge de son Pere.

191
Ir^ne se transporte a grands frais en Epidaure, void Esculape dans son Temple,
and le consulte sur tous ses maux. D'abord elle se plaint, Qu'elle est less,
and recreue de fatigue; and le Dieu prononce, que cela lui arrive par la
longueur du Chemin qu'elle vient de fair. Elle dit, qu'elle est le soir sans
appetit. L'Oracle lui ordonne, de diner peu. Elle lui demand, pourquoy elle
devient pesante, and quel remede? L'Oracle repond, qu'elle doit se lever de bon
matin and prendre de l'exercice. Elle lui declare, que le Vin lui est nuisible;
and l'Oracle lui dit, de boire de l'eau. Qu'elle a des indigestions, and il
ajoute, qu'elle fasse Diete. Ma veue s'affoiblit, dit Irene, Prenez done des
Lunettes, dit Esculape. Je deviens foible, continue-t-elle, and je ne suis plus
si saine que j'ai ete. C'est, dit le Dieu, que vous vieillissez. Mais quel
moyen de guerir de cette Langueur? Le plus court, Irene, C'est de mourir, comme
ont fait votre mere, and votre ayeule. Est ce-la, repondit Irene, toute cette
Science que les hommes publient, and qui vous fait reverer de toute la Terre?
que m'apprenez vous de rare and de mysterieux? and ne savois-je pas tous ces
remedes que vous m'enseignez? Que n'en usiez vous done, repondit le Dieu, sans
venir me chercher de si loin, and abbreger vos jours par un si long voyage?

La Matrone d'Ephese.
192
ILy avoit une Dame a Ephese en si grande reputation de Chastete, que les
Femmes memes des Pais Voisins venoient en foul la voir par curiosite. Cette
prude ayant perdu son mary ne se contenta pas, selon la coutume, d'assister au
convoy toute echevelee, and de se battre la Poitrine devant le Peuple, elle
voulut suivre le defunt jusqu'au Monument, and apres l'avoir mis dans un
Sepulcre, a la maniere des Grecs, guard le Corpse, and pleure Nuit and jour
aupres de lui, se desolant de la sort, and resolve a se laisser mourir de
Faim, les Parens ni les Amiss ne l'en purent detourne^: Les Magistrates rebutez
les derniers l'abandonne^ent: Et une Femme si illustre, pleuree de tous comme
une Person morte passoit deja le cinquieme jour sans manger. Une Servante
fidelle and affectionnee etoit touiours aupres de la miserable, meloit ses
larmes aux siennes, and renouvelloit la lumiere d'une Lamp toutes les fois
qu'elle venoit a s'eteindre. On ne pa^loit donc d'autre chose dans la Ville,
and tout le Monde demeuroit d'accord que c'etoit le plus grand Exemple d'Amour
and de Chastete qu'on eut jamais veu.

Il arriva qu'en ce meme tems le Gouverneur de la Province fit attacher en
croix quelques voleurs tout proche de cette meme Cave, ou la vertueuse Dame se
desoloit sur le Corpse de son cher Epoux. La Nuit suivante, comme un Soldat qui
gardoit les Croix de peur que les Corpse ne fussent enlevez, eut apperceu de la
lumiere dans le Monument, and entendu les soupirs and les Plaintes d'une
Person affligee, pa^ un esprit de curiosite commun a tous les hommes, il
voulut savoir ce que ce pouvoit etre, and ce qu'on y faisoit. Il descend donc
au Sepulcre, and surp^is de la veue d'une fort belle Femme, il demeure d'abord
epouvante, comme si c'eut ete un Fantome: Puis ayant veu un Corpse mort etendu
devant ses yeux, considere ses larmes, un visage dechire avec les ongles, and
toutes les autres marquis de desolation, il s'imagina a la fin ce que c'etoit;
qu'une paure affligee s'abandonnoit aux regrets, and ne pouvoit souffrir sans
desespoir la Mort de celui qu'elle avoit perdu. Un Moment apres il apporte son
petit Souper au Monument, and commence a l'exhorter de ne perseverer pas
davantage dans une douleur inutile and des gemissemens superflus; que la sortie
de ce Monde etoit la meme pour tous les Hommes; qu'il falloit tous aller en
meme lieu; and les autres raisons don't on a de coutume de guerir les Esprits
les plus Malades. Mais elle, irrit^e encore par une consolation si peu
attendue, redouble son devil: se dechire l'estomac avec plus de violence, and
s'arrache les Cheveux qu'elle jette sur ce miserable Corpse. Le Soldat ne se
rebute point pour cela, and avec les memes exhortations il essaye de lui fair
prendre quelque nourriture, jusqu'a ce que la Suivante gagnee sans doubt par
l'odeur du Vin, autant que par son discourse, tendit la main a celui qui les
invitoit si obligeamment, and comme elle eut repris quelque vigueur par le
boire and le manger, elle vint a combattre elle meme l'opiniatrete de sa
Maitresse. Et que vous servira, dit-elle, de vous laisser mouri^ de faim, de
vous ensevelir toute vive, and de render a la Destinee un A me qu'elle ne
redemande pas encore.

Pensez vous que des Morts les insensibles Cendres,
Vous demandent des Pleurs and des Regrets si tendres?
Quoi! vous voulez ressusciter un Mort contre l'ordre de la Nature? croyez moi,
defaites vous d'une foiblesse don't les seules Femmes sont capables and jouissez
des avantages de la lumiere tant qu'il vous sera permis. Ce Corpse que vous
voyez devant vous, montre assez le prix de la Vie, and vous avertit que vous
devez mieux la menager. Person n'ecoute a regret quand on le press de manger
en de pareilles occasions. Ainsi cette Femme extenuee par une si longue
astinence, laissa vaincre son obstination, and se remplit de viande avec la
meme avidite que la suivante, qui s'etoit rendue auparavant. Au rest vous
savez que les Tentations viennent d'ord^naire apres le repas: Avec les memes
Arms qu'employa le Soldat pour combattre son desespoir, avec les memes il
attaqua sa Pudicite, and la jeune Veuve ne le trouvant ni desagreable, ni sans
esprit, la suivante n'oubliant rien pour lui render de bons Offices, and disant
ensuite a sa Maitresse.

Songez, songez a vous: voyez vo^re interet,
Et ne combattez pas un Amor qui vous plait.
Qui m'arrete davantage? la bonne Dame eut la meme Abstinence en ce qui regard
cette Party de son Corpse, and le Soldat pleinement satisfait vint a bout de
l'un and de l'autre. Ils demeurerent ensemble* non seulement la premiere nuit
de leur jouissance, mais encore le lendemain, and le jour d'apres, les ports
si bien ferm^es, que quiconque fut venu au monument, soit connu ou inconnu,
auroit cru, sans doubt, que la plus honnete Femme du Monde avoit expi^e sur le
Corpse de son Mari.

Le Soldat charm de la beauty de sa Dame, and du secret de sa bonne Fortune,
achetoit tout ce que son peu de bien lui pouvoit permettre, and a peine la nui^
etoit elle venue, qu'il l'apportoit dans le monument. Cependant les Parens d'un
de ces Pendus, comme ils s'apperceurent qu'il n`y avoit plus de Guard,
enl^verent le Corpse une nuit, and lui rendirent les derniers devoirs. Mais le
pauvre Soldat qui s'etoit laisse abuser pour demeurer trop long tems attache a
son plaisir, voyant le lendemain une de ces Croix sans cadavre, alla trouv^r sa
Maitresse dans la crainte du supplice, and lui conta tout ce qui etoit arrive:
quant au rest, il etoit resolu de ne point attendre sa condamnation, and que
se faisant justice lui meme, il alloit punir sa negligence de sa propre main;
Pour toute grace, qu'il la supplioit d'avoir soin de sa Sepulture and de la lui
preparer en ce meme tombeau fatal a son Epoux and a son Amant. Cette Femme
aussi charitable que Prude, and aux Dieux ne plaise, dit-elle, que je voye en
meme tems les funerailles de deux persons qui me sont si cheres; j'aime mieux
pendre le Mort, que de fair perir le vivant. Selon ce beau discourse elle tire
le Corpse de la Biere, lui defigure le visage, and le done au Soldat pour
l'attacher a cette croix ou il n'y avoit plus rien. Le Soldat seut profiter du
conseil ingenieux d'une Femme si avisee: and le lendemain tout le Peuple
s'etonna de quelle maniere le Voleur mort avoit pu retourner au Gibet.

Conte tire de l'Ane d'Or d'Apulee.
193
UN Ouvrier qui gagnoit sa vie a travailler au^ Forges, avoit une Femme fort
belle, mais qui n'etoit pas des plus vertueuses. Ce pauvre malheureux etant un
jour sorti de bon matin, selon sa coutume, donna occasion a un jeune Gaillard
de se glisser dans sa Maison, ou etant aux prises avec sa femme, le Mari
survint contre leur attente, mais trouvant la port fermee, il ne se douta
guere de ce qui s'etoit pass en son absence* La dessus il loua en soi meme la
chastete de sa Femme, and avec un siflet l'avertit de son arrivec Elle, qui en
pareilles occasions ne manquoit pas de Politic, se degagea bient^t des bras
de son Amant, and sans s'emouvoir le cacha dans un vieux cuvier vuide, qui
etoit dans un coin de la chamber: cela fait, ouvrant la port avec fury, elle
parla a son mari de cette maniere.

Est-ce ainsi, sot lendore, que tu pourvois aux besoins de ta famille? Et que
pendant que tu vas de la sort les bras croisez il faut que je travaille jour
and nuit pour supleer aux besoins ou nous sommes reduits par ta paresse? Oh!
combien plus heureuse que moy, est ma Voisine Daphne, qui n'a autre chose a
fair qu'a se divertir avec ses Amans.

A quoi le mari tout craintif repliqua: and quel grand mal y a-t-il, m'Amie?
quoi que mon Maitre n'ait point d'ouvrage pour moy d'aujourd'huy, je ne laisse
pas d'avoir pourveu a ton Diner. Vois-tu ce vieux cuvier, qui ne sert a rien
qu'a embarrasser la chamber? je viens, ma poupone, de le vendre pour quinze
Sols and l'homme qui l'a ache^e, va venir ici tout presentement pour
l'emporter. Allons, laisse la un peu ton ouvrage, and aid moi a le nettoyer,
car je ne voudrois pas pour quoi que ce soit, le lui livrer avaunt qn'il soit
net and en bon etat.

La dessus la Femme se mit a rire de bon appetit, etc l'occasion lui
fournissant un Stratageme, elle s'ecria Misericorde! voila un rare Marchand que
mon mari* qui a seu vendre pour quinze Sols, une chose don't j'ai eu un
demi-ecu, quoy que je ne sois qu'une femme qui ne sors jamais du logis.

Le mari ravi du march de sa Femme, lui demanda d'abord qui etoit le sot qui
en avoit tant offert; quelque Benet comme vous pouvez croire, reprit la Femme,
and pour preuve de cela, c'est qu'il vient de s'y fourrer pour voir le profit
qu'il lui en reviendra. A ces Mo^s, le Galand, voyant qu'il etoit tems qu'il
jouat son Roll mit la tete dehors, and dit: Bonne Femme, voulez vous que je
vous parle franchement, ce cuvier est fort vieux and pl^in de fentes, and vous
ne deve^ pas en Conscience en avoir ce que je vous en ai offert: Ensuite se
tournant du cote du mari, il lui dit finement, and vous, mon ami, qui que vous
soyez, je vous pry, donnez moy un peu une Chandelle, afin que je racle les
ordures, and que je voye s'il fait pour moy, avaunt que j'en pay l'Argent, a
moins que vous ne croyez que je l'aye derobe. La dessus notre adroit Vulcain,
ne songeant guere a ce qu'on meditoit contre lui, alla vite chercher une
Chandelle, and s'etant approach de lui, il lui dit: Mon ami, ote toi un peu de
la, je te pry, and laisse moy voir ce que j'y puis fair, car il n'est que
trop just que tu l'ayes aussi net qu'il se pourra: ensuite otant son habit,
and donnant la Chandelle a tenir a sa Femme, il entra dans le Cuvier, and se
mit a travailler de toute sa force sur la lie seche, pendant que le ruse Galand
en faisoit autant sur sa Femme, qu'il avoit couchee sur le cuvier.

Cependant la bonne Femme, baissant la tete pour eclairer son mari, amusoit le
pauvre homme en lui montrant plusieurs endroits qui avoit besoin d'etre
nettoyez. Mais enfin le travail de l'un and de l'autre etant fini, le cocu
content, apres avoir receu le demi ecu, se crut encore oblige de charger le
cuvier sur son dos, and de le porter chez son Ami.

Conte tire de Theophile.
194
LArisse aimoit a conter, and se trouvant un jour en compagnie, elle voulut
bien leur parler des folies de sa jeunesse, and le fit ainsi.

Je servois chez un Citoyen Romain avec un jeune Grec son Esclave, que la
tempete ayoit oblige de servir aussi, quoi que ne libre. La nature avoit mis
sur le visage de ce jeune homme toutes les marquis de la noblesse and de la
bonne education qu'il devoit a sa naissance and aux soins de ses Parens; et on
voyoit bien qu'il n'etoit pas ne pour l'etat ou son malheur l'avoit reduit;
s'il falloit porter quelque fardeau, il succomboit aux plus legers: Cependant
il vouloit tout fair, and il oublioit sa nais^ance, pour tacher de
s'accommoder a l'etat present de la Fortune. Mais ne pouvant resister a la
fatigue, ni a la nourriture de valet, il tomba peu a peu dans un grand
abbatement, and il se negligeoit a un point qu'il ne peignoit pas meme les plus
beaux cheveux du monde qu'il avoit. En peu de temps il devint maigre and ride,
il eut les yeux cavez and languissans; les mains noires and pleines de calus:
enfin il n'etoit plus reconnoissable. La tristesse lui avoit abbatu l'esprit,
autant que la fatigue lui avoit altere la sante. Il soupiroit souvent; and son
affliction me faisoit pity; Je trouvois la fortune bien injuste a son egard;
je l'exhortois a se consoler; je pleurois ses malheurs, je lui apprenois ses
fonctions, and je le soulageois meme de quelques-unes. Sa misere ne lui otoit
pas un air noble, and je ne s^ai quelle superiorite sur ma naissance, qui me
faisoit sentir la difference de la sienne, a laquelle je me soumetois
volontiers. Il sentoit bien les obligations qu'il m'avoit and il m'en
remercioit avec la politesse d'un homme de la Cour. Enfin toutes ces bonnes
qualitez me toucherent si fort, que ne croyant avoir que de la pity pour ses
malheurs, je me trouvai de l'amour dans le coeur pour sa person, and je
l'aimai eperdument.

Larisse par ee conte, avoit attire l'attention de toute la compagnie, mais sur
tout de deux jeunes Filles qui faisoient semblant de dormir de peur que la
Bienseance ne les obligeat de se retirer si else paroissoient entendre ce
qu'elle disoit; l'une d'elles ayant ouvert les yeux pour regarder Larisse,
comme si c'eut ete sans dessein, les referma aussi-tot. Pour l'autre, faisant
semblant de se reveiller: Est-il deja jour? dit elle, and rougit en le disant.
La compagnie connut leurs finess^s, and s'en rejouit fort. Cependant L^risse
avoit cesse de parler, disant qu'elle ne vouloit pas achever le recit de cette
avanture, de peur de fair de la peine a ces jeunes Filles and elle menacoit la
compagnie de quelques (...) Histoires serieuses; Mais Eugene impatient de
seavoir le rest du conte: He Larisse lui dit il, ces jeunes Filles n'ont fait
semblant de dormir, que pour vous ecouter avec plus de liberte: je vous assure
qu'elles ont plus d'envie que pas un de nous de scavoir la fin de votre
histoire. Continuez, je vous en conjure, lui dit-il en l'embrassant. Elle y
consentit, promit d'achever le conte le plus modestement qu'elle pourroit; and
faisant approcher d'elle les jeunes filles leur dit,

Il est permis aux jeunes gens
De n'etre pas toujours si Sages.
Et recommenca ainsi a parler:

Tantot je me plaignois de l'Amour, and tantot je le priois. Grand Dieu, lui
disois-je souvent, ou gueris moi, ou me fais aimer de ce que j'aime. Cependant
je ne mangeois, ni ne dormois plus. La beauty de Glison, c'etoit le nom de
celui que j'aimois, revenoit tous les jours; car le temps, qui vient a bout de
tout, avoit addouci ses chagrins. Pour moi je n'etoit plus reconnoissable and
plus les agremens de Glison augmentoient, plus ma passion secrette changeoit
mon esprit, mon Visage, and mon humeur. Je n'osois decouvrir mon Amor, and
j'etois au desespoir de le taire: mais Glison ne connoissoit pas mon mal. Il me
plaignoit, and payoit de reconnoiss^nce seulement les obligations qu'il
m'avoit, and se contentoit de me soulager de mes devoirs d'esclave, comme je
l'avois soulage dans les siens. Mais enfin ne me trouvant plus Maitresse de mon
Amor, je vis bien qu'il faloit me declarer. Un Vendredy donc, o jour heureux!
que je n'oublierai jamais, ayant trouv^ Glison ^ur mon lit, ou il se reposoit
quelquefois apres dine, je le priai en fondant en larmes d'avoir pity de moi,
il ne s'en defendit pas, and me parut fort aise de m'avoir sauve la Vie.

Vous autres, mes Enfans, rejouissez vous pendant que l'age vous le permet. Le
souvenir des plaifirs passez seront les seuls de votre Vieillesse.

Les Pensees ingenieuses, nobles Sentimens, Bons Mots, and Reparties fines des
MODERNES. Avec quelques CONTES Plaisans. En ANGLOIS and en FRANCOIS.
1
HEnry VIII. Roy d' Angleterre, ayant des demelez avec Francois I. Roy de
France, resolut de lui envoyer un Ambassadeur, and de le charger de plusieurs
paroles fieres and menacantes, and choisit pour cet employ l'Eveque Bonner, en
qui il avoit beaucoup de confiance; cet Eveque lui representa que sa vie seroit
en grand danger, s'il tenoit de pareils discourse a un Roy aussi fire qu'etoit
le Roy Francois Premier: Ne craignez rien lui dit* Henry VIII. Si le Roy de
France vous faisoit mourir, je ferois abbatre bien de tetes a quantite de
Francois, qui sont ici en ma puissance; je le crois, repondit l'Eveque, Mais de
toutes ces tetes, ajouta t-il en riant, il n'y en a pas une qui vint si bien
sur mes Epaules que celle-cy, en lui montrant la sienne* Cette reponse agreeable
put au Roy, and l'obligea a reformer l'instruction de son Ambassadeur.

2
Le Chevalier Thomas More, fameux Chancelier d' Angleterre etant en Prison par
l'ordre de Henry VIII laissa croitre ses cheveux and sa barbe; and comme un
Barbier, se presenta pour les lui couper and pour le razer, Mon Ami, lui
dit-il, Nous avons le Roy and moy un Procez pour ma tete, and je ne veux fair
aucune depense pour l'ajuster, que je ne sache qui de nous deux en doit
disposer.

3
Baeon, autre celebre Chancelier d' Angleterre, fut visit par la Reine
Elizabeth, dans une Maison de Campaign qu'il avoit fait batir devant sa
Fortune, D'ou vient, lui dit la Reine, que vous avez fait une si petite Maison?
Ce n'est pas moy, Madame, reprit le Chancelier, qui ai fait ma Maison trop
petite, mais c'est votre Majeste qui m'a fait tr^p grand pour ma Maison. Outre
l'Esprit and l'agrement de cette reponse, elle marque une Modesty and une
Reconnoissance qui doivent la fair estimer.

4
En Espagne il semble qu'on ne vive que pour aimer: Au lieu que ce qu'on
appelle aimer en France, n'est le plus souvent que parler d'Amour, and ajouter
aux sentiments de l'Ambition, la vanite des Galanteries. D'ou vient qu'une
Femme de qualite Espagnole lisant, il n'y a pas long tems, le Roman de
Cleopatre, and apres un long recit d'Avantures, etant tombee sur une
Conversation delicate d'un Amant and d'une Amante, egalement passionnez, Que
d'Esprit mal employe, dit-elle, ^ quoi bon (...) ces beaux discourse quand ils
sont ensemble and qu'ils sont seuls?

5
Une Dame Espagnole, jeune and bien faite alla a confess a un Religieux de son
Pais. Le Confesseur apres lui avoir ^ait plusieurs questions sur les matieres
de sa Confession, devint curieux de la connoitre and lui demand^ son nom. La
Dame, qui ne se sentit point tentee de sa^isfaire sa curiosite, lui repondit,
Mon Pere, mon nom n'est pas un Pecbe.

6
Une autre Dame Espagnole alla dans une Eglise de Religieux a dessein de s'y
confesser and trouvant un Religieux de cette Maison, qui etoit alors seul dans
une Chapelle, Elle se mit a genoux aupres de lui, and lui dit tous ses pechez:
Et comme il ne lui repondit rien, elle lui demanda ensuite l'Absolution. Je ne
puis pas vous la donner, lui dit le Religieux, car je ne suis pas Pretre. Vous
n'etes pas Pretre? lui dit la Dame fort surprise and fort en colere: Non,
Madame, lui repondit froidement le Religieux. Je vais, lui repliqua-telle me
plaindre a votre Superieur de ce que vous avez entendu ma Confession. Et moy,
lui repartit le Religieux, je vais dir^ de vos nouvelles a votre Mari. Surquoy
etant entrez en compensation de menaces, ils se separerent but a but, la Dame
ayant juge sagement, qu'il n'etoit pas de son (...) de divulguer cette Avanture.

7
Le Comte d' Orgaz, Grand d' Espagne, voulant avoir aupres de lui un homme de
Lettres pour le plaisir de la Conversation, un de ses Amiss lui en presenta un a
qui il demanda d'abord s'il s^voit fair des Verse? L'homme de Lettres lui
repondit qu'il en jugeroit par les Ouvrages qu'il lui feroit voir de sa facon:
Et il lui apporta le lendemain quantite de Romances, and d'autres Poesies
Espagnolles de toutes les especes. Le Grand d' Espapne apres les avoir leaves,
dit a son Ami que cet Homme ne l'accommodoit pas: Et pourquoi? lui demanda son
Ami; C'est, repliqua-t-il, que je tiens pour sot celui qui ne sait pas fair
deux Verse, and pour fou celui qui en fait quatre. En Espagnol, Tengo por necio
al que no sabe hazer una copl^, por loco al que haze dos.

8
Un Chymiste ayant dedie au Pape Leon X. un Livre ou il se vantoit d'apprendre
la maniere de fair de l'Or, s'attendoit a recevoir un magnifique Present: Mais
le Pape ne lui envoya qu'une grande Bourse toute vuide, and lui fit dire, Que
puis qu'il savoit fair de l'Or, il n'avoi^ besoin que d'un lieu pour le mettre.

9
Un Galant homme de la Cour de France alla chez un de ses Amiss pour le
feliciter d'une dignite qu'il avoit obtenue depuis peu: Celui-ci tout fire de
sa nouvelle elevation demanda qui il etoit? l'autre sans se deconcerter, change
de langage, and lui dit, Qu'il venoit lui temoigner la douleur qu'il avoit d^s
malheur qui lui etoit arrive and qu'il etoit fort touch de le voir sourd and
aveugle, puis qu'il ne reconnoissoit plus ses meilleurs Amiss.

10
Un mechant Predicateur Italien prechoit un jour le Panegyrique d'un Saint, and
etant dans (...) de son Discourse, il demandoit avec beaucoup d'emotion ou
mettrai-je mon Saint? ou mettrai-je mon Saint? un Plaisant qui etoit dans son
Auditoire, ennuye de sa Predication, resolut de s'en aller, and lui cria tout
haut: Voila ma place que je lui laisse.

11
Quand le fameux Moliere fut mort, plusieurs mauvais Poets lui firent des
Epitapnes. Un d'entr'eux, alla un jour en presenter une de sa facon a un Prince
fort celebre par son Esprit: Plut a Dieu, Monsieur, lui dit le Prince en la
recevant, que Moliere me presentat la votre.

12
Un homme de la Cour de France etoit soupconne d'etre impuissant, and ne
vouloit jamais demeurer d'accord qu'il le fut; il rencontra un jour le Poet
Benserade, qui l'avoit souvent raille la dessus. Monsieur, lui dit il,
nonobstant toutes vos mauvaises Plaisanteras, ma Femme est accouchee depuis
deux jours: He, Monsieur, lui repliqua Benserade, on n'a jamais doubt de votre
Femme.

13
Un petit Prince d' Italy ayant appris qu'un Gentilhomme Francois qui etoit en
sa Cour, avoit fait quelques railleries de lui and de ses desseins, lui envoya
dire qu'il eut a sortir dans trois jours de ses etats. Il me fait trop de
Grace, repondit le Francois, de m'accorder un si long term: Je n'ai pas besoin
de plus de trois quarts d'heure pour lui obeir.

14
La Mere d'une Demoiselle jeune and coquette vouloit l'envoyer au Convent des
Filles Repenties. Je n'en suis pas d'avis, dit une Dame de ses Parents, and
pourquoi? lui demanda la Mere: C'est, repondit-elle, parce qu'elle n'est ni
l'une ni l autre.

15
Le Roy de France dit il y a quelques jou^s a Racine and a Despreaux, je suis
fache que vous ne soyez venus a cette derniere Campaign, vous auriez veu la
Guerre, and votre voyage n'eur pas ete long. Racine lui repondit, Sire, nous
n'avions que des habits de Ville, nous en commandames de Compagne, mais les
Places que vous attaquez furent plutot prises que nos habits ne furent faits.

16
Trois Gentilhommes etant a jouer ensemble, un Taureau en fureur entra dans le
lieu ou ils etoient: l un se cacha sous un lit, l'autre se mit dans un Tonneau,
and le troisieme sous le Bat d'un Ane. Comme ils racontoient a leurs Amiss de
quelle maniere ils etoient echappez, tous se mocquerent de celui quis'etoit
cach^ sous le Bat; mais il y en eut un qui dit: Il avoit asseurement raison
d'avoir voulu mourir avec son habit.

17
Un homme demandoit a un vieillard comment il avoit fait pour vivre si long
tems: Il lui repondit, pouvant etre assis, je ne me suis point tenu debout; je
me suis marie fort tard, j'ai ete bien tot veuf, and je ne me suis point
remarie.

18
Un Malheureux que le Bourreau fouettoit dans une Ville alloit si doucement
qu'un des Spectateurs s'approcha and lui dit: Miserable, tu vas si lentement
que tu en compteras de belles, avaunt que tu sois a la fin de ton voyage;
march, double le pas, pour sortir, au plus vite de ce supplice and de cette
honte. Le Patient lui repondit, quand tu seras fouette tu iras comme il te
plaira, pour moy, je veux aller a mon aise.

19
Un homme de Perouse se desesperoit and fondoit en pleurs de ce que (...) Femme
s'etoit pendue a un Figuier qui etoit dans sa Cour. Un de ses Voisins le voyant
dans ce triste etat, s'approcha de lui, and lui dit tout doucement a l'Oreille:
Que tu es fou, de t'affliger ainsi lors que tu as tant de sujet de te rejouir!
done moy, je te pry, un rejetton de ce Figuier, afin que je le plant dans
mon jardin, pour voir ce que ma Femme sait fair.

20
Laurent, Prince Palatin, reprochoit a l'Empareur Sigismond, qu'au lieu de
fair mourir ses Ennemis vaincus, il les combloit de Graces, and les mettoit en
etat de lui nuire: Ne les fais-je pas mourir, dit-il, en faisant cesser leur
haine and les rendant mes Amiss?

21
Un Seigneur ayant choisi un homme ignorant pour etre son Biblio^equaire,
C'est, dit une Femme de qualite fott spirituelle, le Serrail qu'on a done a
garder a un Eunuque.

22
Balzac ayant besoin d'Argent, envoya prier Voiture son Ami de vouloir bien lui
preter quatre Cens ecus, and chargea son Valet de Chamber de donner a Voiture
une Promise de pareille sum: Voiture conta l'Argent, and comme on lui
presenta la Promise ou il y avoit ces Mots, Je promets de payer a Monsieur de
Voiture la sum de quatre cens ecus qu'il m'a pretee, etc. il la prend, la
lit, and souscrit ces Paroles, Je promets de payer a Monsieur de Balzac la
sum de huit cents ecus, pour le plaisir qu'il m'a fait de m'en emprunter
quatre cens. Apres cela il rend la promise au Valet de Chamber pour la
reporter a son Maitre.

23
Henri IV. Roy de France fut si genereux que de vouloir que Vitri Captain de
ses Gardes du Corpse, recut dans sa Compagnie celui qui le blessa dans la
Bataille d' Aumale. Le Marechal d' Etrees etant un jour dans son Carrosse, and
ce guard merchant a la Portiere, Voila, lui dit le Roy, en le montrant, le
Soldat qui me blesla a la Bataille d'Aumale.

24
Comme on disoit a ce meme Prince, que bien qu'il eut pardonne, and fait
plusieurs Graces a un brave, qui avoit ete un des Capitaines de la Ligue, il
n'en etoit pourtant pas aim, il repondit: Je veux lui fair tant de bien que
je le forcerai de maimer malgre lui. Ce grand Prince gagnoit ainsi les plus
rebels, and il disoit souvent, qu'on prenoit plus de mouches avec une
cueilleree de miel, qu'avec vingt tonneaux de Vinaigre.

25
Un Archeveque de Florence disoit a un Cardinal: Les Hommes sont bien
malheureux: tout l^ur bonheur consiste aux biens de l'Ame, du Corpse, ou de la
Fortune, cependant ils sont toujours tourmentez par les trop subtils Avocats,
par les Medecins ignorans, and par les mauvais Theologiens.

26
Un Espagnol etant dans un Vaisseau qui fut surpris de la Tempete, le Captain
fit commandment de jetter en Mer les chooses qui incommodoient and pesoient le
plus pour soulager le Navire. Aussitot l' Espagnol prit sa Femme, and la
vouloit jetter dans l'Eau; and comme le Captain lui demanda la raison de ce
proceed, il repondit; Je n'ai rien qui me pese and qui m'incommode plus que ma
(...) me, c'est pourquoi j'execute sur elle votre commandment.

27
Alphonse Roy d' Aragon, voyant qu'une Galere chargee de Soldats perissoit,
commanda qu'on l'allat secourir; and comme on tardoit a lui obeir, a cause du
peril, il se mit lui meme en etat de courir a son secours; and sur ce que
chacun lui representoit le danger ou il s'exposoit! Ah! dit-il, j'aime mieux
etre Compagnon que Spectateur de la Mort de mes Soldats.

28
Le Roy Henri IV. apprenant qu'un fameux Medecin Protestant avoit quitte sa
Religion pour se fair Catholic Romain, dit au Duc de Sully qui etoit alors
avec lui: Mon Ami, ta Religion est bien malade, car elle est abandonnee des
Medecins.

29
Le meme Roy visitant un jour son Arcenal, un Seigneur lui demanda si l'on
pouvoit trouver au Monde d'aussi-bons Canons que ceux qu'ils voyoient: Ventre
saint gris, repondit le Roy, je n'ai jamais trouve de meilleurs Canons que ceux
de la Mess.

30
Comme on consideroit les pertes que la Ville de Milan causoit a la France, on
dit qu'il seroit a souhaiter que cette Ville la eut ete entierement ruinee:
Non, non, dit le Chancelier du Prat; la Guerre de Milan sert d'une Purgation a
la France, pour la nettoyer d'une infinite d'hommes perdus and debauchez, qui
la pourroient infecter.

31
Louis onzieme, qui fut ensuite Roy de France, se retira en Bourgogne, pour
eviter le colere de son Pere Charles VII, and la il contracta familiarite avec
un Paisan nomme Conon. Apres qu'il eut succeed au Royaume de son pere, Conon se
mit en Chemin pour Paris, afin d'y fair present au Roy de quelques Navets,
parce qu'il avoit observe que le Roy avoit quelquefois pris grand plaisir a en
manger, lors qu'il revenoit fatigue de la chasse. Pendant son voyage la faim
l'obligea de manger tous ses Navets, a la reserve d'un seul d'une grosseur
extraordinaire. Le Roy prit plaisir a la simplicite de cet Homme, and lui fit*
donner mill ecus; and commanda qu'on conservat ce Navet parmi ses Trefors,
apres l'avoir envelope dans un morceau de Taffetas. Un Cour^isan assame avoit
observe tout ceci, and ayant deja devore une plus grande sum, il acheta un
fort beau Cheval, and en fit present au Roy lequel re^eut ce present avec joye,
and lui sit donner le Navet. Apres que le Courtisan l'eut develope, and qu'il
eut veu ce que c'etoit, il se plaignit de ce qu'il avoit ete trompe; Il ^'y a
point de tromperie, dit le Roy, puis que tu as ce qui m'a coute mill ecus,
pour un Cheval qui a peine en vaut-il cent.

32
Alphonse Roy d' Espagne dit a ceux qui lui remontroient que la simplicite de
ses Habits le confondoit avec ses sujets: J'aime bien mieux que ma Gloire and
ma Virtue me distinguent de mes sujets, que le Diadem and la Pourpre.

33
Les Hongrois qui avoient conspire la perte de Sigismond, etant entrez en son
Palais, ou pour le prendre, ou pour le tuer, l'Empereur les apperceut, and
courut au devant d'eux, un Poignard a la main: Qui de vous, leur dit-il, sera
assez insolent pour me maltraiter? Qu'ai je fait qui merit la Mort? si
quelqu'un a dessein de me frapper qu'il avance, je me defendrai. Ces Paroles
fierement prononcees epouvanterent tellement les conjurez; qu'ils prirent
aussi-tot la fuite.

34
Un Sage Modern disoit: Que de fair l'Hypocrite c'etoit aller en Enfer par le
chemin de Paradis.

35
Un Pape, avaunt que d'etre eleve au souverain Pontificat, faisoit, par une
feinte and politic humilite, couvrir sa Table d'un rets de Pescheur au lieu
d'une Nappe, mais a ussi-tot qu'il fut parvenu a cette eminente dignite qu'il
ambitionnoit, il dit a ses Officiers qui le vouloient servir a l'ordinaire:
Servez moy de linge, je n'ai plus besoin de filet, le Poisson est pris.

36
Un Bouffon dit un jour au Roy Fran^ois qu'il avoit un Livre de Fous ou il
avoit ecrit le nom de l'Empereur Charles Quint. Le Roy lui en demanda la
Raison: Parce, dit il, qu'en passant par la France, il s'expose a etre arrete,
Mais que diras-tu, continua le Roy, si non seulement je le laisse passer, mais
encore, si je lui livre les Places que je lui ai promises: Scavez-vous,
repondit le Bouffon, ce que je ferai? J'oterai de mon Livre le Nom de Charles
Quint, and je mettrai le votre en sa Place.

37
Alphonse Roy d' Aragon etoit si liberal, qu'il donnoit quelquefois les Villes,
and les Duchez, and ^emit a son Peuple une grande party des Impots, c'est ce
qui le fit appeller Main-percee; and comme on lui temoignoit que ses Largesses
etoient excessives, il disoit: Le principal Soin d'un Roy, doit etre d'enrichir
se, Sujects, car quelques riches qu'ils soient, le Prince n'en devient pas plus
pauvre.

38
Ce meme Roy disoit ordinairement: Pour vivre dans le Marriage, il faut que le
Mari soit Sourd, afin qu'il n'entende pas les Impertinences et les Criailleries
de sa Femme; et que la Femme soit Aveugle pour ne voir point toutes les
Debauchesde son Mari.

39
Le Roy Alphonse etant malade apres avoir tente en vain plusieurs Remedes, il
les abandonna entierement* and se mit a lire l'Histoire de Quinte-Curse. Le
plaisir qu'il y prit soulagea peu a peu son mal, and enfin se voyant gueri, il
dit: Adieu Hyppocrate, Adieu Avicenne, and toute la Medecin: Vive
Quinte-Curse, mo^ veritable Medecin.

40
Le Roy Henry IV. voyant son Tailleur qui lui montroit un Livre de quelques
Reglements pour l'Etar* qu'il avoit compose, dit a un de ses Officiers: Qu'on
me sasse venir sur l'heure mon Chancelier pour me fair un Habit, puis que mon
Taill^ur veut fair des Reglements.

41
Alphonse, Roy d' Espagne, apprenant que les Siennois, qui pendant la Guerre d'
^alie, eto^ent demeurez Neutres, avoient ete pillez par les Soldats des deux
Partis, aussi tot que la Guerre eut e^e fin^e, dit: Qu'ils etotent semblables a
ceux qui etant logez dans les etages moyens d'une Maison, sont incommodez par
la Fumee de ceux qui sont a^ dessous, et par le Bruit de ceux qui demeurent au
dessous.

42
Un Seigneur, qui durant les troubles de (...) Ligue, avoit long tems balance
sans suivre aucun Parti, vint un Jour a la Cour d' Henri IV. qu'il trouva
jouant a la Prime; aussi-tot que le Roy l'eut apperceu, il lui dit, Approchez,
Monsieur, soyez le bien venu; si nous gagnons* sans doubt vous serez des notres.

43
Un Homme de Guerre elevant en presence de Sigismond, les Dignitez Militaires,
et meprisant les Magistratures: Taisez vous, lui dit l'Empereur, et apprenez
que si tous les Magistrates faisoient bien leur Devoir, nous n'aurions par
besoin d Officers de Guerre.

44
Adolphe Comte de Nassau, nouvellement eleve a l'Empire d' Allemagne, envoya a
Philippe Roy de France, un ecrit injurieux, et lui fit fair des Menaces fort
ridicules, Le Roy, qui etoit plus modere, se contenta de charger le Courrier
d'une Feuille de Papier, ou pour toute Reponse il n'avoit ecrit en gros
Caracteres que ces feuls Mots, TROP ALLEMAND.

45
Charles V. disoit: Pour bien dresser un Corpse d'Ar^ee, je voudrois que les
Italiens en fussent la Tete, les E^pagnols les Bras, les Allemans la Poitrin^,
a cause de leur Fidelite et de lenr Force; et que les autres Nations en
composassent le Ventre et les Pieds.

46
Quelques Soldats qui e^oient pres du Carrosse de Catherine de Medicis, dirent
cent Insolences d'elle: Et comme le Cardinal de Lorraine l'eut avertie qu'il
les alloit fair pendre: Non, non, lui repondit* elle, laissez les aller; je
veux apprendre aujourd'huy a la Posterite, qu'en une meme Person, une Femme,
une Reine, et une Italienne, ont s^eu commander a leur Colere.

47
Le Roy Jean ayant ete pris en une Bataille qu'il donna devant Poitiers contre
les Anglois, fut conduit dans seur Camp, ou le Prince de Galls le servit tete
nue a souper: Le Roy le pria plusieurs fois de s'asseoir aupres de lui, mais le
Prince s'en excusa par ces Paroles: Il n'appartient pas au Sujet de s'asseoir
aupres de son Se^gncur; en^uite le Roy lui dit: J'avois dessein de vous donner
aujourd'huy a souper, mais la Fortune a voulu que vous me l'ayez done.

48
Un Peintre ayant promis le plus beau de tous ses Tableaux a une Person qui
ne s'y connoissoit pas, elle lui vint dire adroitement que le Feu etoit en son
Logis: le Peintre s'ecria d'abord a son Eleve, qu'on me sauve un tell Tableau.
Elle reconnut par la que, c'etoir le meilleur, et le lui demanda apres que son
emotion fut appaisee, et qu'il eut appris que cette alarm etoit fausse.

49
Quelques Pa^sans se plaignant a un Captain que ses Sol^ats les avoient
volez, il leur demanda s'ils leur avoient laisse quelque chose? ils lui
repondirent que ou^: He bien, leur dit le Captain, ce ne sont donc pas mes
Soldats, ils auroient assurement tout emporte.

50
Le Roy Alphonse repondit a quelques Persons qui le pressoient de donner
Bataille dans une Conjoncture dangereuse. Le Devoir d'un General, c'est de
Vaincre, non pas de Combattre seulement.

51
Dragut, Corsaire Turc, fit tuer Ibrahim, qui venoit de lui livrer la Ville d'
Aphrodisium, que les Maures uomment Mahudia; et comme il lui avoit promis la
Vie avec de grandes Recompenses, il dit pour se justifier: Que person n'etoit
oblige de tenir sa Parole a celui qui avoit ete Traitre a sa Patriie.

52
Alphonse Roy d' Aragon, beuvoit si peu de Vin, que ses Amiss s'en etonant, il
leur dit: L'Amour qu' Alexandre eut pour le Vin ternit beaucoup l'eclat de sa
Gloire, il fait ombre and obscurit la Raison et la Virtue, il disoit encore, Le
Vin a deux fort mechantes Filles, la Fur^ur et l'Amour brutal.

53
Le Roy Lois XI. entendant dire que Nicolas Raulin, Chancelier du Duc de
Bourgogne, avoit fond un rich Hopital a Beaune, dit: Il est bien raisonnable
que le Chancelier de Bourgogne, qui de son tems a fait tant de Pauvres, batisse
ala fin de ces Jours un Hopital pour les loger.

54
Charles Duc de Calabre, ayant Condamne un Gentilhomme a donner cent Florins
d'Or a une Fille qu'il avoit abusee, il lni commanda de suivre la Fille chargee
de cette Sum, et de feindre de la lui vouloir oter. Elle seut bien la garder,
and revint se plaindre deses Violences au Duc, qui lui dit: Si vous eussiez eu
autant de soin pour conserver votre Honneur que pour defendre votre Argent,
vous ne l'eussiez pas perdu; allez Ma^ie, n'y retournez plus.

55
Un Astrologue avertit un Prince de mettre order a ses Affairs, parce qu'il
devoit mourir dans trois Jours d'une Mort violente; le Prince lui demanda s'il
avoit preveu de quelle Mort lui meme devoit mourir? and sur ce qu'il assura
qu'il mourroit d'une Fievre chaude, il lui dit, que pour fair connoitre la
Vanite de sa Science, il seroic pendu sur l'heure meme. Comme on s'etoit deja
saisi de l'Astrologue pour le conduire au Supplice, il dit au Prince, Voyez
Monseigneur, sima Prediction n'est pas veritable, tatez moi le Poux, and vous
sentirez si je n'ai pas la Fievre. Cette subtilite lui sauva la Vie.

56
Le Duc de Guise, apres une Battle du Roy Francois I. contre Charles Quint,
reprochoir au Sieur Villandri, que bien qu'il fut arm de toutes pieces, on ne
l'avoit point veu dans le Combat; je vous prouverai, lui repondit fierement
Villandri, que je m'y suis trouve, and meme en un endroit ou vous n'eussiez ose
paroitre. Le Duc pique de ce reproach, le menacoit de quelque chatiment
rigoureux, maisil l'appaisa par cette Parole: J'etois, Seigneur, avec le
Bagage, ou votre Courage ne vous eut pas permis de vous cacher.

57
Le Roy de France, Louis XII. disoit: La plupart des Gentilhommes ont le meme
sort qu'Acteon and Diomede; ils sont devorez par leurs Chieni et par leurs
Chevaux. Voulant dire que la Chasse, et le soin d'avoir de beaux Chveaux
ruinoit beaucoup de Gens de Qualite.

58
Une Person qui marchoit devant le Roy Alphonse ayant pousse une Branche
d'A^bre, elle fit ressort, et frappa l'oeil du Roy, qui en fut meurtri, et en
devint fort enfle. Comme chacun lui temoignoit avoir part a sa douleur: Je n'ai
point de Mal, dit-il, qui me touch plus sensiblement, que la doule^r et la
crainte de celui qui m'a bless.

59
Un Homme qui avoit epouse une laid Femme, en consideration de son grand Bien,
l'ayant un jour surprise avec un Galand, il lui dit, Puis qu'on te baise
gratis, qu'etoit il besoin de chercher un Mari aux depens de ton Bien?

60
Un Laboureur voyant passer l'Archeveque de Cologne accompagne de plusieurs
Soldats, ne put s'empecher de rire: L'Archeveque le pressa de lui en dire le
sujet; C'est, dit le Laboureur, que je sui, etonne de voir un Archeveque arm,
et suivi, non pas d'Ecclesiastiques, mais de Gens de Guerre, comme un General
d'Armee.. Mon ami, lui repondit l'Archeveque, apprenez que je suis Duc aussi
bien qu'Archeveque. Dans mon Eglise je fais la fonction d'Archeveque avec mon
Clerge, mais dans la Campagn^ je march en Duc accompagne de mes Soldats.
J'entens bien, Mon Seigneur, lui repliqua le Paisan, mais dites moy, je vous
pry, quand Monsieur le Duc ira a tous les Diables, que deviendra Monsieur
l'Archeveque.

61
Le Duc de Milan assiege dans un Chateau par les Florentins, qui le pressoient
fort, ne trouvoit aucune Viande a son gout lors qu'il etoit a Table; et comme
il en querelloit souvent son Cuisinier, ce domestique adroit, apres plusieurs
autres Excuses, lui dit enfin: Voulez vous, Monseigneur, que je vous parle
nettement? les Viandes sont bonnes, and bien preparees, mais ^ranchement les
Florentins vous degoutent.

62
La Vie du Pape Boniface VIII. fut si peu reglee, qu'on a dit de lui: Qu'il
entra au Souverain Pontificat, comme un Renard, qu'il vecut comme un Lion, and
qu'il mourut comme un Chien.

63
Le Roy Henry IV. importune par un homme de Qualite, qui lui demandoit une
Grace pour son Neveu, coupable d'un assassinat, lui repondit: Je suis bien
fache de ne pouvoir vous accorder ce que vous me demandez, il vous sied bien de
fair l'Oncle, and a moy de fair le Roy: J'excuse votre demand, excusez mon
refus.

64
Un Poet importun, apres avoir commence de lire a quelqu'un un Poem qu'il
avoit fait, demanda a celui qui l'ecoutoit lesquels de ces Verse etoient les
meilleurs? Ce sont ceux, repondit-il, que tu n'as pas encore lus, car ils ne
m'ont pas fait mal a la tete.

65
Un homme de Marque, au sortir d'un long diner, et dans les douces fumees du
Vin, signa un Order qu'on lui presenta, qui eut ote le Pain a toute une
Province, fi l'on n'y eut remedy. Il est excusable, dit un Railleur la dessus,
le moyen de comprendre dans la premiere heure de la Digestion, qu'on puisse
quelque part mourir de faim?

66
Lorsque le Doge de Genes etoit a Versailles, (ou il etoit venu fair des
Soumissions au Roy de la Part de sa Republique) et qu'il en visitoit toutes les
Beautes, un Courtisan lui demanda ce qu'il y trouvoit de plus extraordinaire:
C'est de m'y voir, lui repondit le Doge.

67
Eude Eveque de Bayeux en Normandy, and friar de Guillame le Conquerant, du
cote de sa Mere, fut cree Comte de Ke^t par le Conquerant. Il arriva ensuite
que cet Eveque tomba en Disgrace, si bien qu'il fut mis en Prison. Le Clerge
dans ce tems-la etoit exempt du bras Seculier, and le Pape ^pousant la Querelle
de l'Eveque, ecrivit aigrement au Roy Guillaume la dessus. Le Roy ne lui fit
d'autre reponse, sinon qu'il avoit mis e^ Prison le Comte de Kent, and non
l'Ev^que de Bayeux.

68
Un Ambassadeur de Venise a Rome passa a Florence, ou il salua le feu grand Duc
de Toscane. Ce Prince se plaignit a cet Ambassadeur de ce que sa Republique lui
avoit envoye un Venitien qui s'etoit fort mal conduit durant le sejour qu'il
avoit fait aupres de lui. Il ne faut pas, dit l'Ambassadeur, que votre Altesse
s'en etonne, ^ar je la puis assurer que nous avons beaucoup de Foux a Venise.
Nous avons aussi nos Foux a Florence, lui repondit le grand Duc, mais nous ne
les envoyons pas dehors pour traiter des Affairs publiques.

69
Un Prince railloit un de ses Courtisans, qui l'avoit servi dans plusieurs
Ambassades, and lui disoit, qu'i^ ressembloit a un (...): Je ne sai a qui je
ressemble, lui repondit le Courtisan; mais je sai que j'ai eu l'honneur de vous
representer en plusieurs Occasions.

70
Un Homme de la Cour prenant conge du Roy, qui l'envoyoit en Ambassade verse un
autre Prince: La principale Instruction que j'ai a vous donner, lui dit le Roy,
est que vous observiez une conduite toute opposee a ce^le de votre
Predecesseur. Sire, lui repartit l'Ambas^adeur, je vai fair ^n sort que votre
Majeste ne done pas une pareille Instruction a celui que me succedera.

71
Un Domestique du Roy Henry le Grand, qui etoit confident du ses Amors, en
obtint quelque grace, and alla voir le Chancelier pour en avoir l'expedition.
Le Chancelier y trouvant de la difficulte, le Courtisan le pressoit, and
vouloit lui prouver qu'il n'y en devoit pas avoir: il faut, lui dit le
Chancelier, que chacun se mele de son metier. Mon Metier, lui repondit le
Courtisan, qui crut qu'il lui reprochoit la Confidence de Son Maitres, est un
si bon Employ, que si le Roy avoit vingt ans de moins, je ne le changerois pas
po^r quatre comme le votre.

72
Un Homme entete d'une piece de Theater de sa facon, en expliquoit l'intrigue
and le Dessein a un Courtisan: La scene, lui disoit-il, est en Cappadoce; il
faut se transporter dans ce Pais la, and entrer dans le genie de la Nation,
pour bien juger do la Piece: Vous avez raison, repondit le Courtisan, and je
croi qu'elle seroit bonne a jouer sur les lieux.

73
Monsieur de Vaugelas ayant obtenu une Pension du Roy par l'entremise du
Cardinal de Richelieu, ce Cardinal lui dit; Au moins, Monsieu^, vous n
oublierez pas dans votre Dictionnaire le mot de Pension. Non, Monseigneur, lui
repondit Vaugelas, ni celui de Reconnoissance.

74
Benserade etant a l'Academie y prit la Place de l'Abbe Furetiere, qu'il
n'aimoit pas, and dit en s'y mettant; Voici une Place ou je dirai bien des
sotises: Courage, lui repondit Furetiere, vous avez fort been commence.

75
Le Marquis du Chatelet, autre Academicien, etant sorti de la Bastille, ou il
avoit ete mis pour un sujet assez ledger, se presenta devant le feu Roy de
France. Le Roy, qui avoit de la peine a voir un homme qu'il n'avoit pas bien
traite, s'appliquoit a detourner les yeux de dessus lui. Le Marquis s'en
appercevant, s'approcha du Duc de S. Simon, and lui dit: je vous pry,
Monsieur, de dire au Roy que je lui pardonne, and qu'il me fasse l'bonneur de
me regarder. Ce qui fit l'effet qu'll desiroit; car le Duc l'ayant dit auRoy,
il en rit, and lui parla ensuite fort obligeamment.

76
Louis XII. Roy de France, etant Duc D'Orleans, avoit receu plusieurs
deplaisirs de deux Persons qui etoient en faveur dans le regne precedent. Un
de ses Confidents l'excitoit a lui en temoigner son ressentiment: Il est
indigne du Roy de France, repondit il, de venger les injures faites au Duc
d'Orleans.

77
Jean II. Duc de Bourbon etant en Otage en Angleterre pour le Roy Jean,
plusieurs Gentilhommes, Vassaux de ce Duc, cabalerent contre lui durant son
absence, and empieterent sur ses Droits. Un de ses Officiers en fit des
Memoires exacts, et en presenta un gros Recueil au Duc a son retour, afin qu'il
en fit fair justice. Le Duc lui demanda, s'il avoit aussi tenu Regitre de tous
les bons Services qu'ils lui avoient rendus auparavant, and l'Officier lui
repondant que non: il n'est done pas just, repliqua le Duc, que je fasse aucun
usage de celui ci, and le jetta dans le feu sans le lire.

78
L'Intendant Du feu Duc de Guise lui representoit la necessite qu'il y avoit de
mettre order a ses af^aires domestiques, and lui donna une list de plusieurs
persons inutiles dans sa Maison. Le Prince l'ayant examinee, il est vray, lui
dit il, que je pourrois bien me passer de tous ces Gens la: Mais leur avez vous
demand, s'ils pourront aussi se passer de moy.

79
Une demoiselle galante reprochoit a son Friar sa passion pour le jeu qui le
ruinoit: Quand cesserez vous de jouer, lui dit elle: Quand vous cesserez
d'aimer, repondit le Friar. Ah! Malheureux, repliqua la soeur, Vous jouerez
donc toute votre vie.

80
Un homme de Qualite, voyageant en Espagne, alla voir l' Escurial, and comme il
visitoit ce rich and magnifique Convent de Religieux de l'ordre de S. Jerome,
qu'on nomme le cloi^re de S. Laurent, le Superieur qui le conduisoit lui
raconta les particularitez de sa fondation; il lui dit comme le Roy Philippe
II. l'avoit fait batir pour satisfaire au voeu qu'il en sit le jour de la
bataille de S. Quentin, qui fut donnee le jour de S. Laurent, en cas qu'il en
sortit victorieux: la dessus le Voyageur lui dit en admirant la Magnificence de
ce Batiment: Mon Pere, il falo it que ce Roy eus grand p^ur, lors qu'il sit us
si grand voeu.

81
Toutes les dents d'une Demoiselle, qui parloit beau coup, etant pretes a
tomber, elle en demanda la cause a un Medecin, qui lui repondit, que c etoit a
cause des secousses, qu'elle leur donnoit avec sa langue.

82
Un mechant Peintre, qui ne pouvoit vendre ses ouvrages, s'en alla dans un
autre pais and s'y fit Medecin* Quelqu' un qui passoit par la le reconnut and
lui demanda pour quelle raison il alloit vetu en Medecin? Il repondit, J'ai
voulu professer un Art, ou toutes les fautes que l'on y fait, sont couvertes
par la Terre.

83
Certaines Demoiselles, se promenant a la campaign, rencontrerent par le chemin
un Berger qui portoit un chevreau au march; une d'entre else sen etant
approchee, le caressa and dit a ses compagnes, Regarde^ comme il est joly, il
n'a point encore de corns* ^e Berger entendant cela, leur repondit, c'est
qu'il n'est pas encore marie.

84
La Cour du Roy etant en une certain ville, deux gentiles hommmes se promenant
ensemble rencontrerent un Paisan qui battoit son Ane avec excez, ils lui dirent
aussi tot, he, mon amy, n'avez vous point de conicience de maltraiter ainsi
cette pauvre Bet^? Cet homme ayant ote son chapeau dit aussi tot, Pardon,
monsieur l Ane, je ne croyois pas que vous eussies des parens a la Cour.

85
Un homme de la Ville dit a un Courtisan, qu'il venoit de se decharger d'un
pesant fardeau en payant une Sum qu'il devoit, and qu'il ne comprenoit pas
comment on pouvoit dormir, quand on etoit charge de dettes: Pour moy, repondit
le Courtisan, qui etoit fort endette, Je le comprens facilement; mais je ne
comprens pas comment mes Creanciers peuvent dormir, sachant bien que je ne les
payerai jamais.

86
Le Baron des Adrets, l'un des chefs du Parti Huguenot, prit durant la Guerre
un Chateau du Parti des Catholics, and condamna les Soldats qui l'avoient
defendu a sauter du haut en bas d'une Tour de ce Chateau; Un du ces Soldats
s'avanca par deux fois au board du Precipice, and s'en recula par deux fois; le
Baron lui dit, Saute donc sans tant marchander, car je vais te fair souffrir
bien d'autres tourmens si tu recules pour la troisieme fois. Monsieur, lui
repondit le Soldat, Puisque vous trouvez la chose si facile, je vous la done
en quatre: Ce qui plut a ce Baron, qui tout cruel qu'il etoit, lui pardonna en
faveur de ce bon mot.

87
Une jeune Dame etant en Compagnie avec son Mary, on se mit sur les bons
Contes, and chacum dit ceux qu'il savoit; la Dame en voulut dire un a son tour,
and raconta toutes les addresses don't un Galand s'etoit servi pour s'introduire
la nuit dans la Chamber d'une Femme qu'il aimoit, and don't le Mary etoit
absent; mais par malheur, ajouta-t-elle, comme ils etoient en semble, fort
contens l'un de l'autre, Voici le Mari qui revint frapper a la port: Imaginez
vous, dit elle, alors l'embarras ou je fus. Cette reflection mal placee, jetta
son Mary dans un autre embarras, en lui faisant connoitre la part qu'il avoit
en cette avanture, and comme sa femme, sans y penser, avoit laisse echapper une
verite qu'elle n'avoit pas intention de lui apprendre.

88
Le Comte de Mansfelt, ayant perdu trois Battailles en Allemagne, vint demander
de nouveaux Renforts au Roy de France. Un jour qu il alla voir les deux Reins
a diner, la Reine Mere dit: On dit que le Comte de Mansfelt est parmi cette
Foul; je n'en crois rien, Dit la jeune Reine, Car il prend la fuite d'abord
qu'il voit un Espagnol.

89
Un Captain qui avoit une jambe de bois bottee, y receut un coup de Canon qui
la lui fracassa; and comme ses Soldats demandoient un Chirurgien, Un Chirurgien
pour le Captain. Non, non, dit il, un Charpentier fera mon affair.

90
Un Secretaire d'Etat en France, passant en hyve^ sur le Pont-neuf a Paris, sur
les neuf a dix heures du soir avec son Laquay and un Flambeau pout l'eclairer,
il entendit un Chamaillis d'Epees and de gens qui se battoient, and voyant a la
faveur du Flambeau, qu ils n'etoitent que deux, il dit a son Laquay de pa^ser
Chemin. A peine eurent ils fait quelques pas que deux hommes armez, avec leurs
Pistolets bandez, and l'epee nue, s'en vinrent fierement a eux: l'un d'eux
avoit un Papier en sa main, qu'il dit avoir ramasse par hasard dans la rue, and
qui avoit cause leur demele; c'est pourquoy ils prierent fort civilement le
Secretaire de le lire. Le Secretaire tira ses lunettes, and se mit a lire ce
Papier, don't le contenu etoit. Il est fait a scavoir a toutes Persons que
quiconque passera sur ce Pont apres neuf heures en hyver, and dix en Ete, il
aye a laisser son Manteau, and en cas qu'il n'ait point de Manteau, son
Chapeau. Comme un des Filous vit que le Secretaire tressailloit de peur, il lui
dit, qu'il croyoit que cet ecrit le regardoit; ainsi ils lui prirent son
Manteau, and notre Secretaire fut content de ce qu'on le laissa aller
paisiblement chez lui en pourpoint.

91
Le Duc d' Ossone, Viceroy de Naples, passant par Barcelone, and voulant se
servir du Droit qu'il avoit de delivrer quelques Forcats, alla sur la Galere
Capitainesse, and passant par la Chiourme, il interrogea plusieurs Forcats
touchant leurs Crimes. Ils s'excuserent tous sur diverse Pretextes, les uns
disant qu ils etoient la par malice, les autres parce que leur Juge avoit ete
corrompu; mais tous injustement. Parmi ceux-ci il se rencontra un petit noirand
esperlucat, and comme le Duc lui demanda pourquoi il etoit la: Monseigneur, dit
il, je ne saurois nier que ce ne soit avec justice qu'on m'a mis ici; car me
trouvant sans argent, je pris une Bourse pres de Tarrascon pour m'emp^cher de
mourir de faim. Le Duc, avec un petit baton qu'il avoit en sa main, lui donna
deux ou trois coups sur l'epaule, and lui dit, Coquin, qu'est ce que tu fais
ici parmi tant de gens de bien qui sont innocens? Sors promtement de leur
Compagnie. Ansi il fut mis en liberte, and les autres demeurerent pour tirer a
ia Rame.

92
Jaques I. Roy d' Angleterre demandant au Chancellier Bacon, ce qu'il pensoit
del'Ambassadeur de France; il respondit que c'etoit un homme de belle taille.
Ouy, repliqua le Roy, mais que dites vous de sa tete? Est-elle propre pour une
Ambassade? Sire, dit Bacon, les Gens grands sont comme les Maisons de cinq ou
six etages, ou les Chambres les plus hautes sont ordinairement les plus mal
garnies.

93
Christophe de Plaisance, Gentilhomme agreeable and bon compagnon, mais fort
pauvre, trouvant une nuit des voleurs dans sa maison, leur dit, sans se mettre
en colere, Je ne scay ce que vous pretendez trouver dans ma Maison pendant la
nuit, puisque moy meme, je n'y trouve rien pendant le jour.

94
Un Comte Italien, des environs de Naples, qui avoit cent mill ecus de rent,
ayant epouse une simple Blanchisseuse; le Dimanche d'apres, on vit Pasquin avec
une Chemise extremement sale, and ces mots satyriques au dessous: Fi donc,
Pasquin, Une Chemise sale un jour de Dimanche? La reponse en faveur de Pasquin
etoit, Je ne saurois qu'y fair, car ma Blanchisseuse est devenue Comtesse.

95
On fit une Raillerie fort piquante sur le Pape, and un de les Neveux, sur la
fin de l'annee 1649. En cette maniere. Le bon Pere avoit eleve ce jeune homme
de la Condition d'un miserable benet de Tailleur, a la dignite de Baron de
Rome; Toute l'ancienne Noblesse en fut piquee: and on chargea un Esprit malin
de tourner en ridicule, and la conduite du Pape, and la dignite du nouveau
Baron; sur cela on vit le jour de Noel, de grand matin, Pasquin v^tu d'un habit
fort sale and tout dechire avec un morceau de Papier a la main, avec ces mots.
Quoy donc, Pasquin, d'ou viennent ces Guenilles un jour de Noel? La reponse en
faveur de Pasquin etoit, Helas! je^ne saurois qu y fair, car mon Tailleur a
ete fait Baron.

96
Un jour on menoit un voleur a la Potence, and comme son Confesseur lui
demandoit s'il n'etoit pas fache d'avoir commis le larcin pour lequel il alloit
etre pendu: Ouy, lui repondit le Criminel, mais ce qui me fache davantage,
c'est de n'avoir pas assez vole pour corrompre mes Juges.

97
Deux Dames jouant au Piquet, un jeune Seigneur vint sur le jeu, qui leur
demanda ce qu'elles jouoient, else lui dirent qu'elles ne jouoient que pour
l'honneur. Il n'y aura donc rien pour les carts; repliqua t-il.

98
Un avocat dit a son Client, que sa Party adverse avoit port l'affaire d'une
cour a une autre, a quoi le Client repondit, Elle n'a qu'a la porter au Diable
si elle veut; Je suis seur que mon Procureur l'y poursuivra pour de l'argent.

99
Un Usurier se faisoit toujours servir deux Plats a Table, quoy qu'il ne
touchat qu'a un; un jour son valet n'en servit qu'un, and laissa l'autre.
Coquin, lui dit son Maitre, Ou est (...) Plat? Monsieur, dit il, Il est venu
ici (...) souvent, que je eroyo^ qu'il retrouveroit assez le chemin sans moy.

100
Un Avocat etant malade, fit son Testament and donna tout son Bien aux Fous,
aux Lunatiques, and aux Enragez: Et comme on lui en demanda la raison, il
repliqua, Qu'il vouloit le render a (...) de qui il se tenoit.

101
Un Tailleur alla porter ses Parties au Duc de Buckingham, qui lui dit-qu il ne
pouvoit pas le payer alors, mais lui fit prendre une eeuellee de son Bouillon,
ce qu'ayant fait, il remercia (...) humblement sa Grandeur, and se retira. Il
n'eut pas ere long tems chez lui a fair aller ses Ciseaux, qu'il eut affair
de son Poincon; car le Bouillon commencant a operer, il falut qu'il fit monter
sa Femme, laquelle ne se fit pas beaucoup prier pour yenir voir ce qu'il
souhaitoit. A mesure que le Bouillon operoit sur lul il en fit autant sur sa
Femme; and s'etant bien diverti avec elle, il lui donna un baiser, and la
renvoya. Dans un quart d'heure il la fit remonter; et puis une troisieme and
quatrieme fois. Ensin elle lui demanda d'ou venoit un Changement si etrange and
si subit? Il repondit que Milord ne lui avoit pas pay ses Parties, mais qu'il
lui (...), une eeuellee de son Bouillon, quiwl'avoit rendu si vigou^: (...)
quoi la Femme repliqua ^ t^i de tou^es tes parties en Bo^llons

102
Un Tailleur borgne revint au Logis avaunt que sa Femme l'y attendit; and comme
pendant son absence elle s'etoit divertie avec son galand, and qu'elle ne
savoit comment le fair sortir, elle s'avisa de ce Stratageme. Elle s'approche
de son mari, lui saute au cou, met sa main sur son bon oeil, and lui dit qu
elle avoit song a nuit passee qu'il y voyoit de l'autre l'oeil, and dans ce
tems la son galand se fauva.

103
Un Tailleur, qui avoit une Femme jeune and belle, s'en etant all en Province
chez ses Chalands; un de ses Compagnons jeune and vigoureux tacha de la
corrompre, mais elle le rebuta; Enfin il jura que lors qu'elle seroit couchee,
il la viendroit trouver dans sa chamber, and elle jura de son cote que s'il le
faisoit, elle auroit un grand Couteau dans son lit pour lui couper la gorge. La
nuit venue, il ouvre doucement la Port, mais se ressouvenant du Couteau, il
alloit resortir a la derobee: Elle, entendant du bruit, demanda qui c'etoit?
C'est moy, dit il, qui avois resolu de coucher avec vous, n'etoit que je me
suis ressouvenu du serment que vous avez fait du Couteau. O! la sotte que je
suis, dit elle, d'avoir oublie^ le Couteau la bas dans la Cuisine!

104
Un homme qui etoit a la Table d'un Milord, l'entretenoit d'une Operation
chimique qu'il avoit veue en Flandre, and qui etoit un Remede general pour
toutes fortes de maux; and je vous avoue, dit il, que je ne l'eusse pas creu si
je ne l'eusse veu moi-meme; le Milord en parut fort surpris, and il demanda a
un Philosophe grave qui etoit a Table, ce qu'il en croyoit: Vrayment* Milord,
dit-il, ce Monsieur la vient d'expliquer me^ sentimens, car il a dit qu'il ne
l'eut point creu, a moins que de l'avoir* veu, and moy je ne saurois le croire
non plus.

105
Un Gentilhomme arriva dans une Hotelerie de Chelmsford, un jour qu'il faisoit
grand froid, and comme il ne pouvoit avoir place aupres du feu, il appella le
valet d'Escurie, and lui dit d'aller chercher un Picotin d'Huitres, and de les
donner au plus vite a son cheval. Est-ce que votre cheval mange des huitres,
reprit le valet d'Escurie? Vous n'avez qu'^ essayer, lui dit le Gentilhomme.
D'abord tout le monde accourut pour voir cette merveille, and le feu demeurant
libre, le Gentilhomme prit la place qu il voulut. Un moment apres le valet
d'Escurie rapporte les huitres, and dit que le Cheval n'y vouloit pas mordre;
He bien, dit le Gentilhomme, il faut que je les mange moi-meme.

106
Un Gentilhomme ayant affair de deux Coupe j^rrets determinez pour fair piece
a un homme qui lui avoit fait affront, son valet lui en amena deux, qui avoient
le visage balafre: Non, dit-il, je ne veux point de vous; Mais si vous pouvez
m'amener ceux qui vous ont fait oes Balafres, ils feront mon affair.

107
Deux Amiss qui ne s'etoient pas veus depuis long tems, se rencontrant par
hazard, l'un d'eux demanda a l autre comment il se po^toit? il lui d^t pas trop
bien, and qu il s'etoit marie depuis qu'il ne l'avoit veu: voila une bonne
nouvelle, dit-il; Pas trop bonne, lui repliqua l'autre, car j'ai epouse une
querelleuse; Voila qui va mal, lui dit l'autre; pas tant mal non plus, dit il,
car ^lle m'a apporte deux mill livres Sterlin; voila qui est encore bien, lui
dit l'autre; Pas trop bien non plus, car j'en ai achete des Moutons, and ils
sont tous morts du Tac: Voila qui est cruel, lui dit son ami; Pas tan^ cruel,
dit il, car j'ai vendu les peaux plus que les Moutous ne me coutoient; Cela
vous a dedommage, lui dit l'autre; Pas beaucoup, car j'en ai achete une Maison
qui s'est brulee; Voila en verite une grande perte; Pas trop grande, car ma
Femme s'y est brulee aussi.

108
Un homme dit a sa Femme, qu'o^ l'avoit assure que tous ceux de leur ville
passoient pour Cocus, a la reserve d'un seul: Qui crois tu que c'est? dit-il;
Urayment, mon mari, dit-elle, je ne saurois m'imaginer qui ce peut etre.

109
Un Filou etant venu dans une Hotelerie, il e^voya chercher un Cordonnier avec
des Bottes, and en ayant essaye une Pair qui lui etoient propres, il lui en
demanda le prix, and lui dit qu'il ne pouvoit pas le payer de la semaine; le
Cordonnier lui dit qu'il vouloit donc ravoir ses Bottes; l'autre, voyant qu'il
n'avancoit rien, prend aussi tot la fuite, and court a travers la ville, and le
Cordonnier apres lui, criant de toute sa force, qu'on l'arrete, qu'on l'arrete.
Comme quelques uns alloient l'arreter, il leur cria; je vous pry ne m'arretez
pas, car nous gageons a qui courra le mieux, moy avec des Bottes, and lui avec
des souliers; alors ils s ecrierent qu'ils gageoint cent Livres Sterlin que les
Bottes gagnoient.

110
Un Debauche fut mean devant un juge de Paix pour avoir fait des juremens; Le
juge lui ordonna de payer ^amende, qui eroit deux Chelins pour deux juremens;
la dessus il ^ire un demi-ecu de sa poche, and demand au juge le prix d'une
imprecation, lequel lui dit, Six sols: Et bien, dit il, La Peste vous e^ouffe
Pripons and Fous ^ ^.

111
Un Certain Pace, grand Railleur du Tems de la Reine Elizabeth, etant venu a
la'Cour: He bien, Pace, lui dirent les Dames, nous allons maintenant entendre
nos Defauts: Point, dit il, je n'a^ pas (...) de parler de ce qui fait
l'entretien de toute la ville.

112
Un Getilhomme a cheval, avoit un chien appelle Cocu, qui suivit une chienne
dans une Entree de maison; la dessus il se mit (...), Cocu, Cocu; La Femme du
logis sortit and lui dit nu'il etoit un coquin d'appeller son mari cocu; Vous
vous trompez, dit-il, ce n'est pas lui que j'appelle, c'est mon chien; Vous
avez encore plus grand tort, dit elle, de donner a un chien le nom d'un
Chretien.

113
Alphonse, surnomme le Sage, Roy d' Aragon avoit accoutume de dire, que parmi
tant de chooses que les Hommes possedent, ou qu'ils recherchent avec ardeur
pendant le course de leurvie, tout n'est qu'un vain amusement, except du Bois
sec and vi^ux pour bruler, du vin vieux pour boire, d anciens amiss pour
converser, and de vieux Livres pour lire.

114
Un Gentilhomme, qui avoit une belle femme, avoit accoutume de venir souvent a
Londres, and de laisser sa Femme a la Campaign; pendant son absence un Drole de
Chartier, fort and vigoureux; etoit familier avec elle, ce qui etant venu aux
Oreilles du Gentilhomme, il jura qu il tueroit ce Coquin en quelque endroit
qu'il put le renconter; Un jour, etant aux Champs, quelqu un lui dit: voila le
Drole qui vous a fait cocu; la dessus il s'approche de lui, and lui dit:
Coquin, j'apprens que pendant mon absence vous etes familier avec ma Femme, and
que vous m'avez fait Cocu: He bien, Monsieur, dit il, je l'ai fait, qu'est ce
qu'il y a? Ce qu il y a, dit il? C'est que si vous ne l'aviez pas avoue je vous
aurois casse la tete.

115
Un jeune homme dit a sa femme la premiere nuit des noces, que si elle lui eut
permis de coucher avec elle avaunt le Marriage, il ne l'eut jamais epousee: Ma
foy, dit elle, C'est ce que je me suis imaginee, car j'ai deja ete attrapee
troi^ ou quatre fois auparavant, and je n'avois guard de me laisser encore
attraper.

116
Une Demoiselle modeste etant forcee d'accuser son Mari d'impuissance, and
etant a l'audience, elle pria tres humblement le Juge de lui permettre d'ecrire
ce qu'elle n'osoit dire, par Modesty; ^le Juge lui accorda cette liberte, and
commanda d'abord a^ Greffie^ de lui donner une Plume, de l'Encre and du Papier;
Elle prit la plume, ^ans y mettre do l'Encre, and (...) semblant (...); Le
Greffier lu^t dit, Madame, Il n^y a point d Encre a votre plum^: Urayment,
Mo^sieur, dit elle, c'est la justement mon cas, and ainsi il n'est pas
n^cessaire que je m'explique d'avantage.

117
Un Maltotier se promenant pres d'une Riviere vit un Gar^on qui peschoit, and
qui savoit qu'il etoit de cette honnorable Profession. Petit Gar^on, lui dit
il, Que pesches tu? Je tache de pesche^ le Diable, repliqua l^ Gar^on, mais je
n'ai pas la bonne amorce pour l'attraper: Quelle est cette amorce, dit l'autre?
Urayment, Monsieur, j'ai entend^ dire qu'il n'y a pas de meil^eare amorce qu'un
Maltotior.

118
Un homme qui venoit d'un grand Voyage, and qui pour fair diligence avoit
couru la Post, etant arrive chez lui, il pria sa Femme de l'excuser s'il ne la
caressoit pas cette nuit; Elle parut assez content, mais maudit dans son coeur
ceux qui avoient invente la Post. Le (...), s^ promenant dans la (...) avec sa
Femme* il vit* l^ Coq (...) au ^oleil aupres des Poules, and la dessus il
domanda a sa Femme qu'est-ce qui rendoit le Coq si pesant and assoupi;
Urayment, dit elle, je ne sai, a moi^s que ce ne soit d'avoir couru la Post.

119
Un Captain de (...) (...) que son Bisayeul, son Ayeul and son Pere ^toient
morts sur mer; si j'etois que de vous, lui dit quelqu un, je n'irois jamais sur
mer a cause de cela. Et ou est^ce que tous vos Parens sont morts, lui dit-il?
Il repondit dans leur lit. Et ^ien, repliqua-t-il, par la meme raison, si
j'etoit que de vous je ne me mettrois jamais au lit.

120
Un Marchand Anglois a Amsterdam, devoit vendre pour cent livres Sterlin de
Gans a certains ^uifs, lesquels se dedisant du March, en apportant leur Argent
n'en voulurent prendre que la Moitie; le Marchand Anglois leur demanda un p^u
de tems pour les appareiller, and leur dit qu'ils en auroient Moitie; Ensuite
il donna order a ses Gens de la mettre tous les Gans de la main droite en une
Party, and ceux de la gauche en une autre; quand les ^uifs vinrent il leur dit
de choisir, ce qu'ayant fait, and pay l'argent, ils commencerent a les
empaqueter, mais comme ils s'apperceurent enfin qu'ils etoient tous d'une main,
ils furent obligez de prendre les autres au prix d^ Marchand.

121
Un Gentilhomme donna order a son valet de l'appeller a six he^res du Matin,
mais il l'eveilla a quatre; and comme il lui en demanda la raison, il repondit:
Qu'il venoit lui dire qu'il avoit encore d^ux heures a dormir.

122
Un Cuisinier qui servoit un Taquin, dit qu'il vouloit le quitter, and comme on
lui demanda pourquoi? C' est, dit il, que si je demeure long tems chez lui,
j'oublierai mon metier.

123
Une Dame etant recherchee par deux Galands don't l'un etoit grand, and l'autre
petit, un Gentilhomme lui demanda, lequel etoit le plus a son gre? Urayment,
Monsieur, dit elle, le grand me revient le plus, pourveu qu'il ayt tout a
proportion.

124
Un homme demandoit pourquoi on donnoit plutot aux Gueux qu'aux Savans? Un
autre lui repondit, Parce qu'on peut devenir gueux plutot que savant.

125
Un homme demandoit a un autre, quelle opinion on avoit de lui? Urayment, lui
dit l'autre, vous paroissez fou, aux Sages; and Sage, aux fous; mais, je vous
pry, que pensez vous de vous meme.

126
Un pere grondoit son filz de ce qu'il se levoit tard, and luy disoit pour
exemple qu'un certain homme s'etant leve de bon Matin, il avoit trouve une
bourse pleine de Pistoles, son filz luy repondie. Celui qui l'avoit perdue
s'etoit leve encore plus matin.

127
Un Medecin ayait fait venir un Marechal pour lui guerir sa Mule, la second
fois qu'il vint, le Medecin luy mit trente, solz dans la main, le Marechal les
luy rendit en luy (...), Monsieun, vous ne prenons jamais d'argent de ceux de
notre profission.

128
Oh homme disoit que les sottises resembloint aux malheurs, qui ne viennent
jamais seuls, and qu Vaussitot qu'il en entendoit dire quelqu'u une, il disoit,
soyez la bien venue pourveu que vous soyez seule.

129
Deux jeunes hommes demandoient une Fille en marriage a son pere, l'un etoit
rich and l'autte pauore, le pere l'ayant donnee au dernier quelques-uns de ses
mis lui demanderent pourquoy il ne l'avoit pas donnee a celuy qui etoit rich;
Parce que, leur dit-il, Le rich qui n'a point d'esprit, pourra devenir pauvre,
mais le pauvre qui est un homme judiceux and sage pouvra facilement devenir
rich.

130
Un borgne rencontra un matin de fort bonne heure un bossu, and luy dit,
compere, vous etes charge de bonne heure; il est vray qu'il est de bonne heure,
dit le bossu, car vous n'avez encor qu' une fenetre ouverte.

131
Un certain homme disoit, que le vin avoit deux mauvaises qualitez: la
premiere, si l'on met de l'eau dans le Vin, vous le gatez, la secon de
sivousn'y en mettez point, il vous gate vous meme.

132
Deux Hommes allant a cheval de Shipton ^ Burford, and voyant un Meunier, qui
alloit tout doucement devant eux monte sur ses sacs, ils resolurent de se
moquer de lui, and pour cet effet l'un d'euxse mit a un de ses cotez and
l'autre de l'autre, Lui demandant s'il etait plut fripon que fou? Vrayment,
dit-il, Je ne sai ce que je suis le plus, mais je juge que je suis enter deux.

133
En Flandres un Macon Flamand tomba par accident du Toit d'une Maison sur un
Espagnol, and le tua, quio qu'il eut le bonheur d'echapper lui meme sans se
fair mal; le plus proche Parent fit des poursuites vigoureules contre le Macon
au sujet de la mort du Defunt, and quoy qu'il lui offrit une Recompense
pecuniaire, il insistoit toujours sur la loy du Talion. Sur quoy le juge lui
dit que s'il demandoit une tell sentence, il faloit qu'il montat sur le Toit
de la meme Maison and que de la il se jettat sur le Macon, and qu' ainsi il le
fit mourir, de la meme maniere qu'il avoit tue son Parent.

134
Les Espagnols favorisoient le patli du Duc De Mayenne and des autres Rebels
de France, qui prirent le nom de Saint Ligue: Et comme on demandoit a un
Gentilhomme Francois les causes de leurs Brouilleries domestiques, il repondit
par cette excellent Allusion, qu'elles etoient Spanie and Many; semblant
signifier par cette Reponse (...), indigence; and (...), la Many, la Fureur;
Mais voulant marquer a mots couverts, le Roy d' Espagne and le Duc de Mayenne.

135
Thomas d'Aquin vint voir un jour le Pape Innocent III. en presence de qui on
contoit alors une grande sum d'argent. Tu vois Thomas, lui dit le Pape, que
l'Fglise n'a pas besoin de dire presentement, ce qu'elle disoit dans son
enfance, Je n'ai ni or, ni argent. A quoi Thomas lui repliqua sans etude: Il
est vray Saint Pere, mais aussi l'Eglise d'apresent ne peut elle pas dire ce
que l'ancienne dit a ce meme Boiteux, Leve-toi, march and te port bien.
Remarquez en passant que quelques uns font ce Conte du Pape Sixte IV. Et d'un
Cordelier.

136
Le Pape Alexandre VI. demandoit a Jerome Donat, Ambassadeur de Venise, de qui
les Venitiens tenoient les Droits, and les Contumes de la Mer? A quoi
l'Ambassadeur repondit sur le champ: Que votre saintete^ me montre les Titres
du Patrimony de S. Pierre, and vous trouverez au dos, une donation faite aux
Venitiens de la Mer Adriatique.

137
Un Plaisant avoit accoutume de dire que dans la Chretiente il n'y avoit n'y
assez de gens scavans, ni assez de Gentilhommes, ni assez de Juiss: Et comme on
lui repondit que bien loin qu'il en manquat il n'y en avoit qu'un trop grand
nombre, il repliqua, que s'il y avoit assez de scavans, il n'y auroit pas tant
d'ignorans beneficiez; Si assez de Gentilhommes, il n'y auroit pas tant de
Roturiers faits nobles; and si assez de Juiss, tant de Chretiens ne se feroient
pas Usuriers.

138
Du tems de la Reine Elizabeth, dans la chaleur des guerres enter l' Angleterre
and l' Espagne, il fut resolu qu'on entreroit dans un Traite de Paix entres ces
deux couronnes; Et Pour cet effet on nomma des Commissaires de part and
d'autre. Ils s'assemblerent dans une Ville du Roy de France, and la premiere
question que l'on mit sur le Tapis fut, en quelle Langue se feroit la
negotiation. Un Espagnol, voulant railler les Commissaires Anglois, proposa la
langue Francoise comme la plus propre, and que les Espagnols entendoient fort
bien, and pour ces Messieurs les Anglois, je crois, dit-il, qu'ils n'ignorent
pas la langue des autres sujets Francois, puis que leur Reine est Reine de
France aussi bien que d' Angleterre. De bonne Foy, Messieurs, reprit le Docteur
Dale, un des Commissaires Anglois, la langue Francoise est trop vulgaire pour
une affair si secrette and si importante, sur tout dans une ville de France.
Traitons plutot en Hebreu, qui est la langue de Jerusalem, don't votre Maitre
est le Roy; pour moi, je suppose que vous y etes aussi bien versez que nous le
sommes dans le Francois.

139
Poggius le Florentin raconte une histoire plaisante pour condamner la Folly de
ceux qui consument leur Tems and leur Bien a la chasse, and a la Fauconnerie,
sur tout quand ce sont des Persons de bas lieu. Un Medecin de Milan, dit-il,
qui guerissoit de la Folly, avoit un creux plein d'eau dans sa maison, ou il
mettoit ses malades, les uns jusq'aux genoux, les autres jusqu'a la ceinture
and les autres jusqu'au menton, selon qu'ils etoient plus ou moins fous. Un
d'eux, qui etoit deja assez bien remis, se tenoit par hazard devant la Port,
and voyant passer un Gentilhomme a cheval, avec un Faucon sur le Poing, and ses
chiens apres lui, il voulut savoir a quoi servoit tout cet appareil! Il lui
repondit a tuer certain Gibier; le malade lui demanda encore ce que pouvoit
valoir le Gibier qu'il tuoit en un an? l'Autre lui repliqua neuf ou dix ^cus;
and comme il le pressa de lui dire combien ses Chiens, son Cheval and ses
Oiseaux lui coutoient d'entretien tous les ans? Il lui dit quatre cens ecus: Le
Malade entendant cela lui dit de s'en aller au plus vite, si son salut lui
etoit cher; Car, dit-il, si notre Maitre vient, and vous trouve ici, il vous
mettra assurement dans son creux avec les Foux jusqu'au Menton.

140
Une Dame Galante ayant accord un Rendzvous a un homme qui lui avoit temoigne
de la Passion, Elle le receut seule dans sa Chamber, and fort paree. l'Amant se
mis a genoux aupres d'elle, and apres plusieurs beaux discourse, il lui dit: Ah,
Madame, que ne vous tiens* je mainten^nt dans le fond d'un Bois? ^'est donc
pour ^'egorger, s'ecria la Dame irrittee: and elle appella au^i-tot ses Femmes
pour la delivrer de ce froid Amant.

141
Deux Freres qui logeoient ensemble, se ressembloient parfaitement, and
portoient le meme nom. Un homme demanda a (...) a l'un des deux. Lequel
demandez* vous? Lui dit le Portie^: Celui qui est conseill^r, ^epondit cet
homme; ils le sont tous deux. Celui qui est un peu louche; ils le sont tous
deux. Celui qui est marie; ils le sont tous deux. Celui qui a une belle (...)*
ils (...) sont tous deux. C'est donc celui qui est cocu; (...) (...), Monsieur,
lui repondit le Portie^, je crois qu'ils le (...) (...) (...)* Voila, dit cet
homme, (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).

142
Les Comediens jouant a Paris devant Louis XIII. une Comedy contre les Gens de
Robe avoient fait mettre parmi les Spectateurs, un de leur troop en Habit de
Ville. Ce Comedien, qui avec cet Habit ressembloit a un Conseiller, se leva a
l'endroit le plus risible de la Piece, dit hautement que cela n'etoit pas
supportable, de voir ainsi jouer les Gens de justice, and qu'ils en auroient
raison. Enfin, il somma les Comediens de cesser a l^nstant cette insolente
Piece. Et moi je veux qu'ils la jouent, repondit le Roy, qui crut que c'etoit
un Conseiller qui lui manquoit de respect en sa presence. Ce qui donna une
autre espece de Divertissement a l'assemblee, lors qu'elle feut que c'etoit un
Comedien deguise. Et le Roy qui entendoit Raillerie, rit le premier d'y avoir
ete trompe.

143
L'Addresse de Richard I. Roy d' Angleterre pour excuser au Pape sa detention
de Philippe Eveque de Beauvais, qu'il avoit fait Prisonnier, est admirable. Cet
Eveque etoit un Homme aguerri, and sort incommode aux Anglois, qui possedoient
alors la meilleure party de la France. Etant enfin tomb enter leurs Mains, le
Pupe, qui en ignoroit la Maniere, ecrivit au Roy pour son elargissement, comme
etant Ecclesiastique; and un de ses Fills bien-aimez. Le Roy la-dessus envoye au
Pape l'Armure que l'Eveque portoit quand il sut pris, y ayant premierement fait
graver ces Mots, Vide an h^c sit Tunica Filii tui vel non: Voi si c'est le
hoqueton de son Fills, ou non. Qui sont les propres Terms don't se servirent les
Enfans de Jacob, lors qu'ils lui presenterent le Hoqueton de leur Friar Joseph.
Le Pape voyant l'Armure avoua de bonne foy, Que cet Eveque avoit en effet
plutot l'air d'un Fills de Mars, que d'un Fills de l'Eglise, and l'abandonna la
dessus au bon plaisir du Roy.

144
Une Pauvre Paisane du Poitou tomba malade d'une si grande Lethargy, que son
Mari and toutes les Femmes du voisinage la crurent morte. Pour l'enterrer, on
ne fit que l'enveloper d'un Drap, suivant la maniere des pauvres Gens de cette
Province. Comme on la portoit au Cimetiere, on passa si pres d'un Buis son
d'Epines qu'etant piquee jusqu'au vif par les Epines, elle revint de sa
Lethargy; mais quelques annees apres elle mourut tout de bon. Son Mari
craignant une autre Resurrection; se souvint du Buisson d'Epines, and quand le
Corpse de sa Femme passa pres de ce Buisson, il ne manqua pas de crier a
diverses fois, Prenez guard au Buisson d*Epines, n'approchez pas trop d^ la
hay.

145
Sixte V. etant devenu Pape de Cordelier qu'il etoit, ne changea pas d'humeur
en changeant de fortune, mais conserva leCaracterequ'il avoit d'homme
natu^rellement plaisant, and il aimoit a repasser dans sa memoire les bons
Tours qu'il avoit faits, and les aventures de sa premiere Condition. Il se
ressouvint entr'autres chooses, qu etant Cordelier, il avoit emprunte de
l'argent du Superieur du Convent de --, and qu'il ne le lui avoit point rendu.
Il demanda done de ses nouvelles, and ayant appris qu*il vivoit encore, il lui
envoya order de venir lui render conte de ses Actions. Le bon Pere qui n avoit
rien a se reprocher, s'en alla a Rome, avec la tranquillite que done une bonne
Conscience. Quand il ^ut devant le Pape: On nous a averti, lui dit le S. Pere,
que vous avez mal employe les deniers de votre Convent, and nous vous avons
envoye querir pour nous en render compte. S. Pere, lui repondit ce Religieux,
Je ne crois point avoir failli en cela. Songez bien, dit le Pape, si vous
n'avez point prete de l'argent a quelqu'un mal-a-propos, and entr'autres a un
certain Cordelier qui passa chez vous en une tell annee. Ce bon Homme apres
avoir un peu reve, lui dit: Saint Pere, il est vray, C'etoit un grand Fripon,
qui m'atrappa cet argent sous de vains Pretextes, and sur la parole qu'il me
donna de me le render dans peu. He bien, lui dit le Pape, nous sommes ce
Cordelier don't vous parlez nous voulons bien vous restituer cet argent, suivant
notre Promise, and vous donner avis en meme tems, de n'en plus preter aux Gens
de cette Robe; qui ne sont pas tous destinez a devenir Papes, pour etre en etat
de vous le render. Le bon Homme fort surpris de retrouver son Cordelier en la
Person du Pape, voulut alors lui demander pardon de l'avoir appelle Fripon.
Ne vous en mettez pas en peine, lui dit le S. Pere, cela pouvoit bien etre en
ce tems-la; mais Dieu nous a done le moyen de reparer nos fautes passees. Il
renvoya ensuite ce bon Religieux, apres lui avoir rendu l'argent qu'il lui
devoit, and lui avoir fait beaucoup de Caresses.

146
Un Predicateur prechant devant un grand Prince, qui avoit pris les Arms
contre son Pais, il le compara a Coriolan, ce fameux Captain Romain, qui
apres avoir bien servi sa Patrie dans les Commencemens de la Republique, en fut
banni. Et cette ingratitude lui toucha si fort au coeur, qu'il vint assieger
Rome avec les Volsques. Ce grand Captain, s'ecria ce Predicareur, Justement
irrite de l'ingratitude de ses Compatriotes, etoit en etat d'en tirer une
cruelle vengeance. Mais enfin il se laissa toucher par les Larmes de sa Mere
and de sa Femme: and ces deux Dames obtinrent de lui ce que ni le sacre College
des Cardinaux, ni le Pape memes, qui etoient allez au devant de lui, n'avoient
jamais pu obtenir.

Le Prince fit alors un eclat de rire, and ne put s'empecher de s'ecrier,
Monsieur le Predicateur, vous ne savez pas ce que vous dites, il n'y avoit en
ce tems-la ni Papes ni Cardinaux.

Mais le Predicateur, sans s'etonner, soutint courageusement au Prince qu'il ne
se trompoit pas. Et pour marque, Monseigneur, ajouta t-il, que ce que je vous
dis est vray, c'est que j'ai veu cette Histoire representee dans une Tapisserie
de votre Chasteau d'un tell Lieu. l'Autorite de cette Tapisserie city si a
propos redoubla les eclats de rire, and l ignorant Predicateur en fut si
trouble qu'il fit, comme on dit, le Plongeon dans sa chair, and s'enfuit au
lieu d'achever son Sermon.

147
Un Eveque donnant a Diner a plusieurs Prelates, fit dresser un Buffet compose
de beaux and grands Ouvrages d^argenterie, faits par les meilleurs Ouvriers. Et
comme ses Confreres admiroient la magnificence de ce Buffet, Je l'ai achete,
leur dit i^ a dessein d'en assister les Pauvres de mon Diocese: Monscigneur,
lui repondit un de ces Prelates, vous auriez pu leur en epargner la facon. Lui
faisant entendre par cette reponse, que sa charity avoit eu moins de part que
sa vanite and son luxe en l'achapt de cette Vaisselle.

148
Un Religieux allant precher par la Campaign, s'arreta pour diner chez un
pauvre Cure de Village; Mais ne trouvant pas le Pain ni le Vin assez bon, il en
envoya acheter de meilleur, avec les autres Provisions ne^essaires a fair un
bon Repas. En se mettant a table il se fit apporter une Cassette, remplie
d'Utensiles d'argent vermeil-dore, don't il se servoit dans ses Voyages. Le
Cure, surpris de sa magnificence, lui demanda, S'il avoit fait ses voeux? Oui,
sans doubt: Repondit le Predicateur, Mon Pere, lui dit alors le Cure, Nous
(...) donc vous and moi un bon Religieux, Car vous avez fait le voeu de
Pauvrete, and moy je l'observe.

149
Un Cure Italien nomme Il Piovano Arlotto passant par la ville de Naples, alla
saluer le Roy Alphonse, qui apprit par un de ses Courtisans que ce Cure etoit
un homme plaisant, qui disoit librement and agreablement ce qu'il pensoit aux
Persons les plus elevees, and qu'il avoit un Livre ou il ecrivoit toutes les
Fautes des Principaux de son tems. Le Roy, etant d'humeur a rire, lui dit,
Messer Piovano, ne serois je point ecrit sur votre livre? Vous pouvez voir,
repondit Piovano, and lui ayant done le Livre, il y trouva entr' autres
chooses, Fault faite par Alphonse Roy de Naples, d'avoir envoye en Allemagne un
Allemand qui etoit en sa Cour pour lui acheter des Chevaux. En quoi trouves tu
que j'aye failli, dit le Roy un peu emu, de donner cette Commission a un
Allemand? c'est, repondit Piovano, parce qu'il restera en son Pais avec votre
argent; Et s'il revient avec des Chevaux, ou qu'il me rapporte mon argent, que
diras tu alors? repartit le Roy: Alors, repliqua Piovano, je vous effacerai de
mon Livre, and j'y ^crirai l'Alemand en votre place.

150
Un Cure Italien invita un jour a diner il Piovano Arlotto avec plusieurs
autres Curez; and voulant fair le plaisant, il tira ceux-ci a part and leur
dit: Messieurs, je suis d'avis que nous nous divertissions aujourd'huy aux
Depens de Piovano, qui comme vous savez, fait le bon Compagnon, and se moque de
tout le Monde; Comme mon Clerc est malade, and que je n'ai person pour nous
servir, j'ai dessein de vous proposer de tirer a la court Paille, pour voir
lequel de nous ir^ a la Cave tirer le vin, and servir les autres pendant qu'ils
dineront, and je ferai en sort que le sort tombera sur Piovano, ce qui ayant
ete conclu entr'eux, fut execute. Piovano s'apperceut du complot, and resolut
d'en fair repentir son Hot; il s'en va a la Cave remplir les Bouteilles
pendant que les autres commencoient a diner, and etant remonte avec les
Bouteilles, Vouz voyez, Messieurs, leur dit-il, comme j'ai fait ce que le sort
m'a ordonne; tirons presentement a la court paille pour voir lequel de nous
descendra a la Cave pour refermer les muids que j'ai laissez ouverts. Alors le
Maitre de la Maison ne parla plus de tirer au sort, and connoissant Piovano,
pour etre homme a l'avoir fait comme il le disoit, il quitta promtement son
Diner, and courut a la Cave ou il trouva ses Muids ouverts, and une party de
son vin perdu; don't il fit ensuite de fort grandes Plaintes a Piovano. Vous
n'avez pas raison de vous plaindre de Moy, lui repondit il, puis que j'ay
satisfait ponctuellement au jeu, qui m'avoit bien ordonne d'aller tirer le vin,
and de remplir les Bouteilles, Mais non pas de refermer les Muids d'un Hot qui
fait si mal les honneurs de sa Maison.

151
Un Courtisan jouant au Piquet dans une Academie, and ayant reconnu par les
Carts qui lui rentroient, qu'il avoit mal ecarte, il s'ecria, je suis un franc
Goussaut; c'etoit le nom d'un President, qui ne passoit pas pour etre des plus
eclairez de son Tems, mais qui se trouva pour lors par hazard derriere le
joueur qui ne l'avoit pas aperceu. Ce President, se sentant offense d'^etre
cite en cette occasion, lui dit, qu'il etoit un sot: Vous avez raison, lui
repondit le joueur, c'est cela memes que je voulois dire.

152 Le Marriage est quelquefois un Remede contre l'Amour.
CLitandre ayant veu par hazard Celimene, il demeura surpris and charm de sa
beauty extraordinaire, Cependant comme elle n'avoit qu'un bien mediocre, and
qu'il avoit des Richesses immenses, il fit Reflection sur un engagement qu'il
trouvoit bien prompt, and bien fort. Il n'avoit plus de repos: Il se sentoit
continuellement agite, and il craignoit qu'une Passion qui etoit si violente
des son commencement, ne le portat enfin a satisfaire son coeur au prejudice de
sa Fortune. Pour bannir de son ame une tendresse si dangereuse il alla fair
une Campaign en Flandres; mais il revint plus amoureux qu'il n'etoit parti.
Puis, s'accusant de Foiblesse, il fit un second effort and entreprit le voyage
d' Italy; mais les Dive^tissemens de Rome, and le Carnaval de Venise ne furent
pas moins inutiles que le Siege de Namur. Clitandre fut a son retour plus
passionne que jamais, and comme son Ami Philante fut lui render visit, Mon
cher Phil^nte, lui dit il, je train une vie malheureuse; je ne puis oublier
Celimene; je m imagine qu elle est toujours devant mes yeux avec tous ses
Charms; Enfin, ajouta-t-il, enfin il faudra, que je l'epouse pour cesser de
l'aimer. Il l'epousa en effet, and un mois de Marriage changea son Amor
violente and tumultueuse, en une Amity douce and tranquille.

153 De la Reine d'Espagne and de ses Perroquets.
LA Camerara Major, ou la premiere Dame d'honneur, de la feue Reine d' Espagne,
etoit une Femme d une humeur chagrine and emportee, qui au lieu de servir sa
Maitreffe, se croyoit en droit de la gouverner: Elle hai^oit (...) ement deux
Perroquets que la Reine avoit apportez de France, parce qu ils parloient
Francois. Un jour sa Majeste etant sortie, la Camerara, prit les Perroquets de
ceile qui les gardoit, leur tordit le cou de sang ^roid, and s en alla. Aussi
tot que la Reine fur revenue, elle demanda ses Perroquets, qui etoient son pius
grand divertissement, dans un Pays ou elle n en avoit guere d autre; ses Femmes
tout etonnees firent paroitre leur surprise sur leur Visage, and ne sachant
d'abord que lui repondre, else lui avouerent enfin ce qui en etoit. Cela lui
per^a le coeur, mais elle t^ouva a propos de cacher son ressentiment. Quelque
tems apres la Camerara etant de retour, and voyant sa Majeste assez calm,
s'approcha d'elle pour lui baiser la main comme elle avoit accou^nme de fair,
mais elle en fut receue avec deux grands soufflets. A peine peut on exprimer la
confusion qu'un affront si sensible donna a cette Femme superbe: Elle sortit
toute en colere, and ramassant toutes ses Parents and Alliees, elle s'en alla
trouver le Roy avec une suite de quatre cens Dames, and lui demanda la
Reparation de son honneur avec tant d importunite, qu'ils se vit oblige d'aller
chez la Reine, pour savoir ses Raisons. Sire, repliqua cette ingenieuse
Princess, ce n'etoit que pour fair passer ^ne envy de Femmes: Est-ce donc
assez de deux, Madame, repondit le Roy: Autrement, je vous pry, appliquez lui
en deux douzaines. Et comme un malheur ne vient jamais seule la Camerara perdit
sa place sur le March. Digne recompense de ceux qui perdent le respect qui est
du a des Persons si augustes.

D'un vieux Seigneur Impuissant. 154
UN vieux Seigneur devint amoureux d'une jeune Demoiselle qui servoit sa Femme:
La Fragilite qui est assez o^dinaire aux Suivantes se trouvant heureusement
soutenue par les desagremens du Vi^illard, Elle eut assez de force pour
resister a ses Solicitations: Elle en avertit meme sa Maitresse, and confirma
par ses larmes ces Temoignagnes de sa Chastete. Il n'est pas possible, Madame,
lui dit elle, que je souffre davantage: Pour qui me prend Monsieur? Et comment
peut-il me croire capable de manquer a ce que je dois and a vous, and a mon
honneur? S'il continue, je vous supply de me permettre de me retirer. La bonne
Dame ^ort piquee contre son Mari, and tres content de l'honnetete de sa
Suivante, lui dit, Ma fille, ne te mets point en peine, il ne faut pas que tu
songs a me quitter, etant si asseuree que tu l'es de mon Amity. Il faut donc,
Madame, reprit-elle, que vous me delivriez des Persecutions de Monsieur. He
bien, lui dit la Dame, il me vient dans l'esprit un expedient fort propre pour
cela: Il faut que tu fasses semblant de t'addoueir pour lui, and qu'ensuite tu
lui donnes la nuit un Rendez-vous dans ta Chamber, Moy, Madame, lui donner un
Rendez-vous? lui dit la Demoiselle; ecoute jusqu'au bout ce que j'ai a te dire,
repliqua la Dame: Quand tu lui auras done l'heure, and laisse la Port
ouverte, j'irai en ta place dans ton lit and tu passeras dans ma Chamber, and
alors quand il viendra je lui ferai tant de honte qu'il n'aura plus l'envie de
te tourmenter. La suivante executa avec soin les ordres de sa Maitresse: la
nuit venue, le vieillard amoureux se glissa dans sa Chamber, and alla avec
empressement dans le lit ou sa Femme l'attendoit. Elle ne jugea pas a propos de
le quereller d'abord, mais comme cette avanture se passoit plus chastement
qu'elle ne s'y etoit attendue, elle s'en ennuya, and se resolut enfin de
parler: Quoy! n'est-ce donc que pour cela, lui dit elle, que vous vous ^tes
done tant de peine? Le Mari reconnut alors son erreur and la voix de sa Femme,
Je vous avoue, Madame, lui dit-il, que mon Corpse est plus sage que mon Esprit,
car il vous a reconnue, and mon Esprit aveugle vous prenoit pour une jolie
fille.

155 Le Troc de la Veuve.
UNE jeune Dame, qui venoit d'enterrer son Mari, qu'elle appelloit le vieux
Simon, commanda a un Statuaire de lui fair une Statue de Bois aussi
ressemblante qu'il pourroit, laquelle elle faisoit mettre toutes les nuits a
son cote, pour se souvenir de lui. Cependant un jeune Gentilhomme qui l'aimoit
passionnement, gagna si bien sa Servante par l'entremise de ses Guinees, qu
elle le mit une nuit en la place du vieux Simon. La Veuve s'alla coucher, and
selon sa coutume embrassa la Statue de son cher Mari, and la trouvant fort
chaude, elle s'en approcha davantage, jusqu'a ce que s'etant embrassez fort
etroitement, elle s'apperceut que ce n'etoit point son homme de Bois. La Matin,
sa Servante vint a la port de la Chamber selon sa coutume, and l^i demanda ce
qu'elle souhaitoit avoir a diner? A quoi elle repondit, Fais rotir le Dindon
qu'on apporta hier, and bouillir un Gigot de Mouton avec des choux fleurs, and
achete nous un bon plat de Fruit, Madame, dit la Servante, nous n'avous pas
assez de Bois pour appr^ter tant de Viandes. Et bien, repliqua-t-elle, vous
n'avez* qu'a bruler le vieux Simon.

156 L'aveu Indiscret.
UN Idiot en Lombardie, etoit fort amoureux (...) Fille qu'il croyoit etre
Pucelle; and afin de vivre en paix and en bonne amity avec elle, il s'avisa de
cet expedient; un jour il lui dit qu'il avoit resolu de l'epouser, and que pour
eviter toutes sorts de querelles a l'avenir, il vouloit lui dire tous ses
Secrets, afin de render par la leur Alliance plus ferme: Enter autres chooses,
il lui dit, que dans la Chaleur de sa jeunesse il avoit fait un Garcon a une de
ses amies, laquelle etoit encore en vie, and qu'il la prioit que cela ne lui
fit point de peine. Non, non, dit elle, j'en suis fort content, car un de mes
Amiss m'a fait une Fille, and si vous voulez fortifier notre Alliance, nous
pouvous le fair par un autre Marriage de votre Fills avec ma Fille.

157 Le Gascon puni.
UNE jeune Veuve belle and rich, etoit aimee par un jeune Gascon, pauvre and
presomptueux. Ce Gascon vouloit qu'on crut qu'il etoit fort bien avec cette
Dame, and divulguoit beaucoup plus de faveurs qu^il n'en recevoit. La Dame qui
etoit d'une humeur enjouee and plaisante, resolut de l'en punir d'une maniere
nouvelle: Je sai, lui dit elle, que vous avez de l'Affection pour moy; and je
suis persuadee que vous voudrez bien m'en donner des Marquis dans une Occasion
qui se present; le Gascon lui temoigna etre pret a tout fair pour son
Service; vous connoissez, ajouta la veuve, une tell Dame de mes amies, qui a
un Mari jaloux and fort incommode, and qui ne lui permet pas de coucher horse de
chez lui, cependant il est necessaire, pour des Raisons particulieres, qu'elle
couche ce soir chez moy, and ce que je desire de vous est que vous ailliez vous
coucher en sa place, a^in que son Mari, qui ne reviendra que tard, vous
trouvant dans son lit croye que c'est sa Femme; and comme il se leve de
meilleur matin qu'elle pour aller a ses Affairs, il ne s'appercevra de rien,
car quoy qu'il soit fort jaloux de sa Femme, il n'a pas accoutume de troubler
son repos durant la nuit. Le Gascon apres avoir consenti a tout ce qu'elle
voulut, se laissa mener chez l'Amie de sa Maitresse; on lui mit une coiffure de
nuit tell que les Femmes en portent, and il se mit ensuite dans le lit du Mari
jaloux qui etoit absent, and que la jeune Veuve savoit bien ne devoir pas
revenir ce soir la: les deux Amies laisserent le Gascon seul dans ce lit, and
quelque tems apres la jeune Veuve entra en Rob de Chamber, and sans lumiere,
and alla se coucher aupres de lui. Le Gascon qui la prenoit pour le Mari
jaloux, etoit en une peine extreme; il tenoit fort peu de place, and tournant
le dos a la jeune Veuve, il s'etoit mis le plus pres qu'il avoit pu de l'autre
board du lit. Il passa de cette sort une nuit la plus in quiet qu'il eut
jamais eve, apprehendant toujours quelques Caresses a contre tems du Mari
jaloux, mais sa peine fut encore plus grande, lorsque le jour comcant a
paroitre, la jeune Veuve prit une sonnette au bruit de laquelle il entendit
qu'il entroit quelqu'un dans la Chamber; il se couvrit la tete avec la
Couverture, and auroit voulu s'abimer dans le lit, tant il avoit peur d'etre
connu. Ce fut l'Amie de la Veuve qui entra and qui ouvrit les rideaux du lit,
d'ou la veuve sortit aussitot paree de toutes ses beautez naturelles, qui
penserent fair mourir le Gascon de regret, de depit, and de honte d'avoir fait
un si mauvais usage d'une si belle nuit.

FINIS.
BOOKS printed for Thomas Newborough and John Nicholson.
THE Complete French-Master, for Ladies and Gentlemen. Containing, I. A New
Methodical French Grammar. II. A Large and Copious Vocabulary. III. Familiar
Phrases, with the Niceties of the French Tongue. IV. Familiar Dialogues. V.
Dialogues of Wit and Humor, upon Love, and other Subjects. The Six last done
out of Spanish. By Mr. Savage. For the use of His Highness, the Duke of
Gloucester. By Mr. Bayer, Author of the Royal Dictionary. The Second Edition,
Corrected and much Enlarged.

The History of the Buccaneers of America: From their first Original down to
this Time. Written in several Languages, and now Collected into one Volume. The
Whole newly Translated into English, and Illustrated with Twenty five Copper
Plates. Octavo.

A new Survey of the West Indies, being a Journal of Three thousand and three
hundred Miles within the Main Land of America. By Tho. Gage, the only
Protestant that was ever known to have Traveled those Parts. The Fourth
Edition enlarged by the Author. With an Accurate Map. Octavo.

The History of Portugal; from the first Ages of the World to the late
Revolution, under King John the Fourth, in the Year 1640. Written in Spanish by
Emanuel de Faria y' Souso, Knight of the Order of Christ. Translated and
continued down to this Year, by Capt. John Stevens. Octavo.

There is in the Press, and will be speedily Published,

A Dictionary of the Roman and Greek Antiquities. Written by Peter Danett for
the use of the Dauphin, Duke of Burgundy, Anjou and Berry. Translated into
English for the use of Schools.


