HYDROSTATICAL PARADOXES, Made out by New EXPERIMENTS, (For the most part
PHYSICAL and Easy.)

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

OXFORD, Printed by William Hall, for Richard Davis, Anno Dom. M.DC.LXVI.

THE PUBLISHERS ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
WHen the Author Writ the following Treatise, he had a design, as appears by
some passages in the Preface, to publish together with it some things, which he
had diverse years before provided for an Appendix to the Physico-Mechanical
Treatise about the Air: But part of the Appendix consisting of Experiments,
which the Author has several times made, but trusting to his memory, did not
think it necessary to Record, when he came to recollect particulars, he found
that some years which had passed since diverse of them were tried, and variety
of intervening occurrents, had made it unsafe for him to rely absolutely upon
his Memory for all the circumstances fit to be set down in the Hystorical part
of the designed Appendix. And therefore he resolved to repeat diverse
Experiments and Observations, that he might set down their Phenomenon whilst
they were fresh in his Memory, if not objects of his sense. But though, when he
Writ the following Preface* he did it upon a probable supposition, that he
should seasonably be able to repeat the intended Trials, yet his Expectation
was sadly disappointed by that heavy, as well as just, Visitation of the Plague
which happened at London whilst the Author was in the Country: and which much
earlier then was apprehended, began to make havoc of the People, at so sad a
rate that not only the Glass-men there were scattered, and had, as they
themselves advertised him, put out their Fires, but also Carriers, and other
ways of Commerce (save by the Post) were strictly prohibited betwixt the parts
he resided in and London; which yet was the only place in England whence he
could furnish himself with peculiarly shaped Glasses, and other Mechanical
Implements requisite to his purposes; And the same Calamity continuing still,
without yet affording us any certain ground of determining when it will end:
The Author chooses rather to suffer the following Paradoxes to come abroad
without the Appendix, (which is no way necessary to them, whatever they may be
to It,) then any longer put off those Ingenious persons that solicited the
publication of them.

The PREFACE.
THe Rise of the following Treatise being a Command imposed on me by the Royal
Society, the Reader will, I hope, need no more then this intimation, to keep
him from wandering to find some passages Worded as parts of a Discourse
pronounce'd before an Assembly, it being not unusual (though not necessary) to
present either in writing or by word of mouth, together with the Experiments
made before that Illustrious Company, an Historical account of Them.

But because it is probable, that some Readers will desire to be satisfied about
other particulars, relating to the publication of this Treatise, I presume it
will not be amiss, both to say something of the Reasons, why I publish it as
the first part of the present Appendix to my Physico-Mechanical Experiments,
and to give some account of the manner of writing it.

I had quickly both an opportunity and an Invitation to enlarge the papers I
was to read, beyond the Limits of a bare description of the Phenomenon, and
matters of fact, by my having been through some intervening Accidents so
hindered from exhibiting them altogether, that I was desired to bring in an
Account in Writing, that might be Registered (how little soever worthy of such
Company) in the Societies Collection of Philosophical Papers, for the sake of
those Members who could not be present at all the Experiments: So that finding
some enlargements expected from me, I was easily induced to add the
Explications of the Phenomenon I described, whilst I perceived that by a small
addition of pains I might much gratify diverse Ingenious Friends that were not
so well versed in Hydrostaticks as in the other parts of real Learning.

Having thus been induced to enlarge the Account of my Experiments till it had
attained the bulk it is now arrived at, I confess I was without much difficulty
persuaded, that to suffer it to pass abroad About this passage, See the
Publisher, to the Reader.
in the Company of the Appendix wherewith it is published, would not prove
unacceptable to the Curious, no more then an improper introduction to the rest
of my Appendix, and that for several Reasons.

For (first) the Hydrostaticks is a part of Philosophy, which I confess I look
upon as one of the ingeniousest Doctrines that belong to it. Theorems and
Problems of this Art, being most of them pure and handsome productions of
Reason duly exercised on attentively considered Subjects, and making in them
such Discoveries as are not only pleasing, but diverse of them surprising, and
such as would make one at first wonder by what kind of Ratiocination men came
to attain the knowledge of such unobvious Truths. Nor are the delightfulness,
and the subtilty of the Hydrostaticks, the only things for which we may
commend Them: For there are many, as well of the more familiar, as of the more
abstruse Phenomenon of Nature; that will never be thoroughly understood, nor
clearly explionted by those that are strangerste the Hydrostaticks; upon whose
Principles depend, besides many other things, the Explications of most of the
Physico. Mechanical Experiments, we have ventured to present the Public, and
the Decision of those many Coutroversies, which they, and the Phenomenon of the
Torrecellian Experiment have occasioned among the Modern Inquirers into Nature.

But the use of this Art is not alone Speculative, but Practical, since not
only the propositions it teaches, may be of great importance to Navigation,
and to those that inquire into the magnitudes and gravities of Bodies, as also
to them that deal in Salt works: But that the Hydrostaticks may be made diverse
ways serviceable to the Chemists themselves, to whose Art that Doctrine seems
to be so little of Kin, I might here manifest, if I could think it fit to
transcribe, what I have Chiefly, in several places of the unpublish'd part of
the Treatise of the osefulness of Experimental Philosophy.
elsewhere delivered to that purpose.

But that which invited me to Write something of this part of Philosophy, is,
not only that I think it considerable, but that, notwithstanding its being so,
I find it but very little, and not very happily cultivated. For being not looked
upon as a Discipline purely Mathematical, the generality of Mathematicians have
not in their Writings so much as taken notice of it, much less improved It. And
since the admirable Archimedes, who, in his little Tract De insidentibus
humido, has left us three or four very excellent propositions, (but proved by
no very easy Demonstrations) among diverse others that have more of Geometrical
Subtility, then usefulness, Those Mathematicians, that, (like Marinus
Ghetaldus, Stevinus, and Galileo) have added anything considerable to the
Hydrostaticks have been (that I know of) very few, and those too, have been
wont to handle them, rather as Geometricians, then as Philosophers, and without
referring them to the explication of the Phenomenon of Nature. And as for the
Peripateticks, and other School-Philosophers, though on some Occasions, as when
they tell us, That water weighs not in water, nor air in air, they deliver
assertions about matters belonging to the Hydrostaticks, (which term, in this
Treatise, I often take in a large sense because most of the things delivered
about the weight of Bodies may by easy variations, be made applicable to other
Fluids) yet they are so far from having illustrated, or improved them, that
they have but broached or credited, diverse of the most erroneous conceits, that
are entertained about them. So that, there being but few Treatises written
about the Hydrostaticks, and those commonly bound up among other Mathematical
works, and so written, as to require Mathematical Readers, this useful part of
Philosophy, has been scarce known any farther then by name, to the generality
even of those Learned men, that have been inquisitive into the other parts of
it, and are deservedly reckoned among the ingenious Cultivators of the modern
Philosophy. But this is not all, For some eminent men, that have of late years,
treated of matters Hydrostatical; having been prepossessed with some errenous
Opinions of the peripatetick School, and finding it difficult, to consult
experience, about the truth of their Conclusions, have interwoven diverse
erroneous Doctrines among the sounder propositions, which they either borrowed
from Archimedes, and either circumspect Mathematicians, or devised themselves,
and these mistakes being delivered in a Mathematical dress, and mingled with
Propositions demonstrably true, the Reputation of such Learned Men, (from which
I am far from desiring to detract,) and the unqualifiedness of most Readers, to
examine Mathematical things, has procured so general an entertainment for those
Errors, that now the Hydrostaticks is grown a part of Learning, which it is not
only difficult to attain, but dangerous to Study.

Wherefore, though neither the Occasion and design of this Treatise exacted,
nor my want of skill and leisure qualified me to Write either a Body or
Elements of Hydrostaticks: yet I hoped I might do something, both toward the
illustrating, and toward the rescue of so valuable a Discipline, by Publishing
the ensuing Tract; where I endeavor to disprove the received errors, by
establishing Paradoxes contrary to them, and to make the Truths the better
understood and received, partly by away of Explicating them unimploy'd in
Hydrostatical Books, and partly by confirming the things I deliver by Physical
and sensible Experiments. And over and above this, the more to recommend
Hydrostaticks Themselves to the Reader, I have, besides the Paradoxes, opposed
to the Errors I would disprove, taken occasion by the same way, to make out
some of the usefullest of those Hydrostatical Truths, that are wont to seem
strange to Beginners.

If it be here demanded, why I have made some of my Explications so prolix, and
have on several occasions inculcated some things. I answer, That those who are
not used to read Mathematical Books, are wont to be so indisposed to apprehend
things, that must be explicated by Schemes, and I have found the generality of
Learned men, and even of those new Philosophers that are not skilled in
Mathematics, so much more unacquainted, then I before imagined both with the
principles and Theorems of Hydrostaticks, and with the ways of explicating and
proving them, that I feared, that neither the Paradoxes themselves, that I
maintain, nor the Hypotheses about the weight and pressure of the air, upon
which, little less then my whole Pneumatical Book depends, would be thoroughly
understood without such a clear Explication of some Hydrostatical Theorems, as
to a person not versed in Mathematical writings, could scarce be satisfactorily
delivered in few words. And therefore, though I do not doubt, that those who
are good at the most compendious ways of demonstrating, will think, I might in
diverse places, have spared many words without injury to my proofs, and though I
am my self, of the same mind I exspect to find them of; yet, I confess that
'twas out of choice that I declind that close and concise way of writing, that
in other cases I am wont most to esteem. For Writing now not to credit my self,
but to instruct others, I had rather Geometricians should not commend the
shortness of my Proofs, then that those other Readers, whom I chiefly designed
to gratify, should not thoroughly apprehend the meaning of them.

But this is not all for which I am to excuse my self to Mathematical
Readers. For some of them, I fear, will not like that I should offer for Proofs
such Physical Experiments, as do not always demonstrate the things, they would
evince, with a Mathematical certainty and accuratenesse; and much less will
they approve, that I should annex such Experiments to confirm the Explications,
as if Suppositions and Schemes, well reasoned on, were not sufficient to
convince any rational man about matters Hydrostaticall.

In Answer to this I must represent, that in Physical Enquiries it is often
sufficient that our determinations come very near the matter, though they fall
short of a Mathematical Exactness. And I choose rather to presume upon the
equity of the Reader, then to trouble him and my self with tedious
Circumlocutions, to avoid the possibility of being misunderstood, or of needing
his Candor. And we see, that even Mathematicians are wont, without finding any
inconvenience thereby, to suppose all perpendicular Lines, made by pendulous
Bodies, to be parallel to one another: Though indeed they are not; since, being
produced, they would meet at the Center of the Earth: And to presume, that the
Surface of every calm water, in a Vessel, is parallel to the Horizon; and
consequently, a Plain: Though, in strictness, themselves think it the portion
of a Sphere: And though also I have usually observed it to be higher, where
it is almost contiguous to the sides of the Vessel, then it is in other places.

Moreover, since we find that though water will be uniformly raised in Pumps to
several heights, but not to thirty five foot, and will in ordinary open pipes,
be almost of the same level within and without, but not if the pipe be
extraordinary slender; Upon these, and diverse other such considerations, I may
have sometimes made use of expressions, that seemed not positive and
determinate enough to be employed about matters to which Mathematical
Demonstrations are thought applicable. But I elsewhere give an account of the
scruples I have about such Demonstrations, as they are wont to be applied to
Physical matters. And, in the present Paradoxes, I think I have not done
nothing, if in my Hydrostatical Explications I have made it appear, That in
Experiments made with such Liquors and Glasses, as I employed, the Rules will
hold without any sensible, or at least any considerable Error; for thereby we
may learn the Truth of many things, for the main, though in some we should not
have attained to the exactness of measures and proportions, which yet our
endeavors may assist others to arrive at.

And as for my confirmation of Hydrostatical propositions by Physical
Experiments, if some Readers dislike that way, I make no doubt but that the
most will not only approve it, but thank me for it. For though, in pure
Mathematics, he that can demonstrate well, may be sure of the Truth of a
Conclusion, without consulting Experience about it: Yet because demonstrations
are wont to be built upon Suppositions or Postulates; and some things, though
not in Arithmetic or Geometry, yet in Physical matters, are wont to be taken
for granted, about which men are liable to slip into mistakes; even when we
doubt not of the Ratiocination, we may doubt of the conclusion, because we may,
of the Truth of some of the things it supposes. And this Consideration, if
there were no other, will, I hope, excuse me to Mathematicians, for ventring to
confute some reasonings that are given out for Mathematical demonstrations. For
I suppose it will be considered, that those whose presumed Demonstrations I
examine, though they were some of them Professors of Mathematics, yet did not
Write merely as Mathematicians, but partly as Naturalists: so that to question
their Tenets, ought not to disparage those, as well certain, as excellent and
most useful Sciences, pure Mathematics, any more then that the Mathematicians
that follow the Ptolemaick, the Copernican, the Tichonian, or other Systemes of
the world, Write Books to manifest one another Paralogismes in Astronomical
matters: And therefore (to proceed to what I was about to say) it cannot but be
a satisfaction to a wary man to consult sense about those things that fall
under the Cognizance of it, and to examine by Experiences, whether men have not
been mistaken in their Hypotheses and Reasonings, and therefore the Learned
Stevinus himself (the chief of the Modern Writers of Hydrostaticks) thought
fit, after the end of his Hydrostatical Elements, to add in an Appendix some
Pragmatical Examples (as he calls them) that is, Mechanical Experiments (how
cogent I now inquire not) to confirm the Truth of his Tenth Proposition, to
which he had, not far from the beginning of his Book, annexed what he thinks a
Mathematical Demonstration. And, about the very Subjects we are now upon, the
following Paradoxes will discover so many mistakes of eminent Writers, that
pretend to have Mathematically demonstrated what they teach, that it cannot but
make wary Naturalists (and it is chiefly to gratify such that I publish this)
be somewhat diffident of Conclusions, whose proofs they do not well understand.
And it cannot but, to such, be of great satisfaction to find the things, that
are taught them, verified by the visible testimony of Nature her self. The
importance of this Subject, and the frequent Occasion I have to make use of
this kind of Apology, will I hope, procure me the Readers pardon if I have
insisted somewhat long upon it.

After what has been hitherto discoursed, 'twil be easy for me to give an
Account, why I premised these Hydrostatical Paradoxes to the rest of the
Appendix, wherewith they are An Account of this passage also, may be had from
the Publishers Advertisement to the Reader.
now published: For since a great part of my work in that Appendix, was to be a
further Explication of some things delivered in the Book it is subjoined to,
and the vindication of then from invalid objections: And since I have generally
observed, that the objections that have bin, either publicly or privately*
made against the explications and reasonings contained in that Book, were wont
to proceed from unacquaintedness, either with the true notion of the weight and
spring of the air, as I maintain them, or with the Principles and Theorems of
Hydrostaticks, or else from erroneous Conceits about them; I thought it would
much conduce to both the forementioned ends of my Appendix, If I cleared up
that Doctrine to which my Experiments and reasonings have been all along
Consonant, and whose being either not known, or misunderstood, seems to have
occasioned the objections that have been hitherto made against the Hypotheses I
have proposed, or the Explications I have thence given. And however, since the
Proofs I offer for my opinions are for the most part drawn from Experiments new
and easy, and that my aim is but to discover Truths, or make them out by
clearer explications, without supposing, like those I dissent from, any thing
that is either precarious or scarce, if at all, intelligible; I hope, that if I
should not prove happy enough to reach my ends, yet the Ingenious and Equitable
Reader will approve my Design, and be advantaged by my Experiments. Of which
some of the chiefest, and some of the most difficult, having been seen (diverse
of them more then once) by the Royal Society it self, or by inquisitive Members
of it; it will, I presume, be but a reasonable request, if the Reader, that
shall have the curiosity to try them over again, be desired not to be hasty in
distrusting the matters of fact, in case he should not be able at first to make
every thing succeed according to expectation. For as easy as I have
endeavored to make these Experiments, yet I dare not promise my self that they
will all of them be priviledg'd from the fate whereto I have observed other
Physico-Mathematical ones to be not seldom obnoxious from some unheeded
Physical Circumstance, by which those that are not acquainted with the
subtleties of Nature, or, at least for the time, do not sufficiently consider
them, are apt to be imposed upon.

This Advertisement will perhaps be best illustrated, and recommended by an
instance. And therefore I shall subjoyne one that will possibly seem somewhat
odd.

It has been taken notice of by two or three Ingenious modern Mathematicians,
and I have had occasion to make it out by particular Experiments, that warm
water is lighter in specie then cold: whence it has been deduced, that wax, and
other Bodies, very near aequiponderant with common water, will swim in that
which is cold, and sinck in that which is hot, or lukewarm. Which Experiment,
though as it may be (and perhaps it has been) tried, I readily allow to be
agreeable to the known Laws of the Hydrostaticks; Yet I have sometimes
undertaken that the Trial should have a quite contrary event. To this purpose
having taken some yellow Beeswax, which was formed into a Pellet of the
bigness of a Cherry, and, by the help of a little Lead, was made so near
aequiponderant to cold water, that; being but a very little heavier, a very
small diminution of its weight would make it emerge, I removed it out of the
very cold water, into some that had bin purposely made lukewarm, (or a little
more then so) where it quickly, somewhat to the wonder of the lookers on,
appeard to swim on the top of the water. And that it might not be suspected
that it was supported by any visible bubbles, which I have observed, in some
cases, to buoy up even heavy Bodies, and deceive the unskilful, or unattentive;
I briskly enough duck'd the bullet 2 or 3 times under water to throw them off,
notwithstanding which it constantly returned to float, and yet being removed
again into the same cold water it had been taken out of, and duck'd as before
to free it from adherent bubbles, it lay quietly at the bottom, and, though
raised several times to the upper part of the water, would immediately subside
again, and fall to the very lowest. Now that which invited me to promise an
Experiment which seems to contradict the principles of the Hydrostaticks, was
not any distrust of those principles themselves, but a conjecture, that as by
warmth the water would be made a little lighter in specie then 'twas before; so
by the same warmth the spirituous and more agitable parts of the wax, whose
texture is loose enough, would be somewhat (though not visibly) expanded, and
would by that expansion gain a greater advantage toward floating, then the
increased lightness of the water would give it disposition to sinck. And I
confirmed this conjecture by a farther experiment, which at first was it self
somewhat surprising to the Beholders. For when the wax was first taken out of
the cold water, and immediately immersed in the warm, it would readily enough
sinck, and being (with a quill or a knife) raised to the top of the water, it
would again fall down, but more slowly then at the beginning, and aftersome few
minutes, if it were raised to the upper parts of the water, it would remain a
float. (And I have known it, when it had remained a while longer at the bottom,
so to emerge, that if I were sure no unheeded bubbles had been newly generated,
and held it up, it might be said to emerge of its own accord) as on the other
side, being put into the cold water as soon as ever it was taken out of the
warm, it would at the very first float, and being then knocked downwards, it
would, readily enough, regain the upper part of the water, but if I continued
to send it downwards about 6 or 7 times (more or fewer) successively, it would
emerge every time more slowly then other, and at length not emerge at all, even
when I tried it in water made heavy, by being highly infrigidated with salt and
snow placed about the Glass. Which Phenomenon I had thought it reasonable to
expect, because I presumed, that the Wax being removed immediately out of the
warm water, into the cold, must require some time, to loose the adventitious
expansion, which the warmth had given it, and must be deprived of it by
degrees, by the coldness of the water into which the wax was transferred. As on
the other side, there must be some time necessary for so little a warmth, as
that of the tepid (or little more then tepid) water, to give the wax that
addition of dimensions (which also it must receive by degrees) that was
necessary, in spite of the rarefaction of the water, to make it float. I might
add, that these Trials were repeated, for the main, with more Bullets of wax
then one, and that they succeeded far otherwise, when, instead of a piece of
wax, we employed a poised glass bubble, in which the temperature could make
either no change at all, or no considerable change of dimensions. And to these
I might add other circumstances, if I did not remember, that I mention these
Trials but occasionally, and to make the caution, formerly recommended to the
Reader, appear not to be impertinent, since a Hydrostatical Experiment, true in
its self, may easily miscarry by over-looking such Circumstances as it is not
easy to be aware of.

But by this Advertisement I would by no means divert Men from being diffident
of Hydrostatical Traditions and Experiments. For, besides the many Erroneous
Opinions, there are matters of fact, whose Truth, tho not questioned, but built
upon, I think ought to be brought to trial. For, even whilst I was concluding
this Preface, I found that diverse even of the Moderns, and particularly a very
learned Man that has lately Written of Hydrostaticks, have much troubled
themselves to render a reason why, since, according to their Doctrine, water
weighs not in water, Wooden vessels, though of a substance lighter then water,
being by leaks, or otherwise, filled with water, should sinck and remain at the
bottom of the water: whereas judging this Phenomenon disagreable to what I
look upon as the Laws of the Hydrostaticks, I was confirmed in that opinion, by
having had the curiosity to make some trials of it, wtth 4 or 5 vessels of
differing shapes and sizes, whereof two were of wax, which, though a matter but
very little lighter then water, I could not sinck, or keep sunck by pouring
water into them, or suffering them to fill themselves at leaks made near the
bottom, and if they were depressed by force or weights, they, as also the
wooden Vessels, would upon the removal of the impediment (and sometimes with
the cavity upwards) emerge. And I am the more solicitous to have things in the
Hydrostaticks duly ascertained, because the weighing of bodies in Liquors may
hereafter appear to be one of the general ways I have employed, and would
recommend, for the examining of almost all sorts of tangible Bodies.

THE CONTENTS.
PAradox. 1. That in Water and other Fluids, the lower parts are pressed by the
upper. 24 Par. 2. That a lighter Fluid may gravitate or weigh upon a heavier.
43 Par. 3. That if a Body contignous to the water be altogether, or in part,
lower than the highest level of the said water, the lower part of the Body will
be pressed upward by the water that touches it beneath. 67 Par. 4. That in the
ascension of water in Pumps, etc. there needs nothing to raise the Water, but a
competent weight of an External Fluid. 94 Par. 5. That the pressure of an
External Fluid is able to keep an Heterogeneous Liquor suspended at the same
height in several Pipes, though those Pipes be of very different Diameters. 106
Par. 6. If a Body be placed under water, with its uppermost Surface parallel to
the Horizon; how much water soever there may be on this or that side aboyd the
Body, the direct pressure sustained by the Body (for we now consider not the
Lateral nor the recoyling pressure, to which the Body may be expos'dand if
quite environed with water) is no more then that of a Colomne of water, having
the Horizontal superficies of the Body for its Basis, and the perpendicular
depth of the water for it is height. And so likewise, If the water that leans
upon the Body be contained in pipes open at both ends; the pressure of the
water is to be estimated by the weight of a pillar of water, whose Basis is
equal to the lower Orifice of the pipe, (which we suppose to be parallel to the
Horizon) and its height equal to a perpendicular reaching thence to the top of
the water; though the pipe be much inclined toward the Horizon, or thought it
be irregularly shaped, and much broader in some parts, then the said Orifice.
117 Par. 7. That a Body immersed in a Fluid, sustains a lateral pressure from
the Fluid* and that increased, as the depth of the immersed Body, beneath the
Surface of the Fluid, increases. 142 Par. 8. That water may be made as well to
depress a Body lighter then it self, as to buoy it up. 160 Par. 9. That, what
ever is said of positive Levity, a parcel of oil lighter then water, may be
kept in water without ascending in it. 165 Par. 10. That the cause of the
Ascension of water in Syphom, and of its flowing through them, may be
explicated without having a recourse to nature's abhorrency of a Vacuum. 170
Par. 11. That a solid Body, as ponderous as any yet known, though near the Top
of the water, it will sinck by in own weight; yet if it be placed at a greater
depth then that of twenty times its own thickness* it will not sinck, if its
descern be not assisted by the weight of the Incumbent water. 184 Appendix. 1.
Containing an Answer to seven Objections, proposed by a late Learned Writer, to
evince, that the upper parts of water press not upon the lower. 193 Ap. 2.
Concerning the Reason why Diverse, and others who descend to the bottom of the
sea, are not oppressed by the weight of the incumbent water. 221
Imprimatur,

ROBERTUS SAY,
VICE-CANCELLARIUS OXON.
HYDROSTATICAL PARADOXES, Made out by NEW EXPERIMENTS: Presented to the ROYAL
SOCIETY, (The Lord Viscount Brouncker being then President.) May 1664.
My LORD,
TO obey the orders of the Society, that forbid the making of Prefaces and
Apologies in Accounts of the Nature of that which you expect from me; I shall
without any further preamble begin with taking notice, that upon perusal of
Monsieur Paschall's small French Book, which was put into my hands, I find it
to consist of two distinct Treatises: The one of the AEquilibrium of Liquors,
as he calls it; and the other of the weight of the Mass of the Air.

As for this latter, (which I shall mention first, because I can in very few
words dispatch the little I have to say of it) Though it be an ingenious
discourse, and contains things, which if they had been published at the time,
when it is said to have been written, would probably have been very welcome to
the Curious: yet I have very little else to say of it in this place, in regard
that since that time, such kind of Experiments have been so prosecuted, that I
presume it is needless, and would not be acceptable to repeat what Monsieur
Paschall has written, in this Society, which has seen the same Truths, and
diverse others of the like Nature, more clearly made out by Experiments, which
could not be made by Monsieur Paschall, and those other Learned Men, that
wanted the advantage of such Engines and Instruments, as have in this place
been frequently made use of.

Wherefore having already at a former meeting given you, by word of Mouth, an
account of Monsieur Paschall's Ingenious Invention, of a pair of Bellows
without vent, to measure the various Pressure of the Atmosphaere; I remember
nothing else that needs hinder me from proceeding to the other part of his
Book, The Treatise of the AEquilibrium of Liquors.

This I find so short, and so worthy of the Author, that to give you all that I
judge worth taking notice of in it, would obliege me to transcribe almost the
whole Tract; and therefore I shall rather invite you to read the whole, then
divert you from the design by culling out any part of it; yet if you will not
be satisfied without something of more particular, I shall be obliged to tell
you, That the Discourse consisting partly of Conclusions and partly of
Experiments; the former seemed to me to be almost all of them (there being but
few that I doubt of) consonant to the Principles and Laws of the
Hydrostaticks. But as for the latter, the Experimental proofs he offers of his
opinions are such, that I confess I have no mind to make use of them.

And the Reasons why, notwithstanding that I like most of Monsieur Paschall's
Assertions, I decline employing his way of proving them, are principally these.

First, Because though the Experiments he mentions be delivered in such a
manner, as is usual in mentioning matters of fact; yet I remember not that he
expressly says that he actually tried them, and therefore he might possibly have
set them down as things that must happen, upon a just confidence that he was
not mistaken in his Ratiocinations. And of the reasonableness of this Doubt of
mine, I shall ere long have occasion to give an instance.

Secondly, Whether or no Monsieur Paschall ever made these Experiments himself;
he does not seem to have been very desirous, that others should make them after
him. For he supposes the Phenomenon he builds upon to be produced fifteen or
twenty foot under water. And one of them requires, that a Man should sit there
with the End of a Tube leaning upon his Thigh. But he neither teaches us how a
Man shall be enabled to continue under water, nor how in a great Cistern full
of water, twenty foot deep, the Experimenter shall be able to discern the
alterations, that happen to Mercury and other Bodies at the Bottom.

And Thirdly, These Experiments require not only Tubes twenty foot long, and a
great Vessel of at least as many feet in depth, which will not in this Country
be easily procured, but they require Brass Cylinders, or Pluggs, made with an
exactness, that, though easily supposed by a Mathematician, will scarce be
found obtainable from a Tradesman.

These difficulties making the Experiments proposed by Monsieur Paschall more
ingenious then practicable, I was induced on this occasion to bethink my self*
of a far more Expeditious Way, to make out, not only most of the Conclusions
wherein we agree, but others that he mentions not; and this with so much more
ease and clearness, That not only This Illustrious Assembly, but persons no
more than moderately versed in the Vulgar principles of the Hydrostaticks, may
easily enough apprehend what is designed to be delivered, if they will but
bring with them a due Attention, and minds disposed to prefer Reason and
Experience to vulgar Opinions and Authors; which last clause I annex, because
the following Discourse, pretending to confute several of those, challenges a
right to except against their Authority.

It not being my present Task to deliver the Elements, or a Body of
Hydrostaticks, but only ten or twelve Paradoxes, which I conceive to be
proveable by this new way of making them out, I shall, to avoid Confusion,
Deliver Them in as many distinct propositions; After each of which, I shall
endeavor in a proof, or an Explication, to show, both that it is true, and why
it ought to be so. To all these I shall to avoid needless Repetitions, premise
a word or two by way either of postulatum or Lemma.

And because I remember to what Assembly I address This Discourse, I shall make
use of no other then an easy supposition I met with in a short Paper (about a
Mercuriall Phenomenon) brought in a year or two since to this Learned Society,
by a deservedly Famous Member of it That excellent Mathematician the Learned Dr
Wallis, Savilian Professor of Geometry.
, For though his supposal be made upon occasion of an Experiment of another
Nature, then any of the ensuing, it may be easily accomodated to my present
purpose.

This postulatum or Lemma, consists of three parts; the first of them more, and
the two last, less principal.

Suppose we then, (First) That if a Pipe open at both Ends, and held
perpendicular to the Horizon, have the lower of them under Water, there passes
an Imaginary plain or Surface, which touching that Orifice is parallel to the
Horizon; and consequently parallel as to sense to the upper Surface of the
water, and this being but a help to the Imagination will readily be granted.

Secondly, To this it will be consonant, that each part of this designable
surface, will be as much, and no more pressed, as any other equal part of it,
by the water that is perpendicularly incumbent on it. For the water or other
Fluid being supposed to be of an homogeneous substance, as to gravity, and
being of an equal height upon all the parts of the imaginary Surface; there is
no reason why one part should be more pressed by a perpendicular pillar of that
incumbent fluid, then any other equal part of the same Surface by another
perpendicularly incumbent pillar of the same or equal Basis and height, as well
as of the same Liquor.

But Thirdly, Though whilst our imaginary Surface is equally pressed upon in
all parts of it, the Liquor must retain its former position; yet if any one
part comes to have a greater weight incumbent on it, then there is upon the
rest, that part must be displaced, or depressed, as it happens, when a stone or
other Body heavier then water sincks in water. For wherever such a a Body
happens to be underneath the water, that part of the imaginary plain that is
contiguous to the lower part of the stone, having on it a greater weight then
other parts of the same Surface, must needs give way, and this will be done
successively till the stone arrive at the Bottom; and if, on the other side,
any part of the Imaginary Surface be less pressed upon then all the rest; it
will by the greater pressure on the other parts of the Surface be impelled
upwards, till it have attained a height, at which the pressure (of the raised
water, and the lighter or floating Body (if any there be) that leans upon it,
and gravitates together with it, upon the subjacent part of the Imaginary
Surface) will be equal to that which bears upon the other parts of the same
Surface.

And because this seems to be the likeliest thing to be Questioned in our
Assumption, This Experiment and the Explication of it, if to some they should
here seem somewhat obscure, will be easily understood by the Figures and
Explications belonging to the first ensuing Paradoxe.
though he that considers it attentively, will easily enough be induced to
grant it: Yet I shall here endeavor to evince it Experimentally, and that by
no other way of proof, then the same I employ all along this present discourse.

Take then a Cylindrical glass pipe* of a convenient Bore open at both Ends,
let the Tube be steadily held perpendicular to the Horizon, the lower end of it
being two or three inches beneath the Surface of a convenient quantity of
water, which ought not to fill the Glass Vessel that contains it. The pipe
being held in this posture, it is manifest, that the water within the pipe, will
be almost in a level with the Surface of the water without the pipe, because
the external and internal water (as I am wont for Brevities sake to call them)
have free intercourse with one another by the open Orifice of the immersed End
of the pipe: yet I thought fit to insert the word almost, because if the pipe
be any thing slender, the Surface of the water in it, will always be somewhat
higher then that of the water without it, for reasons that it is not so
necessary we should now inquire after, as it is, that we should here desire to
have this taken notice of once for all; That mistakes may be avoided without a
troublesome repetition of the difference in heights of the Surface of Liquors
within pipes and without them, in case they be any thing slender.

The pipe being held in the newly mentioned posture, if you gently pour a
convenient Quantity of Oil upon the external water, you shall see, That as the
Oil grows higher and higher above the Surface of That water, the water within
it, will rise higher and higher, and continue to do so, as long as you continue
to pour on oil; Of which the Reason seems manifestly to be this; That in the
Imaginary plain that passes by the Orifice of the immersed end of the pipe,
all that is not within the Compass of the Orifice, is exposed to an additional
pressure from the weight of the oil which swims upon the water, and that
pressure must still be increased, as there is more and more oil poured on;
whereas a Circular part of the Imaginary plain, equal to the Orifice of the
Glass, is by the sides of the pipe fenced from the immediate pressure of the
oil; so that all those other parts of the water, being far more pressed, then
that part which is comprehended within the Cavity of the Tube: and consequently
the pressed parts of the external water, are by the equal gravitation of the
oil, upon the parts of the external water, impelled up into the Cavity of the
pipe, where they find less resistance, then any where else, till they arrive at
such a height, that the Cylinder of water, within the pipe, does as much
gravitate upon the subjacent part of the Imaginary Surface, as the water and
oil together, do upon every other equal part of the same Surface or plain.

But as well the former Lemma, as this Experiment, will be sufficiently both
cleared and confirmed by the following Explications; to which I should for that
Reason forthwith proceed; Were it not that, since diverse passages of the
following Treatise suppose the Air to be a Body not devoid of weight, which
yet diverse Learned adherents to the Peripatetick Philosophy do resolutely deny,
it seems requisite to premise something for the proof of this Truth.

And though I think the Arguments we have employed to that purpose already, do
strongly evince it: yet if I may be allowed to anticipate one of my own
Experiments of the Appendix, I shall give an instance of the weight of the
Air, not liable so much as to those invalid objections, which some of the
Aristotelians have made against those Proofs, wherewith we have been so happy,
as to satisfy the learned even of our professed Adversaries.

We caused then to be blown at the flame of a Lamp, a Bubble of glass, (of
about the bigness of a small Hen-egge) which, that it might be light enough to
be weighed in exact Scales, ought to be of no greater thickness, then is judged
necessary to keep it from being (when sealed up with none but very much
expanded air in it) broken by the pressure of the ambient Atmosphaere. This
bubble was (like a Pear with its stem) furnished with a very slender pipe of
Glass, at which it was blown, that it might be readily sealed up; and then (the
Air within it being by the flame of the Lamp gradually rarefied, as much as
conveniently could be) whilst the Body of the Bubble was exceeding hot, the
newly mentioned stem was nimbly put into the middle of the flame; where, by
reason of its slenderness, the Glass, which was exceeding thin, was immediately
melted; whereby the Bubble was Hermetically sealed up. This Glass being
permitted leasurely to cool, I could afterward keep it by me an hour, or a
day, or a week, or longer, if I thought fit; and when I had a mind to show the
Experiment, I put it in one of the scales of an exact balance, that would
turn, perhaps with the 30th, or 50th, or a less part of a grain; and having
carefully counterpois'd it, I then warily broke off the sealed end, placing a
sheet of paper just under the scale to receive the fragments of the Glass: and
putting in again those fragments, that scale wherein the Glass was would
considerably preponderate; which it must do upon the account of the Weight of
Air, there being no other cause, either needful, or justly assignable, but the
weight of the Air that rushed into the Cavity of the Glass, as finding less
resistance there then elsewhere, by reason that the included Air had it is
spring much weakn'd by it is great expansion.

This Experiment I many times tried, sometimes before some Virtuosi, and
sometimes before others; who all allowed it to be conclusive. For here it could
not be objected as against the weighing of Air in a Bladder, (which objections
yet I could easily answer, if it were now proper) that the air which
ponderates, it stuffed with the Effluvia of him that blows the Bladder, and
(besides that) is not air in its Natural state, but violently compressed. For
here it is the free air, and in it is wonted laxity, that makes the Glass
preponderate.

And that there is a great Ingress of the external air, is evident by these
three Phenomenon. The one, that if you lend an attentive Ear, you shall plainly
hear a kind of whistling noise to be made by the external air, as it rushes
violently in upon the breaking of the Glass; The other, that the Rarefaction of
the air, sealed up in the bubble, being very great, there is a great deal of
space left for the ambient air to fill upon its admission; and the greatness
of this Rarefaction may be guessed at, both by the breaking of such bubbles now
and then by the pressure of the External air, which is not competently
assisted by the Internal to resist; and also by the third Phenomenon I
intended to take notice of, namely, That if, instead of breaking off the sealed
end of the Glass in the air, you break it under water, that Liquor will, by
the Pressure of the Atmosphaere, be forced to spring up like an artificial
Fountain into the Cavity of the Bubble, and fill about three quarters of it.
By which last circumstance I gather, that the weight of the air is more
considerable then even many, who admit the air to have weight, seem to
imagine. For we must not suppose, that all the air contained in the Bubble,
when broken, weighs no more then the weight requisite in the opposite Scale, to
reduce the Balance to an Aequilibrium; since this additional weight is only
that of the air, that intrudes on the breaking of the glass; which air, by
the Observations newly mentioned to have been made with water, appears to be
but about three quarters of the whole air contained in the broken Bubble; and
yet, according both to our Estimate, and that of diverse Virtuosi, and some of
them eminent Mathematicians, when the capacity of the Bubble was short of two
cubical Inches, (and so proportionably in other glasses,) the nice Balance we
used, manifested the newly admitted Air to amount to some times near half a
grain, and sometimes beyond it.

And because one of the last Experiments that I made to this purpose, with
sealed Bubbles was none of the least accurate, I shall conclude this Subject
with the following account of it.

A thin glass Bubble, blown at the flame of a Lamp, and Hermetically sealed
when the contained air was exceedingly rarefied, was Counterpoiz'd in a nice
pair of Scales, and then the sealed apex being broken off, and put again into
the same Scale, the weight appeared to be increased by the readmitted air, a
pretty deal above 11/16;ths, and consequently very near, if not full of a
grain: Lastly, having by some slight (for it is no very easy matter) filled it
with common water, we weighed the glass and water together, and found the
latter, besides the former, to amount to 906 grains: so that supposing,
according to our former Estimate, countenanced by some Trials, that the
readmitted air, which amounted to of a grain, filled but of the whole Cavity
of the Bubble, the air that was in it, when sealed, possessing one quarter of
that Cavity, the whole air contained in the Bubble, may be reasonably presumed
to weigh a whole grain; in which case we might conclude (abstracting from some
little Niceties not fit to be taken notice of here; as elsewhere) that the
water in our Experiment, weighed very little more then nine hundred times as
much as an equal quantity of Air. And therefore, though we allow, that in an
Experiment so diligently made, as this was, the air praexistent in the bubble
did not adaequately possess so much as a fourth part, but about a fifth or a
sixth of its Cavity, the air will yet appear so heavy, that this Experiment
will agree well with those others, recorded in another Treatise, wherein we
assigned (numero rotundo) a thousand to one, for the proportion wherein the
specific Gravity of water exceeds that of air.

PARADOX I.
That in Water, and other Fluids, the lower parts are pressed by the upper.
PRovide a Glass vessel of a convenient height and breadth A. B. C. D. filled
with water almost to the Top; Then take a glass Pipe, open at both Ends,
Cylindrical, and of a small Bore, (as about the eighth or sixth part of an Inch
in Diameter.) Put the lower End of this Pipe into clear Oil or Spirit of
Turpentine; and having by Suction raised the Liquor to what part of the Pipe
you think fit, as soon as it is there, you must, very nimbly removing your
Lips, stop the upper Orifice with the pulp of your finger, that the raised
Liquor may not fall back again: Then taking the Pipe and that Liquor out of the
Oil of Turpentine, place it perpendicularly in the Glass of water, so as that
the Surface of the Oil in the Pipe be somewhat higher then that of the water
without the Pipe; and having so done, though you take off your finger from the
upper Orifice of the Pipe, the Oil will not fall down at the lower Orifice,
though that be open, but will remain suspended at the same height, or near
there abouts, that it rested at before.

Now Oil of Turpentine, being a heavy Fluid, does, as such, tend downwards,
and not being stopped by the Glass it self, whose lower Orifice is left open,
it would certainly fall down through the Pipe, if it were not kept suspended by
the pressure (upwards) of the water beneath it. There appearing no other Cause
to which the Effect can reasonably be ascribed, and this being sufficient to
give an Account of it, as we shall presently see. For that it is not any
contrariety in Nature, betwixt the oil and the water, as Liquors that will not
mingle, is evident from hence, That if you had removed your finger when the
Pipe was not so deeply immersed in the Glass, but that the Surface of the oil
in the Pipe was an Inch or two more elevated above that of the water in the
Glass, then in our present case we suppose it to be; The Oil, notwithstanding
its presumed contrariety to water, would have freely subsided in the Pipe, till
it had attained an aequipollency of pressure with the External Water.

The Reason therefore of the Phenomenon seems to be plainly this. Supposing
the imaginary surface, on which the Extremity Q of the pipe P Q leans, to be G
H. If that part of the Surface, on which the Oil leans at Q, be as much, and no
more charged, or pressed upon by the weight of the incumbent Cylinder of Oil Q
X, then the other parts of the same imaginary Surface G H are by the water
incumbent on Them, there is no Reason why that part at Q should be displaced,
either by being depressed by the weight of the Cylinder of Oil X Q, or raised
by the equal pressure of water upon the other parts of the Superficies G H.

And that this Aequilibrium, betwixt the Oil and the Water, is the true cause
of the Phenomenon, may be confirmed by observing what happens, if the altitude
of either of the two Liquors be altered in Relation to the other.

And (First,) we have already taken notice, That if the Cylinder of Oil reach
in the Pipe, much higher then that of the Surface of the water, the oil will
descend: Of which the Reason is, Because the designable Surface G H, being more
charged at Q then any where else, the part Q, being unable to resist so great a
pressure, must necessarily be thrust out of place by the descending oil.

Secondly, This subsiding will continue but till the Surface of the Oil in the
Pipe be fallen almost as low as that of the water without the Pipe; because
then, and not before, the parts at Q are but as much pressed by the oil, as
the other parts of the Surface G H are by the water that leans upon them.

Thirdly, It Is a concluding Circumstance to our present purpose, That if the
Oil and Water being in an Aequilibrium, you gently lift up the Pipe, as from Q
to S, the depth of the water being lessend, the oil in the Pipe will grow
praeponderant, and therefore will fall out in Drops or Globuls, which by the
greater Specific Gravity of the water, will be buoyed up to the Top of the
Liquor, and there flote: And still as you lift up the Pipe higher and higher,
toward the Surface L M, more and more of the Oil will run out. But if you
stop the Pipe any where in its Ascent, as at S, the Effluxion of the oil will
likewise be stopped. And at the imaginary Superficies* J K, as by Reason of the
shallowness of the water from L to J, or M to K, the pressure of the water upon
the other parts of the Surface is not near so great, as it was upon the Surface
G H, where the water had a greater depth: So by reason of the proportionate
Effluxion of the oil, whilst the Pipe was lifted up from Q to S, the
remaining Cylinder of oil incumbent on S, is not able to press that part of
the Superficies J K more strongly then the other parts of the same Superficies,
are pressed by the water Incumbent on them. And if the Pipe be lifted up till the
lower Orifice be almost raised to V; that is, almost as high as the uppermost
Surface of the water L M, so much of the oil will, for the Reason already
given, run out, that there will scarce be any left in the Pipe T V.

Fourthly, But if when the Pipe rests at the Surface G H, where the oil is in
an Aequilibrium with the water; you should instead of lifting it from Q to S,
thrust it down from Q to O; then the External water would not only sustain the
oil, but make it ascend in the Pipe to a height equal to the distance E G; and
so the Pipe will contain besides a longer Cylinder of oil AE W, a shorter one
of water AE O. For the pipe being transferred from the position P Q, to the
position O N, there is a new Imaginary Surface E F, that passes by the lower
Orifice of the Pipe. Now the part of this Surface at O will not, by the
Incumbent oil alone, be pressed as much as the other parts of the same Surface
are by the Incumbent water. For the oil alone was but in Aequilibrium with the
water, when it was no deeper then L G, or H M; so that the other parts of the
Superficies E F, being more pressed upon by the water, then the part at O by
the oil, the oil must give place, and be buoyed up by the water, (which, if
it were not for the weight of the oil, would be impelled up into the pipe full
as high as the Surface of the External water) till the pressure of the admitted
water O AE, and the Cylinder of oil AE W, do both together gravitate as much
upon the part O, as the rest of the Incumbent water does upon the other parts
of the same Superficies E F.

Fifthly and lastly, It Is very agreeable to what has been delivered, touching
the Aequilibrium of the oil and water in the pipe P Q, that the Surface X of
the oil in the pipe, will not be of the same level with L M, that of the
External water, but a little higher than it. For though the slenderness of the
Pipe do somewhat contribute to this Effect, yet there would be an inequality,
though not so great, betwixt these Surfaces upon this Account, That oil of
Turpentine being in Specie, (as they speak in the Schools) that is bulk for
bulk, a lighter Liquor than Water, it is requisite that the height of it,
incumbent on the part Q, be greater than that of the water on the other parts
of the same Surface G H, to make the pressure of the oil on the part it leans
upon, equal to the pressure of the water on the other parts of the Surface. And
if the inequality were greater betwixt the Specific Gravities of these two
Liquors, the inequalities betwixt the Surface X, and the Surface L M would be
also greater, as may be tried by substituting for common water, oil of Tartar
per deliquium, which is a saline Liquor much heavier than it. And that, in case
the Pipe contain not a lighter Liquor then the External fluid, the Surface of
the Liquor in the Pipe will not be higher than that of the Liquor without it,
we shall by and by have opportunity to manifest by Experience.

From what has been hitherto shown, we may safely infer the Proposition, upon
whose occasion all this has been delivered. For since the oil in a Pipe, open
at both Ends, may be kept suspended in any part under water, as at Q, because
it is there in an Aequilibrium with the External water; and since being lifted
up in the water, as from Q to S, the oil can no longer be kept suspended, but
by its own gravity will run out. And since, in a word, the deeper the water
is, the greater weight and pressure is required in the Cylinder of oil, to be
able to countervail the pressure of the water, and keep it self from being
lifted up thereby; there seems no cause to doubt but that the parts of the
water incumbent on the Superficies G H, do more press that Superficies, than
the parts of the water contiguous to the Superficies J K do press that; and
consequently, that the parts of the water that are under the uppermost Surface
of it, are pressed by those of the same Fluid that are directly over them: As
we saw also that the upper parts of the oil, whilst the pipe was in raising
from Q to S, depressed the lower so much, as to force them quite out of the
Pipe; there being in these cases no reason why the lowermost parts of a Liquor
should press more, or have a stronger Endeavor against any other Liquor (or
any other Body) the higher the Liquor incumbent reaches, if these inferior
parts derived their pessure only from their own particular Gravity, (which is
no greater then that of the other Homogeneous parts of the Liquor) and
therefore they must derive the great force wherewith they press from the weight
of the Incumbent parts, which consequently must be allowed to press upon them.

But before I proceed to the following propositions, it will not be amiss to
mention here, once for all, a few advertisements, to avoid the necessity of
repeating the same things in the sequel of the Discourse.

And First, What is here said of the pressure of the parts of water upon one
another, and the other Affections that we shall attribute to it, in the
following paper, are to be applied to heavy Fluids in general, unless there
shall appear some particular Cause of excepting some of them in particular
Cases.

Secondly, Whereas I lately intimated, That the inequality betwixt the Surfaces
of the oil in the Pipe, and of the External water, was in part to be ascribed
to the slenderness of the Pipe, to be employed in these Experiments, I did it
for this cause, that, whatever the Reason of it be, (which we need not here
inquire after,) we are assured by Experience, as we have elsewhere shown, That
when Glass pipes come to be slender, water and many other Liquors (though not
Quicksilver) will have within them a higher Surface then that of the same
Liquor without them, and this inequality of Surfaces (as far as we have yet
tried) increases with the slenderness of the pipe. But this, as to our present
Experiment, is a matter of so little moment, That it may suffice to have
intimated that we did not oversee it.

Thirdly, Wherefore, notwithstanding this little inconvenience of slender
Glasses, we think it Expedient to employ such in the following Experiments,
because we found, that in those of a wide Bore, upon such little inequalities
of pressure as are not easily to be avoided, the oil and water will pass by
one another in the Cavity of the pipe, and so spoil the Experiment, which
requires that the oil within the pipe be kept in an entire and distinct Body.

Fourthly, Common oil and water, or any other two Liquors that will not
mingle, may serve the turn in most of these Experiments; but we rather choose
oil of Turpentine, because it is light and thin, clear and colorless, and may
be easily had in quantities, and is not so apt to spot ones Clothes, or
obstinately to adhere to the porous Bodies it chances to fall on, as Common,
and other expressed oils. And for their sakes to whom the odor is offensive,
we presently correct it, by mingling with it a convenient quantity of oil of
Rhodium, or some other Chemical oil that is odoriferous.

Fifthly, Oil of Turpentine, though it be not reckoned among the saline
Menstruums, will yet (as we elsewhere note) work upon Copper, and so by
digesting it upon crude filings of that Metal, we obtain a deep green Liquor,
which may be made use of instead of the Limpid oil, to make the Distinction of
the Liquors more conspicuous.

Sixthly, And for the same purpose we often use instead of clear water, a
strong Decoction of Brazill, or Loggwood, or else Red Inck it self, I say, a
strong Decoction, because unless the Liquor be so deeply tinged, as to appear
Opacous in the Glass, when it comes into the slender pipe, its Color will be
so diluted, as to be scarce discernable.

Seventhly, In the shape of the Glass Vessel, we need not be Curious; though
that of a wide Mouthed Jarr, expressed in the Scheme, be for some uses more
convenient than other shapes. The depth of these Glasses, and the length of the
Pipes must be determined by the Experiments, about which one means to employ
them. To make out the first Paradox already proved, a Glass of about five or
six Inches deep, and a Pipe about as many Inches long, will serve the turn: but
for some others of the following Experiments, tall Cylindrical Glasses will be
requisite; and for some, Broad ones likewise will be Expedient.

Eighthly, One must not be discouraged by not being able at the first or second
time, to suck up oil of Turpentine to the due height, and stop it with ones
finger from relapsing; but one must try again, and again; especially since many
Trials of this kind may be made in a few Minutes: and for Beginners it is a safe
and good, though not the shortest way, to suck up rather more Liquor then one
judges will be needful; because having filled the Pipe to that height, you may
by letting in the Air warily and slowly, between the Orifice of the Glass and
the pulp of your finger, suffer so much Liquor to run out of the Pipe, as will
reduce it to the height you desire; and there, by close stopping the Orifice
with your finger, you may keep it suspended as long as you please, and immerse
it into any Heterogeneous Liquor, and take it out again at pleasure without
spilling any of it. By which slight Expedient alone, I can decline several
Difficulties, and do many things, which, according to Monsieur Paschal's way,
require a great deal of Trouble and Apparatus to be performed.

Lastly, In such Experiments where it may be of use, That there be a
considerable disparity betwixt the two unmingled Liquors, we may (as is above
intimated) instead of fair water, employ Oleum Tartari per deliquium, and tinge
it with Brazill or Chochineele; from either of which, but especially from the
latter, it will obtain an exceeding deep Redness: and where one would avoid
strong sents and oyliness, he may, if he will be at the Charge, employ oil of
Tartar per deliquium, instead of fair water, and highly Rectified Spirit of
Wine, instead of oil of Turpentine. For these two Liquors, though they will
both readily mingle with water, will not with one another; and if a great
quantity of some other Liquor be to be substituted for simple water, when these
Chemical Liquors are not to be had in plenty, one may employ (as we have done)
a very strong Solution made of Sea Salt, and filtred through Cap-paper: this
Brine being near about as Limpid as common water, and far heavier than it.
And for a Curiosity, we have added to the two lately mentioned Liquors (oil of
Tartar, and Spirit of Wine) some oil of Turpentine, and thereby had three
Liquors of different Gravities, which will not by shaking, be brought so to
mingle, as not quickly to part again, and retire each within its own Surface;
and by thrusting a Pipe with water in the bottom of it (placing also ones
finger upon the upper Orifice) beneath the Surface of the lowermost of these
Liquors, and by opportunely raising or depressing it, one may somewhat vary the
Experiment in a way not unpleasant; but explicable upon the same grounds with
the rest of the Phenomenon mentioned in this Discourse.

PARADOX. II.
That a lighter Fluid may gavitate or weigh upon a heavier.
I Know that this is contrary to the common opinion, not only of the Schools*
but even of diverse hodiern Mathematicians, and Writers of Hydrostaticks; some
of whom have absolutely rejected this Paradox, though they do but doubt of the
truth of the former.

But when I consider, that whether the cause of Gravity be the pulsion of any
superior substance, or the Magnetical attraction of the Earth, or whatever else
it be, there is in all heavy Bodies, as such, a constant tendency toward the
Center, or lowermost parts of the Earth; I do not see why that tendency or
endeavor should be destroyed by the interposition of any other heavy Body;
Though what would otherwise be the effect of that endeavor, namely an approach
toward the Center, may be hindered by another Body, which being heavier then
it, obtains by its greater gravity a lower place; but then the lighter Body
tending downwards, must needs press upon the heavier that stands in its way,
and must together with that heavier press upon whatever Body it is that
supports them both, with a weight consisting of the united gravities of the
more, and the less heavy Body.

But that which keeps Learned Men from acknowledging this Truth, seems to be
this, That a lighter Liquor (or other Body) being environed with a heavyer,
will not fall down but emerge to the Top; whence they conclude, that, in such
Cases, it is not to be considered as a heavy, but as a Light Body.

But to this I answer, That though in Respect of the heavier Liquor, the less
heavy may in some sense be said to be light; yet, notwithstanding that relative
or Comparative Levity, it retains all its absolute Gravity, tending downwards
as strongly as before; though by a contrary and more potent Endeavor upwards
of the contiguous liquor (whose lower parts, if less resisted, are pressed
upwards by the higher elsewhere incumbent; according to the Doctrine partly
delivered already, and partly to be cleared by the proof of the next
proposition,) its endeavor downward is so surmounted that it is forcibly
carried up. Thus when a piece of some light wood being held under water, is let
go and suffered to emerge, though it he buoyed up by the water, whose specific
Gravity is greater, yet even whilst it alcends it remains a heavy Body; so that
the aggregate of the water and the ascending wood weighs more then the water
alone would do; And when it floats upon the upper part of the water, as part
of it is extant above the surface, so part of it is immerst beneath it, which
confirms what we were saying, That a lighter Body may gravitate upon a heavier.

And thus there is little doubt to be made but that if a man stand in one of
the scales of a Balance with a heavy stone tied to his hand, and hanging
freely by his side, if then he lift that weight as high above his head as he
can, notwithstanding that the stones motion upwards makes it seem a light Body
in respect of the Man whose Body it leaves beneath it, yet it dos not, either
during its ascent or after, loose any thing of its connatural weight. For the
Man that lifts it up shall feel its tendency downwards to continue, though his
force, being greater than that tendency, be able, notwithstanding that
tendency, to carry it up: and when it is aloft, it will so press against his
hand, as to offend, if not also to bruise it; and the Stone, and the Man that
supports it, will weigh no less in the Scale he stands in, then if he did not
at all support it, and they were both of them weighed apart.

Likewise, if you put into one Scale a wide mouthed Glass full of water, and a
good quantity of powdered common Salt; and into the other Scale, a Counterpoise
to them both; you may observe, that, though at the beginning the Salt will
manifestly lie at the bottom, and afterward by degrees be so taken up into
the Body of the Liquor, that not a grain will appear there; yet nevertheless
(as far as I can judge by my Experiments) the weight in that Scale will not be
diminished by the weight of as much Sale as is incessantly either carried up,
or supported by the restless motion of the dissolving Corpuscles of the water;
but both the one and the other, (allowing for what may evaporate) will
concurrently gravitate upon the Scale that the glass containing them leans on.

But of this more elsewhere. Now to prove the proposiion by the New Method, we
have proposed to our self in this Discourse.

Take a slender Glass pipe, and having sucked up into it fair water, to the
height of 3 or 4 Inches, stop nimbly the upper Orifice with your finger, and
inmerse the lower into a Glass full of oil of Turpenrine, till the Surface of
the oil in the Vessel be somewhat higher than that of the water in the Pipe;
then removing your finger, though the Pipe do thereby become open at both Ends,
the water will not fall down, being hindered by the pressure of the oil of
Turpentine. As will be obvious to them that have attentively considered the
Explication of the former Paradox; there being but this difference between this
Experiment and that there Explained, that here the water is in the Pipe, and
the oil in the Vessel, whereas there the oil was in the Pipe, and the water
in the Vessel. And if you either pour more oil into the Glass, or thrust the
Pipe deeper into the oil, you shall see that the water will be buoyed up
toward the top of the Pipe; that is, a heavier Liquor will be lifted up by a
lighter. And since, by the Explication of the first Proposition, it appears,
that the Reason why the Liquor is in this case raised in the Pipe, is the
Gravity of the Liquor that raises it, we must allow that a lighter Liquor in
specie, may by its gravity press against a heavier.

And it agrees very well with our Explication, both of this, and of the first
Experiment, that as there, the Surface of the oil in the pipe was always
higher than that of the water without it, because the oil being the lighter
Liquor, a greater height of it was required to make an Aequilibrium; so in our
present Experiment, the Surface of the Liquor in the Pipe will always be lower
than that of the oil without it.

For in the imaginary plain E F, See the second Figure.
the Cylinder of water J G, contained in the Pipe J H, will, by reason of its
greater gravity, press as much upon the part J, as the distilled oil (K E, J
L,) being a lighter Liquor, can do upon the other parts of the same supposed
plain E F, though the oil reached to a greater height above it.

This second Paradox, we have hitherto been discoursing of, may be also proved
by what we formerly delivered, to make out the Truth of the third part of the
Lemma premised to these Propositions.

But because this and the former Paradox are of importance, not only in
themselves but to the rest of this Treatise, and are likely (in most Readers)
to meet with indisposition enough to be received, I will subjoyn in this place
a couple of such Experiments, as will not, I hope, be unacceptable; that I
devised, the one to confirm this second Paradox, and the other to prove the
first.

Some of the Gentlemen now present may possibly remember, that about the end of
the Year that preceded the two last, I brought into this place a centain new
Instrument of Glass, whereby I made it appear, that the upper parts of water
gravitate upon the lower; which I did by sincking a Body, that was already
under water, by pouring more water upon it.

But that Experiment belonging to other papers, I shall here substitute another
performed by an Instrument, which though it makes not so fine a show, may be
more easily provided, and will as well as that other (though you were pleased
to command that from me) serve to make out the same Truth; which I shall apply
my self to do, as soon as I have, by an Improvement of the Expedient I am to
propose, made good my late promise of confirming the second Paradox.

And before I can well draw an Argument from these Experiments, for either of
the propositions to be proved by them, In certain, Notes upon some of the
Physics-mechanical Experiments, touching the Air.
I must briefly repeat what I have elsewhere delivered already (on another
occasion) touching the cause of the sincking of such Bubbles. Namely that the
Bubble X. consisting* of Glass, Fig. 3.
which is heavier in specie then Water; and Air, which is lighter in specie
then Water; and, if you please, also of Water itself, which is of the same
specific Gravity with Water; as long as this whole aggregate of several Bodies
is lighter then an equal bulk of Water, it will float; but in case it grows
heavier then so much water, it must, according to the known Laws of the
Hydrostaticks, necessarily sinck, (being not otherwise supported.) Now when
there is any competent pressure (whether produced by weight or otherwise,) upon
the water, in which this Bubble is for the most part immersed, because the
glass is a firm Body and the water, though a Liquor, either suffers no
compression, or but an inconsiderable one; the Air included in the Bubble,
being a springy and very compressible Body, will be compelled to shrink, and
thereby possessing less Room, then it did before, the contiguous water will
succeed in its place; which being a body above a thousand times heavier then
air, the Bubble will thereby become heavier then an equal Bulk of water, and
consequently will sink: but if that force or pressure be removed, the
Imprisoned Air will by its own Spring free it self from the intruding water;
and the Aggregate of Bodies, that makes up the Bubble, being thereby grown
lighter then an equal bulk of water, the subsided bubble will presently emerge
to the Top.

This Explication of the Causes of the sinking of Bubbles agrees, in some
things, with the Doctrine of the Learned Jesuits Kercher and Shottus, and some
other writers, in the Acount they give of those two Experiments that are
commonly known by the name, the one of the Roman, the other of the Florentine
Experiments. But there are also particulars wherein I (who have never a
recourse to a fuoa Vacui,) dissent from their Doctrine; the principles I go
upon, having invited and assisted me to make that Experiment, afford me some
new Phenomenon, which agree not with their Opinions, but do with mine: but I
forbear to mention them here, because they belong to other Papers; and for the
same reason I omit some accession of Ludicrous Phenomenon (as they call them,)
which I remember I have sometimes added to those, which our Industrious Authors
have already deduced from those Experiments.

These things being premised, I proceed to the confirmation of the second
Paradox, by the following Experiment.

Take a long glass pipe, sealed or otherwise exactly stopped at one end and open
at the other (whose Orifice if it be no wider, then that it may be conveniently
stopped with man's. Thumb, the Tube will be the fitter to exhibit some other
Phanomena. Into this pipe pour such a quantity of common water, as that there
may be a foot, or half a yard, or some other competent part left unfill'd, for
the use to be by and by mentioned. Then having poised a glass Bubble with a
slender neck, in such a manner as that though it will keep at the Top of the
water, yet a very little addition of weight, will suffice to sinck it, put this
Bubble thus poised into the Tube; where it will swim in the upper part of the
water, as long as it is let alone, but if you gently pour oil of Turpentine
upon it, (I say gently to avoid confounding the Liquors) you will perceive
that, for a while, the Bubble will continue where it was: but if you continue
pouring on oil, till it have attained a sufficient height above the water,
(which, 'twill be easy to peceive, because those two liquors will keep
themselves distinct) you shall see the Bubble subside till it fall to the
Bottom, and continue there as long as the oil remains at the height above the
water.

The Reason of this Phanomenon, according to our Doctrine, is this, That the
oil of Turpentine, though a lighter Liquor then water, yet gravitates upon the
subjacent water, and by its pressuce forces some of it into the cavity of the
bubble at the open Orifice of its neck, whereby the Buble, which was before but
very little less heavy then an equal Bulk of water, being by this accession
made a little more heavy must necessarily sinck; and the cause of its
submersion, namely the pressure of the oil, continuing, it must remain at the
bottom.

And to confirm this explication I shall add, that in case, by inclining the
Tube or otherwise, you remove the Cylinder of oil, or a competent part of it,
(in case it were longer then was necessary,) the Bubble will again emerge to
the Top of the water (for, as for the oil, that is too light a Liquor to buoy
it up;) which happens only because the pressure of the oil upon the water
being taken of the Air, by virtue of its own spring, is able to recover its
former Expansion, and reduce the bubble to be as light as 'twas before.

And now we may proceed to that other Experiment, by which we lately promised
to confirm the first Paradox. And in some regard this following Experiment has
been preferred, as more strange, to that I have been reciting. For it seemed
much less improbable, that of two Heterogeneous Liquors, the inferior should be
pressed upon by the incumbent, which, though lighter, kept in an entire body
above it; then that in water, which is a Homogeneous Liquor; and whose parts
mingle most freely and exquisitely with one another, the upper part should
press upon the lower; and that they will do so, may appear by the Experiment it
is now time to sub join.

Provide a long Tube and a poised Bubble, as in the former Experiment, then
having poured water into the Tube, till it reach above 5 or 6 Inches (for a
determinate height is no way necessary) above the Bottom, cast in the Bubble,
which will not only swim, but if you thrust it down into the water it will of
it self emerge to the upper part of it. Wherefore take a slender Wand, or a
Wire, or a slender glass pipe, or any such Body that is long enough for your
purpose, and with it having thrust the bubble beneath the Surface of the water,
pour water slowly into the Tube (whose Cavity will not be near filled by the
rod or wire) till it have attained a competent height, (which, in my last
Trials, was about a Foot, or half a Yard above the bubble:) and you shall see,
that the bubble, which before endeavored to emerge, will by the additional
weight of the incumbent water, be depressed to the bottom of the Tube. After
which you may safely remove the wire, or other body that kept it from rising.
For as the weight of the Incumbent water was that which made it sinck, so that
weight continuing on it, the bubble will continue at the bottom.

But yet it is not without cause, that we employ a wire, or some such thing, in
this Experiment, though we affirm it to be only the weight of the Incumbent
water, that makes the Bubble sinck. For if you should pour water into the Tube,
to the height lately mentioned, or even to a greater, if you did not make use
of the Wire, it would not serve the turn; because that as fast as you pour in
the water, the Bubble being left to it self, will rise together with it; and
so, keeping always near the upper part of the water, it will never suffer the
Liquor to be so high above it, as it must be, before it can depress it. But to
confirm, that it is the weight of the Superior water that sincks the Bubble, and
keeps it at the Bottom; if you take out of the Tube a competent quantity of
that Liquor, and so take of the pressure of it from the Bubble, this will
presently, without any other help, begin to swim, and regain the upper part of
the water; whence it may at pleasure be praecipitated, by pouring back into the
Tube the water that was taken out of it. And these Confirmations, added to the
former Proofs of the first and second Paradoxes, being we conceive sufficient
to satisfy Impartial Readers of the Truth of them, we should presently advance
to the next Proposition, if we did not think fit to interpose here a Scholium.

SCHOLIUM.
IT may perchance be wondered at, why, since we lately mentioned our having made
some Trials with oil of Tartar per deliquium, we did not in the present
Experiment, in stead of fair water, make use of that, it being a very much
heavier Liquor, and (though it may be incorporated with expressed oils)
unmingleable in such Trials with oil of Turpentine. But to this I answer, That
even in such slender pipes, as those made use of about the first Experiment, I
found that oil of Tartar was ponderous enough to flow down, though slowly,
into the oil of Turpentine at one side of the immersed Orifice, whilst the
oil passed upwards by it along the other side of the pipe. And my knowledge of
this could not but make me a little wonder, That so Curious a person, as
Monsieur Paschall, should somewhere teach, That if a Tube of above 14 foot
long, and having its Orifice placed 14 foot under water, be full of
Quicksilver, the fluid Metal will not all run out at the Bottom of the pipe,
though the Top of it be left open to the Air, but will be stopped at a foot
high in the pipe, For the Impetus, that its fall will give it, must probably
make it flow quite out of the pipe: And, not here to mention those Trials of
ours with Quicksilver and slender Tubes, that made me think this very
improbable; if we consider that the Experiment will not succeed with much more
favorable circumstances, betwixt oil of Turpentine and oil of Tartar, though
the heavier of these two Liquors be many times lighter that quick. silver: It
tempts me much to suspect, that Monsieur Paschall never actually made the
Experiment, at least with a Tube as big as his Scheam would make one guess, but
yet thought he might safely set it down, it being very consequent to those
Principles, of whose Truth he was fully persuaded. And indeed, were it not for
the impetus, the Quicksilver would acquire in falling from such a height, the
Ratiocanation were no way unworthy of him.

But Experiments that are but speculatively true, should be proposed as such,
and may oftentimes fail in practice; because there may intervene diverse other
things capable of making there miscarry, which are overlooked by the peculator*
that is wont to compute only the consequences of that particullar thing which
he principally considers; As in this case our Author seems not to have
considered, that in such Tubes, as the Torricelliah Experiment is wont to be
made in the largness of them would make them unfit for this Trial.

And I have known Ingenious men, that are very well exercised in making such
Experiments, complain, that they could never make this of Monsieur Paschall's
to succeed. In which attempts, that the size of the Tubes much contributed to
the unsuccesfulness of the Trials, I shall (without repeating what has been
already intimated to that purpose) in the following part of this Discourse have
opportunity to manifest; and withal to add as Illustrious a proof of this our
second Paradox, as almost any we have yet given.

PARADOX III.
That if a Body contiguous to the water be altogether, or in part, lower than
the highest level of the said water, the lower part of the Body will be pressed
upward by the water that touches it beneath,
THis may be proved by what has been already delivered in the Explication of
the first Experiment: For where ever we conceive the lowest part of the Body,
which is either totally, or in part, immersed in water, to be there the
imaginary Superficies being beneath the true Superficies, every part of that
imaginary Superficies must be pressed upwards, by virtue of the weight of the
water incumbent on all the other parts of the same Superficies, and so that
part of it, on which the immersed Body chances to lean, must for the same
Reason have an endeavor upwards. And if that Endeavor be stronger then that
wherewith the weight of the Body tends downwards, then (supposing there be no
Accidental Impediment) the Body will be buoyed or lifted up. And though the
Body be heavier then so much water, and consequently will subside, yet that
Endeavor upwards of the water, that touches its lower part, is only rendered
ineffectual to the raising or supporting the body, but not destroyed; the force
of the heavy Body being from time to time resisted, and retarded by the water,
as much as it would be if that Body were put into One Scale, and the weight of
as much water, as is equal to it in bulk, were put into the other.

To confirm this, we may have recourse to what we said in the Explication of
the second Experiment. Fig. 1. 2.
For in case the slender pipe, wherein the water is kept suspended, be thrust
deeper into the oil or in case these be more oil poured into the Vessel, the
water will be impelled up higher into the pipe; which it would not be, if the
oil, though bulk for bulk a lighter Body, did not press against the lower
Surface of the water, (where, alone, the two Liquors are contiguous,) more
forcibly then the water by its gravity tends dovvnvvards. And even when the
Liquors rest in an Aequilibrium, the oil continually presses upvvards, against
the lower Surface of the water; since in that continual endeavor upvvards
consists its constant resistance to the continual endeavor that the gravity of
the water gives it to descend. And since the same Phenomenon happens, whether
we suspend water in oil, as in the second Experiment, on oil in water, as in
the first: it appears, that the proposition is as well applicable to those
cases, where the sustein'd Body is specifically heavier, as to those where it is
specifically lighter then the subjacent fluid.

But a further and clearer proof of this Doctrine will appear in the
Explication of the next proposition. In the mean time, to confirm that part of
out Discourse, where we mentioned the Resistance made by the water to Bodies
that sinck in it, Let us suppose, in the annexed Figure, That the pipe E F
contains an oil specifically heavier then water, Fig. 4.
(as are the oils of Guaisteum, of Cinnamon, or Cloves, and some others,) and
then, That the oil in the pipe, and the water without, being at rest in an
Aequilibrium, the pipe be slowly raised toward the Top of the Vessel. It Is
evident, from our former Doctrine, and from Experience too, that there will run
out drops of oil, which will fall from the bottom of the pipe, to that of the
Vessel; but far more slowly then if they fell out of the same pipe in the Air.

Now to compute how much the pressure of the water against the lower parts of
the drop amounts too, let us suppose the drop to be G, to whose lowermost part
there is contigueus, in any assignable place where it falls, the imaginary
Superficies H J. It Is evident, That if the drop of oil were not there, its
place would be supplied by an equal bulk of water; which being of the same
specific Gravity with the rest of the water in the Vessel, the Surface H J
would be laden every where alike; and consequently to part of it would be
displaced* But now, the drop of oil being heavier then so much water, that
part of the imaginary superficies, on which that drop leans, has more weight
upon it, then any other equal part of the same Superficies; and consequently,
will give place to the descending drop. And since the case of every other
supposed Surface, at which the drop can be conceived to arrive in its descent,
will be the same with that of the Superficies H J; it will for the Reason newly
given, continue falling till it comes to the bottom of the Vessel which will
suffer it to fall no further. And in case the drop G were not, as we suppose
it, of a substance heavier in specie then water, but just equal to it, the
contiguous part of the Superficies H J would be neither more nor less charged
then the other parts of the same Supeficies; and the part leaned on would be
neither depressed nor raised, but the drop G would continue in the same place.
And so we may prove, (what is affirmed by Archimedes, and other Hydrostatical
Writers) That a Body acquiponderant in specie to water, will rest in any
assignable place of the water where it is put.

And (to proceed further) since, if the drop G were of a matter but
acquiponderant to water it would not sinck lower at all, no more then emerge;
it follows, that though being heavier in specie then water, it will fall, yet
the gravity upon whose account it falls, is no more then that by which it
surmounts an equal bulk of water; (since, if it were not for that over plus,
the resistance of the water would hinder it from falling at all:) and
consequently, it looses in the water just as much of the weight it would have
in the air, as so much water, weighed likewise in the same air, would amount
to.

Which is a Physical Account of that grand Theorem of the Hydrostaticks, which
I do not remember that I have seen made out in any Printed Book, both solidly
and clearly; The Learned Stevinus himself, to whom the later Writers are wont
to refer, having but an obscure (and not Physical) demonstration of it.

And, because this Theorem is not only very noble, but (as we else where
manifest) very useful, 'twill not be amiss to add, That it may easily be
confirmed by Experiment.

For if you take (for instance) a piece of Lead, and hang it by a Horse hair
(that being supposed very near acquiponderant to water) from one of the Scales
of an exact Balance; and, when you have put a just Connterpoize in the other
Scale, suffer the Lead to sinck in a ressel of water, till it be perfectly
covered with it, but hangs freely in it, the counterpoize will very much
preponderance, And, part of the Counterpoize being taken out till the Ballatice
be again reduced to an Aequilibrium, you may easily (by subducting what you
have taken out, and comparing it with the whole weight of the Lead in the air)
find what part of its weight it looses in the water And then if you weigh any
other piece of the same Lead, suppose a Lump of 12 ounces, and hang it by a
Horse hair at one scale, you may be sure that by putting into the other scale a
weight less by a twelfth part, (supposing Lead to water to be as twelve to one)
that is eleven ounces, though the weights be far from an Aequilibrium in the
Air, they will be reduced to it when the Lead it covered with water.

The pressure of water against the lower part of the Body immersed in it may be
confirmed by adding; That we may thence deduce the cause of the emergency of
wood and other Bodies lighter then water; which though a familiar Effect, I
have not found its cause to have been so much as enquired into by many, nor
perhaps to have been well rendered by any. If we suppose then that the pipe be
almost filled, not with a sincking but a swimming oil, as oil of Turpentine,
if, as in the first Experiment, the lower orifice be thrust under water, (to a
far less depth then that of the oil in the pipe) and the upper be slovvly
unstop'd, the oil will (as we formerly declared) get out in drops at the
bottom of the pipe. But to determine why these drops, being quite covered and
surrounded with water, and pressed by it as well dovvnvvards as upvvards,
should rather emerge then descend, I shall not content my self to say, that
water in specie heavier then this kind of oil; For, besides that in some
cases (e're long to be mentioned) I have made the water to depress even this
kind off oil, and besides that it is not every piece of wood lighter in specie
then water that will float upon water, how shallow soever it be: The Question
is how this praepollent Gravity of the water comes to raise up the oil, though
there be perchance much more water, for it to break its way thorough, above it,
then beneath it.

The Reason then of the emersion of Lighter Bodies in heavier fluids, seems to
be this, That the endeavor upwards of the water, contiguous to the lower part
of the Body, is stronger then the endeavor downwards of the same Body, and the
water incumbent on it. As, in the former Scheme, supposing the Drop G to be the
oil of Turpentine, and to touch the two imaginary and parallel plains H J, K
L; it is evident, that upon the lower part of the Drop, N, there is a greater
pressure of water, then upon the upper part of the same Drop, M: because that
upon all the surface K L* there is but an uniform pressure of water A K B L,
and upon all the parts of the surface H I, there is a greater weight of water A
H B I, except at the part N; for there the oil G, being not so heavy as so
much water, the oil being exposed to a greater pressure from beneath, then its
own gravity (and that of the water incumbent on it) will enable it to resist,
must necessarily give way and be impelled upwards. And the case being the same
between that and any other parallel plain, wheresoever we suppose it to be in
its ascent, it must consequently be impelled further and further upwards till
it arrive at the Top; and there it will float upon the water: Or, (to Explicate
the matter without Figures) when a specifically lighter Body is immersed under
water, it is pressed against by two pillars of water; the one bearing against
the upper, and the other against the lower part; and because the lengths of
both these Pillars must be computed from the Top of the water, the lower part
of the immersed body must be pressed upon by a Pillar longer then the upper
part by the thickness of the immersed Body; and consequently must be pressed
more upwards then downwards. And by how much the greater disparity of specific
Gravity there is betwixt the water and the emerging Body, by so much the
swifter (caeteris paribus) it will ascend: because so much the more will there
be of pressure upon all the other parts of the imaginary surface, then upon
that part that happens to be contiguous to the Bottom of the ascending Body.

And upon the same Grounds we may give (what we have not yet met with) a good
solution of that Problem, proposed by Hydrostatical Writers, why, if a
Cylindrical stick be cut in two parts, the one as long again as the other, and
both of them, having been detained under water at the same depth, be let go at
the same time and permitted to emerge, the greater will rise faster then the
lesser. For suppose one of these Bodies, as O P, to be two foot high, and the
other, Q R, to be half so much, and that the lowermost Surfaces of both be in
the same imaginary plain, parallel to the uppermost surface of the water and
three foot distant from it; in this case there will be against the lower part
of each of the wooden Bodies a pressure, (from the laterally superior water)
equal to that upon all the other parts of the Imaginary plain, whereto those
Bodies are contiguous; But whereas upon the upper surface of the shorter Body,
Q R, there will lean a pillar of water two foot high, the pillar of the same
Liquor that will lean upon the Top of the taller Body, P O, will be but one
foot high; as the attentive considerer will easily perceive. So that the wooden
Bodies being lighter in specie then water, both of them will be impelled
upwards; but that compounded pillar, (if I may so call it) which consists of
one foot of wood and two foot of water, will by its gravity more resist the
being raised, then that which consists of two foot of wood and but one foot of
water: so that the cause of the unequal celerity in the Ascension of these
Bodies consists chieflly, (for I would neither overvalue nor exclude Concomitant
Causes) that the difference of the pressure against the upper and lower part of
each body respectively is greater in one then in the other.

And hence we may probably deduce a reason of what we often observe in the
Distillation of the oils of Annisseeds, Cloves, and diverse* Aromatic
vegetables, in Lembecks by the intervention of water; for oftentimes, when the
fire has not been well regulated, there will come over, besides the floating
Oil, a whitish water, which will not in a long time become clear. And as we
have elsewhere taught, That whiteness to proceed from the numerous reflections
from the oily substance of the Concrete' by the heat of the fire broken into
innumerable little Globuls, and dispersed through the Body of the water; so the
reason why this whiteness continues so long, seems to be chiefly (for I mention
not such things, as, the great surfaces that these little Globuls have in
respect of their Bulk) that, because of the exceeding minuteness of these
Drops, the height of the water that presses upon the upper part, is almost
equal to that of the water that presses against the lower part; so that the
difference between these two pressures being inconsiderable, it has power to
raise the Drops but very slowly, (insomuch that upon this ground I devised a
Menstruum, wherewith I could mingle oil in drops so exceedingly minute, that,
even when there was but a few spoonfuls of the mixture, it would continue
whitish for diverse whole days together) though at length they will emerge; and
the sooner, because whilst they swim up and down, as they frequently chance to
meet and run into one another, they compose greater Drops; which are (for the
Reason already given) less slowly impelled up by the water: at the Top of
which, the Chemist; after a due time, is wont to find new oil floating. But
whether this be any way applicable to the swimming of the insensible particles
of corroded metals in Aquaflortis, and other saline. Menstruums, I must not now
stay to enquire.

One thing more there is, that I would point at before I dismiss this Paradox;
Namely, that, for the same Reason we have all this while deduced, when the
emergent drop, or any other Body, floats upon the Top of the water, it will
sinck just so far, (and no farther) till the immersed part of the floating Body
be equal in Bulk to as much water as is equal in weight to the whole Body.
Fig. 5.
For suppose, in the annexed figure, Y to be a Cube of wood three foot high and
six pound in weight; this wood, being much heavier then Air, will sinck into
the water, till it come to an imaginary superficies, X W, where, having the
position newly described, it will necessarily acquiesce. For all the other
equal parts of the Superficies, X, W, Q, being leaned upon by pillars of water
equal in height to the part X A, or W B, if the whole weight of the wooden Cube
be greater then that of as much water as is equal to the immersed part, it must
necessarily sinck lower, because the subjacent part of the Surface (at V,) will
be more charged then any of the Rest. And, on the other side, if the Cube were
lighter then as much water as that whose place the immersed part takes up; it
must by the greater pressure of the water upon the other parts of the imaginary
superficies X W, then upon that contiguous to the wood, (as at V) be impelled
upward, til the pressure of the whole wood upon the part it leans on, be of the
same degree with that of the rest of the water, upon the rest of the
superficies: and consequently be the same with the water, whose place the
immersed part of it takes up. The lightness of that immersed part, in respect
of so much water, being recompensed by the weight of the unimmers'd part, which
is extant above the Superficies of the water. And we see, that when a piece of
wood falls into water, though, by the impetus it acquires in falling, it passes
through diverse imaginary plains that lie beneath its due station; yet the
greater pressure, to which each of those plains is exposed in all its other
parts, then in that which is contiguous to the Bottom of the wood, dos quickly
impel it up again, till, after some emersions and subsidings, it rests at
length in such a position, as the newly explicated Hydrostatical Theorem
assigns it.

SCHOLIUM.
THis Ingenious Proposition (about floating Bodies) is taught and proved after
the manner of Mathematicians, by the most subtle Archimedes and his
Commentators: and we have newly been endeavoring to manifest the Physical
reason why it must be true. But partly because the Proposition ought to hold,
not only in such entire and homogeneous Bodies as men exemplify it in, (such
as a piece of wood, or a Lump of wax) but in all Bodies, though of a concave
figure, and made up of many Bodies of never so differing natures; (and perhaps
some of them joined together only by their superincumbency upon one another)
and partly because that a Truth, which is one of the main and usefullest of the
Hydrostaticks, and may be of so much importance to Navigation, has noyet (that
I know of) been attemtpted to be demonstrated otherwise then upon Paper: it
will not be amiss, for the satisfaction of such of those whom it may concern,
as are not versed in Mathematical Demonstrations, to add an Experiment which I
made to prove it Mechanically; as exactly as is necessary for the satisfaction
of such persons.

After (then) having employed several Vessels, some of wood, some of Laton, and
some of other materials, to compass what I desired; we found glasses to be the
most commodious we could procure. And therefore filling a large and deep glass
to a convenient height with fair water, we placed in it another deeper glass,
shaped like a Goblet or Tumbler, that it might be the fitter for swimming; and
having furnished it first with Ballast, and then, for merryment sake, with a
wooden Deck, by which a tall Mass, with a Sail fusten'd to it, was kept
upright; we fraughted with wood, and by degrees poured Sand into it, till we
had made it s^^^k just to the Tops of certain conspicuous marks, that we had
fastened on the outside of the Glass to opposite parts thereof. Then observing
how high the water reached in the larger Glass, (which by reason of the Vessels
Transparency was easy to be seen) we carefully placed two or three marks in
the same level with the Horizontal Surface of the water; and taking out the
floating Vessel, as it was, with all that belonged to it, and wiping the
outside dry, we put it into a good pair of scales, and having found what it
amounted to, we weighed in a competently large Viol (first counterpoiz'd apart)
so much water, (to a grain, or thereabouts,) and pouring this water into the
large Glass above mentioned, we found it to reach to the marks that we had
fastened to the outside of the Glass, and consequently to reach to the same
height to which the weight of the floating glass, and all that was added to
make it resemble a Ship, had made it arise to. By which Experiment (which we
tried, as to the essential parts of it, with Vessels of differing sizes,
shapes; and ladings too, as Wood, Stone, Quicksilver, etc.) it appears, that
the floating Vessel it self, with all that was in it, or supported by it, was
equal in weight to as much water as was equal in bulk to that part of the
Vessel which was under water, supposed to be cut off from the extant part of
the same vessel by a plain continuing the Horizontal Surface of the water:
since the weight of the floating Vessel, which raised up the water in the
larger Vessel to the greatest height it attained, was the same with the weight
of the water, which being poured into the larger vessel (when the other was
taken out) raised the water therein to the same height. We may also obtain the
same end, by a somewhat differing way, (which is the best way in case the
Vessels be too great viz. to observe, first, by pouring in water out of a Bowl
or Paile, or other Vessel of known capacity, as often as is necessary to fill
the great Vessel, or Cistern, or Pond, to the Top, (or to any determinate
height required) and, next, letting out, or otherwise removing all that water,
to put in its place the Vessel, whose weight is to be found out. Thirdly, to
let, or pour in, water till the Vessel be afloat, and by its weight raise the
External water to the height it had before: And lastly, to examine how much
this water, that was last poured in, falls short in weight of the water that
was in it at first, and afterward removed. For this difference will give us
the weight of as much water, as is aequiponderate to the whole floating Vessel,
whither small or great, with all that it either carries or susteins. The
Hydrostatical Theorem we have been considering, and the Experiments whereby we
have endeavored to confirm, or illustrate it, may (Mutatis mutandis) be
applied to a Ship with all her Ballast, Lading, Guns, and Company; it holding
generally true, That (to express the sense of the Proposition more briefly) the
weight of a floating Body, is equal to as much water, as its immersed part
takes up the room of. Whence we might draw some Arguments in favor of the
Learned Stevinus, (for whose sake it partly was that I annexed this Scholium)
who, if I mis-remember not, does somewhere deduce as a Corollary from certain
Hydrostatical Propositions, See PARADOX the sixth.
That a whole Ship, and all that belongs to it, and leans upon it, presses no
more nor less upon the Bottom it swims over, then as much water, as is equal
in bulk to that part of the Ship which is beneath the Surface of the water.

PARADOX IV.
That in the Ascension of water in Pumps, etc. there needs nothing to raise the
Water, but a competent weight of an External Fluid.
THis Proposition may be easily enough deduced from the already mentioned
Experiments. But yet, for further illustration and proof, we will add that
which follows.

Take a slender Glass-pipe, (such as was used about the first Experiment) and
suck into it about the height of an Inch of deeply tincted water; and, nimbly
stopping the upper Orifice, immerse the lovver part of the pipe into a Glass
half filled with such tincted water, till the Surface of the Liquor in the
pipe be an inch (or as low as you would have it) beneath that of the External
water. Then pouring on oil of Turpentine till it swim 3 or 4 Inches, or as
high as you please above the water; loosen gently your finger from the upper
Orifice of the pipe, to give the enclosed Air a little intercourse with the
External, and you shall see the tincted water in the pipe, to be impelled up,
not only higher then the Surface of the External water, but almost as high as
that of the External oil, through which (it being transparent and colorless)
the Red Liquor may be easily discerned.

Now in this case it cau't be pretended, That the ascent of the water in the
pipe proceeds from Natures abhorrency of a Vacuum; since the pipe being full of
air, and its Orifice unstopp'd, though the water should not ascend, no danger
of a Vacuum would ensue; the air and the water remaining contiguous as
before.

The true Reason then of the ascent of the water, in our case, is but this,
That upon all the other parts of the Imaginary Superficies, that passes by the
immersed Orifice of the pipe, there is a pressure partly of water, and partly
of the oil swimming upon that water, amounting to the pressure of 4 or 5
inches of water; whereas upon that part of the same superficies whereon the
Liquor contained in the pipe leans, there is but the pressure of one inch of
water, so that the parts near the immersed Orifice must necessarily be thrust
out of place by the other parts of water that are more pressed; till so much
Liquor be impelled up into the pipe as makes the pressure on that part of the
Imaginary Superficies, as great as that of the oil and water on any other
equal part of it: and then, by Virtue of the Aequilibrium, (often mentioned)
the water will rise no further; and, by virtue of the same Aequilibrium, it
will rest a little beneath, the Surface of the External oil, because this last
named Liquor is less heavy, bulk for bulk, then water.

And by this we may be assisted to give a reason of the Ascension of water in
ordinary sucking Pumps. For as the oil of Turpentine, though a lighter Liquor
then water, and not mingleable with it, does, by leaning upon the Surface of
the External water, press up the water within the pipe, to a far greater height
then that of the External water it self: so the Air, which, though a far
lighter Liquor then oil of Turpentine, reaches I know not how many Miles high,
leaning upon the Surface of the water in a Well, would press it up into the
Cylindrical Cavity of the Pump* much higher then the External water it self
reaches in the Well, if it were not hindered.

Now that which hinders it in the Pump, is either the Sucker, which fences the
water in the Pump from the pressure of the External air, or that pressure it
self. And therefore, all that the drawing up of the Sucker needs to do, is, to
free the water in the Pipe from the impediment to its Ascent, which was given
it by the Suckers leaning on it, or the pillar of the Atmosphaeres being
incumbent on it; as in our Experiment, the sides of the pipe do sufficiently
protect the water in the pipe from any pressure of the External oil, that may
oppose its ascent.

And lastly, as the water in our pipe was impelled up so high, and no higher,
that the Cylinder of water in the pipe was just able to balance the pressure
of the water and oil without the pipe; so in Pumps, the water does rise but to
a certain height, as about 33 or 34 foot: and though you pump never so long, it
will be raised no higher; because at that height the pressure of the water in
the Pump, upon that part of the imaginary Superficies that passes by the lower
Orifice of it, is the same with the pressure which other parts of that
imaginary superficies* sustain from as much of the External water, and of the
Atmosphaere, as come to lean upon it.

That there may be cases wherein water may be raised by suction, not upon the
Account of the weight of the air, but of its spring, I have elsewhere shovvn;
and having likewise in other places; endeavored to explicate more
particularly the ascension of water in Pumps; what has been said already may
suffice to be said in this place, where it is sufficient for me to have shovvn,
That vvhither or no the Ascension of water may have other causes, yet in the
cases proposed, it needs no more then the competent weight of an External
Fluid, as is the Air; whose not being devoid of gravity, the Cogency of our
Experiments has brought even our Adversaries to grant us.

For confirmation of this, I will here add, because it now comes into my mind,
(what might perhaps be elsewhere somewhat more properly mentioned) an
Experiment that I did but lightly glance at in the Explication of the first,
and the Scholium of the second Paradox.

In order to this I must advertise, That, whereas I there took notice, that
some Ingenious men had complained, that, contrary to the Experiment proposed by
Monsieur Paschall, they were not at all able to keep Mercury suspended in
Tubes, however very slender, though the lower end were deeply immersed in
water, if both their ends were open: The Reasons of my doubting, whether our
Ingenious Author had ever made or seen the Experiment, were, not only that it
had been unsuccesfully tried, and seemed to me unlikely to succeed in Tubes
more slender then his appeared; but because the Impetus, which falling quick
silver gains by the acceleration of motion it acquires in its descent, must in
all probability be great enough to make it all run out at the bottom of a Tube,
open at both ends, and filled with so ponderous a Liquor, though the Tube were
very much shorter then that proposed by Monsieur Paschall.

This advertisement I premise to intimate, that, notwithstanding the
hopelessness of the Experiment, as it had been proposed and tried, I might have
reason not to think it impossible to perform, by another way, the main thing
desired; which was to keep Quicksilver suspended in a Tube, open at both ends,
by the resistance of the subjacent water. For by the Expedient I am going to
propose, I have been able to do it, even with a Liquor much lighter then water.

Finding then, that even a very short Cylinder of so ponderous a fluid, as
Mercury, would, if it were once in falling, descend with an impetus not easy to
be resisted by the subjacent Liquor, I thought upon the following Expedient to
prevent this inconvenience. I took a slender pipe, the Diameter of whose Cavity
was little above the sixth part of an Inch, and having sucked in at the lower
end of it somewhat less then half an inch of Quicksilver, and nimbly stopped
the upper Orifice with my finger; I thrust the Quicksilver into, a deep glass
of oil of Turpentine, with a care not to unstop the upper Orifice, till the
small Cylinder of quicksilver was 18 or 20 times its depth beneath the Surface
of the oil. For by this means, when I unstopp'd the pipe, the Quicksilver
needed not (as otherwise it would) begin to fall, as having a longer Cylinder
then was requisite to make an Aequilibrium with the other fluid. For by our
Expedient the pressure of the oil was already full as great, if not greater,
against the lower part of the Mercurial Cylinder, as that which the weight of
so short a Cylinder could exercise upon the contiguous and subjacent oil. And
accordingly, upon the removal of my finger, the Quicksilver did not run out,
but remain suspended in the lower part of the pipe. And as; if I raised it
toward the Superficies of the oil, the Mercury would drop out for want of its
wonted Counterpoize; so, if I thrust the pipe deeper into the oil, the
increased pressure of the oil would proportionably impell up the Mercury
toward the higher parts of the pipe, which being again a little, and but a
little, raised, the Quicksilver would fall down a little nearer the bottom of
the pipe: and so, with a not unpleasant spectacle, the ponderous Body of quick
silver was made sometimes to rise, and sometimes to fall; but still to float up
on the Surface of a Liquor, lighter there common Spirit of Wine it self.

But, besides that the Experiment, if the maker of it be not very careful; may
easily enough miscarry, the divertisement it gives seldom proves lasting; the
oil of Turpentine after a while insinuating it self betwixt the sides of the
pipe, and those of so short a Cylinder of Mercury, and thereby disordering all.
And therefore, though I here mention this Experiment, as I tried it in oil of
Turpentine; because that is the Liquor I make use of all along these Paradoxes;
and because also I would show that a lighter fluid then water, (and therefore
why not air, if its height be greatly enough increased:) may by its weight and
pressure, either keep the Mercury suspended in pipes, or even raise it in them:
Yet I found water (wherewith I filled tall glasses) a fitter Liquor then oil
for the Experiment; in which though I sought, and found some other Phenomenon,
yet because they more properly belong to another place, I shall leave them
unmention'd in this.

And since Experience shows us, that a Cylinder of, Mercury, of about 30 Inches
high, is aequiponderant to a Cylinder of water of about 33 or 34 foot high; its
very easy to conclude, That the weight of the External air, which is able to
raise and keep suspended 33 or 34 foot of water in a Pump, may do the like to
29 or 30 Inches of Quicksilver in the Torricellian Experiment.

PARADOX V.
That the pressure of an External Fluid is able to keep an Heterogeneous Liquor
suspended at the same height in several Pipes, though those Pipes be of very
different Diameters.
THE contrary of this Proposition is so confidently asserted and believed, by
those Mathematicians, and others, that favor the Doctrine of the Schools; That
this persuasion of theirs seems to be the chief thing, that has hinderd men
from acknowledging, that the Quicksilver in the Torricellian Experiment may be
kept suspended by the Counterpoize of the external air. And a famous writer,
that has lately treated, as well of the Hydrostaticks, as of the (...) of the
Torricellian experiment (...) the falsehood of our Paradox, That, laying aside
all other Arguments, he contents himself to confute his Adversaries with one
Demonstration (as he calls it) grounded on the quite contrary of what we here
assert. For his Objection runs to this sense. That if it were the pressure of
the External Air, that kept the Quicksilver suspended in the newly mentioned
experiment, the height would not (as Experience shows it is) be the same in all
Cylindrical pipes, though of very differing B^^es. For, supposing the height of
the Mercurial Cylinder, in a Tube of half an Inch Diameter, to be 29 Inches;
it is plain, that a Mercurial Cylinder of the same height, and three Inches in
Diameter, must weigh diverse times as much as the former; and therefore the
pressure of the External air, being but one and the same, if it be a just
Counterpoize to the greater Cylinder, it cannot be so to the less; and if it be
able to keep the one suspended at 29 Inches it must be able to keep the other
suspended at a far greater height, which yet is contrary to experience. And
indeed this Objection is so specious, That, though I elsewhere have already
answered it, both by reason and Experience, as far forth as it concerns the
Torricellian Experiment; Yet, to show the mistake on which it is grounded, it
may be very well worth while to make out, our proposed Paradox, (as that whose
truth will sufficiently disprove that error) by showing both that the
Assertion is true, and why it must be so.

Provide then a more then ordinarily wide mouthed Glass, Fig. 6.
clear, and of a Convenient depth; into which having put a convenient quantity
of water, deeply tinged with Brazil or some other Pigment, fit to the Orifice a
broad but thin Cork, in which, by burning or cutting, make diverse round holes
of very differing widenesses; into each of which you may thrust a glass
Cylinder, open at both ends, and of a size fit for the hole that is to receive
it; that so the several pipes may be embraced by these several holes; And, as
near as you can, make them parallel to one another, and perpendicular to the
superficies of the water, into which they are to be immersed. But we must not
forget, that, besides these holes, there is an aperture to be made in the same
Cork (it matters not much of what figure or whereabouts) to receive the
slender end of a glass Funnel; by which oil may be conveyed into the vessel,
when it is stopped with the Cork. And in the slender part of this Funnel we use
to put some Cotton-week, to break the violence of the oil that is to be poured
in, which might else disorder the Experiment. All this being thus provided, and
the Cork (furnished with its pipes) being fitted to the Orifice of the Vessel;
if at the Funnel you pour in oil of Turpentine, and place the Glass betwixt
your eye and the Light; you may, through that transparent Liquor; perceive the
Tincted water, to be impelled up into all the pipes, and to rise uniformly in
them. And, when this tincted Liquor has attained to the height of two or three,
or more Inches, above the lowermost Surface of the External oil; if you remove
the Funnel, (which yet you need not do, unless there be yet oil in it,) you may
plainly perceive the water to reach as high, in one of the smaller pipes, as in
another three or four times as great; and yet the water in the several pipes
(as it is evident) is sustained, at that height above the level of the other
water, by the pressure or counterprize of the external oil; which then if one
being lighter in specie then water, will have its Surface somewhat higher
without the pipes, then that of the Tincted water within them. And if by the
Aperture, that receives the Funnel, you immerse, almost to the Bottom of the
oil, the shorter leg of a slender glass Siphon, at whose longer Leg you
procure by Suction the oil to run out; you shall perceive, That, according as
the depth and pressure of the External third decreases, so the water in the
pipe will subside; and that uniformely, as well in the lesser as in the greater
pipes.

The Reason of this is not difficult to be rendered, by the Doctrine already
delivered. For suppose, E F to be the Surface of the water, both within and
without the pipes, before any oil was poured on it: if we then suppose the
oil to be poured in through the Funnel, its lightness in respect of water,
wherewith it will not mingle, will keep it from getting into the cavity of the
pipes L, M, N; and therefore spreading it self on the outside of them above, it
must necessarily, by its gravity, press down the Superficies of the external
water, and impell up that liquor into the cavities of the pipes. And if we
suppose the pouring on of the oil to be continued till the uppermost surface of
the oil be raised to G H, and that of the external water depressed to I K, (or
thereabouts,) an imaginary plain passing along the lower Orifices of the pipes;
I say, the tincted waters in the pipes ought to have their uppermost Surfaces
in the same level, notwithstanding the great inequality of their Bores. For
that part of the Surface IK, which is comprehended within the Circular Orifice
of the greatest pipe L, is no more charged by the incumbent water, then any
other part, equal to that Circle of the same Imaginary Superficies, is by the
water or oil incumbent on it; (and consequently, no more then the part
comprehended within the circle of the final pipe N, is by the water contained
in that small pipe;) the external oil having as much a greater height upon the
Superfices I K, then the water within the pipe, as is requisite to make the two
Liquors Counter-ballance each other, notwithstanding the difference of their
specific Gravities. And though the pipe L were twice as bigg, it would Charge
the subjacent plain I K no more then the pressure of the oil on the other
parts of the same imaginary Surface is able to resist. And yet this pressure of
the External oil ought not to be able to raise the water in the slender pipe
N, higher then the Surface Q in the same Level with the Surface O. For, if the
water were higher in the small pipe; being a heavier Liquor then oil, it must
press upon that part of the Surface I K, it leans on, with greater force then
the external oil upon the other parts of the same plain I K; and therefore
with greater force then the weight of the External oil could resist. And
consequently, the water in the slender pipe must subside, till its Surface be
inferior to that of the External oil; since, till then, the difference of
their specific gravities cannot permit them to rest in an Aequilibrium. To be
short; It is all one, to the resistance of the external oil, how wide the
Cylinder is that it supports in the pipe; provided the height of it be not
greater in respect of the height of the oil, then the difference of the
respective Gravities of those two Liquors requires. For, so long the pressure
of the Cylinder of water-will be no greater, on that part of the Imaginary
Superficies which it leans upon, then the pressure of the external oil will be
on all the other parts of the same Superficies; and consequently, neither the
one, nor the other of those Liquors will subside, but they will both rest in an
Aequilibrium,

But here it will not he amiss to note; First, that it is not necessary that
the Glass Cylinders L, M, N, should be all of the same length; since, the lower
Orifice being open, the water will rise to the same height within them, whether
the parts immersed under the water be exactly of the same length or no.

And Secondly, That throughout all this Discourse, and particularly in the
Explication of this Paradox, we suppose, either that the slenderest pipes, that
are employed about these Experiments, are of a moderate size, and not exceeding
small; Or that, in case they be very small, allowance be made in such pipes for
this property, That water will rise in them to a greater height, then can be
attributed to the bare Counterpoize of either the water or the oil, that
impels it upwards and keeps it suspended. But this difference is of so little
moment in our present Inquiries, That we may safely neglect it, (as hereafter
we mean to do) now we have taken this notice of it for prevention of mistakes.

PARADOX VI.
If a Body be placed under water, with its uppermost Surface parallel to the
Horizon; how much water soever there may be on this or that side above the
Body, the direct pressure sustained by the Body (for we now consider not the
Lateral nor the recoyling pressure-to which the Body may be exposed if quite
environed with water,) is no more then that of a Column of water* having the
Horizontal superficies of the Body for its Basis, and the perpendicular depth
of the water for its height.
And so likewise, If the water that leans upon the Body be contained in pipes
open at both ends; the pressure of the water is to be estimated by the weight
of a pillar of water, whose Basis is equal to the lower Orifice of the pipe,
(which we suppose to be parallel to the Horizon) and its height equal to a
perpendicular reaching thence to the top of the water; though the pipe be much
inclined toward the Horizon, or though it be irregularly shaped, and much
broader in some parts, then the said Orifice.
STevinus, in the tenth Proposition of his Hydrostatical Elements, having
proposed in more general terms the former part of our Paradox; annexes to se a
Demonstration to this purpose.

Having first supposed A. B. C. D, to be a solid Rectangular figure of water,
whose- Basts E F is parallel to the Horizon; and whose height G E is a
perpendicular let fall from the uppermost Surface of the water to the
lowermost; His Demonstration is this,

If the Bottom E F be charged with a greater weight then that of the water G H
F E, that surplusage must come from the adjoining water; therefore, if it be
possible, let it be from the water A G E D, and H B C F; which granted, the
Bottom D E will likewise have a greater weight incumbent on it, upon the score
of the neigbouring water G H F E, then that of the water A G E D. And, the
reason being the same in all the three cases, the Basis F C must sustain a
greater weight, then that of the water H B C F. And therefore the whole bottom
D C, will have a greater weight incumbent on it, then that of the whole water A
B C D; which yet (A B C D being a rectangular Body) would be absurd. And by the
same way of reasoning you may evince, That the Bottom E F sustains no less a
weight, then that of the water G H F E. And so, since it sustains neither a
greater weight, nor a less, it must sustein just as much weight as the Column
of water G H F E.

This Demonstration of the Learned Stevinus may well enough be admitted by a
Naturalist (though, according to some Hypotheses touching the Cause and Nature
of Gravity, it may fail of Mathematical exactness;) and by it may be confirmed
the first part of our proposed Paradox. And some things annexed by Stevinus to
this Demonstration, may be also applied to countenance the second. But because
this is one of the noblest and usefullest Subjects of the Hydrostaticks, we
think it worth while to illustrate, after our manner, each of the two parts of
our Paradox by a sensible Experiment.

First then, Take a slender Glass pipe, of an even Bore, turned up at one end
like the annexed Siphon. Fig. 8.
Into this Siphon suck oil of Turpentine till the Liquor have filled the
shorter leg, and be raised 2 or 3 Inches in the longer. Then nimbly stopping
the upper Orifice with your finger, thrust the lower part of the Siphon so
far into a deep Glass full of water, That the Surface of the oil in the
longer leg of the pipe, may be but a little higher then that of the External
water; and, upon the removal of your finger, you will find the Surface of the
oil to vary but little, or not at all, its former Station. And as, if you then
thrust the pipe a little deeper, you will so the oil in the shorter leg to
begin to be depressed; so, if afterward you gently raise the pipe toward the
top of the water, you shall see the oil not only regain its former station,
but flow out by degrees in drops that will emerge to the Top of the water. Now,
since the water was able, at first, to keep the oil, in the longer leg of the
pipe, suspended no higher, then it would have been kept by a Cylinder of water
equal to the Orifice of the shorter leg of the pipe, and reaching directly
thence to the Top of the water; (as may be easily cried, by making a Siphon,
where the shorter leg may be long enough to contain such a Cylinder of water to
conterpoize the oil in the longer;) and since, when once, by the raising of the
pipe, the height of the incumbent water was lessened, the oil did more then
Counter-ballance it; (as appears by its flowing out of the Siphon,) we may well
conclude; That, though thence were in the Vessel a great deal of water, higher
then the immersed Orifice of the Siphon, (and it would be all one, though the
Siphon were placid at the same depth in a pond or lake;) yet, of all that
water, no more did gravitate upon the Orifice, then that which was placed
directly over its, which was such a pillat of water, as the Paradox describes.

And, by the way, we may hence learn; That though water be not included in
pipes, yet it may press as regularly upon a subjacent Body, as if it were. And
therefore we may well enough conceive a pillar of water, in the free water it
self, where there is nothing on any side, but the contiguous water, to bound
the imaginary pillar.

But I had forgot to add, That the first part of our Paradox will hold, not
only when the water, superior to the Body it presses upon, is free; but also,
when it is included in Vessels of never so (seemingly) disadvantageous a shape.
For, if you so frame the shorter leg of a Siphon, that it may expand its self
into a funnel, like that of Fig. 6. employed about the proof of the foregoing
(fisth) Paradox; (for which purpose the legs must be at a pretty distance from
each other:) though you fill that Funnel with water, the oil in the longer and
slender leg of the Siphon will be able to resist the pressure of all the water,
notwithstanding the breadth of the upper part of the funnel. So that, even in
this case also, the Surface of the oil in the longer leg, will be but a little
higher then that of the water in the funnel.

For further Confirmation of this; we caused to be made a Siphon, so shaped,
that one of the legs (which were parallel, and of the same Bore,) had in the
midst of it a Sphaere of Glass, save that it communicated with the upper and
lower parts of the same leg.

In the uniform leg of the Siphon, we put a convenient quantity of oil of
Turpentine, and into the other, as much water as filled not only the lower part
of it, but the Globular part too. And yet we did not find, that all this water
was able to keep up the oil in the uniform leg, at a greater height then if
the leg that contained the water had been uniform too; as much of the water in
the Globe, as was not directly over the lower Orifice of it, being supported by
the lateral parts (if I may so call them) of the same Globe. And, if that leg
were, instead of water, filled with oil, and the uniform leg with water;
notwithstanding the far greater quantity of oil, that was necessary to fill
that leg, whereof the hollow sphaere was but a part; the water in the uniform
leg would not be kept up* so much as to the same height with the oil in the
misshapen leg.

But to make this matter yet the more clear, we caused a Siphon to be made of
the Figure expressed in the adjoining Scheme; Figur. 9.
into which having poured a convenient quantity of Mercury, till it reached in
the shorter leg C D, almost to the bottom of the Clobulou part E, and in the
longer leg A B, to an equal height: We afterward, poured a sufficient quantity
of water into the said longer leg A B, which drove away the Quicksilver, and
impelled it up in the shorter leg till it had half, or more then half, filled
the Cavity of the Globular part E, (which yet we did not wholly fill with
Quicksilver, because the Tube A B was not long enough for that purpose;) and
then we observed, that, notwithstanding the great weight of (that Body, which
is of all Bodies, save one, the most Ponderous) Quicksilver, which was
contained in the lower part of the same leg of the Siphon, the surface of the
Quicksilver H G, was impelled up as high by the water in the Leg A B, as the
disparity of the specific weights of those two Liquors (whereof one is about
14 times as heavy as the other) did require: So that it appeared not, that, for
all the great weight of Quicksilver, contained in the Globulous Cavity E, there
pressed any more upon the slender and subjacent part E C of that leg, then as
much as was placed directly over the lower Orifice of the said Cavity E* So
that the other, and lateral parts of that Mercury, being supported by the
concave sides of the Glass, whereunto they were contiguous, the water in the
leg A B, appeared not any more pressed by the quicksilver, then if the leg C D
had been, as well as the other, of an uniform bigness; and, by this means, if
we had made the hollow Globe of a large Diameter, a small quantity of water,
poured into the leg A B, might have been able to raise a quantity of
quicksilver exceedingly much heavier then it self. But then so little water can
raise the quicksilver, in so broad a pipe, but to an inconsiderable height.

To make out the second part of our Paradox by an Experiment, we took three
Glass-pipes; the one made like a Bolt-head, Fig. 10.
with a round Ball and two opposite Stemms; the other was an irregular pipe,
blown with an Elbow, wherewith it made an Angle; and the third was as
irregularly shaped, as I could get it blown; being in some places much broader,
and in some much narrower then the lower Orifice of it. And these two last
named pipes had their upper ends so inserted into holes, made fit for them in a
broad piece of Cork; that, when they were immersed, they made not right Angles,
but very oblique ones, with the Horizontal Surface of the Liquor. The other
Glass likewise, which consisted of a great Bubble, and two opposite pipes, was
fastened to the same Cork, which having before hand been made fit for a wide
mouthed glass of a good depth, and half filled with water, was thrust as a
stopple into the mouth of the said glass, so that the water a scended a pretty
way into each of the three pipes by their lower Orifices, which as well as the
upper we left open; Then a good quantity of oil of Turpentine being poured
into the same Vessel, through a funnel, the water was by the incumbent oil
impelled up to the height of 2 or 3 Inches in each of the three pipes. Which
argues, that, notwithstanding their being so unequal in bigness, and so
irregular in shape, (insomuch that we guessed one of them was 10 or 12 times
greater in one part, then in another, or then it was even at the Orifice) the
water, contained in each of them, pressed upon its lower Orifice no more (I do
not add, nor no less) then it would have done if it had been a Cylinder, having
the Orifice for its Basis, and the perpendicular depth of the water and oil
above, for its height. For in case each of the pipes had contained but such a
Cylinder of water, that water would nevertheless have had its uppermost
Superficies at the same height: and on the other side, it would have been
impelled up beyond it, if its weight did not as strongly endeavor to depress
the immediately subjacent water, as the pressure of the External fluids
endeavored to impel it up.

And since the height of the water was about the same in the several pipes,
though two of them, being very much inclined, contained much more water then if
they were erected: yet by the same way of reasoning we may gather, That the
imaginary plain, passing by the immersed Orifice of either of these inclining
pipes, sustained no more of pressure, then it would have done from a shorter
Cylinder of water if erected. And indeed, in all these cases, where a pipe
either is broader in other places then at its lower Orifice, or inclined any
way toward the Horizon, the weight of the contained Liquor is not all
supported by the Liquor or the Body contiguous to the lower Orifice, but partly
by the sides of the pipe it self. And therefore if, when in a slender pipe you
have brought a parcel of oil of Turpentine to be in an Equilibrium with the
External water, as in the Experiment belonging to the first Paradox; If, I say,
when this is done, you incline the pipe toward the sides of the Glass, You may
indeed observe the Surface of the oil in the pipe to be, as before, a little
higher then that of the water without it: But you shall likewise see, That,
though the Orifice of the pipe were not thrust deeper into the water, yet
therewill be a pretty deal of water got up into the pipe; because the oil not
leaning now upon the water only; as it did before, but partly upon the water,
and partly upon the pipe, its pressure upon the subjacent water is considerably
lessened; and there by the external water, whose pressure is not diminished
too, is able to impel up the oil, and intrude for a little way into the pipe.
But if you re-erect the pipe, the pressure of the oil being then again exerted
upon the subjacent water, it will be able to depress, and drive it again out of
the Cavity of the pipe.

And to this agrees very well what we further tried as follows: We caused 3
pipes to be blown (shaped as the adjoining Figures; Fig. 11.
) one having in it diverse acute Angles; the other being of a winding form, like
a scrue or worm of the Limbeck; and the third very irregularly crooked; and yet
each of these pipes having all its crooked parts, and some of its straight and
erected parts, filled with oil of Turpentine; being thrust to a convenient depth
under water and unstopp'd there, (after the manner already often declared) we
found, that, according to our Paradox, the surface of the oil in the pipe was
higher than that of the water without it, as much as it would have been in case
the pipe had been straight, (as we tried by placing by the crookedest of them a
straight pipe with oil in it) though the quantity of the oil, in one of these
pipes, were perhaps three times as much as would have sufficed, if the pipe had
been strait: So that this surplusage of oil did not press upon the subjacent
water, (for if it had done so, the oil would have run out of the pipe.) And I
remember, that lifting up as much of one of these crooked pipes, as I thought
fit, somewhat above the Surface of the water; when the Superficies of the oil
in the pipe was not above half an inch higher then that of the water without
it, I estimated that the crooked pillar of oil, contained in that part of the
pipe which was above the Surface of the water, was about 7 or 8 Inches long. So
true it is, that the pressure of Liquors, contained in pipes, must be computed
by the perpendicular that measures their height, what ever be their length or
bigness.

SCHOLIUM.
THE Learned Stevinus, having demonstrated the Proposition we lately mentioned
out of him, subjoyns diverse consectaries of which the truth has been thought
more questionable, then that of the Theorem it self. And therefore he thought
fit to add a kind of Appendix to make good a Paradox, which seems to amount to
this. That If, in the Cover of a large Cylindrical Box, exactly closed, there
be perpendicularly erected a Cylindrical Pipe open at both ends, and reaching
to the Cavity of the Box; this Instrument being filled with water, the circular
Basis of it will sustain a pressure, equal to that of the breadth of the Basis
and height of the Pipe.

I chose thus to express this Theorem, (which might be, according to Stevinus,
proposed in more general terms,) because this way of expressing it will best
suit with the subsequent Experiment, and may consequently facilitate the
understanding of the Paradox. But though the Learned Stevinus's aims were to be
commended; who finding this Proposition doubted, seems to have had a great mind
to give an Experimental Demonstration of it, and therefore proposes no less
then five pragmatical Examples (as he calls them) to make out the truth of what
he asserts; yet in this he has been somewhat unhappy, that that Experiment,
which alone (for ought I can find) has been tried of all the five, is rejected
as incompetent, by those that profess to have purposely made trial of it. And
indeed, by reason of the difficulty of bringing them to a practical examen, I
have somewhat doubted whether or no this useful writer did ever make all those
Trials himself; rather then set down the events, he supposed they must needs
have; as presuming his conjectures rightly deduced from a Demonstrative Truth.
Wherefore though another of the Experiments, he proposes, be not free from
difficulty, yet having, by the help of an Expedient, made it practicable, we
are induced by its plainness and clearness to prefer it to what else he
proposes to the same purpose.

We provided then a vessel of Laton, of the figure expressed in the Scheme, See
Fig. 12.
and furnished it with a loose Bottom C D, made of a flat piece of wood covered
with a soft Bladder and greased on the lower side near the edges, that leaning
on the rim of wood G H, contiguous every where to the inside of the Laton it
might be easily lifted from off this Rim; and yet lie so close, upon it, that
the water should not be able to get out between them: And to the midst of this
loose bottom was fastened a long string, of a good strength, for the use
hereafter to be declared. The Instrument thus fitted, the water was poured in
apace at the Top A B, which, by its weight pressing the false Bottom C D
against the subjacent Rim, G H, contributed to make the Vessel the more tight,
and to hinder its own passing. The Vessel being filled with water we took the
forementioned string, one of whose ends was fastened to I, the middle part of
the loose Bottom; and, tying the other end K to the extremity of the Beam of a
good pair of Scales, we put weights one after another into the opposite scale,
till at length those weights lifted up the false Botom C D from the Rim G H;
and, consequently, lifted up the Incumbent water; which presently after ran
down between them. And having formerly, before we poured in any water, tried
what water would suffice to raise the Bottom C D, when there was nothing but
its own proper weight that was to be surmounted; we found, by deducting that
weight from the weight in the scale, and comparing the Residue with the weight
of as much water, as the cavity of the broad, but very shallow Cylinder B E C H
G D F would have alone (if there had been no water in the pipe A I) amounted
to; we found, I say, by comparing these particulars, that the pressure upon C D
was by so very great odds more, then could have been attributed to the weight
of so little water, as the Instrument pipe and all contained, in case the water
had been in an uniform Cylinder, and consequently a very shallow one, of a
Basis as large as that of our Instrument, That we could not but look upon the
success, as that, which though it did not answer what the reading of Stevinus
might make a man expect; yet may deserve to be further prosecuted, that whether
or no the Paradox of Stevinus (which not only some others, but the Learned Dr.
Wallis himself question) will hold; the Inquiry he has started, may be so
persued, as to occasion some improvement of this part of Hydrostaticks: where,
to define things with certainty, will perhaps be found a difficulter Task then
at first glance one would think; both because diverse speculative things must be
taken into consideration, whose Theory has not perhaps yet been cleared, and
because of the difficulty that will be found in practice by them that shall go
about to make Stevinus's Experiments, or others of that sort with all requisite
Accurateness: As indeed, it is far easier to propose Experiments, which would
in likelihood prove what we intend, in case they could be made, then to propose
practicable Expedients how they may be made.

PARADOX VII.
That a Body immersed in a Fluid, sustains a lateral pressure from the Fluid;
and that increased, as the depth of the immersed Body, beneath the Surface of
the Fluid, increases.
THough I shall not wonder if this proposition seems strange enough to most
Readers: yet I think I could make it out by several ways, and particularly by
one that is plain and easy, being but that which follows.

Take then a slender Glass pipe (like that imployd about the first Experiment;)
Fig. 13.
and cause it to be bent within two or three Inches of one end, so that the
longer and the shorter legs, E F and F G, may make, as near as can be, a right
Angle at F; then dipping the Orifice of the shorter leg F G in oil of
Turpentine, suck into the Siphon (if I may so call it) as much of the Liquor,
as will fill the shorter leg, and reach two or three Inches high in the longer;
then, nimbly stopping the upper Orifice with your finger, immerse the lower
part of the Glass under water, in such manner as that the longer leg E F may
make, as to sense, right Angles with (A B) the Horizontal Surface of the water,
and the shorter leg F G may be so far depressed under that Surface, That I K,
the Superficies of the oil in the longer leg, be but a little higher then A B,
that of the external water. Then, removing your finger, you may observe, That
the oil in the Siphon will continue (with little or no change) in its former
station. By which it appears that there is a lateral pressure of the water
against the oil contiguous to G, the Orifice of the shorter leg of the pipe,
since it is only that pressure that hinders the efflux of the oil at that
Orifice, notwithstanding the pressure of the perpendicular Cylinder of oil
that would drive it out.

And that this pressure of the perpendicular Cylinder does really urge the oil
in the shorter leg to flow out; you may learn by slowly lifting the Siphon
(without changing its, former posture) toward the Surface of the water. For as
the lower leg comes nearer and nearer to that Surface, (to which, as I newly
intimated, it is still to be kept parallel) the oil in the Horizontal leg will
be driven out in drops, by the pressure of the other oil in the perpendicular
leg.

That likewise before you begin to raise the Siphon, the lateral pressure of
the water against the lower Orifice of it is, at least in such Experiments,
near about the same with what would be the perpendicular pressure of a Cylinder
of water, reaching from the same Orifice G (or some part of it) to the top of
the water, may be gathered from hence, That the Surface of the oil in the
longer leg will be a little higher then that of the external water, as (by
reason of the often mentioned comparative levity of the oil) it would be, if we
suppose, That a pipe of Glass of the same bore, and reaching to the top of the
water, being fitted to the Orifice of the Horizontal Leg (as in the annexed
figure the Cylinder, G H) were filled with water.

And, to make out the latter part of our proposition, we need add no more, then
that, if you plunge the Siphon deeper into the water, you shall find the oil,
by the Lateral pressure of the water, driven by degrees quite out of the
shorter leg into the longer: and if you thrust it yet deeper, you may observe
that the longer leg will admit a Cylinder of water, upon which that of oil
will swim; the whole oil alone being unable to counterballance the lateral
pressure of the water at so great a depth.

By which last circumstance, it appears, that water has also a lateral pressure
against water it self, and that increased according to its depth; since
otherwise the external water could not impel that in the Horizontal leg of the
Siphon, into the perpendicular leg, though to do so, it must surmount the
weight or resistance of the whole cylinder of oil, that must be hereby
violently raised in the said perpendicular leg.

But if you gently raise the Siphon again, the lateral pressure of the water
against the immersed Orifice being diminished, (according as the distance of
that Orifice G from the Horizontal Surface, A B, comes to be lessened,) the
prevalent oil will drive out the water, first out of the Longer leg, and then
out of the shorter, and will at length flow out in drops at the immersed
Orifice, and thence emerge to the Top of the water.

Besides, when the oil in the Siphon does just counterballance the external
water, if you keep the shorter leg parallel to the Surface of the water, and
move the Orifice of it this way or that way, and place it nearer or further off
from the middle or from the sides of the Glass, (provided you keep it always at
the same depth under the water,) you will find the oil in the longer Leg to
continue (as to sense) at the same height: Whence we may learn (what I have not
yet found mentioned by any Writer,) That, even in the midst of the water, we
may suppose a pillar of water, of a Basis equal to the side of an immersed
Body, (and reaching to the lowest part of it;) And that, though this Imaginary
aqueous pillar, such as in our figure G H, be not included in any solid Body or
stable superficies; nevertheless its lower parts will have a lateral pressure
tending outward, against the imaginary sides, from the weight of the water
that is above these subjacent and lateral parts; and will have that pressure
increased proportionably to the height to which the imaginary pillar reaches
above them. Which observation, being duly noted and applied, may be of no mean
use in the explication of diverse Hydrostatical phenomenon.

And lastly if, in stead of holding E F, the longer leg of our Siphon,
perpendicular, (and, consequently, the shorter parallel to the Horizon,) you
variously incline the former, so as to bring it to make an obtuse or an Acute
Angle with the superficies of the water A B; though by this means the shorter
and immersed leg, F G, will in Situation sometimes respect the Bottom, and
sometimes the top of the Glass: yet in all these oblique situations of this
leg, and the immersed Orifice of it G, the oblique pressure of the water will
so much depend upon the height of the Surface of the Liquor above the Orifice,
and so much conform to the observations already delivered, That you shall still
see the surface of the oil I K, in the longer pipe, to be a little, and but a
little superior to that of the external water, A B, and so the AEquilibrium
betwixt the Liquor, or Liquors, within the Siphon, and the water without it,
will even in this case also be maintained.

SCHOLIUM.
Remembering on this Occasion an Experiment, which though it do not show what
the precise quantity of Lateral pressure is, that the lower parts of the fluid
may sustain from the more elevated; yet it may confirm the foregoing Paradox,
and by its Phenomenon afford some hints that may render it not unacceptable; I
shall subjoyn it, as I set it down not long after I devised it.

In the first place then, there was made a glass Bubble with a slender neck;
and (in a word) of the figure expressed in the annexed Scheme; Fig. 14.
This Bubble I caused to be so poys'd, That, though it would float upon the
water, yet the addition of a weight small enough would suffice to make it sinck.

This done, I provided a very large wide mouthed Glass, and caused to be fitted
to it, as exactly as I could, a stopple of Cork, which being strongly thrust
in, would not easily be listed up. In the middle of this Cork there was burned,
with a heated instrument, a round hole; through which was thrust a long slender
pipe of Glass; so that the lower end of it was a pretty way beneath the Cork,
and the upper part of it was, as near as could be, at right Angles with the
upper part of the said Cork. And in an other part of the stopple, near the
edge, there was made another round hole, into which was likewise thrust another
small pipe; whose lower part reached also a pretty way beneath the Cork; but
its upper part was but about two or three Inches high; and the Orifice of this
upper part was carefully closed with a stopple and Cement. Then the glass
vessel being filled with water, and the poised Bubble being made to float upon
it, the stopple or cover of the great glass vessel was put on, and made fast
with a close Cement, that nothing might get in or out of the vessel, but at the
long slender pipe; which was fastened into the Cork* (as was also the shorter
pipe) not only by its own fitness to the hole, it passed through, but by a
sufficient Quantity of the same Cement, carefully applied to stop all crevesses.

The Instrument thus prepared, (and inclined this or that way, till the
floating Bubble was at a good distance from that end of the long pipe, which
reached a pretty way downwards beneath the Surface of the water,) we began to
pour in some of that Liquor at the open Orifice of the pipe E F; and, the mouth
of the Vessel being exactly stopped, the water for want of another place to
receive it, ascended into the pipe through which it had fallen before. And, if
I held my hand when the water I had poured in was able to reach but to a small
height in the Cylinder, as for instance, to the Superficies J; the Bubble X
would yet continue floating. But if I continued pouring till the water in the
pipe had attained to a considerable height above the Surface of that in the
Vessel, as if it reached to K; then the Bubble X would presently sinck to the
bottom of the Vessel; and there continue, as long as as the water continued at
so great a height in the pipe E. F.

This Experiment will not only teach us, That the upper parts of the water
gravitate upon those that are under them, but (which is the thing we are now to
confirm) That in a Vessel, that is full, all the lower parts are pressed by the
upper, though these lower be not directly beneath the upper, but aside of them,
and perhaps at a good distance from the Line in which they directly press:
These things, I say, may be made out by our Experiment. For the Addition of the
Cylinder of water K J, in the pipe E F, makes the Bubble X subside; as the
force or pressure of any other heavy body upon the water in the vessel would
do. And since (as may be gathered from the Reason formerly given (in the Proof
of the second Paradox) of the sincking of poised Bubbles) the included air in
our Bubble was notably compressed; it will follow, that the Cylinder of water,
KI, did press the subjacent water in the Vessel. For, without so doing, it
could not be able to compress the air in the Bubble. And since the said Bubble
did not swim directly under or near the pipe E F; but at one side of it, and
at a pretty distance from it, nay and floated above the lower Orifice, F, of
the pipe; it is evident that that Aqueous Cylinder, JK, does not only press upon
the water, or other Bodies that are directly under it; but upon those also that
are laterally situated in respect of it, provided they be inferior to it.

And, according to this Doctrine, we may conceive, that every assignable part
of the sides of the Vessel does sustain a pressure, increased by the increase
of that parts depth under water, and according to the largness of the said
part. And therefore, if any part were so weak, as that it would be easily
beaten out or broken by a weight equal to the Cylinder I K, (making always a
due abatement for the obliquity of the pressure) it would not be fit to be a
part of our Vessel: Nay the Cork it self, though it be above the Surface of the
water in the Vessel; yet because the water in the pipe is higher then it, each
of its parts resists a considerable pressure proportionate to its particular
bigness, and to the height of the water in the pipe. And therefore, if the Cork
be not well stopped in, it may be lifted up by the pressure of the water in the
pipe, if that be filled to a good height. And if the Cement be not good and
close, the water will (not without noise) make it self a passage through it.
And if the stopple G, of the shorter pipe G H, (which is placed there likewise
to illustrate the present conjecture) do not firmly close the Orifice of it, it
may be forced out, not without violence and noise. And, for further
satisfaction, if, in stead of the stopple G, you close the Orifice with your
finger, you shall find it pressed upwards as strongly, as it would be pressed
downwards by the weight of a Cylinder of water of the breadth of the pipe, and
of a not inconsiderable height, (for it is not easy to determine precisely,
what height:) so that (to be short) in the fluid Body, we made our trial with,
the pressure of the Superior parts was communicated, not only to those that
were placed directly under them, but even to those that were but obliquely so,
and at a distance from them.

I had forgot to confirm, that it was the pressure of the superior parts of
the water, that made our floating bubble sinck, by such another circumstance as
I took notice of in some of the former Experiments; viz. that, when it lay
quietly at the bottom of the Vessel, if by inclining the Instrument we poured
off as much of the water in the pipe, E F, as sufficed competently to diminish
its height above the water in the Vessel A B C D, the air in the bubble,
finding its former pressure alleviated, would presently expand it self, and
make the bubble emerge. And to show, That the very oblique pressure which the
bubble sustained from the water in the pipe, was not overmuch differing from
that which it would have sustained from an External force, or from the weight
of water placed directly over it; I caused two such bubbles to be poised, and
having put each of them into a long Cylindrical Glass, open above, and filled
with water, upon which it floated, if we thrust it down a little way it would
(agreeably to what has been above related) ascend again; See the Proof of the
11. Paradox.
so that we were forced to thrust it down to a good depth, before the pressure
of the incumbent water was great enough to make it subside.

And perhaps it will not be impertinent to take notice, before we conclude, how
the pressure of such differing fluids, as air and water, may be communicated
to one another. For having sometimes forborne to fill the Vessel A B C D quite
full of water, so that, when the Cork was fitted to it, there remained in it a
pretty quantity of air, (as between the Surface L M, and the Cork)
nevertheless, if the stopple or cork were very closely put in, the pressure of
the water that was afterward poured into the pipe E F, from J to K, would make
the bubble sinck, little otherwise, for ought I took notice of, then if the
Vessel had been perfectly filled with water; the air (above L M,) that was
both imprisoned and compressed, communicating the pressure it received to the
water contiguous to it:

PARADOX VIII.
That water may be made as well to depress a Body lighter then it self, as to
buoy it up.
HOw strange soever this may seem, to those that are prepossessed with the
vulgar Notions about gravity and levity: It need not be marvail'd at, by them
that have considered what has been already delivered. For since, in Fluid
Bodies, the upper parts press upon the lower, and upon other bodies that lie
beneath them. And since, when a Body is unequally pressed by others, whether
lighter or heavier then it self, it must necessarily be thrust out of that
place, where it is more pressed, to that where it is less pressed; If that a
parcel of oil be by a contrivance so exposed to the water, as that the water
presses against its upper Superficies, and not against the undermost or lateral
parts of it; If we suppose that there is nothing (whose pressure is not
inferior to that of the water) to hinder its descent, (supposing, withal, that
the oil and water cannot pass by one another; for which cause, we make use of
a slender pipe;) the oil must necessarily give way downwards, and consequently
be depressed and not buoyed up. This is easily exemplified by the following
Experiment.

Take a slender Glass Siphon E F G H, of the bore we have often mentioned, Fig.
15.
whose shorter leg G H may be about 3 or 4 Inches long, and as parallel as the
Artificer can make it to the longer E F; dip the shorter leg in oil of
Turpentine, till the oil quite fill the shorter leg, and reach to an equal
height in the longer, as from F to J. Then stopping the Orifice E of the longer
leg with your finger, and immersing the replenished part of the Siphon about an
inch under water, you shall perceive that as you thrust it lower and lower,
upon the removal of your finger, the oil in the shorter leg will be made to
sinck about an inch or somewhat more; and as afterward you thrust the pipe
deeper, the oil in the shorter leg will, by the weight of the incumbent water,
H K, be driven downward more and more, till it come to the very bottom of the
shorter leg; whence, by continuing the immersion, you may impel it into the
longer. The cause of which Phenomenon, I suppose to be already clearly enough
assigned, to make it needless to add any thing here about it.

It remains, that, before I proceed to the next proposition, I add; That, to
Exemplify at once three Paradoxes, (both this, and the next foregoing, Fig. 16.
and the second) I caused to be made a slender Glass-pipe, of the Figure
expressed in the annexed Scheme, and having, by the lower Orifice L, sucked
into it as much oil of Turpentine, as reached in the longest leg, N O, as high
as the Top of the other part of the Glass; (namely, to the part P, in the same
level with the Orifice L,) I first stopped the upper Orifice of it, O, with my
finger. And then, thrusting it as before under water to a convenient depth,
upon the removal of my finger, the External water did first drive away the oil
that was in L M, that part of the crooked pipe which was parallel to the
Horizon; then it depressed the same oil to the bottom of the shorter leg, that
is from M to N: And lastly, it impelled it all up into the longer leg N P O, to
what height I thought fit. So that the oil was pressed by the water both
laterally, downwards, and upwards: the causes of which are easily deducible
from the Doctrine already delivered.

PARADOX IX.
That, what ever is said of positive Levity, a parcel of oil lighter then
water, may be kept in water without ascending in it.
TO make out what I have to represent about this Paradox the more intelligible,
the best way perhaps will be to set down the Considerations that induced me to
judge the thing it pretends to feasible. And in order to this, it would be
expedient to consider, why it is that a Body lighter in specie then water,
being placed never so much beneath the Superficies of that Liquor, will rather
emerge to the Top, then sinck to the bottom of it; if we had not already
considered that problem in the Explication of the third Paradox. But being now
allowed to apply to our present purpose what has been there delivered, I shall
forthwith subjoyne, That 'twas easy enough for me to collect from hence, that,
the Reason why it seems not possible, That a parcel of oil lighter then water,
should without violence be kept from emerging to the Top of it, being this,
That since the Surface of a Vessel full of standing water is (Physically
speaking) Horizontal, the water that presses against the lower part of the
immersed Body, must needs be deeper then that which presses against the upper:
If I could so order the matter that the water that leans upon the upper part of
the Body should be being higher then the level of the rest of the water have a
height great enough to balance that which presses against the lower, (and the
Bodies not shift places by passing one by the other) the oil might be kept
suspended betwixt two parcels of water.

To reduce this to practice, I took the following course; having sucked into a
slender pipe* (such as that employed about the first experiment about an Inch
of water, and kept it suspended there by stopping the Orifice of the pipe; I
thrust the lower part of the pipe about two inches beneath the Surface of some
oil of Turpentitie (which, to make the effect the clearer, I sometimes tinge
deeply with Copper:) then removing my finger, the oil being pressed against
the immersed Orifice with a greater force, then the weight of so little
suspended water could resist, that oil was impelled into the lower part of the
pipe to the height of near an inch; and then again I stopped the upper Orifice
of the pipe with my finger, and thereby keeping both the Liquors suspended in
it, I thrust the pipe into a Glass full of water, three or four inches beneath
the Surface of it; and then (for the Reason just now given) the water, upon the
Removal of my finger, will press in at the lower Orifice of the pipe, and
impell up the oil, Fig. 17.
till they come to such a station, as that expressed in the annexed Scheme:
where P Q is the water, newly impelled up into the pipe, Q R is the oil, and R
S the water that was at first sucked into the pipe. For in this station, these
three liquors do altogether as much gravitate upon the part P, as the incumbent
water alone does upon the other parts of the imaginary superficies G H; and yet
the oil, R Q, does not ascend, because the diffluence of the water, R S, being
hindered by the sides of the pipe, its superficies, T S, is higher then A D, the
Superficies of the rest of the water; by which means the incumbent water may be
brought to have upon the upper part R of the oleous Cylinder, as great a
pressure as that of the water, that endeavors to impel upwards the lower part
Q of the same suspended Cylinder of oil.

PARADOX X.
That the cause of the Ascension of water in Siphons, and of its flowing
through them, may be explicated without having a recourse to natures abhorrency
of a Vacuum.
BOth Philosophers and Mathematicians, having too generally confessed themselves
reduced to fly to a fuga vacui, for an account of the cause of the running of
water and other Liquors through Siphons. And even those moderns, that admit a
Vacuum, having (as far as I have met with) either left the Phenomenon
unexplicated, or endeavored to explain it by disputable Notions: I think the
Curious much obliged to Monsieur Paschal, for having ingeniously endeavored to
show* That this difficult Problem need not reduce us to have recourse to a
fuga vacut. And indeed his Explication of the motion of water in Siphons, seems
to me so consonant to Hydrostatical principles, that I think it not necessary
to alter any thing in it. But as for the experiment he propounds to justify
his Ratiocination, I fear his Readers will scarce be much invited to attempt
it. For, besides that it requires a great quantity of Quicksilver; and a new
kind of Siphon, 15 or 20 foot long; the Vessels of Quicksilver must be placed 6
or 7 yards under water, that is, at so great a depth, that I doubt whether men,
that are not diverse, will be able conveniently to observe the progress of the
Trial.

Wherefore we will substitute a way, which may be tried in a glass Tube, not
two foot deep, by the help of another peculiarly contrived glass, to be
prepared by a skilful hand. Provide then a glass Tube A B C D, of a good
wideness, and half a yard or more in depth; provide also a Siphon of two legs F
K, and K G, whereunto is joined (at the upper part of the Siphon) a pipe E K,
in such manner, as that the Cavity of the pipe communicates with the cavities
of the siphon; Fig. 18.
so that if you should pour in water at E, it would run out at F and G. To each
of the two Legs of this new Siphon, must be tied with a string a pipe of Glass,
I and H, sealed at one end, and open at the other; at which it admits a good
part of the leg of the Siphon to which it is fastened, and which leg must reach
a pretty way beneath the Surface of the water, wherewith the said pipe is to be
almost filled. But as one of these legs is longer then the other, so the
surface of the water in the suspended pipe I, that is fastened to the shorter
leg K F, must be higher (that is, nearer to K or A B) then the surface of the
water in the pipe H, suspended from the longer leg KG; that (according to what
is usual in Siphons) the water may run from a higher vessel to a lower.

All things being thus provided; and the pipe E K being held, or otherwise made
fast that it may not be moved; you must gently pour oil of Turpentine into
the Tube A B C D, (which, if you have not much oil, you may before hand fill
with water till the liquor reach near the Bottom of the suspended pipes, as to
the superficies X Y) till it reach higher then the top of the Siphon F K G,
(whose Orifice E you may, if you please, in the mean time close with your
finger or otherwise, and afterward unstop) and then the oil pressing upon the
water will make it ascend into the legs of the Siphon; and pass through it, out
of the uppermost vessel J, into the lowermost H; and if the vessel J were
supplied with water, the course of the water through the Siphon would continue
longer, then here (by reason of the paucity of water) it can do.

Now in this Experiment we manifestly see the water made to take its course
through the legs of a Siphon from a higher vessel into a lower, and yet the top
of the Siphon being perforated at K, the air has free access to each of the
legs of it, through the hollow pipe E K which communicates with them both. So
that, in our case, (where there is no danger of a Vacuum, though the water
should not run through the Siphon) the fear of a Vacuum cannot with any show of
Reason be pretended to be the cause of its running. Wherefore we must seek out
some other.

And it will not be very difficult to find, that it is partly the pressure of
the oil, and partly the contrivance and situation of the vessels; if we will
but consider the matter somewhat more atentively. For the oil, that reaches
much higher then K, and consequently then the legs of the Siphon, presses upon
the surface of the External water, in each of the suspended pipes I and H. I
say the External water, because the oil floating upon the water, and the
Orifice of both the legs F and G being immersed under the water, the oil has
no access to the cavity of either of those legs. Wherefore, since the oil
gravitates upon the water without the legs, and not upon that within them, and
since its height above the water is great enough to press up the water into the
Cavity of the legs of the Siphon, and impel it as high as K, the water must by
that pressure be made to ascend.

And this raising of the water happening at first in both legs, (for the cause
is in both the same) there will be a kind of conflict about K betwixt the two
ascending portions of water, and therefore we will now examine which must
prevail.

And if we consider, That the pressure, sustein'd by the two parcels of water
in the suspended pipes I and H, depends upon the height of the oil that
presses upon them respectively; it may seem (at the first view) That the water
should be driven out of the lower vessel into the higher. For if we suppose
that part of the shorter leg that is unimmers'd under water to be 6 Inches
long, and the unimmers'd part of the longer leg to be seven Inches; because
the surface of the water in the vessel I, is an Inch higher, then that of the
water in the vessel H, it will follow, That there is a greater pressure upon
the water, whereinto the longer leg is dipped, by the weight of an Inch of oil:
so that that liquor being an inch higher upon the surface of the water in the
pipe H, then upon that in the pipe I, it seems that the water ought rather to
be impelled from H toward K, then from I toward K.

But then we must consider, That, though the descent of the water in the leg G,
be more resisted then that in the other leg, by as much pressure as the weight
of an Inch of oil can amount to; Yet being longer by an Inch then the water in
the leg F, it tends downwards more strongly by the weight of an Inch of water,
by which length it exceeds the water in the opposite leg. So that an inch of
water being (ceteris paribus) heavier then an Inch of oil; the water in the
longer leg, notwithstanding the greater resistance of the external oil, has a
stronger endeavor downwards, then has the water in the shorter leg; though the
descent of this be resisted but by a depth of oil less by an Inch. So that all
things computed, the motion must be made toward that way where the endeavor
is most forcible; and consequently the course of the water must be from the
upper vessel, and the shorter leg, into the longer leg, and so into the lower
vessel.

The application of this to what happens in Siphons is obvious enough. For,
when once the water is brought to run through a Siphon, the air (which is a
fluid and has some gravity, and has no access into the cavity of the Siphon,)
must necessarily gravitate upon the water whereinto the legs of the Siphon are
dipped, and not upon that which is within the Siphon: and consequently, though
the incumbent air have somewhat a greater height upon the water in the lower
vessel, then upon that in the upper; yet the gravitation it thereby exercises
upon the former more then upon the latter, being very inconsiderable, the water
in the longer leg much preponderating (by reason of its length) the water in
the shorter leg, the efflux must be out of that leg, and not out of the other.
And the pressure of the External air being able to raise water (as we find by
sucking Pumps) to a far greater height, then that of the shorter leg of the
Siphon; the efflux will continue, for the same reason, till the exhaustion of
the water, or some other circumstance, alter the case. But, if the legs of the
Siphon should exceed 34 or 35 foot of perpendicular altitude; the water would
not flow through it; In the Physico-Mechanical Experiments.
the pressure of the external air being unable, (as has been elsewhere
declared,) to raise water to such a height. And if a hole being made at the top
of a Siphon, that hole should be unstopp'd while the water is running, the
course of it would presently cease. For, in that case, the air would gravitate
upon the water, as well within as without the cavity of the Siphon; and so the
water in each leg would, by its own weight, fall back into the vessel belonging
to it.

But because this last circumstance, though clearly deducible from
Hydrostatical principles and Experiments, has not, that I know of, been
verified by particular Trials, I caused two Siphons to be made, the one of Tin,
the other of Glass; each of which had, at the upper part of the flexure, a
small round hole or socket, which I could stop and unstop, at pleasure, with
the pulp of my finger. So that, when the water was running through the Siphon,
in case I removed my finger, the water would presently fall, partly into one of
the subjacent vessels, and partly into the other. And if the legs of the Siphon
were so unequal in length, that the water in the one had a far greater height
(or depth) then in the other; there seemed to be, when the liquor began to take
its course through the Siphon, some light pressure from the external air upon
the finger, wherewith I stopped the Orifice of the socket made at the flexure.

And on this occasion I will add, what I more then once tried; to show, at how
very minute a passage the pressure of the External air may be communicated, to
Bodies fitted to receive it. For, having for this purpose stopped the orifice
of one of the above mentioned Siphons, (instead of doing it with my finger,)
with a piece of oiled paper, carefully fastened with Cement to the sides of the
socket; I found, as I expected, that though hereby the Siphon was so well
closed, that the water ran freely through: yet, if I made a hole with the point
of a needle, the air would at so very little an orifice insinuate it self into
the cavity of the Siphon, and, thereby gravitating as well within as without,
make the water in the legs to fall down into the vessels. And though, if I held
the point of the needle in the hole I made, and then caused one to suck at the
longer leg; this small stopple, without any other help from my hand, sufficed
to make the Siphon fit for use: Yet if I removed the needle, the air would
(not without some noise) presently get in at the hole, and put a final stop to
the course of the water. Nor was I able to take out the needle and put it in
again so nimbly, but that the air found time to get into the Siphon; and, till
the hole were again stopped, render it useless, notwithstanding that the water
was by suction endeavored to be set a running.

PARADOX XI.
That a solid Body, as ponderous as any yet known, though near the Top of the
water it will sinck by its own weight; yet if it be placed at a greater depth
then that of twenty times its own thickness, it will not sinck, if its descent
be not assisted by the weight of the incumbent water.
THis Paradox, having never been (that I know of) proposed as yet by any, has
seemed so little credible to those to whom I have mentioned it, (without
excepting Mathematicians themselves,) that I can scarce hope it should be
readily and generally received in this Illustrious Company, upon less clear
Testimony, then that of Experience. And therefore, though (if I mistake not)
some part of this proposition may be plausibly deduced by the help of an
Instrument ingeniously thought upon by Monsieur Paschal; Yet I shall have
recourse to my own Method for the making of it out, for these two Reasons. The
one, That a great part of the Paradox must be Explicated, as well as proved, by
the Doctrine already settled in this paper. The other, That the Experiment
proposed by Monsieur Paschal, being to be done in a deep River, and requiring a
Tube 20 foot long, whose Bottom must be fitted with a Brass Cylinder, made
with an exactness, scarce (if at all) to be hoped for from our Workmen: If I
should build any thing on this so difficult an Experiment, (which himself does
not affirm to have ever been actually tried,) I fear most men would rather
reject the Experiment as a Chimaerical thing, then receive for its sake a
Doctrine that appears to them very Extravagant.

Let us then, to employ in this case also the method we have hitherto made use
of, Fill a Glass vessel, A B C D, almost full of water; Fig. 19.
only, in regard that there is a great depth of water requisite to some
Circumstances of the Experiment, This last must not be so shallow as those
hitherto employed: but a deep Cylinder, or Tube sealed at one end, whose depth
must be at least two or three foot, though its breadth need not be above 2 or 3
Inches; and, to keep it upright, it may be placed in a socket of metal or wood,
of a size and weight convenient for such a purpose. This Glass being thus
fitted in water, let us suppose E F, to be a round and flat piece of solid
Brass, having about an Inch in Diameter, and a fourth or sixth part of an inch
in thickness. This Cylinder, being immersed under water till it be just covered
by the uppermost Surface of that Liquor, and being let go, must necessarily
fall downwards in it; because if we suppose the imaginary Superficies, G H, to
pass along the Circle F, which is the lower part of the Brass Body, that metal
being in specie far heavier then water, the Brass that leans upon the part F,
must far more gravitate upon the said part F, then the incumbent water does
upon any other part of the Superficies G H; and, consequently, the subjacent
water at F will be thrust out of place by the descending Body. And because
that, in what part soever of the water, not exceeding nine times its thickness
measured from the Top of the water A C, the ponderous Body, E F, shall happen
to be; there will be still, by reason of the specific gravity of the Metal, a
greater pressure upon that part of the imaginary Superficies that passes along
the bottom of the Body on which the part F shall happen to lean, then upon any
other part of the same imaginary Superficies; the Brass Body would still
descend by virtue of its own weight, though it were not assisted by the weight
of the water that is over it. But let us suppose it to be placed under water on
the designable plain J K; and let this plain, which (as all other imaginary
plains) is, as well as the real Surface of the water, to be conceived parallel
to the Horizon; and let the depth or distance of this plain, from the
uppermost Surface of the water, be (some what) above nine times the thickness
of the Brass Body: I say that, in this case, the body would not descend, if it
were not pressed downwards by the weight of the water it has over it. For Brass
being but about nine times The word, about, is added, because indeed the
Author, as he elsewhere delivers, did by exact scales find Brass to weigh
between eight or nine times as much as water; but judged it needless to his
present Argument, and inconvenient to take notice of the fraction.
as heavy as water of an equal bulk to it, the Body E F alone would press upon
the part F, but as much as a Cylinder of water would, which having an equal
Basis were 8 or 9 times as high as the Brass is thick. But now all the other
parts of the Imaginary surfaces, I K, being pressed upon by the incumbent
water, which is as high above them as the newly mentioned Cylinder of water
would be; there is no reason why the part F should be depressed, rather then
any other part of the Superficies J K: But because it is true, which we
formerly taught; namely, that water retains its gravity in water; and that too,
though a body, heavier in specie then it, be placed immediately under it; it
will necessarily happen, That in what part soever the solid body be placed,
provided it be every way environed with the water, it must, for the Reason
newly given, be made to move downwards, partly by its own weight, and partly by
that of the incumbent water; and must continue to sinck, till it come to the
bottom, or some other body that hinders its farther descent.

But in case the water above the solid body did not gravitate upon it, and
thereby assist its descent; or, in case that the incumbent water were by some
Artifice or other, so removed, That none of the lateral water (if I may so call
it) could succeed in its place to lean upon the solid; then it will follow,
from what we have newly shown, that the solid would be kept suspended. And in
case it were placed much deeper in the water, as over against the point L or M;
Then, if we conceive the incumbent water to be removed or fenced off from it,
the pressure of the solid alone upon the part F, of the imaginary Superficies L
M, being very much inferior to that of the water upon the other parts of the
same Surface, the part F would be strongly impelled upwards, by a force
proportionate to the difference of those two pressures. And therefore, since I
have found by trials, purposely made in scales marvellously exact, and with
refined Gold, (purer then perhaps any that was ever weighed in water) That
Gold, though much the ponderoufest of bodies yet known in the world, is not
full 20 times as heavy as water of the same Bulk; I kept within compass (as
well as employed a round number, as they call it) when I said, That no body
(yet known,) how ponderous soever, will subside in water by its own weight
alone, if it were so placed under water, that the depth of the water did above
twenty times exceed the height of the Body; (not to mention here, that though
gold and water being weighed in the air, their proportion is above 19 to one,
yet in the water, gold does, as other sincking bodies, loose as much of its
weight, as that of an equal bulk of water amounts too.)

I was saying just now, that in case the Brazen body were placed low eenough
beneath the Surface of the water, and kept from being depressed by any
incumbent water, it would be supported by the subjacent water. And this is that
very thing that I am now to show by an Experiment.

Let then the Brass body E F, be the cover of a brass Valve; Fig. 20.
(as in the annexed figure:) and let the Valve be fastened with some strong and
close Cement to a Glass pipe, O P, (open at both ends) and of a competent
length and wideness. For then the Body, E F, being the undermost part of the
Instrument, and not sticking to any other part of it, will fall by its own
weight if it be not supported. Now then, tying a thread to a Button Q, (that is
wont to be made in the middle of the doors of Brass valves) you must, by
pulling that string straight and upwards, make the Body, E F, shut the orifice
of the Valve, as close as you can; (which is easily and presently done.) Then
thrusting the Valve under water, to the depth of a foot or more; the Cement and
the sides of the Glass, O P, (which reaches far above the top of the water X Y)
will keep the water from coming to bear upon the upper part of the body E F;
and consequently the imaginary Surface, V W, (that passes by the lower part of
the said body) will, where it is contiguous thereunto, be pressed upon only by
the proper weight of the body E F; but in its other parts, by the much greater
weight of the incumbent water. So that, though you let go the string, (that
held the body, E F, close to the rest of the Instrument) the said body will not
at all sinck, though there be nothing but water beneath it to support it.

And to manifest that it is only the pressure of the water, of a competent
depth, that keeps the solid suspended; if you slowly lift up the instrument
toward (X Y) the top of the water; you shall find, that, though for a while
the parts of the Valve will continue united, as they were before; yet, when
once it is raised so near the Surface, (as between the plain J K, and X Y) that
the single weight of E F, upon the subjacent part of the imaginary plain that
passes by it, is greater then the pressure of the incumbent water upon other
parts of the same plain; that Body, being no more supported as formerly, will
fall down, and the water will get into the pipe, and ascend therein, to the
level of the External water.

But if, when the Valve is first thrust under water, and before you let go the
thread that keeps its parts together, you thrust it down to a good depth, as to
the Superficies R S: then, though you should hang a considerable weight, as L,
to the Valve E F, (as I am going to show you a Trial with a Massy Cylinder of
stone broader then the Valve, and of diverse inches in length) the surplusage of
pressure on the other parts of the plain, V W, (now in R S) over and above what
the weight of the body E F, and that of the Cylindrical stone, L, to boot, can
amount to, on that part of the Surface which is contiguous to the said body E
F, will be great enough to press so hard against the lower part of the Valve,
that its own weight, though assisted with that of the stone, will not be able
to disjoyne them.

By which (to note that by the way) you may see, that though, when two flat and
polished marbles are joined together, we find it is impossible to sever them
without force; we need not have recourse to a fuga vacui, to Explicate the
cause of their Cohaesion, whilst they are environed by the Air, which is a
Fluid not devoid of Gravity, and reaching above the Marbles no body knows how
high.

And to evince, That it is only such a pressure of the water, as I have been
declaring, that causes the Cohaesion of the parts of the Valve; if you gently
lift it up toward the top of the water, you will quickly find the Brass body,
E F, drawn down by the stone (L) that hangs at it; as you will perceive by the
waters getting in between the parts of the Valve, and ascending into the pipe.

To which I shall only add, what you will quickly see, That, in perfect
Conformity to our Doctrine, the pressure of the body, E F, upon the subjacent
water, being very much increased by the weight of the stone that hangs at it,
the Valve needs not, as before, be lifted up above the plain J K, to overcome
the resistance of the water, being now enabled to do it before it is raised
near so high.

APPENDIX I.
Containing an Answer to seven Objections, proposed by a late Learned Writer,
to evince, that the upper parts of water press not upon the lower.
AFter I had, this Morning, made an end of reviewing the foregoing papers,
there came into my hands some questions lately published, among other things,
by a very recent Writer of Hydrostaticks. In one of which Questions. the
Learned Author strongly defends the contrary to what has there been in some
places proved, and diverse places supposed.

The Author of these Erotemata asserts, That, in consistent water, the upper
parts do not gravitate or press upon the lower.

And therefore, I think it will be neither useless, nor improper, briefly to
examine here the Arguments he produces. Not useless; because the Opinion he
asserts, both is, and has long been, very generally received; and because too,
it is of so great importance, that many of the Erroneous Tenets and
Conclusions, of those that (whether professedly or incidentally) treat of
Hydrostatical matters, are built upon it. And not improper; because our Learned
Author seems to have done his Reader the favor to sum up into one page all
the Arguments for his Opinions that are dispersedly to be found in his own or
others men's Books. So that in answering these, we may hope to do much toward a
satisfactory Decision of so important a Controversy. And, after what we have
already delivered, our Answers will be so seasonable, that they will not need
to be long: The things they are built on having been already made out, in the
respective places whereto the Reader is referred.

Our Author then maintains, that, in Consistent water, the Superior do not
actually press the Inferior parts, by the seven following Arguments.

Object. 1. Says he, Because else the inferior parts of the water would be
more dense then the Superior, since they would be compressed and condensed by
the weight of them.

Ans. But if the Corpuscles, whereof water consists, be supposed to be
perfectly solid and hard; the inferior Corpuscles may be pressed upon by the
weight of the superior, without being compressed or condensed by them. As it
would happen, if Diamond dust were laid together in a tall heap: For though
the upper parts, being heavy and solid Corpuscles, cannot be denied to lean and
press upon the lower; yet these, by reason of their Adamantine hardness, would
not be thereby compressed. And it is possible too, that the Corpuscles of water,
though not so perfectly hard, but that they may a little yield to an extreme
force, be solid enough not to admit from such a weight, as that of the
incumbent water, (at least in such small heights as observations are wont to be
made in,) any compression, great enough to be sensible; As, besides some Trials
I have formerly mentioned in another place, those made in the presence of this
Illustrious Company seem sufficiently to argue; viz. That water is not sensibly
compressible by an ordinary force. And I find not, by those that make the
Objection, that they ever took pains to try, whether in deep places of the Sea,
the lower parts are not more condensed then the upper: nor do I see any
absurdity, that would follow from admitting them to be so.

Object. 2. Our Authors second Argument is, Because Diverse feel not, under
water, the weight of the water that lies upon them.

Ans. But for Answer to this Argument, I shall content my self to make a
reference to the ensuing Appendix, where this matter will be considered at
large; and where; I hope, it will be made to appear, that the phenomenon may
proceed, partly from the firm Texture of the Diverse body, and partly from the
nature of that pressure which is exercised against bodies immersed in fluids;
which, in that case, (as to sense) presses every where equally, against all the
parts of the body, exposed to their Action.

Object. 3. The third Argument is, That even the slightest Herbs growing at the
bottom of the water, and shooting up in it to a good height, are not oppressed
or laid by the incumbent water.

Ans. But the Answer to that is easy, out of the foregoing Doctrine. For the
Plants, we speak of, sustain not the pressure of the water above them by their
own strength; but by the help of the pressure of water that is beneath: which
being it self pressed by the water that is (though not perpendicularly over it)
superior to it, presses them upwards so forcibly, that if they were not by
their Roots, or otherwise fastened to the ground, they, being in specie lighter
then water, would be buoyed up to the top of the water, and made to float; as
we often see that weeds do, which storms, or other accidents have torn from
their native soil.

Object. 4. A fourth Objection is this, That a heavy Body tied to a string, and
let down under water, is supported, and drawn out with as much ease, as it
would be if it had no water incumbent on it; nay, with greater ease, because
heavy bodies weigh less in water then out of it.

Ans. But an Account of this is easy to be rendered out of our Doctrine; For,
though the water incumbent on the heavy body do really endeavor to make it
sinck lower, yet that endeavor is rendered ineffectual, to that purpose, by the
equal pressure of the water upon all the other parts of the Imaginary surface,
that is contiguous to the bottom of the immersed body. And that pressure upon
the other parts of that supposed plain, being equal not only to the pressure of
the pillar of water, but to that pillar, and to the weight of as much water as
the immersed body fills the place of; it must needs follow, That not only the
hand that susteins the body, should not feel the weight of the incumbent water,
but should be able to lift up the Body more easily in the water, then in the
air. But though the pressure of the water incumbent on the stone can not, for
the reason assigned, be felt in the case proposed; yet if you remove that
water, (as in the Experiment brought for the proof of the last Paradox,) it
will quickly appear by the pressure against the lower part of the heavy body,
and its inability to descend by its own weight, when it is any thing deep under
water; it will (I say) quickly appear, by what will follow upon the absence of
the Incumbent water, how great a pressure it exercised upon the stone whilst it
leaned on it.

Object. 5. The fifth Argument is proposed in these words, Because a Bucket
full of water, is lighter in the water, then out of it; nor does weigh more
when full within the water, then when empty out of it; nay it weighs less, for
the reason newly assigned (in the fourth Objection;) therefore the water of the
Bucket, because it is within water, does not gravitate, nor consequently press
downwards, either the Bucket, or the water under the Bucket. This is the grand
and obvious Experiment, upon which the Schools, and the generality of Writers,
have very confidently built this Axiom: That the Elements do not gravitate in
their proper place; and particularly, that water weighs not (as they speak) in
its own Element.

Ans. What they mean by proper or natural place, I shall not stand to examine,
nor to enquire whether they can prove, that water or any other sublunary body
possesses any place, but upon this account, that the cause of gravity, or some
other movent, enables it to expel other contiguous Bodies (that are less heavy
or less moved,) out of the place they possessed before; and gives it an
incessant tendencie, or endeavor toward the lowermost parts of the Earth.

But as to the Example proposed, its very easy to give an account of it. For
suppose ABCD, to be a Well; wherein, by the string E F, the Bucket is suspended
under water, and has its Bottom contiguous to the imaginary plain I K. If now
we suppose the Bucket to consist only of wood, lighter then water, it will not
only not press upon the hand that holds the Rope at E, but will be buoyd up,
till the upper parts of the Bucket be above the top of the water; because the
wood, whereof the Bucket is made, being lighter in specie then water, the
pressure of the water in the Bucket G, and the rest of the water incumbent on
that, together with the weight of the Bucket it self, must necessarily be
unable to press the part H so strongly, as the other parts of the imaginary
plain I K are pressed by the weight of the mere water incumbent on them. But
if, as it is usual, the Bucket consists partly of wood, partly of iron; the
Aggregate may often indeed be heavier then an equal bulk of water: But then the
hand, that draws up the Bucket by the Rope F E, ought not, according to our
Doctrine, to feel the weight of all the Bucket, much less that of the water
contained in it. For though that aggregate of wood and iron, which we here call
the Bucket, be heavier then so much water; yet it tends not downwards with its
whole weight, but only with that surplusage of weight, whereby it exceeds as
much water as is equal to it in Bulk; which surplusage is not wont to be very
considerable. And as for the water in the Cavity, G, of the Bucket, there is no
reason why it should at all load the hand at E, though really the water both in
the Bucket and over it do tend downwards with their full weight; because that
the rest of the water, L I, and M K, do full as strongly press upon the rest of
the imaginary Superficies I K, as the Bucket and the incumbent water do upon
the part H: and consequently the bottom of the Bucket is every whit as strongly
pressed upwards by the weight of the water, upon all the other parts of the
plain I K; as it tends downwards, by virtue of the weight of the Incumbent
water, that is partly in the Bucket, and partly above it; and so these
pressures ballancing one another, the hand that draws the Rope at E, has no
more to lift up then the surplusage of weight, whereby the empty Bucket exceeds
the weight of as much water as is equal in bulk (I say, not to the Bucket as
it is a hollow Instrument, but) to the wood and iron whereof the Bucket consists.

And because this Example of the lightness of filled Buckets within the water
has for so many Ages gained credit to, if it have not been the only ground of,
the assertion, That water weighs not in its own Element, or in its proper
place; I shall add (though I can scarce present it to such a company as this
without smiles) an Experiment that I made to convince those, that were, through
unskilfulness or prejudice, indisposed to admit the Hydrostatical account I
have been giving of the phenomenon. I took then a round wooden Box, which I
substituted in the room of a Bucket; and (having filled it with melted Butter,
into which, when it was congealed, some small bitts of lead were put, to make
it a little heavier then so much water,) I caused a small string of twined silk
to pass through two small holes, made in the opposite parts of the upper edge
of the box, and to be suspended at one end of the beam of a pair of Goldsmiths
Scales; and then putting it into a vessel full of water, till it was let down
there, to what depth I pleased, it appeared that not only the least endeavor
of my hand would either support it, or transport to and fro in the water, or
draw it up to the top of it; and this, whether the box were made use of, or
whether the butter and lead alone, without the box, were suspended by the
silken string: but (to evince, that it was not the strength of my hand, or the
smallness of the immersed body, that kept me from feeling any considerable
resistance,) I cast some grains into the scale that hung at the other end of
the above mentioned Beam, and presently raised the Lead and Butter to the
surface of the water. So that unless the Schoolmen will say that the butter and
lead were in their own Element; we must be allowed to think, that the easy
sustentation, and elevation of the box, did not proceed from hence, That those
bodies weighed not because they were in their natural place. And yet in this
case, the effect is the same with that which happens when a bucket is drawing
out of a well.

And, to manifest that 'twas the pressure of the water against the lower part
of the surface of our suspended body, that made it so easy to be supported in
the water, or raised to the top of it; I shall add, that though a few grains
sufficed to bring the upper surface of the butter to the top of the water: yet
afterward there was a considerable weight requisite, to raise more and more of
its parts above the waters surface; and a considerabler yet, to lift the whole
body quite out of the water. Which is very consonant to our Doctrine. For,
suppose the bucket to be at the part N, half in and half out of the water: the
hand or counterpoise, that supports it in that posture, must have a far greater
strength then needed to sustein it, when it was quite under water; because that
now the imaginary plain P Q, passing by the bottom of the bucket, has on its
other parts but a little depth of water, as from L to P, or M to Q, and
consequently the bottom of the bucket, H, will searce be pressed upwards above
half as strongly as when the bucket was quite under water. And if it be raised
to O, and consequently quite out of the water; that liquor reaching no longer
to the bottom of the bucket, can no longer contribute to its supportation; and
therefore a weight not only equal, but somewhat superior to the full weight of
the bucket, and all that it contains, (being all supposed to be weighd in the
air,) will be necessary to lift it clear out of the water.

But to dwell longer on this subject cannot but be tedious to those that have
been any thing attentive to the former Discourses. I proceed therefore to our
Authors sixth Argument, which is,

Object. 6. That Horse-hairs, which are held to be of the same gravity with
water, keep whatever place is given them in that Liquor; nor are depressed by
the weight of the super-incumbent water.

Answ. Whether the matter of fact bestrictly and universally true, is scarce
worth the examining, especially since we find the difference in point of
specific gravity, betwixt most Horsehaires, and most waters, to be
inconsiderable enough. But the phenomenon, supposing the truth of it, is very
easily explicable, according to the Doctrine above delivered. For supposing in
the last Scheme the body, R, to be bulk for bulk exactly equiponderant to
water; it is plain there is no reason why that body should press the part S, of
the imaginary Superficies I* K, either more or less then that part S would be
pressed, if, the body R being annihilated or removed, it were succeeded by
parcel of water of just the same bulk and weight. And consequently, though all
the water directly above the solid R do really lean upon that body, and
endeavor to depress it; yet that endeavor being resisted by an equal and
contrary endeavor, that proceeds (as we have been but too often feign to
declare) from the pressure exercised upon the other parts of the Superficies, I
K, by the water incumbent on them; the body, R, will be neither depressed nor
raised. And its case being the same in what part of the water soever it be
placed, provided it be perfectly environed with that Liquor; it must keep in
the water (which in this whole Discourse we suppose to be Homogeneous as to
gravity) the place you please to give it.

And, (to add That on this occasion) though Mathematicians have hitherto
contented themselves to prove, that in case a Body could be found or provided,
that were exactly equiponderant to water, it would retain any assignable place
in it; yet the Curiosity we had, to give an Experimental proof of this Truth,
at length produced some glass Bubbles, which some Gentlemen here present have
not perhaps forgot, that were (by a dexterous hand we employed about it) so
exquisitely poised, as, to the wonder of the Beholders, to retain the places
given them, sometimes in the middle, sometimes near the top, and sometimes near
the bottom of the water (though that were Homogeneous) for a great while, till
some change of consistence or gravity in the water, or some of its parts, made
the bubble rise or fall.

The Application of this, to what has been objected concerning Horsehairs,
being too easy to need to be insisted on, there remains to be dispatched our
Authors seventh and last Argument, which is this.

Object. 7. That, otherwise, all the inferior parts of the water would be in
perpetual motion, and perpetually expelled by the Superior.

Answ. But if, by the inferior parts, he means, such portions as are of any
considerable bulk; the Answer newly made to the last objection (where we showed
that the body, R, would retain its place any where in the water, and
consequently near the bottom) will show the invalidity of this Objection. And
unless we knew of what bigness and shape the Corpuscles of water are, it would
perhaps be to little purpose to dispute how far it may be granted, or may be
true in the particles that water is made up of. Only this I shall add* That,
whereas this Learned Author mentions it as an absurdity, that the lower parts
of water should be in perpetual motion: And Stevinus himself, in the beginning
of his Hydrostatical Elements, seems to me to speak somewhat inconsiderately of
this matter; and though, as I lately said, I allow such sensible bodies, as
those whose gravity in water Writers are wont to dispute of, to be capable of
retaining their places in water, if they be in specie equiponderant to it: Yet
I am so far from thinking it absurd, that the inferior Corpuseles of water
should be perpetually in motion; that I see not how otherwise they could
constitute a Fluid body, That restless Motion of their parts, being one of the
generalest Attributes of Liquors; and being, in water, though not immediately
to be seen, yet to be easily discovered by its Effects: As, when Salt, being
cast into water, the aqueous parts that are contiguous to it, and consequently
near to the bottom, do soon carry up many of the faline ones, to the very top
of the water; where, after a while, they are wont to disclose themselves in
little floating grains of a Cubical shape.

But, of this restless motion of the parts of Liquors having professedly
treated elsewhere already; In the History of fluidity and firmness
I shall add nothing at present: But rather take notice of what our Author
subjoyns to the last of his Arguments, (as the Grand thing which they suppose)
in these words, Ratio porro, a priori, hujus sententiae videtur esse, quia res
non dicitur gravitare nisi quatenus habet infra se Corpus levius se in specie.
The erroniousness of which conceit, if I should now go about solemnly to
evince; I as well fear it would be tedious, as I hope it will be needless to
those, that have not forgot what may concern this subject in the former part of
the now at length finished discourse; and especially where I mention those
Experiments, which show, That neither a stone, nor Gold it self, when placed
deep under water, would sinck in it, if the Superior water, that gravitates on
it, did not contribute to its depression.

APPENDIX II.
Concerning the Reason why Diverse, and others who descend to the Bottom of the
Sea, are not oppressed by the weight of the incumbent water.
AMongst the difficulties that belong to the Hydrostaticks, there is one which
is so noble, and which does still so much both exercise and pose the wits of
the Curious, That perchance it will not be unacceptable, if to the former
Experiments we add, by way of Appendix, one that may conduce to the solving of
this difficult problem; viz. Why men, deep under water, feel no inconvenience
by the pressure of so great a weight of water as they are placed under?

The common Answer of Philosophers and other Writers to this puzling Question,
is, That the Elements do not gravitate in their own proper places; and so,
water in particular has no gravitation upon water, nor consequently upon bodies
every way surrounded with water. But that this Solution is not to be admitted,
may be easily gathered from our proofs of the first Paradox, and from diverse
other particulars, applicable to the same purpose, that may be met with in the
foregoing papers.

A famous Writer, and, for ought I know, the Recentest (except Monsieur
Paschal) that has treated of Hydrostaticks, having rendered this Reason of the
Phenomenon.

[The Superior parts of consistent water (as he speaks) press not the inferior,
unless beneath the inferior there be a Body lighter in specie then water; and
therefore, since a humane Body is heavier in specie then water, it is not
pressed by the incumbent water, because this does not endeavor to be beneath a
humane Body.] He subjoyns, contrary to his Custom, this confident Epiphonema,
Qui aliam causam hujus rei assignant, errant and alios decipiunt.

But, by his favor, notwithstanding this confidence, I shall not scruple to
seek another Reason of the Phenomenon. For I have abundantly proved, that
(contrary to the Assertion on which his Explication is built) the upper parts
of water press against the lower, whether a body heavier or lighter in specie
then water be underneath the lower. And, the contrary of which being the (...)
in this Controversy, perhaps the matter may be somewhat cleard, by mentioning
here a distinction, which I sometimes make use of. I consider then a body may
be said to gravitate upon another body in two senses. For sometimes it actually
sincks into, or gets beneath the body that was under it, as a sincking stone
gravitates upon water, and which I call Praevalent, or successful Gravitation;
and sometimes it does not actually, at least not visibly descend, but only
exercises its gravitation by pressing against the subjacent body that hinders
its descent; as when a Woman carries a Paile of water on her head, though the
weight do not actually get nearer the Center of the Earth; yet actually presses
with its whole gravity upon the Woman's head, and back, and other subjacent
parts that hinder its actual descent; and according to this Doctrine I cannot
admit our Authors reasoning, that because a man's body is bulk for bulk heavier
then water, therefore the water does not endeavor to place its self beneath
it. For water, being a heavy body, derives from the cause of its gravity, (what
ever that be) an incessant endeavor toward the Center of the Earth; nor is
there any Reason, why its happening to be incumbent on a body heavier in specie
then it self, should destroy that endeavor. And therefore, though it may be
said that the water does not endeavor to place it self beneath a humane body,
because indeed an inanimate Liquor cannot properly be said to act for this or
any other end; yet the water being a heavy body, tends continually toward the
lower part of the Earth; and therefore will get beneath any body that is placed
betwixt it and that, (without regard whether the inferior body be heavier or
lighter in specie then it self) as far as the degree of its gravity will enable
it; nor would it ever rest, till it have reached the lowermost parts of the
Earth, if the greater ponderousness of the earth and other heavy bodies did not
hinder, (not its endeavor downwards, nor its pressure upon subjacent bodies,
but only) its actual descent.

This Learned Author himself tells us, (as well as Stevinus, and others, that
have written of the Hydrostaticks, unanimously teach,) that if the bottom of a
vessel be parallel to the Horizon, the weight of water, that rests upon it, is
equal to a pillar of water, having that bottom for its Basis, and for its
height a perpendicular reaching thence to the uppermost Surface of the water.
Nor is it reasonable to conceive that there will be any difference in this
pressure of the incumbent water, whether the bottom be of Deal that will
swim, or of Box that will sinck in water; or to speak more generally, whether
it be of Wood, in specie lighter then water, or of Copper, or some other Metal,
that is in specie heavier then it. And since water, being not a solid Body, but
a fluid, consists (as other fluids) of innumerable Corpuscles, that, though
extremely minute, have their own sizes and figures; And since the pressure of
water upon the bottom of a vessel is proportionate to its perpendicular height
over the bottom; It Is manifest, that the upper Corpuscles press the bottom as
well as the lower; which, since they cannot do immediately, they must do by
pressing the intermediate ones. And I have already shown (discoursing one of
the former Paradoxes,) that the Superior parts of water do not only press
those that are directly under them, but communicate a pressure to those that
are aside of them, and at a distance from them.

And if it be objected, That water endeavors to get beneath a Bottom of Glass
Vessels, or other bodies heavier in specie then its self, because under that
bottom there is air, which is a body lighter in specie then water: I say,
that this is precarious; for the indisputable gravity of the water is alone
sufficient to make it always tend downwards, (though it cannot always move
downwards) what ever body be beneath it. And who can assure the makers of this
Objection, That there are not beneath even the bottom of Rivers, or of the
Sea, (where yet they say water is consistent, and rests as in its own place,)
vast spaces replenished but with air, fumes, or fire, or some other body
lighter then water? For, (not to mention that the Cartesians take the Earth we
tread on, to be but a thin Crust of the Terrestrial Globe, whose inside, as
far as the Center, is replenished with a subtle fluid matter, like that
whereof the Sun consists.) We know that in some places, as particularly at a
Famous Coalmine in Scotland, there are great Cavities that reach a good way
under that ground that serves there for a bottom to the Sea: So that, for
ought these Objectors know, even according to their own Doctrine, the water
even in the Sea, may endeavor to get beneath a body heavier in specie then it
self.

But, for my part, I cannot but think, that, to imagine the water knows,
whether or no there be air or some lighter body then it self beneath the body
it leans on, and the superior parts do accordingly exercise or suspend their
pressure upon the inferior; is to forget that it is a heavy Liquor, and an
inanimate Body.

Another Solution there is of this Hydrostatical problem, we have been
discoursing of, which I met with in a Printed Letter of Monsieur Des Carts, in
these terms.

Je ne me, etc. I remember not what reason it is that Stevinus gives, Second
Tome lettre 32.
why one feels not weight of water, when one is under it: but the true one is,
that there can no more of water gravitate upon the body that is in it, or under
it, then as much water as could descend in case that body left its place. Thus
for Example: Fig. 22.
If there were a Man in the Barrel, B, that should with his Body so stop the
hole, A, as to hinder the waters getting out, he would feel upon himself the
weight of the whole Cylinder of water, A B C, of which I suppose the Basis to
be equal to the hole A; for as much as if he sunck down through the hole, all
the Cylinder of water would descend too, but if he be a little higher, as about
B, so that he does no longer hinder the water from running out at the hole A,
he ought not to Feel any weight of the water which is over him, betwixt B and
C, because if he should descend toward A, that water would not descend with
him, but contrariwise a part of the water which is beneath him toward A, of
equal bulk to his Body, would ascend into its place: so that in stead of
feeling the water to press him from the Top downward, he ought to feel that it
buoys him upward from the bottom; which by Experience we see.

Thus far this subtle Philosopher: for whose Ratiocinations though I am wont to
have much respect, yet I must take the liberty to confess my self unsatisfied
with this. For having already sufficiently proved, That the upper parts of
water press the lower, and the bodies placed beneath them, whether such bodies
be lighter in specie then water or heavier; we have subverted the Foundation,
upon which Monsieur Des Cartes's ingenious, though unsatisfactory, Explication
is built. And yet I shall add ex abundanti, That supposing what he says, That
in case the solid B should descend toward A, the incumbent water would not
descend with it, but a part of the subjacent water, equal in bulk to the solid,
would ascend, and succeed in its room; yet that is but accidental, by reason of
the steinchness and fullness of the Vessel. And though indeed the Superior water
cannot actually desend upon the depression of the solid at B, if, at the same
time while that body descends, an equal bulk of water succeeds in its place:
Yet both the solid about C, and the water that succeeds it, do, in their turns,
hinder the descent of the Superior water; which therefore must gravitate upon
which soever of the two it be that actually comes to be placed directly under
it, if there be nothing, before the displacing of the solid, capable to take
away the natural gravity, upon whose account the water, over B and C, does
incessantly tend downwards. And though Monsieur Des Carts does not so clearly
express himself, whether he supposes the hole at A* to be stopped with some
other body, when the solid is placed about B: yet, because he is wont to speak
consistently, I presume he means, that when the solid is removed to B, the hole
at A is otherwise sufficiently stopped; I say then, that the reason why the
solid, which, whilst at A, sustained a great pressure from the incumbent water,
feels not the weight of it, when placed at B, is not that which Monsieur des
Carts gives, but this, That the solid being environed with water, the
subjacent water does (as we have often had occasion to manifest) press it
upwards, full as strongly (and somewhat more) as the weight of the incumbent
water presses it downwards; So that a man's body, in stead of sincking, would be
buoyed up; if, as it is a little heavier, it were a little lighter in specie
then water. Whereas, when the solid was that alone which covered and stopped the
hole, there was a manifest Reason why it should be forcibly thrust downwards by
the weight of the incumbent water B C. For, in that case, there was no water
underneath it at A, to support the solid; and, by its pressure upward, to
enable it to resist so great a weight.

And this, (to hint that upon the by) may perchance help us to guess at the
reason of what Geographers relate of the Lake Asphaltites in Judea, (in case
the matter of fact be true,) That this dead Sea (as they also call it) will not
suffer any living creature to sinck in it. For the Body of a Man (and for ought
we know of other Animals,) is not much heavier in specie then common fresh
water: Now if in this Lake (that stands where Sodom and Gomorrah did, before
those impious Regions were destroyed by fire from Heaven,) we suppose, (which
the nature of the Soil, and the Sacred Story makes probable enough) That the
water abounds with Saline or Sulphurous Corpuscles; (the former helping the
later to associate with the water, as we see in soap consisting of salt and
oil, and in Chemical mixtures of Alcalis and Brimstone dissoluble in water)
the Liquor may have its gravity so augmented, as to become heavier in specie
then the body of an animal. For I have learned of a Light Swimmer, that he
could hardly begin to Dive in salt water, though he easily could in fresh. And
it is not difficult to make a Brine or Lixivium (which are but Solutions of salt
in water,) heavy enough to keep up an egg from sincking. And, not only barely
by dissolving a metalline body in a saline Menstruum, without otherwise
thickning the Liquor, I have brought solid pieces of Amber it self to swim upon
it: but I have tried that certain saline Solutions, which I elsewhere mention;
nay, and a distilled Liquor, (I used defleam'd oil of Vitriol) without any
thing dissolved in it, would do the same thing; by reason of the numerous,
though minute, Corpuscles of salt and sulphur, that it abounds with.

There remains but one solution more of our Hydrostatical problem, that I
think worth mentioning, and that is given by the Learned Stevinus in these
words,

Omni pressu quo Corpus dolor afficitur, pars aliqua Corporis luxatur; sed
isto pressu nulla Corporis pars luxatur, isto igitur pressu Corpus dolor nullo
afficitur. Assumptio syllogismi manifesta est, nam si pars aliqua, ut caro,
sanguis, humor, aut quodlibet denique membrum luxaretur, Stevinus Hydrostat.
Lib. 5. page 149.
in alium locum concedat necesse esset: Sed Exemple clarius ita intelliges,
este ABCD aqua, cujus fundum
atqui locus ille non est extra Corpus; D C* in quo foramen E habeat Epistimeus
sibi iesertum, cui Dorso incumbat Homo F, Quae cum ita fiat, ab aqua pondere
ipsi insidente nulla pars Corporis luxari poterit, cum aqua, ut dictus est,
undiquaque aqualiter urgeat.
cum aqua undiquaque aequali pressu circumfusa sit (quod vero pars ima, Fig. 23.
per 11. propositionem Hydrostaticorum, Si vero ejus veritatem explorare
libeat, eximito Epistemiun, tumque tergum nulla re fultum sustinebitur, ut in
locis cateris, ideoque istic tanto pressu afficietur, quantus tertio exemple
secunda propositionis hujus demonstratus est: vidquantam efficit columna aquea
cujus Basis sit foramica E, altitudo autem eadem quae aqua ipsi insidentis. Quo
exemplo propositi veritas manifest declaratur.
paulo validius prematur superiori, id hoc casu nullius momenti est, quia
tantula differentia partem nullam sua sede dimovere potest) neque item intra
ipsum Corpus concedit, cum istic Corpore omnia oppleta sint, unde singulae
parts singulis partibus aequaliter resistunt, namque aqua undiquaque eadem
ratione Corpus totum circumstat. Quare cum locus is nec intra, nec extra Corpus
sit; absurdum, imo impossible fuerit, partem ullam suo loco emoveri, ideoque
nec Corpus hic afficitur dolor.

This Solution of Stevinus, I esteem preferrible by far, to those that are
wont to be given of this difficult Problem: But yet, the Phenomenon seems to
me to have still somewhat in it of strange. It Is true, that if the Question
were only that which some put, viz. Why the body of a Diver, when it is near
the bottom of the Sea, is not pressed down by so vast a weight of water, as is
incumbent on it; It might be rationally answered, That the weight of so much
water, as leans upon the body, is not sustein'd by the force of the body it
self, but by that of the water which is under it. For, by the Experiments and
Explications, we have annexed to some of the foregoing Paradoxes, it appears,
That the subjacent water, by its pressure upwards, is able, not only to support
the weight of the incumbent water, but so far to exceed it, that it would not
only support the immersed body, and the incumbent water, but buoy up the body,
if it were never so little lighter in specie then water. And as for what
Stevinus insinuates, That, when the water presses the body every way, that
pressure is not felt, though it would be, in case it pressed upon some parts,
and not upon others; I am of the same opinion too; and, to prove it, shall not
make use of the example he proposes, in the words immediately following those
of his, I just now recited: (For I doubt, that example is rather a supposition,
then a tried thing;) but by an Experiment which may be easily made, and has
diverse times been so, in our Pneumatical Engine. For, though the air be a
heavy fluid, and though, whilst it uniformely presses the whole superficies of
the body, we feel not the pressure of it. And though, for this reason, you may
lay the palm of your hand upon the open orifice of a small brass Cylinder,
applied to the Engine instead of a Receiver, without any hurt; Yet when, by
pumping, the air that was before under the palm of your hand, is withdrawn,
and consequently can no longer help to support your hand, against the pressure
of the external and incumbent air; the external air will lean so heavy upon
the back of your hand, that you will imagine some ponderous weight is laid
upon it. And I remember by such an Experiment, I have not only had my hand put
to much pain, but have had the back of it so bent downward, as if it were going
to be broken.

But though such considerations, as these, may much lessen the difficulty of
our phenomenon, whose cause is inquired into; Yet still it seems somewhat odd
to me, That (since it is evident from the nature of the thing, and by Stevinus's
his confession, that there is a vast pressure of water against every part of
the body, whose endeavor tends inward,) so exceedingly forcible a pressure,
(which thrusts, for instance, the Muscles of the Arms and Thighs against the
Bones, the Skin and Flesh of the Thorax against the Ribs,) should not put the
Dives to any sensible pain; As I find not (by one that I examined) that it dos;
(Though this man told me, he stayed a good while at the depth of betwixt 80 and
100 foot under the Sea water, which is heavier then fresh water;) For, that
which Stevinus's Explication will only showis, That there must be no manifest
dislocation of the greater parts of the Body; whereas the bare compression of
two small parts, one against another, is sufficient to produce a sense of pain.

But it seems, the Texture of the bodies of Animals is better able to resist
the pressure of an every way ambient fluid, then, if we were not taught by
experience, we should imagine. And therefore, to satisfy those that (secluding
the Question about the sense of pain,) think it an abundantly sufficient
Argument, (to prove, that bodies immersed under water, are not compressed by
it;) That Diverse are not oppressed, and even crushed* by so vast a load of
water, (amounting, by Stevinus's computation, to many thousands of pounds) as
is incumbent on them. We will add, that though an Experiment, proposed by
Monsieur Paschal to this purpose, were such, that at first sight I said that it
would not succeed, (and was not upon trial mistaken in my conjecture;) yet it
gave me the occasion to make another, which will, I hope, fully make out the
thing I designed it for.

The Ingenious Monsieur Paschal would persuade his Readers, that if into a
glass Vessel, with lukewarm water in it, you cast a fly; and, by a Rammer,
forcibly press that water, you shall not be able to kill, or hurt the fly.
Which, says he, will live as well, and walk up and down as lively, in
lukewarm water, as in the air. But, upon trial with a strong fly, the
Animal was (as we expected,) presently drowned, and so made moveless, by the
lukewarm water.

Wherefore we substituted another Experiment, that we knew would not only
succeed, (as you will presently see it will do,) but teach us how great a
pressure the included Animal must have been exposed to. We took then a
somewhat slender Cylindrical pipe of Glass, Fig. 24.
sealed at one end, and open at the other; and to this we fitted a Rammer,
which (by the help of some thongs of soft leather, that were carefully wound
about it) did so exactly fill the pipe that it could not easily be moved to and
fro; and would suffer neither water, nor air, to get by betwixt it, and the
internal surface of the Glass. We also provided some small Tad-poles (or
Gyrini) about an Inch long or less; which sort of Animals we made choice of
before any other, partly because they could, by reason of their smalness, swim
freely to and fro in so little water as our pipe contained; and partly because
those Creatures, being as yet but in their Infancy, were more tender, and,
consequently, far more exposed to be injured by compression, then other Animals
of the same Bulk, but come to their full age and growth, would be, (as indeed
such young Tad-poles are so soft and tender, that they seem, in comparison to
the bigger sort of flies, to be but organized Gelly.) One of these Tadpoles
being put into the water, and some Inches of air being left in the pipe, for
the use anon to be mentioned; the water and air, and consequently the Tadpole,
were by the intrusion of the plug or rammer, with as great a force as a man was
able to employ, violently compressed; and yet, though the Tadpole seemed to be
compressed into a little less Bulk then it was of before, it swom freely up and
down the water, without forbearing sometimes to ascend to the very top, though
the Instrument were held perpendicular to the Horizon. Nor did it clearly
appear to us, That the little Animal was injured by this compression; and most
manifest it is, he was not crushed to death, or sensibly hurt by it.

And having repeated this Experiment several times, and with Tadpoles of
differing ages; we may, I presume, safely conclude, That the Texture of Animals
is so strong, that, though water be allowed to weigh upon water, yet a Diver
ought not to be oppressed by It: Since, whether or no water weighs in water, it is
manifest that in our Experiment, the water, and consequently the Tadpole, was
very forcibly by an External Agent compressed betwixt the violently condensed
air, and the rammer. And, by the notice we took of the quantity of air before
the compression began, and that to which it was reduced by compression; The
moderatest estimate we could make, was, That it was reduced into an eighth, or
tenth part of it is former space; and so (according to what we have elsewhere
proved) the pressure that was upon the air, (and consequently upon the water,
and the included Tadpole,) was as great as that of a Cylinder of water of above
200 if not 300 foot high. And yet all this weight being unable to oppress, or
so much as manifestly to hurt, the tender Tadpole (which a very small weight
would suffice to have crushed, if it pressed only upon one part of it, and not
upon the other) we may thence learn the Truth of what we have been endeavoring
to evince: That though water be allowed to press against water, and all
immersed Bodies; yet a Diver may very well remain unoppress'd at a great depth
under water, as long as the pressure of it is uniforme against all the parts
exposed thereunto.

FINIS.



