ADVERTISEMENTS About the EXPERIMENTS AND NOTES Relating to CHEMICAL Qualities.
WHen, after I had gone through the common Operations of Chemistry, I began to
make some serious Reflections on them, I thought 'twas pity, that Instruments
that might prove so serviceable to the advancement of Natural Philosophy,
should not be more studiously and skilfully made use of to so good a purpose. I
saw indeed, that diverse of the Chemists had by a diligent and laudable
employment of their pains and industry, obtained diverse Productions, and
lighted on several Phenomenon considerable in their kind, and indeed more
numerous, than, the narrowness and sterility of their Principles considered,
could well be expected. But I observed too, that the generality of those that
busy themselves about Chemical Operations; some because they practice Physic;
and others because they either much wanted, or greedily coveted money, aimed in
their Trials but at the Preparation of good Medicines for the humane body, or
to discover the ways of curing the Diseases or Imperfections of Metals, without
referring their Trials to the advancement of Natural Philosophy in general; of
which most of the Alchymists seem to have been so incurious, that not only
they did not institute Experiments for that purpose, but overlookt and despised
those undesign'd ones that occurred to them whilst they were prosecuting a
preparation of a Medicine, or a Transmutation of Metals. The sense I had of
this too general omission of the Chemists, tempted me sometimes to try, whether
I could do any thing toward the repairing of it by handling Chemistry, not as
a Physician or an Alchymist, but as a mere Naturalist, and so by applying
Chemical Operations to Philosophical purposes. And in pursuance of these
thoughts, I remember I drew up a Scheme of what I ventured to call a Chymia
Philosophica, not out of any affectation of a splendid Title, but to intimate,
that the Chemical Operations, there treated of, were not directed to the usual
scopes of Physicians, or Transmuters of Metals, but partly to illustrate or
confirm some Philosophical Theories by such Operations; and partly to explicate
those Operations by the help of such Theories.

But before I had made any great progress in the pursuit of this design, the
fatal Pestilence that raged in London, and in many other parts of England, in
the years 1664 and 65, obliging me among the rest to make several removes;
which put me upon taking new measures, and engaging me in other employments of
my time, made me so long neglect the Papers I had drawn up, that at last I knew
not where to find them, (though I hope they are not yet mislaid beyond
recovery,) which I was the less troubled at, because the great difficulties, to
be met with in such an undertaking, did not a little discourage me, such a Task
requiring as well as deserving a Person better furnished, than I had reason to
think my self, with Abilities, Leisure, Chemical Experiments, and Conveniences,
to try as many more as should appear needful. But yet to break the Ice for any
that may hereafter think fit to set upon such a Work, or to shorten my own
Labor, if I should see cause to resume it my self, I was content to throw in
among my Notes about other Particular Qualities, some Experiments and
Observations about some of those, that I have elsewhere called Chemical
Qualities, because it is chiefly by the Operations of Chemists, that men have
been induced to take special notice of them. Of these Notes I have assigned to
some Qualities more, and to some fewer, as either the nature or importance of
the Subject seemed to require, or my Leisure and other Circumstances would
permit. And though I have not here handled the Subjects they belonged to, as if
I intended such a Chymia Philosophica as I lately mentioned, because my design
did not make it necessary, but did perhaps make it impertinent for me to do so,
yet in some of the larger Notes about Volatility and Fixtness, and especially
about Precipitation, I have given some little Specimens of the Theorical part
of a Philosophical Account of those Qualities or Operations, that I hope will
not be wholly useless. I know, it may be objected, that I should have employed
for Instances some more considerable Experiments, if not Arcana; but though
possibly I am not altogether unfurnished with such, yet aiming rather to
promote Philosophy, than appear a Possessor of elaborate Processes, I declined
several Experiments that required either more skill, or more time, or more
expense than could be well expected from most Readers, and chose rather to
employ such Experiments as may be more easily or cheaply tried, and, which is
mainly to be considered, being more simple, are more clearly intelligible, and
more fit to have Notions and Theories built upon them; especially considering,
that the Doctrine of Qualities being it self conversant about some of the
Rudimental parts, if I may so call them, of Natural Philosophy, it seemed unfit
to employ intricate Experiments, and whose Causes were liable to many disputes,
to settle a Theory of them. In short, my design being to hold a Taper not so
much to Chemists as to the Naturalists, 'twas fit I should be less solicitous
to gratify the former than to inform the later.

FINIS.

