ETERNITY: OR, THE WEIGHTINESS OF THE UNSEEN CONCERNS Of the other World, from
their Duration: Opened, proved, and applied in a Sermon preached in
WORCESTERSHIRE.

By THO. BADLAND, Minister of the Gospel.

Illi brevi huic vitae se totos implicent, qui aeterna nesciunt.

Hieron. LONDON, Printed for Sampson Evans, Bookseller in Worcester, and are
to be sold by N. Simmons at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church Yard, 1676.

Jan. 18. 1675.
IMprimatur haec Concio de Aeternitate

Gul. Jane S. T. B. Rev. in Christo Patri Dno Henrico Episc. Londin. agrave;
Sac Domest.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THis Sermon was never intended to peep out of the bounds of a popular
auditory: The importunity of Friends, who would not otherwise be satisfied,
has brought it upon the public Stage. The Discourse is but short and mean for
so large and ponderous a subject; but the smalness of the Volume may bring it
to more hands, and the plainness thereof is most apt and congruous for their
use and benefit, for whom it is chiefly sent abroad. The poor and unlearned,
which are always most numerous, and who are also no less concerned in the
weighty affair of Eternity than others, cannot reach nor perhaps so well
understand the bigger and more learned, or otherwise more useful Treatises of
this subject that are written: And to such, I hope, the Father of Mercies at
least will make this hasty scrible a Blessing; which is the great desire, and
shall be the earnest prayer of the Author, who is

Thine in Christ T. B.

2 Cor. 4.18. the latter part. But the things which are not seen are eternal.


TO pass by the Analysis of this Chapter; toward the latter end you have the
Apostle acquainting us with the reason of his own, and other Apostles and
Ministers of the Gospel's constancy, boldness, unwearied diligence, and
faithfulness in the work of Christ, in the midst of the great perils,
distresses and hazards attending them in their course. The main of their
encouragement is this, that their utmost sufferings and sorrows in their duty
were their high advantage: They worked for them a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory: verse. 17. This prize (he tells us) their hearts were
on in the contempt of all things here. This they would not lose, whatever they
lost, or suffered in pursuance of it. And that they were rational in this
resolution, he evidenceth from the Glory of the prize they had in their eye.
This is the most excellent prize, and infinitely sufficient to recompense them
for all losses and afflictions befalling them in the due prosecution of it.
There is no comparison between things that are seen, and things that are not
seen. The invisible concerns of the other world do as much excel outward and
visible concerns, as Eternity is of more consequence than time. The things that
are seen (says he) are temporal; but The things that are not seen are eternal.

So that the words are a reason why the Apostles had their hearts so fixed on
the blessings of the unseen world, as lightly to set by the most terrible
discouragements attending them in pursuance of them. They were eternal; whereas
their outward afflictions and miseries were but temporal. In the words there is,

1. The things spoken of: Things which are not seen; that is, the invisible
concerns and enjoyments which yet are out of our view in the other world; The
mercies of the Paradise of God, and the miseries of the unquenchable fire,
which will be the portion of the damned. The happy estate of the Blessed, and
the wretched condition of the Cursed and condemned beyond the borders of time;
These are the things which in general the Apostle means by things unseen.

2. Here is something affirmed of these unseen things: They are Eternal; that
is, they are of everlasting duration; they will never have an end, but continue
for ever and for ever. When this world and all Sublunary things are burnt up
and vanish, and all concerns of time have a period; the happiness of the
Saints, and the misery of the wicked shall last and continue: they shall never
vanish or have a period. The Godly shall triumph in God's Love, and the wicked
weep and howl under God's fury, to the endless bounds of eternity. When the
space of million of millions of years, according to our poor and shallow
reckoning, are over, the happiness of the Pious, and the sorrow and perplexity
of the wicked is never the nearer a period: still the Saints joy continues, and
still the wickeds sufferings continue, and are no nearer ending than at the
beginning; Night and day to eternity the Holy shall rejoice and triumph; and
night and day to eternity the impious shall have gnashing of teeth, and mourn.
Unseen things are eternal.

From the words thus explained, were raised these two Doctrines.

Doctr. 1. The weighty concerns attending us in the other world are unseen. The
entertainment that immortal Souls will meet with, when death comes, and has
done its work upon them, we cannot here behour. We perceive not the triumphant
joys of the Glorified here: nor do we perceive the doleful howlings of the
damned here. It Is true, we have something of these weighty concerns revealed in
the Word: but yet they are not within our view. We see not now the Saints
Crowns or Glorious Robes, and we hear not now their melodious and transporting
Songs of triumph and praise, wherewith they are privileged in the Kingdom of
their Father; and we see not now the wickeds horror, torments and
insupportable sufferings in the Hellish Lake: we have only the report of these
things, though it be an infallible report. And doubtless, this is the main
cause why Heaven is no more prized, and no more vigorously pursued; and Hell is
no more abhorred, and strenuously and diligently avoided and shunned by
Mortals; they believe not these things, because they see them not, had they
seen the happiness of the Righteous in God's Eternal Kingdom, or the misery of
the impious, in the Infernal prison; or had they believing apprehensions of
(...) equivalent to sense; they could not neglect them, they could not choose
but look upon them, as the Apostle here does, as the most weighty affair and
concerns.

Doctr. 2. The weighty concerns of the unseen world are eternal. They are not
fading or vanishing, but of never ending continuance and duration. The
triumphant world's felicity shall never have a period, and the damned world's
misery shall never expire. When innumerable years are past and gone, the Saints
triumph is as far from a period, as at the beginning; and the sorrows and
sufferings of the wicked are no nearer expiring than at the beginning.

This last is the Doctrine we intend to handle; and in the prosecution thereof,
we shall observe this Method. 1. We shall prove it. 2. We shall show what is
implied in this word Eternal, and so the weigh^iness of Unseen concerns. 3. We
shall make some application.


First, we shall prove the Doctrine, That the weighty concerns of the unseen
world are eternal. And that, 1. By Scripture plainly. 2. By induction from
Scripture and Nature.


1. We shall prove the Doctrine by plain Scripture, Mat. 25. ult. These shall
go away into everlasting punishment, but the Righteous into life eternal. Here
you see the rewards of the other world, that all shall reap, are styled
everlasting and eternal. Dan. 12.2. Many of them that sleep in the dust of the
Earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt. Both the reward of the Godly and the impious is here called
Everlasting in the unseen world. So you have the Scripture speaking of the
Righteous and the wicked particularly, and proclaiming their reward to be
eternal and everlasting. Thus it is said the Godly seek for Eternal life in the
other world, Romans 2.7. and, that They are heirs of Eternal life, Titus 3.7.
and, that They have an House not made with hands eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor.
5.1. And the Apostle tells us, that he therefore endured all things for the
Elects sake, that they may also obtain the salvation, which is in Jesus Christ,
with eternal Glory, 2 Timothy 2.10. so, Heaven is called their Everlasting
Habitation, Luke 16.9. And as the enjoyments of the Saints are eternal; so
likewise are the miseries of the wicked. They are to be punished with
Everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the Glory of his
power, 2 These. 1.9. they are to be cast into Everlasting fire, Mat. 18.8. or
into fire that shall never be quenched, and where the worm dies not, Mark
9.44. So also it is said, that they shall be tormented day and night for ever,
and for ever, Rev. 20.10.15.

2. We shall prove the Doctrine by induction from Scripture and Nature.

1. The Soul is eternal and dies not, and therefore must be happy or miserable
for ever. This cannot be killed, Mat. 10.28. when it leaves the Body, it does
not sleep or die as the Body does, Eccles. 12.7. and when it is again reunited
to the Body at the Resurrection, 'twill never be separated from it; but Body
and Soul are joined together at the Resurrection for Everlasting life, or
Everlasting shame and contempt, Dan. 12.2. and therefore they will have an
Eternal Existence. At the Resurrection the very Body it self will be raised
incorruptible; Our corruption must put on incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.53. Though at
present our Bodies die and moulder to dust, yet at the Resurrection they will
not be capable of corruption. We shall then die no more a Natural death, Luke
20.36. And if Body and Soul will live eternally after the Resurrection-day,
they must needs be either happy or miserable to eternity; if they have for ever
an Existence, they must needs have a felicitous or infelicitous Existence. If
they do not vanish into nothing, or are not corrupted, killed, or separated;
then they will certainly for ever groan or triumph, rejoice or mourn.

2. Eternal rewards are promised, or threatened: God does not promise to magnify
mercy and loving kindness to the Saints for a small season only, but to
Eternity; nor does he threaten momentany losses or sufferings only to the
wicked and impious, but everlasting. The Righteous shall shine as the Stars for
ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. And the wicked have darkness for ever reserved for
them, 2 Peter 2.17. Believers shall never perish or die, John 11.26. And the
Impenitent are to be cast into fire that shall never be quenched, Mark 9.43.
This is the encouragement that God does give his People, they shall have
everlasting joy upon their heads ere long: and this is the discouragement he
gives the wicked, they shall be punished with eternal destruction, or tormented
day and night for ever and for ever. Oh! Heaven will have Believers triumphing
in it to the utmost limits and bounds of Eternity; for God has promised it to
them. And Hell will have ungodly Souls and the finally impenitent, weeping and
gnashing their teeth in it for ever more: for God has foretold and threatened
it; and he is a true, just, and Righteous GOD.

3. GOD, that is engaged to distribute these Rewards, is eternal; he lives for
ever to see the execution of what ever has gone out of his mouth. As he was
from everlasting, so he will continue to everlasting. He inhabits eternity,
Isa. 57.15. The Eternal God is the refuge, comfort and salvation of the Saints,
Deuteronomy. 33.27. And the confusion, discomfort and and terror of the impious and
wicked. If Jehovah himself could die, the Saints happiness would expire, and
have a period; and the wickeds and damneds misery in Hell would be over: but he
living, who has promised and threatened, and is engaged to accomplish the
Saints hopes, and wicked's fears; we may be sure they will last for ever. Oh!
God has no end of days, Jehovah's age will never expire. He is Eternal that
has undertaken to privilege the Pious with eternal Life, and reward the
Impious with eternal Death; therefore unseen concerns will be eternal.

4. As God is eternal, so he will be eternally Alsufficient to make good his
word. As he was Almighty, and Infinite, and boundless in all perfections from
eternity; so he will remain unto eternity. From everlasting to everlasting he
is God, Ps. 90.2. He will never descend from the Throne, or become frail, or
unable to execute his promises or threatenings. He is the eternal and immortal
King, 1 Timothy 1.17. He is independent for ever, and can perform his pleasure to
all eternity. And therefore his Decree and Law touching the endless condition
of the Righteous and wicked will stand. Alas! God can as easily make the
Righteous immortally happy, and the impious immortally miserable, as uphold the
world and all things therein upon the borders of time. He lives continually in
the same Majesty, Glory, and Perfections, that he is invested with to this day:
And he will never have his Omnipotency impaired, diminished, or weakened. If God
were capable to be dethroned, or to become infirm or weak for the
accomplishment of his projects or revealed Will; the ungodly might hope for an
expiration of their sorrows, and the Righteous might fear a period of their Joy
and Felicity: but God being unchangeable, and immutably the same to
everlasting; the hopes of the one, and the fears of the other will be vain.

5. God will eternally delight in the happiness of the Saints, and miseries of
the wicked; and therefore both the one and the other will be eternal. Touching
the Pious it is said, that it is the Father's good pleasure to give them a
Kingdom, Luke 12.32. They are the Persons, that Jehovah delights to honor:
their Glory is God's Glory, Ephesians. 1.12. JESUS CHRIST will come to be glorified
in them at the Resurrection-day, when he shall set the Crown of Heavenly
Felicity and magnificency upon their heads, 2 These. 1.10. So that their
happiness and exaltation will be God's Glory, Delight and Rejoicing; and
therefore will be eternal. 'Twill continue as long as God shall delight in it,
and that will be for ever more. So likewise the misery of the wicked in Hell
will be to the glory of God's Justice and Righteousness; and therefore will be
eternal, even as long as God does continue just and righteous, which will be
for ever. So also God does rejoice in their perdition and destruction; he
laughs at their calamity, and mocks at their distress, when they are
remediless, Prove. 1.26. And therefore though they call upon him, he will not
answer them; though they seek him early, they shall not find him, that is, not
merciful or gracious to them. He that made them (says the Prophet) will not
have mercy on them; and he that formed them, will show them no savor, Isa.
27.11. So that you see, that both the happiness of the Godly, and misery of the
wicked in the other world, will be God's delight and his Glory: and therefore
they will be eternal.

6. The Saints cannot forfeit their happiness, and the wicked cannot purchase
or make satisfaction for their Redemption from their misery in the other world*
and therefore both will be eternal. 'Ti^ apparent that in Heaven the Saints are
as the confirmed Angels, and so not capable to be tempted to evil, or to fall
from God. Their separated Souls in Eternal Mansions are said to be made
perfect, Hebr. 12.23. And into God's Paradise, which is their glorious Abode
and Habitation, there enters nothing that defiles, Rev. 21.27. Whilst they
are in the Kingdom of their Father, they are under the fullest communications
of sanctifying, and preventing, and triumphing Grace. Holiness is their
element; duty love and praise to God is their very food and recreation; and sin
is as lothsom, as death and the most exquisite miseries and torments are to us.
There also they have no tempter, and nothing to be a bait or allurement to draw
them from God: which with the consideration of their corrobating and confirming
Grace does proclaim, that they cannot sin, or forfeit the mercies wherewith
they are priviledg'd: And therefore they will not lose their happiness. God
will not deprive them of their mercies without cause, he will not send them
from his Triumphant Kingdom, to which they are Heirs, till they cut off the
entail of eternal Blessings, and that will be never: So that their happiness
must needs be eternal. And then, the wicked will never make satisfaction in
order to their redemption from Hell; and therefore their miseries must be also
eternal. They must stay there, till they have paid the utmost mite they are
endebted unto Divine Justice, Matt. 5.26. and that will be for ever more: And
therefore that expression, Till thou have paid the last mite, thou shall not
depart thence, signifies as much as, Thou shall never depart thence, Luke
12.59. Oh! all the sufferings of the damned, even to an endless eternity will
not satisfy for their sin and disobedience here. And it is apparent, they have
none else to satisfy for them; CHRIST will die no more for them. There remains
no more Sacrifice for sin, when the price of CHRIST's Blood is neglected. Oh!
the Godly will not lose their happiness, and the wicked will never get
redemption from Hell; as it is in the Parable, There is an Unpassable Gulf
between the Glorified and the damned, so that they cannot pass the one to the
other, Luke 16.26. and therefore their condition in the other world will be
eternal.

7. If the Saints happiness were not eternal, 'twould much discomfort them in
the other world; and if the wicked's misery were not eternal, 'twould much
comfort them, and alleviate their miseries and extremities in the Unseen world:
and therefore both are eternal. The Saints have fullness of joy in God's
everlasting Kingdom; and therefore have no expectation that 'twill have an end:
And the damned have perfection of misery in the Infernal prison; and therefore
have, no hope that their sorrows will ever have a period. Reason will tell you,
that if Triumphant Souls had any apprehensions that their felicitous estate
should at length expire, it would much abate their glorious peace and
tranquillity. And Reason will also tell you, that, if the wicked had any hopes
that their sorrows and exquisite torments should at length cease, it would
something at least mitigate their infelicity and grief; but this word Eternal
added to the enjoyments of the Glorified fills them with perfect Triumph,
excluding all pensiveness fear and dolor. And the same word Eternal or
Everlasting added to the sorrows and miseries of the damned makes them most
exquisite, and sets Hell a roaring most dismally. Oh! that the pleasures of the
Saints are for ever more, Psalm. 16.11. this makes them pleasures indeed: And
that the anguish, perplexity and extremities of the damned are for ever more,
this makes them perfectly doleful indeed.

8. Nature does seem to evidence this Truth, that things unseen are eternal.
The very Heathens are taught to believe in general that the Good shall be
everlastingly happy, and the wicked everlastingly miserable, in the other
world. Not only the Christians, but the Mahometans; yea, and the Pagans, that
have not unmanned themselves, do hold that after this life Men and Women shall
live in a felicitous or doleful condition for ever. The Soul's immortality is
commonly believed, even where Christianity is not known: Nature has dictated
this to those that never heard the Scripture-revelation; and if the Soul dies
not, it must needs be happy or miserable for ever.

Now, lay all these allegations together, and how apparent and undoubted is
this Doctrine, that the weighty concerns of the unseen world are eternal.

2. We come to show you what is employed in this word (Eternal) and so the
weightiness of unseen concerns: And there are three things implied in it.

1. That the Unseen concerns of the other world have continuance or are
lasting, they are not of short or small duration. Our lives here cannot be said
to be eternal, because they are but of short continuance; yea, they are said to
flee away as a Weaver's shuttle, Job 7.6. and are compared to a vapor that
soon vanishes: but now the happiness of Heaven, and the sufferings of Hell are
more lasting. They continue not a 100 or a 1000 Years only, but many millions
of millions of Years: When many Ages and Generations of Years are past and
gone, yet still the Saints felicity and the wicked's misery and sorrow
continues. When the Saints have been in the Kingdom of their Father triumphing
in his love, as long as this World shall last or endure; yet they have
thousands of Years of the same felicity still behind. And when the wicked have
been in Hell groaning, and hideously roaring under the most doleful sufferings,
as long as this World does endure; yet they have millions of Years of the same
misery, sorrow, and suffering; still behind. Oh! Eternity does note not a short
or transitory season, but a space (...) continuance beyond the limits of time:
an^ verily, this does bespeak unseen things, or the happiness or misery of the
other World, to be fearfully and dreadfully weighty; especially in comparison
of our concerns here, that are all shut up in the narrow compass and bounds of
a little time. Heaven is the Saints, and Hell is the wickeds long abode and
habitation; whereas our stay here is comparatively very short. The enjoyments
of your other world are continuing, and not of a short, fading, or transitory
nature.

2. Eternity implies continuance also without intermission, or any
discontinuance. It Is not like the life of mortals that has a mixture of joy
and sorrow, or a succession of content and discontent: but the happiness of the
Saints continues without any intervening infelicity or sorrow; And the misery
of the wicked continues in Hell without the intermixture of any joy or comfort
whatsoever. Oh! so long as Eternity lasts, the Pious will be triumphing in the
highest Heavens; and so long as Eternity lasts, the wicked will have weeping
and gnashing of teeth in the Infernal prison. The Saints shall not weep an hour
or a moment; they shall not grieve or be sadned the continuance of the
twinkling of an eye during their abode in the other World: And the wicked shall
not rejoice an hour or a minute, they shall have no intermission of their
sorrow or misery in the other World. The Saints joy will continue or last
without the least mixture of grief to allay their happiness; and the wickeds
grief, perplexity and horror will continue and last without the least mixture
of joy or comfort to alleviate their infelicity. The Rich man in Hell is not
allowed a drop of water to ease or refresh him for a moment's season, Luke
16.24, etc. And how much more considerable are unseen concerns in this respect
than all our concerns here? Alas! who is there here that continues in a
constant tenure of happiness or misery without change, during the days of
their vanity in this World? The most felicitous has some sorrow mixed with his
joy here: and the most miserable has some intervening hours or minutes of
refreshment or ease here: but in Eternity there is no change at all. The Saints
rejoice still, and are immutably triumphing; and the wicked mourn always, and
are unchangeably overwhelmed with dismal amazement and astonishment. The
happiness of the one is eternal, and the misery of the other is eternal, and
unchangeably so for the least moment.

3. Eternity notes continuance without any period, or length of space without
any end: and this completes the Saints joy, and perfects the damneds misery in
the other world. It Is not only a lasting continuance, and a continuance without
intermission, but it is an everlasting continuance without any final
discontinuance* When the bounds of time, yea ten thousand millions of millions
of the bounds of time are passed over and gone; yet the Triumphs of the
Glorified, and the roaring and sorrows of the damned are no nearer ending than
at the beginning. Eternity is a space of continuance immeasurable, and
inexpressible, yea and inconceivable It Is pictured out by a ring or circle,
which you may turn round, but cannot find any end in it. And though we might
give you strange measures of Eternity, yet we shall fall infinitely short of
fully measuring it: we shall only set before you one, which though common, will
best help you to conceive of it, as indeed it is, to be inconceivable. Suppose
God should make a Decree, (which he has not done, and never will do) that if
an Angel would take a drop of water from the Sea once in a million of Years,
till he had quite emptied it; that then the misery of the wicked should have a
period, when the Sea is thus quite emptied, so that there remains not one
drop of water there more: this would be an inconceivable term of time; and yet
this would be nothing unto Eternity. Yea, if we should add to the drops of
water in the Sea, the innumerable piles of grass in fields, the small dust of
the Earth, the particular sands on the Seashore, the atoms or motes in the
Sun, the small leaves of every tree, the hairs on Men and Women's heads, and
the Stars in the spacious Firmament; that an Angel should take but one of these
away once in a milion of Years, and when they are all gone with every drop of
water in the Sea, and in all Rivers, that then the damned should be released,
and be delivered from their miseries; this would be a much more inconceivable
term of time, and yet all would be nothing unto Eternity. Nay further, Suppose
the condition of their discharge from those fearful miseries they groan under
were straightened thus, that when an Angel had thus emptied all the Sea and every
River, and carried away or removed every pile of grass in the field, all the
dust in the Earth, the sand on the Seashore, the atoms in the Sun, the small
leaves of every tree or flower, the hairs of Men and Women's heads, and all the
Stars of the Firmament, by taking away only one once in a million of Years;
that then at the expiration of this term of time, only one of the damned should
be redeemed and released from their dreadful miseries and sorrows; and so allow
them all one after another successively the same privilege, as soon as the
Angel had performed this condition particularly for each of them: This would be
an inconceivable term of time; and yet all would be delivered at last, Hell
would be emptied of all its inhabitants at last: but now, when all this space
of time is over and gone, Eternity is no nearer ending, than it was at the very
beginning of the Saints entrance into Heaven, or the wickeds entrance into
Hell. When all these Years are past and expired, the Sints have as many more;
yea, ten thousand times as many more to rejoice and triumph in. And the wicked
have as many more; yea, ten thousand times as many more to weep, and howl, and
to be miserable in. Oh, Eternity! who can conceive the length thereof? Finite
Creatures cannot comprehend it: when you think the utmost you can, Eternity
runs quite beyond your thoughts, and much more beyond your utmost expressions.
Oh! this comforts the Saints to purpose in the Triumphant world, that their
happiness is everlasting, and will never, never end, expire, or have a period:
And this makes hellish inhabitants roar to purpose, and sills them with horror,
unspeakable confusion and amazement, that their misery will be everlasting,
even to the utmost bounds of Eternity, and never never end, expire, or have a
period.

3. We come to make application of this Truth, That the unseen things of the
other world are eternal. Which will be 1. By way of Inference. 2. By way of
Examination. 3. By way of Dehortation, and Caution. 4. By way of Exhortation.


1. To speak by way of Inference, and so many things may be drawn from this
Doctrine for our instruction: As,

1. Our concerns of time are certainly, but trifles and inconsiderable to
unseen things. Alas! what is time to Eternity? and what is 30, or 60, or a 100
Years, the common utmost bounds of our abode here, unto Eternity? it is but a
flash, a vapor or a dream. Oh! whether we are miserable or felicitous in this
world, is nothing in comparison of happiness or misery in the other. Men's
utmost and longest day of happiness here will be quickly at an end; and Men's
utmost and longest day of misery here will very speedily expire: but Eternity,
into which all must lanch, will never end. What a bubble is all sublunary
glory, and what a vanity is all sublunary ignominy and disgrace, to the more
weighty unseen concerns that are before us? what are transient, fading,
perishing Riches and wealth, and what is a short season of poverty or want, to
the Riches of Heaven, or the necessities of indigent Souls in Eternity? Alas!
Men put too high a price and value on Creaturecontents, and are dolefully too
proud of their earthly felicity; and too much discontented with their temporal
afflictions and miseries: All concerns here, whether contenting or not
contenting, are but things that are not. And therefore the Apostle tells us, It
remains, that both they that have wives be as though they had none, and they
that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they
rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that
use the world, as not abusing it, for the fashion of this worldpasseth away, 1
Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. Sorrow and joy here, if rightly considered with Eternity,
are nothing, or at least much less matters than mortals esteem them; even the
greatest felicity and infelicity upon the borders of time are poor
inconsiderable things, if seriously weighed and compared with the Unseen things
of the other world, which are eternal.

2. Of what consequence and weighty import is the well or ill improvement of
time here? as time is spent here, so will be our eternal portion. As our days,
hours and Years are husbanded here, will be our reward for ever and for ever.
Heaven or Hell attend us, the enjoyments whereof are everlasting, according as
we sow here. As happiness or misery in this world is light, trivial and
inconsiderable to the weighty unseen things that are before us: so our judgment
of them is of eternal consequence. Time well spent, though it be but a short
season, will be our happy and everlasting advantage; and time ill spent, though
it be very short, will be our detriment and damage. Here the Seed of that
harvest of felicity or misery that all reap in the other world is sown: You
have no more time or opportunity to provide for your eternal peace, but your
present day of mercy and grace. And the neglect or abuse of your present
transitory days or hours will everlastingly undo you. Oh! it is not to no
purpose that you are called upon to redeem your time, and prize every inch of
the Day of grace that is before you, and to work whilst it is called (to day,)
and not to harden your hearts whilst opportunity lasts: Alas! an eternity of
joy or sorrow and misery depends on it. He that allures you to trifle away your
precious time, allures you to make shipwreck of eternal mercies, and to
adventure on eternal wrath, distress and perplexity. And how dreadful should
temptations to such folly and madness be to us?

3. Sin is no light matter, for it is the seed of unseen sorrow in the other
world, which is eternal: it is the seed of Hell, and the furious rebuke of the
infinitely terrible and dreadful God for ever and for ever. This is little
considered by the generality, who wallow in it like swine as in their element*
little do they think, or at least they have no^ strong convictions, that it
prepares never ending exquisite and perfect misery for them. Materially some
sins are final matters* as Adam's eating the forbidden-fruit, or the speaking
of a vain word, etc. but formally* and in its cursed wages, nothing is a
greater evil. If sinners did but see the doleful^ fruit that iniquity bears,
they would dread and abhor it in public and in private, a^ they do extremity
of misery, or Hell it self* Oh! how injurious is that which most take to be
their profit and advantage? what does the world more hurt finally than sin?
what brings the rational Creature under God's eternal displeasure, but
iniquity? whatever content at present any have in sin or wickedness, be sure
they will have none in the everlasting pernicious and cursed consequents of it:
they will not make light of it when it has brought them under the miseries,
that are the portion of the damned for ever.

4. What a dreadful evil is unbelief* Alas! this is the cause of all other
sins: and Men's dreadful making light of the weighty ^nseen things that are
before them. Men ^ear that the happiness and misery of the ^ther world is
eternal; and that here we sow ^or our portion there: but they do not be^ieve
it, or but superficially believe it; that is ^he reason why Heaven is
neglected, and not ^ecured, and why its eternal mercies and ^oyes are slighted;
and that is the reason ^hy Hell and its everlasting miseries and ^orrows are no
more industriously shunned, and that sin the seed thereof is no more ab^orred
and lothed. Alas! who could for ^hort perishing concerns slight these
inconceivably weighty concerns of eternity, that did to purpose believe their
certainty, or had through convincing apprehensions of their verity? Oh!
unbelief is a more common malady than Men's profession intimates; most are
unbelievers, and the faith of those that do sincerely believe has some
unbelief mixed with it; otherwise unseen things would have more influence upon
them. The great reason, why Believers themselves are not more the world's
wonders in their signal and remarkable self-denial, crucifixion and
estrangedness to the vanities of time* is because their faith is but imperfect
and infirm. Alas! the weightiness of the concerns of Heaven and Hell would
certainly work the greatest contempt in us of the things here below; if we were
as sensible of it, as ere long we shall be. Oh! unbelie^ is that which undoth
the World, keeping them from knowing and firmly pursuing the things of their
eternal peace.

5. What an unspeakable price is Christ's Love and Blood? what a singular mercy
and rich advantage to sinners is the Redemption that Christ has wrought for
us? The mercies of eternity would never have been our portion, had it not been
for Christ; and eternal misery perdition and destruction would certainly have
been our portion, had it not been for Christ's appearing for our salvation and
deliverance. After a few days spent upon the borders of time, we should all
have been the firebrarnds of unquenchable fire, and the vessels of God's
furious rebukes to eternity without remedy, had it not been for Christ. But
Christ being incarnated, and having satisfied justice, and purchased a
Gospel Covenant, we are now ^apable of escaping everlasting sorrow and
^erplexity, and of triumphing eternally (...) God's Love and Mercy. And what a
^ich and glorious privilege is this? how ^appy are we if we knew, and had
wise^om to lay hold on the things of our peace and comfort? We may be happy for
ever, through Christ, if we will look about us. Eternal life through Christ's
Blood is ob^ainable, if we are not wanting to our selves: and that everlasting
wrath, which we have deserved will never be our portion, if we do but ark our
selves in Christ. Oh! Christ ^s the greatest price that ever was put into ^he
hands of mortals; and they are the wisest Men that know his worth, and prize
him ^ccordingly: And they are fools and madmen that lightly esteem and neglect
him.

6. The Word and Ordinances of the Gospel are likewise an inestimable price in
our hands: for these help us to acquaintance with, and security about these
unseen concerns. Alas! notwithstanding all that Christ has done for us, if we
had not the Word among us, we should eternally without question perish and be
undone. How should we ever know the way to Heaven, or an escape from the wrath
to come without this? how easily would Hell beguile the best of us, and cause
us to make shipwreck of our eternal hopes, and sow the seed of eternal misery,
had it not been for this? Many poor Heathens are therefore in a lamentable
condition, that have nothing but the dim light of Nature to help them in this
weighty affair: though they know, or have have some imperfect or superficial
convitions of another life in the other world, where it shall go well with the
Good, and ill with the Bad; yet they do not know the way to true Happiness. The
Book of Nature preaches not Christ or his Redeeming Love to sinners:
multitudes are in darkness and blindness in comparison of those that are
privileged with the Scripture. Little do many that are only under the Tutorage
of the Light of Nature, know of their duty, or of their sin; and what wonder is
it then that they walk not in the way of Life, or forsake not the way of
eternal death? And those that now enjoy the Word and Ordinances of the Gospel,
if they should be deprived of them, will be in no small danger of losing their
eternal hopes: In a little time they may forget those precious truths they are
acquainted with; or at least the constant preaching of temptations, and the
Spirit of seduction may in time wear off the impression the Word had formerly
made upon them. Experience tells us, that the frequent pressing of the same
truths is necessary to their effectual influence upon the hearts of mortals,
and to the prevention of the frauds and cheats of their Spiritual enemies:
Without the Word and Ordinances of Christ Men will not sow for eternal Life;
yea, they will certainly sow the seed of eternal death. And what a mercy does
this bespeak the Word and Ordinances to be? And what enemies are they to a
people that deprive them of these mercies, considering the weightiness of
eternal concerns that are before us?

7. They are unworthy of unseen mercies that slothfully carelessly and
indifferently prosecute them: They bid too low a price for these stupendous
Blessings, and judge themselves unfit to enjoy them, that faintly or lukewarmly
mind them. How righteously will they miss of everlasting Triumphs, that think
it much all the days of their vanity here to sweat and labor to make them
sure? And how righteously will they be the Vessels of eternal misery, that
think not salvation from it worth their utmost endeavors during their short
abode here? Alas! that there should be any so dismally unreasonable thus to
undervalue Everlasting concerns; and yet what more common, general or
epidemical malady in the world? though these are the most weighty affair; yet
they are not at all, or inconsiderably minded by the most. Most seek after
eternal life, as if it were a matter of smallest moment: Most prefer the
trivial concerns of time before them. Men's greatest care and most constant
endeavors are about temporal enjoyments, what they shall eat, or drink, or
wherewith they shall be clothed; or how they shall be Great, or felicitous or
happy here; whereas Eternity is allowed only those scraps of time and care,
that the world or their earthly concerns can spare. Oh! very few live like
strangers here in the exercise of self-denial and contempt of Creaturecomforts
and enjoyments; it is but a little flock that to purpose makes it the business
of their days to work out their salvation, and make sure their everlasting
peace and comfort; and how deservedly then is everlasting Life entailed and
confined only to a little flock? If never ending felicity be not worth the work
and utmost diligence of a few days and years, it is worth nothing: and if
salvation, from Hell and the dismal miseries there attending the damned for
ever more be not worth constancy in duty, and utmost faithfulness during the
little season of mortals abode here, it is worth nothing.

8. The Unholy and Ungodly are unmeet and unfit to dwell in Heaven: The
enjoyments thereof are so much against their nature, that they will soon be
weary of them; they cannot endure holy work, or such a holy place a little
while, and much less for ever. None but those that have Godliness for their
element are meet for the everlasting mercies of the Paradise of God. None else
will delight to be housed in that eternal Dwelling. Those that are enemies to
holy love, and praise and duty to God; what should they do there, where there
is nothing else? All that dwell in God's triumphant Kingdom must make holiness
their delight; and this the wicked do not, and therefore are unmeet for these
Eternal mercies.

9. Afflictions and sharp providence that cause us to mind Unseen concerns
most intensely and effectually are happy dispensations. Alas! it is better to
weep and groan dismally for a small season, than for ever: it is better to be in
heaviness and distress for a short moment, than to eternity: and Heaven's joy
being everlasting will certainly fully make amends for all our temporal
sufferings how great soever: Though we should lie in extremity of misery during
the age of Methusalah; yet if all be sanctified to our never ending comfort and
triumph, we shall not (ere long) repent it, but call our miseries happy
miseries, and our afflictions happy afflictions.

This was that which supported and caused our Apostle and the rest of his
Brethren to rejoice under all the most terrible providenc^es attending them in
the exercise of their duty and faithfulness, that they worked for them a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Yea, all that are bound for Heaven
are more or less the Sons and Daughters of sorrow here: God estrangeth them
from the world and its vanities by many sharp and severe trials here; and yet
Eternity makes them glad of these wholesome severities, and causes them to
bless God for these medicinal and healthful corrections. Oh! it is happy for the
Saints that God hedgeth up their way with thorns, that they may not sin against
him: It Is their high privilege, that they have be times God's fatherly sharp
rebukes to preserve them from making shipwreck of their eternal hopes: Alas! if
they did not mourn and weep dolefully here, they would be in danger of weeping
and mourning much more dolefully to all eternity in Hell; and that would be
dreadful indeed, and bespeak them miserable indeed.

10. How happy a change will the Pious have, and how dismal and doleful a
change will the Impious have, when Death has done its work upon them, or when
they lanch into the other world? Oh! how the Righteous will rejoice, when they
are sensible of the alteration of their condition for the better to the utmost
date of eternity! And oh! how the wicked will be horribly amazed, when they are
sensible of the alteration of their condition for the worse to the utmost
limits and bounds of eternity! When the Godly find themselves landed in the
Kingdom of their Father, where joys and triumphs, glory and inconceivable
felicity attend them world without end, what a rapture of grateful exhilaration
will seize upon them? And when the wicked find themselves thrust or hurled into
the infernal prison, where sorrow and misery in perfection must be their
everlasting never ceasing or ending portion; what an overwhelming and
heart-sinking flood of anguish horror and dreadful amazement will seize upon
them? Oh! how far will the Holy be from repenting of their duty and
faithfulness to God and their Souls then, whatever hardships or extremities
they here grapled with in pursuance of them? and how certainly and dolefully
will the impious and finally impenitent repent of their wickedness, and
neglects of CHRIST and their Souls then, how highly soever they were dignified
or privileged here by it? they will both find eternity presenting them with
such weighty concerns as will bespeak all creatures, and earthly concerns to be
but trifles. The Godly will be perfectly selicitous for ever and for ever: and
the wicked will be completely and perfectly miserable, and eternally so.

11. What a vain conceit is the Doctrine of merit and works of Supererogation?
Some Papists hold, that it is not only possible for the Religious to merit
Heaven for themselves, but also for others: but alas! who can believe it, that
does soberly consider the weightines of those mercies they say they merit? what
proportion is there between their work and their wages? what is a few Years
holiness or service to God to an eternity of Mercy and Glory? Surely it is
amazing Grace that does privilege the most righteous, holy and pious with
Heaven's Everlasting Blessings. It Is Infinite Mercy that does reward the short,
finite and transitory performances and endeavors of the Religious with never
ending consolation and felicity, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. The worth of Christ may indeed
hence be gathered, who really did merit these eternal Mercies for us, and upon
the account of whom the Saints are heirs of this stupendous Reward: But alas!
the Saints themselves are but finite Creatures, and their service and duty but
finite; and between finiteness and infiniteness there is no proportion. Oh! the
best of Men cannot merit the joys of Heaven, but must be beholden to an
interest in amazing Grace for a participation of them, because they are
eternal. Persons of this persuasion, that their works are meritorious of the
inconceivably glorious Blessings of Eternity, do overvalue themselves and
duties, and undervalue the Saints Triumphant and Eternal Blessings.

12. God is the best Master, and the worst enemy: God's love is most valuable,
and his fury and frowns most dismal. This is he that can privilege us with
never ending joy, or reward us with never ending misery. None can so well
requite their servants, as God can and will; and none can so dreadfully avenge
themselves on their enemies, as God can and will. In God's favor there is
eternal life, and in his wrath there is nothing but eternal death. Happy are
the people that have GOD for their God and Friend, for they shall be felicitous
world without end: and cursed are the people that have GOD for their righteous
adversary; for they will be miserable world without end. This is he that can
save or destroy for ever, and will dispose of us Body and Soul to eternity. Oh!
there is none whose love can thus reward us; and there is none whose hatred can
thus injure us, as Jehovah's will.

So much by way of inference from the Doctrine.

2. To speak by way of Examination: Do you enquire whether you are bound for
Eternal Life, or Eternal Death? Will the Unseen things of Heaven or Hell be
your never ending portion? have you sowed for everlasting joy or sorrow? for
eternal comfort or discomfort? It Is certain you must have your portion of
Unseen things, which you hear are eternal: you are all marching toward an
everlasting estate, and you do here sow the seed of an harvest of never ending
and never sading happiness or misery: And are you not then concerned to
consider what is like to be your portion? Oh! Sirs, enquire whether you are the
heirs of happiness or misery, which shall last for ever. Consider whether you
are like to triumph, or weep and howl to an endless eternity: Consider whether
God will be your Friend, or your enemy for ever. Really this is no light or
contemptible affair; it is infinitely more considerable than all concerns here
below. Be careful therefore to search impartially for satisfaction in this. The
uncertainty of your lives, and the weightiness of this concern, should prompt
you to faithfulness, diligence and speed in this enquiry. And indeed what
greater concern have you to mind? what trifles, and how trivial are all
concerns here to this? alas! it is nothing considerable whether you are high or
low, rich or poor, in adversity or prosperity here in comparison of what shall
be your eternal portion. You are inexpressibly foolish and mad in minding any
thing here in the neglect of this weighty concern.

Enquire after these things following, if you would be satisfied, and not
deceived in this Affair.

1. What have you made your bu^siness? or what has been the main bent and aim
of your Souls during the days of your vanity here? what is it that all your
Undertakings and endeavors are subordinate to? Is it Heaven, the enjoyment of
God in Glory; or the contents of time? can you say, that you are seekers for
Glory and Immortality in the main course of our lives, yea, or no? The
generality mind Soulconcerns, or what will or shall become of them for ever
only by the by; whilst worldly or perishing concerns are most minded and
chiefly pursued. Oh! enquire whether this be not your case.

2. Are you arrived beyond the seize of hypocrites in Grace and Holiness?
can you say that you are got beyond the bounds of common Grace and
Sanctification? have you not merely a common repentance, a common Faith, and a
common love to God, and fear of him, and a common obedience to him? The
generality among us are deceived in this weighty affair by common Grace, which
causes them to think they are the Vessels and Heirs of Heaven, when they are
not.

3. What delight have you in Holiness and duty to God? is it your meat and
drink? is it your Element? could you be contented with or take pleasure in an
eternal Exercise of holy love, duty and praise to the Infinite Jehovah? Alas!
what should you do for ever in Glory, if you delight not in these exercises,
which will be the eternal work of Saints in the Kingdom of their Father? Heaven
will be no Heaven to you, whilst obedience to God and Spiritual enjoyments are
your burden, and not your recreation and complacency. By this therefore do you
enquire whether you are bound for Heaven and eternal Life; yea, or no.

3. We come to speak something by way ^f Dehortation. And is it so, that Unseen
things are eternal? then

1. Take heed of sowing the seed of sor^ow, grief or misery in the other world;
^or you hear it will be eternal. Oh! take ^eed at any rate of plunging your
selves under the unseen wrath, fury and vengeance of the Great Jehovah; for you
see it will be of everlasting duration. You read of some that treasure up for
themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the Righteous
Judgment of God, Romans 2.5. Oh! let not this be the case of any of you. Yea, the
generality of Men, and most Professors do walk in the broad way leading to
everlasting destruction, Matthew. 7.13. do you take heed that you be not of their
number. And for that end take heed of hypocrisy: for the hypocrites in heart
heap up wrath, Job 36.13. Watch also against every sin; for the wages or fruit
of it is eternal death, Romans 6.23. Get acquaintance with the things of your
eternal peace; for you find God himself complaining sometimes that for want of
knowledge his people perish, Hos. 4.6. Be careful to be delivered from an evil
heart of unbelief for he that believes not w^ be damned Mark 16.16. Die not in
impe^cy; for those that repent not will certa^ be destroyed, Luke 13.3. Live
not after the flesh; for he that lives after the flesh must die, Romans 8,13.
Take heed of pride; for this goes before destruction, Prove. 16.18. Abhor
unmercifulness and cruelty; for he shall have judgment without mercy, that
shows no mercy, James 2.13. Especially neglect not the relief of Christ in
his indigent Members; for you see this is given as the reason of that dreadful
sentence, that will pass on the vessels of perdition at the last day, Mat.
25.41, 42. etc. And lastly dread dis-obedience to the Gospel of Christ; for
Christ will come (ere long) to take everlasting vengeance on those that obey
not his Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 18. Oh Sirs, you are in fearful danger; be not in
insensible of it, and do not further it. Live not in peril of eternal
damnation: do not make sure everlasting burnings for your selves: if you would
not groan for ever under insupportable miseries, take heed of being heirs of
them. It Is here that sinners prepare for their never ending horror in the other
world; be not you guilty of this folly and madness.

And for that end consider,

1. That most do sow for Hell and destruction, and accordingly will reap the
doleful harvest thereof to all eternity; most are in the broad way leading to
the chambers of everlasting death; yea, multitudes of those, that to others
seem bound for Heaven, are certainly bound for perdition world without end. Oh!
you have need to look about you, considering what abundance miscarry in this
affair; and especially what abundance that seem to bid fair for Heaven, do yet
eternally lose their Souls. There are many that pray and fast, and in some sort
mourn for and repent of their sins, and live in the exercise of much holy duty;
that yet remain in the gall of bitterness, and at length groan under the
insupportable wrath of God for evermore. It Is but a very little flock, even
among Professors, that effectually take heed of the seed of Hell, and eternal
damnation. Therefore you are fearfully concerned to look about you.

2. You have a wicked nature within you addicted to this Soul-undoing course.
The hearts of Men and Women are desperately evil: The seed of Hell is in your
breasts already. It Is very difficult for you to escape the snares and
entanglements of sin and death through the doleful propensity of your Souls to
comply with them: It Is upon this account that the Righteous are scarcely saved;
and that the best of Saints have so much ado to avoid the wrath to come. If you
are not very watchful, the evil heart within you will be your eternal
perdition without fail. The law in your members will certainly captivate you to
your everlasting doleful prejudice. Oh! how natural is pride, flesh-pleasing
and worldliness to sinful Man, which are the seed of Hellish misery? And how
does carnal interest covertly, secretly and insensibly sway the Souls of
multitudes to their utter destruction? you are in doleful peril of sowing for
eternal misery. Therefore you are concerned to take heed.

3. Sorrow, and much less eternal sorrow in the other world, is not desirable;
it is much less desirable unspeakably than a harvest of misery, and utmost
extremities and calamities here: Yea, it is most abhorrent as the greatest
evil. Alas! what is more dreadful to mortals than severe punishments? and what
greater severity of misery is there, than what is the cursed fruit of sin in
the eternal Ocean? The damneds roarings and heart-sinking lamentation in Hell
do evidence that their portion there is most dismal. The stoutest heart will
tremble (as the sinners in Sion are said to do) when they are to purpose
sensible what they adventure on by sin in the other world; and cry, Who among
us shall dwell with devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting
burnings? Isa. 33.14. Deliberately none would choose destruction, and much less
everlasting destruction. Sinners know not what they do, when they treasure up
wrath for their Souls in the Unseen world: They little dream that they store up
such fearful and dreadful sorrows, as they must reap when they have left the
borders of time. Oh! Sirs, it is extremity of misery, or perfection of calamity,
that you are now cautioned against. It Is that infelicity, which will be the
most eminent display of God's hottest fury and indignation; and what can be
imagined to be more dreadful? Be careful therefore at any rate to fly from the
wrath to come, and not to make light of it, considering how dismal it is, and
not desirable.

4. You have a better price in your hand; you may sow for Heaven, and the
Blessings of God's Paradise. You may lay a foundation for comfort, peace and
glorious joy, instead of misery and dismal sorrow in the other world, if you
will look about you: working out your Salvation is not impossible. Oh! you may
live with God to your triumphant consolation, if not wanting to your selves.
And should rational Creatures neglect this Prize, and choose astonishing
horror? Is Happiness contemptible, and misery eligible and to be preferred
before it? How dolefully mad are the wicked and hypocrites in neglecting the
Blessings, and sowing for the curses and calamities of the other world? God
forbid, that any of you should be guilty of this folly and madness. Oh! Sirs,
remember Life and Immortality is brought to light through the Gospel, and
Heaven's Mercies and amazing enjoyments are obtainable by sinful dust and
worms. You are capable of becoming the Heirs of the matchless and unspeakable
triumphs of the Kingdom of God. And can you imagine that you shall not dolefully
lament the loss of this Price, if you lose it, and sow for Hell, and its
inexpressible miseries?

5. Consider the weight of Unseen things from this consideration in the
Doctrine, that they are eternal: And let that prompt you to take heed of sowing
for sorrow in the other world. Alas! what sad prejudice do you adventure Body
and Soul upon by such a doleful seedness? If misery in perfection for a season
were tolerable; yet surely eternal exquisite misery, and uncessant weeping and
wailing for ever, will be intolerable: and believe it, if you look not about
you, you will have an eternity of time horribly to lament your stupendous and
amazing folly. Oh! you that are impatient and restless under God's light
affliction for a season here, and that cannot quietly bear the pain of the
headache, Gout, or Stone for a little time; how will you be able to endure the
utmost revelation of God's most terrible indignation in Hell? Oh! to be howling
incredibly a whole eternity without intermission, and without ending, how
horrible and dreadful is it? If you do not therefore like eternal burnings and
misery, take heed of sowing the seed of it, and become not the heirs thereof.

2. Take heed that the things of time do not jostle out your care of Unseen
things. Let not this world's concerns cause you to neglect or be mindless of
the Unseen world's concerns. This is the folly that the generality are guilty
of: They prefer temporal riches before eternal, and momentany pleasures before
everlasting. Let not this be the case of any of you. Oh! learn to look on all
things here as vanity and nothing in comparison of the weighty affairs of
Heaven and Hell. Remember you shall be here but a little while, and all
enjoyments here will be of use to you but for a very short season; take heed
that you be not gulled, as the Rich man in the Gospel, by a fancied selicity in
Creature-contents, Luke 12.19, etc. Alas! what is it that keeps persons from
the power of Religion, but things that are seen? what coseneth the generality
out of their everlasting hope, but t^ things of time? They cannot live in
self-den^* or renunciation of visible comforts; that is the reason why eternal
Mercies are indiffe^ly and lukewarly pursued: Things that are seen have their
hearts, that is the reason why Heaven and Eternal life is neglected. Oh! Sirs,
take heed of this folly in doting upon things that are but temporal. Look upon
them as they are, trample them under your seet in comparison of the
stupendiously more weighty concerns of Eternity. Live like strangers here with
weaned affections from all terrene enjoyments.

It Is certain you will never sow for Heaven else, you will never become the
heirs of everlasting Blessings; unless you are dead to the world and fleshly
delights. All the portion of comfort and peace you shall ever have will be only
in this world, unless you disengage your Souls from the vanities of time. What
ever profession you make, or how ever any may flatter you, you shall never win
CHRIST or Eternal Life, unless you can look upon all things here as dross or
dung in comparison of Unseen things, Phil. 3.8.

And certain it is, that the stronger your Faith is, the more you will despise,
and the less you will be impeded in your Christian course by, concerns here.
The believing Soul will certainly be a self-denying Soul. Can you believingly
view the Glorious and weighty enjoyments of Heaven and Hell, and not have
undervaluing thoughts and conceits of temporal enjoyments? Oh it is an argument
that you ^nbelievers, whilst ordinarily you permit earthly contents to rule and
sway you. Alas! what trifles are all our sublu^y affairs, to those that are
arrived to the element of Souls? and what fools do they account mortals in
setting such an estimation on them as they do? And if your Faith were strong,
it would be equivalent to sense, and have the same impression on you. Oh! if
you would be accounted Believers, and consequently Christians, you must slight
temporal concerns, and let Heaven have chiefly your heart and affection.

Remember also the cloud of Witnesses that have gone before you, that have
lived like strangers here, and looked upon all the contents of this life as
vanity and emptiness, and trampled visible enjoyments under their feet in
pursuance of the more glorious hope before t^n. Alas! there would have been no
Martyrs in the world, if there had not been self-denying Men and Women abroad.
Yea, there is not a person got to Glory, but what was mortisied to the World
and the Flesh: All that ever entered GOD's eternal Kingdom, did march through
the narrow gate of crucisixion to the vanities here below. And as they were
accounted fools and Madmen by the worldly Wise; so must we expect to be
censured, if ever we would sow for everlasting Mercies.

Add to this, that this is as plain a duty, as any the Scripture presses, and
its necessity is likewise as clear; they are strangers to the Scripture, that
are stangers to this necessary duty. It Is a wonder that any, that call
themselves Christians, can overlook so plain a caution as this is. They are
most palpably blinded by the god of this world, that enjoy the written Word,
and are not convinced that they must live like strangers here.

So, how deeply will you repent it, if your respect to Creatureconcerns cause
you to lose Eternal Mercies? When Eternity has opened your eyes to see your
loss, and for what inconsiderable things you have lost everlasting joy and
triumphs, you will dolefully lament it: Then you will know that Creature
felicity was but a bubble, and that the highest and most valuable enjoyments
here were but a shadow or dream to those more substantial and neverfading
contents you have made shipwreck of. And you cannot now imagine how Conscience
will then afflict you for such gross folly and madness: especially when it
appears that your loss of Heaven is irrecoverable, and you must for ever be
shut out of the Habitation of the Blessed: And especially when you find that
your temporal felicity is your eternal bane, and for your short enjoyment of
these fading comforts you must be miserable, and roar under God's insupportable
wrath for ever more. The Rich man in the Gospel that here enjoyed his good
things to full content, when he had lost Heaven and his Soul, and was tormented
in these flames that were unquenchable, could not choose but dolefully repent of
his madness in taking up with, and doting upon such vanities as his portion.
Yea, doubtless this does fill Hell with roaring, to think for what trifles they
lost Eternal Life, and purchased to themselves eternal death. Take heed
therefore of this desperate madness. Prefer not in your practical judgments or
estimation temporal concerns, before eternal: and suffer not the things of
time, to cause you to neglect, or be cold or indifferent in your pursuit after
Everlasting Mercies: rather live like strangers here, and trample under your
feet all earthly enjoyments; that you may be heirs of God's eternal Kingdom,
and not be punished everlastingly from his presence, and the glory of his power.

3. You that are Godly, take heed of being discontented or discouraged with the
portion of evil things here attending you, considering that your reward is
eternal. Be not offended with the sorrows or miseseries way-laying you in your
passage to Glory, considering the weightiness of the Prize before you, that
will make amends for all. This was the great encouragement the Apostles had to
bear all afflictions and sufferings patiently; even because their light
afflictions, which were but for a moment, did work for them a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Oh! think it not much to groan a few
days or years, that you may eternally rejoice; be content to weep for a
season, that you may triumph for ever: Yea, think it no marvel, if a Prize so
glorious and weighty, as Everlasting Life, be attended with difficulties, and
cost you some sharp, though very short, afflictions, Alas! what is worth your
toil and utmost suffering here, if Heaven and its never fading consolations are
not? and what will uphold, support and keep you from sinking under the
pressures and afflicting sorrows of this life, if the eternal weight of Glory,
which you have or should have in your eye, will not? Nay, will you not judge
your selves unworthy of this Glorious Prize, whilst you cannot patiently bear
small affliction in pursuance of it? The Mariner and worlding will resolutely
pass through many a dismal and perilous storm for the poor prize of temporal
riches, which they may lose as soon as they enjoy; and they will suffer much
contentedly in order to the obtainment of them: And should not Christians much
more willingly, cheerfully and patiently endure all con^cts in order to the
enjoyment of a Prize ^itely more weighty? What should not (...) hope of
Everlasting Life be encourage^ ^ough to undergo and adventure on? (...) (you
find) in all Ages could (...) rejoice under utmost suffer^ (...) of Eternal
Life; and why (...)? Oh! you that are Christians, learn of the Apostles, learn
of the Martyr^ and Saints in all Ages patiently to bear the crosses of this
life, which are but temporal; and to glory and triumph in suffering^ for
CHRIST, considering the end o^ them, which is Eternal Life.

4. We come to speak something by way of Exhortation. And is it so, tha^ Unseen
things are eternal? Then

1. Be exhorted to get sound convictions and believing apprehensions of the
truth* and weightiness of these Unseen things. See that your judgment be fully
satisfied about the verity, and that you are to purpose sensible of the
Unspeakable ponderousness of these great concerns. Alas! there are but very few
that do really believe that an eternity of sorrow or joy will be their portion
in the other world: And there are but few that in any tolerable measure are
sensible; of the importance or consequence of eternity. These things would
otherwise influence their hearts and lives, and be more visible in all their
carriage and deportment. How could they carelessly pursue these great concerns,
if they had sound and convincing apprehensions of their truth and weighti^ess?
how could they choose but live like ^trangers here, and in the contempt of all
^errene enjoments in comparison of these things, if they did indeed look for
the re^elation of them? Could Men endure to ^pend their time for trifles, or
vanishing and fading contents, that knew that ever^asting life or death would
be their portion (ere long) according to their deportment ^ere? surely no. Oh!
time would be more precious, and the word and ordinances of the Gospel would be
more precious, and better husbanded, if these things were soundly believed and
to purpose considered. Be careful therefore to get your Faith in these affairs
strengthened; labor to be soundly convinced, that you shall be in Heaven or
Hell for ever; and be sure to understand and be sensible of the weightiness of
these things. This is the foundation of all Religion and practical Godliness,
You Will never to purpose work out your salvation, or lay hold on Eternal Life,
without this: therefore see to it.

2. Be exhorted to lament your hitherto slight care and doleful lukewarmness in
these weighty affairs. Lament your heartless pursuit after Eternal Life, and
your lifeless endeavors to escape eternal death. Lament your misspent time,
which might have been improved for your everlasting comfort. Mourn over
especially your misimproved Sabboths, and golden opportunities and advantages
for never ending felicity, which you have been fruitless or unprofitable under.
Oh! let your sad neglects of the things of your eternal peace be your shame,
and penitent confusion, and heart-afflicting grief. Alas! what have you more
reason to lament, than your regardlesness of eternity? wherein did you ever
show greater folly or madness, than in your slighting this weighty concern? Oh!
what a mercy is it that you are not forced to lament with desperation by the
convincing light of eternity, what now you are called upon to lament in a day
of Grace before hope is gone? You do not know how soon you may be compelled to
mourn over your folly in this affair in Hell, if you mourn not over it now in
order to your future advantage and comfort. And alas! who is there that has
not cause enough to be covered with confusion for their mindlesness of eternity
in the days of their present vanity; and the inconsiderable preparation they
have made for their comfort in that Ocean? We have too much reason to be
ashamed for our dull prosecution of these weighty concerns.

3. Be exhorted to make sure work for Eternal Life; and to give diligence to
lay hold on the everlasting Blessings of the Unseen world. Oh! build firmly for
your peace and triumph in that Kingdom, which will last for ever: spare no
expense of time, strength or cost in this weighty affair. Wherever you are
slothful, unfaithful or careless, see that utmost unwearied diligence and
faithfulness be used here. Make this the buisiness of your days to sow for
Everlasting joy and comfort when time is gone. Yea, see that you have no
Employment or affair, but what is undertaken and managed in a due subserviency
to this weighty affair. Alas! Sirs, what greater buisiness have you to mind?
what an infinitely glorious prize does the Unseen world set before you? and how
poor and inconsiderable are all concerns of time to it? You spend your time and
strength for trifles, whatever you pursue, if you neglect Heaven and Eternal
Life. Earthly Kingdoms and Crowns are but shadows and vanity to the everlasting
substantial enjoyments of the Paradise of GOD, which you are invited to secure
for your Souls. It Is a wonder that the World should have in it a rational
creature, that can find himself employment without reference to his comfort in
the Eternal Ocean; the concerns thereof are so infinitely weighty above all the
things of time. Oh; be not you so unreasonable, do not you thus neglect your
own greatest, most necessary and most glorious mercies. For perishing fading
contents let not never ending and everlasting triumphing Blessings be lost and
jeoparded. Seriously consider the weightiness of these concerns, and surely
they will influence you to utmost faithfulness for the assuring of them.
Everlasting joy or sorrow what is there here that is any thing like it?
Triumphs or howlings for evermore what on Earth bears any comparison to them?
If any thing here be worth your care or minding, surely eternity and its
concerns are infinitely more considerable, and should be infinitely more
influencing.

The Joys of Heaven are Mercies indeed; they are the most inconceivable
glorious Blessings. There Is happiness in perfection, fullness of joy, peace,
content and comfort, without a dram of sorrow, in glory. There God is to be
enjoyed, who is All in all. There are Rivers of pleasure, and an Ocean of the
most Soul-satisfying goodness. So glorious are the Blessings of eternity, that
eye never saw, ear never heard, and it never entered into the heart of Man to
conceive their glory, 1 Cor. 2.

9. These are mercies that quite surpass and exceed the very thoughts and
imaginations of finite Men; so unspeakably do they excel all contents here, and
infinitely more, if you were capable to set your ear at Heaven's door, and
could hear the Souls ravishing Songs of the glorified quire in God's Paradise:
If there were but a hole or a little chink, through which you might view their
triumphant Robes, or if by any means you could get a glimpse of that
overflowing consolation wherewith they do abound unto eternity; no temptation
will ever be strong enough to make you neglect or slight the pursuit of their
enjoyments; yea, you would certainly reach after an interest in them, whatever
they cost you, and would not endure a diversion from a faithful prosecution of
them.

Add to this, that Eternal Life contains in it an eternal salvation from
Hellish misery; if you make sure of Heaven, you shall not sip of the Lake of
fire and brim-stone, wherein the wicked will be tormented for ever. This you
are at present in danger of; and this you will escape if you become the Heirs
of eternal Blessings. And what a rich Price is this, which yet Infinite Mercy
entrusteth you with? How would the damned in Hell prize and improve it, now
they have tasted hellish sorrows, if the privilege of hope of deliverance were
yet before them? what would they not do or give for their redemption from those
miseries? It Is not unlike but you have, or may have, all of you, some troubles,
afflictions, crosses, pains or miseries to groan under here, redemption from
which you would be willing to purchase at the dearest rate: And is not
redemption and deliverance from Hell much more desirable and necessary? Oh! how
will you value this mercy, when the Eternal Ocean has effectually acquainted
you with the worth of it? to be saved from these sorrows that are unspeakable
and never ending is a prize inestimable: therefore spare no diligence or
endeavor in pursuit of it.

Moreover, remember you must and will be housed in Heaven or Hell for ever: you
will unquestionably have your portion in everlasting joy or sorrow: there is no
avoiding it, but you will be the vessels of amazing mercy in God's triumphant
Kingdom; or the vessels of amazing wrath and indignation in unquenchable
flames: And which of you can think of dwelling with devouring fire, or of being
the fuel of everlasting burnings, without horror? how should the thoughts of
your dreadful peril cause you to mend you pace in your Christian course; and
double your diligence, watchfulness and faithfulness, that you may inherit
eternal mercies? especially if you consider the quality and nature of that
misery, that otherwise will certainly overwhelm you with the eternity of its
duration? Remember, misery in perfection will be your inheritance for evermore,
if you lose Heaven's Mercies and Blessings; extremity of sorrow you will endure
world without end, if you have no part nor lot in the triumphs of God's
Paradise. Once have the gate of Heaven shut against you, and it will be shut
against you for ever: and once be plunged into the Infernal Lake where is
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth without intermission, and you will
be hopeless of redemption from it forever. Christ's love and blood will be
insignificant to you, and all the promises of the Gospel will be in vain to
you; and your day of Grace will be utterly unprofitable to you, and have an
everlasting period. And oh! Sirs, soberly consider the weight of this adjunct
eternal and everlasting, and surely 'twill effectually render unseen things
most incomparable to you, and make them chiefly influential in heart and life.
Upon serious consideration you will find eternity weighty beyond your
conceptions. Remember, it notes not only lasting joys and sorrows beyond the
account of time inconceivably, and not only a continuance of happiness and
misery without any intermission; but also an everlasting or never ceasing
permanency of felicity and calamity without any period or ending. When sinners
have been groaning and roaring in Hell under unspeakable torments as many
millions of millions of Years as there be drops of water in the Sea, piles of
grass in the field, small dust in the Earth, sand on the Sea shore, hairs on
Men and Women's heads in the world, and Stars in the Firmament; yet their
miseries, sorrows, and calamities are no nearer ending than at the beginning.
And when the Saints have been triumphing in the Paradise of God as many more
millions of millions of Years, yet still their joys, happiness, and triumphs
are no nearer expiring than at the first entrance into Glory. As long as God is
just, holy and righteous, that is as long as God is God the damned must howl
and roar under inexpressible miseries: and the Glorified Saints must be
swimming and rejoicing in triumphant Blessings. And how few to purpose consider
the weightiness of these things? If your danger were only to suffer God's
hottest wrath, and lose his special love for a million of years; yea, for a
year or a month, 'twere yet so considerable as that you would forfeit your
reason to slight this concern upon the account of any earthly happiness
whatever; and how much more unspeakably foolish will you be to make light of
this concern which is eternal, not only of inexpressible but inconceivable
length of duration? Oh Sirs, pause more frequently on the meaning and
weightiness of Eternity, that the Gospel-promises and threatenings of the Word
may more influence you, and render temptations from worldly enjoyments and
fleshly delights to bias you from holiness not only succesless, but
contemptible, and whatever you do, be careful to make sure of eternal Life, and
an escape from eternal misery.

4. Be exhorted to perform every duty as for eternity. Fast and pray, and
humble your Souls for sin as for eternal Life, and an escape from eternal
death. Hear the Word, labor to profit by it, as persons that know eternity
depends upon it; love and serve God as for eternity. As Solomon advises,
Whatsoever thy hand s^ndeth to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work,
n^r device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go, Eccles.
9.10. Set all the powers of your Souls on work in every duty: for in Eternity
you cannot amend what is amiss, you must then reap the cursed fruit of your
negligence, sloth and unfaithfulness in duty; but you will not have opportunity
or ability to reform your miscarriages in order to one dram of comfort or
consolation for your Souls. As Zeuxes therefore of old was used to draw his
Pictures with singular exacteness, because (as he said) he painted for
eternity: even so should we be industrious and exact in what we do, because all
is for eternity. Oh! ask your Souls in all your undertakings and endeavors, Is
this to work for eternity? do I now improve my self like a person sensible that
an eternity of joy or sorrow, happiness or misery depends upon my present
carriage and deportment? Shall I reflect back with heart-sinking remorse and
regret, or with heart-ravishing content and satisfaction upon my present work
in the Ocean of eternity? Say and think of every action, what if this should be
my last? what if eternity should swallow me presently, and bring me to God's
impartial and eternal Judgment? and accordingly with utmost vigor and
faithfulness be found in your duty, and the exercise of your integrity in
pursuit of everlasting Blessings.

FINIS.

