THE HISTORY OF CANG-HY The Present Emperor OF CHINA Pesented to the Most
Christian King By Father J. BOUVET, of the Society of JESUS, and Missionary
into CHINA.

LONDON, Printed for F. Coggan, in the Inner-Temple-Lane. MDCXCIX.

The HISTORY of CANG-HI, The Present Emperor of China: AND THE EASTERN-TARTARY.
THE Name of the Emperor who at this time Commands over all China, and Part of
the Great Tartary, is CANG-HI, which implies as much as THE PEACEABLE. He
succeeded his Father, CHUN-TEHI, a Prince of the Tartarian Race, called, The
Mantcheou's, who first of all, being possessed of a large Tract of Ground in
the Great Eastern Tartary, afterward settled themselves in the Province of
Leaotong, situate on the North-East side of China; and at last complicated
their Conquest of this vast Monarchy, toward the middle of our Age.

This Prince is at present in the 44th year of his Age, and the 36th of his
Reign; a Person, who by many Noble Qualifications has rendered himself Worthy of
the Management of so Great an Empire.

His whole Deportment is very Majestic, being well proportioned in his Limbs,
and pretty Tall, the Feature of his Face very exact,, with a large and brisk
Eye, beyond what is observable among others of that Nation; He is a little
crooked Nosed, and pitted with the Smallpox, but not so as to be in the least
disfigured by them.

But the rare Accomplishments of his Mind, surpass infinitely those of his
Body. His Natural Genius is such as can be paralleled but by few, being
endowed with a Quick and piercing Wit, a vast Memory, and Great Understanding;
His Constancy is never to be shaken by any sinister Event, which makes him the
fittest Person in the World, not only to undertake, but also to accomplish
Great Designs.

To be short, His inclinations are so Noble, and in all respects so Answerable
to the High Station of so Great a Prince, that his People stand in Admiration
of his Person, being equally Charmed with his Love and Justice, and the
Tenderness he shows for his Subjects, and with his virtuous Inclinations; which
as they are always guided by the Dictates of Reason, so, they render him an
Absolute Master of his Passions.

But, what may seem most surprising, is, that so Great a Monarch, who bears
upon his Shoulders the Weight of so vast an Empire, should apply himself with a
great deal of Assiduity to, and have a true relish of all Sorts of useful Arts
and Sciences.

It was owing to his extraordinary Genius which appeared in his very Infancy,
the Emperor his Father, notwithstanding his Tender Age, gave him the
Preference before all his Brothers, in declaring him his Successor; and this
Prince has by his Conduct, since, made it apparent to all the World, that his
Father was not mistaken in his Choice.

For no sooner was he mounted upon the Throne, but his Chief aim was, how to
make himself beloved by both the Nations he was to Command; and knowing the
Tartars to be a Warlike People, he accomplished himself in all Sorts of
Exercises used among them, as well as in those Sciences most esteemed among the
Chinese.

In Bodily Exercises he soon improved, to that degree, that there was scarce
any Person of Note that could coop with him. And as the Tartars equally esteem
the Strength and Agility of Body, they stand amazed at this Prince, when they
see him manage his Bow with the utmost Dexterity, which is of such a bigness,
that there is not one in the whole Court, who can bend it. He shoots well, both
with his left and right Hand, whether on Foot or on Horseback, though riding at
full-speed, and rarely misses his Mark, even when he shoots flying. He is very
expert in Managing all sorts of Arms, not excepting those, that are no more in
use now adays, and is as dextrous at Handling our Firelocks, as at the Bow.
The Tartars are naturally good Horsemen, but this Prince surpasses most of them
in this Exercise.

Notwithstanding he excels thus in all Military Exercises, this does not hinder
his having a good relish of Music, especially of those Musical Instruments,
which are brought thither out of Europe. And, if the multitude and weight of
public Affairs did not prevent him from playing upon the same, as often as he
could wish, there is no question but he would soon become as great a Master of
them, as he is of some Tartarian and Chinese Instruments, which he has been
taught to play upon, when as yet in his tender Age.

But as he is not ignorant that the Art of Government is the Principal
Qualifications belonging to a Sovereign, so it is to that he has applied
himself with the utmost Diligence. He was scarce sixteen years of Age, when his
Chief Minister of State (who was the most Potent of those four Lords, unto whom
his Father had committed the Regency during his Son's Minority) was become so
insolent, as to Lord it over all the Princes of the Blood, and to dispose of
all the Courts of Justice at Pleasure, no body daring to stand in opposition to
his Greatness.

This young Emperor was the first who had resolution enough to stop the
carreer of his insolency. For which purpose, having called together the
Chiefest of the Princes of the Royal Blood, who were Members of the Great
Council of the Empire, he upbraided them with their want of Courage, in
conniving at the Outrages committed by this Minister of State, without daring
to oppose him in his violent Courses, and at the same time, ordered the
President of this Council, to go immediately and seize his Person, which was
done accordingly.

He being convicted of many Injustices, was condemned to die; but having asked
and obtained permission to see the Emperor before his Death, he showed him the
Scars and Marks of his Wounds, which he had received in the Service of the
Emperor TAITSOW (whose Life he saved) Grandfather to His Majesty, and Father
of the Emperor CHUN-TEHI, who entirely conquered China. In consideration of
these Wounds received in the Service of the two preceding Reigns, he was
pardoned as to his Life, and his Punishment changed into a perpetual
Imprisonment, where he afterward ended his days.

Ever since that time, the Emperor having taken the Reins of the Government
into his own hands, he has applied himself to the management of Affairs, with
so much Affiduity, that he takes cognizance of all matters, and regulates them
himself, after having understood the Sentiments of his Ministers of State and
Council. By this continual application to Business, he has acquired such a
Habit of managing all public Affairs, that so prodigious a multitude and
variety of Business, as daily were brought before him from the most remote
Parts of so vast an Empire, seemed rather to be his Diversion, than any Toil.

For which purpose, he gives duly every Morning at break of day, Audience to
those of the Sovereign Courts of Peking, who then lay all the Petitions lodged
with them, before him. If the said Petitions concern any thing of Moment, he
sends them to the Court of Colao, which is properly the Council of the Empire;
where, when they are examined, and an Account given concerning them to the
Emperor, he decides them as he thinks fit; No Judgment of any Court not of the
Council of the Empire it self being of any Validity, till approved of by the
Emperor.

Besides, those Hours he sets aside in the Morning to give Audience, there is a
certain Person of great Ability, in the nature of a Master of Requests, who all
the day long attends the Emperor's Person, wherever he goes, and receives such
Petitions or other Papers, as must be delivered to His Majesty, and to hear
such Persons, as have any Business to be delivered by way of mouth, of which
this Gentleman is bound to give an exact Account instantly to His Majesty, and
to bring back his Answer, provided they are Persons, whose province it is, to
inform the Court concerning these Matters, for otherwise they meet feldom with
any Encouragement.

If any of his Subjects find themselves oppressed by the Mandarins or
Governors, they need only to enquire when the Emperor goes out of Peking a
Hunting, or upon any other Diversion, and so to present themselves upon their
Knees with their Petition open in their hands, somewhere near the High Road
where he is to pass by; when most commonly the Emperor sends one of his
Attendance, to enquire and examine the Matter of Complaint, and if the
Mandarins are found guilty, they are sure to meet with most severe Punishment;
But great care must be taken in this Case by the Subjects, to offer these
Petitions with all the imaginable Respect and Humility due to His Majesty,
expecting his coming, at a convenient distance from the High-road, if they
expect to be favorably received; For if they are wanting in these Marks of
Respect, and will force themselves upon him, by loud Acclamations, and
demanding Justice, they are pushed back by the Guards; though effectual Care is
taken, that no hurt be done to any who come to present their Petitions, unless
they should be so bold as to lose all manner of Respect, this Prince being
willing to give all due Encouragement to his Subjects, to have recourse to him
in their Grievances, looking upon this as the most proper Means to keep the
Mandarins in their Duty, for fear of being accused before the Emperor. We have
observed during our Stay in China, that many of the most Considerable Mandarins
of the Empire, and who had free Access to the Prince's Person, being thus
complained against, and found guilty of what they were charged with, lost not
only their Employments, but were likewise severely punished, according to their
Deserts.

The present Emperor never had any Favorite Minister, in whom he confided,
but has introduced such an Absolute Government in the Court, that no body dares
speak to him concerning any Business that does not belong to his Province,
unless he be asked. And, as for his own Person, he is so close in all his
Affairs, that the more you approach to his Person, the more you are convinced,
that his Designs are past all Discovery.

It is his Custom to require an exact Account of all Matters of Moment, and to
have secret Intelligence by different Persons, of all that is transacted in the
Courts of Justice, and otherwise; when he gives Audience to private persons, he
asks much, but answers little. He observes with great attention every word that
is spoke to him, which he ruminates upon at leisure; And to be short, there is
scarce any Prince, that ever I heard of, who more seriously reflects upon all
what comes before him, who knows better the Act of Dissimulation, and is a
greater Master both of his Words and Secrets.

He is so happy in his Memory, as to remember for a great while after, the
meanest Circumstances of Things he has once taken notice of, even to the names
of Persons; neither the multitude of his Affairs, of which he daily takes
cognizance himself, neither length of Time being able to crase that out of his
Memory, which has been once firmly imprinted there. Of this we as well as
Father Verbiest, have had several times Experience; Among the rest it happened
one day, when the said Father was following the King in one of his Progresses,
that his Majesty asked him the name of a certain Bird which he saw, and the
name of which, Father Verbiest had told him in Flemish, several years before;
The said Father not being able just then to remember the name of the said Bird,
which was somewhat odd; was not a little surprised, to hear the Emperor ask
him; whether it was not called so and so in Flemish, and that he should
remember what he had forgot himself!

This prince has so quick an insight into Matters, that it is no easy Matter
to deceive him, and such is the Solidity of his Natural Understanding and
Judgment, as most generally to pitch upon the best expedient, where the Success
is doubtful, and even the best Head-pieces among his Ministers of State, do
readily confess, that they are more beholding to his Instructions than their
Advice in most Matters of Moment.

Of this he has given frequent Instances, both whilst the Differences were on
foot betwixt him and the Muscovites, and during the Treaty of Peace with them.
As the Muscovites were formerly looked upon as a very unpolished Nation, which
had nothing that is engaging in their Conversation, and that the vast distance
betwixt their Country and Peking, made them little regarded in China, as being
scarce known there; so their first Embassy, which was sont to CHUN-TCHI, the
present Emperor's Father, was not as much as admitted to Audience.

For these Muscovites having refused to conform themselves to these slavish
Ceremonies, which commonly are made use of by those who make their applications
to the Chinese Court, they were kept up close, in a manner, like Prisoners,
without having the Liberty allowed them to see the City of Peking, or to
converse with any of the Inhabitants; and being after some time sent back with
their Presents, and without receiving their Credentials; This gave the first
Occasion to the Muscovites to Invade some of the Tartars, Subject to the
Chinese Empire.

The present Emperor had no more reason to fear the Muscovites, than his
Predecessors, but wisely considering, that they might prove troublesome
Neighbors to some of the Tartars subject to and bordering upon China, His
Majesty judged it most advisable, to treat them with more Civility, for the
Benefit of his Subjects.

Of this he gave a very remarkable Proof some years ago; For the Muscovites,
having been forced to surrender at Discretion, the Emperor was so far from
punishing them with Death, (according to the ancient Custom of China) that he
treated them very civilly; those that were willing to return into Muscovy he
sent back with a certain allowance of Provision; such as were willing to serve
him, he received among his Troops, some of whom were sent to the Capital City
of the Province of Leaotong, the others to Peking.

They had each of them a House with some Land, and Slaves allotted them, and
each simple Foot Soldier was made a Horse Man; The Officers were entertained
in the same Station, and in better pay than they had in the Muscovite service.

In the same manner he has treated the Muscovite Envoys, which since that time
were sent to his Court, with a great deal of Civility, in defraying their
Charges as long as they were within his Territories, and ordering the necessary
Carriages to be provided not only for their use, but also for their whole
Baggage and Merchandises, both in going and coming, through a large Tract of
Land of above three hundred Leagues. Whilst they were at Peking, they had all
the liberty that could be granted, both in their own Persons and Traffic,
without paying the usual Custom, or any molestation. The Muscovites being
thereby made sensible of the Benefit that did acrue to their Empire by this
Commerce, the desire of not loosing this Advantage was one of the main reason,
which induced them to conclude a Peace with the Chinese.

The Muscovite Plenipotentiaries did frankly confess to the two Fathers Pereyra
and Gerbillon, which were sent by the Emperor of China to be present at the
Conferences of Peace betwixt these two Nations, That the Chief Motive, which
had prevailed with his Czarish Majesty to send his Plenipotentiaries to the
Treaty of Peace, was the good Treatment his Subjects had of late received from
the present Emperor of China.

It is certain that on the Chinese side, it was by the Emperor's absolute
Authority, That it was resolved in his Council, that their Plenipotentiaries
should meet those of Muscovy upon the Frontiers; this Prince looking upon it as
very reasonable, to dispense with that ancient Custom of the Proud Chinese,
who never used to send any Ambassadors to foreign Princes, unless it was to
carry to them their Emperor's Commands.

The two Chief of this Embassy were two of the most considerable Lords of his
Court, the best Head-pieces in his Great Council, and of whose Integrity he was
well assured. The Treaty not being brought to a good issue the first Year, he
was so far from being disgusted at this want of Success, that on the contrary,
he sent his Plenipotentiaries a second time, with such full Instructions, that
the Treaty was happily concluded, and the Limits settled betwixt these two
Empires, to his Satisfaction.

It is more than probable, That if this Emperor would have insisted upon those
extravagant Punctilio's, used among the Chinese, and would have pretended to
give no better reception to the Muscovite Ambassadors, than what they had met
with at their first Embassy sent to this Court, they would have found means to
enter into an Alliance with some of the Western Tartars, by which means they
might have proved very troublesome Neighbors to the Chinese Subjects on that
side.

And upon this occasion, I cannot pass by in silence, That the Muscovites are
not the only strangers, who have been made sensible of the good Will, the
present Emperor bears to them. The Portugese and Holland Ambassadors, have
received such signal Proofs of his Magnanimity, during their stay in this
Court; That they do freely confess, That the present Emperor's Temper is far
different in this respect, from that of the Chinese in general, who have at
all times shown so much Aversion to Strangers, and have looked upon them as so
despicable, as not worth their keeping any Correspondence with them; Or if they
vouchsafed sometimes to receive some of their Ambassadors, they were treated
rather like Subjects than their Equals.

Thus much is to be said in behalf of the Chinese, That unless it be the
Iaponeses, the Toakineses and Coreans, who have got something of Politeness,
which they are obliged for, to the Chinese, all their neighboring Nations are
very Savage and Barbarous; But the present Emperor, who has a much better
insight into foreign Affairs than the rest, has a considerable time ago, found
out the effects of this Mistake. The Jesuits have imprinted into his Mind so
advantageous an Idea of the European Kingdoms, and of some other Nations in the
World; and by this continual Application to some of the best Works, as well as
to Arts and Sciences flourishing in Europe, he has been sufficiently convinced,
that the Chinese are not the Only in the World, who can boast of their being
Famous in many Arts and Sciences.

This has been, in a great measure, the true Reason why this present Emperor
has thought fit, to lay aside this preposterous Custom of the Chinese Nation,
and to receive the Ambassadors of Holland, Portugal, and Muscovy, with all the
marks of Respect and Civility; tho at the same time, they were obliged to
Accommodate themselves in this point to the ancient Custom of this Empire, as
to Treat concerning what they were to transact, with the Courts appointed for
that purpose.

But this singular Wisdom and Conduct did never appear with such Luster, than
during these several intestine Commotions, which happened under his Reign.

The first and most Famous of all, was the Rebellion raised by one Ousan-Gouei,
who, having brought a considerable number of Tartars into China, and thereby
deserved the Title and Dignity of King, of Feudatary Prince of a certain
Province, from the present Emperor's Father, at last entered into Cabals
against the Tartars, with an Intention to drive them out of China.

He was at first so successful, that in a little time, he made himself Master
of one half of this vast Empire, without much Opposition, and it was next to a
Miracle, that the rest escaped his Hands; the Chinese declining, wherever he
came, for his Party; in comparison of whom, the Tartars were but a Handful of
People, who were not able alone to stop the Current of his Victorious Arms. But
such was the Prudence and Conduct of this young Prince, who then was not above
twenty years old, that what he wanted in Force, he supplied by his own Ability.

To speak without Flattery, it was chiefly owing to this Prince, who managed
all Matters in Person; it was, I say, owing to the wise Precautions he took
with the Chief Governors of the Provinces, and other Military Officers among
the Chinese, that he not only kept in Obedience those who had not had the
Opportunity as yet to join with the Rebel Ousan-Gouci, but also brought over a
great many of the Revolted Chinese.

It Is true, he did not appear in Person at the Head of his Army's; but this was
an effect of his Wisdom, being sufficiently convinced, that his Presence was of
Great Consequence at Peking, to keep the Northern Princes in Obedience, and to
disperse by his Royal Presence these Factions, which were carried on in that
City against his Interest, and which might otherwise have proved of more
dangerous Consequence, than the whole Force of Ousan-Gouci.

To be short, he acted in this Affair not like a young Prince, but with such
precaution, that no more could have been expected from the most accomplished
Politician. He was day and night present at the Councils, and ready at all
times to dispatch his Orders according to the different Exigencies of Affairs,
concerning which, and all the least Circumstances that attended it, he had
constant Intelligence given him; it being the most dangerous that ever
threatened the Chinese Empire; forasmuch as it proved the Source of many other
Factions, which however, he happily suppressed before they came to any
Maturity, by his prudent Conduct.

The first of these Factions was a Conspiracy among the Slaves of Peking, who
being all Chinese, had agreed among themselves, to Murder all their Masters
that were Tartars by Offspring, in one Night; and the better to compass their
Design, they were afterward to set Fire to four or five places of the City.
But there being so vast a number concerned in this Conspiracy, as scarce to
know one another, the same was by Accident discovered by several of the
Accomplices, some days before it was to be put in Execution; whereupon the
Emperor, having seized upon and punished with present Death some of the
Ringleaders, he broke the Neck of the whole Conspiracy in a few days, by
granting a General Amnesty to the rest.

This Faction was soon after followed by another: For the Kings of Canton and
Fokien, being likewise of the Chinese Race, when they saw the Tartars embroiled
by the Revolt of Ouson-Gouci, did look upon this as the fittest Opportunity to
shake off the Tartarian Yoke, and to make themselves Sovereigns each in their
own Province.

Much about the same time there revolted another King of the Race of Mongo,
Chief of the Head branch of those Princes descended from the West-Tartarian
Emperors, who Reigned over China before the Imperial Family of Taiming; which
is above three hundred years ago, and who, after they were chased from thence,
regained the Imperial Throne a second time, and reigned till the 30th year of
this Age, when these Princes ruined themselves by Intestine Divisions.

For, the present Emperor's Grandfather, laying hold of this Opportunity to
ascend the Imperial Throne, knew so well how to foment these Quarrels, till he
found means to reduce them, one after another, under his Obedience, not
expecting even the Chief of the Family, who retained hitherto the Name of
Emperor, and was forced by his own Subjects, to submit like the rest. But the
Tartars of the Race of Mantcheou, to render their Subjection more specious and
easy, did, after the entire Conquest of China, bestow the Title of King upon
this Emperor, as well as upon several others of the most Potent Princes of the
Family of Mongo.

Whilst the present Emperor was engaged against the three beforementioned
Rebellious Chinese Princes or Kings, some Officers belonging to this Prince,
who is Chief of the Principal Branch of the Family of Mongo, being come to
Peking, and having observed, That the Place was not provided with any
considerable Number of Troops, the Garrison consisting only of a few young, raw
Soldiers, they did not fail to give Intelligence of it to their Master, who
being encouraged to improve so favorable a Conjuncture, resolved to try his
Fortune, whether he could recover his ancient Right, and the Empire of China.

But whilst he was making the necessary Leagues with the other neighboring
Princes of the Race of Mongo, the thing could not be carried on with so much
secrecy, but that it reached the Emperor's Ears, who with an incredible
Resolution, sent immediately a small Body of Troops, composed partly of the
Garrison of Peking, partly of those Quartered in the Province of Leaotong,
bordering upon the Territories of the revolted Prince, against him, whereby the
Enemy being bereaved of the Succors he expected from the other Princes his
Allies, was forced, with what Forces he could bring together in haste of his
own, to fight the Army of the Emperor, who were advanced to the very heart of
his Province, where he was entirely put to the Rout, and taken Prisoner in the
pursuit, with his Brother and Children.

He made use of the same Method, and with the same Success upon many other
Occasions, during the Civil War; for with that small number of Troops, who were
entirely to his devotion, he always was successful against the Rebels, though
they stood it out to the last with a great deal of Bravery.

Among the Heads of the Rebellion, even many, who did not stir, or had any
share in these Commotions, were seized and put to Death, with all their
Children, without distinction of Age or Sex; pursuant to that most rigorous
Constitution of the Chinese; according to which, Rebellion is punished in the
ninth Generation, which was done with an Intention to extinguish the whole Race
of a Rebellious Faction.

In the mean while, the Emperor, whose Nature is in no wise inclined to
Cruelty, was so merciful to the Brothers of the Kings of Canton and Fokien,
that he would not let them receive the least Damage either in their Persons or
Estates, knowing them to have had no hand in the Rebellion. But, because he
found himself under a necessity to put to Death some of the Kindred of
Ousan-Gouei, that were as yet very young, he issued out a Manifesto, in which
he protested, that it was not according to his Inclinations, to put them to
Death; but that he was constrained to yield to the Law of the Empire, and to
the Advice of the Princes of the Blood, and of other Sovereign Courts of the
Empire, who were all for maintaining the Force of this Law, to strike Terror
into the Subject against Rebellion, by the Dread of the worst of all the
Punishments which can be inflicted upon the Chinese, which is to leave no
Posterity behind them.

Thus the Emperor did not only reunite those Provinces with the Crown, which
had shaken off the Yoke, but also those who were dignified with the Title of
Kingdoms in favor of three Generals of the Chinese Army, who having embraced
the Party of the Tartars, were very instrumental in the Conquest of China.

He had also the good Fortune, to exterminate the Remainders of those ancient
Chinese, who rather than submit to the Tartarian Yoke, when they first entered
China, chose rather to follow that Famous Pyrate Couesin.

It was under the Reign of CHUNTCHI, Father of the present Emperor, that this
Pyrate attempted no less than the Conquest of the whole Empire, for which
purpose, he was advanced with a very formidable Army, as far as the City of
Nanking, which in all likelihood he would have been soon Master of, if it had
not been Bravly defended by a certain Tartarian Commander, who being sensible
that the Fate of the Empire depended on the Preservation of this Place, did,
not only with a small number of Troops, repulse the Enemies in their several
Attacks, but at last, also surprised the Pyrate and his Army, which he put to
an entire Rout one Night, when they were overwhelmed with Drink, having the day
before celebrated the Birthday of their General.

This was the same Famous Pyrate, who, after he had lost his whole Army in this
Occasion, retired with his few Remainders to the Isle of Formosa, from whence
he chased the Hollanders, and established himself there. His Son maintained
himself after his Father's Death, upon that Island, till the present Emperor
of China, forced him to submit to his Obedience, with all his Subjects, except
a few, who retired to the Kingdom of Kamboya.

Thus it may be said without flattery. That the present Emperor, CANG-HI, has
acquired more Glory in subduing so many Rebels, and maintaining himself in the
Throne, against so many dangerous Enemies, than the Famous Amavang his Uncle,
and Guardian to his Father, did, by the Conquest of the whole Empire. For the
Conquest of China was not very dearly bought by the Tartars, the Chinese
striving to destroy one another at that time, and the bravest among them siding
with the Tartars against their Countrymen.

The Fire of Rebellion being thus extinguished, and Tranquillity restored to the
Empire, the next care the Emperor took, was to re-establish a good Order, and
suppress such Abuses as were crept into the Government, during the
Licenciousness of these intestine Wars, in lieu of which, he endeavored to
re-establish the ancient Vigor of the Laws, and introduce Plenty among his
Subjects.

But as he knew, that nothing could so much conduce to the encompassing of this
Design, than if Ministers of known Ability and Probity were put in Offices of
Trust, both in the Court and Provinces; it was his main Study to choose such as
were best qualified for that purpose, and and to encourage such in their Duty
as were in Offices before.

It is to be observed, that the Constitutution of the Chinese Government is
absolutely Monarchical, all depending on One single Head. The inferior
Officers have their Dependence entirely on their Superiors; The Governor of
each City regulates alone all Affairs belonging to the City under his
Jurisdiction; and so does each Governor in his Province. This Form of
Government, which in it self considered, is very perfect, requires however,
That the Governors of Cities and Provinces, who are invested with the Royal
Authority, be of such approved Integrity and Probity, as to be Proof against
all manner of Corruption.

It is almost incredible, what effectual Care the present Emperor takes in the
Choice of his Mandarins, especially those of the Provinces and Cities; and with
how watchful an eye he over-looks all their Transactions. He does not rest
satisfied with the Account he receives from the Court of the Mandarins, and
with the Persons that are recommended by them, but he has every where his
Spies, who furnish him with secret Intelligence; from whence it comes, that he
often chooses quite otherwise, and contrary to their Recommendations; his Chief
aim being to advance every one according to his Deserts. For, whenever he
observes in any one of his Ministers a more than ordinary Capacity, he never
fails to give him particular Marks of his Favor, by bestowing upon him some of
the most Eminent and Considerable Offices: On the other hand, if they make the
least false steps in the Management of their Trust, this is sufficient to make
them lose their Office, if it reaches the Emperor's Ears; But, if any one be
convicted of Bribery, he is sure to meet with a Prince who is inexorable in
that Point, and without the least Respect to his Degree or Quality, he loses
not only his Place, but is Exemplarily punished besides.

From hence it is, that we have seen such continual Changes among the Mandarins
of all degrees. For, within the first four Years, whilst we tarried at Peking,
most of the Governors and Viceroys of the Provinces, as well as the Chief
Members of the several Tribunals or Courts of Peking were displaced; for the
Emperor keeps so watchful an Eye over them, that it is next to an
impossibility that any of their Faults should long escape his Knowledge.

We were no sooner arrived at this Court, but we saw four Calao, two Tartars,
and two Chinese, deposed from their Offices at once; as was likewise the
President of the first Tribunal of the Six, which are the Supreme Courts of the
Empire, though he was Father-in-law to the eldest Son of the Emperor. At our
very first coming to the Royal Palace, we were shown one of these
beforementioned Calao, sitting near one of the Gates, and supplying the Place
of a Common Sergeant of the Guards; the Emperor, for his Mortification, having
condemned him to this Employment.

Much about the same time, two or three Viceroys were brought to Peking, one of
them in Chains, without the least Attendances, and being afterward convicted
of having exacted Great Sums from the Province under his Jurisdiction, he was
condemned to Death, the other Two escaped with loosing their Offices, their
Crimes being not of so high a Nature.

In the next following Year, the Viceroy of the Province of Tohe-Kiang, who
was always a professed Enemy of the Christian Religion, and did with all his
Might oppose our Stay in China, being accused of Malversation, was condemned by
the Emperor himself, not only to be deprived of his Office, but also to a
perpetual Banishment into Tartary.

Thus this Prince has laid so strict an Obligation upon himself, to conform his
Reign in all Respects to the Laws of Equity, and to advance none but Deserving
Persons to any Places of Trust, that there is scarce one Instance to be given,
when either out of Partiality or Self-Interest he has acted contrary to this so
laudable a Resolution.

Neither is it only in this particular Care of choosing well qualified
Mandarins, and his Vigilance over their Actions, that the Emperor's Goodness
to his People is Conspicuous; whenever there happens any public Calamity in
his Realm, his Compassion and Inquietude are most evident Proofs, that he looks
upon himself rather a Father, than a Sovereign of his People.

Of this we saw our selves, several Instances in two Years. For, there
happening a great Scarcity, occasioned for want of Rain, in some of the
Provinces, which had reduced the Inhabitants to the utmost degree of Misery;
this Prince was so sensibly touched with their Calamity, that he not only
remitted the whole Annual Tribute, which amounts to betwixt thirty and forty
Millions of Livres, and caused the public Granaries to be set open; but he
likewise ordered both Corn and Money to be distributed among the most
Necessitous of the People.

And the more effectually to supply the Necessities of the Poor, he gave leave
to such of the richer Sort, as had qualified themselves by taking the necessary
Degrees for Mandarins, and had undergone the Examen, to buy those Offices, and
to furnish a certain Quantity of Corn, to be sent to these places, where they
stood most in need of it; And, because there flocked great Numbers of these
Miserable Wretches daily to Peking, in hopes of finding some Means of
Subsistence there, the Emperor found out a way, at once to supply their
Necessities, and to do something for the public Good; For he ordered them to
be employed in re-building those Tribunals that are within the Precinct of the
Court, by which means he also prevented those Disorders which are the ordinary
Effects of an idle Life.

Upon the occasion of any public Calamity, he debars himself of his ordinary
Divertisements, which else he frequently takes at one of his two Royal Country
Seats, not far from Peking. We have seen him, during all this Time of that
Scarcity of Corn, keep close in his Palace, without appearing in public,
unless when he went with his whole Court to the Temple, dedicated to the Sun,
there, (according to ancient Custom observed upon such like Occasions among the
Chinese) to pray for Rain, by public Prayers and Sacrifices, which he offers
to the Supreme Lord of Heaven and Earth; being much more enlightened in this
point, than most of the Modern Chinese, who being in this fundamental point of
Religion, degenerated from their Ancestors (as they are in many other points),
do adore the Material Heavens in lieu of that Supreme Intelligence, which
governs the Universe with an infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness.

As often as this Prince takes his progress into some of his Provinces (which
he does from time to time) on purpose to be informed concerning the true
Condition of his People, and in what manner they are Governed by the Mandarins;
it is his Custom to appear with a more Affable and Familiar Air than at other
times, and to permit even the meanest Workmen or Peasant to approach his
person. He speaks to them with so much Affability and Sweetness, as Charms them
to the Heart; and among other Questions, which he commonly asks them, he
seldom fails to ask, Whether they are satisfied with their present Governors.
If he finds any real Occasion of Complaint against any one of the Mandarius, he
is sure to be dispossessed of his place immediately; as on the other hand, if
his Conduct is recommended by the general Approbation of the People, this is a
sure step to higher Dignities.

It is about seven years ago, when the Emperor in one of his Progresses to the
Southern Provinces, passed through Hovingan, which is a large City in the
Province of Nan-king, and the ordinary place of Residence of the Tsong-ho, or
Superintendant General of all the Waters, Rivers, and Canals of the Empire,
which is one of the most Considerable places without the Court. This Tsong-ho,
being accused of Malversation in his Office, and upon the point of being
displaced, besides the paying of a Great Fine; the people of this City
presented a Petition to the Emperor, in favor of the said Tsong-ho, who had
no sooner perused the Petition, much in Commendation of this Mandarin, but
without taking any further Information, he restored him immediately to his
Office; as an evident Mark, that nothing could be able to make a more sensible
Impression upon his Mind in respect of the Mandarins, than if they treated the
people in such a manner, as to be considered by them rather like Fathers than
Governors.

Though it is beyond all Dispute, that the Emperor of China, is the most
potent Prince in the World, both in respect of his vast Revenues, and the great
extent and Goodness of his Territories; nevertheless is he a great Enemy to
Luxury, in respect of his own person; being in this point an exact Observer of
one of the Fundamental Laws of the Chinese Monarchy, which forbids all
excessive Expenses in the Great Ones, and the Prince himself, unless it be with
relation to the public Good.

Not but that the Expenses of his Household surpass without all Contradiction,
much those of the most Magnificent Courts of Europe, by reason of that almost
innumerable Multitude of Officers and others, who daily have their Subsistence
from Court; But in respect of his own Person, he is the most Exact pattern of
Frugality and Modesty. It Is true, he is Served at his Table in Gold and Silver,
according to his Grandeur, but in other Matters not regulated by Custom, he
never shows the least Inclination to Nicety; being contented with ordinary
Dishes; and such is his Sobriety, that there cannot be one Instance given when
he committed the least Excess in that kind.

His Palace is of a vast Circumference, resembling in Bigness a considerable
City, and to look upon the many large Structures which it contains, and which
are all covered with Tyles varnished with a Gold Color, affording a most
Glorious sight, it is no difficult matter to judge that this Palace was
intended to be the Seat of a Great Monarch; But as for the Appartments and
their Furnitures, even not excepting the Emperor's Lodgings, their Chief
Ornament is, that they are kept clean and neat, there being nothing to be seen
but some Pictures, a little Guilding, and plain Silk Hangings, of which indeed
there is great plenty, because they are so common in China.

He has built himself a Country House, about two Leagues distant from Peking,
where he takes frequently his Divertisements, and retires thither for a good
part of the Year. But besides two Great Cisterns and some Canals, which have
been made by his Orders, there is nothing to be seen there that bears the least
proportion to the Magnificence of so Rich and Great a Monarch. Every thing
indeed is very Neat; but in respect of both the Structure it self, and in
respect of the Gardens, and the whole Design of the Place, it does not approach
to some Country Houses belonging to some Persons of Quality about Paris.

His Modesty appears as well in his Habit as in all other Things which serve
for his proper Use. For, his Clothes, unless it be some Sables and Ermins,
which as they are very common in this Court, so he makes use of them for the
Winter Season for Linings, are of a plain Silk, which is so common all over
China, that every body, unless the poorest Sort, makes use of them.

In a Rainy day you shall see him sometimes dressed in a Woollen Cassock, such
as is worn among the ordinary Sort of people in China; so, we have seen him
sometimes in the Summer appear in a Habit made of nothing but Callicoe, which
is the ordinary Wear of the Chinese in their Houses. Unless it be upon some
Festival, the only thing which is remarkable and magnificent in his Habit, is a
very large Pearl, which during the Summer Season he wears upon his Bonnet, made
after the Tartarian Fashion.

His Chair in which he is carried both within and without the Precinct of the
Palace, when he has no mind to go on Horseback, is no more than a kind of a
Litter, made of ordinary Wood Varnished over, adorned on the Corners with
Copper plates, or Guild Carvings of Wood. He appears no more Magnificent when
he goes abroad on Horseback, the Trappings of his Horse having no other
Ornament than a pair of Stirrups of Iron very neatly guilt, and the Reins of
his Bridle being of yellow Silk.

To comprehend all in few words, there appears nothing in any thing which
belongs to his Person, which has the least Resemblance to that Pride and Pomp,
which is so much affected by the other Asiatick Princes; and it may be truly
said of him, That he is sensible, that the true Luster and Grandeur of a Prince
does not consist so much in the exterior Pomp, as in their own Virtues;
especially since it must be confessed, That, as his Treasury is vastly Rich,
his Empire abounding in all manner of Things, and the Chinese naturally
inclined to Industry and all sort of Handy-works, he might with as much ease
exceed all the other Princes of Asia in Pomp and Magnificence, as his Empire
has the preference before theirs both in Extent and Riches.

But to let the World see, that it is not out of Avarice or any sordid Temper
of his own, that he thus avoids all Profusedness and Luxury in Matters relating
to his own Person; he shows himself as Liberal and Magnificent in any thing
which has respect to the Public, as he is Sparing in his private Expenses. He
is not prodigal of Millions, when they come in Competition with the Welfare of
the Empire He does not grudge to bestow Immense Sums in repairing the public
Edifices, to keep the Rivers, Channels, Bridges, and Banks, and such like
Things, which serve for the Convenience of Commerce, and Ease of the People, in
good Repair: From whence it is easy to judge, that, if he retrenches something
from his superfluous private Expenses; he Husbands it for the Benefit of the
public Good, in order to employ it for the more exigent Occasions of the
State, the Chief aim of this Prince being, to be considered by his Subjects as
their Father, not their Master.

Of this he gave a most Eminent proof about five years ago. The greatest part
of his Soldiers (of whom there is a great Number at Peking) were reduced to
great Extremity by reason of their Debts, which they had contracted from time
to time, the greatest part of their Pay being scarce sufficient to pay the
Interest of what they owed. This could not be imputed to any thing else, but
the Ill-husbandry of the Soldiers themselves, or at least of their Father's;
For their Pay is both very good, and exactly paid every Month; and when they
first settled themselves at Peking, they had Houses, Grounds, and Slaves
allotted them, sufficient for an honorable Maintenance, every one
proportionably to his Quality. Nevertheless the Emperor was no sooner informed
concerning their present Condition, but being touched with Compassion, he
ordered immediately their Accounts to be Stated, and to be paid out of his
Treasury, the whole amounting to above sixteen Millions of Livres.

And to prevent the like for the future, he issued his Orders, That no private
person should presume to advance any Money to the Soldiers upon their Pay,
under penalty of loosing the Debt; but to supply at the same time the Occasions
of the Soldiers in case of Necessity; he commanded, that upon any necessitous
Occasion Money should be advanced them out of the Treasury, to a certain
limited Sum, to be deducted by little and little out of their Pay, without
putting them under the necessity of paying Interest-Money, or rather
Extortions, as are usually paid at Peking, when people are droven to the
necessity of Borrowing Money.

About the same time, a Petition being presented to him from the Hia or
ordinary Mandarins of his Guards (of whom there are betwixt seven and eight
Hundred) and from some other Officers belonging to his Household, That they were
much in Debt, and begged Relief from His Majesty; he ordered the Officers of
his Household eight hundred Livres a-piece, and four hundred to each of such of
the inferior Officers, as were unable to pay their Debts, and whose Duty it is
to Attend his Person in the progresses he makes throughout the Empire. This Sum
which amounted in the whole to above two Millions of Livres, he ordered to be
paid out of his privy Purse; because, said he, It would be unjust to lay the
Burden of these Debts, which have been contracted by my Domestic Servants,
upon the Public Treasury.

This Extraordinary Generosity of the Emperor, had very near proved the
Occasion of a Revolt among those of the Chinese Horse, who being composed of
Slaves, as they could not contract any Debts, so they had had no share in the
Emperor's Liberality. It is to be observed, that there is a considerable
number of these Horsemen entertained among the Tartars, and, that as their Pay
is very good, so they for the most part, maintain thereby their Families. Near
five thousand of these Slaves assembled themselves near the Royal Palace, in
order to present a Petition to the Emperor, in which they begged to be
included in the Number of those that were to receive such ample Marks of his
Bounty.

There being not one among all the Courtiers there present, who showed any
Inclination to prefer their Petition to His Majesty, they remained for some
time in an humble posture, bare-headed and upon their Knees, in the Great
outward Court of the Palace; But being soon after informed by some that passed
that Way, That the Emperor was gone to take a Walk in the Garden behind the
Palace, they surrounded the Garden, and with great Clamor, desired His
Majesty to extend his Bounty to them as well as the other Soldiers, they having
been ready upon all Occasions to serve him, and sacrifice their Lives for his
Interest, with the same Zeal as the rest. But the Emperor taking another way,
did, as if he had not heard or understood their Meaning; whereupon some time
afterward, word being brought to the Emperor, That they had forced the first
Gate that leads to the Garden, inspite of the Guards; who were not able to
resist their Number, he commanded eight of the Ring-leadersto be seized
instantly, and the rest to be beaten out of the Court with Sticks; which being
done accordingly, this mutinous Rabble was dispersed in an instant.

But as His Majesty had by this last Act of Generosity, given very ample
demonstrations of his Affection and Tenderness for the Soldiery in General; so,
upon this Occasion, he resolved to let them see, That he would not suffer
himself to be abused, and that he knew how to punish their Insolence. For which
Reason, these eight Mutineers were ordered to be tried before the Criminal
Court, as well as their Masters, pursuant to an ancient Custom among the
Tartars, according to which the Masters bare a Share in the punishment
inflicted upon their Slaves, in case of any Misbehaviour, the better to oblige
them to keep a watchful eye over their Slaves, that they may not transgress
upon others.

By this Court the eight Slaves were the next day condemned to Death, and their
Masters to a perpetual Banishment into Tartary.

The Emperor however extended his Mercy toward them in mitigating this
Sentence, which was only executed upon one, who having been the Chief
Ringleader of this Mutiny, was beheaded the same day before Noon, and his
Master, who was one of the Mandarins of the Emperor's own Guards, lost his
place, and was banished into the remotest parts of Tartary.

The other seven escaped with being soundly Whipped, and as a further Punishment
were forced to carry, for three Months after about their Necks the Chinese
Cangve, which is nothing else but two thick Boards joined together in the
middle, like our Pillory Boards, of about three foot Square, and near eighty
pound Weight.

Their Masters were Graciously pardoned by the Emperor, as well as the other
Soldiers, and their principal Commanders, who threw themselves at His Majesty's
feet, excusing their Fault in not preventing the Design of these Mutineers, and
asking his Pardon, ready to submit themselves to any Punishment he should think
fit to inflict upon them for the neglect of their Duty. Thus this Great Prince,
knowing how to keep an equal Balance betwixt Mercy and Severity, makes himself
both beloved and feared by his Subjects, who thereby are kept under a most
strict Obligation of performing their Duty.

As he is in his own Person the greatest Enemy of Idleness and Laziness; but
the greatest Admirer of Business, without being the least sparing of his own
Person, so it is his Chiefest Study to prevent his Subjects; but especially the
Tartars of the Race of Mantcheon, from being ensnared by the Luxurious Life of
the Chinese, being sensible, that if they once were brought to tred in the
footsteps of the Chinese as to this Point, it would be a very difficult Task
for them to maintain themselves in China, which they Conquered with a Handful
of Men; only, because they are inured to all manner of Hardships, as their
Enemies were swallowed up in Luxury, which had rendered them quite Effeminate.

It Is for this Reason that the Emperor, who is a great Master in the Politics
of this Government, sends very rarely any of the Tartars as Mandarins to the
Southern Provinces of the Empire, where they are more addicted to this Vice
than in other Parts; and, if he is sometimes obliged to send some thither, he
recalls them as soon as possibly he can. It Is for the same Reason of State,
that he goes so frequently abroad a Hunting; and that almost every year he
takes once, if not twice, a Progress into the Mountainous parts of Turtary.

For, his Guards and Officers of the Household, as well as most of the Great Men
of the Court, or Chief Commanders of his Forces, and other Mandarins of the
Court of Peking, being obliged by their Places (at least each in his Turn,) to
attend the Emperor's Person wherever he goes; it is upon these Occasions, that
by his Example, he animates them to endure the Fatigues of the Campaign, and to
follow him wherever he leads the Way, where he is sure never to be sparing of
his Person.

For in these Progresses you shall see him appear in a very common Habit,
sometimes a whole day on Horseback, traversing the Mountains and Forests, so
that he tires sometimes nine or ten Horses in a day; and oftentimes, according
to the disposition of the Ground, does not grudge to march on foot for a
considerable time.

When he returns at Night to his Tent, he is so far from taking any Repose,
that he first dispatches all Matters beforehim, in the same manner, as if he
were in his Palace at Peking. He peruses and takes an Account of all Petitions
laid before him, without delay, which oftentimes takes up good part of the
Night, so that he spares these hours from his Sleep, which he has employed in
the Daytime for his Diversion. And it is observable, that he leads this sort
of Life not for four or five days only, but sometimes for three or four Months
together, without Intermission.

Father Gerbillon, who among all the Jesuits attends him most frequently in his
Progresses, has attested to me, That he has seen him often all covered with
Dust and Sweat, continue the Chase, without changing his Linen or Clothes after
they came to the appointed Place of rest; and that he has seen him for several
Hours together, sitting and exposing himself to the Heat of the Rays of the
Sun, without an Umbrello, which constantly attend him wherever he stirs, in
great Numbers.

I have heard the same Author, Gerbillon, relate it to others of our Society,
That in one of his Progresses, at a great distance from Peking, the Emperor
and his Court were forced to pitch their Tents in a place where it was very
difficult to be supplied with any other Provisions, but what the Place
afforded, so, that most of his Retinue were forced to be contented with Beef
and Mutton, of which you meet with good Store in Tartary. The Emperor, to let
them see, that at this Juncture, he could live and be satisfied with what the
rest had, ordered, That nothing but Beef and Mutton should be Served upon his
Table, till such time that they received new Supplies of Provisions, sufficient
for all the rest of his Attendance,

By these Means he encourages his Subjects to use themselves to undergo all
sorts of Fatigues, being never sparing of his own Person upon such like
Occasions; as on the other hand, he is sure to lay some Mortification or other
upon those, whom he finds addicted to an Idle and Lazy Life.

For which reason, to prevent the Children of the Chief Men of his Court, of
the Tartarian Race, or of those Chinese, who have espoused their Interest,
from embracing an idle Life, he makes it his constant Custom to prefer them to
such places as are not to be Officiated without a great deal of Trouble.

So soon as they are of a fit Age to go abroad, he makes them take care and
lead his Hounds, when he goes a Hunting; others he employs in managing his
Hawks and other Birds of Prey. Some are employed in boiling Tea and other
Dishes for his Use, and in Serving them at his Table; some in making Bows and
Arrows for his own and his Son's Use. Those who are to be preferred before
others, by reason of their Great Quality, or on whom the Emperor intends to
bestow some particular Favor, are made Mandarins of his Guards, who lead a
very Toilsome Life, being obliged by their Station to be upon the Guard both
Day and Night, at least one day in six, to attend every Morning early at Court,
and to follow the Emperor in his Progresses.

As they are commonly chosen out of those who have considerable Fortunes to
expect from their Parents or Kindred; so they are the better qualified to bear
the Expenses of these Journeys, which are very chargeable, and would be the
ruin of People of Moderate Estates, by reason of the great number of Horses
and Servants they are obliged to carry along with them, when they are a Hunting
in remote places, where meeting sometimes with inhabitable Deserts, they are
forced to provide themselves aforehand with all manner of Necessaries for their
Sustenance and Convenience.

Besides, that thereby these young Gentlemen are inured to all manner of
Fatigues and Hardships, the Emperor likewise reaps this Advantage by their
constant Attendance upon his Person, to meet with frequent Opportunities to
approve their Ability; according to which they are afterward Advanced to the
most Eminent Dignities in the Empire.

All these beforementioned Qualifications, would questionless be judged more
than sufficient among other Nations, to place this Prince among the most Famous
Hero's; But the Chinese, who measure the Ability and Qualifications of Great
Persons to be entrusted with the Management of public Affairs, by their Skill
and Knowledge in all manner of Arts and Sciences, would scarce look upon him,
(as they do) as one of the Greatest Monarchs that ever ascended the Chinese
Throne, if he were not as well Accomplished in this, as in other Matters.

It is without question, for no other reason, than to conform himself to the
predominant Genius of the Chinese Nation, that he applied himself with so much
Assiduity to the Study of all the Learning and Sciences in vogue among the
Chinese, that there are few Books of Note in that Language, but what he has
taken the pains to peruse.

He has got a great part of the Works of Confucius by heart; these being
considered among the Chinese, as the Originals of all their Sacred Books, and
reverenced as such. To attain to a more perfect understanding of all the most
difficult Passages therein contained, he has caused certain Commentaries to be
made upon them for his own Use, both in the Chinese and Tartarian Languages, by
the most Able Doctors of the Empire; many of whom were employed for ten or
twelve Years together, to bring this Work to perfection; and at the same time
to explain the Text to the Emperor. The better to show his Veneration for this
most ancient Doctrine of the Chinese, he did compose the Prefaces himself,
which were put before each of these Commentaries, and published by his
Authority.

He likewise caused the Universal History of China, to be Translated into the
Tartarian Language; and the first Translation not being so exact in all its
parts as he desired, he ordered a second to be made, which as it was more
perfect, so it was augmented with some additional Notes, for the better
understanding of some difficult passages. He is so absolute a Master of the
whole Body of this History, that, notwithstanding its vast extent, you can
scarce mention any passage in it, but what occurs immediately to his Memory.

Of this we had the opportunity to observe a most remarkable Instance about six
years ago. The Emperor had ordered a certain Inscription to be made upon the
Tomb of his Uncle on the Mothers-side, who had not long before lost his Life in
a Battle sought in Tartary against the King of Eluth, who is one of the
West-Tartarian Princes, and had with a considerable Force invaded the Frontiers
of China.

The Doctor who was pitched upon to compose it, and who was looked upon as one
of the best of the Imperial College, had; by what mistake, I know not, made a
comparison betwixt this Uncle of the Emperor and a Famous General among the
Chinese, who in effect, had deservedly acquired the Reputation of a Brave and
Great, General; but, who besides other ill Qualities, was stigmatized for want
of Loyalty to his Prince: As for the rest, the whole was extremely well done,
so it met with the general Approbation of all the Doctors, who were to revise
it, and of the President of the College himself, who being at the same time
President of the Tribunal of Rites, did present it to the Emperor, who always
takes notice of any thing of Moment.

But what had escaped the Sagacity of so many Learned Doctors, who are
considered here as Oracles of all the Sciences known among the Chinese, and
who by their Profession, ought to be particularly well versed in History, was
at first sight discovered by the Emperor. For, this Prince, recalling to his
Memory, beyond what all the rest had done, the Defects charged upon this
General in the Chinese History, who had lived above two thousand years before;
and being sensible that this Comparison would rather tend to the Dishonor of
his Uncle, than to transmit his Great Name to posterity; after he had strictly
examined all the Circumstances of the Matter, he resolved to punish this
Oversight in the Doctor, who had been the Author of the Inscription, by
Banishing him into the Province of Leaotong; and the President, who had the
Revising of it, with the Loss of his Place.

The present Emperor is likewise well versed both in the Rhetoric and Poetry
of the Chinese, being a nice Judge both of the Chinese and Tartarian
Languages; both which he writes in with the greatest Exactness imaginable, and
excels in Politeness of his Speech, the most refined of all his Courtiers. To
be short, there is not any kind of Learning in China, but what he is a Great
Master of. He is very Curious in his Library, which is composed of all the
Valuable Books to be met with in the whole Empire; and many of approved Ability
are employed, to search in all places after good Books, out of which the
Emperor frequently chooses such, as he judges fit to have a place in his
Library.

Besides these, there are many others, whose constant Business it is, to
Translate the best Chinese Books into the Tartarian Language; which is a great
Addition to the last, and a vast Advantage especially to the Tartars of
Mantchou, as well as to the Missionaries, they being not well versed in the
Chinese Characters, by reason of their great variety, could otherwise not
attain to the Knowledge of the Chinese Language, and consequently of their best
Books, without applying themselves for several years to that Study, which by
the Convenience of these Translations, (easy to be understood in comparison of
the Chinese Language) they apprehend without any great difficulty.

The Arts and Sciences of the Chinese, are not the only Delight of this
Prince; for as he judges with the greatest Nicety and Exactness of every thing
he thinks worth his taking notice of; so there is not any Science in Europe,
that ever came to his Knowledge, but he showed a great Inclination to be
instructed in it. The first Occasion which had a more than ordinary Influence
upon his Mind, happened (as he was pleased to tell us himself) upon a
Difference arisen betwixt Yang quansien, the Famous Author of the last
Persecution in China, and Father Ferdinand Verbiest, of the Society of Jesus.
The Dispute was concerning the Chinese Astronomy, which this Impostor
maintained to be very perfect, and not to want any Reformation from the
European Astronomers, though it was well known, that he understood neither. It Is
true, he was made President of the Mathematical Tribunal; but for his
Advancement to this Dignity, he was not so much beholding to his Ability, as to
his perversed Zeal for the ancient Rites of his Country and Religion, in
opposition to those who endeavored to spread the Christian Doctrine among the
Chinese.

Notwithstanding which, most of the Chief Mandarins of the Court, who were not
well versed in Matters of this Nature, and prepossessed with a good Opinion of
things in relation to their Native Country. Those also who were Members of the
Mathematical Tribunal, jealous of their own Reputation; and looking upon it as
a signal Affront to see themselves Corrected by Foreigners, did with all their
Main and Might espouse Yang-quang sien's Quarrel. Some few Persons of Authority
and Credit there were, who, without the least regard to their own Interest,
frequently declared in all places wherever there was the least Opportunity,
That the Calculations of the Ephemerides made by the European Fathers
Missionaries, were always conformable to the most exact Observations they could
make; whereas on the contrary, the Calculations of the Chinese, founded upon
the Principles of their Astronomy, proved always defective,

The Emperor was then scarce seventeen years of Age; and there was at that
time a grand Combination of all the Tribunals against the European Astronomy,
who in a General Assembly, held for that purpose, resolved to request the
Emperor to give a Decisive Sentence in Favor of the Chinese Astronomy. But he
proceeded with more Caution in this Matter, than could be expected from his
Age; For being resolved to take cognizance of the Matter himself, and to stop
the Mouth of all the vain Pretenders to this Noble Science, he sent both to
Father Verbiest and Yang-quang sien, who appearing in the Council to give an
account of what was to be proposed to them, he asked them in public, whether
they could by some Experriment or other make it appear to the Eye, which of
these two Astronomers was the most exact in its Calculations? Yang-quang sien
stood mute, but Father Verbiest offered to the Emperor. That if His Majesty
would appoint a Stick to be given of what length he pleased, that he and
Yang-quang sien would endeavor to determine exactly in what place the Shadow
of it must fall the next day at Noon. The Emperor having approved of this
Proposition, and fixed a certain Stick, Father Verbiest immediately went to
work, and by his Calculation demonstrated in what place the Shadow must fall
precisely at Noon the next day. Father Verbiest's Calculation having been fully
proved by the Event, and Yang-quangsien not being able to calculate it, or to
give any other Ocular demonstration of what was proposed to him, the Emperor
declared in favor of the European Astronomy.

Soon after he ordered several more demonstration to be made, which of these
two Calculations was the most proper for the Ephemerides and Observations of
the Ecclipses; and which His Majesty caused to be present, not only the
Mandarins of the Tribunal of Rites, but also several of the Great Men of his
Court, in whom he confided most, and from whom he expected to receive an exact
Account of every thing that should be transacted in this Affair. Accordingly
all these Observations having been found conformable in all respects to the
European Calculations, the Emperor commanded that they should be received, and
made use of in China, according to the Translation made by Father Adam Shall,
into the Chinese Language, under the last Emperor's Reign, which accordingly
was put in execution, and continues thus to this day.

As this Trial of Skill in the Mathematics was the first Occasion that
introduced the Father Missionaries into the Emperor's acquaintance; so from
that time, he always showed a great inclination to be instructed in the
Mathematical Sciences, which in effect, are in great Esteeem among the
Chinese. It is to be admired, that, being then of Age, which Princes and Great
Personages seldom are seen to addict to Study, he did apply himself to it with
so much Assiduity, that he made it his Chiefest Delight, sacrificing all his
spare Hours to this Study.

During the space of two Years, Father Verbiest instructed him in the
Usefulness of the best of the Mathematical Instruments, and in what else was
most Curious in Geometry, the Statique, and Astronomy; for which purpose he
wrote several Treatises. It was also about the same time, that he took first to
our Music, under the Tuition of Father Peyrera, who not only composed an
entire Treatise of Music, but also caused several European Instruments to be
made for the Emperor's use; upon some of which, he taught him to play some
Tunes.

The civil Commotions, which happened not long after, did somewhat interrupt,
but not suppress his first Attempts of this kind. For, he employed some of his
spare Hours, (notwithstanding his continual Fatigues and Business, the effects
of these remarkable Revolutions which happened in China) to the repetition of
these things he had learned before; and the Flames of these Intestine Broils,
being happily extinguished by his Prudence; and all his Subjects, both of the
Chinese and Tartarian Race, enjoying the Fruits of Peace and Tranquillity, by
the Peace concluded about seven or eight years ago, with the Muscovites; it was
then that this Prince began to give fresh demonstrations of his Desire to be
instructed in the European Sciences.

He did the Honor to us four Jesuits, Missionaries then at Peking, to receive
our Instructions, sometimes in the Chinese, sometimes in the Tartarian
Language; but, as the Tartarian is not so difficult as the Chinese, the
Emperor being informed, that Father Gerbillon and I, in about eight Months
time, had made so much Advancement in it, as to be understood tolerably well;
he was pleased to make use of us, to explain to him the Principles of these
Sciences, in the Tartarian Language. The better to accomplish our selves, he
assigned us certain Masters for a Month together, who taught us every day in
the Tribunal of the Great Masters of the Palace.

Much about the same time, Father Anthony Thomas, did give him further
Instructions concerning the Use of the best Mathematical Instruments, in the
Chinese Language, and the practical Part of Geometry and Arithmatick, the
principles of which he had formerly been taught by Father Verbiest. He would
also have us explain him the Elements of Euclid in the Tartarian Language,
being desirous to be well instructed in them, as looking upon them to be the
Foundation, upon which to build the rest.

That every thing might be done with as much Ease and Convenience as could be
wished for, he assigned us a certain large Appartment in the Palace belonging
to the late Emperor, his Father is Lodgings; where, he himself used frequently
to dine, and pass many Hours in the Day, before we were well in possession of
it. Here we were furnished plentifully with every thing we stood in need of,
and that in a most obliging manner in the World. For every Morning early, we
were attended, and carried to the Palace, by his own Servants and Horses, and
were in the same manner conducted back to our Lodgings every Night. Two
Mandarins of his Household, well versed in both Languages, were appointed on
purpose to Assist us in our Works, and as many Scribes as we pleased, to write
every thing fair. There scarce passed a day, but we were called in to the
Emperor, who heard our Lessons with a great deal of Attention, and oftentimes
he would bestow whole Hours together in our Company, to hear and repeat our
Explications; to make the Figures himself, and ask many Questions concerning
what remained as yet doubtful; and when we had given our Resolutions, both by
way, and Mouth, and in Writing, he would bestow much of his leisure Time, to
make his Repetitions in private.

He did not neglect at the same time to exercise himself frequently in the
Calculations and Use of Mathematical Instruments, and in the re-iterated
Repetitions of the chiefest, Propositions of Euclid, the better to imprint into
his Mind their Demonstration; and by this extraordinary Application, he made
the Elements of Euclid familiar to himself in five or six Months, that it was
impossible to show him any Mathematical Draught or Figure, having relation to
any of the Propositions of Euclid, but that he immediately remembered both the
Proposition and its Demonstration; having (as he was pleased to tell us
himself; I read them over at least twelve times one after another. We did
Translate all the most necessary Propositions of Euclid, and their
Demonstrations into the Tartarian Language, for his use, as well as the
choicest of Archimede's Propositions And with the same Readiness he would
remember the Practick and use of the Compass of Proportion, of the best
Mathematical Instruments of Geometry and Arithmatick.

Such was his eager Desire to attain to the perfect Knowledge of these Things,
that nothing was able to prevent or hinder his Resolution; neither the various
Instances that occur in this Study, nor our want of Skill in the Language. For,
if he with any demonstration which he did not well apprehend at first, either
because it was more intricate than the rest, or because we wanted proper words
to explain our selves clearly in a foreign Language, he would readily ask
sometimes one, sometimes another of us, and that at three or four several
times, which way the same was to be understood; and if it happened sometimes
that we had not the good fortune to give him a clear Idea of the matter at that
time, he would not grudge to defer the further Explication of it, to another
time, a convincing Instance of his most Admirable Patience and Attention. He
was pleased to tell us one time upon this account, speaking of his own Person;
that he never thought he could have too much patience in reference of these
Matters, which absolutely required it; and, that from his very Infancy, he had
always applied himself, to whatever he undertook, with a great deal of
Attention and Constancy.

After he was sufficiently instructed in the Elements of Geometry, he ordered
us to compile a whole System of both the Theorick and Practick of Geometry, in
the Tartarian Language, which we afterward explained to him in the same manner
as we had done with the Elements of Euclid. At the same time, Father Thomas
made a Collection of all the Calculations of Geometry and Arithmaticks (in the
Chinese Language) containing most of the Curious Problems extant, both in the
European and Chinese Books, that treat of this matter.

He was so much delighted in the pursuit of these Sciences, that besides
betwixt two and three Hours, which were set aside every day on purpose to be
spent in our Company, he bestowed most of his leisure time, both in the day and
at night in his Studies. It Is to be observed, That this Prince, as he is a
declared Enemy of a Lazy and Idle Life, so he never go's to Bed but very late,
and rises early; from whence it came, that, though we were always very careful in
being at Court early in the Morning, it happened frequently, that before we
could get out of doors, he had already sent for us, either to Revise some of
his Calculations, or perhaps a new Problem; For it is almost incredible, with
what Assiduity he applies himself to investigate some new Problems, which have
some reference to those that have been explained to him before; and how he did
make it his chief Divertisement, to put in practice whatever he had learned of
most Curious in Geometry, and to perfect himself in the Management of the most
useful Mathematical Instruments.

For which purpose, besides those that were formerly presented to his Father
(which were carefully preserved by his Orders) he caused many more to be made,
the management of all which he could learn to understand, even to the Nicest
Point. These were committed to the Care of Father Peyrera, and Father Suarez,
who being two Persons that spared no pains in Encouraging the Emperor's Zeal,
did manage the whole to the entire Satisfaction of His Majesty.

We on our side, were likewise not negligent in obliging the Emperor with what
Mathematical Instruments we had in our Custody, proper for his Use, among which
was a very fine and large Demycircle, fitted for Geometrical Operations, being
a present of the Duke de Maine. This he did not only make frequent use of in
the Gardens of his Palace, but likewise in his Progresses, when it was always
carried upon the Back of one of the Mandarins of his Household, who
notwithstanding its Weight, was not a little proud of the Honor in being
entrusted with this precious Burden. By the help of this Instrument, he would
frequently measure sometimes the height of a neighboring Mountain, sometimes
the distance of some remarkable place or other, and that in the presence of his
whole Court, who were surprised to see that their Emperor managed this
Instrument, and performed the Operations with the same dexterity and good
success, as Father Gerbillon a Jesuit, who always used to attend His Majesty
in his Progresses.

Immediately after our first arrival at Peking, we presented him with two
excellent Machines, in which one might observe the Eclipses of the Sun and
Moon, with the different Aspects of the Planets, for every day in the Year, and
for many Ages together. We stand indebted for the Invention of these two most
Curious Machines, to those of the Academy Royal. The Emperor having commanded
us to show him the perfect Use of them, and how to apply them to the Chinese
Calendar, ordered these two Machines to be placed on each side of his Throne,
in one of the Principal Appartments of his Palace, where I saw them standing
but the day before my departure out of Peking; a most convincing Proof of the
great Esteem the Emperor has for these as well as all other curious [and
useful Mathematical Instruments.

Ever since that time, he has shown a most particular Inclination and Esteem
both for the French Mathematical Instruments, and other Works and Curious
Contrivances; those we had the Honor to offer to His Majesty, having had the
good Fortune to meet with his Approbation above all the rest.

It was no wonder if the Esteem the Emperor had for the European Mathematical
Instruments, soon influenced most of the Great Men at Court to tred in his
footsteps; and if those who honor us with their good Will and Favors, do
often engage us, to let some be brought over for them; being sensible that they
cannot make their Court with better hopes of Success, than by making a Present
of some Curious Mathematical Invention or other, to the Emperor, who not only
receives very favorably, all what is offered him in this kind, but shows so
much Eagerness for his being furnished with them from all Parts, that he has
caused all the Meathematical Instruments, that were in the hands of the
Governors of the Maritime Provinces, to be brought to Peking.

To encourage this Noble Desire, we sent to our Brothers the Fathers, Fontenay
le Comte and Visdelou, to desire them to furnish us with such Instruments as we
judged most proper for the Emperor's use. These Fathers sent us several of the
most Curious Mathematical Instruments, some Phosphorus's, both solid and
liquid, and other such like Rarities; which we having made a Present of to the
Emperor, he received them with all the Marks of Joy, and a most particular
Esteem. But these Fathers, being afterward invited by the Emperor to his
Court, they and their Presents met equally with the most obliging Receiption in
the World. Among several other Mathematical Instruments they presented to His
Majesty, there were several Levels with two Pendulum's, to distinguish the
Seconds, for Celestial Observations, which by reason of their great Exactness
and Usefulness, being highly extolled by the Emperor, he assigned them
convenient Places in his own Bedchamber; And the Prince, who is declared
Successor of the Empire, and shows no less Inclination for these Curiosities
than his Royal Father, being extremely taken with them, and discovering his
Intention to us, I went straight ways to our House, and presented him with the
only of the same kind, I had left, which he accepted of in a most
extraordinary obliging manner.

After we had completed our Explications both of the Practical and Speculative
Geometry, in the same Method as we had made use of before, when we instructed
the Emperor in the Elements of the Euclid, he showed so much Satisfaction in
having attained to this Noble Science, that, to give the World some manifest
Proofs of his Esteem for these Works we had composed, he ordered them to be
Translated out of the Tartarian into the Chinese Language. He himself took the
pains to prefix a Preface to each of them, and to have them Revised and printed
in his own Palace, and to have them published throughout the whole Empire in
both Languages, as a most evident Sign of his laudable intention, to introduce
the European Sciences into China, and to render them familiar to all his
Subjects; and having observed in his third Son, (who is a young Prince of about
seventeen years of Age, and endowed with many NobleQualifications) a more than
ordinary Genius for these Sciences, he taught him the Principles of Geometry in
person.

I do not question but there are not a few, who will look upon this so
Extraordinary Inclinations and Assiduity toward these Sciences (which without
all Contradiction, are not sufficiently to be praised in a private person) as
rather blameable than commendable in so Great a Prince, who bears the Weight of
so vast an Empire as that, of China, upon his Shoulders; But, if we will take
the pains to make due Reflections upon the due Character and present State of
the Chinese Empire and Nation, who at all times have made Learning the
Foundation-stone of their Government, and the knowledge of Sciences the Steps
by which to ascend to the highest Dignities and Employments, we shall be forced
to confess, That the Emperor's Extraordinary passion for, and delight in these
Sciences, ought to be considered as the Effects of a most refined piece of
Policy of France, who has an absolute insight into the true Nature of the Art
of Government.

It is undeniable, that of late years, if you except Moral Philosophy, which is
the principal Study that meets with Encouragement among the Modern Chinese.
This Nation has neglected most of these Sciences, which rendered their Ancestors
Famous to Posterity, and were questionless the Chief Cause of the flourishing
Condition of their Empire. The present Emperor being inspired with a most
glorious Ambition to restore the ancient Glory of this Empire, he judged
nothing could be more conducing to attain this Great End, than if he could
receive these most useful Arts and Sciences, which were once the Glory of this
Nation, and, by his own Example, encourage his Subjects to follow his footsteps.

The Emperor being thus instructed in all the parts of Geometry, applied his
Thoughts to the Study of Philosophy; For which Reason, he commanded us to
Compile a Body of Philosophy in the Tarvirian Language, and to follow the same
Method we had observed in our Mathematical Treatises, which appeared to him the
most easy and natural. The Success, wherewith it had pleased God hitherto to
bless our Endeavors, increased our Wishes and Hopes of the same, if not better
Success in this; and, as we were fully persuaded, that this might prove one day
the most proper Means, and be consequently of the utmost Consequence to dispose
the Hearts of the Chinese, especially those who have any relish of Learning,
toward the receiving of the Gospel; we were not sparing in any thing which we
thought might contribute toward the introducing a good Philosophy among them.

For this purpose we consulted most of the Ancient and Modern Philosophies; but
among all of them, found none more suitable for our Purpose, than the Ancient
and Modern Philosophies of Mr. Duhamel, a Member of the Royal Academy, by
reason of the Solidity, Purity, and good Connection of the Doctrine contained in
this Treatise; which, therefore we made our Guide to bring our Work to the
desired Effect.

But the Emperor being about the same time attacked by a most dangerous
Distemper, it was the Advice of his whole Court, and especially of his
Physicians, upon his Recovery, to desist for some time from his Studies, as
being prejudicial to the re-establishment of his Health. This Prince, being for
the abovementioned Reason obliged to be more remiss in his applications to
these Sciences, we only showed him a short Logic, which we intended as an
Introduction to our Phisolophical Work, of which we had given a Scheme in a
large Preface. It was upon this score, that, in lieu of pursuing the same
Method and Purpose we intended before; we saw our selves under an indispensible
Obligation to conform our selves to the present Disposition and particular
Inclinations of the Emperor; which, as we had observed, being of late, for the
most part, bent upon the knowledge of the Structure of the Human Body, upon its
various Operations and most surprising Motions, we, contrary to our former
Design, applied our selves to Treat of this, with the utmost Care and
Application.

But because the Chinese, for all their great Reputation of having for many
years past, had the ablest Physicians, have at present but a very confused
Knowledge in Anatomy; we were forced to extend this Treatise to a much larger
Bulk, than we at first intended, and to give a true Idea, first of all the
Parts of the Humane Body in general, and to treat of each afterward in
particular; and to represent the several Relations and Connexions betwixt them,
to give them a right Idea of the whole Occonomia Animalis. We did not neglect
to insert in this Treatise all the most Curious and useful Discoveries of our
Modern Anatomsts, especially those of Mr. Du Verney, and of some other Learned
Members of the Royal Academy, who have distinguished themselves before others
in this, as well as in all other kind of Learning.

We showed the Emperor twelve of fourteen of these Propositions, with their
proper Figures and Explications, just as he was returned out from one of his
Progresses, he frequently makes into Tartary; he was so extremely pleased with
them, that, to show how much he was delighted with them, he ordered his Chief
Painter, who is a Great Master of his Art, to lay aside all other Things, and
to make it his whole Business to draw these Figures with all the Exactness he
could.

Nevertheless, as this Work required more Application and Assiduity, than was
consistent with the Emperor's Health, so our Labor was interrupteb for some
time by the Emperor's Command, whose Curiosity inclining rather at that time
to the investigating the Causes of some of the most noted Distempers, wherewith
he had either been formerly, or was still afflicted; he ordered us to endeavor
to inform him concerning the Causes of these Distempers, according to the
Principles of our Modern European Physicians.

God Almighty, who by his Providence had given us this favorable Opportunity,
to touch more effectually the Heart of this Great Prince in favor of the
Christian Religion and its Ministers, did also assist us in making a
Considerable Progress in this Matter. For in two or three Months time, we writ
18 or 20 small Treatises, each Treating of a certain Distemper in particular,
pursuant to the Method prescribed to us by the Emperor. They met with the good
Fortune of being not only Approved, but also very pleasing to the Emperor, who
extolled them in Public, and sent for us into his Presence, to be Witnesses
our selves of the Satisfaction he showed upon this Occasion. To give us an
ample proof of his Acknowledgement, he pitched upon the most proper Recompense
that could be bestowed upon Ministers of the Gospel, and at our most Earnest
Request, he, by his public Edict granted the free Exercise of our Religion,
and consequently freed its Professors from those dangers that had threatened
them for many years last past.

In some of the first of these Treatises we had, upon the occasion of speaking
of the internal Chimical Remedies, enlarged our selves upon their Excellencies,
in respect of this Particular, that besides their Qualities of Curing or giving
Ease in many Distempers, they had this peculiar Prerogative before other
Medicines, that they were not so nauseous, and taken in less quantity. The
Emperor having conceived a particular Curiosity to see some Effects of it, was
very desirous to see some Experiments made of this kind. We did all what in us
lay to decline this province, in representing to him, that we having no
experience in Matters of this Nature, durst not attempt a thing of such Moment;
But this Prince, who by some small things of this Nature, he had seen us do
before, judged that we might undertake this also with the same hopes of
Success, would not admit of our excuses.

To work therefore we went, taking for our Guide the Dispensatory of the Sieur
Charas, Director of the Royal Laboratory; The Emperor assigned us a large Room
within the Palace, where we set up a Laboratory. Here you might have seen
several Sorts of Furnaces, with most Instruments and Utensils requisite for
Chimical Operations; which pursuant to the Emperor's Orders, who is never
sparing upon such like Occasions, were all of Silver. We were busy in
preparing several Sorts of Conserves, Lymphs and Essences, for three Months
together, and the Emperor would sometimes honor us with his Presence, and
took such particular Satisfaction in those Preparations, that he ordered them
to be preserved for his own Use.

More than this, he caused many Golden and Silver Vessels to be made, in which
he carried these Medicines in his Progresses, which he took a peculiar Fancy
in, and would give them upon occasion to his Children, the Great Men of his
Court, and others of his Attendance. It must truly be confessed of this Prince,
that his Natural Inclinations are very Charitable; for no sooner does he hear
of any of his Servants being ill, but he sends his Physicians to them, and
liberally furnishes them with what is most precious among his Medicines. Of
this we have had several times experience our selves; as often as any of us
happened to be afflicted with any Distemper.

We had the good Fortune to see many Sick people, and among them, several of
the Emperor's Household, to be relieved by these Medicines we had brought along
with us out of Europe. The Emperor falling sick some time after; and having
for some time made use of the Chinese Remedies, but with little Success, had
recourse to ours, which produced the desired effect. His Physicians jealous of
their Reputation, did all what in them lay to restore him to his Health, but to
little purpose, all proving ineffectual, except the Quinquina, of which the two
Fathers, De Fontenay and Visdelou, who arrived very fortunately at that time,
had brought a good Quantity along with them. Heaven, which upon this as well as
several other Occasions, was pleased to give us a particular Mark of its Mercy;
being willing to make use of our Assistance as a Recompense to this Prince, for
the Liberty granted to the Professors of the Christian Religion in the
preceding Year; and as a further Engagement to extend his Bounty more and more
toward the Preachers of the Gospel, to whom he stood indebted for the
preservation of his Life, as he himself was pleased publicly to declare in the
presence of most of the Grandees of his Court.

There are very few who have tarryed for any considerable time at Peking, but
what know with how much Esteem and Affection Father Verbiest was received by
this Emperor; but it is also undeniable, that he never gave him such
particular proofs of his Esteem, as he did to us for several years past, whilst
we had the Honor of being instrumental in promoting his Studies in the
Mathematics.

Those who are acquainted with the Chinese Court, where every thing is carried
on with a singular Grandeur, are not ignorant, how rare a thing it is to see
their Emperors enter into a familiar Conversation with their Subjects; and how
difficult a thing it is, even for the Greatest Men in the Empire, and the
Princes of the Royal Blood to approach his person, unless it be upon the
Occasion of some public Festival, will perhaps be scarce able to believe, that
we had so free an Admittance; especially considering that we were Religious
persons, and Foreigners.

The whole Court have been eyewitness (to their great Surprise) of the private
Audiences and Conferences we had duly every day, no body being admitted to be
present, but three or four Eunuchs of the Emperor's Bedchamber; where the
Chief Subject of our Discourse was concerning all manner of Sciences, the
Manners and Customs, and what else was worth our Observation in the European,
and some other States of the World. As there was not any Subject, wherewith we
used to entertain this Prince with more particular Satisfaction, than the
Glorious Actions of Lewis the Great, so I can testify it my self, That there
was not any thing of this Nature, in which he took more delight to be informed
in. At last, he gave us such ample Marks of his great Esteem, that he would
absolutely command us to sit down near his side; an Honor never granted before
to any Body living, unless to his own Children.

But if he is lavishing in his Bounty toward us in private, he is not sparing
of it in public, having given sufficient proofs to the World, of a particular
Affection and Esteem. Every body knows in what manner Father Verbiest was
honored by him, both in his Lifetime and after his Death. Very few are
unacquainted in what Splendid manner Father Thomas was invited and received in
China; and how the first five French Jesuits Missionaries, were received with
no less Honor at his Court. The Muscovites have been eye witnesses of Honors
conferred upon the Fathers, Peyrera and Gerbillon, at the Treaty of Peace
betwixt their Plenipotentiaries and those of China, about eight Years ago. It
was the Entertainment of the whole Court of Peking at that time, when Father
Grimaldi was sent by the present Emperor as his Envoy into Muscovy. I will
leave it to others to testify, how honorable I was Treated by his Special
Orders, by all the Governors of the Provinces, and others, and that frequently
in the presence of the Missionaries of several other Nations, and of the
English and Portugese Merchants; especially, at that time when I received his
special Instructions to go into France; and how it acquired me so extraordinary
a Reptitation throughout all the Eastern-parts, (even among the Enemies of our
Nation) as is source to be credited.

We indeed, as well as all the other Jesuits, which formerly were entrusted
with any public Employments by the Emperor of China, made it our constant
Business to insinuate both to the Prince and his Grandees, that we were not
desirous of these Honors, which were not very agreeable to the Humility taught
by the Gospel; but inspite of all our Excuses, it was the Emperor's Pleasure
to heap upon us from time to time these public Marks of his Favor, looking
upon them as the most proper Means to promote our Interest, both among the
Great Men and common People; and to give the more Authority and Weight to the
Profession and Doctrine of the Christian Religion.

The same Curiosity which had led the Emperor toward the Improvement of our
Sciences, did also induce him to be informed concerning the Chief Points of our
Religion. The first knowledge of them he drew from diverse Consultations he had
with Father Verbiest, under pretext of Conferring with him about some of the
most Valuable Sciences of Europe. He has also read several Treatises upon this
Subject, which were presented to him by some of the Fathers Missionaries. That
which he delighted in most was an excellent Piece of the Famous Jesuit, Father
Ricei, which he kept by him above six Months. You may believe we did not let
slip any Opportunity that offered, to speak to him concerning the true
Principles of Christianity. He permits to the Jesuits Missionaries the free
exercise of our Religion within the precinct of his own Palace; and he has
been often heard to say, that, to judge of the Christian Religion according to
its Principles and Progress it had made in China, he did not question, but that
it would become the Established Religion there.

He has laid aside already many of the most ancient Superstitions of the
Chinese. As for instance, there is scarce any body in China, (unless he be a
Christian) but what, if he is to undertake any thing of Moment, chooses a
certain Day and Hour, to begin it in. There is a special Appartment belonging
to the Tribunal of the Mathematics, where their whole Business is, to choose by
many Superstitious ways, Places, Days, and Hours, for any thing of Moment that
is to be taken in hand. It is no longer than in the Minority of this present
Emperor, that three Mandarins of the Mathematical Tribunal, were condemned by
the Regents of the Empire, to lose their Heads, for no other Reason, than
having been not careful enough in Observing the exact Hour, when the Emperors
Brother's Funeral was to have been begun; they looking upon this Neglect as
ominous, if not Fatal to the whole Imperial Family.

It Is true, the Emperor has hitherto out of a Principle of Policy, not
abolished this Tribunal; but he has more than once told us himself, that he
makes not the least Reflection upon their Observations; and it is certain, that
in all Matters relating to his own Person, he takes his Resolutions beforehand,
which he afterward sends to the Tribunal. Thus for instance; when he was going
to Marry his eldest Son, the Mathematical Tribunal, unto whom it belongs
(according to a most ancient Custom among the Chinese) to determine which of
the several Persons proposed ought to be preferred before the rest, received
his Instructions to choose the same Person the Emperor had pitched upon before,
which was done accordingly. The same Method he makes use of when he intends to
take a Progress; when he always sends his Orders to this Tribunal, what day he
intends to set out, and their Resolutions are always agreeable to his prefixed
Time.

It is next to a Miracle, to see a Prince so Potent, so Absolute, whose
Commands are a Law, and executed without delay, surrounded with such a number
of Courtiers, addicted to their Pleasures and all manner of Luxury, so moderate
in his person, and so great a Master of his passions, as this Monarch. He is
naturally of a Colerick Disposition, notwithstanding which, it has been
observed upon many Occasions, both in respect of public or private Affairs,
that he so absolutely controuls his Anger, as scarce ever to punish an ill
Action immediately, but generally delays it to another time, sometimes for
Weeks and Months; looking upon this as the most proper means to make punishment
bear a due proportion to the Fault committed, and consequently to maintain a
good Order in the State.

Of this we observed a most memorable Instance about six years ago. The
Emperor happening to fall dangerously ill in one of his progresses, which he
made in the Mountainous parts of Tartary to Hunt, according to his Custom; he
sent Post for his Son, who was declared his Successor. Some of the young
Prince's Domestics, having conceived some hopes of seeing their young Master
surmounted upon the Throne, had not only showed their Satisfaction in their
Countenances, but also had let slip some Words, which having reached the
Emperor's Ears, immediately after his first Recovery, he was extremely vexed
at their Indiscretion; but considering that at this Juncture of time, it would
turn to the no small prejudice of his Health, if he should give vent to his
Anger; he mastered his passion, and delayed their punishment to a more
seasonable Time. After he had pretty well recovered his former Strength, he
asked his Physicians, whether without any Danger to his Health, he might
discharge a little Choler, which had oppressed him for some time? And his
Physicians having given their Consent, he ordered them to be soundly
Bastonaded, beginning with the Forster-Father of the Prince, who was then his
Governor; and some of the Chief Eunuchs of his Chamber, he banished to the
utmost Confines of Tartary. But it ought to be observed here, that a good
Bastonade or Whipping, is an extraordinary Punishment in China, and some other
Eastern-Parts, which do not leave behind them any Stain of Infamy, as it is
with us in Europe; nothing being more frequently to be seen, than, that the
Emperor's Servants, after they have been thus Chastised, are put in their
former Stations again, and are admitted again even into the Emperor's
presence, who looks upon them never the worse for this Reason, if they make an
Amends for their past Misdemeanour by their future Good behavior.

The present Emperor of China is no less Master of his other, than of this
Passion, and especially of that which is so predominant in most Courts of the
Asiatick Princes, and which at all times have been so far from being considered
in China as a Vice, that it has rather been authorized by Custom. Within the
Palace are entertained great Numbers of young Maids, chosen out of the Fairest
of the whole Empire, to be at the Disposal of their Prince; And it is an
ancient Custom among the Tartars, not to marry any of their Daughters, but,
what has been first presented to the Emperor, who, without any further
formality, may retain which he pleases of them, for his own use; which is,
besides this, looked upon by their Kindred as a singular Honor done to their
Family.

It is to these most dangerous Customs, which have proved the ruin of so many
Emperors; the Chinese may chiefly attribute these many Revolutions, which
have happened in their Empire, their Princes being thereby enticed to abandon
themselves altogether to Voluptuousness, and whilst they passed the greatest
part of their time among their Concubines, leave the whole Management of
public Affairs to their Eunuchs and other Favorites.

But the Emperor, who at this time sits upon the Chinese Throne, is so far
from indulging himself in these Pleasures, that on the contrary, he avoids even
the least Opportunities, and takes all the Precautions he can to render himself
proof against all these Temptations.

About some years ago in one of his Progresses into the Province of Nanking;
they presented him, according to Custom, with seven of the Handsomest Maids of
the whole Province; but he was so far from accepting of them, that he would not
so much as look upon them. Some of his Courtiers, who had free access to his
Person, having abused this Liberty, by endeavoring to entice him to
Voluptuousness, they were never after looked upon with a good eye by this
Prince, who found several ways to chastise them afterward for their
Misbehaviour, to make them sensible how little Satisfaction he took, and how
much he stood upon his Guard against these Allurements, which serve only to
debase a Generous Soul.

To remove all Opportunies of being drawn into the Snare of those pernicious
Pleasures, he employs his Time in the more Noble exercises both of his Mind and
Spirit; such as Traveling, Hunting, Fishing, Horse-Races, Exercises of Arms,
Reading of Books, and the Study of useful Sciences. It is for this Reason he
delights so much in taking long Journeys, where the Women never follow the
Court; and, besides that, he allots himself every Year, at least three Months
for Hunting amongst the Mountainous parts of Tartary, where even Necessity it
self, oblige the whole Court to abate much of these Pleasures they are wont to
enjoy in China; he frequently takes a Progress of 15 or 20 days, to the
Imperial Tombs of his Family, where he spends most of his time in Hunting.

When he is at Peking, or at one of his two Country Seats near that City, he
often spends the greatest part of the Day in Hunting. For this purpose, he has
a very fine Park, about a Leagues distance from Peking, of a quadrangular
Figure, surrounded with a very high Wall, containing about sixteen Leagues in
Circumference, where great numbers of wild Beasts and Fowl are entertained for
his constant Diversion. And as he takes particular Delight in Hunting the
Tiger, so he constantly takes care to have some young ones bred up in a small
Park behind his Palace, which serve him for his Diversion when they are grown
up.

For the same reason it is the Emperor, delights extremely in Fishing, and is
well versed in every thing belonging to it. Sometimes you shall see him Fishing
in the River of Peking, sometimes in the Ponds belongining to the Gardens of
his Palace, and his Country Seats; sometimes he casts a Net, at other times he
Fishes with the Angle; We have oftentimes received the honor of being
presented with some of the Fish he caught with his own hands; which is looked
upon among the Chinese, as a most particular mark of the Emperor's Favor.

As for the Horse-Races, though they are not so frequently practiced, yet once or
twice a year he keeps Public Horse-Races for his whole Court. Every one of the
Princes and Grandees do here produce their finest and Swiftest Runners in their
Stables. The Emperor likewise puts in his own Horses, and sets a considerable
Prize, to be carried by the Horse, that first comes to the end of the Race. The
Tartars in general are great Admirers of the Races, and Ride sometimes Races of
six or seven Leagues long, without taking breath, and with so much eagerness,
that often Horse and Man drops by the way, notwithstanding which, there do not
want others, who readily supply their places.

The Horses commonly used among the Tartars, no more than those of the
Chinese, don't come near our European Horses of any Value, either for shape,
or Generosity and Spirit. But they have this Advantage before most of our
Horses, that they are kept with much less Trouble and Charges; and yet will
endure more Fatigues and run both longer and swifter.

We have told you before that this Prince is very aderoit in managing the Bow
and Fire-lock, as well as in other Bodily Exercises; and what wonder is it, if
he takes particular delight, to instruct his Sons in the same exercises, of
which he is so great a Master himself.

He is no less careful in keeping his Troops in continual exercise; Four Months
in the year are appointed on purpose for the exercising the Soldiers in all
sorts of Military Actions; to wit, two Months in the Spring, and two in Autumn;
but especially those quartered in and about the City of Peking, of which one
fifth part is drawn out into Field, to do their exercises every day. Sometimes
the Emperor takes a review of them altogether, sometimes some part of them in
Person, where Prizes are allotted those who manage their Arms with most
dexterity. When they Shoot at the Mark, every Foot or Horse Soldier, who
Shoots with his Arrow within the Circle receives a Reward of three Shillings
and Sixpence.

If but a private Centinal's place be vacant in the Emperor's Troops, there
are many ready to offer their Service; whereas in Europe, our Officers cannot
complete sometimes their Companies, but with a great deal of Trouble; the
Emperor lays his strict Commands upon his Officers, always to pick out those
they find most Accomplished in managing their Arms, and other Military
exercises, there being none to be admitted without having undergone the Toil of
it. But, when any place either of a Common Soldier, or Mandarin of his Guards,
happens to be vacant, the Emperor takes effectual Care himself, that his
Orders as to this point, may be put in execution with the greatest exactness
imaginable. For, so often as a vacant place is to be supplied among the Troops
of the Household, those who desire to be admitted into it, are brought into His
Majesty's presence, who examines them concerning such Matters as belong to
their several Stations, and always gives preferrence to those, whom he finds
best Qualified.

The present Emperor never neglects any thing which he judges may in the least
contribute to the Preservation and Securiof the State. He was no sooner
instructed in what belong to the Casting of Cannons, as used in Europe, but he
caused a great Quantity to be cast in Imitation of them; and many of his
Subjects to be instructed in the Management of the Great Artillery, as well for
Cannoneering as Bombarding of places. He ordered a prodigious Quantity of Brass
Fieldpieces to be made, which are portable upon a Horse or Mule; another Horse
being alloted to each, for the Carriage and Ammunition belonging to it, all of
his own Inventing.

In a late Battle fought betwixt his Troops and those of the Tartarian King of
Eluth, it had been observed, that the Enemy by their Firearms, had done the
greatest mischief to his Forces; that their continual Firing upon his Horse,
had forced them back out of their Lines, and consequently had prevented them
from putting the Enemies. Army to an entire Rout; ever since, the Emperor has
taken care to have part of his Troops, but especially those of his Household, to
be instructed as well in the Management of the Fire-lock, as of the Bow.

What leisure time this Prince has, is altogether employed, either in the
Improvement of his Mind, or useful exercise of his Body. For besides what is
spent in Reading of the Chinese Books, and European Treatises concerning many
Arts and Sciences, after he has been fully instructed in the use of the
Mathematical Instruments, nothing is more frequent, for some years last past,
than to see him either at Peking, or at his Country Seats, nay even in his
Progresses into Tartary, to take the greatest Pleasure in the World to make
some Astronomical or Geometrical Observations, by the help of those
Mathematical Instruments, which are carried after him, wherever he goes.
Sometimes you would see him to take the hight of the Sun at Noon; sometimes the
Hour and Minute with an Astronomical Ring, to investigate the elevation of the
Pole. At other times, you might find him measuring the hight of some Tower or
Mountain, or the Distance of some remarkable Places. Oftentimes he would employ
himself in Calculating the length of the Shadow of a Stick at Noon of a certain
day. As the Observations made by the Emperor, and those of Father Gerbillon,
who commonly attended him in his Progresses, and made his Observations at the
same time with the Emperor, did generally agree very exactly with one another;
so the whole Court was over-joyed at it, and there was scarce any Prince, or
Person of Quality, who were not desirous, to have at least their Children
instructed in those Sciences, which they so much admired; but dispair'd of ever
being able to attain to the Knowledge of them themselves.

After Father Fontenay and Father Visdelou came to Peking, the Emperor had the
Curiosity to be instructed by them concerning the use of the Pendulum, fitted
for Celestial Observations, and of the Level, and some other Instruments,
which these Fathers presented to the Emperor, immediately after their arrival.
They were not sparing in their Labor, and after they had explained to him many
Curious Propositions concerning several points of Astronomy; they having
likewise mentioned to him two new Methods to find out the Ecclipses, of the
Invention of Mr. Cassini, and Mr. De-la-hire; he was so extremely taken with
them, that he would needs be informed concerning these Methods, for which
reason he ordered these Fathers to draw up the necessary Figures for their
Explication.

To give the most ample demonstration to the World that could be, how much he
delighted in all these noble Exercises, he resolved to re-establish the most
useful Arts and Sciences in his Empire. That which chiefly made him take this
Resolution, was his frequent Conversation with the European Authors, and
especially those of France, who have treated of these Matters; Add to this,
that we never let slip the least opportunity that offered, for to enlarge our
selves in our Discourses upon the Subject of those several Famous Academies,
erected ender his present Majesty's Reign in Paris, for the Encouragement of
Arts and Sciences; and to what a degree of perfection the same were brought,
under the protection of Lewis the Great, who by his Royal Munificence had drawn
thither the most Eloquent Masters of all kinds.

It was in Imitation of that same Model, we had given him of this Academy, the
present Emperor of China laid the Foundation of an Academy of Painters, of
Engravers, Carvers, and other Artists in Brass and Copper; for Clock-Works and
Mathematical Instruments; assigning them certain Appartments about five Years
ago within the precinct of his own Palace, give them all due Encouragement,
and to create among them a kind of Emulation, he used to set them for Patterns
those pieces which were made in Europe, and especially those made at Paris. And
as he is an excellent Judge both of the Goodness and Beauty of all Sorts of
Curious Workmanship, he has every day, if he is at Peking, or every other day,
if at one of his Country Houses, at a certain hour brought to him the several
pieces of these New Academnians. He takes a view and examines every thing with
all Nicety imaginable; finds fault with what is defective, and gives due praise
to those that deserve it; and retains for his own use what he finds as most
exact and perfect. He also bestows some Public Marks of his Favor upon all
those Artists, whom he finds industrious in improving their Natural Talent, and
passionate for to bring their Pieces to the utmost degree of perfection; Some
of whom he has elevated to the Dignity of Mandarins, and has caused them to be
invested with those Ceremonies and Titles which are the ordinary Marks of these
Honors, the Emperor was pleased to bestow upon them.

The present Emperor of China, as absolute a Master as he is, both of his
Subjects and Passions, would not be looked upon by the Chinese, as an
accomplished Monarch, if besides his many other great Qualifications, he had
not also a particular Respect and Tenderness for his Kindred. As the principal
Duty in reference of those that are next of Kin, consists in that respect which
is due from Children to their Parents, and in the tenderness of Parents to
their Children; So this Prince has signalized himself in these two points, to
the highest degree.

As to what relates to the first of these two Duties, which is considered among
the Chinese, as one of the most Essential parts of Morality; the present
Emperor having been bereaved of both of the Emperor his Father, and the
Empress his Mother, in his very Infancy; the old Empress his Grandmother,
which survived them for a considerable time, was always both in her lifetime,
and after her death, the true Object of his filial Respect; as the Prince was
the most perfect Pattern of Dutyfulness, that ever was heard of before, even in
China it self. She was the only person, that took care of his Education; and it
is incredible, with what Submission he could receive her Instructions; how he
never failed to attend her continually, and what Inquietudes might be observed
in his very Countenance, when at any time he had notice given him, that she was
never so little out of Order; upon which occasion, he has sometimes left off
Hunting immediately, and Rid three or fourscore Miles Post, to give her a Visit.

But those that have been Eye witness of what he did at the time of Her Death,
will readily confess that nothing could pass his Tenderness toward his
Grandmother. For he caused not only the whole Court, but the whole Empire to
go into Mourning, for fifteen days together, that the Dead Body of the Empress
lay in State, there was a general suspension of all public Affairs; All the
Grandees and Mandarins, even to the most inconsiderable Officers were forced to
attend Day and Night in the several Courts of the Palace, where,
notwithstanding the Rigor of the Winter Season, they were to bewail the Loss
of this Princess.

He himself could not be persuaded to leave the Coffin, and would sometimes
tarry in the same Appartment where She lay, whole Nights together without
taking rest. He ordered a most magnificent Funeral to be Celebrated, which cost
several Millions, to give the most evident proof of his respect to the deceased
Princess, he followed the Corpse in Person with his whole Court, as far as to
the Place of Burial, which was 25 Leagues distant from Peking.

But it is to be observed, that it was near four Months after her Death, before
the Celebration of these Funeral Rites; the Emperor having caused the Corpse to
be deposited in the mean while in one of the Royal Palaces without the City,
whither he followed it on foot, with all his Children, that were of a fit Age
to walk.

During these four Months, it laid in State there, the Emperor went constantly
three or four times a Week, to pay his Duty to the Deceased, and to Deplore the
Loss of this Incomparable Princess. Near the Sepulcher where her Body was
Interred, he built a very Magnificent Palace, surrounded with a great many
fair Lodgings, for the convenient Entertainment of a Considerable Number of
Gentlemen, whose Business it was to do all imaginable Honor to the Memory of
this Princess, by their Lamentations, and other Ceremonies used among the
Chinese upon such like Occasions.

For whole three years after, neither he nor his whole Court took any public
Divertisements; such as Plays, Music, Feasting, etc. During which time, he
took several Progresses every year to the Sepulcher, (notwithstanding its
distance from Peking) where he spent his time in giving all the imaginable
Demonstrations of his Respect toward the deceased Princess; and continues it
since, after the expiration of these three years alloted for the Mourning.

I have it from very good hands, that even to this day, when he happens to pass
by the Appartment where the Empress died, he cannot forbear to shed Tears.

As the present Emperor of China, has made himself the Admiration of the
Chinese, by these unparalleled Examples of Piety and Filial Respect to his
Illustrious Grandmother; so the Love he bears to his Children, and the Care he
takes without intermission of their Education, have no less gained him the
Hearts of all his Subjects.

At the beginning of the year 1694, (when I left China) he had fourteen Sons,
and a great many Daughters living, by several Wives, who for the most part are
Dignified with the Title of Queen; it being sufficiently known, that Polygamy
is more encouraged in China, than in any other part of the World, because the
Chinese look upon a numerous Posterity, as the greatest Happiness in this
World. We had the Honor of being acquainted with ten of the fourteen Sons, who
were all very Handsome, and gave us great hopes of their future Creatness, the
other four living, being as yet not past their Infancy.

Those who have the Tuition of these young Princes, are chosen from among the
most Learned Doctors of the Imperial College. Their Governors are persons of
the first Rank, and of known Merit, who have been brought up at the Emperor's
Court from their Infancy. Besides these, the Emperor himself keeps a watchful
eye over all the Actions of these Princes, and takes particular Notice of what
progress they make in their Studies; sometimes he peruses their Compositions,
and makes them explain some Passages in their Books in his presence.

But, above all, he makes it the Chief Care of his Life, to see them instructed
in every thing tending to Virtue and the useful Exercises of the Body. No
sooner are they able to walk upright, but they are taught to mount on
Horseback, to use both the Bow and Firearms; which Exercises are their daily
Recreations and Divertisements. He will not allow them to be too tenderly used,
but on the contrary orders them to be accustomed in their early Years to all
sorts of Fatigues, and even the coursest sort of Meat. I cannot forbear on this
Occasion to give you an Account of what I heard Father Gerbillon relate one day
upon this Subject, about six years ago, after his return from a long Journey
into Tartary, whither he had attended the present Emperor in one of his
Progresses.

The Emperor had at that time taken along with him only his Eldest Son, and
two more, to wit, the Third and the Fourth; but after he had spent some days in
Hunting, he sent likewise for four more of his Sons, the eldest of those being
but Twelve, and the youngest Nine years of Age. All these young Princes were
for a Month together every day on Horseback, a Hunting among the Mountains of
Tartary, exposed to the Heat of the Sun, with their Bows in Hand, and Quivers
at their Backs, which they managed with so much Dexterity, that their passed
not a day, but each of them killed some wild Fowl or other; and the first time
they went abroad a Hunting, the youngest killed two Stags with his Arrow.

They were well versed in and spoke both the Tartarian and Chinese Languages;
and had already made such progress in the Study of the Chinese Characters, that
the youngest was come to the last Book of the Morals of Confucius, having gone
through the three first Parts before. The Emperor will not suffer them to be
encouraged in the least Fault they commit, their Education being much more
strict, than what is commonly practiced in Europe; for which Reason it is, that
if those, to whose Tuition they are committed, should pretend to dissemble or
hide any of their Faults, they are sure to meet with severe Punishment from the
Emperor.

It is an ancient Custom among the Chinese, to dignifie the Emperor's
Children with the Title of King, as soon as they are arrived to the Age of
Sixteen or Seventeen, at which time they are provided with a Palace, their own
Servants, and a proportionable Revenue to sustain their Grandeur; But, when I
left China, the present Emperor kept as yet his eldest Son with him in his own
Palace, without any particular Attendance, though he was then near three and
twenty years of Age, was Married, and had several Children. The Emperor is
extremely fond of him, and to give him his Due, he is a young Prince very
Deserving; Handsome, Witty, and endowed with many other Noble Qualifications.

The Tribunal of Princes, and of Officers of the Crown, did some years ago
present a Petition to the Emperor, in favor of this Son, whom they desired to
be Dignified with the Title of King. But the Emperor, without answering their
Petition, kept him near him as before; and we have seen him duly every day go
to that Appartment next adjoining to the Emperor's, which is the School of the
Princes, where they pass the greatest part of their Time in their Studies, and
other useful exercises. His Majesty comes thither frequently to visit them, and
examines them what progress they make.

But above all the rest, the Education of his Second Son, who is declared
Hoang-Tai-Tse, That is to say, Hereditary Prince, or Successor in the Empire,
he being the Firstborn by the Empress his first Spouse; the Education, I say,
of this Prince, seems to be the Chiefest Care of the present Emperor: There is
a particular Tribunal appointed, whose Business it is, to instruct this Prince
in every thing that belongs to the Accomplishment of so Great a Monarch, and to
the Art of Government; The Emperor his Father, is extremely vigilant in every
thing that concerns his Education, and takes an exact Account from time to time
of all his Actions, being willing to qualify him in time for the Management of
so vast an Empire. And it must be confessed that this Prince, who now is of
about twenty three years of Age, is one of the Handsomest Persons in the whole
Court of Peking, and that he is preferable to all others in respect of his many
Noble Qualities; there being not one-among all his Domestics, but what speak
of him with the greatest Reverence that can be, and are fully persuaded, that
he will tred in his Father's Footsteps, and be one day, one of the most
Glorious Monarchs, that ever ascended the Chinese Throne

But, that which obliges us to have a most particular Esteem for this Prince,
is, that being by the Emperor his Father always inspired with favorable
Sentiments in respect of the Christian Religion and the Missionaries, we have
always observed in his Person an Affection for us, equal to that of the
Emperor.

It is about five year passed, when the Emperor having shown him the
Observatory of Peking, and all the Mathematical Instruments there, he told the
Prince, That the Empire of China stood indebted to Father Verbiest, for these
many Curious and Magnificent Engines, making a large recital of the services
done by this Father, and the other Missionaries, to the late Emperor his
Father.

The same day that I had my Audience of leave from the Emperor, this young
Prince made me a Present of one of his own Suits of Clothes, which is looked
upon as a most particular Favor among the Chinese; and this Present was
accompanied with Words, so obliging on his side, that I have all the reason in
the World to have a high Esteem of so extraordinary a Person. It was, indeed,
our opinion, that it was by the Emperor's means, I received this Favor from
the Prince, he having sent twice to me a little before, to know, Whether
Hoang-Tai-Tse made me any Present?

Not long after, this young Prince made likewise a Present of one of his own
Suits of Clothes, to Father Gerbillon, with about fifty Pistols in it,
accompanied with this obliging Message; That being sensible that the
Missionaries did not look for any Recompense of this Nature, he had sent him
this small Present, as a Token of his Affection, and of the Satisfaction he
took in the Recovery of the Emperor his Father, who stood indebted for it, to
the Care of Father Gerbillon.

The same day that Father de Fontenay, and Father Visdelou came to Peking, the
Emperor being indisposed, and keeping his Bed, could not immediately admit
them to his Presence, as he would certainly have done, if he had been well; But
Hoang-Tai-Tse, having received a very advantageous Character of them before,
was very desirous to see them, and received them in a most obliging manner.
This Prince, who is very well versed in all the Books and Sciences of the
Chinese; having understood, that Father Visdelou had made a considerable
progress in these Studies, was very desirous to be convinced of the Truth of it.

For which purpose, having showed him diverse of the most difficult Passages in
some of their Ancient Books, which Father Visdelou explained with a great deal
of exactness, he was over-joyed to see, that this Father was as well versed in
the Chinese Books, as most of their own Doctors. But his satisfaction increased
more and more, when having asked Father Visdelou, concerning the Conformity
betwixt the Doctrine of Confucius, and the Ancient Chinese, and the Christian
Religion; he received for Answer from this Father, That this Ancient Doctrine
was so far from being contradictory to the Christian Religion, that there was a
great uniformity betwixt both their Principles. This Prince being thereby
brought to the knowledge of some of the Fundamental Points of the Christian
Religion, seems to be convinced, as well as the Emperor his Father, That the
Ancient Doctrine of the Chinese was founded upon the same Principles with the
Christian Religion.

I say, as well as the Emperor his Father; For, it is to be observed, that it
is a considerable time ago, this Prince has been convinced of this Truth; of
which he has given us very evident and Authentic Proofs upon several
occasions. And it was, without question, this Consideration, that prevailed
with him, to allow the free Exercise of the Christian Religion throughout his
Dominions, in so Public and solemn a manner, which I am well satisfied, he
would never have done, (he being a very Politic Prince) if he had had the
least doubt that the Fundamental Maxims of the Christian Religion, which flow
from the Law of Nature and are its perfection, were contradictory to those of
the Ancient Chinese; which if considered in its genuine Purity, and according
to the Principles Established by the Ancient Sages of China, free from those
additional Corruptions inserted by their Modern Doctors, is altogether the same
with the Law of Nature, The Emperor was fully convinced of this Truth by the
reading of that excellent Treatise of Father Ricei which Treats expressly of
this Matter; and being in so high an esteem among all the Learned Men of China,
did, as we mentioned before, at last fall, into the Emperor's hands; which
induced him to grant us the free exercise of our Holy Religion, which we would
not as much as have hoped for, without the particular Assistance and Mercy of
the Almighty.

The Title belonging this Great Prince of being the Chief or Supreme Head of
their Religion, and his exquisite Judgment, improved to the highest degree, by
the long Study of so many Books, especially of them relating to those Ancient
Chinese Religion, must needs be a great Weight to any unbiased Person.

As to what relates to Hoang-Tai-Tse, I have it from unquestionable hands, That
since my departure from Peking, he treads altogether in his Father's Footsteps,
and gives our Missionaries frequent Proofs of his Esteem and Affection both for
their Religion and Persons. Just as I was ready to Embarque in the Port of
Cantore, in order to my return into France, I received a Letter from Father
Gerbillon, in which he assured me, That in one of the late Progresses of the
Emperor into Tartary, in which he attended, as he was always used to do, the
young Prince had heaped upon him all the Marks of a particular Esteem and
Affection, that could be imagined. That so, being desirous to see some Tables
for Calculations, composed by Father de Fontenay and Father Visdelou, for the
Emperor, he had instructed him in the use of them; The Emperor had been so
much taken with the usefulness of them, that he had been the first who had
shown them to Hoang-Tai-Tse, who ever since carried them in a Case, fastened to
his Girdle. That one day, this young Prince asked him concerning the God of
Heaven; upon which occasion, Father Gerbillon, having made a short Harangue
upon this Subject in his presence, he heard him with a great deal of
Satisfaction and Attention; and at another time engaged him to explain him half
a page out of the Holy Scripture.

The Brothers of this Prince, but especially the eldest, who besides many other
rare Qualities, has a most excellent Natural Genius, treat us at all times very
favorably, as well as the two own Brothers of the Emperor, who in this point
exceed all the other Princes of the Blood.

This favorable Disposition of the Imperial Family, and most of the other
Princes toward the Christian Religion, and those who publish it in the Capital
City of Peking, has communicated it self to most of the Persons of the first
Rank; and the Example of their Sovereign has made so deep an Impression upon
the rest, even to the Mandarins and other Officers of the Court, that there are
few who have not very favorable Sentiments of us.

But what is the most surprising, and which has been looked upon almost like a
Prodigy to all the World, is, that the two Chief Ministers of State, have given
us such public and extraordinary Demonstrations of the Affection and Esteem
they bare toward the Gospel. I mean the Lord Go-san, and the Lord Ming. The
first of these two is the same Illustrious Person, who, for a considerable time
has been the Chief Supporter of the Christian Religion and the Missionaries in
China, and who signalized his Zeal of late in making use of all his Interest
and Rhetoric to persuade, first the Emperor, and afterward the Sovereign
Court of Rites (the same Tribunal which for this Age last past, has appeared so
dreadful to the Preachers of the Gospel) to approve and conform themselves to
the Emperor's Resolution of granting to us in most Solemn and Authentic
manner, the free exercise of the Christian Religion.

What relates to the Second, to wit, the Lord Ming, though it must be confessed,
that hitherto, he has not had the same Opportunity to give us such public and
Signal Proofs of his Zeal and Protection, as the other illustrious Lord:
Nevertheless, we are entirely satisfied as to his favorable Disposition
toward our Cause; knowing him to be ready upon all Occasions to do what
Service he can, to promote the Advancement of our Religion, and to second the
Zeal of our Missionaries; for which reason, we ought to consider him as a Main
Pillar of the Christian Religion in China; and whose Affection does not in the
least fall short of that of the Lord Go-san. If it were permitted me, to
publish certain Particularitick relating to this Subject, which I am very well
acquainted with, to my own Knowledge, I could relate such things as would give
sufficient Cause for the whole Church to rejoice at.

To put the last Hand, as I may say, the finishing Stroke to the Portraicture
of this Great Prince, I will make bold to say, That in so many Respects he
resembles Your Majesty, that like You, he would be one of the most Accomplished
Monarchs that ever wore a Crown; if he could likewise attain to that Happiness
to resemble You in one point more, which makes Your Illustrious Reign appear
with greater Luster in the Christian World, I mean in that point which relates
to our Religion.

To attain to this happiness, the present Emperor of China must embrace the
Christian Faith, and profess it with the same Sincerity as You. It is next to
an impossibility for us to dive into his Thoughts, as to this point, or to
guess at what he keeps concealed in his Breast. But if it may be allowed us, to
judge by these things we have been eyewitness of, by the knowledge he has of
the Fundamental parts of our Religion, and the Esteem he shows, or at least
seems to show for it; by the public protection he affords to the Missionaries,
and the favorable Sentiments he has concerning them and our Religion, inspired
into his Subjects, the Chiefest Men of his Court into the Princes, his Sons,
nay even into him, who is declared his Successor in the Empire; We may, I
think, without presumption conceive some hopes, that this Great Prince is not
far from the Kingdom of Heaven.

What else can be concluded from these many Favors, he heaps without
intermission upon the Ministers of the Gospel? Some of the most Remarkable, I
have had occasion to mention before. Since which, he has extended his Bounty
further than ever before to our Missionaries. For he thought it not sufficient
to allow them Lodgings within the precinct of his Royal Palace at Peking, but
not long after my departure, generously assigned them a very spacious piece of
Ground in the same place, for the Building of a most Magnificent Church, to be
dedicated to the True God; and they are not without hopes that he will be the
Founder of it himself.

If this Prince had the Happiness to be actually become a Member of our holy
Church, and had taken a firm Resolution to communicate the same to all his
Subjects; it is scarce to be imagined, he could give us more evident proofs of
his Satisfaction, than he has done of late, on the account of the happy
progress of the Gospel in his Dominions, after the publication of his Edicts in
favor of the Christian Religion; Let us see what the Hollanders themselves say
upon this point, the following Relation being an Abstract of some Letters sent
from Macao and Peking, toward the end of the Year 1695, which is inserted in
their Historical Transactions, printed at the Hague: The Emperor of China,
since the An. 1697 for the Month of Febr.
Publication of his Edict, whereby Freedom is granted to all his Subjects, to
embrace the Christian Faith, takes so much Satisfaction to understand the good
Success the Missionaries meet with in all Parts of the Empire, in Converting
Great Numbers of the Chinese, that he has given Permission to two Italian
Jesuits, who were at his Court, to go, and Preach the Gospel in the most remote
Provinces under his Jurisdiction; the People having earnestly desired, that
some Fathers might be sent thither, to show them the way to Heaven. And the
favorable Disposition of this Great Monarch toward the Christian Religion,
gives us all imaginable Hopes, to see the whole Empire of China receive the
Christian Faith within the next Hundred Years.

Besides which, they give us an Account of the Conversion of six or seven
Persons of Great Quality and Authority among the Chinese; which, as they say,
makes so great a Noise in the Court, that their daily Entertainment is there,
concerning the Christian Religion. They add, That among the common People, the
Number who are ready to receive Baptism, is so Great in some Parts of the
Empire, that the Missionaries who are there, are not sufficient to Administer
it to all that are desirous of it. That the Emperor is often heard to speak
very favorably of our Religion; That he takes particular Delight in the
Conversion of his Subjects, and speaks much in Commendation of the Zeal the
Missionaries show in their Function. And that he has made more presssing
Instances to four Jesuits, that are at his Court, to send without delay for
more of their Fraternity, to aid and assist them in their Ministerial Function.

I am sure this was one of the Principal Instructions I received from this
Prince, at that time when I was ready to repass the Seas, as I have had the
Honor to give an Account of it to Your Majesty. He desired then, that above
all other things, such of the French Jesuits as were then in the East Indies,
might be forthwith sent into China; but especially Father Tachard, and Father
le Comte. For, having understood that both of them were designed by Your
Majesty, to go as Missionaries into China, as well as we, he was extremely
desirous to have them at his Court. And it was a considerable time before, to
wit; when he invited Father Fontenay and Father Visdelou thither, That he had
given his express Commands, to induce Father le Comte (for whom he had a most
particular Respect) to come to Peking with his Companions.

But as Providence would have it, when I came to the Indies, I could not meet
with any one Jesuit that was in a Condition to undertake so long a Voyage. I
made therefore all possible dispatch to return into France; and, pursuant to
the Instructions received from this Great Prince, to address my self to Your
Majesty, to solicit for as many Missionaries to be sent into China, as could
be had; but especially of the same Character with those that are already at his
Court, with whom he is satisfied to the highest degree.

For it is to be taken notice of, That the French Jesuits, such as are well
Versed in all Sorts of useful Arts and Sciences, are the Persons of whom this
Prince makes the greatest Account; he persisting in his Resolution, to make use
of them, with those employed there already, to erect a kind of Academy within
his Palace, subordinate to Your Royal Academy; of which he has conceived so
high an Idea, since that Time we have shown to him, and Translated some of our
Treatises into the Tartarian Language; That his Resolution is, that from
thence, as the most excellent and pure Springhead, may be taken most of these
Memoirs, which are to be the Subject Matter of those Works he intends to have
Translated into the same Language, especially those who treat of our Arts and
Sciences, which he intends to encourage with all his Might throughout all his
Dominions.

Great Advantage must needs acrue from this Project to the Christian Religion,
when those who are to be employed upon this Subject, may be of great use in
propagateing the Faith, by giving Assistance to the rest in their Ministerial
Function; it being rationally to be supposed, that by divideing the several
Subjects in hand betwixt them, according to their different Talents, they may
bestow great part of their time in promoting the Doctrine of the Gospel, which
ought always to be their Principal Aim. Besides which, they will have the
opportunity of obliging the World every year with many Curious and exact
Observations and Reflections concerning diverse Matters; as likewise with the
Translations of the best Chinese and Tartarian Treatises, which may not a
little conduce toward the perfecting of some of our Arts and Sciences. In
return of which, our Learned Men will not be backward in furnishing them with
what new Discoveries are made here, for the Benefit of the Chinese, which, as
we hope, may be made use of with good Success; to meet with the easier an
Access among the Learned Men, the Great Men of the Court, the Princes and Empe
our himself; and will furnish us with frequent opportunies to enlarge our
selves upon the Fundamentals of our Religion, which by degrees, through the Grace
of God, may dispose them to the embracing of the Faith.

For it has been sufficiently proved by the Experience of this last Age, That,
since God has pleased to make the Missionaries Instrumental in introducing and
planting the Christian Religion in China, of all other natural Means nothing
has contributed so much to the accompllishment of this Great Work, than their
knowledge of all useful Sciences, from whence we may rationally infer, that
even to this day, he would have us have recourse to the same Methods, to root
out Paganism in this Empire.

It has been a general Observation, That the Chinese, whose Genius is much
elevated above all other Pagan Nations, and who consequently are sooner brought
to understand and follow the Dictates of right Reason, are commonly sooner
prevailed upon than the rest, to be instructed in the fundamental Principles of
the Christian Religion, and to yield to the Truth of the Gospel; provided
matters be made perspicuous to them, and in a Method agreeable to their Genius
by such persons, as have before deserved their Esteem, and acquired a great
Authority among them, by their Ability and an exemplary Life; God Almighty, who
upon these Occasions, is always very Bountiful in showing his Mercy, and
regulating the inward Motions of hearts, having extended his Mercy in a
peculiar manner to the Chinese, so, that by the affluence of his Spirit, many
of the most Learned among them have acknowledged their Error in their mistaken
Wisdom, and submitted with all Humility to the Doctrine of the Gospel.

All this duly considered, who can reasonably doubt, but, that, when by God's
singular Inspiration You resolved some Years ago, to send some French Jesuits
into China, to be employed in the Conversion of the Infidels; it was by the
same Motive that You gave them Your Instructions concerning the Improvement of
Arts and Sciences? And that Providence having been pleased to second Your Great
and Holy Intentions, has raised such a favorable Disposition in the Hearts of
the Chinese, and of the Emperor of China himself toward these Missionaries,
that this Prince has thought it convenient to Solicit Your Majesty, for a far
greater Number of them.

What is it we may not hope for from the happy Effects of Your Heroic Zeal, to
which You put no Bounds, for the good of God's Cause? If we may presume to
presage of the future by what is passed, especially in respect of what Your
Majesty has been pleased to do of late Years in favor of the Missions into the
Eastern Countries, into Ethopia and the Indies; only upon a bare Prospect of
introducing our Religion among these Pagans; we may promise our selves all the
hopes for Success from those sent into China, which alone are more valuable
than all the rest together, because they are likely to bring a greater Number
of Infidels to the Church, than may be expected from all the other Parts of the
World, provided there were a proportionable Number of Ministers to the
Multitude of those who show a greater willingness to be instructed, sent into
those parts.

The present Emperor of China's Bounty in granting free Liberty to all his
Subjects to embrace the Catholic Faith, is alone a sufficient Motive to induce
us to live in hopes, that we may see that vast Empire of China, entirely
reduced under the Obedience of Christ. But if this Great Prince should lead the
way, and encourage his Subjects by his own Example, we have all the reason in
the World to hope, that we may see this Great work accomplished under the
Auspicious Reign of Your Majesty.

It must be confessed, that without almost a miraculous Providence of God, it
is not easy to hope for the Conversion of so Great and Potent a Prince, who is
a Pagan. But let us consider on the other hand, the extraordinary Esteem he has
always shown for, and the powerful Protection he affords to the Christian
Religion; Let us, I say, consider that this Prince is free from all these
Vices, which being contrary to the Rules of our Religion, proves frequently the
Main stumblingblock to Pagan Princes to embrace the Faith of Christ; and that
he has made all these Moral Virtues, which are so rarely to be met with in a
Pagan Prince his constant practice; all these things considered together, we
may not without great reason presume to hope, that the same God who has raised
such favorable Inclinations toward our Religion in the Heart of this Prince,
may be prevailed upon to extend his Boundless Mercy toward him, especially if
the Faithful in their servent Prayers to him, do implore his Mercy in behalf of
this Prince and his Subjects.

I say, in behalf of this Prince and all his Subjects; For, as this Emperor is
invested with an absolute Power over all his Subjects, as he is most Famous
throughout all the Orient by reason of his extraordinary Genius, Wisdom,
Learning and uncommon Probity; so, we have all the reason in the World to
believe, that, if he should be prevailed upon to embrace the Christian
Religion, his Examples would be sufficient to induce all his Subjects to tread
in his footsteps, who, for their number, exceeed all Nations in Europe. And it
is not improbable, but that, considering the light Esteem those Nations
bordering on China, have conceived of their extraordinary Wisdom, and how much
they are inclined to follow their Maxims and Customs, this would be prevailing
enough with many to be entirely reconciled to our holy Religion.

The most fortunate Opportunity that could be wished for, the most advantageous
for the Establishment of our Church, and the most Glorious to Your Majesty, who
seems to be chosen by Heaven, the happy Instrument of advancing the honor of
the Church, to Crown all the Actions of Lewis the Great with this, the most
Glorious of all Your Enterprises. Nothing less can be imagined to be a
Recompense bearing the least proportion to that Heroic Zeal and Magnanimity,
of which Your Majesty has given such ample Demonstrations to all the World
within these ten Years last past, during which, after You had protected the
Church, both by the force of Your Arms, and Your unparalleled Conduct, against
the Joynt-power of Europe, You were, notwithstanding all the Advantages on Your
side, nevertheless disposed to offer Peace to Your Enemies upon very
advantageous Terms on their side, out of a Generous Motive for the Public
Good; and the universal Benefit of the Church.

Among those Vows and Prayers, which we send without intermission up to Heaven,
for the Conversion of the present Emperor of China and all his Subjects, we
are never forgetful to offer our hearty Thanks to God, for the Conclusion of
the last Peace, which in all probability will prove more advantageous to China
than Europe it self. For by the re-establishing a free Commerce, our Ships will
not want Opportunity to carry every Year some new Missionaries to the utmost
Parts of the East; so that we may reasonably expect to be Rejoiced with the
most agreeable News of the Conversion of many Thousand Chinese, by the
Assistance of these Fathers, who are to be sent thither under Your Majesty's
Protection, to labor for the Increase of the Empire of JESUS CHRIST.

I live in hopes to hear suddenly, that some more of our Fraternity are to be
sent by Your Majesty, with the first Ships designed for China, where, I am
sure, they will be at least as well received, as any other Nation. And I hope
from Your Majesty's Goodness, that I may be thought Worthy to be one of their
Company, to return with all possible speed into that Part of the World, where
the Sun has its Rise. It shall be my Chief aim, there to second Your
extraordinary Zeal in propagating the Christian Religion among the Infidels, in
the most remote Parts of the World; And, as a particular Acknowledgement of
these Favors You have been pleased to heap upon me, I shall not neglect the
least Opportunity of publishing, wherever I come, Your Great Actions; but
especially to give an exact Account of what I have seen, during my stay here,
to the present Emperor of China, who, of all other Princes, takes the greatest
Satisfaction in hearing of Your Glorious Enterprises, and is the most worthy of
Your Esteem and Friendship.

To conclude, I will join my hearty Prayers, with all the Faithful Chinese,
who look upon Your Majesty as their Chief Supporter, for the Preservation of
Your Royal Person and Family, as an unfeigned Testimony of the most profound
Respect and Devotion, wherewith I presume to subscribe my self,

Your Majesty's Most humble, most obedient, and Most faithful Servant, J.
BOUVET, of the Society of JESUS.

FINIS.

