THE EXCELLENCY OF THEOLOGY, COMPARED WITH NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, (as both are
Objects of Men's Study.)

Discoursed of In a LETTER to a Friend.

By T. H. R. B. E. Fellow of the Royal Society.

To which are annexed Some Occasional Thoughts about the EXCELLENCY and GROUNDS
Of the MECHANICAL HYPOTHESIS.

By the same Author.

Felicitatem Philosophi quaerunt; Theologi inveniunt; soli Religiosi possi^ent.
LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, at the Anchor in the Lower Walk
of the New Exchange. 1674.

The PUBLISHER's Advertisement to the Reader.
WHen I shall have told the Reader, that the following Discourse was written in
the year 1665, while the Author, to avoid the great Plague that then raged in
London, was reduced with many others to go into the Country, and frequently to
pass from place to place, unaccompanied with most of his Books; it will not, I
presume, be thought strange, that in the mention of some things taken from
other Writers, as his memory suggested them, he did not annex in the Margent
the precise places that are referred to. And, upon the same score, it ought not
to seem strange, that he has not mentioned some late Discoveries and Books that
might have been pertinently taken notice of, and would well have accommodated
some parts of his Discourse; since things that may thus seem to have been
omitted, are of too recent a Date to have been known to him when He writ. But
if it be demanded, why then a Discourse finished so long ago, did not come
abroad much sooner? I must acquaint the Reader, That 'twas chiefly his real
Concern for the welfare of the Study he seems to depreciate, that kept these
Papers so long by him. For he resisted for several years the desires of Persons
that have much power with him, and suppressed the following Discourse, whilst
he feared it might be misapplied by some Enemies to Experimental Philosophy,
that then made a noise against it, without suffering these Papers to come
abroad, till the Addresses and Encomiums of many eminent Foreign Virtuosi, and
their desire to be admitted into the Royal Society, had sufficiently
manifested, how little its Reputation was prejudiced, or like to be endangered,
by the attempts of some envious or misinformed Persons. And to this Reason must
be added the Authors backwardness to venture abroad a Discourse of an unusual
Nature, on which account, among others, he declined to have his Name prefixed
to it; though, now the Book is Printed, he finds cause to fear, that 'twill not
be long concealed; since he meets with some Marginal References to other Tracts
of His, which (these Papers having long lain by him) he forgot to have been set
down for private use, and which should not have been exposed to public view.

ERRATA.
IN the Author's Preface, p. 13. l. 7, 8. for somewhat, r. much. In the
Introduction, p. 2. l. 18. point thus, else; our. In the Book, p. 51. l. 17.
for Corpuscularium, r. Corpuscularian. p, 75. l. 2. for he, r. we. p. 114. l.
3. r. Theology for Philosophy. p. 133. l. 10. r. yet many of. ibid. l. 19. r.
else do but. p. 171. l. ult. for of. r. or. p. 172. l. 28. for indeed, r.
'twill perhaps he said that. p. 201. l. 12. point thus; Predecessors, did
unanimously teach.

The Author's PREFACE.
I Am not so little acquainted with the Temper of this Age, and of the Persons
that are likeliest to be Perusers of the following Tract, as not to foresee it
to be probable enough, that Some will ask, For what Reason a Discourse of this
Nature was written at all; and that Others will be displeased that it has been
written by Me.

Those that would know, by what Inducements my Pen was engaged on this Subject,
may be in great part informed by the Epistle it self, in diverse places whereof,
as especially about the Beginning, and at the Close, the Motives that invited
me to put Pen to Paper are sufficiently expressed. And though several of those
Things are peculiarly applied, and (if I may so speak) appropriated to the
Person the Letter is addressed to; yet that Undervaluation, I would dissuade
Him from, of the Study of Things Sacred, is not His fault alone, but is grown
so rise among many (otherwise Ingenious) Persons, especially Studiers of
Physics, that I wish the ensuing Discourse were much less seasonable than I
fear it is.

But I doubt, that some Readers, who would not think a Discourse of this Nature
Needless or Useless, may yet not be pleased at its being written by One, whom
they imagine the Acceptance his Endeavors have met with, ought to oblige to
spend his whole Time in Cultivating that Natural Philosophy, which in this
Letter he would persuade to quit the Precedence, they think it may well
challenge, before all other sorts of Learning.

I am not unsensible of the favorable Reception that the Philosophical Papers
I have hitherto ventured Abroad, have had the Happiness to receive from the
Curious: But I hope, they will not be displeased, if I represent, that I am no
Lecturer or Professor of Physics, nor have ever engaged my self by any Promise
made to the Public, to confine my self, never to write of any other Subject;
nor is it Reasonable, that what I did or may write, to gratify other men's
Curiosity, should deprive me of mine own Liberty, and Confine me to One
Subject; especially since there are diverse Persons, for whom I have a great
Esteem and Kindness, who think they have as much Right to solicit me for
Composures of the Nature of this, that They will now have to go abroad, as the
Virtuosi have to exact of me Physiological Pieces. And though I be not
ignorant, that (in particular) the following Discourse, which seems to
depreciate the Study of Nature, may at first sight appear somewhat improper for
a Person, that has purposely written to show the Excellence and Usefulness of
it; yet I confess, that, upon a more Attentive Consideration of the Matter, I
cannot Reject, no, nor Resist, Their Reasons, who are of a quite differing
Judgment.

And 1. My Condition, and my being a Secular Person (as they speak) are looked
upon as Circumstances that may advantage an Author that is to write upon such a
Subject as I have handled. I need not tell you, that as to Religious Books in
general, it has been observed, that those penned by Laymen, and especially
Gentlemen, have ( caeteris paribus) been better entertained, and more effectual
than those of Ecclesiastics: And indeed it is no great wonder, that
Exhortations to Piety, and Disswasions from Vice, and from the Lusts and
Vanities of the World, should be the more prevalent for being pressed by Those,
who have, and yet decline, the Opportunities to enjoy plentifully Themselves
the pleasures They dissuade Others from. And (to come yet closer to our present
purpose) though I will not venture to say with an excellent Divine, That what
ever comes out of the Pulpit, does with many pass but for the foolishness of
Preaching; yet it cannot well be denied, but that if all other Circumstances be
equal, He is the fittest to commend Divinity, whose Profession It is not; and
That it will somewhat add to the Reputation of almost any Study, and
consequently to that of things Divine, That it is praised and preferred by
Those, whose Condition and Course of Life exempting them from being of any
particular Calling in the Commonwealth of Learning, frees Them from the usual
Temptations to Partiality to this or that sort of Study, which Others may be
engaged to magnify, because it is their Trade or their Interest, or because
it is Expected from them; whereas these Gentlemen are obliged to commend it,
only because they really Love and Value it.

But there is another thing that seems to make it yet more fit, that a Treatise
on such a Subject should be Penned by the Author of This: For professed
Divines are supposed to be busied about Studies, that even by their being of an
Higher, are confessed to be of Another, Nature, than those that treat of things
Corporeal. And since it may be observed, that there is scarce any sort of
Learned men, that is more apt to undervalue those that are versed only in
other parts of Knowledge, than many of our Modern Naturalists, (who are
conscious of the Excellency of the Science they Cultivate,) it is much to be
feared, that what would be said of the Preeminences of Divinity above
Physiology by Preachers (in whom the Study of the Latter is thought either but
a Preparatory thing, or an Excursion) would be looked upon as the Decision of
an Incompetent, as well as Interressed, Judge; and their undervaluations of the
Advantages of the study of the Creatures, would be (as their depreciating the
Enjoyment of the Creatures too often is,) thought, to proceed but from their
not having had sufficient opportunities to relish the pleasures of them. But
these Prejudices will not lie against a Person, who has made the Indagation of
Nature somewhat more than a Parergon, and having by a not-lazie nor short
Enquiry manifested, how much He loves and can relish the Delight It affords,
has had the good Fortune to make some Discoveries in it, and the Honor to have
them Publicly, and but too Complementally, taken notice of by the Virtuosi.
And it may be not Impertinent to add, that those who make Natural Philosophy
their Mistress, will probably be the less offended to find her in this Tract
represented, if not as an Handmaid to Divinity, yet as a Lady of a lower Rank;
because the Inferiority of the Study of Nature is maintained by a Person, who,
even whilst he asserts it, continues (if not a Passionate) an Assiduous Courter
of Nature: So that, as far as his Example can reach, it may show, that as on
the one side a man need not be acquainted with, or unfit to relish, the Lessons
taught us in the Book of the Creatures, to think them less Excellent than
those, that may be learned in the Book of the Scriptures; so on the other side,
the Preference of this last Book is very consistent with an high Esteem and an
Assiduous Study of the first.

And if any should here object, that there are some Passages, (which I hope are
but very few) that seem a little too unfavourable to the Study of Natural
things; I might allege for my excuse the great difficulty that there must be
in comparing two sorts of Studies, both of which a man much esteems, so to
behave ones self, as to split a hair between them, and never offend either of
them: But I will rather represent, that in such kind of Discourses as the
ensuing, it may justly be hoped, that equitable Readers will consider, not
only what is said, but on what occasion, and with what design it is delivered.
Now it is plain by the Series of the following Discourse, that the Physeophilus,
whom it most relates to, was by me looked upon as a Person, both very partial
to the study of Nature, and somewhat prejudiced against that of the Scripture;
so that I was not always to treat with him, as with an indifferent man, but,
according to the Advice, given in such cases by the Wise, I was (to use
Aristotle's expression) to bend the crooked stick the contrary way, in order to
the bringing it to be straight, and to depreciate the study of Nature somewhat
beneath its true value, to reduce a great Over valuer to a just Estimate of it.
And to gain the more upon Him, I allowed my self now and then to make use of
the contempt he had of the Peripatetick and Vulgar Philosophy, and in some
passages to speak of them more slightingly, than my usual Temper permits, and
than I would be forward to do on another occasion; that, by such a Complaisance
for his Opininions, I might have Rises to Argue with him from them.

But to return to the Motives that were alleged to induce me to the
Publication of these Papers, though I have not named them all, yet all of them
together would scarce have proved effectual, if they had not been made more
prevalent by the just Indignation I conceived, to see even Inquisitive Men
depreciate that kind of Knowledge, which does the most Elevate, as well as the
most Bless, Mankind, and look upon the Noblest and Wisest Employments of the
Understanding, as Signs of weakness in it.

It Is not that I expect, that whatever can be said, and much less what I have
had occasion to say Here, will make Proselytes of those that are resolved
against the being made so, and had rather deny themselves the Excellentest
kinds of Knowledge, than allow that there can be any more Excellent, than what
they think themselves Masters of: But I despair not, that what is here
represented, may serve to fortify in a high Esteem of Divine Truths those that
have already a just Veneration for them, and preserve Others from being seduced
by Injurious, though sometimes Witty, Insinuations, to undervalue that kind of
Knowledge, that is as well the most Excellent in it self, as the most Conducive
to Man's Happiness. And for this Reason I am the less displeased to see, that
the following Letter is swelled to a Bulk far greater than its being but a
Letter promises, and then I first intended. For I confess, that when the
Occasion happened that made me put Pen to Paper, as I chanced to be in a very
unsettled Condition (which I fear has had too much influence on what I have
written,) so I did not design the insisting near so long upon my Subject as I
have done; but new things springing up (if I may so speak) under my Pen, I was
content to allow them room in my Paper, because writing as well for my own
satisfaction, as for that of my Friend, I thought it would not be useless to
lay before my own Eyes, as well as His, those Considerations that seemed proper
to justify to My self as well as to Him, the Preference I gave Divine Truths
(before Physiological ones) and to confirm my self in the Esteem I had for
them. And though I freely confess, that the following Discourse does not
consist of nothing but Ratiocinations, and consequently is not altogether of an
Uniform Contexture; yet that will, I hope, be thought no more than was fit in a
Discourse, designed not only to Convince, but to Persuade: Which if it prove
so happy as to do, as I hope the Peruser will have no cause to regret the
trouble of Reading it, so I shall not repent that of Writing it.

THE INTRODUCTION.
SIR,
I Hoped you had known me better, than to doubt in good earnest, how I relished
the Discourse your Learned Friend entertained us with yester-night. And I am
the more troubled at your Question, because your way of inquiring, how much
your Friends Discourse obtained of my Approbation, gives me cause to fear, that
you vouchsafe it more of yours then I could wish it. But before I can safely
offer you my sense of the Discourses, about which you desire to know it, I must
put you in mind, that they were not all upon one Subject, nor of the same
Nature: And I am enough his Servant to acknowledge, without the least
reluctance, that he is wont to show a great deal of wit, when he speaks like a
Naturalist, only of things purely Physical; and when he is in the right,
seldom wrongs a good cause by his way of managing it. But as for those
passages, wherein he gave himself the liberty of disparaging the learned Dr. N.
only because that Doctor cultivates Theological as well as Physical Studies
and does both oftentimes read Books of Devotion* and sometimes write them; I am
not so much a Courtier, as to pretend that I liked them. It Is true, he did not
deny the Doctor to be a learned and a witty Man, as indeed the wise providence
of God has so ordered it, That to stop the bold mouths of some, who would be
easily tempted to imagine, and more easily to give out, that none are
Philosophers, but such as, like themselves, desire to be nothing else. Our
Nation is happy in several men, who are as eminent for Humane, as studious of
Divine Learning; and as great a veneration as they pay to Moses and St. Paul,
are as well versed in the Doctrine of Aristotle, and of Euclid; nay, of
Epicurus and Des Carts too, as those that care not to study any thing else.
But though for this reason Mr. N. had not the confidence to despise the Doctor,
and some of his Resemblers, whom he took occasion to mention; yet he too
plainly disclosed himself to be one of those, who though they will not deny,
but that some, who own a value for Theology, are men of parts; yet they talk,
as if such persons were so, in spite of their being Religiously given; That
being, in their opinion, such a blemish, that a man must have very great
Abilities otherwise, to make amends for the disadvantage of valuing Sacred
Studies, and surmount the disparagement it procures him. Wherefore since this
disdainful humor begins to spread much more than I could wish it did among
differing sorts of men, among whom I should be glad not to find any
Naturalists; and since the Question you asked me, and the esteem you have for
your Friend, makes me fear you may look on it with very favorable eyes: I
shall not decline the Opportunity you put into my hands of giving you, together
with a profession of my dislike of this practice, some of my Reasons for that
dislike; and the rather, because I may do it without too much exceeding the
limits of an Epistle, or those which the haste, wherewith I must write this,
does prescribe to me. For your Friend does not oppose, but only undervalue
Theology; and professing to believe the Scriptures (which I so far credit, as
to think he believes himself when he says so) we agree upon the principles: So
that I am not to dispute with him as against an Atheist, that denies the
Author of Nature, but only against a Naturalist, that over-values the study
of it. And the Truths of Theology are things, which I need not bring Arguments
for, but am allowed to draw Arguments from them.

But though, as I just now intimated, I design brevity; yet for fear the
fruitfulness and importance of my Subject should suggest things enough to me to
make some little method, requisite to keep them from appearing confused; I
shall divide the following Epistle into two distinct parts. In the former of
which I shall offer you the chief positive Considerations, by which I would
represent to you the study of Divinity, as preferable to that of Physics: And
in the second part I shall consider the Allegations, that I foresee your Friend
may interpose: in favor of Natural Philosophy. From which distribution you
will easily gather, that the Motives on the one hand, and the Objections on the
other will challenge to themselves distinct Sections in the respective parts
whereto they belong. So that of the Order of the particulars you will meet
with, I shall not need to trouble you with any further Account.

THE EXCELLENCY OF THEOLOGY: OR, The Preeminence of the Study of Divinity,
above that of Natural Philosophy. THE FIRST PART.
TO address my self then, without any farther Circumstance or Preamble, to the
things themselves, that I mainly intend in this Discourse, I consider in the
General, That as there are scarce any Motives accounted fitter to engage a
Rational man in a study, than That the Subject is Noble, That it is his Duty to
apply himself to it, and That his Proficiency in it will bring him great
Advantages; So there is not any of these three Inducements, that does not
concur in a very plentiful measure to recommend to us the Study of Theological
Truths.

THE FIRST SECTION.
ANd first, The Excellency and Sublimity of the Object we are invited to
contemplate, is such, that none that does truly acknowledge a Deity can deny,
but that there is no Speculation, whose Object is comparable in point of
Nobleness, to the Nature and Attributes of God. The Souls of inquisitive men
are commonly so curious, to learn the Nature and Condition of Spirits, as that
the over-greedy desire to discover so much as That there are other Spiritual
Substances besides the Souls of Men, has prevailed with too many to try
forbidden ways of attaining satisfaction; and many have chosen rather to
venture the putting themselves within the power of Demons, than remain
ignorant whether or no there are any such Beings: As I have learned by the
private acknowledgments made me of such unhappy (though not unsuccessful)
Attempts, by diverse learned men (both of other Professions, and that of
Physic,) who themselves made them in differing places, and were persons
neither Timorous nor Superstitious: (But this only upon the By.) And certainly
that man must have as Wrong as Mean a Notion of the Deity, and must but very
little consider the Nature and Attributes of that infinitely perfect Being, and
as little the Nature and infirmities of Man, who can imagine the Divine
Perfections to be Subjects, whose investigation a man may (inculpably) despise,
or be so much as fully sufficient for. Not only the Scripture tells us, Ps.
145.
That his Greatness is incomprehensible, Ps. 147.5. Ps. 113.6.
and his wisdom is inscrutable; That he humbles himself to look into (or upon)
the Heavens and the Earth; and, That not only this or that man, Isa. 40.15.
but all the Nations of the World are, in comparison of him, but like the small
Drop of a Bucket, or the smaller Dust of a Balance: But even the Heathen
Philosopher, who wrote that eloquent Book De Mundo, ascribed to Aristotle in
his riper years, speaks of the Power, and Wisdom, and Amiableness of God, in
terms little less lofty, though necessarily inferior to so infinitely Sublime
a Subject; which they that think they can, especially without Revelation,
sufficiently understand, do very little understand themselves.

But perhaps your Friend will object, That to the knowledge of God there needs
no other then Natural Theology; and I readily confess, being warranted by an
Apostle, that the (...), Romans j.19.
was not unknown to the Heathen Philosophers; and that so much knowledge of God
is attainable by the light of Nature, duly employed, as to encourage men to
exercise themselves more than most of them do in that noblest of Studies, and
render their being no Proficients in it, injurious to themselves as well as to
their Maker. But notwithstanding this, as God knows Himself infinitely better
then purblind Man knows Him, so the Informations He is pleased to vouchsafe us,
touching His own Nature and Attributes, are exceedingly preferable to any
account, that we can give our selves of Him, without Him. And methinks, the
differing Prospects we may have of Heaven, may not ill adumbrate to us the
differing Discoveries that may be made of the Attributes of its Maker. For as,
though a man may with his naked eye see Heaven to be a very glorious Object,
enobled with radiant Stars of several sorts; yet when his eye is assisted with
a good Telescope, he can not only discover a number of Stars (Fixed and
Wandering) which his naked eye would never have shown him; but those Planets
which he could see before, will appear to him much bigger, and more distinct:
So, although bare Reason well improved will suffice to make a man behold many
glorious Attributes in the Deity; yet the same Reason, when assisted by
Revelation, may enable a man to discover far more Excellencies in God, and
perceive them, he contemplated before, far greater and more distinctly. And to
show how much a dim Eye, illuminated by the Scriptures, is able to discover of
the Divine Perfections, and how unobvious they are to the most piercing
Philosophical Eyes, that enjoy but the dim light of Nature; we need but
consider, how much more suitable Conceptions and Expressions concerning God are
to be met with in the Writings of those Fishermen and others, that penned the
New Testament, and those illiterate Christians that received it, than amongst
the most Civilized Nations of the World (such as anciently the Greeks and
Romans, and now the Chinese and East-Indians) and among the eminentest of the
Wisemen and Philosophers themselves, (as Aristotle, Homer, Hesiod, Epicurus,
and others.)

Besides that the Book of Scripture discloses to us much more of the Attributes
of God, than the Book of Nature; there is another Object of our Study, for
which we must be entirely beholding to Theology: For though we may know
something of the Nature of God by the Light of Reason, yet we must owe the
knowledge of His Will, or Positive Laws, to His own Revelation. And we may
ghess, how curious great Princes and wise Men have been to inform themselves of
the Constitutions established by wise and eminent Legislators; partly by the
frequent Travels of the Ancient Sages and Philosophers into Foreign Countries,
to observe their Laws and Government, as well as bring home their Learning; and
partly by those Royal and Sumptuous Expenses, at which that Great and Learned
Monarch Ptolomeus Philadelphus stuck not to procure an Authentic Copy of the
Law of Moses, whom he considered but as an eminent Legislator. But certainly
That, and other Laws recorded in the Bible, cannot but appear more noble and
worthy Objects of Curiosity to us Christians, who know them to proceed from an
Omniscient Deity, who being the Author of Mankind, as well as of the rest of
the Universe, cannot but have a far perfecter knowledge of the Nature of Man,
than any other of the Lawgivers, or all of them put together can be conceived
to have had.

But there is a farther Discovery of Divine Matters, wherewith we are also
gratified by Theology: For besides what the Scripture teaches us of the Nature
and the Will of God, it contains diverse Historical Accounts (if I may so call
them) of His Thoughts and Actions. The Great Alexander thought himself nobly
employed, when he read of the Grecian Actions in Homer's Verses; and, To know
the Sentiments of great and wise Persons, upon particular occasions, is a
curiosity so laudable, and so worthy of* an Inquisitive Soul, that the Southern
Queen has been more praised than admired, for coming from the remoter parts of
the Earth, to hear the Wisdom of Solomon. Now the Scripture does in many places
give our Curiosity a nobler Employment, and thereby a higher Satisfaction, than
the King of Macedon, or the Queen of Sheba could enjoy; for in many places it
does, with great clearness and ingenuity, give us accounts of what God Himself
has declared of His own Thoughts, of diverse particular Persons and Things, and
relates, what He that knows and commands all things, was pleased to say and do
upon particular Occasions. Of this sort of Passages are the things recorded to
have been said by God to Noah, Genes. vj.
about the sinful Worlds ruin, and that Just Man's preservation; Numb. xxvij.7.
and to Moses in the case of the Daughters of Zelophehad. And of this sort are
the Conferences, mentioned to have passed betwixt God and Abimelech, Genes. xx.
concerning Abraham's Wife; betwixt God and Abraham touching the destruction of
Sodom; Genes. xviij. 1 Kings iij. Jonah iv.
betwixt God and Solomon, about that Kings happy choice; betwixt God and Jonah,
about the Fate of the greatest City of the World: And above all these, those
two strange and matchless Passages, the one in the first Book of Kings, 1
Kings* xxij. from ver. 19. to ver. 24.
touching the seducing Spirit that undertook to seduce Ahab's Prophets; and the
other, that yet more wonderful Relation of what pas'd betwixt God and Satan,
Job j.6, 7, etc. Job ij.3.
wherein the Deity vouchsafes not only to Praise, but (if I may so speak with
reverence) to Glory in a Mortal. And the being admitted to the knowledge of
these Transactions of another World (if I may so call them) wherein God has
been pleased to disclose himself so very much, is an advantage afforded us by
the Scripture, of so noble a Nature, and so unattainable by the utmost
improvement we our selves can make of our own Reason, that, did the Scripture
contain nothing else that were very Considerable, yet that Book would highly
deserve our Curiosity and Gratitude.

And on this occasion, I must by no means leave unobserved another Advantage
that we have from some Discourses made us in the Bible; since it too highly
concerns us, not to be a very Great one; and it is, That the Scripture declares
to us the Judgment, that God is pleased to make of some particular Men, upon
the Estimate of their Life and Deportment. For though Reason alone, and the
Grounds of Religion in general, may satisfy us in some measure, that God is
Good and Merciful, and therefore it is likely he may Pardon the sins and
frailties of Men, and accept of their Imperfect Services; yet, besides that we
do not know, whether He will Pardon, unless we have His Promise of it; besides
this (I say) though by virtue of general Revelation, such as is pretended to in
diverse Religions, we may be assured, that God will accept, forgive, and reward
those that sincerely obey him, See Heb. v.9. Psalm. ciij.17, 18.
and perform the Conditions of the Covenant, whether it be Express, or
Implicit, that he vouchsafes to make with them; yet since it is He that is the
Judge of the Performance of the Conditions, and of the sincerity of the Person;
and since He is Omniscient, and a (...), Acts j.21.
and so may know more Ill of us, than even we know of our selves; a concerned
Conscience may rationally doubt, 1 John iij.20.
whether in Gods Estimate any particular man was so sincere as to be accepted.
But when He Himself is pleased to give Elogiums (if I may with due respect so
style them) to David, Job, Noah, Daniel, etc. whilst they were alive, and to
others after they were dead, (and consequently having finished their Course,
were passed into an Irreversible state) we may learn with Comfort, both that
the Performance of such an Obedience as God will accept, is a thing really
Practicable by Men; and that even great sins and misdemeanors are not (if
seasonably repented of) certain evidences, that a man shall never be Happy in
the future Life. And it seems to be for such an use of consolation to Frail men
(but not at all to encourage Licentious ones) that the Lapses of holy Persons
are so frequently recorded in the Scriptures. And bating those Divine Writings,
I know no Books in the world, nor all of them put together, that can give a
considering Christian, who has due apprehensions of the Inexpressible Happiness
or Misery of an Immortal state in Heaven or in Hell, so great and well grounded
a Consolation, as may be derived from three or four lines in St. John's
Apocalypse, Revel. vij.9.
where he says, That he saw in Heaven a great multitude, not to be numbered, of
all Nations, and Tribes, and People, and Tongues, standing before the Throne,
and before the Lamb, clothed in white Robes, with Palms (the Ensigns of
Victory) in their hands; and the Praises of God and of the Lamb in their
mouths. For from thence we may learn, that Heaven is not reserved only for
Prophets, and Apostles, and Martyrs, and such extraordinary Persons, whose
Sanctity the Church admires, but that through Gods goodness, multitudes of his
more Imperfect Servants have access thither.

Though the Infinite Perfections and Prerogatives of the Deity be such, that
Theology it self can no more than Philosophy afford us another Object for our
Studies, any thing near so Sublime and Excellent, as what it discloses to us of
God; yet Divinity favors us with some other Discoveries, namely, about Angels,
the Universe, and our own Souls, which though they must needs be inferior to
the knowledge of God Himself, are, for the nobleness of their Objects, or for
their Importance, highly preferable to any that Natural Philosophy has been
able to afford its Votaries.

But before I proceed to name any more particulars, disclosed to us by
Revelation, 'twill be requisite, for the prevention or removal of a Prejudice,
to mind you, that we should not make our Estimates of the worth of the things
we owe to Revelation, by the Impressions they are wont now to make upon Us
Christians, who learned diverse of them in our Catechisms, and perhaps have
several times met with most of the Rest in Sermons, or Theological Books. For
it is not to be admired, that we should not be strongly affected at the mention
of those Truths, which (how valuable soever in themselves) were for the most
part taught us when we were either Children, or too Youthful to discern and
prize their Excellency and Importance. So that though afterward they were
presented to our riper understanding, yet their being by that time become
familiar, and our not remembering that we ignor'd them, kept them from making
any vigorous Impressions on Us. Whereas if the same things had been (with
Circumstances evincing their Truth) discovered to some Heathen Philosopher, or
other virtuous and inquisitive Man, who valued important Truths, and had
nothing but his own Reason to attain them with, he would questionless have
received them with wonder and joy. Which to induce us to suppose we have sundry
Instances, both in the Records of the Primitive Times, and in the recent
Relations of the Conversion of men to Christianity among the People of China,
Japan, and other Literate Nations. For though bare Reason cannot discover these
Truths, yet when Revelation has once sufficiently proposed them to Her, she can
readily embrace, and highly value diverse of them; which being here intimated
once for all, I now advance to name some of the Revelations themselves.

And first, as for Angels, I will not now question, whether bare Reason can
arrive at so much as to assure us, That there are such Beings in Rerum Natura.
For though Reason may assure, that their Existence is not Impossible, and
perhaps too not improbable; yet I doubt, whether 'twere to mere Ratiocination,
or clear Experience, or any thing else but Revelation, conveyed to them by
imperfect Tradition, that those Heathen Philosophers, who believed that there
were separate Spirits other than Humane, owed that persuasion. And particularly
as to Good Angels, I doubt, whether those Ancient Sages had any cogent Reasons,
or any convincing Historical Proofs, or, in short, any one unquestionable
Evidence of any kind, to satisfy a wary person so much as of the being (much
less to give a farther account) of those Excellent Spirits. Matthew. xxvj. 53.
Dan. vij.10. Joh. j.3. Heb. j.7. Luke xx.35, 36. Col. j.16. Matthew. xxiv.36.
Mark xiij.32. Matthew. xviij.10. Isa. vj.2, 3 Matthew. vj.10. 2 Samuel xiv.20. Mark
xiij.32. 2 King. xix.35. 1 Thessalonians. iv.16. Jude ix. Dan. x.13, 21. Col. j.16.
Revel. xij.7. Acts xij.7, 8, 9, 10. Dan. x.13. Acts xij.11. 2 Kings vj.17. Luke
xxiv.4.
Whereas Theology is enabled by the Scripture to inform us, that not only
there are such Spirits, but a vast multitude of them; That they were made by
God and Christ, and are Immortal, and propagate not their Species; and that
these Spirits have their chief Residence in Heaven, and enjoy the Vision of
God, whom they constantly praise, and punctually obey, without having sinned
against him; That also these Good Angels are very Intelligent Beings, and of so
great power, that One of them was able in a night to destroy a vast Army; That
they have Degrees among themselves, are Enemies to the Devils, and fight
against them; That they can assume Bodies shaped like ours, and yet disappear
in a trice; That they are sometimes employed about Humane affairs, and that not
only for the welfare of Empires and Kingdoms, but to protect and rescue
single Good men. And though they are wont to appear in a dazzling Splendour, and
an astonishing Majesty, yet they are All of them ministering Spirits, employed
for the good of the designed Heirs of Salvation. Judge. xiij.6. Heb. j.14.
Revel. xix.10. Revel. xxij.9.
And they do not only refuse men's Adoration, and admonish them to pay it unto
God; but, as they are in a sense made by Jesus Christ, who was true Man as well
as God; so they do not only worship him, Matthew. xxviij.6. Revel. xix.10.
and call him simply, as his own Followers were were wont to do, The Lord, but
style themselves Fellow servants to his Disciples.

And as for the other Angels, though the Gentiles, as well Philosophers as
others, were commonly so far mistaken about them, as to adore them for true
Gods, Joh. j.3 Coloss. j.16. Matthew. viij.7. Luke iv.33. Joh. viij, 34. 1 Pet.
v.8. 2 Cor. xj.3. Revel. xij.9. Revel. xij.7. Matthew. xxv.41. 1 John iij.8.
and yet many of them to doubt whether they were immortal; the Scripture
informs us, that they are not Self-originated, but created Beings; That however
a great part of Mankind worships them, they are wicked and impure Spirits,
Enemies to Mankind, and Seducers of our first Parents to their Ruin; That
though they beget and promote confusion among men, yet they have some Order
among themselves, as having one Chief, or Leader; That they are evil Spirits,
not by Nature, but Apostasy; That their power is very limited, Jude 6. Mark
v.9, 10, 13.
insomuch that a Legion of them cannot invade so contemptible a thing as a Herd
of Swine, without particular leave from God; Jam. iv.7. 1 Pet. v.9.
That not only Good Angels, but Good Men, may, by resisting them, put them to
flight, and the sincere Christians that worsted them here, will be among those
that shall judge them hereafter; 1 Cor. vj.3. Matthew. xxv.41. Jam. ij.19.
That their being immortal, will make their misery so too; That they do
themselves believe and tremble at those Truths, they would persuade men to
reject; and That they are so far from being able to confer that Happiness,
which their Worshippers expect from them, that themselves are wretched
creatures, 2 Pet. ij.4. Jude 6, 13. Matthew. xxv.41.
reserved in chains of darkness to the judgment of the great Day; at which they
shall be doomed to suffer everlasting torments, in the company of those wicked
men that they shall have prevailed on.

We may farther consider, That as to things Corporeal themselves, which the
Naturalist challenges as his peculiar Theme, we may name particulars, and those
of the most comprehensive nature, and greatest Importance, whose knowledge the
Naturalist must owe to Theology. Of which Truths I shall content my self to
give a few instances in the World it self, or the universal Aggregate of things
Corporeal; that being looked upon as the noblest and chiefest Object, that the
Physics afford us to contemplate.

And first, Those that admit the Truths revealed by Theology, do generally
allow, that God is not only the Author, but Creator of the World. I am not
ignorant of what Anaxagoras taught, of what he called (...) -- (and Tully
mentions) in the production of the World; and that what many other Grecians
afterward taught of the Worlds Aeternity, is peculiarly due to Aristotle, who
does little less then brag, that all the Philosophers that preceded him were of
another mind. Nor will I here examine (which I elsewhere do) whether, and how
far by Arguments merely Physical, the Creation of the World may be evinced. But
whether or no mere Natural Reason can reach so sublime a Truth; yet it seems
not that it did actually, where it was not excited by Revelation-Discovery. For
though many of the ancient Philosophers believed the World to have had a
Beginning, yet they all took it for granted, that Matter had none; nor does any
of them, that I know of, seem to have so much as imagined, that any Substance
could be produced out of Nothing. Those that ascribe much more to God than
Aristotle, make Him to have given Form only, not Matter, to the World, and to
have but contrived the pre-existent Matter into this orderly Systeme we call
the Universe.

Next, whereas very many of the Philosophers that succeeded Aristotle, suppose
the World to have been Aeternal; and those that believed it to have been
produced, had not the confidence to pretend to the knowing how old it was;
unless it were some extravagant ambitious People, such as those fabulous
Chaldaeans, whose fond account reached up to 40000 or 50000 years: Theology
teaches us, that the World is very far from being so old by 30 or 40 thousand
years as they, and by very many Ages, as diverse others have presumed; and does,
from the Scripture, give us such an account of the age of the World, that it
has set us certain Limits, within which so long a Duration may be bounded,
without mistaking in our Reckoning. Whereas Philosophy leaves us to the
vastness of Indeterminate Duration, without any certain Limits at all.

The Time likewise, and the Order, and diverse other Circumstances of the
Manner, wherein the Fabric of the World was completed, we owe to Revelation;
bare Reason being evidently unable to inform us of Particulars that preceded
the Origin of the first Man; and though I do not think Religion so much
concerned, as many do, in their Opinion and Practice, that would deduce
particular Theorems of Natural Philosophy from this or that Expression of a
Book, that seems rather designed to instruct us about Spiritual than Corporeal
things. I see no just reason to embrace their Opinion, that would so turn the
two first Chapters of Genesis into an Allegory, as to overthrow the Literal and
Historical sense of them. And though I take the Scripture to be mainly designed
to teach us nobler and better Truths, than those of Philosophy; yet I am not
forward to condemn those, who think the beginning of Genesis contains diverse
particulars, in reference to the Origin of things, which though not unwarily,
or alone to be urged in Physics, may yet afford very considerable Hints to an
attentive and inquisitive Peruser.

And as for the Duration of the World, which was by the old Philosophers held
to be Interminable, and of which the Stoics Opinion, that the World shall be
destroyed by fire (which they held from the Jews) was Physically precarious;
Theology teaches us expressly from Divine Revelation, (...). Jam. iij.6.
that the present course of Nature shall not last always, but that one Day this
world (or at least this Vortex of ours) shall either be Abolished by
Annihilation, or (which seems far more probable) be Innovated, and, as it were,
Transfigur'd, 2 Pet. iij.^, 10, 13.
and that by the Intervention of that Fire, which shall dissolve and destroy
the present frame of Nature: So that either way, the present state of things
(as well Natural as Political) shall have an end.

And as Theology affords us these Informations about the Creatures in general;
so touching the chiefest and noblest of the visible ones, Men, Revelation
discovers very plainly diverse very important things, where Reason must needs be
in the dark.

And first, touching the Body of Man; The Epicureans attributed its Original,
as that of all things else, to the Casual Concourse of Atoms; and the Stoics
absurdly and injuriously enough (but much more pardonably than their follower
herein, Mr. Hobbs) would have Men to spring up like Mushrooms out of the
ground; and whereas other Philosophers maintain conceits about it, too wild to
be here recited; the Book of Genesis assures us, Genesis ij.7.
that the Body of Man was first formed by God in a peculiar manner, of a
Terrestrial Matter; and it is there described, as having been perfected before
the Soul was united to it. And as Theology thus teaches us, how the Body of Man
had its first beginning; so it likewise assures us, what shall become of the
Body after death, Acts xxiv.15.
though bare Natural Reason will scarce be pretended to reach to so abstruse
and difficult an Article as that of a Resurrection; which, when proposed by St.
Paul, Acts xvij.20, 32.
produced among the Athenian Philosophers nothing else but wonder or laughter.

Not to mention, that Theology teaches us diverse other things about the Origin
and Condition of Men's Bodies; Genesis ij. Acts xvij.26.
as, That all Mankind is the Offspring of One Man and one Woman; That the
first Woman was not made of the same Matter, nor after the same Manner as the
first Man, but was afterward taken from his side; That both Adam and Eve were
not, Genesis ij.21, 22.
as many Epicureans and other Philosophers fancied that the first men were,
first Infants; whence they did, as we do, grow by degrees to be mature and
complete Humane Persons, but were made so all at once; Acts xxv.15. Luke xx.35,
36.
and, That hereafter, as all men's Bodies shall rise again, so they shall all
(or at least all those of the just) be kept from ever dying a second time.

And as for the Humane Soul, though I willingly grant, that much may be deduced
from the Light of Reason only, touching its Existence, Properties, and
Duration; yet Divine Revelation teaches it us with more clearness, and with
greater Authority; as, sure, he that made our Souls, and upholds them, can best
know what they are, and how long he will have them last. And as the Scripture
expressly teaches us, that the Rational Soul is distinct from the Body, Matthew.
x.28.
as not being to be destroyed by those very Enemies that kill the Body; so
about the Origin of this Immortal Soul (about which Philosophers can give us
but wide and precarious conjectures) Theology assures us, that the Soul of man
had not such an Origination, as those of other Animals, Genesis ij 7. Zek. xij.1.
but was Gods own immediate Workmanship, and was united to the Body already
formed: And yet not so united, Luke xx.35, 36. Matt. xxv.46.
but that upon their Divorce, she will survive, and pass into a state, in which
Death shall have no power over her.

I expect you will here object, that for the knowledge of the Perpetual
Duration of separate Souls, we need not be beholding to the Scripture, since
the Immortality of the Soul may be sufficiently proved by the sole Light of
Nature, and particularly has been demonstrated by your great Des Carts. But
you must give me leave to tell you, that, besides that a matter of that weight
and concernment cannot be too well proved, and consequently ought to procure a
welcome for all good Mediums of Probation; besides this, I say, I doubt many
Cartesians do, as well as others, mistake, both the difficulty under
consideration, and the scope of Des Cartes's Discourse. For I grant, that by
Natural Philosophy alone, the Immortality of the Soul may be proved against its
usual Enemies, Atheists and Epicureans. For the ground, upon which these men
think it mortal, being, That it is not a true substance, but only a
modification of Body, which consequently must perish, when the frame or
structure of the Body, whereto it belongs, is dissolved: Their ground being
this, I say, if we can prove by some Intellectual Operations of the Rational
Soul, which Matter, however modifi'd, cannot reach, That it is a Substance
distinct from the Humane Body, there is no reason, why the Dissolution of the
Latter should infer the Destruction of the Former, which is a simple Substance,
and as real a Substance as Matter it self, which yet the Adversaries affirm to
be Indestructible. But though by the Mental Operations of the Rational Soul,
and perhaps by other Mediums it may, against the Epicureans, and other mere
Naturalists, who will not allow God to have any thing to do in the case, be
proved to be Immortal in the sense newly proposed; yet the same Proofs will not
evince, that absolutely it shall never cease to be* if we dispute with
Philosophers, who admit, as the Cartesians and many others do, that God is the
sole Creator and Preserver of all things. For how are we sure but that God may
have so ordained, That, though the Soul of Man, by the continuance of his
ordinary and upholding Concourse, may survive the Body, yet, as it is generally
believed, not to be created till it be just to be infused into the Body; so it
shall be annihilated when it parts with the Body, God withdrawing at death that
supporting influence, which alone kept it from relapsing to its first Nothing.
Whence it may appear, that notwithstanding the Physical proofs of the
Spirituality and separableness of the Humane Soul, we are yet much beholding to
Divine Revelation for assuring us, that its Duration shall be endless. And now
to make good what I was intimating above, concerning the Cartesians, and the
scope of Des Cartes's Demonstration, I shall appeal to no other than his own
Expressions to evince, that he considered this matter for the main as we have
done, and pretended to demonstrate, that the Soul is a Distinct Substance from
the Body; but not that absolutely speaking it is Immortal. Cur (answers that
excellent Author) de immortalitate Animae nihil scripserim, D^s Carts
Responsione ad Objectiones secundas, page m. 95.
jam dixi in Synopsi mearum Meditationum. Quod ejus ab omni corpore
distinctionem satis probaverim, supra ostendi. Quod vero additis, Ex
distinctione Animae a corpore non sequi ejus Immortalitatem, quia nihilominus
dici potest, illam a Deo talis naturae factam esse, ut ejus Duratio simul cum
Duratione vitae corporeae finiatur, fateor a me refelli non posse. Neque enim
tantum mihi assumo ut quicquam de iis quae a libera Dei voluntate dependent,
humanae rationis vi determinare aggrediar. Docet Naturalis cognitio, etc. Sed
si de absoluta Dei potestate quaeratur, an forte decreverit, ut humanae animae
iisdem Temporibus esse desinant, quibus Corpora quae illis adjunxit; solius Dei
est, respondere. And if he would not assume to demonstrate by Natural Reason,
so much as the Existence of the Soul after death, unless upon a supposition; we
may well presume, that he would less take upon him to determine, what shall be
the condition of that Soul after it leaves the Body. And that you may not doubt
of this, I will give you for it his own confession, as he freely writ it in a
private Letter to that Admirable Lady, the Princess Elizabeth, first Daughter
to Frederick King of Bohemia, who seems to have desired his Opinion on that
important Question, about which he sends her this Answer, Pour ce qui, etc. i.
e. As to the State of the Soul after this Life, my knowledge of it is far
inferior to that of Monsieur (he means Sir Kenelm) Digby. For, setting aside
that which Religion teaches us of it, I confess, that by mee^ Natural Reason we
may indeed make many conjectures to our own advantage, and have fair Hopes, but
not any Assurance: And accordingly in the next clause he gives the imprudence,
of quitting what is certain for an uncertainty, as the cause why, according to
Natural Reason, we are never to seek Death.

Nor do I wonder he should be of that mind. For all that mere Reason can
demonstrate, may be reduced to these two things; One, that the Rational Soul,
being an Incorporeal Substance, there is no necessity that it should perish
with the Body; so that, if God have not otherwise appointed, the Soul may
survive the Body, and last for ever: The other, that the Nature of the Soul,
according to Des Carts, consisting in its being a Substance that thinks, we
may conclude, that, though it be by death separate from the Body, it will
nevertheless retain the power of thinking. But now, whether either of these two
things, or both, be sufficient to endear the state of separation after death,
to a considering man, I think may be justly questioned. For, Immortality or
Perseverance in Duration, simply considered, is rather a thing presupposed to,
or a requisite of, Felicity, than a part of it; and being in it self an
adiaphorous thing, assumes the nature of the state or condition to which it is
joined, and does not make that state happy or miserable, but makes the
possessors of it more happy or more miserable than otherwise they would be. And
though some Schoolmen, upon Aerie Metaphysical Notions, would have men think it
is more eligible to be wretched, than not to be at all; yet we may oppose to
their speculative subtilties the sentiments of Mankind, and the far more
considerable Testimony of the Savior of Mankind* who speaking of the Disciple
that betrayed him, says, Mark xiv.21.
That it had been good for that man if he had never been born. And Eternity is
generally conceived to aggravate no less the miseries of Hell, than it
heightens the joys of Heaven. And here we may consider, first, That mere Reason
cannot so much as assure us absolutely, that the Soul shall survive the Body:
For the Truth of which we have not only Cartesius's Confession, lately
recited, but a probable Argument, drawn from the nature of the thing, since, as
the Body and Soul were brought together, not by any mere Physical Agents, and
since their Association and Union whilst they continued together, was made upon
Conditions that depended solely upon Gods free and arbitrary Institution; so,
for ought Reason can secure us of, one of the Conditions of that Association
may be, That the Body and Soul should not survive each other. Secondly,
supposing that the Soul be permitted to outlive the Body, mere Reason cannot
inform us what will become of her in her separate state, whether she will be
vitally united to any other kind of Body or Vehicle; and if to some, of what
kind that will be, and upon what terms the Union will be made. For possibly she
may be united to an unorganiz'd, or very imperfectly organized, Body, wherein
she cannot exercise the same Functions she did in her Humane Body. As we see,
that even in this Life the Souls of Natural Fools are united to Bodies, wherein
they cannot discourse, or at least cannot Philosophize. And it is plain, that
some Souls are introduced into Bodies, which, by reason of Paralytical and
other Diseases, they are unable to move, though that does not always hinder
them from being obnoxious to feel pain. So that, for ought we naturally know, a
Humane Soul, separated from the Body, may be united to such a portion of
Matter, that she may neither have the power to move it, nor the advantage of
receiving any agreeable Informations by its interventions, having upon the
account of that Union no other sense than that of pain. But let us now consider
what will follow, if I should grant that the Soul will not be made miserable,
by being thus wretchedly matched. Suppose we then, that she be left free to
enjoy what belongs to her own nature: That being only the Power of always
thinking, it may well be doubted, whether th'exercise of that Power will suffice
to make her happy. You will perchance easily believe, that I love as well as
another to entertain my self with my own thoughts, and to enjoy them
undisturbed by visits, and other avocations; I would, only accompanied by a
Servant and a Book, go to dine at an Inn upon a Road, to enjoy my thoughts the
more freely for that day. But yet, I think, the most contemplative men would,
at least in time, grow weary of thinking, if they received no supply of Objects
from without, by Reading, Seeing, or Conversing; and if they also wanted the
opportunity of executing their thoughts, by moving the Members of their Bodies,
or of imparting them, either by Discoursing, or Writing of Books, or by making
of Experiments. On this occasion I remember, that I knew a Gentleman, who was,
in Spain, for a State-crime, which yet he thought an Heroic action, kept close
prisoner for a year in a place, where though he had allowed him a Diet not
unfit for a Person of Note, as he was; yet he was not permitted the benefit of
any Light, either of the Day or Candles, and was not accosted by any humane
creature, save at certain times by the Jailer, that brought him meat and drink,
but was strictly forbidden to converse with him. Now though this Gentleman by
his discourse appeared to be a man of a lively humor, yet being asked by me,
how he could do to pass the time in that sad solitude, he confessed to me,
that, though he had the liberty of walking too and fro in his Prison, and
though by often recalling into his mind all the adventures and other passages
of his former life, and by several ways combining and diversifying his
Thoughts, he endeavored to give his mind as much variety of employment as he
was able; yet that would not serve his turn, but he was often reduced, by
drinking large draughts of Wine, and then casting himself upon his bed, to
endeavor to drown that Melancholy, which the want of new objects cast him
into. And I can easily admit, he found a great deal of difference between the
sense he had of thinking when he was at liberty, and that which he had when he
was confined to that employment, whose delightfulness, like fire, cannot last
long, when it is, as his was, denied both fuel and vent. And, in a word, though
I most readily grant, that Thinking interwoven with Conversation and Action,
may be a very pleasant way of passing ones Time, yet Man being by nature a
sociable creature, I fear, that alone would be a dry and wearisome Employment
to spend Eternity in.

Before I proceed to the next Section, I must not omit to take notice, That
though the brevity I proposed to my self, keeps me from discoursing of any
Theological Subjects, save what I have touched upon about the Divine
Attributes, and the things I have mentioned about the Universe in general, and
the Humane Soul; yet there are diverse other things, knowable by the help of
Revelation, and not without it, that are of so noble and sublime a Nature, that
the greatest Wits may find their best Abilities both fully exercised, and
highly gratified by making Enquiries into them. I shall not name for proof of
this the Adorable Mystery of the Trinity, wherein it is acknowledged, that the
most soaring Speculators are wont to be posed, or to loose themselves: But I
shall rather mention the Redemption of Mankind, and the Decrees of God
concerning Men. For though these seem to be less out of the Ken of our Natural
Faculties; yet it is into some things that belong to the former of them, that
the Scripture tells us, The Angels desire to pry; 1 Pet. j.12.
and 'twas the consideration of the latter of them, that made one that had been
caught up into the Mansion of the Angels, Romans xj.33.
amazedly cry out, (...), etc.

Not are these the only things that the Scripture it self terms Mysteries,
though, for brevities sake, instead of specifying any of them, I shall content
my self to represent to you in general; that, since Gods wisdom is boundless,
it may, sure, have more ways than one to display it self. And though the
material World be full of the Productions of his Wisdom; yet that hinders not
but that the Scripture may be enobled with many excellent Impresses, and, as it
were, Signatures of the same Attribute. For, as I was beginning to say, it
cannot but be highly injurious to the Deity, in whom all other True
Perfections, as well as Omniscience, are both united and transcendent, to
think, that he can contrive no ways to disclose his Perfections, besides the
ordering of Matter and Motion, and cannot otherwise deserve to be the Object of
Men's studies, and their Admiration, than in the capacity of a Creator.

And I think, I might safely add, that besides these Grand and Mysterious
Points I came from mentioning, there are many other noble and important things,
wherein unassisted Reason leaves us in the dark; which though not so clearly
revealed in the Scripture, are yet in an inviting measure discovered there, and
consequently deserve the indagation of a Curious and Philosophical Soul. Shall
we not think it worth enquiring, whether the Satisfaction of Christ was
necessary to appease the Justice of God, and purchase Redemption for Mankind?
Or whether God, as Absolute and Supreme Governor of the World, might have
freely remitted the Penalties of sin? Shall we not think it worth the
inquiring, upon what Account, and upon what Terms, the Justification of Men
^^wards God is transacted, especially considering how much it imports us to
know, and how perplexedly a Doctrine, not in it self abstruse, is wont to be
delivered? Shall not we inquire, whether or no the Souls of Men, before they
were united to their Bodies, pre-existed in a happier state, as many of the
Ancient and Modern Jews and Platonists, and (besides Origin) some Learned Men
of our times do believe* And shall not we be curious to know, whether, when the
Soul leaves the Body, it do immediately pass to Heaven or Hell (as it is
commonly believed,) or for want of Organs be laid, as it were, asleep in an
insensible and unactive state, till it recover the Body at the Resurrection?
(as many Socinians and others maintain:) Or whether it be conveyed into secret
Recesses, where, though it be in a good or bad condition, according to what it
did in the Body, it is yet reprieved from the flames of Hell, and restrained
from the Beatifick Vision till the Day of Judgment? (which seems to have been
the opinion of many, if not most of the Primitive Fathers and Christians.)
Shall not we be curious to know, whether at that great Decretory Day, this vast
Fabric of the World, which all confess must have its frame quite shattered,
shall be suffered to relapse into its first Nothing, (as several Divines
assert;) or shall be, after its Dissolution, renewed to a better state, and, as
it were, Transfigur'd? And shall not we inquire, whether or no in that future
state of things, which shall never have an end, Genesis ij.21, 22, 23.
we shall know one another? (as Adam, when he awaked out of his profound sleep,
knew Eve whom he never saw before;) and whether those Personal Friendships and
Affections, we had for one another here, and the pathetick Consideration of the
Relations (as of Father and Son, Husband and Wife, Chaste Mistress and Virtuous
Lover, Prince and Subject,) on which many of them were grounded, shall
continue? Or whether all those things, as antiquated and slight, shall be
obliterated, and, as it were, swallowed up? (as the former Relation of a Cousin
a great way off, is scarce at all considered, when the Persons come so to
change their state, as to be united by the strict Bonds of Marriage.)

But 'twere tedious to propose all the other Points, whereof the Divine takes
cognizance, that highly merit an inquisitive man's curiosity; and about which,
all the Writings of the old Greek and other Heathen Philosophers put together,
will give us far less information, than the single Volume of Canonical
Scripture. I foresee indeed, that it may nevertheless be objected, that in some
of these Inquiries, Revelation incumbers Reason, by delivering things, which
Reason is obliged to make its Hypothesis consistent with. But, besides that
this cannot be so much as pretended of all; if you consider how much unassisted
Reason leaves us in the dark about these matters, wherein she has not been able
to frame so much as probable determinations, especially in comparison of those
probabilities that Reason can deduce from what it finds one way or other
delivered in the Scripture: If you consider this, I say, you will, I presume,
allow me to say, That the revealed Truths, which Reason is obliged to comply
with, if they be burdens to it, are but such Burdens as Feathers are to a Hawk,
which instead of hindering his flight by their weight, enable him to soar toward
Heaven, and take a larger prospect of things, than, if he had not feathers, he
could possibly do.

And on this occasion, Sir, the greater Reverence I owe to the Scripture it
self, than to its Expositors, prevails upon me to tell you freely, that you
will not do right, either to Theology, or (the greatest Repository of its
Truths) the Bible; if you imagine that there are no considerable Additions to
be made to the Theological Discoveries we have already, nor no clearer
Expositions of many Texts of Scripture, or better Reflections on that matchless
Book, than are to be met with in the generality of Commentators, or of
Preachers, without excepting the Ancient Fathers themselves. For, there being
in my opinion two things requisite, to qualify a Commentator to do right to
his Theme, a competency of Critical Knowledge, and a Concern for the Honor and
Interest of Christianity in general, assisted by a good Judgment to discern and
select those things that may most conduce to it; I doubt, there are not many
Expositors, as they are called, of the Scripture, that are not deficient in the
former or the latter of these particulars, and I wish there be not too many
that are defective in both.

That the knowledge of at least Greek and Hebrew is requisite to him, that
takes upon him to expound Writings penned Originally in those Languages, if the
nature of the thing did not manifest it, you might easily be persuaded to
believe, by considering with what gross mistakes the Ignorance of Languages has
oftentimes blemished not only the Interpretations of the Schoolmen and
others, but even those of the Venerable Fathers of the Church. For though
generally they were worthy men, and highly to be regarded, as the grand
Witnesses of the Doctrines and Government of the ancient Churches; most of them
very pious, many of them very eloquent, and some of them (especially the two
Critics, Origin and Jerome) very Learned; yet so few of the Greek Fathers were
skilled in Hebrew, and so few of the Latin Fathers either in Hebrew or Greek,
that many of their Homilies, and even Comments, leave hard Texts as obscure as
they found them; and, sometimes misled by bad Translations, they give them
senses exceeding wide of the True: So that many times in their Writings they
appear to be far better Divines then Commentators, and in an excellent
Discourse upon a Text, you shall find but a very poor Exposition of it. Many of
their Eloquent and devout Sermons being much better Encomiasts of the Divine
Mysteries they treat of, than Unvailers. And though some Modern Translations
deserve the Praise of being very useful, and less unaccurate than those which
the Latin Fathers used; yet when I read the Scriptures (especially some Books
of the Old Testament) in their Originals, I confess I cannot but sometimes
wonder, what came into the mind of some, even of our Modern Translators, that
they should so much Mistake, and sometimes Injure certain Texts as they do; and
I am prone to think, that there is scarce a Chapter in the Bible (especially
that part of it which is written in Hebrew) that may not be better Translated,
and Consequently more to the Credit of the Book it self.

This Credit it misses of, not only by men's want of sufficient Skill in
Critical Learning, but (to come to the second Member of our late Division) for
want of their having Judgment enough to observe, and Concern enough to propose
those things in the Scripture, and in Theology, that tend to the Reputation of
either. For I fear there are too many, both Commentators and other Divines,
that (though otherwise perhaps pious men) having espoused a Church or Party,
and an Aversion from all Dissenters, are solicitous when they peruse the
Scripture, to take notice chiefly, if not only (I mean in points Speculative)
of those things, that may either suggest Arguments against their Adversaries,
or Answers to their Objections. But I meet with much fewer than I could wish,
(...). Joh. v.39.
who make it their Business to search the Scriptures for those things (such as
unheeded Prophecies, overlooked Mysteries, and strange Harmonies) which being
clearly and judiciously proposed, may make that Book appear worthy of the high
extraction it challenges (and consequently of the veneration of Considering
men) and who are sollicitous to Discern and Make out, in the way of Governing
and of Saving Men, revealed by God, so excellent an Economy, and such deep
Contrivances, and wise Dispensations, as may bring credit to Religion, not so
much as it is Roman, or Protestant, or Socinian, but as it is Christian. But (as
I intimated before) these good affections for the repute of Religion in
general, are to be assisted by a deep Judgment. For men that want either That,
or a good Stock of Critical Learning, may easily over-see the best Observations
(which usually are not Obvious) or propose as Mysteries, things that are either
not Grounded, or not Weighty enough; and so (notwithstanding their good
meaning) may bring a Disparagement upon what they desire to Recommend. And I am
willing to grant, that it is rather for want of good Skill and good Judgment,
than good Will, that there are so few that have been careful to do right to the
Reputation of the Scripture, as well as to its Sense. And indeed when I
consider, how much more to the Advantage of those Sacred Writings, and of
Christian Theology in general, diverse Texts have been explained and discoursed
of by the Excellent Grotius, by Episcopius, Masius, Mr. Mede, and Sir Francis
Bacon, and some other Late great Wits (to name now no Living ones) in their
several kinds; than the same places have been handled by vulgar Expositors, and
other Divines: And when I remember too, that none of these newly named Worthies
was at once a great Philosopher, and a great Critic; (the three first being
not so well versed in Philosophical Learning, and the last being unacquainted
with the Eastern Tongues:) I cannot but hope, that when it shall please God to
stir up persons of a Philosophical Genius, well furnished with Critical
Learning, and the Principles of true Philosophy, and shall give them a hearty
Concern for the Advancement of his Truths; these men, by exercising upon
Theological matters, that Inquisitiveness and Sagacity that has made in our Age
such a happy Progress in Philosophical ones, will make Explications and
Discoveries, that will justify more than I have said in praise of the study of
our Religion and the Divine Books that contain the Articles of it. For these
want not Excellencies, but only skilful Unvailers. And if I do not tell you,
that you should no more measure the Wisdom of God couched in the Bible, by the
Glosses or Systems of common Expositors and Preachers, than Estimate the
Wisdom he has expressed in the contrivance of the World by Magirus's or
Eustachius's Physics; yet I shall not scruple to say, That you should as
little think, that there are no more Mysteries in the Books of Scripture,
besides those that the School-Divines and Vulgar Commentators have taken notice
of, and unfolded; as that there are no other Mysteries in the Book of Nature,
than those which the same Schoolmen (who have taken upon them to interpret
Aristotle and Nature too) have observed and explained. All the fine things,
that Poets, Orators, and even Lovers have Hyperbolically said in praise of the
Beauty of Eyes, will nothing near so much recommend them to a Philosophers
esteem, as the sight of one Eye skilfully dissected, or the unadorned Account
given of its Structure, and the admirable uses of its several parts, in
Scheiner's Oculus, and Des-Cartes's Excellent Dioptricks. And though I do not
think my self bound to acquiesce in, and admire every thing that is proposed as
Mysterious and Rare by many Interpreters and Preachers; yet I think, I may
safely compare several things in the Books we call the Scripture, to several
others in that of Nature, in (at least) one regard. For, though I do not
believe all the Wonders, that Pliny, Aelian, Porta, and other Writers of that
stamp, relate of the Generation of Animals; yet by perusing such faithful and
accurate accounts, as sometimes Galen, De usu Partium, sometimes Vesalius,
sometimes our Harvey (de Ovo) and our later Anatomists, and sometimes other
true Naturalists, give of the Generation of Animals, and of the admirable
Structure of their Bodies, especially those of Men, and such other parts of
Zoology, as Pliny, and the other Writers I named with him, could make nothing
considerable of; by perusing these (I say) I receive more pleasure and
satisfaction, and am induced more to admire the works of Nature, than by all
their Romantic and Superficial Narratives. And thus (to apply this to our
present Subject) a close and critical account of the more veiled and pregnant
parts of Scripture, and Theological Matters, with such Reflections on them, as
their Nature and Collation would suggest to a Philosophical, as well as
Critical, Speculator, would far better please a Rational Considerer, and give
him a higher, as well as a better grounded, Veneration for the things
explained, than a great many of those sleighter or ill-founded Remarks,
wherewith the Expositions and Discourses of Superficial Writers, though never
so florid or witty, gain the applause of the less discerning sort of men.

And here, on this occasion, I shall venture to add, that I despair not, but
that a further use may be made of the Scripture, than either our Divines or
Philosophers seem to have thought on. Some few Theologues indeed have got the
name of Supralapsarians, for venturing to look back beyond the Fall of Adam for
God's Decrees of Election and Reprobation. But, besides that their boldness has
been disliked by the generality of Divines, as well as other Christians, the
Object of their Speculation is much too narrow to be any thing near and
adequate to such an Hypothesis as I mean. For methinks, that the
Encyclopedia's and Pansophia's, that even men of an elevated Genius have aimed
at, are not diffused enough to comprehend all that the Reason of a Man,
improved by Philosophy, and elevated by the Revelations already extant in the
Scripture, may, by the help of free Ratiocination, and the hints contained in
those pregnant. Writings (with those assistances of God's Spirit, which he is
still ready to vouchsafe to them that duly seek them,) attain unto in this
life. The Gospel comprises indeed, and unfolds the whole Mystery of Man's
Redemption, Acts xx.27.
as far forth as it is necessary to be known for our Salvation: And the
Corpuscularium or Mechanical Philosophy, strives to deduce all the Phoenomena
of Nature from Adiaphorous Matter, and Local Motion. But neither the
Fundamental Doctrine of Christianity, nor that of the Powers and Effects of
Matter and Motion, seems to be more than an Epicycle (if I may so call it) of
the Great and Universal System of God's Contrivances, and makes but a part of
the more general Theory of things, knowable by the Light of Nature, improved by
the Information of the Scriptures: So that both these Doctrines, though very
general, in respect of the subordinate parts of Theology and Philosophy, seem
to be but members of the Universal Hypothesis, whose Objects, I conceive, to be
the Nature, Counsels, and Works of God, as far as they are discoverable by us
(for I say not to us) in this Life.

For those, to whom God has vouchsafed the privilege of mature Reason, seem
not to enlarge their thoughts enough, if they think, that the Omniscient and
Almighty God has bounded the Operations of his Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness,
to the Exercise that may be given them for some Ages, by the Production and
Government of Matter and Motion, and of the Inhabitants of the Terrestrial
Globe, which we know to be but a Physical Point in comparison of that Portion
of Universal Matter, which we have already discovered.

For I account, that there are four grand Communities of Creatures, whereof
things merely Corporeal make but one; the other three, differing from these,
are distinct also from one another. Of the first sort are the Race of Mankind,
where Intellectual Beings are vitally associated with Gross and Organical
Bodies. The second are Demons, or evil Angels; and the third, good Angels;
(whether in each of those two kinds of Spirits, the Rational Beings be
perfectly free from all union with Matter, though never so fine and subtle; or
whether they be united to Vehicles, not Gross, but Spirituous, and ordinarily
invisible to Us.)

Nor may we think, because Angels and Devils are two names quickly uttered, and
those Spirits are seldom or never seen by us, there are therefore but few of
them, and the Speculation of them is not considerable. For, as their Excellency
is great, (as we shall by and by show) so for their number, they are
represented in Scripture as an Heavenly Host, standing on the right and left
hand of the Throne of God. Matthew. xxvj.53.
And of the good Angels, our Savior Speaks of having more than twelve Legions
of them at his command. Nay, the Prophet Daniel says, that to the Ancient of
days, Dan. vij.10.
no less than millions ministered unto him, and hundreds of millions stood
before him. And of the evil Angels the Gospel informs us, that enough to call
them a Legion (which you know is usually reckoned, Mark v.9. Luke viij.30.
at a moderate rate* to consist of betwixt six and seven thousand) possessed
one single man. For my part, when I consider, that matter, how vastly extended,
and how curiously shaped soever, is but a brute thing, that is only capable of
Local motion and its effects and consequents on other Bodies, or the Brain of
man, without being capable of any True, or at least any Intellectual,
Perception, or true Love or Hatred; and when I consider the Rational Soul as an
immaterial and immortal Being, that bears the Image of its Divine Maker, being
endowed with a capacious Intellect, and a Will that no Creature can force: I am
by these Considerations disposed to think the Soul of Man a nobler and more
valuable Being, than the whole Corporeal World; which though I readily
acknowledge it to be admirably contrived, and worthy of the Almighty and
Omniscient Author, yet it consists but of an Aggregate of Portions of brute
Matter, variously shaped and connected by Local Motion (as Dow, and Roles, and
Loves, and Cakes, and Vermicelli, Wafers, and Pie-crust, are all of them
diversified Meal;) but without any knowledge either of their own Nature, or of
that of their Author, or of that of their Fellow Creatures. And as the Rational
Soul is somewhat more noble and wonderful, than any thing merely Corporeal, how
vast soever it can be, and is of a more excellent Nature, than the curiousest
piece of Mechanism in the world, the Humane Body; so to enquire what shall
become of it, and what Fates it is like to undergo hereafter, does better
deserve a man's Curiosity, than to know what shall befall the Corporeal
Universe, and might justly have been to Nebuchadnezzar a more desirable part of
knowledge, than that he was so troubled for want of, Dan. ij.31, 32, etc.
when it was adumbrated to him in the mysterious Dream, that contained the
Characters and Fates of the four Great Monarchies of the World. And as man is
entrusted with a Will of his own, whereas all material things move only as
they are moved, and have no self-determining power, on whose account they can
resist the Will of God; and as also of Angels, at least some Orders of them,
are of a higher Quality (if I may so speak) than Humane Souls; so it is very
probable, that in the Government of Angels, whether good or bad, that are
Intellectual Voluntary Agents, there is required and employed far greater
displays of Gods Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, than in the guidance of
Adiaphorous Matter; and the method of God's Conduct in the Government of these,
is a far nobler Object for men's Contemplation, than the Laws, according to
which the parts of Matter hit against, and justle, one another, and the effects
or results of such Motions.

And accordingly we find in Scripture, that, whereas about the production of
the material World, and the setting of the frame of Nature, God employed only
a few commanding Words, which speedily had their full effects; to govern the
Race of Mankind, even in order to their own Happiness, he employed not only
Laws and Commands, but Revelations, Miracles, Promises, Threats, Exhortations,
Mercies, Judgments, and diverse other Methods and Means; and yet oftentimes,
when he might well say, Isa. v.4.
as he did once by his Prophet, What could I have done more to my Vineyard that
I have not done it? he had just cause to expostulate as he did in the same
place, Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it
forth wild grapes? and to complain of men, as by that very Prophet he did even
of Israel, Isa. lxv.2.
I have spread out my hands all the day to a rebellious people. But not to
wander too far in this digression; what we have said of Men, may render it
probable, that the grand Attributes of God are more signally exercised, and
made more conspicuous in the making and governing of each of the three
Intellectual Communities, than in the framing and upholding the Community of
mere bodily things. And since all Immaterial Substances are for that reason
naturally Immortal, and the Universal Matter is believed so too, possibly those
Revolutions, that will happen after the Day of Judgment, wherein though
probably not the Matter, yet that state and constitution of it, on whose
account it is This World, will be destroyed, and make way for quite new Frames
and Sets of things corporeal, and the Beings that compose each of these
Intellectual Communities, will, in those numberless Ages they shall last,
travel through I know not how many successive changes and adventures; perhaps,
I say, these things will no less display, and bring glory, to the Divine
Attributes, than the Contrivance of the world, and the Economy of Man's
Salvation, though these be (and that worthily) the Objects of the Naturalists
and the Divines Contemplation. And there are some passages in the Prophetical
part of the Scripture, and especially in the Book of the Apocalypse, which, as
they seem to intimate, that as God will perform great and noble things, which
Mechanical Philosophy never reached to, and which the generality of Divines
seem not to have thought of; so diverse of those great things may be, in some
measure, discovered by an attentive Searcher into the Scriptures, and that so
much to the advantage of the devout Indagator, that St. John, near the
beginning of his Revelations, pronounces them happy, that read the matters
contained in this Prophecy, and Rev. j.3. To render the Original word (
observe, or) watch, rather than keep, seems more congruous to the sense of the
Text, and is a Criticism suggested to me by an eminent Mathematician as well as
Divine, who took notice, that the word (...) is used by the Greeks as a term of
Art, to express the Astronomical Observation of Eclipses, Planetary
Conjunctions, Oppositions, and other Celestial Phenomenon.
observe the things written therein. Which implies, that by heedful comparing
together the Indications couched in those Prophetic Writings, with Events and
Occurrences in the Affairs of the World, and the Church, we may discover much
of the admirable Economy of Providence in the Governing of both: And I am
prone to think, the early discoveries of such great and important things, to be
in Gods account no mean vouchsafements, not only because of the title of Happy
is here given to him that attains them, but because the two persons, to whom
the great discoveries of this kind were made, I mean, the Prophet Daniel and
St. John, the first is by the Angel said to be, on that account, a person
highly favored; and the other is in the Gospel represented as our Savior's
beloved Disciple. And you will the more easily think the foreknowledge of the
Divine Dispensations gatherable from Scripture to be highly valuable, if you
consider, that, according to St. Paul, those very Angels that are called
Principalities and Powers in heavenly places, (...). Ephis. iij.10*
learnt by the Church some abstruse points of the manifold wisdom of God. But I
must no longer indulge Speculations, that would carry my Curiosity beyond the
bounds of time it self, and therefore beyond those that ought to be placed to
this occasional excursion.

And yet, as on the one side, I shall not allow my self the presumption of
framing conjectures about those remote Dispensations, which will not, most of
them, have a beginning before this world shall have an end; so on the other
side I would not discourage you, or any pious Inquirer, from endeavoring to
advance in the knowledge of those Attributes of God, that may successfully be
studied, without prying into the Secrets of the future.

And here, Sir, let me freely confess to you, that I am apt to think, that, if
men were not wanting to Gods glory, and their own satisfaction, there would be
far more Discoveries made, than are yet attained to, of the Divine Attributes.
When we consider the most simple or uncompounded Essence of God, we may easily
be persuaded, that what belongs to Any of His Attributes (some of which
thinking men generally admire) must be an Object of Enquiry exceeding Noble,
and worthy of our knowledge. And yet the abstruseness of this knowledge is not
in All particulars so invincible, but that I strongly hope, a Philosophical
Eye, illustrated by the Revelations extant in the Scripture, may pierce a great
deal farther than has yet been done, into those mysterious Subjects, which are
too often (perhaps out of a mistaken Reverence) so poorly handled by Divines
and Schoolmen, that not only what they have taught, is not worthy of God (for
that is a necessary, and therefore excusable, deficiency) but too frequently it
is not worthy of Men, I mean, of Rational Creatures, that take upon them to
treat of such high Points, and instruct others about them. And I question not
but your Friend will the less scruple at this, if he call to mind those new and
handsome Notions about some of the Attributes of God, that his Master
Cartesius, though but moderately versed in the Scriptures, has presented us
with. Nor do I doubt but that a much greater progress might be made in the
Discovery of Subjects, where, though we can never know all, we may still know
farther, if Speculative Genius's would propose to themselves particular Doubts
and Enquiries about particular Attributes, and frame and examine Hypotheses,
establish Theorems, draw Corollaries; and (in short) apply to this study the
same sagacity, affiduity, and attention of mind, which they often employ about
Inquiries of a very much inferior nature; insomuch as Descartes (how profound
a Geometrician soever he were) confesses in one of his Epistles, that he
employed no less then six weeks to find the solution of a Problem or question
of Pappus. And Pythagoras was so addicted to, and concerned for Geometrical
Speculations, that when he had found that famous Proposition, which makes the
47 th. in Euclid's I. Book, he is recorded to have offered a Hecatomb, to
express his joy and gratitude for the Discovery: which yet was but of one
Property of one sort of Right-lin'd Triangles. And certainly if Christian
Philosophers did rightly estimate, how noble and fertile Subjects the Divine
Attributes are, they would find in them wherewithal to Exercise their best
parts, as well as to Recompense the Employment of them. But because what I
would dissuade, does not perhaps proceed only from Laziness, but from a
Mistake; as if there were little to be known of so Incomprehensible an Object
as God, save that in General all his Attributes are like himself, Infinite, and
consequently not to be fully Known by Humane Understandings, because They are
Finite; I shall add, that though it be true, that by Reason of God's Infinity,
we cannot Comprehend him, that is, have a full and adequate knowledge of him;
yet we may not only know very many things concerning him, but, which is more,
may make an Endless Progress in that Knowledge. As, no doubt, Pythagoras (newly
mentioned) knew very well what a Triangle was, and was acquainted with diverse
of its Properties and Affections before he discovered that famous One. And
though since him, Euclid, Archimedes, and other Geometricians have
demonstrated, I know not how many other Affections of the same Figure, yet they
have not to this day Exhausted the Subject: And possibly, I, (who pretend not
to be a Mathematician) may now and then in managing certain Aequations I had
occasion for, have lighted upon some Theorems about Triangles, that occurred
not to any of them. The Divine Attributes are such fruitful Themes, and so
worthy of our Admiration, that the whole Fabric of the Universe, and all the
Phenomena exhibited in it, are but Imperfect Expressions of Gods Wisdom, and
some few of his other Attributes. And I do not much marvel, that the Angels
themselves are represented in Scripture as employed in Adoring God, Isa. vj.2,
3. Luke ij.13, 14. Revel. v.11, 12.
and Admiring his Perfections. For even they being but Finite, can frame but
inadequate Conceptions of Him; and consequently must Endeavor by many of them
to make amends for the Incompleatness of every one of them; which yet they can
never but Imperfectly do. And yet Gods Infinity can but very improperly be made
a Discouragement of our Enquiries into his Nature and Attributes. For (not now
to examine whether Infinity, though expressed by a Negative word, be not a
Positive thing in God) we may, notwithstanding his Infinity, discover as much
of him as our Nature is capable of knowing: And what harm is it to him that is
drinking in a River, that he cannot drink up all the water, if he have liberty
fully to quench his thirst, and take in as much Liquor as his stomach can
contain. Infinity therefore should not hinder us from a Generous Ambition to
learn as much as we can of an Object, whose being Infinite does but make our
knowledge of it the more noble and desirable, which indeed it is in such a
degree, that we need not wonder that the Angels are represented as never weary
of their Employment of contemplating and praising God. For, as I lately
intimated, that they can have but inadequate Idea's of those boundless
Perfections, and by no number of those Idea's can arrive to make amends for the
Incompleatness of them; so it need not seem strange that in fresh Discoveries
of new Parts (if I may so call them) of the same Object, it being such a one,
they should find nobler and happier Entertainments than any where else variety
could afford them.

The second Section.
HAving thus taken notice of some Particulars of those many which may be
employed to show, how Noble the Objects are, that Theology proposes to be
contemplated; I now proceed to some Considerations that may make us sensible
how great an Obligation there lies on us, to addict our selves to the study of
them.

Yet of the Particulars whereon this Obligation may be grounded, I shall now
name but two, they being indeed comprehensive ones, Obedience, and Gratitude.

And first let me represent, that it needs not, I suppose, be solicitously
proved, That it is the Will and Command of God, that men should learn those
Truths that he has been pleased to teach, whether concerning his Nature or
Attributes, or the way wherein he will be Served and Worshipped by Man. For if
we had not Injunctions of Scripture to that purpose, yet your Friend is too
Rational a Man to believe, that God would so solemnly cause his Truths to be
published to Mankind, both by Preaching and Writing, without Intention to
Oblige, those (at least) that have the capacity and opportunity to enquire into
some of them; and if it appear to be His will, that a person so qualified,
should search after the most important Truths that he has revealed, it cannot
but be their duty to do so. For though the nature of the thing it self did not
lay any Obligation on us, yet the Authority of Him that Commands it, would:
since being the Supreme and Absolute Lord of all His Creatures, he has as well
a full right to make what Laws he thinks fit, and enjoin what service he thinks
fit, as a power to punish those that either violate the one, or deny the other;
and accordingly it is very observable, that before Adam fell, and had forfeited
his happy state by his own transgression, he not only had a Law Imposed upon
him, but such a Law, Genesis ij.16, 17.
as, being about a matter it self Indifferent (for so it was to eat or not to
eat of the Tree of Life as well as of any other,) derived its whole power of
obliging from the mere will and pleasure of the Lawgiver. Whence we may learn,
that Man is subject to the Laws of God, not as he is Obnoxious to him, but as
he is a Rational Creature, and that the thing that is not a duty in its own
nature, may become an indispensible one barely by its being commanded. And
indeed, if our first Parent in the state of Innocence and Happiness, wherein he
tasted of Gods Bounty, without, as yet, standing in need of his Mercy, was most
strictly obliged out of mere Obedience to conform to a Law, the matter of which
was indifferent in it self; sure we, in our lapsed condition, must be under a
high Obligation to obey the declared will of God, whereby we are enjoined to
study his Truths, and perform that which has so much of intrinsic Goodness in
it, that it would be a duty, though it were not commanded; and has such
Recompenses proposed to it, that it is not more a Duty, then it will be an
Advantage.

But it is not only Obedience and Interest that should engage us to the study
of Divine things, but Gratitude, and that exacted by so many important Motives,
that he who said, Ingratum si dixeris, omnia dixeris, could not think
Ingratitude so much worse than ordinary Vices, as a contempt of the Duty I am
pressing, would be worse than an ordinary Ingratitude.

It were not difficult on this occasion to manifest, that we are extremely
great Debtors unto God, both as he is the Author and the Preserver of our very
Beings; and as he (immediately or mediately) fills up the measure of those
continual Benefits with all the Prerogatives and other Favors we do receive
from him as Men; and the higher Blessings, which (if we are not wanting to our
selves) we may receive from him as Christians.

But to show, in how many Particulars, and to how high a Degree, God is our
Benefactor, were to lanch out into too Immense a Subject; which 'twere the less
proper for me to do, because I have in other Papers discoursed of those matters
already. Seraph. Love.
I will therefore single out a Motive of Gratitude, which will be peculiarly
pertinent to our present purpose. For whereas your Friend does so highly value
himself upon the Study of Natural Philosophy, and despises not only Divines,
but Statesmen, and even the Learned Men in other parts of Philosophy and
Knowledge, because they are not versed in Physics; he ows to God that very
Skill, among many other Vouchsafements. For it is God who made Man unlike the
Horse and the Mule, Psalm. xxxij.9.
who have no understanding, and endowed him with that noble power of Reason, by
the exercise of which he attains to whatever knowledge he has of Natural things
above the Beasts that perish. For, that may justly be applied to our other
Acquisitions, which Moses, by Gods appointment, told the Israelites concerning
the Acquists of Riches; where he bids the people beware, That when their Herds,
and their Flocks, and other Treasures were multiplied, their heart be not
lifted up, Deuteronomy. viij.10, 11, 12,
and prompt them to say, My power, and the might of my hand has gotten me this
wealth. But, (subjoyns that excellent Person, 13, 14,
as well as Matchless Lawgiver) Thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for it
is he that gives thee power to get wealth. 18,
But to make Men Rational Creatures, is not all God has done toward the making
them Philosophers. For, to the knowledge of particular things, Objects are as
well requisite as Faculties; and if we admit the probable Opinion of Divines,
who teach us, that the Angels were created before the Material World, as being
meant by those Sons of God, Job xxxviij.5, 6, 7.
and Morning Stars, that with glad Songs and Acclamations celebrated the
Foundations of the Earth; we must allow, that there were many creatures endowed
with at least as much Reason as your Friend, who yet were unacquainted with the
Mysteries of Nature, since She her self had not yet received a Being. Wherefore
God having as well made the World, as given Man the Faculties whereby he is
enabled to contemplate it; Naturalists are as much obliged to God for their
Knowledge, as we are for our Intelligence to those that write us Secrets in
Ciphers, and teach us the skill of decyphering things so written; or to those
who write what would fill a Page in the compass of a single Penny, and present
us to boot a Microscope to enable us to read it. And as the Naturalist has
peculiar Inducements to Gratitude for the Endowment of Knowledge; so Ingenuity
lays this peculiar Obligation on him to express his Gratitude in the way I have
been recommending, That it is one of the acceptablest ways it can be expressed
in; especially since by this way, Philosophers may not only exercise their own
gratitude toward God, but procure him that of others. How pleasing men's hearty
Praises are to God, may appear among other things, by what is said and done by
that Royal Poet, whom God was pleased to declare a man after his own heart; for
he introduces God pronouncing, Psa. L.23.
Whosoever offers Praise, glorifieth me; where the word our Interpreters render
offers, in the Hebrew signifies to Sacrifice; with which agrees, that
elsewhere those that pay God their Praises, are said to Sacrifice to him the
calves of their lips. Hos. xiv.2.
And that excellent Person, to whom God vouchsafed so particular a Testimony,
was so assiduous in this Exercise, that the Book which we, following the Greek,
call Psalms, is, in the Original, from the things it most abounds with, called
Sepher Tehillim, i. e. The Book of Praises. And to let you see, that many of
his Praises were such, as the Naturalist may best give, he exclaims in one
place, Psalm. civ.24.
How manifold are thy works, O Lord? how wisely have thou made them, (as Junius
and Tremellius render it, and the Hebrew will bear) and elsewhere, Psalm. xix.1.
The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handiwork, etc. Again, in another place, Psalm. cxxxix.14.
I will praise thee, because I am fearfully and wonderfully made. Mavelous
are thy works, and that my soul knows right well. And not content with many
of the like Expressions, he does several times in a devout Transport, and
Poetical strain, invite the Heavens, and the Stars, and the Earth, and the
Seas, and all the other Inanimate Creatures, to join with him in the
celebration of their common Maker. Which though it seem to be merely a Poetical
Scheme, yet in some sort it might become a Naturalist, who by making out the
Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of the Creator, and by reflecting thence on those
Particulars wherein those Attributes shine, may, by such a devout Consideration
of the Creatures, make them, in a sense, join with him in glorifying their
Author.

In any other case, I dare say, your Friend is not so ill natured, but that he
would think it an unkind piece of Ingratitude, if some great and excellent
Prince, having freely and transcendently obliged him, he should not concern
himself to know what manner of Man his Benefactor is; and should not be
solicitous to inform himself of those particulars, relating to the Person and
Affairs of that obliging Monarch, which were not only in themselves worthy of
any man's Curiosity, but about which the Prince had solemnly declared he was
very desirous to have men Inquisitive. And sure it is very disingenious, to
undervalue or neglect the knowledge of God Himself for a Knowledge which we
cannot attain without him, and by which he designed to bring us to that study
we neglect for it: which is not only not to use him as a Benefactor, but as if
he meant to punish him (if I may so speak) for having obliged us, since we so
abuse some of his Favors, as to make them Inducements to our Unthankful
Disregard of his Intentions in the rest. And this Ingratitude is the more
culpable, because the Laws of Ingenuity, and of Justice it self, charge us to
Glorify the Maker of all things visible, not only upon our own account, but
upon that of all his other works. For by Gods endowing of none but Man here
below with a Reasonable Soul, not only he is the sole visible Being that can
return Thanks and Praises in the World, and thereby is obliged to do so, both
for himself, and for the rest of the Creation; but it is for Man's advantage,
that God has left no other visible Beings in the World, by which he can be
studied and celebrated. For, Reason is such a Ray of Divinity, that, if God had
vouchsafed it to other parts of the Universe besides Man, the absolute Empire
of Man over the rest of the World must have been shared, or abridg'd. So that
he, to whom it was equally easy to make Creatures Superior to Man (as the
Scripture tells us of Legions, and Myriads of Angels) as to make them Inferior
to him, dealt so obligingly with Mankind, as rather to Trust (if I may so
speak) our Ingenuity, whether he shall reap any Celebrations from the Creatures
we converse with, than Lessen our Empire over them, or our Prerogatives above
them.

But I fear, that, notwithstanding all the Excellency of revealed Truths, and
consequently of that only Authentic Repository of them, the Scripture, you, as
well as I, have met with some (for I hope there are not many) Virtuosi, that
think to excuse the neglect of the study of it, by alleging, that to them who
are Laymen, not Ecclesiastics, there is required to Salvation the Explicit
knowledge but of very few Points, which are so plainly summed up in the
Apostles Creed, and are so often and conspicuously set down in the Scripture,
that one needs not much search or study it to find them there.

In answer to this Allegation, I readily grant, 1 Timothy ij.4.
that through the great goodness of God, who is willing to have all men saved,
and come to the knowledge of the Truth, that is necessary to be so, there are
much fewer Articles absolutely necessary to be by all men distinctly believed,
than may be met with in diverse long Confessions of Faith, some of which have, I
fear, less promoted Knowledge than impaired Charity. But then it may be also
considered, 1. That it is not so easy for a Rational Man, that will trouble
himself to enquire no farther than the Apostles Creed, to satisfy himself upon
good grounds, that all the Fundamental Articles of Christianity are contained
in it. 2. That the Creed proposes only the Credenda, Joh. xiij.7. Heb. v.9.
not the Agenda of Religion; whereas the Scriptures were designed, not only to
teach us what Truths we are to believe, but by what Rules we are to live; the
obedience to the Laws of Christianity being as necessary to Salvation, as the
belief of its Mysteries. 3. That besides the things which are absolutely
necessary, there are several that are highly useful, to make us more clearly
understand, and more rationally and firmly believe, and more steadily practice,
the points that are necessary. 4. And since, whether or no those words of our
Savior to the Jews, (...), Joh. v.39. Search, or, You search the Scriptures.
Coloss. iij.16.
be to be rendered in the Imperative or the Indicative Mode; St. Paul would have
the word of Christ to dwell richly in us, (by which, whether he mean the holy
Scriptures then extant, or the Doctrine of Christ, is not here material;)
thereby teaching us, that searching into the matters of Religion may become
necessary as a Duty, though it were not otherwise necessary as a Means of
attaining Salvation. And indeed it is far more pardonable to want or miss the
knowledge of Truths, than to despise or neglect it. And the goodness of God to
illiterate or mistaken persons, is to be supposed meant in pity to our
Frailties, not to encourage our Laziness; nor is it necessary, that he that
pardons those Seekers of his Truths that miss them, should excuse those
Despisers that will not seek them.

But whether or no by this designed neglect of Theology the persons, I deal
with, do sufficiently consult their own safety, I doubt they will not much
recommend their Ingenuity. For to have received from God a greater measure of
Intellectual Abilities than the generality of Christians, and yet willingly to
come short of very many of them, in the knowledge of the Mysteries and other
Truths of Christianity, which he often invites us, if not expressly commands, to
search after, is a course that will not relish of overmuch gratitude. Is it a
piece of That, and of Ingenuity, to receive ones Understanding and ones Hopes
of Eternal Felicity from the Goodness of God, without being sollicitous of what
may be known of his Nature and Purposes by so excellent a way as his own
Revelation of them? To dispute anxiously about the Properties of an Atome, and
be careless about the Inquiry into the Attributes of the great God, who formed
all things; Prove. xxvj.10.
to investigate the spontaneous generation of such vile Creatures as Insects,
than the Mysterious Generation of the Adorable Son of God; and, in a word, to
be more concerned to know every thing that makes a Corporeal part of the World,
than the Divine and Incorporeal Author of the whole?

And then, is it not, think you, a great piece of respect, that these men pay
to those Truths, which God thought fit to send sometimes Prophets and Apostles,
sometimes Angels, and sometimes his only Son himself to reveal, that such
Truths are so little valued by them, that rather than take the pains to study
them, they will implicitly, and at adventures believe, what that Society of
Christians, they chance to be born and bred in, have (truly or falsely)
delivered concerning them? And does it argue a due regard to points of
Religion, that those, who would not believe a Proposition in Staticks, perhaps
about a mere Point, the Center of Gravity, or in Geometry, about the Properties
of some nameless curve Line, or some such other things, (which to ignore, is
usually not a blemish, and about which, to be mistaken, is more usually without
danger,) should yet take up the Articles of Faith, concerning matters of great
and everlasting Consequence, upon the Authority of Men, Fallible as themselves,
when satisfaction may be had without them from the Infallible Word of God? In
this very unlike those Bereans, Acts xvij.11.
whom the Evangelist honors with the Title of Noble, that when the Doctrines
of the Gospel were proposed to them, they searched the Scriptures daily,
whether those things were so.

Again, if a man should refuse to learn to read any more, than just as much as
may serve his turn, by intituling him to the benefit of the Clergy, to save him
from hanging, would these men think so small a measure of Literature, as he had
acquired on such an account, could prove that man to be a Lover of Learning;
and yet a neglecter of the study of all not absolutely necessary-Divine Truths,
during ones life, because the belief of the Articles of the Creed may make a
shift to keep him from being doomed to Hell for Ignorance after his death, will
not by (what in a Learned man must be) so pitiful a degree of knowledge be much
better entitled to that Ingenuous Love of God and his Truths, that becomes a
Rational Creature and a Christian.

The ancient Prophets, though honored by God with direct Illuminations, 1 Pe^.
j.10, 11.
were yet very solicitous to find out and learn the very Circumstances of the
Evangelical Dispensations, which yet they did not know. And some of the Gospel
Mysteries are of so noble and excellent a nature, that the Angels themselves
desire to look into them. 1 Pet. j.^2.
And though all the Evangelical Truths are not precisely necessary to be known,
it may be both a Duty not to despise the study of them, and a Happiness to
employ our selves about it. It was the earnest Prayer of a great King, Psalm.
cxix.18.
and no less a Prophet, that his eyes might be opened to behold (not the
obvious and necessary Truths, but) the wondrous things of Gods Law. He is
pronounced Happy in the beginning of the Apocalypse, Revel. j.
that reads and observes the things contained in that dark and obscure part of
Scripture. And it is not only those Truths that make Articles of the Creed, but
diverse other Doctrines of the Gospel, that Christ himself judged worthy to be
concluded with this Epiphonema, He that has ears to hear, let him hear; on
which the excellent Grotius makes this just Paraphrase, Matthew. xj.15. Mark
iv.^, 23. Luke viij.8.
Intellectus nobis a Deo potissimum datus est, ut eum intendamus documentis ad
pietatem pertinentibus

The third Section.
I Come now to our third and last Inducement to the study of Divine things,
which consists in, and comprises the Advantages of that study, which do as much
surpass those of all other Contemplations, as Divine things transcend all other
Objects. And indeed, the utility of this study is so pregnant a Motive, and
contains in it so many Invitations, that your Friend must have as little sense
of Interest as of Gratitude, if he can neglect such powerful and such engaging
Invitations.

For, in the first place, Theological studies ought to be highly endeared to us
by the Delightfulness of considering such noble and worthy Objects as are
therein proposed.

The famous Answer given by an excellent Philosopher, who being asked what he
was born for, replied, To contemplate the Sun, may justly recommend their
choice, who spend their time in contemplating the Maker of the Sun, to whom
that glorious Planet it self is but a shadow. And perhaps that Philosopher
failed more in the Instance than in the Notion: For his Answer implies, That
Man's End and Happiness consists in the exercise of his noblest Faculties on
the noblest Objects. And surely the seat of Formal Happiness being the Soul,
and that Happiness consequently consisting in the Operations of her Faculties;
as the Supreme Faculty of the Mind is the Understanding, so the highest
Pleasures may be expected from the due Exercise of it upon the sublimest and
worthiest Objects. And therefore I wonder not, that though some of the
Schoolmen would assign the Will a larger share in Man's Felicity, than they
will allow the Intellect; yet the generality of them are quite of another mind,
and ascribe the Pre-eminence in point of Felicity to the Superior Faculty of
the Soul. But, whether or no this Opinion be true in all Cases, it may at least
be admitted in ours: For, the chief Objects of a Christian Philosophers
Contemplation, being as well the Infinite Goodness, as the other boundless
Perfections of God, they are naturally fitted to excite in his mind an ardent
love of that adorable Being, and those other joyous Affections and virtuous
Dispositions, that have made some men think Happiness chiefly seated in the
Will. But having intimated thus much by the way, I pass on to add, That the
contentment afforded by the assiduous discovery of God and Divine Mysteries,
has so much of affinity with the Pleasures, that shall make up men's Blessedness
in Heaven it self, that they seem rather to differ in Degree than in Kind. For,
the happy state even of Angels is by our Savior represented by this
Employment, that they continually see the face of his Father who is in Heaven.
And the same infallible Teacher, intending elsewhere to express the Celestial
Joys that are reserved for those, who for Their sake denied themselves sensual
Pleasures, imploys the Vision of God as an Emphatical Periphrase of Felicity,
Blessed, said he, are the pure in heart, Matthew. v.8.
for they shall see God. And as Aristotle teaches, that the Soul does after a
sort become that which it Speculates, St. Paul and St. John assure us, that God
is a transforming Object, and that in Heaven we shall be like him, 1 John
iij.2. (...)
for (or, because) we shall see him as he is. And though I readily admit, that
this Beatisick Vision of God, wherein the Understanding is the proper
Instrument, includes diverse other things which will concur to the complete
Felicity of the future Life; yet I think, we may be allowed to argue, that that
ravishing Contemplation of Divine Objects, will make no small part of that
happy Estate, which in these Texts take its Denomination from it.

I have above intimated, that the Scripture attributes to the Angels themselves
Transports of Wonder and Joy upon the Contemplation of God, and the Exercises
they consider of his Wisdom, Justice, or some other of his Attributes. But
least in referring you to the Angels, you should say, that I do in this
Discourse lay aside the Person of a Naturalist, in favor of Divines; I will
refer you to Des Carts himself, whom I am sure your Friend will allow to have
been a rigid Philosopher, if ever there were any. Thus then speaks he in that
Treatise, where he thinks he imploys a more than Mathematical Rigor; and where
he was obliged to utter those (I had almost said Passionate) words, I am going
to cite from him, only by the Impressions made on him by the transcendent
Excellency of the Ob^^ he Contemplated; Medit. tertia sub finem.
Sed priusquam (says he) hoc diligentius examinem, simulque in alias veritates
quae inde colligi possunt, inquiram, placet hic aliquandiu in ipsius Dei
contemplatione immorari, ejus attributa apud me expendere, and immensi hujus
Luminis pulchritudinem, quantum caligantis Ingenii mei acies far poterit,
intueri, admirari, adorare. Ut enim in hac sola Divinae Majestatis
Contemplatione summam alterius vitae felicitatem ex consistere fide credimus;
ita etiam jam ex eadem, licet multo minus perfecta, maximam, cujus in hac vita
capaces simus, voluptatem, percipi posse experimur.

But as high a satisfaction as the study of Divine things affords by the
Nobleness of its Object, the Contentment is not much Inferior that accrues
from the same study upon the score of the Sense of a man's having in it
performed his Duty. To make actions of this nature satisfactory to us, there is
no need, that the things we are employed about, should in themselves be
Excellent or Delightful; the inward gratulations of Conscience for having done
our Duties is able to ^^d the bitterest Pills, and, like the Wood that grew by
the Waters of Marah, Exodus xv.25.
to correct and sweeten that Liquor, which before was the most distastful.
Those ancient Pagan Heroes, whose Virtues may make us blush, being guided but
by natural Reason, and innate Principles of Moral Virtues, could find the most
difficult and most troublesome Duties, upon the bare account of their being
Duties, not only Tolerable but Pleasant. And though to deny some Lusts be, in
our Saviors esteem, no less uneasy, then for a man to pluck out his right
eye, Matthew. v.29, 30.
or cut off his right hand; yet even Ladies have with satisfaction chosen, not
only to deny themselves the greatest Pleasures of the Senses, but to Sacrifice
the Seat of them, the Body it self, to preserve the Satisfaction of being
Chaste. Nor are they only the Dictates of Obedience that we comply with in
this study, but those of Gratitude; and that is a Virtue that has so powerful
an Ascendant upon Ingenuous Minds, that those, whose Principles and Aims were
not elevated by Religion, have, in acknowledgment to their Parents and their
Country, courted the greatest Hardships, and Hazards, and Sufferings, as if
they were as great Delights and Advantages. And a grateful Person spends no
part of his Life to his greater satisfaction, than that which he ventures or
imploys for those to whom he is obliged for it; and oftentimes finds a greater
Contentment even in the difficultest Acknowledgments of a favor, than he did
in Receiving of it.

Another Advantage, and that no mean one, that may accrue from the
Contemplation of Theological Truths, is, the Improvement of the Contemplator
himself in point of Piety and Virtue. For, as the Gospel is styled, The mystery
of godliness; 1 Timothy iij.16.
and St. Paul elsewhere calls what it teaches, The truth which is according to
godliness, that is, Tit. j.1.
a Doctrine framed and fitted to promote the Interest of Piety and Virtue in
the World: so this Character and Encomium belongs (though perhaps not equally)
to the more Retired Truths discovered by Speculation, as well as to those more
Obvious ones, that are familiarly taught in Catechisms and Confessions of
Faith. I would by no means lessen the Excellency and Prerogatives of
Fundamentals; but, since the grand and noblest Engagements to Piety and Virtue,
are a high Veneration for God and his Christ, and an ardent Love of them; I
cannot but think, that those particular Inquiries, that tend to make greater
Discoveries of the Attributes of God, of the Nature, and Offices, and Life of
our Savior, and of the Wisdom and Goodness they have displayed in the
Contrivance and Effecting of Man's Redemption; do likewise tend to Increase our
Admiration, and Inflame our Love, for the Possessors of such Divine
Excellencies, and the Authors of such invaluable Benefits. And as the Brazen
Serpent, Numb. xxj.9.
that was but a Type of one of the Gospel Mysteries, brought Recovery to those
that looked up to it; so the Mysteries themselves, being duly considered, have
had a very Sanative Influence on many that contemplated Them. Nor is it likely,
that he that discerns more of the depth of Gods Wisdom and Goodness, should
not, caeteris paribus, be more disposed than others to Admire him, to Love him,
to Trust him, and so to resign up himself to be Governed by him: Which frame of
mind both is it self a great Part of the Worship of God, and does directly tend
to the Production and Increase of those Virtues, without the practice of which,
the Scripture plainly tells us, that we can neither Obey God, nor express our
Love to him. And from this Bettering of the mind by the study of Theology, will
flow (to add that upon the by) another Benefit, namely, that by giving us a
higher value for God and his Truths, it will endear Heaven to us, and so not
only assist us to come Thither, but heighten our Felicity There.

I know it may be said, that the Melioration of the mind is but a Moral
Advantage. But give me leave to Answer, that, besides that it is such a Moral
Advantage as supposes an Intellectual Improvement whose fruit it is, a Moral
Benefit may be great enough, even in the Judgment of a mere Philosopher, and an
Epicurean, to deserve as much study as Natural Philosophy it self. And that you
may not think that I speak this only, because I write in this Epistle as a
Friend to Divines, I will tell you, that Epicurus himself, who has now adays so
numerous a Sect of Naturalists to follow him, studied Physics, and writ so
many Treatises about them for this End, that by knowing the Natural Causes of
Thunder, Lightning, and other dreadful Phenomenon, the Mind might be freed from
the disquieting Apprehensions Men commonly had, that such strange and
formidable things proceeded from some incensed Deity, and so might trouble the
Mind, as well as the Air. This account I have been giving of Epicurus his
Design, is but what seems plainly enough intimated by his own words, preserved
us by Laertius, near the end of his Physiological Epistle to Herodotus, where
recommending to him the consideration of what he had delivered about Physical
Principles in general, and Meteors in particular, he subjoyns, Si enim ab istis
non discesserimus, tum id unde oritur perturbatio, Diogenis Laertii libr. 10.
quodque metum ingerit, recta cum ratione edisseremus, nosque ab ipsis
eximemus. And to this in the close of his Meteorological Epistle to Pythocles,
his best Interpreter, Gassendus, makes him speak consonantly, in these words,
Maxim vero deed teipsum speculationi Principiorum, ex quibus constant omnia,
and Infinitatis Naturae, aliorumque his cohaerentium Insuper vero and
Criteriorum, affectuumque animi, and scopum illius in quem ista edisserentes
collineavimus, attend, Tranquillitatem intelligo statumque mentis
imperturbatum. But this is not all the Testimony I can give you from Epicurus
himself to the same purpose, for among his Ratae Sententiae, preserved us by
Laertius, (himself reputed an Epicurean) I find one that goes further; Si nihil
(says he) conturbaret nos quod suspicamur, veremu que ex rebus sublimibus,
neque item quod ex ipsa morte, ne quando nimirum ad nos pertine at aliquid, ac
nosse praeterea possemus, qui Germani fines dolorum atque cupiditatum sint
((...)) nihil Physiologia indigeremus. Thus far the testimony of Epicurus, of
whose mind though I am not at all, as to what he would intimate, That
Physiology is either proper to free the Mind from the Belief of a Provident
Deity, and the Souls Immortality, or fit for no other considerable purposes;
yet this use we may well make of these Declarations, that, in Epicurus's
opinion, a Moral Advantage that relates to the Government of the Affections,
may deserve the pains of making Inquiries into Nature. And since it hence
appears, that a mere Philosopher, who admitted no Providence, may think it
worth his pains, to search into the abstrusest parts of Physics, and the
difficultest Phenomenon of Nature, only to ease himself of one troublesome
Affection, Fear; it need not be thought Unphilosophical, to prosecute a Study,
that will not only Restrain One undue Passion, but Advance All Virtues, and
free us from all Servile Fears of the Deity; and tend to give us a strong and
well-grounded Hope in Him; and make us look upon Gods greatest Power, not with
Terror, but with Joy.

There is yet another Advantage belonging to the study of Divine Truths, which
is too great to be here pretermitted. For whereas there is scarce any thing
more incident to us whilst we inhabit our ( Batte Chomer) Cottages of Clay, Job
iv.19.
and dwell in this vale of tears, than Afflictions; it ought not a little to
endear to us the newly mentioned Study, that it may be easily made to afford us
very powerful Consolations in that otherwise uneasy state.

I know it may be said, that the Speculations about which the Naturalist is
busied, are as well pleasing Diversions, as noble Employments of the Mind. And
I deny not that they are often so, when the Mind is not hindered from applying
it self attentively to them; so that Afflictions slight and short may well be
weathered out by these Philosophical Avocations; but the Greater and Sharper
sort of Afflictions, and the approaches of Death, require more powerful
Remedies, than these Diversions can afford us. For in such cases, the Mind is
wont to be too much discomposed, to apply the attention requisite to the
finding a pleasure in Physical Speculations; and in Sicknesses, the Soul is
oftentimes as indisposed to relish the Pleasures of merely Humane Studies, as
the languishing Body is to relish those Meats, which at other times were
delightful: And there are but few that can take any great pleasure to study the
World, when they apprehend themselves to be upon the point of being driven out
of it, and in danger of losing all their share in the Objects of their
Contemplation. It will not much qualify our Sense of the burning heat of a
Fever, or the painful gripes of the Cholick, to know, That the three Angles of
a Triangle are equal to two Right ones; or that Heat is not a real Quality (as
the Schools would have it,) but a Modification of the Motion of the Insensible
parts of Matter; and Pain not a Distinct, Inherent Quality in the things that
produce it, but an Affection of the Sentiment. The Naturalists Speculations
afford him no Consolations that are extraordinary in, or peculiar to, the state
of Affliction; and the Avocations they present him with, do rather Amuse the
mind from an Attention to lesser Evils, than bring it any Advantages to Remove
or Compensate them* and so work rather in the nature of Opiates, than of true
Cordials.

But now, if such a Person as Dr. N. falls into Adversity, the case is much
otherwise; for we must consider, that when the study of Divine things is such
as it ought to be, though, That in it self, or in the Nature of the Employment,
be an act or exercise of Reason; yet being applied to, out of Obedience, and
Gratitude, and Love to God, it is upon the account of its Motives, and its Aim,
an act of Religion; and as it proceeds from Obedience, and Thankfulness, and
Love to God, so it is most acceptable to him; and upon the account of his own
Appointment, as well as Goodness, is a most proper and effectual means of
obtaining his Favor; and then I presume, it will easily be granted, that he
who is so happy as to enjoy That, can scarce be made miserable by Affliction.
For not now to enter upon the Commonplace of the Benefits of Afflictions to
them that love God, and to them that are loved by him, it may suffice, that he
who (as the Scripture speaks) knows our frame, Psalm. ciij.14.
and has promised those that are his, 1 Cor. 10.13.
that they shall not be Over-burden'd, is disposed and wont to give his
afflicted Servants, both extraordinary Comforts in Afflictions, and Comforts
appropriated to that state. For though Natural Philosophy be like its brightest
Object, the Stars, which, however the Astronomer can with pleasure Contemplate
them, are unable, being mere Natural Agents, to afford him a kinder Influence
than usual, in case he be cast upon his Bed of Languishing, or into Prison; yet
the Almighty and Compassionate Maker of the Stars, being not only a Voluntary,
but the most Free, Agent, can suit and proportion his Reliefs to our
Necessities, and alleviate our heaviest Afflictions by such supporting
Consolations, that not only they can never surmount our Patience, but are
oftentimes unable so much as to hinder our Joy; and when Death, that King of
Terrors, presents it self, Job xviij.14.
whereas the mere Naturalist sadly expects to be deprived of the pleasure of
his knowledge by losing those Senses and that World, which are the Instruments
and the Objects of it; and perhaps (discovering beyond the Grave nothing but
either a state of Eternal Destruction, or of Eternal Misery,) fears either to
be Confined for ever to the Sepulcher, or exposed to Torments that will make
even such a Condition desirable; the pious Student of Divine Truths, is not
only freed from the wracking Apprehensions of having his Soul reduced to a
state of Annihilation, or cast into Hell, but enjoys a comfortable expectation
of finding far greater Satisfaction than ever in the Study he now rejoices to
have pursued; since the change, that is so justly formidable to others, will
but bring him much nearer to the Divine O^jects of his devout Curiosity, and
strangely Elevate and Enlarge his Faculties to apprehend them.

And this leads me to the mention of the last Advantage belonging to the study
I would persuade you to; and indeed, the highest Advantage that can recommend
Any Study, or invite Men to any Undertaking; for this is no less than the
Everlasting fruition of the Divine Objects of our Studies hereafter, and the
comfortable Expectation of it here. For the employing of ones time and parts,
to admire the Nature and Providence of God, and contemplate the Divine
Mysteries of Religion, as it is one of the chief of those Homages and Services,
whereby we Venerate and Obey God; so it is one of those, to which he has been
pleased to apportion no less a Recompense, Dan. ix.21, 22. Luke j.11, 26. Acts
x.4, 5, 6. 1 Pet. j.12.
than (that which can have no greater) the Enjoyment of Himself. The Saints and
Angels in Heaven have diverse of them been employed to convey the Truths of
Theology, and are sollicitous to look into those Sacred Mysteries; and God has
been pleased to appoint, that those men who study the same Lessons that they do
here, shall study them in their company hereafter. And doubtless, though Heaven
abound with unexpressible Joys, yet it will be none of the least that shall
make up the Happiness even of that Place, that the Knowledge of Divine things,
that was here so zealously Pursued, shall there be completely Attained. For
those things that do here most excite our Desires, and quicken the Curiosity
and Industry of our Searches, will not only there Continue, but be Improved to
a far greater measure of Attractiveness and Influence. For all those Interests,
and Passions, and Lusts, that here below either hinder us from clearly
Discerning, or keep us from sufficiently Valuing, or divert us from attentively
enough Considering, the Beauty and Harmony of Divine Truths, will there be
either abolished, or transfigur'd: And as the Object will be Unveiled; so our
Eye will be Enlightened, that is, as God will there disclose those worthy
Objects of the Angels Curiosity, so he will Enlarge our Faculties, to enable us
to gaze without being dazzled upon those sublime and radiant Truths, whose
Harmony as well as Splendour we shall be then qualified to Discover, and
consequently with Transports to Admire. And this Enlargement and Elevation of
our Faculties, will, proportionably to its own measure, Increase our
Satisfaction at the Discoveries it will enable us to make. For Theology is like
a Heaven, which wants not more Stars than appear in it, but we want Eyes,
quick-sighted and piercing enough to reach them. And as the Milky Way, and
other Whiter parts of the Firmament, have been full of Immortal Lights from the
beginning, and our new Telescopes have not placed, but found them, there; so,
when our Savior, after his glorious Resurrection, instructed his Apostles to
teach the Gospel, it is not said that he altered any thing in the Scriptures of
Moses and the Prophets, but only opened and enlarged their Intellects, Luke
xxiv.45. Psalm. cxix.18.
that they might understand the Scriptures: And the Royal Prophet makes it his
Prayer, That God would be pleased to open his eyes, that he might see wonderful
things out of the Law; being (as was above intimated) so well satisfied, that
the Word of God wanted not Admirable things, that he is only sollicitous for
the Improvement of his own Eyes, that they might be qualified to discern them.

I had almost forgotten one particular, about the Advantages of Theological
Studies, that is too considerable to be left unmention'd: For as great as I
have represented the Benefits accruing from the Knowledge of Divine Truths; yet
to endear them to us, it may be safely added, that, to procure us these
Benefits, the actual Attainment of that Knowledge is not always absolutely
Necessary, but a hearty Endeavor after it may suffice to entitle Us to them.
The patient Chemist, that consumes himself and his Estate in seeking after the
Philosophers Stone, if he miss of his Idolized Elixir, had as good, nay better,
have never sought it, and remains as poor in Effect, as he was rich in
Expectation. The Husbandman that employs his Seed and Time, to obtain from the
Ground a plentiful Harvest, if, after all, an unkind Season happen, must see
his toil made fruitless; -- longique perit labor irritus Anni.

Too many Patients, that have punctually done and suffered for Recovery all
that Physicians could prescribe, meet at last with Death in stead of Health.
You know what entertainment has been given by skilful Geometricians to the
laborious endeavors, even of such famous Writers as Scaliger, Longomontanus,
and other Tetragonists; and that their Successor Mr. Hobbs, after all the ways
he has taken, and those he has proposed, to Square the Circle, and Double the
Cube, by missing of his end, has, after his various attempts, come off, not
only with Disappointment, but with Disgrace. And (to give an Instance even in
things Celestial) how much pains has been taken to find out Longitudes, and
make Astrological Precictions with some certainty, which for want of coming up
to what they aimed at, have been useless, if not prejudicial to the Attempters.

But God (to speak with St. Paul on another occasion) that made the world, Acts
xvij.24, 25.
and all things therein, and is Lord of heaven and earth, seeks not our
Services, as though He needed any thing, seeing he gives Life, and Breath, and
all things: His Self-sufficiency and Bounty are such, that He seeks in our
Obedience the Occasions of rewarding it, and prescribes us Services, because
the Practice of them is not only suitable to our Rational Nature, but such as
will prevail with his Justice, to let His Goodness make our Persons happy.
Agreeably to this Doctrine we find in the Scripture, that Abraham is said to
have been justified by faith, Jam. ij.21.
when he offered his son Isaac upon the Altar, (though he did not Actually
sacrifice him) because he endeavored to do so; although, God graciously
accepting the Will for the Deed, accepted also of the blood of a Ram instead of
Isaac's. And thus we know, that 'twas not David, but Solomon that built the
Temple of Jerusalem, and yet God says to the former of those Kings (as we are
told by the latter) For as much as it was in thine heart to build an House for
my name thou did well in that it was in thine heart; 2 Chronicles. vj.8, 9.
notwithstanding thou shall not build the House, etc. And if we look to the
other Circumstances of this Story, as they are delivered in the Second Book of
Samuel, 2 Samuel vij.
we shall find, that upon David's declaration of a design to build God an
house, God himself vouchsafes to honor him, as he once did Moses, with the
peculiar Title of His Servant; ver. 5.
and commands the Prophet to say to him, ver. 11.
Also the Lord tells thee, that He will make Thee an House: To which is added
one of the graciousest Messages that God ever sent to any particular man. By
which we may learn, that God approves and accepts even those Endeavors (of his
Servants) if they be real and sincere, that never come to be actually
accomplished: Good Designs and Endeavors are our part, but the events of
those, as of all other things, are in the All-disposing hand of God, who, if we
be not wanting to what lies in us, will not suffer us to be Losers by the
defeating Dispositions of his Providence* but crown our endeavors either with
Success, or with some other Recompense, that will keep us from being Losers by
missing of that. And indeed, if we consider the great Elogies that the
Scripture, as well frequently as justly, gives God's Goodness (which it
represents as Over, or as Above, Hab. j.13.
all his Works) and that his purer eyes Punish, as well as See, the Murder and
Adultery of the heart, when those Intentional sins are hindered from advancing
into Actual ones; we can scarce doubt but He, whose Justice punishes sinful
Aims, will allow his Infinite Goodness to recompense pious Attempts: And
therefore our Savior pronounces them blessed, Matthew. v.6.
that hunger and thirst after righteousness, assuring Them that they shall be
satisfied, and thereby sufficiently intimating to us, That an earnest Desire
after a Spiritual Grace (and such is the knowledge of Divine things) may
entitle a man to the complete Possession of it, if not in This life, yet in the
Next, 2 Cor. v.7.
where we shall not any more walk by Faith, but by Sight, and obtain as well a
Knowledge as other Endowments, befitting that Glorious state, wherein the
Purchaser of it for Us, Luke xx.36.
assures us, that we shall be [(...)] equal, or like to the Angels.

The Considerations, Sir, I have hitherto laid before you, to recommend the
Study of Divine Truths, have, I hope, persuaded you, That it is on many accounts
both noble and eligible in it self; and therefore I shall here conclude the
First Part of this Discourse. And in regard that the Undervaluation
Physiophilus expresses for that excellent Employment, seems to flow (chiefly at
least) from his fondness and partiality for Natural Philosophy; it will next
concern us to compare the study of Theology with that of Physics, and show,
that the Advantages which your Friend alleges in favor of the Latter, are
partly much lessened by disadvantageous Circumstances, and partly much
out-weigh'd by the Transcendent Excellencies of Theological Contemplations: The
study whereof will thereby appear to be not only Eligible in it self, but
Preferrible to its Rival. And I must give you warning to expect to find the
Second Part, which the making this Comparison challenges to it self, a good
deal more Prolix than the First; not only because it often requires more
trouble, and more words to detect and disprove an Error, than to make out a
Truth; but also because that diverse things tending to the Credit of Divinity,
and which consequently might have been brought into the First Part of this
Discourse, were thought more fit to be interwoven with other things, in the
Answers made to the Objections examined in the Second.

THE EXCELLENCY OF THEOLOGY: OR, The Preeminence of the Study of Divinity,
above that of Natural Philosophy. THE SECOND PART.
I Shall, without Preamble, begin this Discourse, by considering the
Delightfulness of Physics, as the main thing that inveigles your Friend, and
diverse other Virtuosi, from relishing, as they ought, and otherwise would, the
pleasantness of Theological Discoveries. And to deal ingenuously with you, I
shall not scruple to acknowledge, that though the Address I have made to Nature
has lasted several years, and has been toilsome enough, and not unexpensive;
yet I have been pleased enough with the favors, such as they are, that she has
from time to time accorded me, not to complain of having been unpleasantly
employed. But though I readily allow the seize of Naturalists to be able
to give Philosophical Souls sincerer Pleasures, than those that the more
undiscerning part of Mankind is so fond of; yet I must not therefore allow them
to surpass, or even equal, the Contentment, that may accrue to a Soul qualified
by Religion, to relish the best things most from some kind of Theological
Contemplations.

This, I presume, will sufficiently appear, if I show you, that the Study of
Physiology is not unattended with considerable Inconveniences, and that the
pleasantness of it may be, by a Person studious of Divinity, enjoyed with
endearing Circumstances.

But before I name any of the particular Reasons that I am to represent, I fear
it may be requisite to interpose a few words, to obviate a mistake, which, if
not prevented, may have an ill aspect, not only upon the first Section, but
upon a great part of the following Discourse. For I know that it may be said,
that whereas I allege diverse things, to lessen the lately mentioned
delightfulness of the study of Physic, and to depreciate some other advantages,
by which the following Sections would recommend it, some of the same things may
be objected against the delightfulness of the study of Divinity. But this
Objection will not, I presume, much move you, if you consider the argument and
scope of the two parts of this Letter. For in the former I have shown by
positive Proofs, that the study of Theology is attended with diverse advantages,
which belong to it, either only as some of them do, or principally as others.
And now in the second part I come to consider, whether what is alleged in
behalf of the study of Philosophy, deserve to counter-ballance those
Prerogatives or Advantages; and therefore it neither need be, nor is my design,
to compare, for instance, the delightfulness of the two studies, Philosophy and
Physics, but by showing the Inconveniences that allay the latter, to weaken
the Argument that is drawn from that delightfulness, to conclude it preferrable
to the study of Theology. So that my work, in this and the following Sections,
is, not so much to institute Comparisons, as to obviate or answer Allegations.
For since I have in the past Discourse grounded the Excellency of the study of
Divinity, chiefly upon those great advantages that are peculiar to it; my
Reasonings would not be frustrated, though it should appear, that in point of
Delightfulness, Certainty, etc. that Study should, in many cases, be liable to
the same Objections with the Study of Nature, since it is not mainly for these
Qualities, but, as I was saying, for other and peculiar Excellencies that I
recommended Divinity, And therefore, supposing the Delightfulness, etc. of that
and of Physics, to be allayed by the same, or equal Inconveniences or
Imperfections; that Supposition would not hinder the Scales to be swayed in
favor of Divinity, upon the score of those Advantages that are unquestioned,
and peculiarly belong to it. I know not whether I need add, that,
notwithstanding this, you are not to expect, that I should give Philosophy the
wounds of an Enemy. For my design being not to discourage you, nor any
Ingenious man, from courting Her at all, nor from courting Her much, but from
courting her too much, and despising Divinity for her, I employ against her not
a Sword to wound her, but a Balance, to show, that her Excellencies, though
solid and weighty, are less so, than the preponderating ones of Theology. And
this temper and purpose of mine renders my Task difficult enough to have,
perhaps, some right to your pardon* as well as some need of it, if I do not
every where steer so exactly, as equally to avoid injuring the Cause I am to
plead for, and disparaging a Study, which I would so little depreciate, that I
allow it a great part of my Inclinations, and not a little share of my Time.
And having said this, to keep the Design of this Discourse from being
misunderstood, I hope we may now proceed to the particulars, whose scope we
have been declaring.

Returning then to what I was about to say before this long, but needful,
Advertisement interrupted me, I shall resume my Discourse of the Delightfulness
of the Study of Physics, about which I was going in the first place to tell
you, that I know you and your Friend will freely grant me, that the knowledge
of the empty and barren Physiology, that is taught in the Schools, as it exacts
not much pains to be acquired, so it affords but little satisfaction when
attained. And as I know you will give me leave to say this; so, being warranted
by no slight experience of my own, I shall take leave to say also, that the
study of that Experimental Philosophy, which is that whereof your Friend is so
much enamored, is, if it be duly prosecuted, a very troublesome and laborious
Employment. For, (to mention at present but This) that great variety of Objects
the Naturalist is not only by His Curiosity, but by Their secret dependances
upon one another, engaged to consider, and several ways to handle, will put him
upon needing, and consequently upon applying himself to such a Variety of
Mechanic People, (as Distillers, Drugsters, Smiths, Turners, etc.) that a
great part of his time, and perhaps all his Patience, shall be spent in waiting
upon Tradesmen, and repairing the losses he sustains by Their disappointments,
which is a Drudgery greater than any, who has not tried it, will imagine, and
which yet being as inevitable as unwelcome, does very much counter-ballance and
allay the Delightfulness of the Study we are treating of. In which so great a
part of a man's care and time must be laid out in providing the Apparatus'es
necessary for the trying of Experiments.

But this is not all. For when you have brought an Experiment to an Issue,
though the Event may often prove such as you will be pleased with; yet it will
seldom prove such as you can acquiesce in. For it fares not with an
Inquisitive mind in studying the Book of Nature, as in reading of Aesop's
Fables, or some other collection of Apologues of differing sorts, and
independent one upon another; where when you have read over as many at one time
as you think fit, you may leave off when you please, and go away with the
pleasure of understanding those you have perused, without being solicited by
any troublesome Itch of Curiosity to look after the rest, as those which are
needful to the better understanding of those you have already gone over, or
that will be explicated by them, and scarce without them. But in the Book of
Nature, as in a well contrived Romance, the parts have such a connection and
relation to one another, and the things we would discover are so darkly or
incompleatly knowable by those that precede them, that the mind is never
satisfied till it comes to the end of the Book; till when all that is
discovered in the progress, is unable to keep the mind from being molested with
Impatience to find that yet concealed, which will not be known till one does at
least make a further progress. And yet the full discovery of Natures Mysteries,
is so unlikely to fall to any man's share in this Life, that the case of the
Pursuers of them is at best like theirs, that light upon some excellent
Romance, of which they shall never see the latter parts. For indeed (to speak
now without a Simile) there is such a Relation betwixt Natural Bodies, and they
may in so many ways (and diverse of them unobserved) work upon, or suffer from,
one another, that he who makes a new Experiment, or discovers a new
Phenomenon, must not presently think, that he has discovered a new Truth, or
detected an old Error. For, (at least if he be a considering man) he will
oftentimes find reason to doubt, whether the Experiment or Observation have
been so skilfully and warily made in all circumstances, as to afford him such
an Account of the matter of fact, as a severe Naturalist would desire. And
then, supposing the Historical part no way defective, there are far more Cases
than are taken notice of, wherein so many differing Agents may produce the
exhibited Phenomenon, or have a great Influence upon the Experiment or
Observation, that he must be less jealous than becomes a Philosopher, to whom
Experiments do not oftentimes as well suggest new doubts, as present new
Phenomenon.

And even those Trials, that end in real Discoveries, do, by reason of the
connection of Physical Truths, and the relations that Natural Bodies have to
one another, give such hopes and such desires of improving the Acquists we have
already made, to the explicating of other Difficulties, or the making of
further Discoveries, that an Inquisitive Naturalist finds his work to increase
daily upon his hands, and the event of his past Toils, whether it be good or
bad, does but engage him into new ones, either to free himself from his
scruples, or improve his successes. So that, though the pleasure of making
Physical Discoveries, is, in it self considered, very great; yet this does not
a little impair it, that the same attempts which afford that delight, do so
frequently beget both anxious Doubts, and a disquieting Curiosity. So that, if
knowledge be, as some Philosophers have styled it, the Aliment of the Rational
Soul, I fear I may too truly say, that the Naturalist is usually fain to live
upon Sallads and Sauces, which though they yield some nourishment, excite more
appetite than they satisfy, and give us indeed the pleasure of eating with a
good stomach, but then reduce us to an unwelcome necessity of always rising
hungry from the Table.

Of diverse things, that lessen the Delightfulness of Physiological Studies, I
do so amply discourse in other Papers, that I might well remit you thither; but
indeed it is not necessary that I should insist on this Argument any further.
It Is true, that such a Reference might be very proper, if the Mysteries of
Theology and Physic were like those of Theology and Necromancy, or some other
part of unlawful Magic, whereof the former could not be well relished without
an abhorrence of the latter. But as the two great Books, of Nature and of
Scripture, have the same Author; so the study of the latter does not at all
hinder an Inquisitive man's delight in the study of the former. The Doctor I am
pleading for, may as much relish a Physical Discovery, as Physiophilus; nay, by
being addicted to Theology and Religion, he is so far from being incapable of
the contentments accruing from the study of Nature, that beside those things
that recommend it to others, there are several things that peculiarly endear it
to Him.

For I. he has the contentment to look upon the wonders of Nature, not only as
the Productions of an admirably wise Author of things, but of such an one as he
entirely honors and loves, and to whom he is related. He that reads an
excellent Book, or sees some rare Engine, will be otherwise affected with the
sight or the perusal, if he knows it to have been made by a Friend, or a
Parent, than if he considers it but as made by a stranger, whom he has no
particular reason to be concerned for. And if Rehoboam did not as well
degenerate from the sentiments of Mankind, as from his Family, he could not but
look upon that Magnificent Temple of Solomon with another Eye, than did the
throngs of Strangers that came only to gaze at it, as an admirable piece of
Architecture, whilst he considered that 'twas his Father that built it. And if
(as we see) the same Heroic Actions, which we read in History, of some great
Monarch, that strangers barely and unconcernedly admire, the Natives of his
Country do not only venerate, but affectionately interest themselves therein,
because they are his Contrymen, and their Ancestors were his Subjects: How
much may we suppose the same Actions would affect them, if they had the honor
to be that Prince's Children? We may well therefore presume, that it is not
without a singular satisfaction, that the Contemplator, we are speaking of,
does in all the Wonders of Nature discover, how wise, and potent, and bountiful
that Author of Nature is, in whom he has a great Interest, and that so great an
one, as both to be admitted into the number of his Friends, and adopted into
the number of his Sons, and is thereby in some measure concerned in all the
Admirations and Praises, that are paid either by himself or others, to those
Adorable Attributes that God has displayed in that great Masterpiece of Power
and Wisdom, the World. And when he makes greater discoveries in these Expresses
and Adumbrations of the Divine Perfections, the delightfulness of his
Contemplation is proportionably increased upon such an Account, as that, which
indears to the passionate Lover of some charming Beauty an Excellent, above an
Ordinary, Picture of her; because that the same things that make him, as it
does other Gazers, look upon it as a finer piece, make Him look upon it as the
more like his Mistress, and thereby entertain him with the sublimer Idea's of
the beloved Original; to whose transcendent Excellencies he supposes that the
Noblest Representations must be the most resembling.

And there is a farther Reason, why our Contemplator should find a great deal
of contentment in these Discoveries. For we have in our nature so much of
Imperfection, and withal so much of Inclination to self-love, that we do too
confidently proportion our Idea's of what God can do for us, to what we have
already the knowledge or the possession of. And though, when we make it our
business, we are able with much ado somewhat to enlarge our apprehensions, and
raise our expectations beyond their wonted pitch; yet still they will be but
scantly promoted and heightened, if those things themselves be but mean and
ordinary, which we think we have done enough if we make them surpass. A
Country Villager, born and bred in a homely Cottage, cannot have any suitable
apprehensions of the Pleasures and Magnificence of a great Monarchs Court. And
if he should be bid to scrue up his Imagination to frame Idea's of them, they
would be borrowed from the best Tiled House he had seen in the Market Towns
where he had sold his Turnips or Corn, and the Wedding-feast of some
neighboring Farmers Daughter. And though a Child in the Mother's womb had the
perfect use of Reason, yet could it not in that dark Cell have any Idea's of
the Sun or Moon, or Beauties or Banquets, or Algebra or Chemistry, and many
other things, which his Elder Brothers, that breath fresh Air, and freely
behold the Light, and are in a more mature Estate, are capable of knowing and
enjoying. Now among Thinking men, whose thoughts run much upon that future
state which they must shortly enter into, but shall never pass out of; there
will frequently and naturally arise a distrust, which though seldom owned,
proves oftentimes disquieting enough! For such men are apt to question, how the
future condition which the Gospel promises, can afford them so much happiness
as it pretends to; since they shall in Heaven but Contemplate the Works of God,
and praise him, and converse with him, all which they think may, though not
immediately, be done by men here below, without being happy: But he that by
Telescopes and Microscopes, dexterous Dissections, and well employed Furnaces,
etc. discovers, the wondrous power and skill of him that contrived so vast and
immense a Mass of Matter, into so curious a piece of Workmanship as this World,
will pleasingly be convinced of the boundless power and goodness of the great
Architect. And when he sees how admirably every Animal is furnished with parts
requisite to his respective nature; and that there is particular care taken,
that the same Animal, as for example, Man, should have differing provisions
made for him according to his differing states within the womb, and out of it,
(a humane Egg, and an Embrio, being much otherwise nourished and fitted for
action, than is a (complete) Man;) He, I say, who considers this, and observes
the stupendous Providence, and excellent Contrivances, that the curious Priers
into Nature (and none but they) can discover, will be as well enabled as
invited to reason thus within himself: That sure God, who has with such
admirable Artifice framed Silkworms, Butterflies, and other meaner Insects,
and with such wonderful providence taken care, that the nobler Animals should
as little want any of all the things requisite to the completing of their
respective Natures; and who, when he pleases, can furnish some things with
Qualifications, quite differing from those which the knowledge of his other
works could have made us imagine, (as is evident in the Lodestone and in
Quicksilver among Minerals, and the Sensitive Plant among Vegetables, the
Camelion among Animals, etc.) This God, I say, must needs be fully able to
furnish those he delights to honor* with Objects suitable to their improved.
Faculties, and with all that is requisite to the Happiness he intends them in
their glorified state; and is able to bring this to pass by such amazing
contrivances, as perhaps will be quite differing from any, that the things we
have yet seen suggest to us any Idea's of. And sure he, that has in so immense,
so curious, and so magnificent a Fabric, made such provision for Men, who are
either desperately wicked, or but very imperfectly good, and in a state where
they are not to Enjoy happiness, but by Obedience and Sufferings to Fit
themselves for it, may safely be trusted with finding them in Heaven
Employments and Delights becoming the Felicity he designs them There; as we see
that here below, he provides as well for the soaring Eagle, as for the creeping
Caterpillar, (and is able to keep the Ocean as fully supplied with Rivers, as
Lakes or Ponds are with Springs and Brooks.) And as a state of Celestial
happiness is so great a Blessing, that those things that afford us either
greater assurances, or greater foretastes of it, are of the number of the
greatest Contentments and Advantages, that short of It we can enjoy; so it is
hard for any Divine to receive so much of this kind of satisfaction, as he who
by skilfully looking into the Wonders of Nature, has his apprehensions of God's
power and manifold wisdom (as an Apostle calls it) elevated and enlarged.
Ephesians. iij.10.
As when the Queen of Sheba had particularly surveyed the astonishing Prudence
that Solomon displayed in the ordering of his Magnificent Court; she
transportedly concluded those Servants of his to be happy enough to deserve a
Monarchs Envy, that were allowed the Honor and Privilege of a constant and
immediate Attendance on him.

The second Section.
I Doubt not but you have too good an Opinion of your Friend, not to think that
you may allege in his favor, that the chief thing which makes him prefer
Physiology to all other kind of knowledge, is, That it enables those who are
Proficients in it to do a great deal of good, both by improving of Trades, and
by promoting of Physic it self. And I am too mindful of what I writ to
Pyrophilus, to deny, either that it can assist a man to advance Physic and
Trades, or that, by so doing, he may highly advantage Mankind. And this, I,
(who would not lessen your Friends Esteem for Physics, but only his
Partiality) willingly acknowledge to be so allowable an Endearment of
Experimental Philosophy, that I do not know any thing, that to men of a Humane,
as well as Ingenious Disposition, ought more to recommend the study of Nature;
except the opportunity it affords men to be Just and Grateful to the Author
both of Nature and of Man. I do not then deny, that the true Naturalist may
very much benefit Mankind; but I affirm, that, if men be not wanting to
themselves, the Divine may benefit them much more. It were not perchance either
unseasonable, or impertinent to tell you on this occasion, that he who
effectually teaches men to subdue their Lusts and Passions, does as much as the
Physician contribute to the preservation of their Bodies, by exempting them
from those Vices, whose no less usual than destructive Effects are Wars, and
Duels, and Rapines, and Desolations, and the Pox, and Surfets, and all the
train of other Diseases that attend Gluttony and Drunkenness, Idleness and
Lust; which are not Enemies to Man's Life and Health barely upon a Physical
account, but upon a Moral one, as they provoke God to punish them with Temporal
as well as Spiritual Judgments; such as Plagues, Wars, Famines, and other
public Calamities, that sweep away a great part of Mankind; besides those
personal afflictions of Bodily Sickness, and disquiets of Conscience, that do
both Shorten men's Lives, and Imbitter them. Whereas Piety having (as the
Scripture assures us) Promises both of this Life, and of that which is to come,
those Teachers that make men Virtuous and Religious, by making them Temperate,
and Chaste, and Inoffensive, and Calm, and Contented, do not only procure them
great and excellent Dispositions to those Blessings, both of the Right hand and
of the Left, which God's Goodness makes him forward to bestow on those, who by
Grace and Virtue are made fit to receive them; but do help them to those
Qualifications, that by preserving the Mind in a calm and cheerful temper, as
well as by affording the Body all that Temperance can confer, do both Lengthen
their Lives, and Sweeten them. These things, I say, 'twere not impertinent to
insist on, but I will rather choose to represent to you, That the Benefits which
men may receive from the Divine, surpass those which they receive from the
Naturalist, both in the Nobleness of the Advantages, and in the Duration of
them.

Be it granted then, that the Naturalist may much improve both Physic and
Trades; yet since these themselves were devised for the service of the Body,
(the one to preserve or restore his Health, and the other to furnish it with
Accommodations or Delights;) the boasted use of Natural Philosophy, by its
advancing Trades and Physic, will still be to serve the Body; which is but the
Lodging and Instrument of the Soul, and which, I presume, your Friend, and
which I am sure your self, will be far from thinking the noblest part of Man. I
know it may be said, nor do I deny it, that diverse Mechanical Arts are highly
Beneficial, not only to the Inventors, but to those Places, and perhaps those
States, where such Improvements are found out and cherished. But though I most
willingly grant, that this Consideration ought to recommend Experimental
Philosophy, as well to States as to private Persons; yet, besides that many of
these Improvements do rather Transfer than Increase Mankind's goods, and
prejudice one sort of Men as much as they Advantage another, (as in the case of
the Eastern Spices, of whose Trade the Portugals and Dutch by their later
Navigations, did, by appropriating it to themselves, deprive the Venetians) or
else does but increase that, which, though very Beneficial to the Producers, is
not really so to Mankind in general: Of which we have an Example in the
Invention of Extracting Gold and Silver out of the Oar, with Mercury. For
though it have vastly enriched the Spaniards in the West Indies, yet it is not
of any solid advantage to the World; no more than the Discovery of the Peruvian
and other American Mines; by which, (especially reckoning the multitudes of
unhappy men that are made miserable, and destroyed in working them,) Mankind is
not put into a better condition than it was before. And if the Philosopher's
Stone it self, (supposing there be such a thing) were not an Incomparable
Medicine, but were only capable of transmuting other Metalls into Gold, I
should perhaps doubt, whether the Discoverer of it would much advantage
Mankind; there being already Gold and Silver enough to maintain Trade and
Commerce among men; and for all other purposes, I know not, why a plenty of
Iron, and Brass, and Quicksilver, which are far more useful Metalls, should
not be more desirable. But not to urge this; we may consider, that these
Advancements of enriching Trades do still bring Advantages but to the outward
man, and those many Arts and Inventions that aim at the heightning the
pleasures of the Senses, See Examples of this in my Notes about Sensation and
Sensible Qualities.
belong but to the Body; and even in point of gratifying That, are not so
requisite and important, as many suppose: Education, Custom, etc. having a
greater Interest than most imagine in the relish men have even of Sensitive
pleasures. And as for Physic, not to mind you, that it has been Lowdly (how
Justly, I here examine not,) complained of, that the new Philosophy has made it
far greater promises than have yet been performed; I shall only take notice,
that since all that Physic is wont to pretend to, is, to preserve health, or
restore it, there are multitudes in the world that have no need of the
assistance the Naturalist would give the Physician; and a healthy man, as such,
is already in a better condition, than the Philosopher can hope to place him
in, and is no more advantaged by the Naturalist's contribution to Physic, than
a sound man that sleeps in a whole skin, is by all the fine Tools of a
Surgeons Case of Instruments, and the various Compositions of his Chest.

And as the Benefits that may be derived from Theology, much surpass those that
accrue from Physics, in the Nobleness of the Subject they relate to; so have
they a great advantage in point of Duration. For all the service that
Medicines, and Engines, and Improvements can do a man, as they relate but to
this Life, so they determine with it. Physic indeed and Chemistry do, the one
more faintly, and the other more boldly, pretend sometimes not only to the
Cure of Diseases, but the Prolongation of Life: But since none will suspect,
but that the Masters of those parts of knowledge would employ their utmost
skill to protract their own Lives, those that remember, that Solomon and
Helmont lived no longer, than millions that were strangers to Philosophy; and
that even Paracelsus himself, for all his boasted Arcana, is by Helmont and
other Chemists confessed to have died some years short of 50; we may very
justly fear, that Nature will not be so kind to her greatest Votaries, as to
give them much more time than other men, for the payment of the last Debt all
men owe her. And if a few years respite could by a scrupulous and troublesome
use of Diet and Remedies be obtained; yet that, in comparison of the Eternity
that is to follow, is not at all considerable. But, whereas within no great
number of years, (a little sooner, or a little later) all the Remedies, and
Reliefs, and Pleasures, and Accommodations, that Philosophical Improvements can
afford a man, will not keep him from the Grave, (which within very few days
will make the body of the greatest Virtuoso as hideous and as loathsome a
Carcass as that of any ordinary man;) the Benefits that may accrue to us by
Divinity, as they relate Chiefly, though not Only, to the other World; so they
will follow us out of this, and prove then incomparably greater than ever, when
they alone shall be capable of being enjoyed. So that Philosophy, in the
capacity we here consider it, does but as it were provide us some little
Conveniences for our passage (like some Accommodations for a Cabin, which
out-lasts not the Voyage,) but Religion provides us a vast and durable Estate,
or, as the Scripture styles it, an unshaken Kingdom, when we are arrived at our
Journeys end. And therefore the Benefits accruing from Religion, may well be
concluded preferible to their Competitors, since they not only reach to the
Mind of Man, but reach beyond the End of Time it self; whereas all the variety
of Inventions that Philosophy so much boasts of, as whilst they were in season
they were devised for the service of the Body, so they make us busy, and pride
our selves about things, that within a short time will not (so much as upon Its
score) at all concern us.

The third Section.
I Expect you should here urge on your Friends behalf, That the study of
Physics has one Prerogative, (above that of Divinity,) which, as it is
otherwise a great Excellency, so does much add to the Delightfulness of it. I
mean, the Certainty, and Clearness, and the thence resulting Satisfactoriness
of our Knowledge of Physical, in comparison of any we can have of Theological
matters, whose being Dark and Uncertain, the Nature of the things themselves,
and the numerous Controversies of differing Sects about them, sufficiently
manifest.

But upon this Subject, diverse things are to be considered.

For first, as to the Fundamental and Necessary Articles of Religion, I do not
admit the Allegation, but take those Articles to be both Evident, and capable
of a Moral Demonstration. And if there be any Articles of Religion, for which a
Rational and Cogent Proof cannot be brought, I shall for that very reason
conclude, that such Articles are not absolutely Necessary to be believed; since
it seems no way reasonable to imagine, that God having been pleased to send not
only his Prophets and his Apostles, but his only Son into the World, to
promulgate to Mankind the Christian Religion, and both to cause it to be
consigned to writing, that it may be known, and to alter the course of Nature
by numerous Miracles, that it might be believed; it seems not reasonable, I
say, to imagine, that he should not propose those Truths, which he in so
wonderful and so solemn a manner recommended, with at least so much Clearness,
as that studious and well-dispos'd Readers may certainly understand such as are
necessary for them to believe.

2. Though I will not here engage my self in a Disquisition of the several
kinds, or, if you please, Degrees, of Demonstration, (which yet is a Subject
that I judge far more considerable than cultivated,) yet I must tell you, that
as a Moral certainty (such as we may attain about the Fundamentals of Religion)
is enough in many cases for a wise man, and even a Philopher to acquiesce in;
so that Physical Certainty, which is pretended for the Truths demonstrated by
Naturalists, is, even where it is rightfully claimed, but an inferior kind or
degree of certainty, as Moral certainty also is. For even Physical
Demonstrations can beget but a Physical Certainty, (that is, a Certainty upon
supposition that the Principles of Physic be true,) not a Metaphysical
Certainty, (wherein it is absolutely impossible, that the thing believed should
be other than true.) For instance, All the Physical Demonstrations of the
Ancients about the causes of particular Phenomenon of Bodies, suppose, that ex
nihilo nihil fit; and this may readily be admitted in a Physical sense, because
according to the course of Nature, no Body can be produced out of Nothing, but
speaking universally it may be false, as Christians generally, and even the
Cartesian Naturalists, asserting the Creation of the World, must believe, that,
de facto, it is. And so whereas Epicurus does, I remember, prove, that a Body
once dead cannot be made alive again, by reason of the dissipation and
dispersion of the Atoms, 'twas, when alive, composed of; though all men will
allow this assertion to be Physically demonstrable, yet the contrary may be
true, if God's Omnipotence intervenes, as all the Philosophers that acknowledge
the Authority of the New Testament, where Lazarus and others are recorded to
have been raised from the dead, must believe, that it actually did appear, and
even all unprejudiced Reasoners must allow it to be Possible, there being no
Contradiction impli'd in the Nature of the thing. But now to affirm, that such
things as are indeed Contradictories cannot be both true, or, that factum
infectum reddi non potest, are Metaphysical Truths, which cannot possibly be
other than true, and consequently beget a Metaphysical and absolute Certainty.
And your Master Cartesius was so sensible of a dependence of Physical
Demonstrations upon Metaphysical Truths, that he would not allow any certainty
not only to them, but even to Geometrical Demonstrations, till he had evinced,
that there is a God, and that he cannot deceive men that make use of their
Faculties aright.

To which I may add, that even in many things that are looked upon as Physical
Demonstrations, there is really but a Moral Certainty. For when, for instance,
Descartes and other Modern Philosophers, take upon them to demonstrate, That
there are diverse Comets that are not Meteors, because they have a Parallax
lesser than that of the Moon, and are of such a bigness, and some of them move
in such a Line, etc. it is plain, that diverse of these Learned men had never the
opportunity to observe a Comet in their Lives, but take these Circumstances
upon the credit of those Astronomers that had such Opportunities. And though
the Inferences, as such, may have a Demonstrable Certainty; yet the Premises
they are drawn from having but an Historical one, the presumed
Physico-Mathematical Demonstration can produce in a wary mind but a Moral
Certainty, and not the greatest neither of that kind that is possible to be
attained; as he will not scruple to acknowledge, that knows by experience, how
much more difficult it is, than most men imagine, to make Observations about
such nice Subjects, with the exactness that is requisite for the building of an
undoubted Theory upon them. And there are I know not how many things in
Physics, that men presume they believe upon Physical and Cogent Arguments,
wherein they really have but a Moral assurance; which is a Truth heeded by so
few, that I have been invited to take the more particular notice of them in
other Papers, written purposely to show the doubtfulness and incompleatness of
Natural Philosophy; of which Discourse, since you may command a sight, I shall
not scruple to refer you thither for the Reasons of my affirming here, that the
most even of the modern Virtuosi are wont to fancy more of Clearness and
Certainty in their Physical Theories, than a Critical Examiner will find. Only
that you may not look upon this as a put off, rather than a reference, I will
here touch upon a couple of Subjects, which men are wont to believe to be, and
which indeed ought to be, the most thoroughly understood; I mean the Nature of
Body in general, and the Nature of Sensation.

And for the first of these, since we can turn our selves no way, but we are
every where environed, and incessantly touched by Corporeal Substances, one
would think that so familiar an Object, that does so assiduously, and so many
ways affect our Senses, and for the knowledge of which we need not inquire into
the distinct Nature of particular Bodies, nor the properties of any one of
them, should be very perfectly known unto us. And yet the Notion of Body in
general, or what it is that makes a thing to be a Corporeal Substance, and
discriminates it from all other things, has been very hotly disputed of, even
among the modern Philosophers, and adhuc sub judice lis est. And though your
Favorite Descartes, in making the nature of a Body to consist in Extension
every way, has a notion of it, which it is more easy to find fault with, than
to substitute a better; yet I fear, 'twill appear to be attended, not only
with this Inconvenience, That God cannot, within the compass of this World,
wherein if any Body vanish into Nothing, the place or space left behind it must
have the three Dimensions, and so be a true Body, annihilate the least particle
of Matter, at least without, at the same instant and place, creating as much,
(which agrees very ill with that necessary and continual dependence, which he
asserts Matter it self to have on God for its very Being;) but with such other
inconveniences, that some Friends of yours, otherwise very inclinable to the
Cartesian Philosophy, know not how to acquiesce in it: and yet I need not tell
you, how Fundamental a Notion the deviser of it asserts it to be. Neither do I
see, how this Notion of a Corporeal Substance will any more, than any of the
formerly received Definitions of it, extricate us out of the Difficulties of
that no less perplexed, than famous Controversy, de Compositione Continui. And
though some ingenious men, who perhaps perceive better than others, how
intricate it is, have of late endeavored to show, that men need not be
sollicitous to determine this Controversy, it not being rightly proposed by
the Schoolmen that have started it; and though I perhaps think, that Natural
Philosophy may be daily advanced without the decision of it, because there is a
multitude of considerable things to be discovered and performed in Nature,
without so much as dreaming of this Controversy; yet still, as I would propose
the Question, the Difficulties, till removed, will spread a thick night over
the Notion of Body in general. For, either a Corporeal and extended Substance
is (either really or mentally) divisible into parts endowed with Extension, and
each of these parts is divisible also into other Corporeal parts, lesser and
lesser, in infinitum; or else this subdivision must stop somewhere, (for there
is no mean between the two members of the Distinction;) and in either case the
Opinion pitched upon will be liable to those Inconveniences, not to say
Absurdities, that are rationally urged against it by the maintainers of the
Opposite; the Objections on both sides being so strong, that some of the more
Candid, even of the Modern Metaphysicians, after having tired themselves and
their Readers with arguing Pro and Con, have confessed the Objections on both
sides to be insoluble.

But though we do not clearly understand the Nature of Body in general; yet
sure we cannot but be perfectly acquainted with what passes within our selves
in reference to the particular Bodies we daily See, and Hear, and Smell, and
Taste, and Touch. But alas, though we know but little, save by the Informations
of our senses; yet we know very little of the manner by which our Senses
informs us. And to avoid prolixity, I will at present suppose with you, that
the Ingenious Des Carts and his followers have given the fairest account of
Sensation, that is yet extant. Now according to him, a Man's Body being but a
well organized Statue, that which is truly called Sensation is not performed by
the Organ, but by the Mind, which perceives the motion produced in the Organ;
(for which reason he will not allow Brutes to have Sense properly so called;)
so that if you ask a Cartesian, how it comes to pass that the Soul of Man,
which he justly asserts to be an immaterial Substance, comes to be wrought
upon, and that in such various manners, by those external Bodies that are the
objects of our Senses, he will tell you, that by their Impressions on the
Sensories, they variously move the Fibers or Threads of the Nerves, wherewith
those parts are endowed, and by which the Motion is propagated to that little
Kernel in the Brain, called by many Writers the Conarion, where these differing
motions being perceived by the there residing Soul, become Sensations, because
of the intimate union, and, as it were, Permistion (as Cartesius himself
expresses it) of the Soul with the Body.

But now, Sir, give me leave to take notice, that this Union of an Incorporeal
with a Corporeal Substance, (and that without a Medium) is a thing so
unexampled in Nature, and so difficult to comprehend, that I somewhat question,
whether the profound Secrets of Theology, not to say the adorable Mystery it
self of the Incarnation, be more abstruse than this. For how can I conceive,
that a Substance purely immaterial, should be united without a Physical Medium,
(for in this case there can be none,) with the Body, which cannot possibly lay
hold on It, and which It can pervade and fly away from at pleasure, as
Descartes must confess the Soul actually does in Death. And it is almost as
difficult to conceive, how any part of the Body, without excepting the Animal
Spirits, or the Conarion, (for these are as truly Corporeal as other parts of
the Humane Statue,) can make Impressions upon a Substance perfectly
Incorporeal, and which is not immediately affected by the motions of any other
parts, besides the Genus Nervosum. Nor is it a small difficulty to a mere
Naturalist (who, as such, does not in Physical matters take notice of
Revelations about Angels,) to conceive how a finite Spirit can either move, or,
which is much the same thing, regulate and determine the motion of a Body. But
that which I would on this occasion invite you to consider, is, that supposing
the Soul does in the Brain perceive the differing motions communicated to the
outward Senses; yet this, however it may give some account of Sensation in
general, will not at all show us a satisfactory Reason of particular and
distinct Sensations. For if I demand, why, for Instance, when I look upon a
Bell that is ringing, such a motion or impression in the Conarion produces in
the mind that peculiar sort of perception, Seeing, and not Hearing; and another
motion, though coming from the same Bell at the same time, produces that quite
differing sort of perception that we call Sound, but not Vision; what can be
answered, but that it was the good pleasure of the Author of Humane Nature to
have it so? And if the question be asked about the differing Objects of any one
particular Sense; as, Why the great plenty of unperturbed Light that is
reflected from Snow, Milk, etc, does produce a Sensation of whiteness, rather
than redness or yellowness? Or why the smell of Castor, or Assa foetida,
produces in most persons that which they call a Stink, rather than a Perfume?
(especially since we know some Hysterical Women, that think it not only a
wholesome, but a pleasing smell.) And if also you further ask, why Melody and
sweet things do generally delight us? and discords and bitter things do
generally displease us? Nay, why a little more than enough of some Objects that
produce pleasure, will produce pain? (as may be exemplifi'd in a cold hand, as
it happens to be held out at a just, or at too near a distance from the fire:)
If, I say, these, and a thousand other questions of the like kind, be asked,
the Answer will be but the general one, that is already given, that such is the
nature of Man. For to say, that moderate Motions are agreeable to the nature of
the Sensory they are excited in, but violent and disorderly ones, (as j^ring
Sounds, and scorching Heat) do put it into too violent a motion for its
Texture; will by no means satisfy. For, besides that this Answer gives no
account of the variety of Sensations of the same kind, as of differing Colors,
Tastes, etc. but reaches only to Pleasure and Pain; even as to these, it will
reach but a very little way; unless the Givers of it can show, how an
Immaterial Substance should be more harmed by the brisker motion of a Body,
than by the more languid.

And as you and your Friend think, you may justly smile at the Aristotelians,
for imagining that they have given a tolerable account of the Qualities of
Bodies, when they have told us, that they spring from certain substantial
Forms, though when they are asked particular Questions about these
Incomprehensible Forms, they do in effect but tell us in general, that they
have such and such Faculties, or Effects, because Nature, or the Author of
Nature, endowed them therewith; so I hope you will give me leave to think, that
it may keep us from boasting of the Clearness and Certainty of our knowledge
about the Operations of sensible Objects, whilst, as the Aristotelians cannot
particularly show, how their Qualities are produced, so we cannot particularly
explicate, how they are perceived; the principal thing that we can say, being,
in substance, this, that our Sensations depend upon such an union or permistion
of the Soul and Body, as we can give no Example of in all Nature, nor no more
distinct account of, than that it pleased God so to couple them together. But I
beg your pardon for having detained you so long upon one Subject, though
perhaps it will not prove time misspent, if it have made you take notice, that
in spite of the clearness and certainty, for which your Friend so much prefers
Physics before Theology, we are Yet to seek, (I say Yet, because I know not
what Time may Hereafter discover) both for the Definition of a Corporeal
Substance, and a satisfactory account of the manner of Sensation: though
without the true Notion of a Body we cannot understand that Object of Physics
in general, and without knowing the Nature of Sensation, we cannot know That,
from whence we derive almost all that we know of any Body in particular.

If after all this your Friend shall say, That Des-Cartes's account of Body,
and other things in Physics, being the best that men can give, if they be not
satisfactory, it must be imputed to Humane Nature not to the Cartesian
Doctrine, I shall not stay to dispute how far the allegation is true;
especially since, though it be admitted, it will not prejudice my Discourse.
For, whatsoever the Cause of the imperfection of our Knowledge about Physical
matters be, that there is an Imperfection in that Knowledge is manifest; and
that ought to be enough to keep us from being puffed up by such an imperfect
Knowledge, and from undervaluing upon its account the study of those mysteries
of Divinity, which, by reason of the Nobleness and Remoteness of the Objects,
may much better than the Nature of Corporeal things, (which we see, and feel,
and continually converse with,) have their obscurity attributed to the weakness
of our humane Understandings. And if it be a necessary Imperfection of Humane
Nature, that, whilst we remain in this mortal condition, the Soul being
confined to the dark prison of the Body, is capable (as even Aristotle
somewhere confesses) but of a dim knowledge; so much the greater value we ought
to have for Christian Religion, since by its means (and by no other without it)
we may attain a condition, wherein, as our Nature will otherwise be highly
blessed and advanced; so our Faculties will be Elevated and Enlarged, and
probably made thereby capable of attaining degrees and kinds of knowledge, to
which we are here but strangers. In favor of which I will not urge the
received Opinion of Divines, that before the Fall (which yet is a less noble
condition than is reserved for us in Heaven,) Adam's knowledge was such, that
he was able at first sight of them to give each of the Beasts a name expressive
of its Nature; because that in spite of some skill (which my Curiosity for
Divinity, not Philosophy, gave me) in the holy Tongue, I could never find, that
the Hebrew names of Animals, mentioned in the beginning of Genesis, argued a
(much) clearer insight into their Natures, than did the names of the same or
some other Animals in Greek, or other Languages; wherefore, (as I said) I will
not urge Adam's knowledge in Paradise for that of the Saints in Heaven, though
the notice he took of Eve at his first seeing of her, (if it were not conveyed
to him by secret Revelation) may be far more probably urged, than his naming of
the Beasts: But I will rather mind you, that the Proto-martyr's sight was
strengthened so, Acts vij.56.
as to see the heavens opened, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God; and
when the Prophet had prayed, 2 Kings vj.17.
that his Servant's Eyes might be opened, he immediately saw the Mountain,
where they were, all covered with Chariots and Horsemen, which, though
mentioned to be of Fire, were altogether invisible to him before. To which, as
a higher Argument, I shall only add a couple of passages of Scripture, which
seem to allow us even vast Expectations as to the knowledge our glorified
Nature may be advanced to. The one is that which St. Paul says to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. xiij.12.
For now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face: Now I know in
part, but then shall I know even as also I am known. And the other, where
Christ's Favourite-Disciple tells Believers, Beloved, 1 John iij.2.
now we are the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but
we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him: for we shall see him
as he is.

What has hitherto been discoursed, contains the first Consideration, that I
told you might be proposed about the Certainty ascribed to the knowledge we are
said to have of Natural things; but this is not all I have to represent to you
on this Subject. For I consider further, that it is not only by the Certainty
we have of them, that the knowledge of things is endeared to us, but also by
the Worthiness of the Object, the Number of those that are unacquainted with
it, the Remoteness of it from common Apprehensions, the Difficulty of acquiring
it without peculiar Advantages, the Usefulness of it when attained, and other
particulars, which it is not here necessary to enumerate. I presume, you doubt
not but your Friend does very much prefer the knowledge he has of the Mysteries
of Nature (at many of which we have as yet but Ingenious Conjectures) to the
knowledge of one that understands the Elements of Arithmetic, though He be
Demonstratively sure of the Truth of most of his Rules and Operations. And
questionless Copernicus received a much higher satisfaction in his Notion about
the Stability of the Sun, and the Motion of the Earth, though it were not so
clear but that Tycho, Ricciolus, and other eminent Astronomers have rejected
it, than in the knowledge of diverse of the Theorems about the Sphere, that have
been demonstrated by Euclid, Theodosius, and other Geometricians. Our
discovering that some Comets are not, as the Schools would have them, Sublunary
Meteors, but Celestial Bodies, and the Conjectural Theory, which is all that
hitherto we have been able to attain of them, do much better please both your
Friend, and you, and me, than the more certain knowledge we have of the time of
the Rising and Setting of the Fixed Stars. And the Estimates we can make, by
the help of Parallaxes, of the Heights of those Comets, and of some of the
Planets, though they are uncertain enough, (as may appear by the vastly
different distances that are assigned to those Bodies by eminent Astronomers;)
yet these uncertain measures of such Elevated and Celestial Lights do far more
please us, than that we can by the help of a Geometrical Quadrant, or some such
Instrument, take with far greater Certainty the height of a Tower or a Steeple.
And so a Mathematician, when he probably conjectures at the compass of the
Ter^estrial Globe, and divides, though but unaccurately, its Surface, first,
into proportions of Sea and Land, and then into Regions of such Extents and
Bounds, and, in a word, skilfully plays the Cosmographer; thinks himself much
more nobly and pleasantly employed, than when, being reduced to play the
Surveyor, he does with far more certainty measure how many Acres a Field
contains, and set out with what Hedges and Ditches it is bounded. Now, that the
knowledge of God, and of those Mysteries of Theology, that are ignor'd by far
the greatest part of Mankind, has more sublime and excellent Objects, and is
unattain'd to by much the greatest part even of Learned men, and nevertheless
is of unvaluable Importance, and of no less Advantage toward the purifying and
improving of us here, and the making us perfect and happy hereafter, the past
Discourse has very much miscarried if it have not evinced. Wherefore, as to be
admitted into the P^ivy-Council of some Great Monarch, and thereby be enabled
to give a probable ghess at those thoughts and designs of his, that Govern
Kingdoms, and make the Fates of Nations, is judged preferrable to that clearer
knowledge that a Notary can have of the dying thoughts and intentions of an
ordinary Person whose Will he makes: And as the knowledge of a skilful
Physician, whose Art is yet conjectural, is preferrable to that of a Cutler
that makes his Dissecting Knives, though this man can more certainly perform
what he designs in his own profession, than the Physician can in his: And (in
fine) as the skill of a Jeweller, that is conversant about Diamonds, Rubies,
Saphires, and some other sorts of small Stones, which being for the most part
brought us out of the Indies, we must take many things about them upon report,
is, because of the Nobleness of the Object, preferred to that of a Mason that
deals in whole Quarries of common Stones, and may be sure upon his own
Experience of diverse things concerning them, which as to Jewels we are allowed
to know but upon Tradition: So a more dimm and imperfect knowledge of God, and
the Mysteries of Religion, may be more desirable, and upon that account more
delightful, than a clearer knowledge of those Inferior Truths that Physics are
wont to teach.

I must now mention one particular more, which may well be added to those that
peculiarly indear Physics to the Divine that is studious of them. For, as he
contemplates the works of Nature not barely for themselves, but to be the
better qualified and excited to admire and praise the Author of Nature; so his
Contemplations are delightful to him, not barely as they afford a pleasing
Exercise to his Reason, but as they procure him a more welcome approbation from
his Conscience, these distinct satisfactions being not at all inconsistent. And
questionless, though Esau did at length miss of his aim, yet, while he was
hunting Venison for the good old Patriark that desired it of him, besides the
pleasure he was used to take in pursuing the Deer he chased, Genesis xxxvij.
he took a great one in considering, that now he hunted to please his Father,
and in order to obtain of him an inestimable Blessing. So, when David imployd
his skilful Hand and Voice in praising God with Vocal and Instrumental Music,
he received in one Act a double satisfaction, by exercising his Skill and his
Devotion; and was no less pleased with those melodious sounds, as they were
Hymns, than as they were Songs. And this Example prompts me to add, that as the
devout Student of Nature we were speaking of, does Intentionally refer the
knowledge he seeks of the Creatures to the glory of the Creator; so in his
Discoveries, that which most contents him, is, that the Wonders he observes in
Nature, heighten that Admiration he would fain raise to a less disproportion to
the Wisdom of God; and furnish him with a nobler Holocaust for those Sacrifices
of Praise he is justly ambitious to offer up to the Deity. And as there is no
doubt to be made, but that, when David invented (as the Scripture intimates
that he did) new Instruments of Music, Amos vj.5.
there was nothing in that Invention that pleased him so much, as that they
could assist him to praise God the more melodiously; go the pious Student of
Nature finds nothing more welcome in the Discoveries he makes of her Wonders,
than the Rises and Helps they may afford him, the more worthily to celebrate
and glorify the Divine Attributes adumbrated in the Creatures. And as a
Huntsman or a Fowler, if he meets with some strange Bird or Beast, or other
Natural Rarity, thinks himself much the more fortunate if it happen to be near
the Court, where he may have the King to present it to, than if he were to keep
it but for himself or some of his Companions; So our Devout Naturalist has his
Discoveries of Natures Wonders indear'd to him, by having the Deity to present
them to, in the Veneration they excite in the Finder, and which they enable him
to engage others to join in.

The fourth Section.
BUt I confess (Sir) I much fear, that That which makes your Friend have such
detracting thoughts of Theology, is a certain secret Pride, grounded upon a
Conceit, that the Seize of Natural Philosophers are of so noble a kind,
and argue so transcendant an Excellency of Parts in the Attainer, that he may
justly undervalue all other Learning, without excepting Theology it self.

You will not, I suppose, expect, that a person, who has written so much in the
praise of Physiques, and labored so much for a little skill in it, should now
here endeavor to depretiate that so useful part of Philosophy. But I do not
conceive, that it will be at all injurious to it, to prefer the knowledge of
Supernatural, to that of mere Natural things, and to think, that the Truths,
which God indiscriminately exposes to the whole Race of Mankind, and to the bad
as well as to the good, are inferior to those Mysterious ones, whose
Disclosure he reckons among his peculiar Favors, and whose Contemplation
employs the Curiosity, and, in some points, exacts the wonder of the very
Angels. That I may therefore repress a little the overweening Opinion your
Friend has of his Physical Seize, give me leave to represent a few
particulars conducive to that purpose.

And first, as for the Nobleness of the Truths taught by Theology and Physics,
those of the former sort have manifestly the Advantage, being not only
conversant about far nobler Objects, but discovering things that Humane Reason
of it self can by no means reach unto; as has been sufficiently declared in the
foregoing part of this Letter.

Next, we may consider, that, whatever may be said to excuse Pride (if there
were any) in Moscus the Phoenician, who is affirmed to have first Invented the
Atomical Hypothesis, and in Democritus and Leucippus, (for Epicurus scarce
deserves to be named with them,) that highly Advanced that Philosophy; and in
Monsieur Descartes, who either Improved, or at least much Innovated the
Corpuscula^ian Hypothesis: Whatever (I say) may be alleged on the behalf of
these Men's pride; I see no great Reason, why it should be allowed in such as
your Friend; who, though Ingenious Men, are neither Inventors, nor eminent
Promoters of the Philosophy they would be admired for, but content themselves
to Learn what others have Taught, or at least to make some little further
Application of the Principles that others have Established, and the Discoveries
they have made. And whereas your Friend is not a little proud of being able to
confute several Errors of Aristotle and the Ancients, it were not amiss if he
considered, that many of the chief Truths that overthrow those Errors, were
the Productions of Time and Chance, and not of his daring Ratiocinations: For,
there needs no great Wit to disprove those that maintain the Uninhabitableness
of the Torrid Zone, or deny the Antipodes, since Navigators have found many
Parts of the former well Peopled, and Sailing round the Earth, have found men
living in Countries Diametrically opposite to Ours. Nor will it warrant a man's
Pride, that he believes not the Moon to be the only Planet that shines with a
borrowed Light, or the Galaxy to be a Meteor; since that now the Telescope
shows us, that Venus has her Full and Wain like the Moon, and that the Milky
way is made up of a vast multitude of little Stars, inconspicuous to the naked
Eye. And indeed of those other Discoveries that overthrow the Astronomy of the
Ancients, and much of their Philosophy about the Celestial Bodies, few or none
have any cause to boast, but the excellent Galileus, who pretends to have been
the Inventor of the Telescope: For that Instrument once discovered; to be able
to reject the Septenary number of the Planets by the Detection of the four
Satellites of Jupiter, or talk of the Mountains and Valleys in the Moon,
requires not much more excellency in your Friend, than it would to descry in a
Ship, where the naked Eye could discern but the Body of the Vessel, (to descry,
I say) by the help of a Prospective Glass, the Masts, and Sails, and Deck, and
perceive a Boat towed at her Stern: Though indeed Galileo himself had no great
cause to boast of the Invention, though we are much obliged to him for the
Improvement of the Telescope, since no less a Master of Dioptricks than
Descartes, does acknowledge with other Writers, that Perspective-Glasses were
not first found out by Mathematicians or Philosophers, but casually by one
Metius, a Dutch Spectacle-maker. On which occasion I shall mind you, that to
hide Pride from Man, diverse others of the chief Discoveries that have been made
in Physics, have been the Productions, not of Philosophy, but Chance, by which
Gunpowder, Glass, and, for ought we know, the Verticity of the Lodestone, (to
which we owe both the Indies) came to be found in these later Ages; as (more
recently) the Milky Vessels of the Mesentery, the new Receptacle of the Chyle,
and that other sort of Vessels which most men call the Lymphae-ducts, were
lighted on but by Chance, according to the Ingenious Confession of the
Discoverers themselves.

We may farther consider, that those very things which are justly are alleged
in the praise of the Corpuscularian Philosophy it self, ought to lessen the
pride of those that but make use of it. For that Hypothesis, supposing the
whole Universe (the Soul of Man excepted) to be but a great Automaton, or
self-moving Engine, wherein all things are performed by the bare motion (or
rest) the size, the shape, and the situation or texture of the parts of the
Universal Matter it consists of; all the Phenomenon result from those few
Principles, single or combined, (as the several Tunes or Chimes that are rung
on five Bells,) and these fertile Principles being already established by the
Inventors and Promoters of the Particularian Hypothesis; all that such Persons
as your Friend, are wont farther to do, is but to investigate or guess, by what
kind of Motions the three or four other Principles are varied. So that the
World being but, as it were, a great piece of Clock-work, the Naturalist as
such, is but a Mechanitian; however the parts of the Engine, he considers, be
some of them much larger, and others much minuter, than those of Clocks or
Watches. And for an ordinary Naturalist to despise those that study the
Mysteries of Religion, as much inferior to Physical Truths, is no less
unreasonable, than it were for a Watch-maker, because he understands his own
Trade, to despise Privy-Counsellers, who are acquainted with the secrets of
Monarchs, and Mysteries of State; or than it were for a Ship-carpenter, because
he understands more of the Fabric of the Vessel, to despise the Admiral, that
is acquainted with the secret Designs of the Prince, and employed about his
most important affairs.

That great Restorer of Physics, the illustrious Verulam, who has traced out a
most useful way to make Discoveries in the Intellectual Globe, as he calls it,
confesses, that his work was (to speak in his own terms) partus temporis potius
quam ingenii. And though I am not of his opinion, where he says in another
place, that his way of Philosophizing does exaequare ingenia; yet I am apt to
think, that the fertile Principles of the Mechanical Philosophy being once
settled, the Methods of inquiring and experimenting being found out, and the
Physico-mechanical Instruments of working on Natures and Arts Productions being
happily invented, the making of several lesser improvements, especially by
rectifying of some almost obvious or supine Errors* of the Schools, by the
assistance of such facilitating helps, may fall to the lot of persons not
endowed with any extraordinary Sagacity, or acuteness of parts. And though the
Investigation and clear establishment of the true Principles of Philosophy, and
the devising the Instruments of Knowledge, be things that may be allowed to be
the proper work of sublimer Wits; yet, if a man be furnished with such
assistances, it is not every Discourse that he makes, or thing which he does by
the help of them, that is difficult enough to raise him to that illustrious
rank. And indeed, diverse of the vulgar Errors, as well as of Scholars as other
men, being mainly grounded upon the mere, and often mistaken, Authority of
Aristotle, and perhaps some frivolous Reasons of his Scholastic Interpreters of
such precarious and ungrounded things, that to ruin them, does oftentimes
require more of boldness than skill; it may perhaps be said of your Friend, in
relation to his Philosophical Successes against such vulgar Errors, as I am
speaking of, what a Roman said of Alexander's Triumph over the effeminate
Asiaticks, Quod nihil aliud quam been ausus sit Vana contemnere. And in some
cases it happens, that, when once a grand Truth, or a happy way of
Experimenting has been found, diverse Phenomenon of Nature, that had been left
unexplain'd, or were left mis-explain'd by the Schools, did, in my opinion,
require a far less straining Exercise of the mind to unriddle and explain them,
than must have been requisite to dispel the darkness that attended diverse
Theological Truths that are now cleared up, and perhaps than I have my self now
and then employed in some of those Attempts, to illustrate Theological Matters,
that you may have met in some Papers that I have presumed to write on such
Subjects. And indeed the Improvements, that such Virtuosi as your Friend are
wont to make of the fertile Theorems and Hints, that have been presented them
by the Founders or prime Benefactors of true Natural Philosophy, are so poor
and slender, and do so much oftener proceed from Industry and Chance, than they
argue a transcendent sagacity, or a sublimity of Reason, that, though such
persons may have cause enough to be Delighted with what they have done, yet
they have none to be Proud of it; and their Performances may deserve our
Thanks, and perhaps some of our Praise, but reach not so high as to merit our
Admiration; which is to be reserved for Those, that have been either Framers,
or Grand Promoters, of True and Comprehensive Hypotheses, or (else) the Authors
of other noble and useful Discoveries, many ways applicable.

It will not perhaps be improper to add on this occasion, that, as our
knowledge is not very deep, not reaching with any certainty to the bottom of
Things, nor penetrating to their intimate or innermost Natures; so its Extent
is not very large, not being able to give us, with any Clearness and
particularity, an account of the Celestial and deeply Subterraneal parts of the
World, of which all the others make but a very small (not to say contemptible)
portion.

For, as to the very Globe that we inhabit, not to mention, how many Plants,
Animals, and Minerals, we are as yet wholly ignorant of, and how many others we
are but slenderly acquainted with; I consider, that the objects about which our
Experiments and Inquiries are conversant, do all belong to the Superficial
parts of the Terrestrial Globe, of which the Earth, known to us, seems to be
but as it were the Crust or Scurf. But what the Internal part of this Globe is
made up of, is no less disputable than of what Substance the remotest Stars we
can descry, consist: For even among the modern Philosophers some think, the
internal Portion of the Earth to be pure and Elementary Earth, which (say they)
must be found there, or no where. Others imagine it to be Fiery, and the
Receptacle either of Natural or Hellish Flames. Others will have the Body of
the Terrestrial Globe to be a great and solid Magnet. And the Cartesians on the
other side, (though they all admit store of Subterraneal Loadstones) teach,
that the same Globe was once a Fixed Star, and that, though it have since
degenerated into a Planet, yet the Internal part of it is still of the same
Nature that it was before; the change it has received proceeding only from
having had its outward parts quite covered over with thick spots (like those to
be often observed about the Sun,) by whose Condensation the firm Earth we
inhabit was formed. And the mischief is, that each of these jarring Opinions is
almost as difficult to be demonstratively proved False as True. For, whereas to
the Center of the Earth there is, according to the modestest account of our
late Cosmographers, above three thousand and five hundred miles; my Inquiries
among Navigators and Miners have not yet satisfied me, that men's Curiosity has
actually reached above one mile or two at most downwards, (and that not in
above three or four places,) either into the Earth or into the Sea. So that as
yet our Experience has scarce grated any thing deep upon the Husk, (if I may so
speak) without at all reaching the Kernel of the Terraqueous Globe.

And alas! what is this Globe of ours, of which it self we know so little, in
comparison of those vast and Luminous Globes that we call the Fixed Stars, of
which we know much less? For, though former Astronomers have been pleased to
give us, with a seeming accurateness, their Distances and Bignesses, as if they
had had certain ways of measuring them; yet Later and Better Mathematicians
will (I know) allow me to doubt of what Those have delivered. For since it is
confessed, that we can observe no Parallax in the Fixed Stars (nor perhaps in
the highest Planets,) men must be yet to seek for a Method to measure the
distance of those Bodies. And not only the Copernicans make it to be I know
not how many hundred thousands of miles greater than the Ptolomeans, and very
much greater than even Tycho; but Ricciolus himself, though a great
Anti-Copernican, makes the distance of the Fixed Stars vastly greater, than not
only Tycho, but (if I mis-remember not) than some of the Copernicans
themselves. Nor do I wonder at these so great Discrepances, (though some amount
perhaps to some millions of miles,) when I consider, that Astronomers do not
measure the distance of the Fixed Stars by their Instruments, but accommodate
it to their particular Hypotheses. And by this uncertainty of the remoteness of
the Fixed Stars you will easily gather, that we are not very sure of their
Bulk, no not so much as in reference to one another; since it remains doubtful,
whether the differing Sizes, they appear to us to be of, proceed from a real
Inequality of Bulk, or only from an Inequality of Distance, or partly from one
of those causes, and partly from the other.

But it is not my design to take notice of those Things, which the famous
Disputes among the Modern Astronomers manifest to be dubious. For I consider,
that there are diverse things relating to the Stars, which are so remote from
our knowledge, that the Causes of them are not so much as disputed of, or
inquired into, such as may be among others, Why the number of the Stars is
neither greater nor lesser than it is? Why so many of those Celestial Lights
are so placed, as not to be visible to our naked eyes, nor even when they are
helped by ordinary Telescopes? (which extraordinary good ones have assured me
of.) Why among the familiarly visible Stars, there are so many in some parts of
the Sky, and so few in others? Why their Sizes are so differing, and yet not
more differing? Why they are not more orderly placed, so as to make up
Constellations of regular or handsome Figures (of which the Triangle is,
perhaps, the single Example) but seem to be scattered in the Sky as it were by
Chance, and have as confused Configurations, as the Drops that fall upon ones
Hat in a shower of Rain? To which diverse other Questions might be added, as
about the Stars, so about the Interstellar part of Heaven, which several of the
Modern Epicureans would have to be empty, save where the beams of Light (and
perhaps some other Celestial Effluvia) pass through it; and the Cartesians on
the contrary think to be full of an Ethereal matter, which some, that are
otherwise favorers of their Philosophy, confess they are reduced to take up
but as an Hypothesis. So that our knowledge is much short of what many think,
not only if it be considered Intensively, but Extensively, (as a Schoolman
would express it.) For there being so great a disproportion between the Heavens
and the Earth, that some Moderns think the Earth to be little better than a
Point in comparison even of the Orb of the Sun; and the Cartesians, with other
Copernicans, think the great Orb it self, (which is equal to what the
Ptolomeans called the Sun's Orb) to be but a Point in respect of the Firmament;
and all our Astronomers agree, that at least the Earth is but a Physical Point
in comparison of the Starry Heaven: Of how little extent must our knowledge be,
which leaves us ignorant of so many things, touching the vast Bodies that are
above us, and penetrates so little a way even into the Earth that is beneath
us, that it seems confined to but a small share of the superficial part of a
Physical Point! Of which consideration the natural result will be, that, though
what we call our Knowledge, may be allowed to pass for a high Gratification to
our minds, it ought not to puff them up; and what we know of the System, and
the Nature of things Corporeal* is not so perfect and satisfactory, as to
justify our despising the Discoveries of Spiritual things.

One of the former parts of this Letter may furnish me with one thing more, to
evince the Excellencies and Prerogatives of the knowledge of the Mysteries of
Religion; and that One thing is such, that I hope I shall need to add nothing
More, because it is not possible to add any thing Higher; and that is, That the
Preeminence above other Knowledge, adjudg'd to that of Divine Truths by a Judge
above all Exception, and above all Comparison, namely, by God himself.

This having been but lately shown, I shall not now repeat it, but rather apply
what has been there evinced, by representing, that if He, who determines in
favor of Divine Truths, were such an one, as was less acquainted, than our
overweening Naturalists with the secrets of their Idolized Physics; or if he
were, though an Intelligent, yet (like an Angel) a Bare Contemplator of what we
call the Works of Nature, without having any Interest in their Productions,
your Friends not acquiescing in his estimate of things might have, though not a
fair Excuse, yet a stronger Temptation.

But when he, by whose direction we prefer the higher Truths revealed in the
Scripture, before those which Reason alone teaches us concerning those
comparatively mean Subjects, things Corporeal, is the same God that not only
understands the whole Universe, and all its parts, far more perfectly, than a
Watch-maker can understand one of his own Watches, (in which he can give an
account only of the Contrivance, and not of the Cause of the Spring, nor the
Nature of the Gold, Steel, and other Bodies his Watch consists of,) but did
make both this great Automaton, the World, and Man in it: We have no color to
imagine, that he should either be ignorant of, or injuriously disparage, his
own Workmanship, or impose upon his Favourite-Creature, Man, in directing him
what sort of Knowledge he ought most to covet and prize. So that since it is He
who framed the World, and all those things in it we most admire, that would
have us prefer the knowledge he has vouchsafed us in his Word, before that
which he has allowed us of his Works, sure it is very unreasonable and unkind to
make the Excellencies of the Workmanship a disparagement to the Author, and the
Effects of his Wisdom a Motive against acquiescing in the Decisions of his
Judgment; as if, because he is to be admired for his Visible Productions, he
were not to be believed, when he tells us, that there are Discoveries that
contain Truths more valuable than those which relate but to the Objects, that
he has exposed to all men's Eyes.

The fifth Section.
I Doubt, I should be guilty of a most important Omission, if I should here
forget to consider One thing, which I fear has a main stroke in the Partiality
your Friend expresses in his preference of Physics to Theology; and that is,
That he supposes he shall by the Former acquire a Fame, both more Certain and
more Durable, than can be hoped for from the Latter.

And I acknowledge, not only with readiness, but with somewhat of Gratulation
of the felicity of this Age, That there is scarce any sort of Knowledge more in
request, than that which Natural Philosophy pretends to teach; and that among
the awakened and inquisitive part of Mankind, as much Reputation and Esteem may
be gained by an insight into the Secrets of Nature, as by being entrusted with
those of Princes, or dignified with the splendid'st marks of their favor.

But though I readily confess thus much, and though perhaps I may be thought to
have had, I know not by what fate, as great a share of that perfumed Smoke,
Applause, as (at least) some of those, which among the Writers that are now
alive, your Friend seems most to Envy for it; yet I shall not scruple to tell
you, partly from observation of what has happened to others, and partly too
upon some little Experience of my own, that neither is it so easy as your
Friend seems to believe it, to get by the study of Nature a sure and lasting
Reputation, neither ought the Expectation of it, in reason, make men undervalue
the study of Divinity. Nor would it here avail to object (by way of prevention)
that the Difficulties and Impediments of acquiring and securing Reputation, lie
as well in the way of Divines as Philosophers, since this Objection has been
already considered at the beginning of this Second Part of our present Tract.
Besides, that the progress of our Discourse will show, that the Naturalist,
aspiring to fame, is liable to some Inconveniences, which are either not at
all, or not near equally incident to the Divine. Wherefore without staying to
take any further notice of this preventive Allegation, I shall proceed to make
good the first part of the Assertion that preceded it; which that I may the
more fully do, give me leave (after having premised, That a man must either be
a Writer, or forbear to Print what he knows;) to propose to you the following
Considerations.

And first, if your Physeophilus should think to secure a great Reputation, by
forbearing to couch any of his Thoughts or Experiments in Writing, he may
thereby find himself not a little mistaken. For if once he have gained a repute
(upon what account soever) of knowing some things that may be useful to others,
or of which studious men are wont to be very desirous, he will not avoid the
Visits and Questions of the Curious. Or, if he should affect a Solitude, and be
content to hide himself, that he may hide the things he knows; yet he will not
escape the solicitations that will be made him by Letters. And if these ways
of tempting him to disclose himself, prevail not at all with him to do so, he
will provoke the Persons that have employed them; who finding themselves
disoblieg'd by being defeated of their Desires, if not also their Expectations,
will for the most part endeavor to revenge themselves on him, by giving him
the Character of an uncourteous and ill-natured person; and will endeavor,
perhaps successfully enough, to decry his parts, by suggesting, That his
affected Concealments proceed but from a Conscientiousness, that the things he
is presumed to possess, are but such, as, if they should begin to be known,
would cease to be valued.

You will say (perchance,) that so much reservedness is a fault: Nor shall I
dispute it with you, whether it be or not; but, if he be open and communicative
in Discourse to those Strangers that come to pump him, such is the disingenious
temper of too too many, that he will be in great danger of having his Notions
or Experiments arrogated by those to whom he imparts them, or at least by
others, to whom those may (though perchance designlessly) happen to discourse
of them. And then, if either Physeophylus, or any of his Friends that know him
to be Author of what is thus usurped, should mention him as such, the Usurpers
and their Friends would presently become his Enemies; and, to secure their own
Reputation, will be sollicitous to lessen and blemish his. And if you should
now tell me, that your Friend might here take a Middle way, as that which in
most cases is thought to be the best, by discoursing at such a rate of his
Discoveries, as may somewhat gratify those that have a Curiosity to learn
them, and yet not speak so clearly as divest himself of his Propriety in them;
I should reply, That neither is this Expedient a sure one, nor free from
Inconveniences. For most men are so self-opinionated, that they will easily
believe themselves Masters of things, if they do but half understand them. And
however, though the Persons to whom the Discourse was immediately made, should
not have too great an Opinion of themselves, no more than too great a Sagacity;
yet they may easily, by repeating what they heard and observed, give some more
piercing Wit a hint sufficient to enable him to make out the whole Notion, or
the Discovery, which he will then without scruple, and without almost any
possibility of being disproved, assume for his own. But if it happen, (as it
often will in Extemporaneous Discourse) that a Philosopher be not rightly
understood; either because he has not the leisure, no more than a design, to
explain himself fully, or because the Persons he converses with bring not a
competent Capacity and Attention, he then runs a greater danger than before.
For the vanity most men take in being known to have conversed with eminent
Philosophers, makes them very forward to repeat what they heard such a famous
Wit say; and oftentimes being secure of not being contradicted, ignorantly to
misrecite it, or wittingly to wrest it in favor of the Opinion they would
countenance by it. So that, whereas by the formerly mentioned franckness of
Discourse he is only in danger to have the Truths he discovered arrogated by
Others, this reservedness exposes him to have Opinions and Errors that he
never dreamed of, fathered on Him. And when a man's Opinions or Discoveries
come once to be publicly discoursed of, without being proposed by himself, or
some Friend well instructed by him, he knows not, what Errors or
Extravagancies may be imputed to him (and that without a Moral possibility left
to most men to discern them, (by the mistake of the Weak, or the disingenuity
of the Partial, or the Artifices of the Malicious. And even the greatness of a
man's Reputation does sometimes give such countenance to vain Reports and
Surmises, as by degrees to shake, if not ruin, it. As we see, that Friar
Bacon, and Trithemius, and Paracelsus, who for their times were knowing as well
as famous men, had such feats ascribed to them, as by appearing Fabulous to
most of the Judicious, have tempted many to think, that all the great things
that were said of them were so too.

These are some of the Inconveniences that a Naturalist may be liable to, if he
forbear the communicating of his Thoughts and Discoveries himself: But if
Physeophilus should, to shun these, aspire to Fame by the usual way of writing
Books, he may indeed avoid these, but perhaps not without running into other
inconveniences and hazards, very little inferior to them.

First then, we may consider, that whether a man writes in a Systematical way,
as they have done who have published entire Bodies of Natural Philosophy, or
Methodical Treatises of some considerable part of it, or whether he write in a
more loose and unconfined way, of any particular Subject that belongs to
Physics; whichsoever, I say, of these two ways of writing Books he shall make
choice of, he will find it liable to Inconvenience enough.

For if he write Systematically, first, he will be obliged (that he may leave
nothing necessary undeliver'd) to say diverse things that have been said
(perhaps many times) by others already, which cannot but be unpleasant, not
only to the Reader, but (if he be Ingenious) to the Writer. Next, there are so
many things in Nature, whereof we know little or Nothing, and so many more of
which we do not know Enough, that our Systematical Writer, though we should
grant him to be very Learned, must needs, either leave diverse things that
belong to his Theme untreated of, or discourse of them slightly, and oftentimes
(in likelihood) Erroneously. So that in this kind of Books there is always much
said that the Reader did know, and commonly not a little that the Writer does
not know. And to this I must add in the third place, that Natural Philosophy,
being so vast and pregnant a Subject, that (especially in so Inquisitive an Age
as this) almost every day discovers some new thing or other about it, it is
scarce possible for a Method, that is adapted but to what is Already known, to
continue Long the most proper; as the same Clothes will not long fit a Child,
whose Age will make him quickly out-grow them. And therefore succeeding Writers
will have a fair pretense to compile new Systems, that may be more adequate to
Philosophy improved since the publication of the former. And though there were
little of New to be added, and it were more easy to Alter than to Mend the
Method of our supposed Author; yet Novelty it self is a thing so pleasing and
inviting to the generality of men, that It often recommends things that have
nothing else to recommend them; and we may apply to a great many other things,
what I remember a famous Courtier of my acquaintance used to say of Mistresses,
That Another was preferable to a Better, (the Better being but the same.)

But now if, declining the Systematical way, one shall choose the other of
writing loose Tracts and Discourses, he may indeed avoid some of the lately
mentioned Inconveniences, but will scarce avoid the being plundered by
Systematical Writers: For these will be apt to cull out those things that they
like best, and insert them in their Methodical Books, (perhaps much curtal'd,
or otherwise injured in the repeating,) and will place them, not as their own
Author did, where they may best confirm or adorn his Discourse, and be
illustrated or upheld by it; but where it may best serve the turn of the
Compiler: And these Methodical Books promise so much more Compendious a way
than others to the Attainment of the Sciences they treat of, that though really
for the most part they prove greater helps to the Memory, than the
Understanding; yet most Readers, being, for want of Judgment or of Patience, of
another mind, they are willing to take it for granted, that in former Writers,
if there have been any thing considerable, it has been all carefully extracted,
as well as orderly digested by the later Compilers: And though I take this to
be a very Erroneous and Prejudicial Conceit, yet it obtains so much, that as
Gol^smiths that only give shape and luster to Gold are far more esteemed, and
in a better Condition, than Miners, who find the Ore in the bowels of the
Earth, and with great pains and industry dig it up, and refine it into Metal;
so those that with great study and toil successfully penetrate into the hidden
Recesses of Nature, and discover latent Truths, are usually less regarded or
taken notice of by the Generality of Men, than those who by plausible Methods
and a neat Style reduce the Truths, that others have found out, into Systems of
a Taking Order and a Convenient Bulk.

I consider in the second place, That as the Method of the Books one writes, so
the Bulk of them may prove prejudicial to the Naturalist that aspires to Fame:
For if he write large Books, it is odds but that he will write in them many
things unaccurate, if not impertinent, or that he will be obliged to repeat
many things that others have said before; and if he write but small Tracts, as
is the custom of the Judiciousest Authors, who have no mind to publish but
what is New and Considerable, as their Excellency will make them to be the
sooner dispersed, so the smallness of the Bulk will endanger them to be quickly
lost; as Experience shows us of diverse Excellent little Tracts, which, though
published not many years ago, are already out of Print, (as they speak) and not
to be met with, save by chance, in Stationers Shops. So that these Writings
(which deserve a better fate) come, after a while, either to be lost, (which is
the case of diverse,) or to have their Memory preserved only in the larger
Volume of some Compiler, whose Industry is only preferable to his Judgment; it
being observable, that (by I know not what unlucky fate) very few (for I do not
say, None) that addict themselves to make Collections out of others, have the
Judgment to cull out the choicest things in them; and the small Tracts, we are
speaking of, being preserved but in such a Quoter or Abridger, will run a very
great danger of being conveyed to posterity but under such a Representation as
it pleases the Compiler.

And This (that I may proceed to my third Consideration) may make the
Naturalists Fame very uncertain, not only because of the want of Judgment,
that (as I newly said) is too often observable in Compilers, whereby they
frequently leave far better things than they take, but for the want of skill to
understand the Author they Cite and Epitomize, or Candor to do him right. For
sometimes men's Physical Opinions, and several Passages of their Writings, are
so misrepresented by Mistake or Design, especially if those that recite their
Opinions be not Of them, that men are made to teach or deliver things quite
differing from their Sense, and perhaps quite contrary to it; of which, I my
self have had some unwelcome Experience, a Learned Writer pretending, I know
not how often, that I asserted an Opinion, about which I did expressly (...).
And another noted Writer having (not out of design, but unacquaintedness with
Mechanics, and the Subject I writ of,) given me commendations for having, by a
new Experiment, proved a thing, the quite contrary whereof I intended thereby
to evince, and am not Alone mistaken, if I did not do it. Other Naturalists I
have met with, whose Writings Compilers have traduced out of hatred to their
Persons, or their Religion; as if Truth could in nothing be a Friend to one
that is the Traducers's Enemy; or as if a man that falls into an Error in
Religion, could not light upon a good Notion in Philosophy, in spite of all the
Truths we owe to Aristotle, Epicurus, and the other Heathen Philosophers. Nay,
some there are, that will set themselves to decry a man's Writings, not because
they are directly His Enemies, but because He is esteemed by Theirs; as you may
remember an Instance in a Servant of yours, who had diverse things written
against Him upon this very Account. Nor is it only by the Citations of
professed Adversaries or Opponents, that a worthy Writer's Reputation may be
prejudiced, since it is not unfrequently so by those, that mention him with an
Encomium, and seem disposed to honor him. For I have observed it to be the
Trick of certain Writers, to name an Author with much Complement, only for
some one or few of the least considerable things they borrow of Him; by which
artifice they endeavor to conceal their being Plagiaries of more and better;
which yet is more excusable than the Practice of some, who proceed to that
pitch of disingenuity, that they will rail at an Author, to whom indeed they
owe too much, that they may not be thought to be beholden to him.

But (4.) I must add, that besides these dangers that a Naturalists Reputation
with posterity may run through the Ignorance or Perverseness of men, it is
liable to diverse other hazards, from the very Nature both of Men, of Opinions,
and of Things.

For, as men's Genius's and Inclinations are naturally various in reference to
Studies, one man passionately affecting one sort of them, and another being
fond of quite differing ones; so those Inclinations are oftentimes variously
and generally determined by external and accidental Causes. As when some great
Monarch happens to be a great Patron, or a Despiser, and perhaps Adversary, of
this or that kind of Learning: And when some one man has gained much applause
for this or that kind of Study; Imitation, or Emulation oftentimes makes many
others addict themselves to it. Thus though Rome under the Consuls was
inconsiderable for Learning, yet the Reputation of Cicero, and Favor of
Augustus, brought Learning into request there; where the small countenance it
met with among most of the succeeding Emperors, kept it far inferior to what
it had been among the Greeks about Alexander's Age. And the Age of the same
Augustus was enobled with store of Poets, not only by the countenance which He
and Maecenas afforded them, but probably also by the Examples they gave to, and
the Emulation they excited in, one another. And after the decay of the Roman
Empire, in the Fourth Century, Natural Philosophy and the Mathematics being
very little valued, and less understood, by reason that men's Studies were, by
the Genius of those Ages applied to other Subjects, every hundred years scarce
produced One Improver, (not to say one Eminent Cultivator) either of
Mathematics or of Physics: By which you may see, how little Certainty there
is, that, because a man is skilled in Natural Philosophy, and that Science is
now in Request, his Reputation shall be as great as now, when perhaps the
Science it self will be grown out of Repute.

But besides the Contingencies that may happen to a Naturalist's Fame upon this
Account, That the Science He cultivates, is, as well as others, subject to
Wanes and Eclipses in the general esteem of men; there is another uncertainty
arising from the Vicissitudes that are to be met with in the Estimates men make
of differing Hypotheses, Sects, and ways of Philosophizing about the same
Science, and particularly about Natural Philosophy. For during those Learned
Times, when Physics first and most flourished among the Grecians, Democritus,
Leucippus, Epicurus, Anaxagoras, Plato, and almost all the Naturalists that
preceded Aristotle, were Corpuscularians, endeavoring, though not all by the
same way, to give an account of the Phenomenon of Nature, and even of Qualities
themselves, by the Bigness, Shape, Motion, etc. of Corpuscles, or the minutest
active parts of Matter: Whereas Aristotle, having attempted to deduce the
Phenomenon from the four first Qualities, the four Elements, and some few other
barren Hypotheses, ascribing what could not be explicated by them, (and
consequently far the greatest part of Natures Phenomenon) to Substantial Forms
and Occult Qualities; (Principles that are readily named, but scarce so much as
pretended to be understood,) and having upon these slight and narrow Principles
reduced Physics into a kind of System, which the judicious Modesty of the
Corpuscularians had made them backward to do; the Reputation that his great
Pupil Alexander, as well as his Learning gave him; the Easiness of the way he
proposed to the attainment of Natural Philosophy; the good luck his Writings
had to survive those of Democritus, and almost all the rest of the
Corpuscularians, when Charles the Great began to establish Learning in Europe:
These, I say, and some other lucky Accidents that concurred, did for about
seven or eight hundred years together, make the Corpuscularian Philosophy not
only be Justled, but even Exploded out of the Schools by the Peripatetick;
which in our Times is, by very many, upon the Revival of the Corpuscularian
Philosophy, rejected, and, by more than a few, derided as precarious,
unintelligible, and useless. And to give an instance in a particular thing,
(which, though formerly named, deserves to be again mentioned to our present
purpose,) Aristotle himself somewhere confesses, (not to say brags) that the
Greek Philosophers, his Predecessors did, unanimously teach, that the World was
(I say not Created, but) Made, and yet He, almost by his single Authority, and
the subtle Arguments (as some have been pleased to think them,) that he
employed, (though diverse of them were borrowed of Ocellus Lucanus,) was able
for many Ages to introduce into the Schools of Philosophers that Irreligious
and Ill-grounded Opinion of the Eternity of the World, which afterward the
Christian Doctrine made men begin to question, and which now both that and
Right Reason have persuaded most men to reject.

And this invites me to consider farther, That the present success of the
Opinions that your Physeophilus befriends, ought not to make him so sure as he
thinks he is, that the same Opinions will be always in the same, or greater
Vogue, and have the same Advantages, in point of General Esteem that they now
have, over their Corrivals. For, Opinions seem to have their Fatal Seasons and
Vicissitudes, as well as other things; as may appear, not only by the Examples
of it newly given, but also by the Hypothesis of the Earths Motion, which
having been in great request before Pythagoras, (who yet is commonly thought
the Inventor of it,) had its Reputation much increased by the suffrage of the
famous Sect of the Pythagoreans, (whom Aristotle himself takes notice of as the
Patrons of that Opinion;) and yet afterward for near 2000 years it was laughed
at, as not only false, but ridiculous. After all which time, this so long
antiquated Opinion being revived by Copernicus, has in a little time made so
great a progress among the modern Astronomers and Philosophers, that if it go
on to prevail at the same rate, the Motion of the Earth will be acknowledged by
all its Mathematical Inhabitants. But though it be often the Fate of an
oppressed Truth, to have at length a Resurrection, yet it is not always its
peculiar privilege; for, Obsolete Errors are sometimes revived, as well as
discredited Truths: So that the general disrepute of an Opinion in one Age will
not give us an absolute security, that 'twill not be in as general Request in
another, in which it may perhaps not only Revive, but Reign.

Nor is it only in the Credit of men's Opinions about Philosophical Matters,
that we may observe an Inconstancy and Vicissitude, but in the very Way and
Method of Philosophizing; for Democritus, Plato, Pythagoras, and others, who
were of the more sincere and ingenious Cultivators of Physics among the
Greeks, exercised themselves chiefly either in making particular Experiments
and Observations, as Democritus did in his manifold Dissections of Animals; or
else applied the Mathematics to the Explicating of a particular Phenomenon of
Nature, as may appear (not to mention what Hero teaches in his Pneumaticks,) by
the Accounts, Democritus, Plato, and others, give of Fire and other Elements,
from the Figure and Motion of the Corpuscles they consist of. And although this
way of Philosophizing were so much in request before Aristotle, that (albeit he
unluckily brought in another, yet) there are manifest and considerable
footsteps of it to be met with in some of his Writings, (and particularly in
his Books of Animals, and his Mechanical Questions;) yet the Scholastic
followers of Aristotle did, for many Ages, neglect the way of Philosophizing of
the Ancients, and (to the great prejudice of Learning) introduced every where
in stead of it a quite contrary way of Writing. For, not only they laid aside
the Mathematics, (of which they were for the most part very ignorant,) but
instead of giving us Intelligible and Explicit (if not Accurate) Accounts of
particular Subjects, grounded upon a distinct and heedful Consideration of
them, they contented themselves with hotly disputing, in general, certain
unnecessary, or at least unimportant questions about the Objects of Physics,
about Materia Prima, Substantial Forms, Privation, Place, Generation,
Corruption, and other such general things, with which when they had quite tired
themselves and their Readers, they usually remained utter strangers to the
particular Productions of that Nature, about which they had so much wrangled,
and were not able to give a man so much true and useful Information about
Particular Bodies, as even the meanest Mechanics, such as Minediggers,
Butchers, Smiths, and even Dary-maids, could do. Which made their Philosophy
appear so Imperfect and Useless, not only to the Generality of Men, but to the
more Elevated and Philosophical Wits, that our great Verulam attempted with
much Skill and Industry, (and not without some Indignation) to restore the more
modest and useful way practiced by the Ancients, of Inquiring into particular
Bodies, without hastening to make Systems, into the Request it formerly had;
wherein the admirable Industry of two of our London Physicians, Gilbert and
Harvey, has not a little assisted him. And I need not tell you, that since Him,
Descartes, Gassendus, and others, having taken in the Application of
Geometrical Theorems, for the Explication of Physical Problems; He, and They,
and Other Restorers of Natural Philosophy, have brought the Experimental and
Mathematical way of Inquiring into Nature into at least as high and growing an
Esteem, as ever it possessed when it was most in Vogue among the Naturalists
that preceded Aristotle.

To the Considerations I have hitherto deduced, which (perhaps) might alone
suffice for my purpose, I shall yet subjoyn one that I take to be of greater
weight than any of them, for the manifesting how difficult it is to be sure,
that the Physical Opinions, which at present procure a Champion or Promoter of
them Veneration, shall be still in request. For besides that inconstant Fate of
applauded Opinions, which may be imputed to the Inconstancy of Men, there is a
greater danger that threatens the Aspirers Reputation from the very Nature of
things: For the most general Principles of all, viz. the Figure, Bigness,
Motion, and other Mechanical Affections of the small parts of Matter, being (as
your Friend believes) sufficiently and clearly established already; he must
expect to raise his Reputation from subordinate Hypotheses and Theories; and in
these I shall not scruple to say, that it is extremely difficult, even for those
that are more exercised than He, in framing Them and in making of Experiments
to have so reaching and attentive a prospect of all things fit to be known, as
not to be liable to have their Doctrine made doubtful, or disproved by
something that He did not discover, or that Aftertimes may. This, I doubt not,
but you would easily be prevailed with to allow, if I had leisure and
convenience to transmit to you my Skeptical Naturalist. And without having
recourse to that Tract, it may possibly suffice, that we consider, that one of
the Conditions of a good See the Requisites of a good Hypothesis.
Hypothesis is, that It fairly comport not only with all other Truths, but
with all other Phenomenon of Nature, as well as those it is framed to explicate.
For this being granted, (which cannot be denied,) He that establishes a Theory,
which he expects shall be acquiesc'd in by all succeeding Times, and make Him
famous in them, must not only have a care, that none of the Phenomenon of
Nature, that are already taken notice of, do contradict his Hypothesis at the
present, but that no Phenomenon that may be hereafter discovered, shall do it
for the future. And I very much question, whether Physiophilus do know, or,
upon no greater a number and variety of Experiments than most men build upon,
can know, how incomplete the History of Nature we yet have, is, and how
difficult it is to build an Accurate Hypothesis upon an Incomplete History of
the Phenomenon it is to be fitted to; especially considering that (as I was
saying) many things may be discovered in Aftertimes by Industry or Chance,
which are not now so much as dreamed of, and which may yet overthrow Doctrines
speciously enough accommodated to the Observations that have been hitherto made.

Those Ancient Philosophers, that thought the Torrid Zone to be uninhabitable,
did not establish their Opinion upon wild Reasonings; and as it continued
uncontrol'd for many Ages, so perhaps it would have always done, if the
Discoveries made by Modern Navigations had not manifested it to be Erroneous.
The Solidity of the Celestial Orbs was, for diverse Centuries above 1000 years,
the general opinion of Astronomers and Philosophers, and yet in the last Age
and in Ours, the free Trajection, that has been observed in the Motion of some
Comets from one of the supposed Orbs to another, and the Intricate Motions in
the Planet Mars, (observed by Kepler and others, to be sometimes nearer, as
well as sometimes remoter from the Earth than is the Sun;) these, I say, and
other Phenomena undiscovered by the Ancients, have made even Tycho, as well as
most of the recent Astronomers, exchange the too long received Opinion of solid
Orbs for the more warrantable belief of a Fluid Ether. And though the
Celestial part of the World, by reason of its remoteness from us, be the most
unlikely of any other to afford us the means of overthrowing old Theories by
new Discoveries; yet even in that we may take notice of diverse Instances to our
present purpose, though I shall here name but this One, viz. That, after the
Ptolemaick Number and Order of the Planets had past uncontradicted for very
many Ages; and even the Tychonians and Copernicans, (however they did by their
differing Hypotheses dissent from the Ptolemaick System (as to the Order,) did
(yet) acquiesce in it as to the number of the Planets; by the happy
Discoveries, made by Galilaeo of the Satellites of Jupiter, and by the
excellent Hugenius, of the New Planet about Saturn, (which I think I had the
luck to be the first that observed and showed Disbelievers of it in England,)
the Astronomers of all persuasions are brought to add to the old Septenary
number of the Planets, and take in Five others that their Predecessors did not
dream of. That the Chyle prepared in the Stomach passed through the Mesaraick
Veins to the Liver, and so to the Heart, was for many Ages the unanimous
Opinion, not only of Physicians, but Anatomists, whose numerous Diffections
did not tempt them to question it; and yet, since the casual, though lucky,
Discoveries made of the Milky Vessels in the Thorax by the dextrous Pecquet,
those that have had with you and I the curiosity to make the requisite
Experiments, are generally convinced, that (at least) a good part of the Chyle
goes from the Stomach to the Heart, without passing through the Mesaraick
Veins, or coming at all to the Liver.

'Twere easy to multiply Instances of this kind, but I rather choose to add,
that it is not only about the Qualities, and other Attributes of things, but
about their Causes also, that New and oftentimes Accidental Discoveries may
destroy the credit of Long and generally approved Opinions. That Quicklime
exceedingly heats the Water that is poured on to quench it, on the account of
Antiperistasis, has been very long and universally received by the
School-Philosophers, where it is the grand and usual Argument, urged to
Establish Antiperistasis; and yet I presume you have taken notice, See this
Subject handled at large in an Appendix to the Author's Ex^men of
Antiperistasis.
that this Proof is made wholly Ineffectual in the judgment of many of the
Virtuosi, by some contrary Experiments of mine, and particularly that of
exciting in Quicklime full as great an Effervescence by the Affusion of Hot
water in stead of Cold* So it has been generally believed, that in the
Congelation of Water, that Liquor is condensed into a narrower room; whereas
our late Experiments In the History of Cold.
have satisfied most of the curious, that Ice is Water expanded, or (if you
please) that Ice takes up more room than the Water did, whilst it remained
unfrozen. And whereas the Notion of Natures abhorrence of a Vacuum, has not
only ever since Aristotle's time made a great noise in the Schools, but seems
to be Confirmable by a multitude of Phenomenon; the Experiments of
Torricellius, and some of Now published in the Book of New Physico-Mechanical
Experiments.
Ours, evidencing, that the Air has a great Weight and a strong Spring, have, I
think, persuaded almost all, that have impartially considered them, that,
whether there be or be not such a thing as they call Fuga Vacui, yet Suction,
and the Ascension of Water in Pumps, and those other Phenomenon that are
generally ascribed to It, may be very well Explicated without it, and are
indeed caused by the Weight of the Atmosphere, and the Elastical power of the
Air.

And this puts me in mind to take notice, that even practical Inventions, where
one would think the Matter of Fact to be Evident, may by undream'd of
Discoveries be brought to lose the general Reputation they had for compleatness
in their kind. For to endear the Invention of Sucking Pumps and of Siphons, it
has been generally presumed, that by means of either of these, Water and any
other Liquor may, ob fugam vacui, be raised to what height one pleases; and
accordingly ways have been proposed by famous Authors, to convey Water from one
side of an high Mountain to the other: Whereas first the unexpected
Disappointments that were met with by some Pump-makers, and afterward
Experiments purposely made, sufficiently evince, that neither a Pump nor a
Siphon will raise Water to above 35 foot or thereabouts, nor Quicksilver to so
many Inches.

And as to the Invention of Weather-glasses, which has been so much and justly
applauded and used, as it has been generally received for the truest Standard
of the Heat and Cold of the Weather; so it seems to be liable to no suspicion
of deceiving Us: For not only it is evident, that in Winter, when the Air is
very Cold, the Water rises much higher than in Summer and other Seasons, when
it is not so; but if you but apply your warm hand to the Bubble at the top, the
Water will be visibly depressed by the rarifi'd Air, which upon the removal of
the Hand returning to its former Coldness, the Water will forthwith as
manifestly ascend again. And yet by finding, See a Tract on this Subject,
premised by the Author to his Book of Cold.
that, as the Atmosphaere has a considerable weight, so this weight is not
always the same, but varies much, and that, as far as I can yet discover,
uncertainly enough; I have had the luck to satisfy many of the Curious, that
these Open Thermometers are not to be safely relied on, since in them the
Liquor is made to rise and fall, not only, as men have hitherto supposed, by
the Cold and Heat of the Ambient Air, but (as I have shown by diverse new
Experiments) according to the varying Gravity of the Atmosphaere; which
Variation has not only a Sensible, but a very Considerable Influence upon the
Weather-glass. To these Instances I shall annex only one more, from which we
may learn, that notwithstanding a very heedful survey of all that at present a
man can take notice of, or well suspect that he ought to take into his
Consideration, the Case may be such, that having devised an Instrument, He may
use it many years with good success; and yet, unless he were able to live very
many more, he shall not be sure to outlive the danger of finding the same
Instrument (though to sense as well conditioned as ever) fallacious: As he that
first applied a Magnetic Needle to the finding of the Meridian Line, might
very probably conclude, that his Needle pointing directly N. and S. or
declining from it just two or three, or some other determinate number of
Degrees, he had discovered a certain and ready way, without the help of Sun or
Stars, or Astronomical Instruments, to describe a Meridian Line, and if he
lived but an ordinary number of years after his Observation, he might probably
have found his Instrument not deceitful; which yet it may now be, the Magnetic
Needle not only declining in many places from the true points of N. and S. but
(as later Discoveries inform us) varying in tract of time its Declination in
the self same place.

The Considerations hitherto proposed might easily enough be increased by more
of the same tendency, especially if I thought fit to borrow from a Discourse
(of mine) purposely written about the Partiality and Uncertainty of Fame; but
in stead of adding to their Number, I should think my self obliged to excuse
my having already mentioned so many, and insisted so much upon them, if I did
not vehemently suspect, that in your Physiophilus, (as well as in many other
modern Naturalists,) scarce any thing does more contribute to an Undervaluation
of the study of Divinity, than that being eagerly ambitious of a Certain, as
well as a Posthume Fame, he is confident that Physiologie will help to it; and
therefore the design of his Discourse made me think it expedient to spend some
time to manifest, That it is far less easy than he thinks, to be as sure that
he shall have the praises of Future Ages, as that (though he have them) he
shall not hear them.

The past Considerations have, I presume, convinced you, that it is no such
easy matter for a Naturalist to acquire a great reputation and be sure it will
prove a lasting one. Wherefore, that I may also confirm the second Part of what
formerly I proposed, I now proceed to show, that, though the case were
otherwse, yet he would have no reason to slight the study of Divinity.

1. For, in the first place, nothing hinders, but that a man who values and
inquires into the Mysteries of Religion, may attain to an Eminent degree in the
knowledge of those of Nature. For frequently men of great parts may
successfully apply themselves to more than one Study; and few of them have
their thoughts and hours so much engrossed by that one Subject or Employment,
but that, if they have great Inclinations as well as Fitness for the study of
Nature, they will find time, not only to Cultivate it, but to Excel in it. You
need not be told, That Copernicus, to whom our late Philosophers owe so much,
was a Churchman; That his Champion Lansbergius was a Minister, and that
Gassendus himself was a Doctor of Divinity. Among the Jesuits you know, that
Clavius and diverse others have as prosperously addicted themselves to
Mathematics as Divinity. And as to Physics, not only Scheiner, Aquilonius,
Kircher, Schottus, Zucchius, and others, have very laudably cultivated the
Optical and some other Parts of Philosophy; but Ricciolus himself, the Learned
Compiler of that Voluminous and Judicious Work of the Almagestum novum, wherein
he has inserted diverse accurate Observations of his own, is not only a Divine,
but a Professor of Divinity. And without going out of our own Country, I
could, if I durst for fear of offending the modesty of those I should name, or
injuring the merit of those I should omit; I could (I say) if it were not for
this, among our English Ecclesiastics name you diverse, who though they apply
themselves so much to the study of the Scripture, as to be not only solid
Divines, but Excellent Preachers, have yet been so happily conversant with
Nature, that, if they had lived in the Learned times of the Greeks, they would
have rivall'd, if not eclipsed, some of them, Pythagoras and Euclid; others of
them, Anaxagoras and Epicurus; and some of them, even Archimedes and Democritus
themselves.

And certainly, provided there be Curiosity and Industry enough employed in the
study of Nature, it is not Necessary, that the knowledge of Nature should be
the ultimate End of that Study; a Fondness of the Object being required only
in order to the Engaging the mind to such a serious Application, as a higher
aim May sufficiently invite us to; and Will rather promote than discourage.
David became no less skilful in Music, Amos vj.5.
than those that were addicted to it only to please themselves in it; though
we may reasonably suppose, that so pious an Author of Psalms and Instruments
aspired to an Excellency in that delightful Science, that he might Apply and
Prefer it to the Service of the Temple, and promote the Celebration of God's
Praises with it. And as Experience has manifested, that the Heathen
Philosophers, that courted Moral Virtue for her self, did not raise it to that
pitch, to which 'twas advanced by the Heroic Practices of those true
Christians, that in the highest Exercise of Virtue had a Religious aim at the
pleasing and enjoying of God; so I see not, why Natural Knowledge must be more
prosperously cultivated by those selfish Naturalists, that aim but at the
pleasing of themselves in the attainment of that Knowledge, than those
Religious Naturalists, who are invited to Attention and Industry, not only by
the pleasantness of the Knowledge it self, but by a higher and more engaging
Consideration; namely, that by the Discoveries they make in the Book of Nature,
both themselves and others may be excited and qualified the better to admire
and praise the Author, whose Goodness does so well match the Wisdom they
celebrate, that he declares in his Word, That those that honor him, he will
honor. 1 Samuel ij.30.


And as a man that is not in love with a fair Lady, but has only a respect for
her, may have as true and perfect, though not as discomposing an Idea of her
face, as the most passionate Inamorato; so I see not, why a Religious and
Inquisitive Contemplator of Nature may not be able to give a good account of
her, without preferring her so far to all other Objects of his study, as to
make her his Mistress, and perhaps too his Idol.

II. And now I proceed to consider in the second place, That matters of
Divinity may, as well as those of Philosophy, afford a Reputation to Him that
discovers, or illustrates them. For though the Fundamental Articles of
Christian Religion be, as I have formerly declared, little less Evident than
Important; yet there are many other points in Divinity, and passages in the
Scripture, which (for Reasons that I have elsewhere mentioned) are exceeding
hard to be cleared, and do not only pose ordinary Readers, and the common sort
of Scholars, but will sufficiently exercise the Abilities of a Great Wit, and
give him opportunity enough to manifest that He is One. For diverse of the
points I speak of are much benighted upon the score of the Sublimity of the
Things they treat of; such as are the Nature, Attributes, and Decrees of God,
which cannot be easy to the dimm understandings of Us that are but Men: And
many other particulars that are not Abstruse in their own Nature, are yet made
Obscure to us by our Ignorance, (or at least Imperfect Knowledge,) of the
disused Languages wherein they are delivered, and the great remoteness of the
Ages when, and the Countries where, the things recorded were done or said. So
that oftentimes a man may need and show as great Learning and Judgment to
dispel the Darkness, wherein Time has involved Things, as that which Nature has
cast on them: And in effect we see, that St. Augustine, St. Hierom, Origin, and
others of the Fathers, have acquired no less a Reputation, than Empedocles,
Anaxagoras, or Zeno; And Grotius, Salmasius, Mr. Mede, Dr. Hamond, and some
other Critical Expounders of difficult Texts of Scripture, have thereby got as
much Credit, as Fracastorius by his Book De Sympathia and Antipathia; Levinus
Lemnius by his De Occultis rerum Miraculis; or Cardanus (and his Adversary
Scaliger) by what they writ De Subtilitate; or even Fernelius himself by his
Book De Abditis Rerum Causis. And it will contribute to the Credit which
Theological Discoveries and Illustrations may procure a Man, that the
Importance of the Subjects, and the earnestness wherewith men are wont to busy
themselves about them, some upon the score of Piety, and others upon that of
Interest, some to Learn Truths, and others to Defend what they have long or
publicly taught for Truth, does make greater numbers of Men take notice of
such Matters, and concern themselves far more about them, than about almost any
other things, and especially far more, than about matters purely Philosophical,
which but few are wont to think themselves fit to judge of, and concerned to
trouble themselves about. And accordingly we see, that the Writings of Socinus,
Calvin, Bellarmine, Padre Paulo, Arminius, etc. are more famous, and more
studied, than those of Telesius, Campanella, Severinus Danus, Magnenus, and
diverse other Innovators in Natural Philosophy. And Erastus, though a very
Learned Physician, is much less famous for all his Elaborate Disputations
against Paracelsus, than for the little Tract against particular Forms of
Church Government. And I presume You have taken notice, as well as I, that
there are scarce any Five new Controversies in all Physics, that are known to,
and hotly contended for by so many, as are the Five Articles of the
Remonstrants.

III. My second Consideration being thus dispatched, it remains, that I tell
you in the Third place, that Supposing, but not Granting, that to prosecute the
Study of Divinity, one must of necessity neglect the Acquist of Reputation; yet
this Inconvenience it self ought not to deter us from the Duty it would
dissuade. For in all Deliberations, wherein any thing is proposed to be quitted
or declined, to obey or please God; me thinks, we may fitly apply that of the
Prophet to the Jewish King, who being persuaded (to express his Concern for
God's Glory) to decline the Assistance of an Idolatrous Army of Israelites, and
objecting, that by complying with the Advice given Him, he should lose a Sum of
Money, amounting to no less than the Hire of a Potent Army; received from the
Prophet this brisk, but rational, Answer, The Lord is able to give thee far
more than this. 2. Chron. xxv.9.
The Apostle Paul, who had been traduced, reviled, buffetted, scourged,
imprisoned, shipwrack'd, and stoned for his Zeal to propagate the Truths, whose
study I plead for; after He had once had a Glimpse of that great Recompense of
Reward that is reserved for us in Heaven, scruples not to pronounce, Romans
viij.18.
that he finds upon casting up the Account (for He uses the Arithmetical term
(...)) that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the Glory that is to be revealed in us. Luke xxiij.15.
And if all that the Persecuted Christians of his time could suffer were not
suitable (for so I remember the same Greek word to signify elsewhere) or
proportionable to that Glory; it will sure far outweigh what we can now forego
or decline for it. The loss of an Advantage, and much more the bare missing of
it, being usually but a Negative Affliction, in comparison of the Actual
sufferance of Evil. Christ did not only tell his Disciples, that He who should
give the least of his Followers so much as a cup of cold water upon the score
of their relation to Him, should not be unrewarded; but when the same persons
asked Him, what should be done to Them, who had left All to follow Him; He
presently allots Them Thrones, as much outvaluing that All they had lost, as an
ordinary Recompense may exceed a cup of cold water. And indeed God's Goodness
is so Great, and his Treasures so Unexhausted, that as He is forward to
recompense even the least Services that can be done Him, so He is able to give
the Greatest a proportionable Reward. Solomon had an Opportunity, such as never
any Mortal had, (that we know of,) either before or since, of satisfying his
Desires, whether of Fame, or any other Thing that he could wish; ^ Kings iij.5.
Ask what I shall give thee, was the proffer made him by Him, that could give
All things worth Receiving; and yet the Wisdom even of Solomon's choice,
approved by God Himself, consisted in declining the most ambition'd things of
this Life, for those things that might the better qualify him to serve and
please God. And to give you an example in a Greater than Solomon, we may
consider, Phil. ij.6.
that He who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with
God; and who by leaving Heaven, did, to dwell on earth, quit more than any
Inhabitant of the Earth can to gain Heaven, and denied more to become Capable
of being tempted, than he did when he was tempted with an offer of All the
Kingdoms of the world, and the Glory of them: This Savior, I say, is said in
Scripture to have, Heb. xij.2.
for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the
shame; as if Heaven had been a sufficient Recompense for even His Renouncing
Honors, and Embracing Torments.

He that declines the Acquist of the Applause of men for the Contemplation of
the Truths of God, does but forbear to gather that whilst it is immature, which
by waiting God's time he will more seasonably gather when it is full ripe, and
wholesome, and sweet. That immarcescible Crown (as St. Peter calls it) which
the Gospel promises to them, Romans ij.7.
who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honor, will make
a rich amends for the declining of a Fading Wreath here upon Earth, where
Reputation is oftentimes as undeservedly acquired, as lost: Whereas in Heaven,
the very having Celestial Honors argues a Title to them. And since it is our
Savior's Reasoning, That His Disciples ought to rejoice when their Reputation
is pursued by Calumny, as well as their Lives by Persecution, Matthew. v.11, 12.
because their reward is great in Heaven, we may justly infer, That the
Grounded Expectation of so illustrious a Condition may bring us more Content,
even when it is not attended with a present Applause, than this Applause can
give those who want that comfortable Expectation. So that, upon the whole
matter, we have no reason to despond, or to complain of the Study of Theology,
for but making Us decline an empty and transitory Fame for a solid and eternal
Glory.

The Conclusion.
BY this time, Sir, I have said as much as I think fit (and therefore, I hope,
more than upon your single account was necessary) to manifest, that
Physeophilus had no just cause to undervalue the study of Divinity, nor our
Friend the Doctor, for addicting himself to it. I hope you have not forgotten
what I expressly enough declared at the beginning of this Letter, That both
your Friend and you admitting the holy Scriptures, I knew my self thereby to be
warranted to draw Proofs from their Authority. And if I need not remind you of
this, perhaps I need not tell you by way of Apology, that I am not so
unacquainted with the Laws of Discoursing, but that, if I had been to argue
with Atheists or Scepticks, I should have forborne to make use of diverse of the
Arguments I have employed, as fetched from unconceded Topics, and substituted
others for such as yet I think it very allowable for me to urge, when I deal
with a Person, that, as your Friend does only undervalue the study of the
Scriptures, not reject their Authority. And if the prolixity I have been guilty
of already did forbid me to increase it by Apologies not absolutely necessary,
I should perchance rather think my self obliged to excuse the plainness of the
Style of this Discourse; which both upon the Subject's score, and yours, may
seem to challenge a richer Dress. But the matter is very serious, and you are a
Philosopher, and when the things we treat of are highly important, I think
Truths clearly made out to be the most persuasive pieces of Oratory. And a
Discourse of this Nature is more likely to prove Effectual on Intelligent
Perusers, by having the Reasons it presents perspicuously proposed, and
unprejudic'dly entertained, than by their being pathetically urged, or
curiously adorned. And I have the rather forborne expressions that might seem
more proper to move than to convince; because I foresee, I may very shortly
have occasion to employ some of the former sort in another Letter to a Friend
of yours and mine, who will, I doubt, make you a sharer in the trouble of
reading it. But writing this for you and Physeophilus, I was far more
sollicitous to give the Arguments I employ a good temper, than a bright gloss.
For even when we would excite Devotion, if it be in rational men, the most
effectual pieces of Oratory are those, which like Burning-glasses inflame by
nothing but numerous and united Beams of Light. If this Letter prove so happy
as to give you any satisfaction, it will thereby bring me a great one. For
prizing you as I do, I cannot but wish to see you Esteem those things now,
which I am confident we shall always have cause to esteem; and then most, when
the Light of Glory shall have made us better Judges of the true worth of
things. And it would extremely trouble me to see you a Disesteemer of those
Divine things, which as long as a man undervalues, the Possession of Heaven it
self would not make him happy. And therefore, if the Blessing of Him whose
Glory is aimed at in it, make the Success of this Paper answerable to the
Wishes, the Importance of the Subject, will make the Service done you by it
suitable to the Desires of,

SIR, Your most Faithful, most Affectionate, and most Humble Servant.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Introduction, p. 2 l. 18. point thus; else; our. p. 51. l. 17. r.
Corpuscularian. p. 114. l. 3. r. Theology for Philosophy. p. 133. l. 10. r. yet
many of. ibid. l. 19. r. else do but. p. 201. l. 12. point thus, predecessors,
did unanimously teach.

ABOUT THE EXCELLENCY AND GROUNDS Of the MECHANICAL HYPOTHESIS, Some
Considerations, Occasionally proposed to a Friend.

By T. H. R. B. E. Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, at the Anchor in the Lower Walk
of the New Exchange. 1674.

The Publisher's ADVERTISEMENT.
THe following Paper having been but occasionally and hastily penned, long after
what the Author had written (by way of Dialogue) about the Requisites of a good
Hypothesis, it was intended, that if it came forth at all, it should do so as
an Appendix to that Discourse; because though one part of it does little more
than name some of the Heads treated of in the Dialogue, yet, according to the
exigency of the Occasion, the other part contains several things, either
pretermitted, or but more lightly touched on in the Discourse. But, although
the Author's design were to reserve these thoughts, as a kind of Paralipomena
to his Dialogue; yet, since he is not willing to let that, at least quickly,
come abroad, and these are fallen into my hands; I will make bold, with his
good leave, to annex them to the foregoing Treatise, not only to complete the
Bulk of the Book, but because o^ some affinity between them, since both aim at
manifesting the Excellency of the Studies they would recommend. And perhaps
'twill not be unwelcome to some of the Curious to find, that our Noble Author
in the same Book, wherein he prefers the Study of Divine things to that of
Natural ones, does himself prefer the Mechanical Principles before all other
Hypotheses about Natural things; they being in their own Nature so accommodate
to make considering men understand, rather than dispute of, the Effects of
Nature.

Of the Excellency and Grounds Of the CORPUSCULAR Or MECHANICAL Philosophy.
THe importance of the Question, you propose, would oblige me to refer you to
the Dialogue about a good Hypothesis, and some other Papers of that kind, where
you may find my thoughts about the advantages of the Mechanical Hypothesis
somewhat amply set down, and discoursed of. But, since your desires confine me
to deliver in few words, not what I believe resolvedly, but what I think may be
probably said for the Preference or the Preeminence of the Corpuscular
Philosophy above Aristotle's, or that of the Chemists, you must be content to
receive from me, without any Preamble, or exact Method, or ample Discourses, or
any other thing that may cost many words, a succinct mention of some of the
chief Advantages of the Hypothesis we incline to. And I the rather comply, on
this occasion, with your Curiosity, because I have often observed you to be
alarmed and disquieted, when you hear of any Book that pretends to uphold, or
repair the decaying Philosophy of the Schools, or some bold Chemist, that
arrogates to those of his Sect the Title of Philosophers, and pretends to build
wholly upon Experience, to which he would have all other Naturalists thought
strangers. That therefore you may not be so tempted to despond, by the
Confidence or Reputation of those Writers, that do some of them applaud, and
others censure, what, I fear, they do not understand, (as when the
Peripateticks cry up, Substantial Forms, and the Chemists, Mechanical
Explications) of Nature's Phenomenon, I will propose some Considerations, that,
I hope, will not only keep you kind to the Philosophy you have embraced, but
perhaps, (by some Considerations which you have not yet met with,) make you
think it probable, that the new Attempts you hear of from time to time, will
not overthrow the Corpuscularian Philosophy, but either be foiled by it, or
found reconcilable to it.

But when I speak of the Corpuscular or Mechanical Philosophy, I am far from
meaning with the Epicureans, that Atoms, meeting together by chance in an
infinite Vacuum, are able of themselves to produce the World, and all its
Phenomenon; nor with some Modern Philosophers, that, supposing God to have put
into the whole Mass of Matter such an invariable quantity of Motion, he needed
do no more to make the World, the material parts being able by their own
unguided Motions, to cast themselves into such a System (as we call by that
name); But I plead only for such a Philosophy, as reaches but to things purely
Corporeal, and distinguishing between the first original of things, and the
subsequent course of Nature, teaches, concerning the former, not only that God
gave Motion to Matter, but that in the beginning He so guided the various
Motions of the parts of it, as to contrive them into the World he designed they
should compose, (furnished with the Seminal Principles and Structures or Models
of Living Creatures,) and established those Rules of Motion, and that order
amongst things Corporeal, which we are wont to call the Laws of Nature. And
having told this as to the former, it may be allowed as to the latter to teach,
That the Universe being once framed by God, and the Laws of Motion being settled
and all upheld by His incessant concourse and general Providence; the
Phenomenon of the World thus constituted, are Physically produced by the
Mechanical affections of the parts of Matter, and what they operate upon one
another according to Me^hanical Laws. And now having shown what kind of
Corpuscular Philosophy it is that I speak of I p^oceed to the particulars that I
thought the most proper to recommend it.

I. The first thing that I shall mention to this purpose, is the
Intelligibleness or Clearness of Mechanical Principles and Explications. I need
not tell you, that among the Peripateticks, the Disputes are many and intricate
about Matter, Privation, Substantial Forms, and their Eduction, etc. And the
Chemists are sufficiently puzzled, (as I have elsewhere shown,) to give such
definitions and accounts of their Hypostatical Principles, as are reconcilable
to one another, and even to some obvious Phenomenon. And much more dark and
intricate are their Doctrines about the Archeus, Astral Beings, Gas, Blass, and
other odd Notions, which perhaps have in part occasioned the darkness and
ambiguity of their expressions, that could not be very clear, when their
Conceptions were far from being so. And if the Principles of the Aristotelians
and Spagyrists are thus obscure, it is not to be expected, the Explications that
are made by the help only of such Principles should be clear. And indeed many
of them are either so general and slight, or otherwise so unsatisfactory, that
granting their Principles, it is very hard to understand or admit their
applications of them to particular Phenomenon. And even in some of the more
ingenious and subtle of the Peripatetick Discourses upon their superficial and
narrow Theories, me thinks, the Authors have better played the part of Painters
than Philosophers, and have only had the skill, like Drawers of Landskips, to
make men fancy, they see Castles and Towns, and other Structures that appear
solid and magnificent, and to reach to a large extent, when the whole Piece is
superficial, and made up of Colors and Art, and comprised within a Frame
perhaps scarce a yard long. But to come now to the Corpuscular Philosophy, men
do so easily understand one another meaning, when they talk of Local Motion,
Rest, Bigness, Shape, Order, Situation, and Contexture of Material Substances;
and these Principles do afford such clear accounts of those things, that are
rightly deduced from them only, that even those Peripateticks or Chemists,
that maintain other Principles, acquiesce in the Explications made by these,
when they can be had, and seek not any further, though perhaps the effect be so
admirable, as would make it pass for that of a hidden Form, or Occult Quality.
Those very Aristotelians, that believe the Celestial Bodies to be moved by
Intelligences, have no recourse to any peculiar agency of theirs to account for
Eclipses. And we laugh at those East-Indians, that, to this day, go out in
multitudes, with some Instruments that may relieve the distressed Luminary,
whose loss of Light they fancy to proceed from some fainting fit, out of which
it must be roused. For no Intelligent man, whether Chemist or Peripatetic,
flies to his peculiar Principles, after he is informed, that the Moon is
Eclipsed by the interposition of the Earth betwixt her and it, and the Sun by
that of the Moon betwixt him and the Earth. And when we see the Image of a Man
cast into the Air by a Concave Spherical Looking-glass, though most men are
amazed at it, and some suspect it to be no less than an effect of Witchcraft,
yet he that is skilled enough in Catoptricks, will, without consulting
Aristotle, or Paracelsus, or flying to Hypostatical Principles and Substantial
Forms, be satisfied, that the Phenomenon is produced by the beams of Light
reflected, and thereby made convergent according to Optical, and consequently
Mathematical Laws.

But I must not now repeat what I elsewhere say, to show, that the Corpuscular
Principles have been declined by Philosophers of different Sects, not because
they think not our Explications clear, if not much more so, than their own; but
because they imagine, that the applications of them can be made but to few
things, and consequently are insufficient.

II. In the next place I observe, that there cannot be fewer Principles than
the two grand ones of Mechanical Philosophy, Matter and Motion. For, Matter
alone, unless it be moved, is altogether unactive; and whilst all the parts of
a Body continue in one state without any Motion at all, that Body will not
exercise any action, nor suffer any alteration it self, though it may perhaps
modifie the action of other Bodies that move against it.

III. Nor can we conceive any Principles more primary, than Matter and Motion.
For, either both of them were immediately created by God, or, (to add that for
their sakes that would have Matter to be unproduc'd,) if Matter be eternal,
Motion must either be produced by some Immaterial Supernatural Agent, or it
must immediately flow by way of Emanation from the nature of the matter it
appertains to.

IV. Neither can there be any Physical Principles more simple than Matter and
Motion; neither of them being resoluble into any things, whereof it may be
truly, or so much as tolerably, said to be compounded.

V. The next thing I shall name to recommend the Corpuscular Principle, is
their great Comprehensiveness. I consider then, that the genuine and necessary
effect of the sufficiently strong Motion of one part of Matter against another,
is, either to drive it on in its entire bulk, or else to break or divide it
into particles of determinate Motion, Figure, Size, Posture, Rest, Order, or
Texture. The two first of these, for instance, are each of them capable of
numerous varieties. For the Figure of a portion of Matter may either be one of
the five Regular Figures treated of by Geometricians, or some determinate
Species of solid Figures, as that of a Cone, Cylinder, etc. or Irregular,
though not perhaps Anonymous, as the Grains of Sand, Hoops, Feathers, Branches,
Forks, Files, etc. And as the Figure, so the Motion of one of these particles
may be exceedingly diversified, not only by the determination to this or that
part of the world, but by several other things, as particularly by the almost
infinitely varying degrees of Celerity, by the manner of its progression with,
or without, Rotation, and other modifying Circumstances; and more yet by the
Line wherein it moves, as (besides Straight) Circular, Elliptical, Parabolical,
Hyperbolical, Spiral, and I know not how many others. For, as later
Geometricians have shown, that those crooked Lines may be compounded of several
Motions, (that is, traced by a Body whose motion is mixed of, and results from,
two or more simpler Motions,) so how many more curves may, or rather may not be
made by new Compositions and Decompositions of Motion, is no easy task to
determine.

Now, since a single particle of Matter, by virtue of two only of the
Mechanical affections, that belong to it, be diversifiable so many ways; how
vast a number of variations may we suppose capable of being produced by the
Compositions and Decompositions of Myriads of single invisible Corpuscles, that
may be contained and contex'd in one small Body, and each of them be imbued
with more than two or three of the fertile Catholic Principles above
mentioned? Especially since the aggregate of those Corpuscles may be farther
diversifi'd by the Texture resulting from their Convention into a Body, which,
as so made up, has its own Bigness, and Shape, and Pores, (perhaps very many,
and various) and has also many capacities of acting and suffering upon the
score of the place it holds among other Bodies in a World constituted as ours
is: So that, when I consider the almost innumerable diversifications, that
Compositions and Decompositions may make of a small number, not perhaps
exceeding twenty of distinct things, I am apt to look upon those, who think the
Mechanical Principles may serve indeed to give an account of the Phenomenon of
this or that particular part of Natural Philosophy, as Staticks, Hydrostaticks,
the Theory of the Planetary Motions, etc. but can never be applied to all the
Phenomenon of things Corporeal; I am apt, I say, to look upon those, otherwise
Learned, men, as I would do upon him, that should affirm, that by putting
together the Letters of the Alphabet, one may indeed make up all the words to
be found in one Book, as in Euclid, or Virgil; or in one Language, as Latin,
or English; but that they can by no means suffice to supply words to all the
Books of a great Library, much less to all the Languages in the world.

And whereas there is another sort of Philosophers, that, observing the great
efficacy of the bigness, and shape, and situation, and motion, and connection in
Engines, are willing to allow, that those Mechanical Principles may have a
great stroke in the Operations of Bodies of a sensible bulk, and manifest
Mechanism, and therefore may be usefully employed in accounting for the effects
and Phenomenon of such Bodies, who yet will not admit, that these Principles
can be applied to the hidden Transactions that pass among the minute Particles
of Bodies; and therefore think it necessary to refer these to what they call
Nature, Substantial Forms, Real Qualities* and the like Un-mechanical
Principles and Agents.

But this is not necessary; for, both the Mechanical affections of Matter are
to be found, and the Laws of Motion take place, not only in the great Masses,
and the middle-siz'd Lumps, but in the smallest Fragments of Matter; and a
lesser portion of it, being as well a Body as a greater, must, as necessarily
as it, have its determinate Bulk and Figure: And he that looks upon Sand in a
good Microscope, will easily perceive, that each minute Grain of it has as well
its own size and shape, as a Rock or Mountain. And when we let fall a great
stone and a pibble from the top of a high Building, we find not but that the
latter as well as the former moves conformably to the Laws of acceleration in
heavy Bodies descending. And the Rules of Motion are observed, not only in
Canon Bullets, but in Small Shot; and the one strikes down a Bird according to
the same Laws, that the other batters down a Wall. And though Nature (or rather
its Divine Author) be wont to work with much finer materials, and employ more
curious contrivances than Art, (whence the Structure even of the rarest Watch
is incomparably inferior to that of a Humane Body;) yet an Artist himself,
according to the quantity of the matter he imploys, the exigency of the design
he undertakes, and the bigness and shape of the Instruments he makes use of, is
able to make pieces of work of the same nature or kind of extremely differing
bulk, where yet the like, though not equal, Art and Contrivance, and oftentimes
Motion too, may be observed: As a Smith, who with a Hammer, and other large
Instruments, can, out of masses of Iron, forge great Bars or Wedges, and make
those strong and heavy Chains that were employed to load Malefactors, and even
to secure Streets and Gates, may, with lesser Instruments, make smaller Nails
and Filings, almost as minute as Dust; and may yet, with finer Tools, make
Links of a strange Slenderness and Lightness, insomuch that good Authors tell
us of a Chain of diverse Links that was fastened to a Flea, and could be moved by
it; and, if I mis-remember not, I saw something like this, besides other
Instances that I beheld with pleasure of the Littleness that Art can give to
such pieces of Work, as are usually made of a considerable bigness. And
therefore to say, that, though in Natural Bodies, whose bulk is manifest and
their structure visible, the Mechanical Principles may be usefully admitted,
that are not to be extended to such portions of Matter, whose parts and Texture
are invisible; may perhaps look to some, as if a man should allow, that the
Laws of Mechanism may take place in a Town-Clock; but cannot in a Pocket-Watch;
or (to give you an instance, mixed of Natural and Artificial,) as if, because
the Terraqueous Globe is a vast Magnetical Body of seven or eight thousand
miles in Diameter, one should affirm, that Magnetical Laws are not to be
expected to be of force in a spherical piece of Loadstone that is not perhaps
an inch long: And yet Experience shows us, that notwithstanding the inestimable
disproportion betwixt these two Globes, the Terrella, as well as the Earth,
has its Poles, Equator, and Meridians, and in diverse other Magnetical
Properties, emulates the Terrestrial Globe.

They that, to solve the Phenomenon of Nature, have recourse to Agents which,
though they involve no self-repugnancy in their very Notions, as many of the
Judicious think Substantial Forms and Real Qualities to do; yet are such that
we conceive not, how they operate to bring effects to pass: These, I say, when
they tell us of such indeterminate Agents, as the Soul of the World, the
Universal Spirit, the Plastic Power, and the like; though they may in certain
cases tell us some things, yet they tell us nothing that will satisfy the
Curiosity of an Inquisitive Person, who seeks not so much to know, what is the
general Agent, that produces a Phenomenon, as, by what Means, and after what
Manner, the Phenomenon is produced. The famous Senner^us, and some other
Learned Physicians, tell us of Diseases which proceed from Incantation; but
sure it is but a very slight account, that a sober Physician, that comes to
visit a Patient reported to be bewitched, receives of the strange Symptoms he
meets with, and would have an account of, if he be coldly answered, That it is a
Witch or the Devil that produces them; and he will never sit down with so short
an account, if he can by any means reduce those extravagant Symptoms to any
more known and stated Diseases, as Epilepsies, Convulsions, Hysterical Fits,
etc. and, if he can not, he will confess his knowledge of this Distemper to
come far short of what might be expected and attained in other Diseases,
wherein he thinks himself bound to search into the Nature of the Morbific
Matter, and will not be satisfied till he can, probably at least, deduce from
that, and the structure of an Humane Body, and other concurring Physical
Causes, the Phenomenon of the Malady. And it would be but little satisfaction
to one, that desires to understand the causes of what occurrs to observation in
a Watch, and how it comes to point at, and strike, the hours, to be told, That
'twas such a Watch-maker that so contrived it: Or to him that would know the
true cause of an Echo, to be answered, That it is a Man, a Vault, or a Wood
that makes it.

And now at length I come to consider that which I observe the most to alienate
other Sects from the Mechanical Philosophy; namely, that they think it pretends
to have Principles so Universal and so Mathematical, that no other Physical
Hypothesis can comport with it, or be tolerated by it.

But this I look upon as an easy indeed, but an important, mistake; because by
this very thing, that the Mechanical Principles are so universal, and therefore
applicable to so many things, they are rather fitted to include, than
necessitated to exclude, any other Hypothesis that is founded in Nature, as far
as it is so. And such Hypotheses, if prudently considered by a skilful and
moderate person, who is rather disposed to unite Sects than multiply them, will
be found, as far as they have Truth in them, to be either Legitimately, (though
perhaps not immediately,) deducible from the Mechanical Principles, or fairly
reconcilable to them. For, such Hypotheses will probably attempt to account for
the Phenomenon of Nature, either by the help of a determinate number of
material Ingredients, such as the Tria Prima of the Chemists, by participation
whereof other Bodies obtain their Qualities; or else by introducing some
general Agents, as the Platonic Soul of the World, or the Universal Spirit,
asserted by some Spagyrists; or by both these ways together.

Now to dispatch first those, that I named in the second place; I consider,
that the chief thing, that Inquisitive Naturalists should look after in the
explicating of difficult Phenomenon, is not so much what the Agent is or does,
as, what changes are made in the Patient, to bring it to exhibit the Phenomenon
that are proposed; and by what means, and after what manner, those changes are
effected. So that the Mechanical Philosopher being satisfied, that one part of
Matter can act upon another but by virtue of Local Motion, or the effects and
consequences of Local Motion, he considers, that as, if the proposed Agent be
not Intelligible and Physical, it can never Physically explain the Phenomenon;
so, if it be Intelligible and Physical, 'twill be reducible to Matter, and some
or other of those only Catholic affections of Matter, already often
mentioned. And, the indefinite divisibility of Matter, the wonderful efficacy
of Motion, and the almost infinite variety of Coalitions and Structures, that
may be made of minute and insensible Corpuscles, being duly weighed, I see not
why a Philosopher should think it impossible, to make out by their help the
Mechanical possibility of any corporeal Agent, how subtle, or diffused, or
active soever it be, that can be solidly proved to be really existent in
Nature, by what name soever it be called or disguised. And though the
Cartesians be Mechanical Philosophers, yet, according to them, their Materia
Subtilis, which the very name declares to be a corporeal Substance, is, for
ought I know, little (if it be at all) less diffused through the Universe, or
less active in it than the Universal Spirit of some Spagyrists, not to say, the
Anima Mundi of the Platonists. But this upon the by; after which I proceed, and
shall venture to add, That whatever be the Physical Agent, whether it be
inanimate or living, purely Corporeal, or united to an Intellectual Substance,
the above mentioned changes, that are wrought in the Body that is made to
exhibit the Phenomenon, may be effected by the same or the like means, or after
the same or the like manner; as, for instance, if Corn be reduced to Meal, the
Materials and shape of the Milstones, and their peculiar Motion and Adaptation,
will be much of the same kind, and (though they should not, yet) to be sure the
grains of Corn will suffer a various contrition and comminution in their
passage to the form of Meal; whether the Corn be ground by a Water-mill, or a
Windmill, or a Horse-mill, or a Hand-mill; that is, by a Mill whose Stones are
turned by Inanimate, by Brute, or by Rational, Agents. And, if an Angel himself
should work a real change in the nature of a Body, it is scarce conceivable to
us Men, how he could do it without the assistance of Local Motion; since, if
nothing were displaced or otherwise moved than before, (the like happening also
to all external Bodies to which it related,) it is hardly conceivable, how it
should be in it self other, than just what it was before.

But to come now to the other sort of Hypotheses formerly mentioned; if the
Chemists, or others that would deduce a complete Natural Philosophy from Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury, or any other set number of Ingredients of things, would
well consider what they undertake, they might easily discover, That the
material parts of Bodies, as such, can reach but to a small part of the
Phenomenon of Nature, whilst these Ingredients are considered but as Quiescent
things, and therefore they would find themselves necessitated to suppose them
to be active; and That things purely Corporeal cannot be but by means of Local
Motion, and the effects that may result from that, accompanying variously
shaped, sized, and aggregated parts of Matter: So that the Chemists and other
Materialists, (if I may so call them,) must (as indeed they are wont to do)
leave the greatest part of the Phenomenon of the Universe unexplicated by the
help of the Ingredients, (be they fewer or more than three,) of Bodies, without
taking in the Mechanical and more comprehensive affections of Matter,
especially Local Motion. I willingly grant, that Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, or
some Substances analogous to them, are to be obtained by the action of the
Fire, from a very great many dissipable Bodies here below; nor would I deny,
that, in explicating diverse of the Phenomenon of such Bodies, it may be of use
to a skilful Naturalist to know and consider, that this or that Ingredient, as
Sulphur, for instance, does abound in the Body proposed, whence it may be
probably argued, that the Qualities, that usually accompany that Principle when
Predominant, may be also, upon its score, found in the Body that so plentifully
partakes of it. But not to mention, what I have elsewhere shown, that there are
many Phenomenon, to whose explication this knowledge will contribute very
little or nothing at all; I shall only he^e observe, that, though Chemical
Explications be sometimes the most obvious and ready, yet they are not the most
fundamental and satisfactory: For, the Chemical Ingredient it self, whether
Sulphur or any other, must owe its nature and other qualities to the union of
insensible particles in a convenient Size, Shape, Motion or Rest, and
Contexture; all which are but Mechanical Affections of convening Corpuscles.
And this may be illustrated by what happens in Artificial Fireworks. For,
though in most of those many differing sorts that are made either for the use
of War, or for Recreation, Gunpowder be a main Ingredient, and diverse of the
Phenomenon may be derived from the greater or lesser measure, wherein the
Compositions partake of it; yet, besides that there may be Fireworks made
without Gunpowder, (as appears by those made of old by the Greeks and Romans,)
Gunpowder it self owes its aptness to be fired and exploded to the Mechanical
Contexture of more simple portions of Matter, Nitre, Charcoal, and Sulphur; and
Sulphur it self, though it be by many Chemists mistaken for an Hypostatical
Principle, owes its Inflammability to the convention of yet more simple and
primary Corpuscles; since Chemists confess, that it has an inflammable
Ingredient, and experience shows, that it very much abounds with an acid and
uninflammable Salt, and is not quite devoide of Terrestreity. I know, it may be
here alleged, that the productions of Chemical Analyzes are simple Bodies, and
upon that account irresoluble. But, that diverse Substances, which Chemists are
pleased to call the Salts, or Sulphurs, or Mercuries of the Bodies that
afforded them, are not simple and homogeneous, has elsewhere been sufficiently
proved; nor is their not being easily dissipable or resoluble a clear proof of
their not being made up of more primitive portions of matter. For, compounded
and even decompounded Bodies, may be as difficultly resoluble, as most of those
that Chemists obtain by what they call their Analysis by the Fire; witness
common green Glass, which is far more durable and irresoluble than many of
those that pass for Hypostatical Substances. And we see, that some Amels will
be several times even vitrified in the Fire, without losing their Nature, or
oftentimes so much as their color; and yet Amel is manifestly not only a
compounded, but a decompounded Body, consisting of Salt and Powder of Pebbles
or Sand, and calcined Tinn, and, if the Amel be not white, usually of some
tinging Metal or Mineral. But how indestructible soever the Chemical
Principles be supposed, diverse of the Operations ascribed to them will never be
well made out, without the help of Local Motion, (and that diversified too;)
without which, we can little better give an account of the Phenomenon of many
Bodies, by knowing what Ingredients compose them, than we can explain the
Operations of a Watch, by knowing of how many and of what Metalls the Balance,
the Wheels, the Chain, and other parts, are made; or than we can derive the
Operations of a Windmill from the bare knowledge, that it is made up of Wood,
and Stone; and Canvas, and Iron. And here let me add, that 'twould not at all
overthrow the Corpuscularian Hypothesis, though either by more exquisite
Purifications, or by some other Operations than the usual Analysis of the Fire,
it should be made appear, that the Material Principles or Elements of mixed
Bodies should not be the Tria Prima of the vulgar Chemists, but either
Substances of another nature, or else fewer, or more in number; as would be, if
that were true, which some Spagyrists affirm, (but I could never find,) that
from all sorts of mixed Bodies, five, and but five, differing similar Substances
can be separated: Or, as if it were true, that the Helmontians had such a
resolving Menstruum as the Alkahest of their Master, by which he affirms, that
he could reduce Stones into Salt of the same weight with the Mineral, and bring
both that Salt and all other kind of mixed and tangible Bodies into insipid
Water. For, what ever be the numnumber or qualities of the Chemical Principles,
if they be really existent in Nature, it may very possibly be shown, that they
may be made up of insensible Corpuscles of determinate bulks and shapes; and by
the various Coalitions and Contextures of such Corpuscles, not only three or
five, but many more material Ingredients, may be composed or made to result:
But, though the Alkahestical Reductions newly mentioned should be admitted, yet
the Mechanical Principles might well be accommodated, even to them. For, the
Solidity, Taste, etc. of Salt, may be fairly accounted for, by the Stifness,
Sharpness, and other Mechanical Affections of the minute Particles, whereof
Salts consist; and if, by a farther action of the Alkahest, the Salt or any
other solid Body, be reduced into insipid Water, this also may be explicated by
the same Principles, supposing a further Comminution of the parts, and such an
attrition, as wears off the edges and points that enabled them to strike
briskly the Organ of Taste: For, as to Fluidity and Firmness, those mainly
depend upon two of our grand Principles, Motion and Rest. And I have elsewhere
shown, by several proofs, that the Agitation or Rest, and the looser contact,
or closer cohaesion, of the particles, is able to make the same portion of
Matter, at one time a firm, and at another time, a fluid Body. So that, though
the further Sagacity and Industry of Chemists (which I would by no means
discourage) should be able to obtain from mixed Bodies homogeneous substances
differing in number, or nature, or both, from their vulgar Salt, Sulphur, and
Mercury; yet the Corpuscular Philosophy is so general and fertile, as to be
fairly reconcilable to such a Discovery; and also so useful, that these new
material Principles will, as well as the old Tria Prima, stand in need of the
more Catholic Principles of the Corpuscularians, especially Local Motion. And
indeed, what ever Elements or Ingredients men have (that I know of) pitched
upon, yet if they take not in the Mechanical Affections of Matter, their
Principles have been so deficient, that I have usually observed, that the
Materialists, without at all excepting the Chemists, do not only, as I was
saying, leave many things unexplain^d, to which their narrow Principles will
not extend; but, even in the particulars they presume to give an account of,
they either content themselves to assign such common and indefinite Causes, as
are too general to signify much toward an inquisitive man's satisfaction; or
if they venture to give particular Causes, they assign precarious or false
ones, and liable to be easily disproved by Circumstances, or Instances, whereto
their Doctrine will not agree, as I have often elsewhere had occasion to show.
And yet the Chemists need not be frighted from acknowledging the Prerogative of
the Mechanical Philosophy, since that may be reconcilable with the Truth of
their own Principles, as far as these agree with the Phenomenon they are
applied to. For these more confind Hypotheses may be subordinated to those more
general and fertile Principles, and there can be no Ingredient assigned, that
has a real existence in Nature, that may not be derived either immediately, or
by a row of Decompositions, from the Universal Matter, modifi'd by its
Mechanical Affections* For, if with the same Bricks, diversely put together and
ranged, several Walls, Houses, Furnaces, and other Structures, as Vaults,
Bridges, Pyramids, etc. may be built, merely by a various contrivement of
parts of the same kind; how much more may great variety of Ingredients be
produced by, or, according to the institution of Nature, result from, the
various coalitions and contextures of Corpuscles, that need not be supposed,
like Bricks, all of the same, or near the same, size and shape, but may have
amongst them, both of the one and the other, as great a variety as need be
wished for, and indeed a greater than can easily be so much as imagined. And
the primary and minute Concretions that belong to these Ingredients, may,
without Opposition from the Mechanical Philosophy, be supposed to have their
particles so minute and strongly coherent, that Nature of her self does scarce
ever tear them asunder; as we see, that Mercury and Gold may be successively
made to put on a multitude of disguises, and yet so retain their nature, as to
be reducible to their pristine forms. And you know, I lately told you, that
common Glass and good Amels, though both of them but factitious Bodies, and not
only mixed, but decompounded Concretions, have yet their component parts so
strictly united by the skill of illiterate Tradesmen, as to maintain their
union in the vitrifying violence of the Fire. Nor do we find, that common Glass
will be wrought upon by Aqua fortis, or Aqua Regis, though the former of them
will dissolve Mercury, and the later Gold.

From the foregoing Discourse it may (probably at least) result, That if,
besides Rational Souls, there are any Immaterial Substances (such as the
Heavenly Intelligences, and the Substantial Forms of the Aristotelians) that
regularly are to be numbered among Natural Agents, their way of working being
unknown to us, they can but help to constitute and effect things, but will very
little help us to conceive how things are effected; so that, by what ever
Principles Natural things be constituted, it is by the Mechanical Principles
that their Phenomenon must be clearly explicated. As for instance, though we
should grant the Aristotelians, that the Planets are made of a quintessential
matter, and moved by Angels, or Immaterial Intelligences; yet, to explain the
Stations, Progressions, and Retrogradations, and other Phenomenon of the
Planets, we must have recourse either to Eccentricks, Epicycles, etc. or to
motions made in Elliptical or other peculiar Lines; and, in a word, to
Theories, wherein the Motion, and Figure, Situation, and other Mathematical or
Mechanical Affections of Bodies are mainly employed. But if the Principles
proposed be corporeal things, they will be then fairly Reducible, or
Reconcilable, to the Mechanical Principles; these being so general and
pregnant, that, among things corporeal, there is nothing real, (and I meddle
not with Chymerical Beings, such as some of Paracelsus's,) that may not be
derived from, or be brought to, a subordination to such comprehensive
Principles. And when the Chemists shall show, that mixed Bodies owe their
qualities to the predominancy of this or that of their three grand Ingredients,
the Corpuscularians will show, that the very Qualities of this or that
Ingredient flow from its peculiar Texture, and the Mechanical affections of the
Corpuscles it is made up of. And to affirm, that, because the Furnaces of
Chemists afford a great number of uncommon Productions and Phenomenon, there
are Bodies or Operations amongst things purely Corporeal, that cannot be
derived from, or reconciled to, the comprehensive and pregnant Principles of
the Mechanical Philosophy, is, as if, because there are a great number and
variety of Anthems, Hymns, Pavins, Threnodies, Courants, Gavots, Branles,
Sarabands, Jigs, and other (grave and sprightly) Tunes to be met with in the
Books and Practices of Musicians, one should maintain, that there are in them a
great many Tunes, or at least Notes, that have no dependence on the Scale of
Music; or, as if, because, besides Rhombusses, Rhomboids, Trapeziums, Squares,
Pentagons, Chiliagons, Myriagons, and innumerable other Polygons, Regular and
Irregular, one should presume to affirm, that there are among them some
Rectilinear Figures, that are not reducible to Triangles, or have Affections
that will overthrow what Euclid has taught of Triangles and Polygons.

To what has been said, I shall add but one thing more; That, as, according to
what I formerly intimated, Mechanical Principles and Explications are for their
clearness preferred, even by Materialists themselves, to others in the cases
where they can be had; so, the Sagacity and Industry of modern Naturalists and
Mathematicians, having happily applied them to several of those difficult
Phenomenon, (in Hydrostaticks, the practical part of Optics, Gunnery, etc.)
that before were, or might be referred to (...) Qualities, it is probable, that,
when this Philosophy is deeplier searched into, and farther improved, it will
be found applicable to the solution of more and more of the Phenomenon of
Nature. And on this occasion let me observe, that it is not always necessary,
though it be always desirable, that he that propounds an Hypothesis in
Astronomy, Chemistry, Anatomy, or other part of Physics, be able, a priori, to
prove his Hypothesis to be true, or demonstratively to show, that the other
Hypotheses proposed about the same subject must be false. For as, if I mistake
not, Plato said, (...).
That the World was God's Epistle written to Mankind, and might have added,
consonantly to another saying of his, 'twas written in Mathematical Letters:
So, in the Physical Explications of the Parts and System of the World, me
thinks, there is somewhat like what happens, when men conjecturally frame
several Keys to enable us to understand a Letter written in Ciphers. For,
though one man by his sagacity have found out the right Key, it will be very
difficult for him, either to prove otherwise than by trial, that this or that
word is not such as it is ghess'd to be by others according to their Keys; or to
evince, a priori, that theirs are to be rejected, and his to be preferred; yet,
if due trial being made, the Key he proposes, shall be found so agreeable to
the Characters of the Letter, as to enable one to understand them, and make a
coherent sense of them, its suitableness to what it should decipher, is,
without either confutations, or extraneous positive proofs, sufficient to make
it be accepted as the right Key of that Cipher. And so, in Physical Hypotheses,
there are some, that, without noise, or falling foul upon others, peaceably
obtain discerning men's approbation only by their fitness to solve the
Phenomenon, for which they were devised, without crossing any known Observation
or Law of Nature. And therefore, if the Mechanical Philosophy go on to
explicate things Corporeal at the rate it has of late years proceeded at, it is
scarce to be doubted, but that in time unprejudiced persons will think it
sufficiently recommended by its consistency with it self, and its
applicableness to so many Phenomena of Nature.

A Recapitulation.
PErceiving, upon a review, of the foregoing Paper, that the difficulty and
importance of the Subject, has seduced me to spend many more words about it
that I at first designed* twill not now be amiss to give you this short Summary
of what came into my mind to recommend to you the Mechanical Phelosophy, and
obviate your fears of seeing it supplanted; having first premised once for all,
that presupposing the Creation and general Providence of God, I pretend to
treat but of things Corporeal, and do abstract in this Paper from Immaterial
Beings, (which otherwise I very willingly admit,) and all Agents and Operations
Miraculous or Supernatural.

I. Of the Principles of things Corporeal, none can be more few, without being
insufficient, or more primary than Matter and Motion.

II. The natural and genuine effect of variously determined Motion in portions
of Matter, is, to divide it into parts of differing sizes, and shapes, and to
put them into different Motions, and the Consequences, that flow from these, in
a World framed as ours is, are, as to the separate fragments, posture, order,
and situation, and, as to the Conventions of many of them, peculiar
Compositions and Contextures.

III. The parts of Matter endowed with these Catholic affections are by
various associations reduced to Natural Bodies of several kinds, according to
the plenty of the Matter, and the various Compositions and Decompositions of
the Principles; which all suppose the common matter they diversifie: And these
several kinds of Bodies, by virtue of their Motion, Rest, and other Mechanical
Affections, which fit them to act on, and suffer from, one another, become
endowed with several kinds of Qualities, (whereof some are called Manifest, and
some Occult,) and those that act upon the peculiarly framed Organs of Sense,
whose Perceptions by the Animadversive faculty of the Soul are Sensations.

IV. These Principles, Matter, Motion, (to which Rest is related) Bigness,
Shape, Posture, Order, Texture, being so simple, clear, and comprehensive, are
applicable to all the real Phenomenon of Nature, which seem not explicable by
any other not consistent with ours. For, if recourse be had to an Immaterial
Principle or Agent, it may be such an one, as is not intelligible; and however
it will not enable us to explain the Phenomenon, because its way of working
upon things Material would probably be more difficult to be Physically made
out, than a Mechanical account of the Phenomenon. And, notwithstanding the
Immateriality of a created Agent, we cannot conceive, how it should produce
changes in a Body, without the help of Mechanical Principles, especially Local
Motion; and accordingly we find not, that the Reasonable Soul in Man is able to
produce what changes it pleases in the Body, but is confined to such, as it may
produce by determining or guiding the Motions of the Spirits, and other parts
of the Body, subservient to voluntary Motion.

V. And if the Agents or active Principles resorted to, be not Immaterial, but
of a Corporeal Nature, they must either in effect be the same with the
Corporeal Principles above-named; or, because of the great Universality and
Simplicity of ours, the new ones proposed must be less general than they, and
consequently capable of being subordinated or reduced to ours, which by various
Compositions may afford matter to several Hypotheses, and by several Coalitions
afford minute Concretions exceedingly numerous and durable, and consequently
fit to become the Elementary Ingredients of more compounded Bodies, being in
most Trials Similar, and as it were the Radical parts, which may, after several
manners, be diversified; as in Latin, the Themes are by Prepositions,
Terminations, etc. and in Hebrew, the Roots by the Haeemantic Letters* So that
the fear, that so much of a New Physical Hypothesis, as is true, will overthrow
or make useless the Mechanical Principles, is, as if one should fear, that
there will be a Language proposed, that is discordant from, or not reducible
to, the Letters of the Alphabet.

FINIS.

