THE Faithful and Diligent SERVANT OF THE LORD, Blessed at the COMING OF HIS
LORD.

As it was lately unfolded in a Funeral Discourse On the Death of Mr. THOMAS
CAWTON. AND Now on the earnest desire of the Hearers Published by H. Hurst.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers-Chappel, 1677.

To the Christian Reader, and to those who desired the publishing of the
ensuing Discourse.
Christian Reader,
IT would be an indecorum, as custom now obtains, to send abroad a discourse,
without direction where it may seek its entertainment: whether this be to be
imputed to the great unkindness of Readers, or to the unreasonable multitude of
Writers, it concerns me very little to enquire, and thee as little to know. To
them I send it, who I hope intended honestly, when they desired this plain
discourse might be published; and though perhaps it might be weakness in me to
let your desires have this effect on me, yet it is no fault to wish it may, and
to hope it will do thee good. It was a plain discourse in my mouth, and it was
needful it should be so; and it is plain now in paper and Ink, because I was
desired to publish what I preached: if it be somewhat more concise, it is not
without reason (somewhat being proper enough to the Hearers, which might be
less proper to Readers, who knew not those circumstances the Hearers were
acquainted with). And you need quarrel the brevity of it no sooner than you
find you were at the end of it before you were willing. I am sure I had an
excellent pattern of fidelity and diligence in Gods Family, when I had his life
in my eye, whose death was occasion of this discourse; I will not praeoccupate
your Judgment, whether I have well commended the Duty to you, or encouraged you
to the performance of it. I pray of you a serious and heedful Reading: and I
pray to God that he would give you such a heart as he requires, such a life of
holy care to save your selves and others, that God may give you the blessedness
of faithful Servants in life, at death, to eternity. That this may contribute
to all these, prays,

Your Souls Friend, H. HVRST.
April 20. 1677.
Luke XII. Ver. 43. Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall
find so doing.


I Think I need not give a Reason of my choice of this Text, when I have told
you the occasion of the words: If you will look into the Context, you will soon
see how great agreement there is in it, to this mournful occasion; and that
there was sufficient reason why I should fix here, where the best encouragement
of faithful Servants is laid before us, and an example of such an one is to be
treated by us. Nor shall I need other reason to persuade you to attend to what
shall be spoken.

Our blessed Lord, having exhorted his hearers to a readiness and watchfulness,
which becomes Servants whose Lord will certainly come, though they know not
when, ver. 35, 36. And having encouraged them with the proposal of blessedness,
ver. 37, 38, in case they do attend diligently to this Duty, and persevere in
it unto his coming; and withal, proposing it in so comprehensive a manner,
that it did not appear whether it were spoken to all equally, or to some more
than unto others: Saint Peter, either out of desire to know his Duty, or out of
curiosity to know his Lords mind, does (as in some other cases he did) make the
enquiry, ver. 42, whether the Parable were spoken unto all, or only to the
Disciples and Apostles, Lord, speak thou this unto us, or even unto all?
unto which query, Christ gives such an answer as does more closely bind our
Duty on us, and awakeneth all concerned in it, to see to it that they do their
duty, be ready for their account, and wait for their blessedness; And the Lord
said, Who then is that faithful and wise Steward, etc? Christ seems to have
answered with a check to his curiosity, but with a direction to his and our
willingness to our Duty; as if Christ had plainly told him, I speak to as many
as hope to be blessed by their Lord when he comes, excluding none who pretend
to the relation of Servants to the Lord, or to the hoped reward; who so would
be found faithful in his work, and blessed for it; who so is either Servant or
Steward, to him I speak; and according to the proportion of the Talents and
Trust, I do advise to diligence and fidelity in their employs, and assure of
blessedness to their fidelity. Be then your condition what it will, whether
higher or lower in your Lords Family, if you are in that condition faithful,
and wise, and helpful to your Fellow Servants, and so continue to be till your
Lord shall come, you are and shall be blessed.

For, Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

The words I shall, with your leave, briefly Paraphrase: [ Blessed], we so
express a good, comfortable, and desirable state: It is well with him that is
blessed; and he is thus well, who is thus well doing, and found in it. [ Is
that Servant, whom, etc.] This notes the universality of it, extending to all,
and yet points out the persons, who are here put under the Character of
blessedness; That Servant, though no more; That Steward or Ruler, if so much,
is the person Christ speaks of, who shall be blessed, when his Lord, who has
authority and right to require and direct our obedience, who has right of
calling us to account, and of distributing rewards; when Christ shall come,
then they who served him faithfully, shall be blessed, and in a good condition.

[ When he cometh] which refers both to the time when, and to the manner how
he comes; at what time soever, or in what manner soever our Lord shall come,
all his faithful servants shall be blessed, for they are found [ so doing];
which you must refer, partly to what was spoken more remotely in the Parable,
and concerns all according to the capacity in which they are, Servants in the
Family; and partly to what was spoken in the foregoing verse, where Stewards
and Rulers in the Family, giving to the Family its portion of meat in season,
are described, and supposed to be found faithful and wise in this charge; and
these are they who are so expressly pronounced happy in their so doing. Briefly,
this so doing, is doing the office of our places, and doing it according to the
Rule thereof, wisely, faithfully and diligently. The words thus opened, do lay
in open view before us, 1. A Lord who will sometime or other certainly come to
see what his Servants are in their several places doing. 2. A blessedness or
happy condition of some of those Servants. 3. The Character of those who shall
be happy, which Character is made up of the particulars mentioned distinctly in
ver. 42, and summed up in the Text in so doing. Hence then passing by other
particulars, I commend to your attention this Doctrine.

Doct. That whenever, and however our Lord shall come, all his Servants,
especially his Stewards, who have been wise, faithful, and diligent in his
family, giving to all their portion in season, shall be found in a good and
happy state.

It is not certain when or how our Lord will come; but whenever it is, or
however it may be, they are Servants and Stewards in happy state who are found
fit for, and faithful in the Lords Service.

His condition is and shall be good, who is a good servant to the Great and
good God. The meanest, and most ordinary Servants in the family being faithful,
are blessed according to their capacities; the Stewards who are above ordinary
Servants in their charge, abilities, and account, are also above them in their
blessedness, when they are found faithful to their Lord. It is a good, and a
great employment to be a Servant: It is a better and greater thing to be a
Steward in Gods Family, the Church of Christ. It is the best temper to be wise
and faithful in discharge of either, as our Lord shall appoint to us and
require of us.

Now in handling this Doctrine, that I may speak fully to it, I shall desire
you with me to consider, 1. The time when our Lord comes. 2. The manner in
which he comes. 3. The Scriptures do assure us his faithful Servants are
happy. 4. Wherein their happiness does consist. 5. Why appropriated to so
doing, i. e. to giving the Portion to each, etc. 6. Why deferred until the
coming of our Lord.


When these are dispatched, the Doctrinal part will afford us profitable
Application.

Now to the first thing proposed, I answer:

General.(...)e of our (...)ds coming.
1. That our Lord in his coming, does not observe the same time toward all; he
comes sooner to some, he stays longer to others; our experience and
observation herein is an undeniable witness. Some Parents God has taken away
sooner, and left in younger days both Widows and fatherless Children: Some
Preachers have had the opportunities of Forty or Fifty years, when others have
been called to their rest at half that period. You know not how long God may
continue you to yours, or them with you; P. Martyr aged 63. H. Bulling(...) 50
years d(...) aged 71. Guil. Fare lived 76 ye(...). Bishop Latmer lived years,
and Gataker. Nicol. Hemmingius, ag(...) 87. Theod. Beza aged 87. Dr. Chader 89.
Let. Nanniu insigni litera (...)tura, viz, 10 A^.
you had not been now mourning under this loss, if God had given to all his
faithful Ministers the same length of time for their work, to which some
attended longer than others have lived. The years of labor to some exceeding
by much the years of Life given to others. Thus 35 or 36 end the life, and of
these, some 16 or 17 years end the Labors of this Servant of God; yet he dyed
not the youngest Minister that ever yet dyed. But the unaccountable variety
here bids me forbear to enquire farther into it.

2. That our Lords coming is according to his own determined purpose: Our times
for life and service are in Gods hand; they are reserved with him, and he will
come in his own time. Were our times in other hands, we might be unseasonably
hurried too soon out of Life and Labor, by unkind hands of ill-willers; or
detained too long by the unwillingness of our Friends to part with us. But our
Lord has appointed, and will keep his own set-time to come to us.

3. There can no measures be given beforehand, what time our Lord will take to
come to us in. Nor may we expect any such Rules from any by which to guess how
long it will be ere our Lord will come to you, or me; Thousands have within our
time and observation (if we had heeded it) been summoned, when all about them
have thought they might have continued much longer. Parents have lost their
Children, Wives have lost their Husbands, and People have been deprived of
their Pastors on a sudden, when no such calamity was feared. Our Lord has not
made an hour to come sure to any of us, or invested us with a Right to another
succeeding moment. Our rule is, Work now, attend on the present business God
lays before us, for our Lord comes at an hour we know not of, as Matthew. 24.42,
sooner or later; expected, or unexpected; seasonably to our comfort, or
unseasonably to our Friends, Relations, and Churches grief; we cannot foretell.
Sure we are, he comes not to all at one age, nor to any in any time but his
own; nor with certain fore-warnings of weeks, or days, or hours; he has no
where told us he will stay a day longer for the youngest of us: It is enough
that he does assure us, if we are faithful in our places, and serve him, we
shall be blessed in so doing. And as the time is thus various, so in the second
place, His manner of coming is various; of which next.

Genesis The (...)ner of our (...)s coming.
2. Genesis There are five several ways wherein the Lord is pleased to come toward
us.

1. He comes in public afflictions, and general calamities upon Kingdoms, or
Nations, or People, among which many of his faithful servants dwell, and are
with others oftentimes involved in their troubles and sorrows: When the Lord
did call ( Psalm. 50) his Saints together, verse. 3, he tells us a fire shall
devour before him; and this is the effect when God shall come, and not keep
silence. Of such a coming Isaiah speaks in these words, The Lord shall come
out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth, Isa. 26.21. The
faithful Servants of God inhabiting the earth with others, may thus feel the
castigatory indignation of their Father. And in his Prophetic lofty strains,
the same Prophet does lively describe this coming of the Lord, Chap. 13.5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11 verses, Who is represented coming with the weapons of his
indignation, verse. 5, And the day of destruction comes, verse. 6, To lay the
land desolate, verse. 9, which was indeed accomplished in its time on Jerusalem
and the Jews after they had rejected Christ, and crucified him; yet then at
this coming, those that were faithful, were found in a good Condition; they
were blessed who served the Lord, and prepared for his coming; though this be
not the coming chiefly meant in the Text, yet the Doctrine is sound in this
regard.

2. Sometime the Lord comes in that manner, that particular families or
persons are found out by the rod and corrections. Lev. 20.5, God speaks of
cutting off a house or person. Deuteronomy. 29, 18, 19. God warns persons in a
Family, and the Family too; now if such do not take warning, but provoke him,
he will in his own time come to correct or punish such a person or family: of
this manner of proceeding are we to understand that of 1 Samuel 2.30, 31, and
cap. 3.13. When God does thus visit persons, or families, he is properly enough
said to come against them, and in such cases still it holds true, Those
servants of God who are faithful in their service to God, are blessed, or in a
good condition. So Eli was, though he smarted under the Rod; and David
comforted himself in the prospect hereof, 2 Samuel 23.5, though his house should
not grow; though severe corrections and rebukes should cause the Beauty of his
house to wither; yet God would give him the Covenant-salvation, it should be
well with him, in case of such coming: though the Text less intend it, the
Doctrine is both true and useful.

3. Sometime the Lord comes to search and try men's state, and conscience is
awakened to make enquiry, and to discover them to themselves. While God stands
as at a distance, men are secure; but when he comes by his Word and Spirit,
and commands an admission, he sets up that light within the man's soul that
discovers what he has done, what he may expect, and what he farther must do.
The word is sharp as a two-edged sword, and searches the reins, Heb. 4.12. And
thus the secrets of men's hearts are discovered, when God comes with his word,
1 Cor. 14.25, among men. When God heweth men by his prophets, and makes his
judgments as the light, Hos. 6.5, then he comes into the heart and conscience.
Now certainly the Faithful and Diligent are in a good condition, when their
hearts do not condemn them, when they know God will not condemn them. But oh
the sad condition of those that dare not look themselves in themselves! that
are self-condemned, and afraid to know what God discovers at such coming! The
Kings of Judah, who did not obey the Command of the Lord, could not endure the
Prophets, or their word. But Josiah who was faithful to God, can bear such a
searching word, 2 Chronicles. 34.19. and 27. ver. Who desire to be faithful to God,
they dare abide this coming; it does discover their sincerity, and declare them
happy. In this case (though not directly intended by the Text) it holds true,
All Gods faithful Servants and Stewards are found in a good and happy state.
But next, which is that coming intended chiefly in the words and Doctrine:

4. When Death is the Messenger God sends to let us know he is coming to us,
when he fetches us from amidst men, and comes to take account of each of us;
each man by man, thus visited, is either more or less happy, as he is found
more or less faithful and diligent at this coming of the Lord; this is that
coming, of which by concurrent vote of our Interpreters the Text does speak, as
also does its Parallels, Matt. 24. ver. 42, 43. and Mark 13. ver. 34, 35, 36.
of which I say the less, because it passing with so general consent, needs not
much proof. But,

Fifthly and lastly, The Lord comes in his Glory and Majesty to raise the
dead, and to Judge all men. They who now do, shall not eternally sleep in the
dust; God will come and call them out of their beds: The Lord Jesus will
descend with the voice of the Trump, and the dead shall hear and rise, to the
great, general and last judgment. Thus he comes to judge the world (Psalm.
96.13, and 98.9,) with righteousness, and the people with equity. Places that,
speaking of the Kingdom of the Messiah, do include this Royal procedure which
shall consummate his ministerial Government. When he comes (as Rev. 1.7,) in
view of every eye, for every eye shall see him when he thus comes; or as it is
described, 1 Cor. 15.23, 24, 25, At this coming the Faithful diligent Servant
is in good state. Briefly then, Whether our Lord come sooner or later to try
the heart by his word, or families by his Rod, or Nations, as he did try the
Jews by more public calamities; In these cases the most faithful of his
Servants and Stewards are in the most safe and blessed state; but when he
comes as the judge of all men to particular judgment, calling each man by
death; and to the general judgment, calling all men before him; He, and he only
is in a good and blessed state, who is found to have been faithful and diligent
in his Stewardship and Service within the House and Family of God, giving to
each what portion of meat is due to them. Which is

In the third place now to be proved by the more general Testimony of the
Scriptures. 3. Genesis Proofs of the Doctrine.
Where we find all faithful and diligent Servants, and Stewards especially,
pronounced blessed and happy in their attendance to the work of doing good to
all as they are able, and therein serving their Lord, and waiting for his
coming. So Rev. 14.13, Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord: Death is the
greatest, as well as last Enemy to our life; yet if that natural life be spent
for the Lord, and we dye in him, we are blessed; for such men's Works do follow
them, and they rest from their Labors. Now certainly lesser troubles, and
lighter afflictions cannot render him or her unhappy, whom Death found and left
in a blessed state; so that to work those works which we would have to follow
us, and to dye in the Lord, as they prove our Fidelity, so they do prove our
Felicity, and at once prove us good Christians, and in good state. Again,
Matthew. 25.34, 35, Come ye blessed of my father, etc. These are such who fed,
clothed, harbored, visited, and refreshed those in the Lords Family, though
the least of his Family, verse. 40, which was as much a Duty to them who could
do it, as it was useful to others for whom it was done: Now they are declared
happy ones, who had thus, according to their opportunity Ministered unto others.
And much more will they appear blessed, who have faithfully directed thirsty
Souls to the Fountain of living Waters, hungry Souls to the Bread of Life,
naked Souls to the white Robes, wandering Souls to the rest of Souls. Again,
Matthew. 7.21, Not he that says, Lord, Lord, but he that does the Will of my
heavenly Father, etc. not a fruitless profession, but a faithful obedience; not
an unactive complement, but a diligent fulfilling the Will of our Lord, is at
last a blessing to us; he is in a good state indeed, whose Lord does reward his
Service with an entrance into, and enjoyment of eternal life in Heaven. And
nothing can alter it to him, who alters not his course of Faithfulness and
Diligence. Such an one is ( Jam. 1.22,) Blessed in his deed: now who is blessed
in doing his work, can never be in ill-state whilst he is doing it; and he is
in better state when the work done is rewarded: whose work is his happiness,
cannot but be happy, whilst he attends his work; and this is the case of all
diligent and sincere observers of Gods Commandments, Psalm. 19.11.
The keeping them is a great reward. Christians consider it, if glory, honor,
immortality, and eternal life, can be a blessedness to us, we are assured of
this, For every soul that does good (as God requires) whether Jew or Gentile,
Romans 2.13. There is a crown of righteousness (2 Timothy 4.8. for St. Paul who had
fought a good fight, etc. Yea, but if it were limited to his person, none could
rejoice herein with assurance for themselves; or were it limited to his
excellent qualifications, and unparalled diligence, few or none of us could
argue our own right hereby; therefore it is added, not for me only, but for all
that love his appearing. It is then unquestionable, that when the Lord shall
come by Death and particular Judgment to any of us; and when he shall come in
the general Judgment to us all, every faithful and diligent Servant shall be
blessed. And the blessedness of that future state, will as much make and keep
every state here in our way to it, good and happy, as gains of thousands yearly
will make and keep him rich who loses some farthings or pence now and then.
Thus in general, the common and ordinary Servants find their diligence and
fidelity to be their happiness; Stewards and Ministers of the grace of God find
it much more their happiness to have been faithful and diligent. So the Holy
Ghost seems to speak for encouragement to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna,
Rev. 2.10. And 2 Cor. 4.1, Ministers of the Gospel are mentioned, who did
handle the word of God faithfully, and commended themselves to the consciences
of men, verse. 2. Who did preach not themselves, but Christ, verse. 5. Who were
troubled on every side, verse. 8. Of these it is said, that light and momentary
afflictions work for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
verse. 17, 18. The share Ministers shall have in answer to the diligence and
faithfulness of their Labors, shall be greater than the share of common or
ordinary Christians at the coming of him who is Lord to them all. When each
Believer has his Crown, and all their joys are full, then are those Believers
an accession to the glory and joy of their faithful diligent Ministers, who
labored for their Conversion, and helped forward their final and eternal
salvation, 1 These. 2.19, 20. And once for all, that of Dan. 12.3, Who turn many
to righteousness, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, etc. Each
faithful Minister shall have his Aureola, golden Ornament added to his Crown:
though all the faithful Servants of the Lord shall be as the stars, yet one
star differs from another; the most bright and glorious will be those who
were on earth the stars that Christ held in his right hand, Rev. 2.1.

These Scriptures, with others, which might be added, do confirm the blessed
future state of faithful and diligent Servants, and Stewards, who in the Lords
family attend to their work, and serve the Lord by their affording what help
they can to all; and in proportion to their trust and fidelity, shall be their
happiness at Death and Judgment. And in the mean time, in what ever way of
corrections or judgments the Lord may come to others, and to them while they
are among others, and are liable to troubles; yet they shall be found blessed
in public troubles, blessed in private troubles, blessed under personal
trials, at death more, in the resurrection most blessed, happy, and in good
state in all these cases.

Now wherein this blessedness consists, is the fourth proposed head of our
discourse, to which your attention is now desired, that you may be thoroughly
affected with this undoubted truth, and be brought to a greater resolution for
fidelity and diligence according to your Talents, and may at last have a larger
measure of this present, and that future blessedness, which I thus range before
you.

4. Genesis What the blessedness of faithful Servants.
1. The faithful and wise Servant of the Lord is blessed in the pardon of his
sins, and culpable blemishes, which intermix with his services. He that will be
so wise for, and faithful to his fellow Servants, as to persuade, direct,
encourage and help them to serve the Lord, cannot be supposed will not be wise
for himself, or unfaithful to himself, or neglect to sue out a Pardon for his
known and unknown infirmities: The good man Nehemiah, cap. 13.22, sought this
pardoning Grace from the greatness of Gods mercy, when he reflected upon the
great services he had done for God and his Church. David, the man after Gods
own heart, joins this suit for Pardon, to his requests for guiding in the ways
of God, to which he was fully addicted, Psalm. 25.4, 5, 6. and in midst of
troubles he sueth for the same mercy, Psalm. 25. ver. 15 16, 17, 18. When his
feet were in the net, v. 15. when desolate, v. 16. when troubles were enlarged
into distresses, v. 17. Then he prayed that God would forgive all his sin. So
the returning Church, Hos. 14. ver. 2, prays, and God promises he will do it,
ver. 4. And so Micah 7. ver. 18.19. Now this makes any condition good and
safe: The man whose transgression is forgiven, Psalm. 32. ver. 1, is in every
place and in every condition a safe and happy man. God who pitieth infirmities,
pardons them where he finds sincerity in his Servants. He that faithfully
warns another, and calls on him to repent, and seek his Pardon; he that
faithfully endeavors to engage others to do their Duty, and seek for mercy, is
a man whom God has affected, so as to ensure the blessedness for himself which
he persuades others to look after. Parents, Husbands, Wives, Friends and
Ministers, who heartily desire and labor to get others into the service of
God, on terms and encouragements sufficient to prevail with them, are indeed
the persons whom we must in charity believe are pardoned. I should think he
were pardoned who commended the Grace of his Prince, who persuaded to all due
Allegiance for future, and urged his fellow Subject to sue for Pardon of what
had been ill and undutifully done already. It is certain the faithful are
forgiven and blessed therein, though perhaps they have not sense of it, or we
evidences to prove it of them. Now no condition can come on such a man, to
render him miserable or in evil state.

2. The blessedness of such faithful and diligent ones does lie in that
gracious acceptance which God does afford to them for all their sincere and
willing obedience, though imperfect in it self, unsuccessful to others, and
altogether unprofitable to God. It is a blessed thing to be accepted with God;
this is Heaven upon Earth; this is Heaven after we leave Earth. The Lord
rejects none that he has fitted for, and who are faithful in his charge:
This was a blessing that David entreated of the Lord, Psalm. 19.14, Let the
meditations of my heart, and the words of my mouth be acceptable in thy sight,
etc. This gracious acceptance did in David's troubles counter-balance the
grieviousness of his troubles, Psalm. 69. ver. 7, 8, with ver. 13. He could bear
the reproach of enemies, when he knew his prayer should be acceptable unto his
God. No Courtier despised by Rebels is so happy in his Prince's Favor, and
free access to his Prince's Person, as such diligent and faithful Servants are
in their access to, and acceptance with their God. You may guess at what I say
by the resentment Cain (of men one of the worst) had of Gods refusing to accept
him, Genesis 4. ver. 5. It cast him down, and filled him with trouble. No
condition is uneasy to a soul that enjoys Gods Favor; for it is better than
life, Psalm. 63. ver. 3. and every condition is dark and doleful without his
favor. What is Hell, but a place where hopeless Souls are under the
inconceivable Tortures of an eternal rejection and separation from God? What is
Heaven but a glorious, free, full and eternal state of nearness to God, and of
favor with him? This acceptance is the great blessing God has promised to
such as serve and love him, Isa. 56.7. It is the sum of all we obtain through
Christ, in whom we are accepted with God, Ephesians. 1. ver. 6. Matt. 25. ver. 21,
Well done good and faithful Servant, is enough to make us blessed now; enter
thou into the joy of thy Master is fullness of the future blessedness. In every
state, and at the coming of the Lord, thus blessed is the good Servant.

3. This Blessedness of the faithful and good Servant, does lie partly in the
peace and tranquillity of his mind, persuaded that now sin is pardoned and his
duties are accepted: every condition shall at last give place to what is best,
and all shall work together for good to him; though various troubles do toss
him, yet they (like rolling waves) carry the Ship toward the Harbor. It is
well with him, because he knows the knife which lanceth him, does not make
him a Sacrifice under avenging Justice. And though he is corrected, yet it is
under the hand of a Father, he is not destroyed by the hand of an Executioner.
He is satisfied that it is good for him that he has been afflicted, Psalm. 119.
ver. 67, 71, 75. When he suffers with others, he sees he needed it; so all
appears seasonable, necessary and profitable to him, 1 Pet. 1.6, We are in
heaviness for a season if need be, and for our profit, Heb. 12. ver. 10. It is
blessed to be refined, and God does by his coming intend this, Isa. 48. ver.
10, That he may choose them before others. Now this considered, the faithful
Servants of God do account their condition good, for that it is always tending
to, and shall at last end in what is best for them: It is on the increase
toward full happiness.

4. The faithful and good Servants happiness does partly consist in that
support which his Lord gives to him under his burdens; while he submits to
the will of his Lord waits for him, and does his Duty, he is supported by the
presence of his Lord: He sinketh not, because the Lord upholdeth him, Psalm. 94.
ver. 17, 18. When David's feet did well nigh slip, the Lords mercy held him up.
It is an unutterable variety of helps that God affords to his faithful ones,
they are very secret, unexpected, strong and satisfactory, many times beyond
the belief of strangers, and the hope of those who receive them, Isa. 43.2, In
midst of Rivers and waters, in midst of fire and flames; if God promise to be
with us, we may account our condition good and safe; for his presence shall
save us from Rivers, that they do not overflow us, and from Fire, that it
kindle not on us. Now thus safe and good is the condition of every faithful
Servant of God, he is pardoned, accepted, bettered, and supported still, The
Angel of Gods presence is with him, and saves him, Isa. 63. ver. 9. He is
blessed whom God will save, whom God will support. It is sad to be left sinking
under our burdens; but to be supported under them, is next to a blessed
freedom from them, or next to a life above them.

5. However, it may be death shall be the sad consequence of a faithful and
diligent Servants sufferings with others; yet he is in this case blessed too:
For he might die in peace and joy; he does at least die in safety, and free
from danger of future evils. It is possible a good Servant may die under fears,
but he does not die under danger of condemnation; Who walk in their integrity,
enter into their Rest, Isa. 57. ver. 2. Though Death be an enemy, it is last to
a child of God: Stewards and Servants though faithful and diligent, yet they
must die; but after death there is no other enemy, all is then safe to them:
they pass by Death to the enjoyment of the love of their Lord, to be filled
with that love which is inconceivable, and possess that love which is eternal;
from which, Nothing can ever separate them, Romans 8. ver. 37, 38. thus death is
theirs, 1 Cor. 3. ver. 22. Now that is a blessed state indeed which is so full
of safety: How do dying men acknowledge this! when Death brings no danger with
it, we are happy indeed: This Balaam wished for, though he never attained it.
The untrusty and slothful Servant is unhappy in his death, because he dies
under greatest danger, he dies an evil and wicked Servant; the good Servant
dies as safe as he can wish, and as happy as he can be made. Which will appear
in the

Sixth thing, wherein the blessed state of such does consist: They pass after
death immediately into an inconceivable glory, where their souls purified from
all sin, and made perfectly holy, enjoy a blessed, though not a full
consummated glory: they are in the joys of their master; they live in the sight
of their glorified redeemer, triumph over sin and temptation; assured of the
future resurrection of their bodies, without tediousness of a delay wait for
it; they possess their building of God, their house not made with hands, which
is eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. They are before the throne, etc. Rev.
7.14. Thus blessed in life, in death, after death, are the faithful Servants of
the Lord. And yet, this is not all, there is

A seventh thing, part of their blessedness, which, when their Lord comes,
they shall enjoy, that is the resurrection of their bodies in a glorious
conformity to the glorified body of their redeemer. When the Lord of these
Servants and Stewards we speak of, shall come and awaken all out of their beds
of dust; His good Servants, whose bodies were sown in dishonor, shall receive
their bodies raised in honor: those bodies which were sown mortal and weak,
shall be raised immortal, and in strength, fit to be the eternal habitation of
immortal souls; and both soul and body united, shall ever live in a most
delightful, regular and sinless harmony and friendship. You that admire the
unparalled beauties of mortal creatures, and judge That their happiness, which
is your envy or wish; withdraw your eye, and look to the Grave, whence the
rarest beauties are at last to rise, whence the firmest strength, the most
desirable activity, and the spiritfullest vigor. And then say whether you can
think them less than blessed, who have their part in this Resurrection, to
allude to that of Saint John.

Nothing shall ever be able to hinder them from this, which though exceeding
great, is yet followed with another part necessary to their happiness; which is,

8thly, A public, solemn and full declaration of their absolution from the
charge which men or Devils, in their accusation of them, would load them with;
nay, the charge wherewith the Law would burden them, shall be fully and
solemnly taken off: when they shall be justified before men and Angels, from
all that from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Act.
13.38, which shall be when our Lord shall proceed in Judgment toward all, when
according to the order of the Resurrection, those that are Christ's, shall be
first called, judged and absolved; when according to the order of the Parable,
Matt. 25.34, Those shall be adjuged to glory first, who fed the hungry,
clothed the naked, took into their houses those that were strangers, etc.

This I doubt not, you will confess is a great happiness indeed: well, when our
Lord comes, thus happy shall all his faithful and diligent Servants be, who in
life laid out themselves in labor for the Lord, who in death rest from their
labors, and whose labors follow them into Judgment, to be examined, pardoned
and rewarded according to the riches of Grace.

9thly, Our Lord, when he comes, will add another thing to their happiness:
They shall then with him, as assessors and approvers of his righteous
proceeding with the rest of the world, sit Judges of the world; of this we are
assured, Jude 14, The Lord comes with (or in midst of) ten thousand of his
Saints to Judge, etc. Of this the Apostle speaks more clearly, 1 Cor. 6.2, The
Saints shall judge the world: Nay, more, we shall judge Angels, says the
Apostle. This honor have all his Saints; and in this they are blessed: and
this is enough to make every condition good to them, until the glorious coming
of their Lord, until they are thus advanced: In a word, Christ seems to promise
to his, who are more than the ordinary Servants in his Family, a more than
ordinary degree of this Honor, Luke 22. ver. 28, 29, 30. with Matt. 19.28. I
will not enquire how far faithful Stewards and Ministers are herein, next to
the Apostles, concerned: It is well for them, their faithfulness to souls shall
then be manifested and honored.

10thly and lastly, Christ our Lord, when he comes in the Glory of his Father
Judge of all, will, when the solemnity of Judgment is finished, and the wicked
world is cast into Hell, thrown into the place of Torment, where their worm
dies not, where the fire is not quenched; Then Christ will take all his
faithful ones, and pass with them into the inconceivable and eternal Glory of
his Kingdom, brought to the fullest degree of greatness and Majesty that is
foretold to us. When they shall ever be with the Lord, and behold his Glory;
when they shall be like to him whom they see, and be filled with that Glory
that shines on them; when all the Saints of God, and none others, shall be
amassed into one great and general assembly, and all orderly ranged before the
throne of God, and the Lamb ministering in sinless praises, love and adoration
for ever.

Now certainly, could you and I lift up our eyes toward this illustrious
assembly; could we view them there, we should ever be satisfied, That diligence
in, and faithfulness to the service of our Lord, according to our capacity, now
is, and will, at the coming of our Lord, appear to be as much our comfort and
happiness, as it is our Duty, and ought to be our care. Oh then, let us
consider, What it is to be acquitted from guilt: What to be approved and
rewarded: What it is to be bettered by all providence: What to die in safety at
last: Is not this to be blessed? Is not this to die the death of the righteous?
Why Christians, your faithfulness and diligence shall so be found, and so end,
if you continue it.

Do we believe a glory succeeds our death, a resurrection our burial, a public
absolution our being judged? shall we sit assessors, approvers, and witnesses
to the Great Judge, and pass with him into glory everlasting? And shall not our
unwearied diligence and faithfulness exercised in his Service, prove we believe
the truth, and expect this benefit hereof? I hope now you will be less moved
with present difficulties, and more fixed for future diligence in serving the
Lord, and doing good to his Family, expressed here by giving the Portion of
meat in season; in which appears the wisdom and fidelity of Servants and
Stewards, and to which blessedness is annexed and appropriated in the Text. The
Reason whereof, is the fifth general head of discourse, and which we shall now
briefly touch upon.

Genesis Why Ted, who (...)e the Por(...) of, etc.
1. Wisdom and faithfulness in Servants and Stewards, are the best
qualifications, and comprise all that a Lord and Master requires, or need
require in them: for wisdom makes them meet for such a trust, and faithfulness
encourages their Lord to trust them. And both these appear in their observing
what is sit for each person and season, and applying to both accordingly. So
when Fathers know what is fit for Children, and Masters know what is fit for
Servants, and Ministers for their people, and accordingly instruct, reprove,
warn, encourage, or comfort them: Here is both the widom and fidelity requisite
to a good Servant; and the Lord, who intends in the Text to oblige us to all
that good Servants and Stewards should do, has thus closely couched all our
Duty in this comprehensive phrase. So the blessedness is appropriated, not to a
single Duty, but to the universal diligent discharge of all our Duty; which is
summed up in this giving to each other our Portion of meat in season.

2. Thus we are seasonably minded of that great and necessary duty, which the
last and worst age of the world does neglect; we are minded of giving mutual
help and furtherance to each other in the way of Holiness and Obedience. Our
disputing, quarrelling, censuring, and condemning age, is ready to turn one
another out of the way, to dispute each other out of the truth, and to quarrel
each other for doing their duty, instead of helping each other to do it: But
this little becomes Servants and Stewards in the same Family; this is no part
of their wisdom or fidelity; Christ knew we should (unto his coming) need each
others help, and has therefore so commended it as our wisdom and fidelity, and
so encouraged the discharge of it by this large reward. Let us then have so
much reason to see the excellency of the duty and temper, and so much Religion
before God, and love to our selves, as to get this temper that we may do the
duty, and receive the reward, and be at last blessed with those we helped
toward Heaven.

3. This giving the portion of meat in season: This charitable benificence,
puts a great honor upon Religion, and commends it to others: And Christ does
therefore expect we should thus adorn our Profession; and he encourages us to
it, by such a declaration of the blessedness of those who attend this duty. A
wise, faithful, and diligent Physician credits his Profession, and convinces
men, that it is very useful and profitable to mankind. A Christian of such a
temper in Christianity, and so exercising himself to do this comprehensive good
in his place, does as much convince the world, that Christianity is of all
Professions most useful to mankind, who are by it helped forward in the arduous
and important affairs of eternity.

4. Thus we are awakened to greater watchfulness over our selves and others,
and minded of observing, laying hold on, and improving opportunities; which,
though we are so engaged not to let slip, yet we too too often let fall quite
out of our own hands: and that becomes for ever impossible to us, which once
might have been easily effected by us. Time is not easily redeemed, but
opportunities are more difficultly recovered, and for most part once slipped, and
for ever lost: Well then, might such Emphasis be laid on this Duty of giving a
portion in season, that all might be awakened to heed what opportunities are in
their hand. Oh consider it, I beseech you, Parents for your Children, Husbands
for your Wives, Masters for your Servants, elder ones for the younger, and
Ministers for their People; you cannot always live, they must dye, and neither
can give or receive helps when death swallows up your opportunities. You Will
never hear him catechizing, preaching, praying, and exhorting, who now rests in
his grave; and you are not sure you shall ever have such another. How heedful
should we be then to receive our portion when offered, and to offer it to
others while we may; and be so found prepared for the reward which is promised
to these good Servants, but is reserved until the coming of our Lord: The
reason of which delay or adjourning of our happiness is the sixth General
branch of our discourse, and now comes to be considered. And so,

Genesis This (...)ssed(...)ess (...)y reserved last coming, (...)c.
1. The seasons and manner of our Lords coming before Death and Judgment, are
notable discoveries of the unhappiness of sinners, and therefore do by a
necessary consequence manifest the happiness of the servants of God; Though
light is always pleasant, yet it was most pleasant in Goshen, when Egypt lay in
darkness. Heaven is always desirable, but when the misery threatened involves
the contemners of it, they will appear blessed indeed, who sought it, and
obtained it. The various coming of our Lord does show the world the evil state
in which the unbelieving and rebellious sinners are found, and so cannot but
show the good state in which the faithful are found to be at his coming.

2. There is somewhat of Royal prerogative in it: God will have his last coming
to be the season, because it seems good to him that it should be so. And this
were reason enough, though there were no other; he has reserved times and
seasons in his own hand: and he who gives the reward freely, may (surely)
choose the time wherein he will give it. That ever he will give, it is grace;
that he will give it at last, is his pleasure; of which none ever complained,
when they received the blessing.

3. There is much of Decorum, and due order herein: it would not be so
seasonable at any other time; their Service is for the Lord their Master, and
he is the fittest to view their Service, and to assign their recompense; they
did not expect their happiness before his coming, and yet they professed they
should receive it at his coming; and now when times and seasons suit their
expectations and declared hopes, there appears a just order and harmony between
times and things: Now the promise, and their hopes are consonant to each other.

4. There is somewhat of that we call necessary in the case, their happiness is
reserved to that time, because it could not be sooner. For,

1. All the greatest good Gods Servants can receive before this coming of their
Lord, is too little and mean to be their blessedness; besides that, most of
external advantages are the rewards of such as shall never have better, and are
given to hypocrites, Now it is necessary that faithful Servants should stay till
they may receive a better reward than hypocrites have.

2. It is necessary all their work be done, before they receive their full
blessedness; now their work ends not till they dye, then their works follow
them, and they are blessed. It is not more necessary a Labourer do his work,
ere he receive his wages; or a Soldier conquer, ere he triumph; than that the
faithful Servants of the Lord do all their work ere they are blessed and fully
recompensed for it.

3. Full blessedness of Gods Servants must be in a place and state where all
(not one excepted) may meet, and be joynt-heirs of the same inheritance. Now
this cannot be in any place or state, but that to which (at the Lords coming)
they shall be carried. Now we come into the world, live a few days, and in
small numbers together, and cannot live all together, nor long together; your
tears witness it: but we must be all gathered together ere all tears shall be
wiped from all faces, and this cannot be but where our Lord will be with us for
ever, which will not, cannot be till his coming.

4. Until death be conquered, and we raised immortal, which cannot be till the
last coming of our Lord, we are not able to bear that glory which must be our
final and full blessedness: none can see God while they live, mortal flesh is
too weak for immortal Glory, this is too weighty a Crown for heads that must
lie down in dust: We must dye, that we may be raised immortal, and so be made
capable of our final happiness.

Vlt. lastly, in a word, The eternal Presence of God with us in the immediate
fruits of it, is our objective happiness, and necessary to our reward; and this
cannot be hoped or enjoyed whilst we are on this side eternity, and are
measured by time: But when the last coming of our Lord shall determine the
periods of time, and fix our eternity, which shall commence at the expiration
of time: Then he will never more be absent from us, or hide his presence, or
abate it to us. This being necessary to our happiness, it is necessary we stay
until his last coming; wherein you will, I hope, and wherein I pray that you
may meet the faithful and diligent Servants of God, his Stewards; wherein I
persuade my self you will meet this faithful servant of Christ, whom you now
lament, but shall then ever rejoice with him. Sirs, I believe you will scarce
doubt the truth I have preached; I am sure you cannot with reason contradict
it: I hope you will not through slothful hearts lose the proposed blessedness
which is last, that it may be best to you. I have now done with all the
Doctrinal part, and think I have spoken to as much as needed to be handled in
it: I proceed to the Uses of the Point; which I shall confine to these two
following:

1. Use. Information
1. Information: Hence we may learn, 1. That the care and business of Christians
is as their privilege, very great: Happiness in every condition and state is an
exceeding great privilege; and to be faithful and diligent in the Lords Family,
according to our Talents and Relations, is no light and easy care, or work; it
requires much wisdom, and much heedfulness. I wish we were more apprehensive of
both, that our endeavor to be faithful might somewhat answer our hopes to be
happy; if you separate them now, God will separate you from them hereafter,
when death shall cut you off from your opportunities, and Judgment shall cut
you off from your hopes. Be holy, and serve your Lord, as ever you hope to be
happy with your Lord.

2. Hence learn, The first part of a faithful Servants and Stewards work is the
more troublesome, the last part is most sweet, and satisfactory; Sincerity and
Diligence are sweetest at last. The idle revelling Servant is most at ease when
his Master is at farthest distance; but the diligent and faithful Servant does
most rejoice when his work is nearest an end, his Master nearest coming, and
his reward nearest to his hand. All that is difficult, is at first somewhat
harsh to our weakness; but when difficulties are well nigh conquered, it is
greatest quiet and satisfaction to the diligent hand, and willing mind.
Religion grows sweetest to us at last, if we are sincere in it.

3. Hence learn, That best men, though they shall be fully blessed at last, yet
that last shall not be but when the Lord pleases. None have our times in their
hands, to prolong them, or shorten them to their humors or passions: Good
Christians should live too little, and serve God and the Church too little, if
bad men might measure out the time of their service: such men would send them
to their happiness sooner than would be convenient for those that neeed them.
And were our arrival in glory at the disposal of our friends, and such as love
us, we should be kept longer from it than we would. It is fit it should, and
it is best that it be in God our gracious Sovereign and Lords hand, to measure
out the time of our Service, and to fix the time of our reward, which shall be
when he comes; and he will come when he pleases, and never to the loss of his
faithful Servants.

4. Hence learn, To check the inordinate and excessive grief or impatience of
Spirit under our losses, in the death of our Relations. A thousand disputing
thoughts will start up in your breast, which must not be allowed any debate: It
is the Lord who might have come sooner, though we should possibly think he came
too soon; crush such like surmizes, look rather to the known piety, diligence,
faithfulness and labors of your deceased Christian Relations, and consider to
whom they lived Servants, to whom they are passed, with whom they now do, and
ever shall live. Be followers of them, as they were of Christ; that in Gods
time, i. e. the best and fittest time, you pass to them, and be with your Lord
and theirs, in fullness of rewards and joys.

2. Use. Exhortation
But Secondly, By way of Exhortation. Since the faithful and diligent Servant
shall be blessed at his Lords coming; be persuaded, all, whether Hearers or
Readers, especially you who have such examples, and who have a more peculiar
concern in the occasion of these lines; Be persuaded to get such a temper of
soul, and lead such a course of life, as may best become the Servants of such a
Lord who will come, and as may most comfort you when he comes. I will not
prolixly direct how you may thus do, nor farther move with argument; I will
suppose you willing already, and desirous to hear how you may be blessed in
your temper, life and death.

1. Wisdom is necessary; the verse before my Text tells us as much, therefore
you must get wisdom from the Scriptures. Read, consider and remember them, they
are the rule our Lord has left for direction of his whole Family: The entrance
into these, gives wisdom, and this wisdom will attemper both heart and life,
that both may be holy, and the end happy.

2. Settle your resolutions to do all the known will of your Lord: Let it be
your motive why you do, and your warrant when you have done the things that are
proper to your places and callings. An unresolved man will never be thoroughly
faithful or diligent: the full purpose of your heart must be to do all the good
to all as you can; which is the will of him who is good to all, and whose
tender mercies are over all his works.

3. Whatever advantage you have on men, whether it be advantage of Interest or
Authority, use it all for God, and the good of their souls, who in likelihood
will hearken to you, and be advised by you: Perhaps you may thus save some.
Where you may forbid, let not sin be committed, unforbidden: Where you may
command let not good be omitted through want of your Command: use the Power God
gives you to engage others to serve God. Abraham would command his House to
keep the Covenant of the Lord, so do you.

4. Watch over your selves, that you may watch over others; and ere you pretend
faithfulness to others, and diligence and care to make them good, be sure to be
good your selves; none can believe you are in earnest bent on the good of
souls, if you neglect your own.

First, Do the good which your places require, and then persuade others to mind
their Duty in their places. Masters, Fathers, and Teachers will do more hurt by
bad examples, than they can do good by best Counsels.

5. Look frequently to the future blessedness, under the conditions with which
it is proposed to you and others, in the Text, Context, and other places: a
frequent view of that blessedness, will heighten your desires and hopes: A
frequent view of the conditions, will awaken your care, and provoke to
diligence, lest you should come short of your hopes, and be disappointed of
your best desires. We are apt to forget our hopes, therefore look often to that
blessedness; we are apt to indulge our ease and sloth, therefore look well and
often to the terms on which it must be expected. Though many weaknesses are
passed by and covered, yet wilful negligence and insincerity will not be passed
by; you must be faithful and sincere, if you will be happy and blessed: This
light is sown for the upright; and the spirit in which is no guile, is, and
shall be blessed, Psalm. 32.2.

6. Remember and imitate the best examples that fall under your observation.
Beside what are recorded in sacred Scripture, (to which you must look) it will
be helpful to you, if you will remember and imitate those whose life and
carriage was much in your eye. And let me tell you, in the Copy our late
faithful Brother set you, there are remarkable for your imitation. A prudent
care to manage soul-concerns; a constant unwearied diligence in Labors for
their good; an undaunted resolution for known duty to God and Man; a tender and
meek spirit, gently dealing with the weak, yet willing enquirers after God; A
ready and full-willing mind to minister on every occasion to the edifying of
those he conversed with: An even and steady practice of what he commended as
excellent or urged, as necessary duty, an acquaintedness with the importance of
duty and reward. A serious mindfulness of Death and Judgment, on which he
discoursed frequently, and lively; dying to the World, but living to God, and
still valuing most what was so good, God would not, and men could not take from
him: which appeared in his deportment and frame of spirit, when loss of dying
Children, and uncertain riches, raised his esteem and value of the Gospel, and
his and your hopes set before us in the Gospel; a heart full of love, and
thoughtfulness for your good; whence those last desires and requests in order
to the promoting of your good, which I am informed he left you to consider:
Prize a Guide that will be faithful to your souls; keep the unity of the spirit
into which you are called by the Gospel; and seek God earnestly for both. Now
could we prevail with you who heard, and with others who read this discourse,
to endeavor for such a frame of spirit, and to act according to it, I know
there would be more faithfulness, diligence, and mutual hope among the Servants
of the Lord, and his Family would be more beautiful in sight of others, and
more comforted and edified in their own souls. Read then, and read again, and
be in your houses (which should be little Families, or Churches of God) in
directing, and helping them to Heaven, what he desired and labored to be
amongst you all; I do think he gave you the Copy of Faithfulness and Diligence,
or I would not have thus set it before you; and I commend it to you as becomes
both me and it, viz. It is the Copy of one who whilst he was good, was still a
man; but though I could wish you would excel him, I will not flatter you with a
hope you will do it; Oh that you would equal him, of whom allow me to say, He
could do as much as most of best Men, Scholars, Christians, Husbands, Fathers,
Brethren, Ministers; and his will was ever equal to his ability; the Service of
his Lord was his life: though he lived not on it, he would not, he could not
live without it; by a gracious Master sitted for, succeeded in, carried through
much work in a little time; and I believe now rewarded with a Crown of Life and
Righteousness, which he knew he did not merit, though he knew it should be his
wages.

In brief, he was such an one as friends who knew him, desire they may be; and
now is such as they hope they shall be; such an one as some enemies already (as
I am informed) have wished they might be, and others will once at last wish they
had been. He had a worth known to himself, and others, but it did not puff him
up. Should I say all I could, strangers would think I exceed, Friends would
know a better Orator might justifiably have spoken more. Yet once for all; If
either Readers or Hearers carp at the Character I have given him, I have two
things to say: First it will be easier to quarrel at the praises, than to
deserve them: Next, I would defraud none of the Commendation due to them; nor
do I prefer him above all; there are some (but too few) superior in gifts and
graces, I hope there are many his equals; I am sure the most are lower by head
and shoulders, who likeliest to misinterpret me, shall have a good wish for
them, or rather a serious Prayer, testimony of a hearty love to their persons,
and unfeigned desire of their own good, comfort and welfare; and of all these,
to theirs, and the Church of God, in this, and after ages; for them I say, I
will pray more days, fewer troubles, and that they may be in other things
altogether such as he was.

FINIS.
(...) only on particular Men, Women, and Children; but even on whole Towns,
and Countries; many of which have been miserably Afflicted, and some even
totally destroyed by Tempests, Fires, Pestilences, and other strange Accidents,
whereof no cause in Nature could appear. And this has been Attested not by one
or two private, or Ignorant Men, but Transmitted from one Generation to another
as the Opinion of the most Authentic Historians, Physicians, and Divines,
grounded on the best, and strictest Enquiries of such who have taken
Indefatigable pains to sift and search out the truth of what they have Related:
Nor have we alone the Authority of such, but the consent of whole Courts of
Judicature, and the most Learned Assemblies of Statesmen, and Divines; who in
all Ages by their Public and Solemn Sanctions have declared their belief, and
Detestation of such Cursed Practices. Besides the undeniable Testimony of the
sacred Scriptures, (before mentioned) to whose Unerring Suffrage we ought to
submit our belief; and not by our fidelity Contradict the Authority of the
Almighty; and take upon us to be the Patrons and Champions of those Hellish
Practices we seem to disbelieve.

By Charmers, in a strict sense, may be understood such as by some spell, or
form of Words employ their Familiar Spirits to bring at their call such
Creatures as they shall demand, rendering Venomous Creatures disarmed of their
Noxious Quality during their pleasure; and the most Ferose and Wild Brutes, to
become Tractable, and Couchant. Such were they who could suscitate, or call
together great numbers of Snakes or Serpents, and cause them to go of their own
accord into the Fire, which was enclosed within a Magical Circle of which Dr.
Casaubon, of Credulity and Incredulity, gives an account at large, page. 103.
some have Charmed Flies, and Grasshoppers, when the Fields have been Infested
with them, and the fruits of the Earth in danger. And of this sort of Operators
the Psalmist seems to speak, Ps. 58. v. 4. Which will not hearken to the voice
of the Charmer, Charming never so wisely. So Ecclesiastes chapter 10.11. v. surely
the Serpent will bite without Enchantment, and the 8. of the Prophet Jerem. 17.
v. I will send Serpents, Cockatrices amongst you, which will not be Charmed,
and they shall bite you, etc.

Southsayers, were such, as by Inspection into the Entrails of Beasts, or the
flying of Birds, were wont to prognosticate of Weather, what Tempests, or other
seasons, were like to ensue, they gave their Opinions too with relation to
other Contingencies, as Events of Battle, the fatality of Seasons, or Attempts;
This they foretold by some certain Omens, for which the Heathen Priests were
wont to Inspect the Bowels of their Sacrifices, according to that in the Poet.

-- Consulit Exta
Augur, and absolvens, superis effata recantat.
These Weather-Gagers, were anciently applied to, to secure Corn, Ground,
Vineyards, and Cattle, as well as Towns, and Houses from Storms and Tempests;
mentioned by Seneca in his Fourth Book of Natural Questions. They were deputed
to a certain Office, to observe, and give notice to the People when a Storm was
coming; who upon such warning hastened to kill a Lamb, or a Chick, or some
young thing or other; or if they had none of these to offer, they were to prick
their Finger, and that blood was accepted and the Storm ceased or was
prevented. This was indeed a strange kind of Oblation, and one might well
conclude with Seneca, that the Clouds have little Affinity with blood, or a
Pricked Finger: but what will not the great Enemy of Souls do, if he can but
abuse and delude poor Men into a belief that by some outward means Tempests may
be diverted, that they may have the less suspicion of themselves, and be less
suspected by others; whilst in the mean time they are hereby ensnared into a
Diabolical Idolatry.

By Sorcerers, such may be understood, who (having Contracted a Familiarity,
and entered into a Confederacy with the Devil, or some of his Infernal Spirits)
consult, and advise with their Hellish Confederates about the affairs in which
they are employed, and make their determinations according to the advice of
their Familiars. Nay many Extraordinary things which seem to be done by the
Sorcerer, are really done by the Spirit, so, that they seem to Exchange forms
one with the other; the Demon sometimes appears in the shape and resemblance
of the Sorcerer, and at another time the Sorcerer shall haunt ye in semblance
of the Demon. Of this more will appear, when we come to particular Instances
in the subsequent discourse.

Magician is a name which imports the esteem the Ancients had for such as could
perform feats above the reach and Conception of Ordinary men, whether by that
which is called Natural Magic, or some stricter Familiarity with the
Inhabitants of the lower world: they were by them esteemed Wisemen, for so the
word Magi Signifies; and that is the name which the Turks give to their
Conjurers, and such as deal in those forbidden Arts at this day. Such were
those whom the hardened Pharaoh called for, by their Magical Operations to
perform things semblable, in some sort, and like those wrought by Holy Moses,
by a Divine Command and power, for the wicked King saw them turn Water into
Blood, Rods into Serpents, and with Multitudes of Frogs to cover the face of
the Earth. Nor is it Improbable that the evil Angels were permitted by an
Extraordinary providence thus to exert and show their power, by the hand of
their evil Ministers, in a Judicial way, for the hardening of that seared King:
so that seeing the seeming miracles wrought by his Magicians, he might be the
more confirmed in his obstinacy against the Counsel of God by his Servant
Moses. For the sacred Text assures us that he was raised up in an Extraordinary
manner, to be to future Ages, an Example of the Righteous Judgment of God upon
hardened, self-deluded, and deluding Infidels. And some we read of are given up
to strong delusions, that they might believe a Lie.

By a Witch, is Commonly understood a Femal Agent, or Patient, who is become in
Covenant with the Devil; having in a literal sense sold her self to work
Wickedness, such whose chief Negotiation tends to the spoiling their Neighbors
persons, or goods. They have Commonly certain Excrescencies like Teats, or
Nipples in private parts of their Bodies, which their Familiars often suck.
Sometimes personally, and sometimes in a Dream, or Trance they Revel with the
evil Spirit in nightly Cabals and Consults. Those particularly intended here,
are such as are Commonly called Black Witches; there is besides another sort
termed White Witches; These by a Diabolical Complaisance, or goodnature, are
to uncharm and give ease to those the other have afflicted: but sometimes it so
happens that one or other of the Witches dies by force of the Counter-charm.
Both these are condemned to death by the Divine Law Exodus 22.18. The Suasion of
such has been sometimes sought unto, and used to entice young Maids to unclean
folly But Witches are themselves Imposed upon as well as they Impose on others;
The Grand Impostor the Devil deceives, them, as they deceive those that seek
unto them: and the Cures which by these Imps are performed on the Bodies of
their deluded Patients tend to the Tainting and Infection of the Soul. There
are diverse other General names for the Students of this Infernal Art, as
Enchanters, Wizzards, Dreamers, Observers of times, of diverse of which there
will be Instances in the following Collection of Relations; But these being
mostly Included under the definitions herein specified, being much of the same
Import and Signification, it will be Superfluous to mention in this place; but
the further Notion of those Black Scholars will be better discerned, as we come
to give Relation of their several ways, and Methods of their Operations, as
they appear in the subsequent Chapters.

Having thus displayed the various degrees and kinds of those Confederates with
the Lower World, we shall now enter upon the proofs that the Heathen Priests of
Old and the Idolatrous Papists of later date, have been, and are the Great
promoters of this Infernal and accursed defection from the Eternal Fountain of
happiness; and the great encouragers of Daemonolatry, as well as Idolatry (that
is to say of Devil-Worship) which is the highest Homage he expects from his
Infatuated Vassals, and on the Account of which he (principally) instructs them
in the dark and devilish Mysteries of Hell-Craft and Fascination.

It was always the Custom of the Nations to seek unto their Gods for Counsel,
in the case of War, and other Extremities: and as the holy one Commanded his
People to seek his face, and call upon his name, and expressly in the first
Table forbids the making any semblance or likeness of any Image, in Heaven, in
Earth, or in the Waters under the Earth; thereby strictly forbidding all manner
of Idolatry: so the wicked Angel has at all times been seducing and alienating
the hearts of Men from their Obedience to the Righteous Command, by setting up
false Gods. And as the Prophets and Holy Men of God spoke as they were Inspired
by the Holy Ghost; So the Idol Priests and Pythonists delivered the Devils
Oracles to the People: They were enquired of, and sought unto, in relation to
future events and Contingencies. Nay so far had these Infernal Priests Imposed
upon the Biggotted World, that their Demons, or Familiars for their Deities
were no better) obtained Divine Adoration, and wanted not their High Places,
Groves, and Altars; so this Devil-Worship was Promoted under the Notion of
Religion, and their Services abounded with the Ostentatious Pomps of Devilish
Rites and Ceremonies.

And as the offering of Bullocks, Lambs, Doves, and such like were ordained by
the Divine Command to be offered in the time of the Ceremonial Law, when the
Priest entered into the Holy of Holies, and that not without Blood, as the
Apostle of the Gentiles notes: So were the Altars of the Ethnic Idols steeped
in Blood, and that not only of Beasts; But they Reek't with Humane Gore: So we
read that they caused their Children to pass through the fire to that Canibal
Moloch and often in the History of these deluded Oriental Nations, we read they
Sacrificed sometimes a Youth, sometimes a young Damsel, to pacify their
Incensed Deities. In the 18. Chapter of the 1. Book of Kings, in that mighty
defeat of the Priests of Baal, when they contended with the Prophet of the
Lord, in the 28. verse they cut themselves with Knives, and Lancers, after
their manner, 'till the Blood Gushed out upon them. By which it appears that it
was Customary for those Biggotted Wretches to Implore the aid of their
detestable Mock-Deities. Nor can any one that reads the Modern Histories of
Witchcraft and Sorceries, be Ignorant, that the Compacts and Confederacies of
those deluded ones are confirmed with their Blood, either by making their mark
with it on certain Cov'nants drawn between them; or by permitting their
Familiar to draw their Blood at those Bestial Teats (which for that purpose)
the Succubus draws in the parts of their Bodies.

What were the Pythones, or Pythonici so much resorted to of Old? But because
by the predictions they uttered by the Assistance of the Black Angel, they had
got the estimation of Prophets, and Prophetesses. This made King Saul in the 1.
Sam. 28. Chap. 7. verse. enquire for one that had a Familiar Spirit, or a
Pythonem as the Latain translation has it: And this was it which caused the
King of Moab thrice to send his princes and Servants to the Son of Behor; for
they had in their hand the reward of Divination, Numb. 22. verse. 7. So that if
they had not believed him to have had such a Familiar or Spirit, for what
reason should they carry that reward with them? Besides they apprehended that
he had the power of Blessing and Cursing, ver. 6. As the Biggotted Papists at
this day Impute to their Pythonic Priest the Pope; tho it be the Command of our
great High Priest to his Disciples, that they bless, and Curse not. It is
farther Observable that Balak took Balaam to the High places of the Idol Baal,
from one place to another, where they used to offer Sacrifices, and Expect the
answer of their Diabolical Gods, by the mouth of the Priest, who used to Divine
unto the People. They Imputed a great virtue and power to those places where
their lying Spirits used to Confer with them; therefore when the Prophet could
not Curse Israel from one of the High Places, the King takes him to another,
and to a third, with a peradventure thou may have a power to curse them from
thence: But the Prophet being Commanded by God, was compelled to declare to
him, in chap. 23. ver. 23. Surely there is no Enchantment against Jacob,
neither is there any Divination against Israel. It is evident to any one who
has read the Histories and Classick Authors of former Ages that the great
Apollyon, and Abaddon has uttered his Oracles, Riddles and sayings not only
out of the Bodies, and part of the Bodies of Humane kind, (as he spoke out of
the Demoniac in the Gospel; and Mornaeus de veritate Religionis, chap. 23.
quotes it out of Diodorus, that Oracles were Edit a per Pudenda Puellae; and
there were too your (...) (i. e.) ventriloqui, or such as were heard to have
discourse or words uttered and pronounced in their Bellies:) But this Spirit
has spoken sometimes out of Trees, as in Dodonos Oak, out of Statues, as that
of Memnoe, and many others, of which more will be said hereafter; The Caves of
the Earth, and Sometimes the open Air have resounded with voices, sentences,
and noises of this Infernal Demon, sometimes assuming the Vehicle of one
Shape, sometimes of another; and at other times not at all exposing himself in
any visible form. It is almost incredible how Ancient Authors abound with
Relations of this kind, how frequently they mention the feigned Gods, and
Goddesses of the Field, of Woods, of Houses, of Mountains, Rivers, Deserts, and
Springs, and such like; offering themselves to Men and People, at some times in
one Shape, at other times in other forms; requiring Worship, Ceremonies, and
Rites after diverse manners and fashions; now and then accosting People with
pleasant and diverting Encounters and sometimes affrighting them with furious
Shapes, Gestures, and Menaces. Of these Plato in his Epominede speaks very
largely, treating of the force and Powers of the defunct Heroes which the
Latins named Lemures and Household Gods, also Manes Ghosts, and Genij, and
Demons diversely sorting themselves in the Air, Earth and diverse Regions of the
World, distinguished by several offices, and affairs to which they sometimes
apropriated themselves.

They had multitudes of other names conferred on them, as Fauns, Satyrs,
Nymphs, Hamadriades, and a great Number of others. The Learned Antiquary Mr.
Cambden in his Britannia, among the Antiquities of the Romans which he records
to have been found in this Island, makes mention of Diverse Altars to the Diis
Manibus and other Loci Genij, etc. And the Apostle Paul mentions many Altars
Erected by the Athenians to these kind of Deities, amongst which he found one
Inscribed to the unknown God.

But those to whom the Gospel of truth has been Preached have been taught to
believe that there is but one only true God, and therefore may be well assured
that these were evil Spirits, and Diabolical delusions; and that paying
Adoration to their Impious Shrines, or teaching others so to do, is a Doctrine
of Devils. And that such have been and are still by many Barbarous Nations
acknowledged is evidently confirmed by the universal agreement of all
Histories, Records, and times; and that they were manifestly seen, known, and
familiarly discerned by the outward senses; cannot by any Rational and Candid
Reader be denied, having been so fully proved by Testimonies both Divine and
Moral.

In the next place we shall Compare the Idolatries of the Roman Church with
those of the Ancients, and prove by Natural Consequence, that Idol Worship is a
Confederacy with Devils, and a practice necessarily promoting that detestable
sin of Witchcraft.

It Is very true that the Catholic Doctors (as they call themselves) affirm
that they do not teach Images to be Worshipped; but certainly when we have
enquired into the Doctrines, as well as practices of their Church we shall find
that such like Evasions are but Jesuitical Shams, and pious frauds with which
they would wipe off the Odium of their gross Superstitions amongst the Ignorant
and Credulous. For their Jesuits, and Fathers generally maintain that Images
are to be honored with the same Worship that is due to the Original, or
Prototype: So that the Images of God, and of the Trinity (for such they are not
ashamed to make, as will be seen by and by) and of our Lord Jesus Christ must
be adored with the highest Divine Worship that any Creature is Capable to pay:
and if any have come short herein, and have not preached up this excess of
Devotion, the Constant practice of the Popish Church runs counter to their
Doctrine. They set up Images every where in their Churches, and enjoin their
People to Worship them, and the more they Cringe and Creep, the more devout
Catholics they are accounted.

And as their Predecessors the Priests of Baal, and the Gentile Idolaters
prostrated themselves, and cried, and Macerated their Bodies before their
Idols; so the Popelings bow before their Idols, Pray unto them, smoke their
Nostrils with perfumes, and erect abundance of Wax-Lights about them, and in
Loud Quires Chant the Praises of their Idol Saint, And when this Rotten God
happens to fall into repair, and to be patcht and mended, happy is he that can
get one of the Consecrated Chips, and present it to some Biggotted Lady, or
Nobleman to sanctify their closets. And to convince the world that it is
certainly the Image that they Worship and Adore, and not the Virtues, or
Remembrance of the Original, they pay a great deal more Superstitious homage to
a Graven Image than to a painted one, though they represent the same Person;
besides the same Image, has much more Reverence in one place than in another,
as their Lady of Loretto, and St. James of Compostella, etc. To which you shall
have them trot a hundred Leagues, or more, in Pilgrimage, when perhaps they
have the Image of the same Saint altogether as decent, and as like at home in
their own Parish Church. But all this can be supposed for no other but that
they might keep close to the Copy of the Heathen Idolaters, who though they had
many Groves to Moloch, and Astoreth etc. Yet they had their Capital high
places; where (in case the Petit Country Deities could not give them redress)
they appealed as to a higher Court, and with vast presents, and Chargeable
Pilgrimages sought to obtain an answer to their Petitions. So the Oracle of
Apollo at Delphos had more veneration than any other of his Shrines, though
many others were erected to him; But however it happened, other Climates did
not so well suit with the Temper, or Constitution of that Deity; perhaps they
might be too cold, or hot, the catering of the Scullion Priests, not so
agreeable to his Palate as the Delphick Ragousts and entertainments: certain
it was, the God was more sullen, and seemed to be tongue-tyed in other places,
or spoke in some Language which the Priest did not understand; whereas those at
Delphos soon resolved the doubts, and answered the Petitions of their
Suppliants.

At Nants and Tours, and some other places they erected a Monstrous Image to
our Lord which they call St. Saviors about 10. or 12. foot high, now this
Saint, distinguishable from their Petty Saints by his large bulk and stature,
is Worshipped by them for the preservation of Corn, and of their Vines, from
Cold, Frost, and Tempest, for curing their Horses of the Staggers, keeping
Sheep from the Rot, Bees from dying, and for defending their Lambs from Wolves.
Therefore on his Festival where these great Images are erected, you may see an
Infinite Number of Pilgrims of all Ages, and Conditions, bringing their Gifts
to those Statues. Some bring one thing, some another, according to their
Qualities, or Capacities; for the Idol or rather the Priest, are not so
squeamish but any thing will go down with them for Advantage, and their Temples
(like Parsonage Barns) will entertain any sort of Grain. There you might see
vast Quantities of Wool, Corn, Thread, Butter, Bacon, Honey, Sucking Piggs,
Grapes; all brought Money, or some other good thing as valuable, and none came
without wax Tapers, to burn all the while that Masses were saying at the Altar:
So that besides Chests full of the fore-recited materials, Tables Laden with
great pieces of meat, and a Number of all sorts of Provisions: there have been
gathered up, in five hours time, of short ends of Candles, full threescore and
ten pounds of wax, by the Light of which you may certainly see the dreadful
Idolatry of the Romish Church. De la Mot, Sermon at the Savoy, 1675. page. 68.

It was, and is the Doctrine, and ought to be the belief of every true Son of
the Church of England, that the Church of Rome is an Idolatrous Church; see 35.
Article of the Church of England; and then see the 2d part of the Homily for
Whitsuntide, pa. 213. where you have these words.

That the Church of Rome as it is presently, and has been for the space of
nine hundred years and odd, is so far wide from the nature of the true Church,
that nothing can be more, and in Peril of Idolatry, pa. 69. That it is an
Idolatrous Church, not only an Harlot (as the Scripture calls her) but also a
soul, filthy, old withered Harlot, and the mother of Whoredom, guilty of the
same Idolatry, and worse, then was amongst Ethnicks and Heathen, pa. 71. pa.
54. with abundance more to the same purpose. My Lord Chief Justice Pemberton
affirms in the Trial of Plunket, pa. 200. That Popery is a Religion ten times
worse than all the Heathenish Superstitions. But further to prove that Popish
Idolatry is but Ethnic Idolatry new dipped, see again what the Church of England
says of it in Tom. 2. of her Homilies, pa. 46.

And for that Idolatry stands chiefly in the mind, it shall in this part
first be proved that our Image-maintainers have had, and have the same Opinions
and Judgments of Saints, whose Images they have made and Worshipped, as the
Gentiles Idolaters had of their Gods, and afterward shall be declared, that
our Image maintainers and Worshippers, have used, and use the same outward
Rites of honoring and worshipping their Images, as the Gentiles did use before
their Idols; and therefore that they Commit Idolatry as well Inwardly and
Outwardly as did the wicked Gentiles Idolaters.

And concerning the first part of the Idolatrous Opinions of our
Image-maintainers. What I pray you be such Saints with us to whom we attribute
the defense of certain Countries, spoiling God of his due honor herein, but
Dii Tutelares of the Gentiles Idolaters, such as were Belus to the Babylonians
and Assyrians, Osiris and Isis to the Egyptians, Vulcane to the Lemnians, and
to such other? What be such Saints to whom the safe guard of certain Cities are
appointed, but Dij Presides with the Gentiles Idolaters: such as were at
Delphos, Appollo; at Athens, Minerva; at Carthage, Juno; at Rome Quirinus, etc.
What be such Saints to whom, contrary to the use of the primitive Church,
Temples, and Churches be builded, and Altars erected but Dij Patroni, of the
Gentiles Idolaters: such as were in the Capitol, Jupiter; in Paphos Temple,
Venus; in Ephesus Temple Diana; and such like. Alas we seem in our thus
thinking and doing to have learned our Religion not out of Gods Word, but out
of the Pagan Poets, who say, Excessere omnes adytis, Arisque relictis, Dij
quibus Imperium hoc Steterat, etc. That is to say, all the Gods, by whose
defense this Empire stood, are gone out of the Temples, and have forsaken their
Altars. And where one Saint has Images in diverse places, the same Saint has
diverse names thereof, most like to the Gentiles. When you hear of our Lady of
Walsingham, our Lady of Ipswich, our Lady of Wilsdon and such other: What is it
but an Imitation of the Gentiles Idolaters, Diana Agrotera, Diana Coriphea,
Diana Ephesia, etc. Venus Cypria, Venus Paphia, Venus Guidia. Wherein is
evidently meant, that the Saint for the Image sake, should in those places,
yea, in the Images themselves have a dwelling; which is the ground of their
Idolatry; for where no Images be, they have no such means. Terentius Varro,
shows that there were three hundred Jupiters in his time, there, were no
fewer Veneres, and Dianae, we had no fewer Christophers, Ladies, Mary
Magdalens, and other Saints. Oenomaus, and Hesiodus show, that in their time
there were thirty thousand Gods. I think we had no fewer Saints, to whom we
gave the honor due to God. And they have not only spoiled the true living God
of his due honor in Temples, Countries, Cities, and Lands, by such devices,
and Inventions, as the Gentiles Idolaters have done before them: But the Sea
and waters, have as well special Saints with them as they had Gods with the
Gentiles, Neptune, Triton, Nereus, Castor and Pollux, Venus, and such other. In
whose places be come St. Christopher, Saint Clement, and diverse others;
especially our Lady, to whom Ship-Men sing, Ave Maris Stella. Neither has the
fire escaped their Idolatrous Inventions; for instead of Vulcane and V^sta, the
Gentiles Gods of the Fire, our Men have placed Saint Agatha, and make letters
on her day to quench Fire with. Every Artificer, and Profession has his
special Saint, as a peculiar God: As for Example, Scholars have Saint Nicholas,
and Saint Gregory; Painters St. Luke; neither lack Soldiers their Mars, nor
Lovers their Venus, amongst Christians. All diseases have their special Saints,
as Gods the Curers of them. The Pox, St. Roche; The falling evil St. Cornelis;
The Toothake, St. Apollin, etc. Neither do Beasts and Cattle lack their Gods
with us, for Saint Loy is the Horse-leech, and St. Anthony the Swine-herd, etc.
Where is Gods Providence, and due Honor in the mean season? who says the
Heavens be mine, and the Earth is mine, etc. But we have left him neither
Heaven, nor Earth, nor Water, nor Country, nor City, nor Peace, nor War, to
Rule and Govern, neither Men nor Beasts, for their diseases to cure: That a
godly man might justly for zealous Indignation cry out, O Heaven! O Earth! and
Seas! what madness and wickedness against God are Men fallen into? What
dishonor do the Creatures to their Creator and maker? And if we remember God
sometimes, yet because we doubt of his Ability, or will to help, we join to him
another helper, as if he were a Noun Adjective, using these sayings; such as
learn, God and St. Nicholas be my speed, such as neese, God help and St. John:
to the Horse God and St. Loy save thee; thus are we become like Horses and
Mules, which have no understanding. For is there not one God only, who by his
Power and Wisdom made all things, and by his Providence governs the same, and
by his Goodness maintains and saves them? Be not all things of him, by him,
and through him? Why do thou turn from the Creator to the Creature? This is
the manner of the Gentiles Idolaters: But thou art a Christian; and therefore
by Christ alone have access to God the Father and help of him only. These
things are not written to any reproach of the Saints themselves, who were the
true Servants of God, and did give all Honor to him, taking none unto
themselves, and are Blessed Souls with God: But against our foolishness and
wickedness, making of the true Servants of God, false Gods, by attributing to
them the Power, and Honor which is due to God only.



And, pa. 48. It is further added, If answer be made, that they make Saints but
Intercessors to God, and means for such things as they would obtain of God:
That is even after the Gentiles Idolatrous usage, to make them of Saints, Gods,
called Dii Medioximi, to be mean Intercessours, and helpers to God, etc. The
homily calls it a Lewd distinction of (...) and (...); For it is evident that
the Saints of God cannot abide that as much as any outward Worshipping be done,
or exhibited to them; and to attribute such desire of Divine Honor to Saints,
is to blot them with a most Odious and Devilish Ignominy and Villainy; and
indeed, of Saints, to make them Satan's, and very Devils, whose property is, to
challenge to themselves the Honor which is due to God only, see pa. 50.

And, pa. 54 he proceeds, but in many points they have far exceeded in all
wickedness, foolishness, and madness particularly in this, they pass the folly,
and wickedness of the Gentiles; that they Honor and Worship the Relics and
Bones of Saints; which proves that they be Mortal Men, and Dead, and therefore
no Gods to be Worshipped: which the Gentiles would never confess of their Gods
for very Shame. And after a great many ridiculous practices of theirs, in
reference to the Relics are reckoned up, the Homily concludes that they are,
not only more wicked than the Gentiles Idolaters, but also no wiser than
Horses, Asses, and Mules, which have no understanding.

Great pity it is that so useful, and pious a detection of the Idolatries of
the Roman Church, should be neglected to be read in such a time, when they have
the Impudence to face us down with their bold and false denyals of their
Ethnic Doctrines, and practices. Hereby we see what Opinion the Reformed
Church of England has of their detestable Polytheism, or making a plurality of
Gods; In this they act exactly as the Holy Scriptures speak of the workings of
Antichrist, with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness: and teach up the very
Doctrines of Devils.

That the Original of this Saint and Angel Worship was from the Heathen, is
plain from Nicephorus, a very Credible Author, in his Church History, book the
15. cap. 28. Where he informs us that one Peter Gnapheus, an Heretical Bishop
of Antioch, in the fifth Century (which was before the year 500) was the first
that Instituted the Worship of the Virgin Mary, and that her name should be
called upon in the public Prayers of the Church; which is likewise testified
by the Historians of Magdeburg, cent. 5. chap. 10. and this may fairly be
reckoned as the first public entrance and establishment of Saint-Worship in
General; since it is probable the Blessed Mary obtained the Honor (or rather
Dishonor) of their Misdirected Devotions, as soon as any other meaner Saint:
yet true it is that some private men, Transported with blind zeal, and a little
Tinctured with Platoes Notions, did before begin to hanker after some such
thing, and some of the Fathers, now and then, seemed to give too much
encouragement thereto, by unwary Panegyricks; and flashes of Rhetoric on
departed Martyrs; amongst the rest St. Jerome was much addicted thereunto, and
for the same justly opposed by Vigilantius, in a Treatise wrote on that very
occasion.

The Worshipping of Angels had no better ground, for that practice was anciently
Introduced by certain Heretics, thence called Angelici, as St. Augustine
witnesses, Ad Quod vult Deum, cap. 39. and indeed these seem to have infested
the Church in the Apostles days, occasioning that Caution of St. Paul, Coloss.
2.19. Let no Man beguile you in a voluntary humility, and Worshipping of Angels,
not holding the head, etc. Which the Greek Scholiast, pa. 697. thus interprets.
There were (says he) diverse, that under pretense of modesty, forbad them to go
to Christ by themselves, but that the favor of Angels must be Entreated to
Introduce us to God, So Theodoret on the same text, p. 766. Useing pretense of
Humility, they gave Counsel to pray to Angels; saying, we could neither see,
nor comprehend, nor come to God; and therefore must Conciliate his favor by
Mediation of Angels.

It is evident this Saint and Angel Worship is a piece of revived Paganism.
For the Gentiles besides their Dii Superi, which they owned to be Gods by
Nature, had their Demons, and their Hero's the Spirits of brave Men departed,
whom they Worshipped (just as our Papists do,) not simply and absolutely, but as
Intercessours for them to the Superior Deities. Hence Tully in his book de
Legibus, Deos, etc. Let the Gods be Worshipped, as well those of the upper
house, who were always counted Celestial, as those whom their own Merits have
called into Heaven. And again he says, Deorum manium jura sancta sunto, hos
letho datos, Divos habento; Let the rights of the Ghost-Gods be kept
inviolable, and let them after death be Worshipped as second-rate Deities, by
which is evident how exactly our Catholic Romans have renewed the Idolatrous
Laws of their Heathen Ancestors. The Gentiles Attributed the same offices to
their Demons, which our Papists expect from their Saints; to be Mediators,
Factors, or Agents for them, so Plato in Synopsi. All intercourse between Gods,
and Men is performed by Demons; they are the Carriers of Men's Prayers to the
Gods, and they bring back rewards of Devotion to mortals, so Apuleius in his
Demon Son. Cuncta Coelestium voluntate, Numine, and Authoritate fiunt, sed
Demonum Obsequio, operi and Ministerio. All things (says he) are done by the
Will, Power, and Authority of the Celestial Gods, but by the means dispatch,
and Ministration of Demons. By which they did not ascribe an absolute, but only
an Intercessive Power to them.

It is certain that the Papist can no farther prove their setting up, and
Worshipping of Images to be Lawful, and not of Heathenish Original; then the
Israelites could the setting up their Calves at Dan and Bethel, or Solomon and
the succeeding Kings Justify their setting up the Altars of Baal, and Moloch,
and the rest of their Abominations, which are reckoned amongst the highest
provocations against the Almighty, who always by his Prophets warned them
against that detestable and crying sin, and denounced the Wrath of God against
them; which ever followed them with severe Judgments for those horrid
Impieties, in Psalm. 106.35, to 43, There the Idols of the Heathen are called
Devils, to which they Sacrificed Innocent Blood, so that it is said in, verse.
40. The wrath of the Lord was kindled against his People, insomuch that he
abhorred his own Inheritance.

One of the first Images that ever we read of, that was set up purposly to be
Worshipped, was that consecrated to Belus the Successor of Ninus amongst the
Assyrians who were Paynimas; and Eusebius testifies in his, Eccl. Hist. l. 7.
cap. 17. Or in the Greek 18. The Men of old out of a Heathenish Custom were
wont after that manner to honor those they called Hero's or Saviors. And in
the year of our Redemption 606. Boniface the fourth Pope of Rome caused a
Heathen Temple called Pantheon, because built to the honor of all the Gods, to
be dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and all Saints: and likewise Instituted that
Festival called all Saints day, wherein the Pope himself must read service.

Diverse also of the Images which the Pagans had Worshipped, were dipped into the
name of Saints, and under that notion are still Worshipped. Upon the whole then
here is a bare Exchange of Pagan Gods, for Popish Idols, and Heathenish Heroes,
for modern Saints. So that it may be said of them, they have Changed their
Gods, but not their Religion. But they are still stocks, and stones, and the
work of men's hands, by what names or Titles soever they Dignify and Distinguish
them, and are guilty of as much, yea much more Idolatry and Blasphemy than
their Predecessors the Heathen Romans, for they knew not the Evangelical Rule,
and could not be reckoned such willful, obstinate, and incorrigible opposers of
the Divine Command. So that what Lamech said to his two wives, may with some
Alteration be applied in this case. If the Pagan be avenged seven fold surely
the Papist seventy and seven fold.

They pay the same Adoration to their Images, as they do to God the Father, for
him they represent by (sometimes) the Image of an old man with a Globe in his
hand, and a reverend beard. Sometimes they figure the Trinity as the Heathen
Poets did Cerberus, by an Image with three heads, and faces, etc. With a Solemn
pace they pass before them, and fall down to the ground on their marrow bones,
they go Pilgrimage to them, present them Lamps, and Candles, and offer up
Incense, and Gold: whilst some pretending strange Miracles and lying Wonders,
hang up Crutches, Chains, Legs, Arms, and whole men of War at their Shrines; as
if by them they had been delivered from Lameness, Sickness, Captivity, or
Shipwreck, some of these they pretend have more virtue, and holiness in them,
than others: such a one (say they) was sent from Heaven, like the Palladium, or
Diana of the Ephesians; another was brought by Angels, a Third came it self
from East to West, as Dame fortune fled to Rome. With abundance of such
Fopperies, wherein they not only act over all the Fictions, and Fables of the
Heathenish Poets, but vastly transcend them. They Invocate their Images as
Gods, bestowing Divine Attributes upon them; taking them to be at the same time
in all parts of the world, giving Audience both in this and the Lower
Hemisphere, at millions of distant places, at once, as well as their privy
Chambers, as Loretto, Compostella, Canterbury, etc. They Solicit them for
pardon of sin, and Conferring the graces of the Spirit, and to bring them into
a State of Glory after this Life. For all which they apply themselves to
Saints, and Angels, as well as to God the Father; which is plain by the words
of their Prayers, in their several Offices,

By all which it evidently appears, that these Bigoted wretches seek unto
Devils, instead of God, for the Saints, cannot, dare not hear them; And they
Worship they know not what; nor can it be doubted that they who seek to the
Devil in forbidden Images and Idols, will be ready to entertain him in a
stricter Confederacy, and that Religion that teaches them to sense and smoke
his Statues, and Altars, will Embolden, if not lead them into nearer
familiarities and Acquaintance. Therefore I hope the Reader will Pardon me that
I have been thus long exposing their Damnable Idolatry; it being from thence,
as the fountain that all other their Delusions, and wicked practices naturally
flow. And those whom the Devil can draw away to the Worship of false Gods, he
may easily Impose upon to set up a Shrine to his Infernal Deity, and enter into
all the Mysteries of those Black and Diabolical Arts and Confederacies, which
are the subject of the ensuing Narrations. Some of which will give an account
of the Proficiency of Diverse Popes, and Fathers in that Hellish Science of
Sorcery Necromancy, and Witchcraft.

CHAP. IV.
Considerations, and Arguments Proving the being of Witchcraft, and Witches,
with a Refutation of the Incredulity of some who deny the being of such.
IN an Age Productive of Prodigies and Wonders, it does not seem to be the
least to men of sound Judgment, and accurate Scrutiny; That a sort of Witty and
(otherwise) Ingenious, Persons should openly, and with great zeal profess a
disbeleif of the Existence of Demons, and Witches: As if thereby they intended
to declare, that the best and most Authentic Historians of former times, the
most Learned and strict Divines; yea, the unerring Wisdom of God himself, had
all conspired to impose upon them a belief of things purely fabulous, and mere
Chimerical Fantoms. Thus whilst they assume to themselves an arrogant
Confidence to deny the Divine Verity, and the Power of the Omnipotent;
Arraigning the Equity of the Preceding Ages, the Justice of the most Solemn
Judicatories, and that of all Times, and Nations; and deride the wisdom of the
most learned Councils, which has still run counter to their fancies.
Themselves seem to be a proof of what they deny; and are perfect demonstrations
of the power of Fascination, and a prevailing Demon.

For it is hardly to be supposed, that any thing less should render men
Impenetrable to the most convincing reasons, and repeated proofs of that which
they contend against: Notwithstanding all which, they oppose their simple Ipse
dixit, against the most unquestionable Testimonies, of persons of the greatest
Integrity and Generosity, amongst whom they converse, persons of that caution
and candor, that any disinterested and ingenuous man could not possibly imagine
to have any design to impose upon others, what themselves had not with the
greatest investigation of circumstances, been convinced to be beyond a
possibility of Doubting.

Yet such was the bold confidence of some of these Witch Advocates that they
durst Effront that Relation of the Demon of Tedworth, published by the
Ingenious Mr. Glanvil, and Attested by Mr. Mompesson, a Gentleman, and a
Divine, who (to all that knew them) were never over fond of crediting stories
of that kind; Yet (I say) had some of this sort of men the impudence to declare
to the World that that whole Relation was but a Figment, or Forgery, and that
Mr. Mompesson, and Mr. Glanvill had retracted, whatever they had published
touching that Transaction. This notorious falsity they had the misfortune to
disperse, when Mr. Glanvils sheets were scarce dry from the Press, and the
noise of the drum hardly out of the Ears of the Neigbourhood at Todworth.

So that we see in the second Edition of Saduceismus triumphatus, both Mr.
Glanvil, and Mr. Mompesson, again renew, and confirm the Truth of their former
Testimony, thereby giving the world a just Occasion to detest the base
Artifices of such bold Impostors,

Besides a peremptory and staring confidence, which must Huff and swagger down
all the most undeniable proofs; I have not met with any Argument of theirs
which has not been sufficiently refuted and baffled, by those Learned and
Ingenious Pens who have still made it their business to Vindicate and Rescue
substantial Truth, from the Attacques of Atheists, and Scepticks.

All that seems to remain unconquered of these Incredulous, is a fleering sort
of sham-stories, and Mock-Relations; in the recital of which, it is pleasant to
observe with what Elevation they make their foolish Triumphs over those Truths,
one of which is enough to vanquish a thousand of their little Figments. These
small Pickierers deserve commiseration; having deluded themselves and
endeavoring to delude others into an opinion, that because there is such a
thing in the World as a Lie; therefore it is impossible there should be any
Truth. They might with as much reason affirm, that because there is a Night,
therefore there can be no Day; or because there is such a Quality as heat,
therefore there can be no cold.

Another sort there are, who having had their Education in a Christian Kingdom,
are loath to seem Incredulous of the Holy Scriptures, which the Church in which
they have been bapt^zed Commands them Religiously to submit unto, and not to
dispute the Truth therein delivered; These will acknowledge that they ought to
believe whatsoever is therein contained, and therefore will not question that
there has been such a thing in the world as a Witch, because in the sacred
pages mention is made of the Witch of Endor; whom they are bold to affirm to be
the only Pythoness that ever was in being, and presuming to declare, that she
was raised up, or permitted, for that very end, to delude the credulity of
Saul; and that besides her there has been no other.

Which opinion (if they will not allow it to proceed from incredulity) appears
to be the effect of rank ignorance; For who that has read the Holy Bible
discerns not, that Saul before this time, had cut off those that had Familiar
Spirits, and the Wizzards out of the Land, 1 Samuel 28. chapter ver. the 9. So that
it appears there were many, before the Witch of Endor, even in the days of
Saul, besides what has been ment^oned before of the King of Moab, who sent his
servants to Balaam, with the Reward of Divination* neither can any one that
considers the story of Saul at Endor, imagine that the woman there, was
permitted but in the Case of Saul only. For the servants of Saul knew her to
have a Familiar Spirit, before the Kings intention of Enquiring of her was
supposed, verse 7th. Besides, it seems evident that the Samuel there raised up,
was not by the power of the Witch? for she was affrighted when she saw Samuel,
and cried out, like one in a surprise, and under a Disappointment of what she
Expected: This was none of her Familiars that appeared, for then we may
conclude she had not been transported with such a fear; Her Confederates were
tied up, and could not answer her: but it is most probable to be the Prophet
Samuel raised by the power of God to pronounce the Sentence of death upon Saul
and his Sons, for his Disobedience, which the Holy man had told him was as the
sin of Witchcraft; and for Violating the Righteous Command, in applying himself
to the Witch of Endor contrary to the declared will of God. Not unlike to this
was that dreadful Judgment of Fire from Heaven, which (at the prayer of Eliiah)
fell upon the two Captains and their Fifty's, when Ahaziah King of Samaria had
sent his servants to Enquire of Baalzebub, the Idol, or Demon of Ekron. in 1.
chap. 2 Book of Kings.

But how many more of this kind are mentioned in Scripture, besides the Witch
of Endor, will appear, if we read what is recorded of Manasseh, Jesebell, Simon
Magus, and Elimas the Sorcerer, with many other Instances of the same kind,
whereof the New Testament, as well as the Old, has diverse extraordinary
Relations, but of that the passage in the Prophecy of Isaiah chap. 2. ver. 6.
they are southsayers, like the Philistines. And it is evident by the 19. verse
of the 18. chap. of the same Prophecy; that the Jewish Nation were in a great
measure given up to the Satanicall delusion of enquiring after Witches, and
Sorcerers, and such as divined to them by Pythons; so that they forsook the
holy Oracles of the Divine Law; and in their difficulties they counseled one
another to apply themselves to those forbidden abominations. Therefore it must
proceed from a Neglect, or careless Perusal of the Sacred Books, that any one
should be ignorant of other instances of Witches, besides that of the Pythoness
of Endor. Suidas has a most considerable proof of the Demons answering the
Heathens by Oracles; where speaking of Augustus Caesar's enquiring at an Oracle
who should be his Successor, the Oracle returned him this answer. -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Which may thus be Englished. -- A Boy
Of Hebrew Offspring, whom the Gods Adore,
Commands me hence, to Hell, my proper shore;
Henceforth forbear Our Altars to implore.


The Emperor at his return, commanded an Altar to be Erected in the Capital,
having this Inscription: Haec est Ara Primogeniti Dei. This is the Altar of the
firstborn of God. Now it is plain that our Savior was born dureing the Reign
of this Augustus, for in the second chap. of St. Luke we find, that Joseph and
Mary, went up to Judea to be taxed, at that time when Augustus had imposed a
General Tax upon the World and that during their abode at Bethlehem, the
blessed Nativity happened: of which the Eastern Sages had notice by his Star;
and that the Roman Caesar had some such apprehension (or Impression at least)
the words upon the Altar do plainly manifest. And if this relation of Suidas
obtain credit, it may easily be Evinced that they were Demons, or Crafty
Spirits which answered at the Oracles of the Heathens: for if we admit that
many answers were given by the Cunning, and Juggling of their Priests; Yet it
could not make for their interest to discredit their Oracle, nor for the Credit
of their Deity. But the almighty power of the Son of God forced those
Infatuating Spirits to acknowledge his Sovereign Divinity as the unclean Spirit
in the 8. chap. of Luke, verse 28. What have I to do with thee Jesus, thou Son
of the most High God. Thus at the arising of the Son of Righteousness, did the
Dark Oracles vanish, as the shadows of the night are chased away, by the
Appearing of the Sun beams. To which may be added what Plutarch relates in his
(...). He tells ye, that a certain company sailing from Greece toward Italy,
happened of a sudden to be becalmed, and one Thamus, an Egyptian, who was of
the Ships Crew, was called three times, at the third call he made answer Here
am I; whereupon the voice bad him, when he came to the Palodes (certain Shelves
in the Ionian Sea) that then he should publish that the great Pan was dead. And
then the Ship was discharged of her restraint and went forward, so that when
they came to the place appointed, Thamus from the Poop of the Ship, published
what he had been commanded; whereupon followed a great noise of shrieking and
lamenting together, so that the Sea resounded with the lamentation. The
Emperor Tiberius having been made acquainted with this passage, demanded of
his wise men; who this great God Pan might be? But the best answer they could
give him, was, that he was the Son of Mercury and Penelope.

But this circumstance happening just at the time when our Savior was
crucified, it was concluded by more intelligent and considerate men, that by
the Great God Pan was meant the Blessed Redeemer of Mankind; who by his Death
on the cross, Overthrew the Kingdom, and power of Satan; so that the Devils
were now to Quit those Oracles by which they had so long deceived the World:
and on this account those Spirits might be thought to make that great and
dismal lamentation. For from that time they soon ran into decay, and the
Delphi Oracula cessant, which Juvenal records, makes it plain that they were
but of short continuance, after the fatal blow given them on the Cross, when
our blessed Savior gave up the Ghost with an It is Finished.

Now had these Oracles been managed only by the subtilty and artifice of the
Priest, it is very improbable but they might have been of longer continuance,
for the Priests continue to be as Crafty and Covetous as ever, and as dexterous
at all the feats of Juggling and Legerdemain. But it is plain the time of their
delusions was expired, and it is no small Argument of the power of the Gospel
of Truth, that those vanquished Spirits fly before it; they retire, with the
molten, and Carved Images to the Owls and to the Batts, not being able to
endure the splendor of the Tidings of Salvation.

Hence it is that in those Countries where there is least Idolatry, and where
the sincere preaching of the Word of Power is countenanced, there it is very
rare, comparatively to meet with instances of the Satanical craft and power;
his strong holds are beaten down; tho some small forts he still retains amongst
the ignorant, and superstitious: but in countries where Idolatry, and Paganism
prevail, he Governs, as among the Children of disobedience; Here he has his
Groves, his Cells, and Hermitages, and Altars; He passes for a God, receives
public adoration; whilst every Priest has his Familiar, and the Doctrine of
Devils passes for saving Truth. In Countries more Barbarous, he is Worshipped
for Fear, (as amongst the Indians) and there he often shows himself to them in
monstrous shapes, Dreadful to behold, to affright them into their damnable
sacrifices, and idolatries. In Countries where Humane Learning has obtained, a
pretended Antiquity, and Doctrine of the Ancients is that by which they Justify
their superstitions; whilst a blind Obedience, and misguided Zeal, tumbles
whole Nations down the dreadful precipices of Blasphemy and Devil-worship. And
to these the Grand Impostor appears in shapes, and figures Divine and Angelical
(for the most part) sweetning them in their Heathenish Apostasy and Idolatry,
by glorious Apparitions and Revelations, sometimes to one Saint sometimes to
another; and this in order to the promulgation of some Doctrine that may
advance his dark Empire, and Designs; which must be confirmed by seeming
Miracles and Lying Wonders, the more to Infatuate the minds of their deluded
Bigots, and confirm in them a belief of their diabolical Impostures.

And tho some perhaps may Imagine that what has been said, signifies little to
the proof of the existence of Witches; they may by weighing, and comparing the
Argument, find an evident demonstration thereof: For what less than the
Sorceries of their Priests, and the prevailing influence of evil Angels, could
possibly shut up so many Nations, and that from the first Ages, under such
gross, and stupendous Blasphemy, Idolatry, and Atheism? So that if the
Question were put, which the Apostle Paul demands of the Galatians, chap. 3
verse. 1. O Foolish Galatians, who has Bewitched you, that you should not obey
the Truth? It might truly be answered, that the Devil with the assistance and
confederacy of their Idol Priests has done it. This Indeed, is the most
deplorable kind of Fascination, whereby men's Souls and Faculties are Captivated
to their spiritual Enemy, and their minds and consciences are defiled. It is
impossible almost to relieve men in this kind of delusion, because the whole
Current of their misguided Devotion, runs Diametrically opposite to the means
of their Cure. But of this more will be said in a following Chapter, where the
Witchcraft of Idolatrous, and Popish Priests, will be particularly Treated of.

Others there are amongst the Devils Advocates, that would fain insinuate, that
because some particular Men have Endeavored to attain this Hellish Art, and
could not arrive to it; others have gone a little way in Magical performances,
but could never do any great Exploits, or show any Extraordinary feats in that
profound Science, that therefore such acquirements are not at all Attainable,
but above the reach of the Black Mysteries; such was Nero, who because his
pursuit of that Infernal study was not attended with any Fatal proficiency, he
is said to have contemned the Magical Art, as pretending to such performances,
as it could never attain to and therefore he sat down a Despiser of such as
boasted their knowledge in those Mysteries: But it is no wonder that the Devil
complied not with his studies in that School, Since Nero of his own Nature was
so much a Devil, that had he been furthered with any of those more subtle
Assistances, it is probable he might have Attempted such things as should have
Exceeded all that went before him, and have put his drudging Spirits upon such
performances as (tho they might not Exceed the fierceness of their
dispositions, yet) might surmount their Power. But, from hence to argue that
there are no Witches, seems as incongruous, as if I should say there is no such
thing as a Lion, or a Wolf, which kill and devour the Herds, and Flocks,
because I have a little Dog at home that cannot do it.

Nor ought it to be attributed to a Miraculous power, that Demons and Witches
present themselves in various shapes, sometimes Humane, sometimes Bestial, at
other times Monstrous, and now and then in their proper forms: for as we cannot
understand the profound knowledge that subtle and spiritual beings have of
Natural Causes above the stretch of our Enquiry; so can we much less Limit
their free and unconfined agencies, to Qualities and reasons within our
comprehensions for as they have the advantage of a Larger Intelligence, they
can from time to time Impart things strange and foreign to us: And their Airy
substances are capable of putting on diversities of figures, and they can
assume such a Vehicle as may represent any resemblance they please; that it is
much easier for us to conceive they may borrow the resemblance of Lower shapes,
than the Garb and Mien of the Angels of Light.

And if at any time they Cloth their Daemoniac Confederates in representations
different from their proper Existencies, it is to be attributed to that
knowledge they have of Occult Qualities, which is above the Investigation of
our Scrutinies. By the following Relations, it will appear that at the same
time a Cat or other Creature has been cut, or wounded; the Hurt has
manifestly appeared upon the body of the Witch, in that very part where the
other Assumed Resemblance has to apearance received the blow given. Nor would
we have the reader Imagine that the Authority of the bare following Relations is
all that we insist upon as a proof of what is here Asserted; but these are
published as a farther Confirmation of Matter of Fact which to the Judgment of
all Ingenious and Unprejudiced Persons, are already sufficiently proved, not
only by the Histories of all former Ages, and that not barely of the Rude and
Barbarous, but even of the most Civilized and Polite Times; besides the
Exquisite pens of the most Learned and sober Writers of our Age, which have
given ample and undeniable Attestation of the Existence of Witches, and
Diabolical Contracts.

To those that Object the Improbability of such Transactions, and that the
stories of Witches Transmuting of shapes, Flying in the Air, and such like, are
impossible to Natural reason: So much has already been said in their
Refutation, that it would be preposterous to add any thing more. Only this may
be added, that the more unaccountable these things seem to be in themselves
(The real matter of Fact being proved) it ought the more to prevail toward a
belief of those extraordinary Agencies; for such as endeavor to impose strange
Fictions upon the Credulous, use to adapt them as near as they can to a
supposal of Truth in the management; tho attended with very strange, and
seemingly Prodigious circumstances: And if they would have them to appear to be
Imaginary Fictions; yet it is strange that People of all sorts, in all Ages,
should agree to publish to the World the same Exploded conceits.

And for those that say they cannot conceive how such things can be done; That
is no small Argument of the weakness of the Conceptions, Apprehensions, and
Knowledge of such, who are apt to dispute the certainty of any thing that is
above their Sphere; and it will not be found at all available against the
Possibility of such performances, no more than a Man's doubting how it is
possible that the Sea does Ebb and Flow, should be an Argument that there were
no such thing in Nature. We cannot conceive how from such small, and various
Seeds, such different species of Plants and Trees receive their Formation; or
how the Extreme distant Natures and Compositions of Soul and Body are United:
but Yet notwithstanding our Ignorance, these things are very Obvious to our
sense; tho beyond the Comprehension of our Reasons: and therefore it is no
wonder if we are strangers to the Constitutions, and Powers of Creatures that
do not appear to us.

Therefore the best Judgment we can make of such extraordinary things is by the
Evidence, and not the Measure of our Fancies. For by this we are certainly
convinced that such things are really so, tho by reason of our confined
Circumstances we are not able to penetrate into the Rationality of their
Contingencies.

CHAP. V.
Propositions or Assertions concerning Witches and Witchcraft. The Character of
a Witch. Same Considerations of the Original of their power.
THE last Chapter having designed that Idol Worship (as the Devil is therein
proposed Objectively to be Adored) Is not only a great Countenancer, but Tends
vastly to the promotion of Diabolical Confederacies. Before we proceed to a
particular and Historical Account of Ancient and Modern Witches, it may be
necessary a little farther to explain what we mean by a Witch; and how far the
power of such a one may be understood And this being a nice and difficult
determination; The Candid Reader shall find very little new Asserted Notions
either in Relation to their persons or practices; but we shall choose to lay
down what the most Unprejudiced, Learned, and Sober Writers of things relating
to Matters of this Nature have upon their best search and Enquiry determined.

And first it is agreed that it is very difficult to prove such, or such a one
to be a Witch, and it ought to be done with the greatest Caution and Tenderness
Imaginable: The loss being greater on the part of a false Testimony, than on
that of a Supposed Criminal; Infernal Contracts are not supposed to be made in
the presence of Witnesses; being as has been said, against the Law of God and
Man; So that the Devil out of a seeming regard to the safety and Immunity of
his Prostitute may omit the Ceremony of Testes; the black pupil acting with
greater security when she apprehends none knows of, or is privy to the
Confederation.

Yet is there no doubt but the Devil is as secure of his prey as if the whole
world had subscribed a Test to the Indenture; for by the consent of the party,
he has Seisin of her as his Property; which he will be sure never to part
with, unless Ejected by a stronger than He. Those Hellish Compacts therefore,
are Managed like the filthy Intrigues betwixt a Fornicator and his Strumpet,
where it may be no Eye sees them that may Expose them to the penalties of
Humane Laws; and it is difficult to prove matter of fact between them; but at
last a Spurious offspring, or a more Nauseous Rotteness unveils them to the
world, and they linger out to a more Infamous Death, than if the Law had
Chastised them; The Rotteness of their bones giving them more severe pains and
Twinges than the Rod of Justice could have done: Not unlike this do some of
these Infernal Prostitutes Escape the hand of the public Justice until at last
their loathed and miserable Lives are seized as forfeitures to the Devil; and
they are found (like Faustus) with broken Necks, or with some other wrack upon
their Nauseous Bodies, that Evidently discovers their souls to have been
Extorted from them, and that they have been forcibly Ejected upon forfeiture of
their Lease.

Some too, may have been unjustly accused for Witches; either by an Ignorance
of Causes merely Natural, or misapplying Causes that in themselves are
supernatural: So that the very same operations which to Intelligent, and
Enquiring Philosophers, are merely the product of Natural Sympathies, or
Antipathies of Heat, or Cold, or the like, to the unskilful shall appear, as
done by Art Magical, or Diabolical* So the Freezing a cup of snow-water to a
Stool by the fireside, looks to some weak persons, with an Aspect very strange
and unaccountable, whilst to those that consider and know the restringent
Quality of the Salt, the others Admiration becomes almost Ridiculous.

It is acknowledged by all Naturalists that the power of Imagination has had,
and may have strange Effects, especially upon tender and Irrational Bodies,
such as Children, Chickens, Lambs etc. according to that of Virgil, Nescio quis
Teneros Oculus mihi fascinat Agnos.

And very strange performances may be effected by an Exalted and Fixed
Imagination, the Intention of which vastly contributes toward the Effecting
things seemingly Impossible. The formation of the Child in the Mothers Womb*
which if good Authority may be Credited) has been Imputed to the force of an
Imagination strongly possessed with such, or such a belief. And to this
purpose, it is very remarkable what is by a learned pen related of a Lady, who
being used to wear patches, and that during the time she was with child, a
Gentleman told her that her child would have such a patch in its forehead; and
accordingly at the birth of the Child, such a spot was discerned in the place
described, and still remained in that same part of the Ladies Face, as a
Testimony of the Impression a powerful Imagination may have on tender Bodies.
Infinite more are the Experiments that might be mentioned of this kind, but if
I should Enumerate never so many, it would nevertheless appear that the Feats,
and performances of Infernal Confederacies vastly surpass whatsoever can be
thought attainable in this kind; and this will be so Evident, by matters of
Fact related in the following Collection that it would be needless to speak any
thing more to it in this place.

Besides, if it be supposed that some have been suspected for Witches, barely
for having deformed Bodies, Ill Aspects, or Melancholy Constitutions does it
any ways appear from hence, that there is really no such thing as a Witch? Or
may it not with as much reason be alleged, that because some for having Arms
found about them, have been wrongfully accused for being Robbers; that
therefore there is no such thing as a Highway man. Such allegations as these,
do not at all disprove the Existence of such Haggs.

Tho I must confess that there is no reason that any person (by reason of those
deformities which may be only the Effects of old Age, or the product of some
disease) should be presently Indicted and trust up for a Witch; nor can I
Imagine that ever such a thing has been in a Civilized Nation, without the
concomitant circumstances of some other proofs: That would be a hard case
indeed! But I think it will not be difficult to prove that there have been some
whose Insides have been blackned with as foul and damnable Confederacies as
others; who have notwithstanding appeared with Faces very Charming, and
Angelical. For we have no account of any very Nauseous deformity that sat on
the forehead of Jesabel, Joan of Arc, or Joan Queen of Naples. And perhaps the
Attempts of these Hellish Agents may pass with less Suspicion, when under the
plausible disguise of a handsome Face: For from Objects Nasty and deformed, men
Naturally turn away, with a kind of Innate Aversion and Contempt; whilst under
the Charming Attraction of a fair Face, the Magical Enchantment Insensibly
Steals upon men. Nor is the Devil at any time more dangerous, than when he
appears as an Angel of Light.

Spotswood in his History of the Church of Scotland, book the 6th. page 383.
Reports that there was one Agnes Sampson amongst the Witches and Sorcerers of
that Kingdom, who was commonly called the Wise Wife of Keith, who was very
remarkable; being (as he says) a Woman not of the sordid and base sort of
Witches, in outward appearance, but of a Matron like, and grave Mein, settled,
and seemingly Judicious in her answers; who upon her Examination declared, That
she had a Familiar Spirit, which upon her Invocation usually appeared to her in
a Visible form, and resolved her of doubtful Matters, especially concerning
Matters relating to the Life or Death of persons lying sick, and that he had
taught her, when she called him, to use the word Holla Master. Upon which he
usually appeared to her. See Wanly's Wonders of the little World. lib. 5. chap.
20. So that Deformity alone is no more an Argument of a Witch, than Beauty may
be said to be an Evidence of a Whore.

Sometimes, it is Objected, that some have come in and given Evidence against
themselves; and being brought before Magistrates, have (it may be thought)
causlesly accused themselves, by Confessing themselves to be Witches, and
relating diverse things by them done (as they have supposed) by the help of the
Devil. And all this may be the Effect of a Deep Melancholy, or some Terror
that they may have been under: or perhaps an Argument that themselves have at
the same time been under the Power of Witchcraft; or at least in some kind of
Delirium of Fancy. So some Lunaticks have fancied themselves to be Kings, or
Queens, and it has been beyond the Power of the most Rational Arguments, and
Demonstrations to convince them of the contrary: But the Self-accusations of
such is as little to be credited, as the Self-Compurgations, and Applauses of
others; without some more substantial Testimony.

It is Observable that Witches are commonly of the Female Sex, and some there
are that confine that Term wholly to them: And ever since the prevalence of the
First Temptation upon the first Woman; it is no wonder if the subtle Adversary
still offer his Baits to such palats as are most desirous to taste Fruits
forbidden; and more negligent in Enquiring into the Nature of what they
Swallow. It was an Observation of Fulgentius, Nescio quid habet Muliebre Nomen
semper cum Sacris. And it has been a long time observed of them, that if they
incline to Virtue and Piety, few go beyond them; but if they take up with
Superstitious and evil courses, none surpass them in Heights of Wickedness and
mischief.

Tho these wretched Artists are commonly distinguished into those of the Black,
and White orders; they are certainly the same, and cannot be said to differ in
deeds of darkness, which admit of no difference of Color, They are certainly
both alike guilty in Compounding with the Devil. The black are those which are
looked upon to do the most Mischief, because they commonly Torment men's bodies,
or Injure them in their Estates; and the White, are reckoned to be such as
restore people to health, and to goods lost: So that accordingly they have
acquired the Names of Good and Evil Women. But what Fellowship has Light with
Darkness, or what Communion has Christ with Belial. Both these deal in the
same forbidden Arts, and Equally bring Clients to their Hellish Master. They
may be said to be like the Glasiers boys about the Town, who Employ themselves
to break the Neighbors windows, that their Masters may have the profit of
mending them again.

Some Ancient Arts and Mysteries are said to be lost, but we have reason to
believe that the Father of Mischief will not let fall any of those Trades by
which he brings Souls to perdition, as long as he can have Scholars, and
Servants to carry on his purposes.

So that we need not doubt the Continuance of that Ancient Devil-Craft, and
Infernal Combination, as long as a Sordid Ignorance, Revengeful Malice, or
Blind Superstition remain in the World. The Ignorant resort to it as to a
School of Instruction, where they proceed and graduate themselves in the Cursed
Mathematics, and Mysteries of the Lower World. The Malicious apply themselves
for Revenge, to wreak their spleens upon those they have Animosity against: and
they are all the better part of Mankind: For if once they become in League with
the Devil, they must be supposed to have espoused his Interest so far, as to
stretch out their Malice answerable to his Enmity, which is against all Mankind
in general, but particularly against those of the greatest Integrity: as is
evident in the case of our First Parents, Job, our Blessed Savior and his Holy
Apostles. And in the Revelation of St. John, the Angel tells the Church of
Smyrna, that the Devil should cast some of them into prison that they might be
Tried. And Luke 22. chap. 31. verse. He tells Peter that Satan had desired to
winnow him, as they do wheat, but our Lord had prayed for him, etc. And this
must be Imputed to that Enmity which was put between the seed of the Woman, and
that of the Serpent; So that ever since the Apostate Angel has by himself, and
his wicked Agents, continually been Attempting to wreak his Revenge upon them.

The Superstitious are with as much ease, as any, drawn into the Fatal snare,
for they often become Witches, by endeavoring to defend themselves against
Witchcraft. These doubting that some Witch might have power to hurt them, arm
themselves with the Devil's Shield against the Devil's Sword: Putting on the
Armor of Charms, and Spells piecemeal by degrees; until at length they come to
be Devil-fenc'd cap-a-pie: and so at first they are drawn into a League
Defensive; until at last it comes to be declared Offensive too. That Art is
quickly learnt; which wants nothing but Credulity and practice to attain it;
and where the Devil once finds an Invitation, he ever after Haunts.

Of these Proficients in the Black Mysteries, there are some who at first begin
with Feats rather diverting, than Hurtful; for they are sometimes entertained
by Ludicrous and gamesom Spirits, who (to appearance) do things seemingly
pleasant: but this pastime costs them dear in the End; for they play so long on
the brink of Hell, until at length they tumble in, and sport with the devouring
Lion, until they are seized by his griping Paw; from whence They never after
have power to Extricate themselves.

Others there are that are prevailed with by none of these considerations; but
take up the use of Magical Forms, and Simples by Tradition: Those that were
their Predecessors deriving down to them the use of some Mystical words, or
Ceremonies upon the recital of which, they acquire the knowledge of many
strange, and remote secrets; and are Assisted in the performance of things much
above the reach of a power merely Humane. We have no reason to think it
Improbable that the Apostate Spirit may have Obliged himself, upon the bare
naming, or repeating such or such set forms of words (by himself, perhaps
Appointed) to attend upon those that make use of them. And upon this account it
is that Balaam and the Wisemen of Nebuchadnezar (mentioned in the book of
Daniel) are acquitted by Learned men, from having a particular Covenant with
the Devil, or acting by the Rules of the greater Sorcery.

And here I cannot omit relating a passage which was told me when I was a
Shool-boy in the house of a Learned and Religious Divine in the Country, That
there formerly Lived in the same house a Parson, who likewise taught the Latin
tongue, and having several Lads under his care; they (one day when he was at
Dinner at a Gentleman's house about a mile from the place) happened to go into
his Study, and (whether out of Curiosity, or by accident, is uncertain) were
reading in a book of his, relating to that forbidden Art; the Lads continued
reading, 'till diverse Spirits came into the Room to them (as I remember) I was
told in the Shape of boys, which seemed with a nimble motion to caper and play
about them: Their Master, who was then at such a distance from them, and at
dinner, had some Notice of what was doing at home, and immediately rose from
table, and repaired to them, where he found them very perplexed at their new
company, but knew not how to be rid of them but upon the coming in of their
Master, they were soon discharged.

Not unlike to this may be the case of some, who having by them books of
Conjuration, may perhaps ignorantly, and undesignedly peruse them, without any
previous Compact; until at length their Inquisitive Inclinations are so wrought
upon, as to make use of the more Interdicted means for their Information. Nor
is it Improbable, but that some Students in Astrology, may (in their first
Addresses to that Science) aim no farther than the satisfaction of their
Curiosity, in the Knowledge of Hidden and remote Questions; and Future Events;
Whilst those Mischievous Spirits (who like Beasts of prey) watching all
Occasions to entrap and get them into their Envious reach: may work upon their
overcurious and inquisitive Genius's to search after the more prohibited means
of satisfying their sinful Curiosity. So that Judicial Astrology may well be
looked upon, as a fair Introduction to the Diabolical Art. And it seems not
Improbable, but it might at first be set on foot as a Lure to draw the
Overcurious into those snares that lie beyond it.

And whosoever but seriously Considers the Nature of those Questions, which the
pretenders to that Art undertake to resolve, will find reason to think that
they step somewhat beyond those bounds which are set to their Enquiries.

And it is too much to be doubted, that those who take upon them to Predict and
Calculate of such Occult Contingencies, and Futurities; are not always free
from Inticements and solicitations to the more dangerous Correspondencies.

Tho all this while it is not denied but that there may be an Observation of
Sydereal and Planetical Motions, which falls not under the black Character of
those Interdicted Arts; but if kept within the modest directions of Natural
Speculation, may not only be Lawful, but of Good use, to Excite in us an
Admiration and Adoration of him that stretched out the Heavens like a Courtain,
and binds up the sweet Influences of the Pleiades, Causing the Stars in their
Courses to fight against such as Oppugn his Righteous purposes. As we read in
the Sacred pages.

Nor would we be thought to include all manner of Intimation of Future Events
under the Notion of unlawful Divination; since it is very apparent, that as the
practitioners of the Forbidden Study do by the Indication of the Devil and his
wicked Angels, arrive to a Dear-bought Knowlegde of things to come: So
oftentimes it pleases God (by the blessed Guardians of his Saints, and) by the
Ministry of Holy Spirits, to Impart to such as truly fear him, and call upon
his Name, some certain Intimations of his Divine pleasure in relation to
Mundane affairs, and the Changes that may happen either to his Church in
general, or to particular Countries, Families, or Persons. Many Instances of
this kind might be produced, of which, for proof some few shall be mentioned.
Such was the Dream of Nebuchadnezar, Interpreted by the Prophet Daniel, and
mentioned in the 4. chap. of that Prophecy and such may that Voice which was
heard in the Temple before the destruction of Jerusalem, be well thought to be:
When by a Migremus Hinc, an Alarm was given to the Jews to remove before the
Storm of that dreadful War came upon them, which Occasioned the destruction of
their City and Temple.

The late Reverend and Learned Bishop Usher, as is written in his Life,
predicted the Massacre in Ireland, many Years before the bloody Execution of
it. And King James, strangely discovered the horrid Powder Treason, by that
letter to the Lord Mont-Eagle; which can hardly be imputed to any thing less
than the Courteous Intimation, or Impulse of some good Genius. Nor is it at all
unlikely that we are beholden to those Watchful Admonishers of us, for the
seasonable Hints of approaching Calamities, which often show themselves to us
Either in Aerial, or other Prodigies. For these by the most Considerate men of
all Ages have been acknowledged to be the Prodroms of great Calamities, or
Catastrophies.

So our Blessed Savior tells us that there shall be Signs in the Heavens, and
Signs in the Earth, before that great and terrible day of the Lord. And who
knows, but these Indexes may be through the Care of those good and tender
Guardians; who out of tenderness of our Welfare may give us those Cautions, and
Admonitions to provide our selves against a day of Trial. The dreadful
desolations that happened in Germany, and England, in the Late unnatural Wars
(which whether or no they were presaged by them, yet certainly had many
Tremendous Apparitions in the Air, and on the Earth etc. before those
Calamities broke forth amongst them;) I say these are dismal Testimonies of the
consequence of such Presages.

But these Kind of Predictions, as they are the effects of the Benevolence of
Heaven, to us sinful Mortals, so they generally startle and awaken a secure and
sinful World to meet God in the way of his Judgments: or if they have not that
good effect on the sensual and Disobedient; they are at least Messengers of
Joy, and Harbingers of Grace to those who apply themselves to Study the Voice
of God in his Providence.

Whilst we are foretold in the Holy Scripture that Wicked men and seducers
shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived. For the Spirit of
Delusion to which they adhere, shall betray them into gross mistakes, and
palpable deviations; such are Generally Impenetrable by the Warning of Heaven,
they are Judicially Blinded, and Infatuated, that they should not come to the
knowledge of the Truth. Thus the Prophet Ezekiel tells us of a Spirit of Lying,
which entered into the False Prophets, and they cried Peace, Peace; when a
sudden desolation, and destruction from the Lord was coming upon them. And this
will be the dreadful case of those miserable Wretches who have given themselves
up to the Conduct of the Father of Lies; Who either out of a belief that they
have no souls, have given themselves over to work Wickedness; Or else despising
the Glories of a Blessed Eternity, have Listed themselves under the Banner of
Satan, to Fight against the Power of the Omnipotent. And that Atheism,
Idolatry, Sensuality, and Debauchery, have a Natural Tendence to promote this
Impious and Diabolical Confederacy, has been hinted in the forgoing Pages.
Which being so Regulary, Learnedly, and Largely Treated of by the Excellent
pens of Dr. H. M. and Mr. J. G. before mentioned, in the second part of
Saducismus Triumphatus; I shall presume to Wade no further in the
Argumentative, and Philosophical part; but proceed now, to give an Account of
the most Atested Relations of Ancient Witches; and thence descend to some very
remarkable, and Credible Modern Relations, most of which have happened in these
Few years, and will be attested by persons of Unquestionable Worth and
Reputation now alive amongst us.

CHAP. VI.
Examples of Witchcraft, and Familiarity with Devils amongst the Ancient
Druids, Sybils, Vestal Virgins, and Heathen Priests.
IT is one of the Black Marks which the Apostle of the Gentiles gives us of
Antichrist, That he shall sit in the Temple of God, and show himself to be
worshipped as God. And if we consider the Temples, Groves, Altars, Sacrifices
and Priests that the Ancients in the days of their Blindness, and stupid
Idolatry Erected, and Consecrated to their Infernal Deities, we shall find that
this Exaction of Worship and Adoration which Antichrist lays claim to, was in
the former Ages paid unto the Devil himself; and that the Apostate Church of
Rome usurped to her Revolted Head those Sacred Rites in conformity to those
Sacrifices which their Idolatrous Ancestors paid unto the Revolted and Apostate
Angels.

This Chapter therefore shall be filled with an Enumeration of some of the
first Proficients in the Black Infernal Mysteries, that we may make way to
parallel them with an Account of the Proficience of diverse Popes and Orders
among the Idolatrous Romanists in the same dark and Diabolical Arts, in some of
the following Pages.

But what Astonishment may it well raise in us, if we but remark, that not only
those Barbarous Nations that never knew the true God, nor had the Advantages of
his Law, and his Prophets, amongst them, should follow the foul Abomination:
But even the chosen Israelites, to whom (as the Psalmist elegantly expresses)
the Almighty arose Early, and sent his Prophets, who saw his wonders in Egypt,
in the Red Sea, and in the Wilderness, who saw the Lightnings, heard the
Thunders, and the solemn noise of Trumpets, when their Captain Moses received
the Law from the mouth of the Most High on Mount Sinai, and had there that
First, Positive and Repeated Command against Idol-worship, which (by the
dreadful and amazing Judgments inflicted on them for that provoking sin) can be
thought to be understood no otherwise than Devil-worship. See Exodus 20.23. Yet
notwithstanding, that this Israel should forsake the God that bought them, and
marked them by special favors from all the Nations of the Earth! This you will
say is stupendous Ingratitude, and tremendous Apostasy.

What can be thought of that Biggotted Ahab, who is said to have Taught Israel
to sin? He had been nursed up under a Whorish, Idolatrous Mother, the Patroness
of the Priests of Baal: And he makes little less than a challenge to the
Almighty to contend with his Adored Baalim. See 1 Kings 18. They were then so
besotted, that they thought Baal to be a greater God, that he who laid the
Foundations of the Earth, and whose Thunders their Rebellous Fathers had heard
on the Sacred Mountain.

Was it possible that those Infernal Priests should expect an answer by Fire
from their detestable Idol, unless they had at some time or other by some
Voice, or Motion, or by some Success of their Impious Adorations been deluded
into an Opinion that there was something Sacred in that which they reared their
Shrines unto? It is (I think) indubitable, that the Devil, the Father of Lies
and Blasphemies, had some way or other gulled them into that opprobrious
Worship. They skipt up and down upon his Altars, and lanced themselves until
the blood gushed out; with their Devils Littany, O Baal, hear us, or, We
beseech thee to hear us, O Baal. What can this be but an Invocation of the
Devil? and bears so near a Resemblance unto Witchcraft, as if it were the
Original of it. Do the False Prophets call upon the Devil in their Idol? So do
the Witches call upon their Familiar: Do they offer Sacrifice to their Gods? So
do these to their Goblins: They allure them with Incense and Perfumes; they eat
and drink by way of Oblation to them, as the Priests used to do in their
Idol-Temples: And as the Hellish Priests offered their own Blood to Baal; so do
these Infernal Haggs in their Contracts with Beelzebub.

So that having now cleared the way by explaining the foul Conformity and
Analogy betwixt Idolatry and Witchcraft, it may well be expected that I should
assume the premised Method, and give some Instances of Ancient Examples to make
good the Thesis.

Therefore not to look back upon those dreadful Examples, which the Sacred
Writings afford us of the hardened Israelites, I shall proceed with some
Remarks upon the Ancient, and much Celebrated Sybils.

And that it was the usual Compellation the Ignorant Ancients gave to their
Familiars, Spirits, or Genii, to call them Gods, none need doubt who have read
what is related of the Pythoness of Endor in the Book of Samuel, where she
replies to King Saul, I see Gods coming up out of the Earth. So in 1 Kings
20.21. The Syrians speak of the Gods of the Hills, add of the Valleys, by which
it is evident they reckoned those Demons which used to show themselves unto
them in those places to be Gods; nay, the Idolatrous Gentiles paid an Adoration
to them.

No wonder then if the Sybils obtained their name from an apprehension that
they had Communion and Converse with the Gods; for so it is thought the words
Sios and Beel do import. It always has been, and still is, the Custom of all
Nations to affix something of a sacred and venerable Title or Character on
persons they have esteemed to be Inspired, or in favor with their Gods, and
that even amongst the most uncultivated Scythians and Indians.

That the Sybils did generally by their Raptures and Enthusiasms promote and
encourage an Affiance in, and Dependence upon the Heathen Oracles and Idols,
none need doubt who have seen the Account Zozimus gives of them; who
particularly relates many of their Verses full of Superstitions and Tradition,
having no affinity at all with the holy Religion, but tending to advance the
Credit of their Pagan Shrines.

The Learned Wierius in his Book de Praestigiis Daemonum, lib. 1. cap. 7.
reckons most of the Sybils to be no better than Futhusiastae, and Pythonistae,
and amongst the number of such against whom the mighty Prophet Moses made a
Law, that those who resorted to them, should be stoned; and he is farther of
Opinion, that through their Writings the Frantic Romans were drawn into many
of their Extatick and Superstitious pursuits of their multiplied Deities. And
although some extraordinary Prophecies relating to the Birth of the Glorious
Messiah, are to be found in some of their Writings, yet will not those excuse
the gross Daemonolatry of the rest, any more than that Praediction of the
Delphick Oracle before cited can be supposed to Atone for the wretched
Derelictions of the True and Holy God, occasioned by the Libidinous quest of
the Nations after that Idol. Besides, we have no mention made so much as of one
of them in the Holy Register, tho their Writings had a Date long before the
Records of the Blessed Evangelists and Apostles. Nor need it be thought strange
that an Elogy in praise of our Savior, should come from the Pen of a
Pagan*Prophetess, more than that an Acknowledgment that he was the Son of God,
should be proclaimed by the mouth of the Father of Lies, and the promoter of
false Gods himself; who has been compelled by the irresistible power of Divine
Truth to pay that Acknowledgment to the Sovereign of all. Or, whether those
Divine Praedictions attributed to them, were properly their own, or the Works
of others of later Date, and pretended to be theirs, shall not be my task here
to determine. They were generally Priests Consecrated to Apollo, or the
Delphick, or some other Oracle; and in furious Raptures pronounced their
Prophecies. Plato was of opinion that they were Inspired by the Gods, or some
Spirit. And Jamblicus tells us, that the Sybil of Delphos two several ways
received her Inspirations, either by a soft breath which came upon her whilst
she was, or seemed to be in a Trance or Ecstasy; or else by sitting on a Tripod
of Brass, before the mouth of a Cave, from whence proceeded Fire, or a
whispering Voice, upon which she either resolved the questions demanded of her,
or uttered her Prophecies. See Heywoods Hist. of Women, p. 78.

To these resorted the great Captains, to know the Fate of their Wars; the
Countryman to enquire of the Fertility of the ensuing Season; and others
sought their direction in Emergent cases. They appointed where Temples and
Altars should be reared, and when their Sacrifices were to be observed: And
although according to the Language of those times, all Females (as there were then
many) that were rapt with this Prophetic Fury were called Sybils; yet our
Modern Authors have reduced the number to ten, or twelve, because to them
peculiarly are attributed those praedictions concerning the Evangelical times.
They are thus named Sybilla Persica, called Antiquissima Vaticinantium; She is
said to have divided the term of years until the coming of Christ into seven
Ages, reckoning the first from Adam to Noah 1556 years, and from the Flood to
Abraham 292; from the time of Abraham to the Children of Isreal's coming from
Egypt 503. from that time to the building the Temple by King Solomon 481; and
from thence to the Babylonish Captivity 1800 years; and from thence to the
Birth of our Savior the number of 614 years; which being added together, with
the number of years, since the Redemption by the sufferings of the Immaculate
High Priest, makes the number of Six thousand nine hundred and thirty years,
which comes within 48 years of the Roman Account; whereas by the Scripture
reckoning it will amount to but Five thousand six hundred thirty and three
years. So that upon the whole we see the Roman Priest keeps a nearer touch with
the Priest of Apollo, than the Sacred Chronicle.

2. Was called Sybilla Lybica; and a great dispute there is whether she or the
forenamed were the more Ancient.

3. Was Sybilla Delphica, she is said to have prophesied of the Trojan War.

This by some is affirmed to be that Daphne whom Ovid feigns in his
Metamorphosis, to be changed into a Laurel, to avoid the embraces of Apollo;
and if we can credit their Writings, we shall find the Delphick Deity mightily
enamoured on his Female Priests.

4. Is said to be Sybilla Cumaea; of whom it is reported, that being one of the
Branchidae, or Priests of Apollo, that attended an Old Altar in the Milesian
Fields, near the City of Cuma, when Pactias the Persian had fled for refuge to
the Inhabitants thereof, and was by Mazares their great General commanded to be
delivered into his hand; the Cumaeans thereupon consulted their Old Oracle, and
were commanded by the Sybil to deliver him up; but one Aristodicus, who was a
person of note among them, loath to deliver one who had committed the protection
of his Life into their hands, delayed going out of the Temple, and espying
about the place some Nests of young Sparrows, was about to carry them away;
when sudddenly he heard a voice from the Altar, speaking thus to him;

O thou most wicked of Men, what arrogant boldness has so far possessed thee,
that thou presumest to take hence my Suppliants and such as I have taken to my
protection? Upon which, Aristodicus returned this bold and free answer; Do
thou O King, succor and protect thy Suppliants, and command us to betray
the life of Pactias to the Persians?

5. Is reckoned to be Sybilla Samia, because born in the Island of Samos, a
place notoriously famous for Idolatry; and where the Neiades, a sort of old
fashioned Goblins are first reported to have showed themselves, and entered into
a converse with Mortals.

6. Sybilla Cumana, called likewise Amalthea; of her are devised abundance of
Fabulous Stories, she has likewise ascribed to her a Prophecy of Christ's
Incarnation.

7. Sybilla Hellespontica; she is said to be descended from the Trojans, and to
have written of the Wars between the Greeks, and that City.

8. Sybilla Phrygia, called besides Vates Ancyrae. It is said of her, that she
was to have prostituted her self to Apollo, to obtain the Spirit of Divination,
which she refused, after he had inspired her, so that afterward, in Revenge, he
so ordered it, that no one gave Credit to her Predictions. She is likewise said
to have Prophesied of the destruction of Troy, and of the coming of Christ.

9. They say was Sybilla Europea; little is said of her, only a Prophecy
assigned to her concerning the coming of the blessed day of our Redemption.

10. Is accounted Sybilla Tyburtina, or Italica, being born near the River
Tyber. She is reckoned to have lived in the time of Augustus Caesar; and that
upon account of her Devotion, Heaven opened, and showed the B. V. with her
glorious Infant to the Emperor, at such time as the Romans were asking the
Oracle about Deifying of Augustus: And that at the same time a voice was heard
in the Air, Haec est Ara Primogeniti Dei, which they say is since dedicated to
the Blessed Virgin; who in time perhaps may give his Holiness thanks for it.

11, 12. Are named Sybilla Egyptia, and Sybilla Erithrea, to both which are
assigned certain Prophetic verses relating to our Savior, and to the last a
clause in commendation of St. Peter* which makes it seem to me as if inserted
by some of those who pretended to have been his Successors.

Besides these, there have been reckoned abundance more Sybills, who never
pretended to exceed the Order of the Bacchidae, who still attended the Groves,
and Altars of the Heathen Oracles, and thence returned such answers as their
Demon inspired them withal, by hi^ ^h it is demonstrable to whom they did
belong, by the Office assigned them. Tibullus in his second Book makes mention
of some of them. Quicquid Amalthea, quicquid Marpesia dixit,
Heriphile Phaebo grataque quod monuit.
Politianus likewise reckons up diverse of the Phaebaiedes, or Sybills, with
others skilful in Divination, in his Poem on that occasion, whereof this is a
part, -- Quod and veteres prompsere Sybillae
Carmen Amalthaea, etc.
See Heywood as before.

Besides these, there were another sort of Votaries to the Goddess Vesta, who
were tied by their order to the strictest Virginity for thirty years; and upon
conviction of any lapse in that kind, they were immured, whilst alive. Their
Office was to keep the fire always burning on the Altar of Vesta, they were
under the Discipline of the Flamen, or High Priest, who instructed them in the
Ceremonies, and had the charge of punishing their Delinquencies.

This Order seems to have been of great Antiquity and Veneration amongst the
Trojans, by whom it was brought into Italy in those early days, before the
building of the City Lavinum. As Virgil records in his Aeneids, lib. 2. --
Vestamque potentem,
Aeternumque aditis effert penetralibus Ignem.


Dr. Cotta in his discovery of Witchcraft, makes a quotation out of Livy, of
one of this Ancient Order, named Claudia, who (unassisted by any humane help)
did (only with a small string fastened thereunto) draw a mighty Ship along the
River of Tyber; which by reason of its vast weight and greatness, could not be
moved by the force of many strong Men, assisted by Cattle that were used to
draw heavy burdens, which with good reason he concludes she could not have
performed without the cooperation of some evil Spirit. He likewise mentions
Tuccia, another of that Sister-hood, who by muttering some Invocation, or
Enchantment, could take up water in a Sieve, and carry it at a good distance
from the River Tyber, without spilling a drop.

Besides, he takes notice out of Carrion, quoted by Melancthon, of a Druid
amongst the Nation of the Tungri, who did foretell to Dioclesian, That after he
had killed a Boar, he should be Emperor of Rome. Which came to pass after he
had killed one Aper, who was at that time an Usurper, and whose name in the
Latin Tongue, signifies a Boar. Heywood reports in page 100. That Alexander the
great went to the Oracle of Delphos to demand the success of his Expedition
against Darius; after many Importunities, was answered by the Prophetess with
an Invictus ^ris O Alexander. By which his great Victories, and Triumphs were
foretold, although had he met with contrary misfortune, the subtle Devil could
have salved the reputation of the Oracle, by construing the words with relation
to himself: So that if Alexander had been vanquished by Darius, yet had he
remained Invictus, because by his Importunities, he overcame the Oracle.

It would be endless, should I go about to enumerate the many Instances, with
which Histories do abound in this kind; nor do I desire to tire the Reader with
a tedious transcript of Relations so common amongst Authors: That which is here
represented, will be sufficient to evince, that Idol Priestcraft, and
Devil-Worship, are inseparable dependants one upon the other: That the Devils
Empire has been supported, and promoted by the Collusion of his Priests, and
the Reputation of the Priest has been acquired by his converse, and
intercourse with the Devil and his Oracles.

The Apostate Angel was not contented to have his Altars advanced, his Oracles
sought unto, his Idols Adored, his Priests had in Admiration among the Great
and Pompous Eastern, and Western Monarchies: But he has stained the remote
Indians with his foul and contagious Worship; and with the help of his more
Pagan Priests, and Brachmans, enslaved those Barbarous Nations to a Diabolical
Adoration of his horrid Shrines. Sometimes they Sacrifice, and supplicate unto
his Image in the most foul and monstrous Figure; sometimes he personally
appears unto them, and frights them into a Panick Adoration of his Tremendous
Deity: Oftentimes he scares them with dreadful Apparitions in the Air, which he
rends with violent Tempests, and devouring fire, and frequently mischiefs them,
not only in their Fields, but in their persons too, which occasions their
supplicating him to avert his Terrors from them. The Histories of America give
a large account of the many slaveries they are drawn into by this their
Infernal Deity, who seems to have obtained a Personal Empire, and Dominion
amongst them.

The History of Persia gives a large Relation of the many monstrous Idols, and
Pagods, to which that People pay Divine Worship, and Adoration, to some of
which they offer their Children by way of Immolation, as the Idolatrous
Israelites of old did unto their Monster Moloch. To some of their Idols they
prostitute their Daughters, whom they reckon not fit for the Nuptial Rites,
until they have permitted a penetration of their Bodies, by the wanton Member
of their Beastly Idol: Or rather some sordid and lascivious Spirit, that
sometimes actuates it from within. See Herberts Travels, which I take it, gives
a particular, and distinct account of these, and diverse other Abominations
among them.

Nor have the Inhabitants of China, and the Eastern India, escaped the
pollution of this Devil-Worship. For Ferdinand Mendez Pinto, a Portuguize, who
Traveled many years amongst them, has very largely set forth the many
Idolatries and Superstitions of that people: They have amongst them a vast
number of Priests, which they have in high veneration; and a prodigious
accumulation of Rites and Ceremonies. And though the Turks in their extended
Empire do forbid the use of Idols, yet we find in Knowles his History of them,
that they have amongst their Priests abundance of Conjurers, which they call
Wise, or Cunning Men, by which they maintain a Correspondence with the black
Inhabitants of the Infernal World: So that, tho they do not permit the use of
the more lawful and liberal Studies, they yet give themselves up to be
Scholars, and Disciples to the most interdicted Mysteries.

In Lappland they maintain such an ordinary Correspondence with the expulsed
Spirits, that a Lappland Witch is almost grown to a Proverb with us: And though
it be common amongst the Inhabitants to Converse, and Revel with their Demons,
and Familiars; yet the Priests among them generally acquire a dexterity in the
Art above what the rest can pretend to: So that they do as ordinarily train up
their people in those Black Arts, as we do ours in Trades, and liberal Sciences.

There was in the year 1677. or 78. a Book printed, Entitled, The History of
Lappland, which gives a full relation of their many Methods of raising their
Spirits; and of diverse forms and shapes, in which they ordinarily showed
themselves to their Invocators, and conversed with them, sometimes like a
Satyr, sometimes in the likeness of a Man: and there is amongst them such a
kind of Familiarity maintained, as if they were of the same Country, and
Descent. Amongst the many ways they have to call the Spirits to their
Attendance, none is more in use then that of a Magical Drum they have, and in
great esteem amongst them; they are very well described in the Book above
mentioned, and I have lately seen one of those Drums in Gresham College; it is
all over marked upon the vellam with a sort of Necromantick Characters,
somewhat like the Arabic letters; but doubtless a sort of Orthography, taught
by the Black Master of the Infernal Science. When one of these Drums is beaten
(with the addition of some Diabolical Ceremonies, and Incantations,) the Spirit
presently attends, and either answers to what is demanded, out of the Drum, or
else appears in some form in a place assigned him, and there resolves the
matter for which he was invocated. It is notorious, amongst all Historians,
that the people of Lappland sell Winds to Merchants for certain Voyages; by
which they much enrich themselves. But I fear I have stretched this Chapter
beyond its due length, though I have used all possible brevity to contract it.
I shall therefore here put a period to this, and hasten to the seventh Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
Confederacy of several Popes, and Roman Priests with the Devil. Such the
principal Incouragers and promoters of Idolatry in the Church.
HAving as succinctly as I could, given an account of the Gentiles, and Jewish
Idolatry, with the mischievous Consequences thereof, in the former Chapters: My
Method now leads me to relate in this Chapter how fatal Idol-Adoration has
been, and must still be to those that continue it, tho under a different
denomination: So that Rome Antichristian, will appear not to come short of, if
not to exceed, the Daemonolatry of Rome Pagan. I shall therefore first begin
with a list of some of their Popes, as I find them Registered by the Learned and
Ingenious Mr. Wanly, in his Wonders of the little World, page 473. where, (out
of their own Authors, and particularly their Celebrated Platina,) he gives a
Catalogue of diverse of them, who stand Recorded for Conjurers, and such as have
had Familiarity with the Devil. And here it ought not to pass without good
Observation, that in the first Centuries, before their Bishops had made a
defection from the humility, and purity of the Evangelical Doctrine, we find
none of them branded with that blackest of Characters; but after the Apostasy
from the Primitive Simplicity had gradually obtained among them, then came they
to fall off from the Worship of God himself, to a downright contracting with,
if not Worshipping of the Devil.

We will first observe by what degrees this defection obtained upon them: For,
1. Alexander the first introduced that which they call Holy Water, mixed with
Salt, and ordered it to be used. 2. Sixtus the first ordered, that Priests
should Minister in linen Surplices. 3. Faelix the first appointed yearly
Sacrifices in memory of the Martyrs. 4. Marcus the first brought in the singing
of the Nicene Creed, and the giving the Pal to the Bishop of Ostia. 5. Zosimus
brought the use of Tapers into the Church. 6. Boniface the third obtained of
Phocas, a Murderer of his Lord, that Popish Supremacy, which to this day is so
much stood upon, and was the first that Usurped the proud Title of Universal
Bishop. 7. Boniface the fourth instituted All-hallow day, and dedicated the
Temple of Pantheon, (an Idol Temple) to the Virgin Mary. 8. Martin the first,
ordered Priests to shave their Polls, and to keep themselves single. 9.
Vitalianus the first, first brought Organs in use in the Church of Rome. He
sent Theodorus, and Hadrian into England, to introduce the Latin service. 10.
Leo the second, Ratifyed the sixth Synod, to confirm the Mass, and brought in
the kissing of the Pax. 11. John the seventh, noted for building Churches, and
erecting Images. 12. Gregory the second Excommunicates the Emperor Leo
Isaurus, for standing against Images. 13. Gregory the third Excommunicates the
Emperor upon the quarrel about Images. 14. Paul the first Excommunicates the
Emperor Constantine Capronimus upon the same Quarrel, upon which, it was well
worth noting that the Emperors, who were descended from Idolaters, and
Persecutors, withstood Images, being convinced of the dangerous consequences of
them; when those who pretended to be the Successors of the Apostles, were the
Introducers of Heathenish Idolatry into the Church of God. 15. Stephen the
third brought in Worshipping, and Censing of Images. So the point was gained.
16. Martin the second, his Father Palumbus was acknowledged to be a Conjurer:
by which Arts it is said he sought the Papacy. 17. Christopher the first is
Recorded to have got into the Chair by the aforesaid evil Arts: and was
therefore deposed, and thrust into a Monastery. 18. Sergius the third ordained
the bearing of Candles in the feast of the Purification of the Virgin Mary. 19.
John the thirteenth, a man from his Youth polluted with all kind of villainy and
dishonesty, deposed in Council by the Emperor Otho, slain in the Act of
Adultery. 20. John the fourteenth began to Baptize Bells, and give them Names.
21. Silvester the second was a Magician, and contracted with the Devil for the
Papacy. 22. John the nineteenth given to Magic; he took off the Election of
the Pope from the People; and appointed the Feast of All Souls. 23. Benedict
the ninth, a Conjurer, wont with Laurence and Gratian (two Conjurers) whom he
made Cardinals, to wander in the Woods, to invocate Devils, and bewitch Women
to follow them. 24. Nicholaus the second, a great contender for
Transubstantiation. 25. Innocent the third brought in the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. 26. Sixtus the fourth brought in Beads into the Divine
Worship. 27. Alexander the sixth, Incestuous with his own Daughter, and gave
himself to the Devil.


By this short, yet dreadful List, it may appear by what degrees, first
Superstition, then Idolatry, and after that Daemonolatry, or a Correspondence,
if not a Confederacy with the Prince of Darkness, crept into the world; nay,
that part of it that claims the name of an Apostolic Church: Tho nothing more
contrary, or rather Diametrically opposite to the Doctrine and Faith
established by the Holy Jesus, and his blessed Apostles. The Heathen Oracles
had been struck dumb by the coming of the Eternal Redeemer, and the Divine
Miracles wrought by him in Confirmation of the everlasting Gospel; the
Magicians, and Sorcerers confounded by the Sacred Authority derived to the
constituted Apostles, as we find recorded in their Acts, in the cases of Simon
Magus, and Elimas the Sorcerer, with diverse others of that kind: But after the
Christian Doctrine had been confirmed by so many, and unquestionable Divine
Miracles, so that there wanted nothing that might assure the World of the
mighty hand of God that accompanied his Ministers in their first planting the
Gospel of Salvation: Then again do we find the Arch-Enemy of our Souls
unchained, and we may well calculate his losing from the time of Stephen the
third, which was that fatal period that again spread the foul Contagion over
the Apostate Church: For now the mystery of Iniquity showed itself in the
Temple of God, and the old Serpent began again to be Worshipped as God, and
(...) his Altars in the obnoxious Tem^^^

And here I cannot omit that which is irrefragably urged upon this Argument by
the learned Doctor Brevint, in his Book, entitled, Saul and Samuel at Endor; a
Treatise, that perhaps gives some of the clearest demonstrations of the
defection of the Roman Church, of any thing yet extant: though many of our
Reverend and Learned Divines have acquitted themselves with singular Honor
upon that occasion, to whose Memories Posterity will be obliged to pay the most
grateful acknowledgments: But this Gentleman had the opportunity of a long
co-habitation amongst their Fathers beyond the Seas, and the advantage of
making such discoveries, and observations, as cannot fall under the cognizance
of others. I shall therefore make bold to cite some passages out of the
forenamed book of that excellent Authors, in refutation of the pretended Roman
Miracles.

I shall begin with p. 45. where he makes a quotation out of St. August. de
Civit. l. 10. c. 16. There are some of the Devils Miracles, says St. Austin
that as to the work itself, seem to be no lesser then Gods are, but their end
must distinguish them. And therefore he will have the Miracles of the latter
times to be tried by the true Church, as we find it in the Scriptures: and not
the Church by these Miracles.

Bring Roman Miracles to this Rule, you may divide them into three Ranks; for
some of them are but mere Tales; some are counterfeit Impostures, and
Artificial tricks of Juglers: others have a real Being, but the Question is,
whence they have it.

As for the first sort of Miracles: The Papists have by little and little,
heaped them to such an extravagancy, that diverse of their Communion, who have
some Modesty left them, can scarce forbear blushing at the Relation. Gregory of
Tours, and Gregory the first Bishop of Rome, (if the four Books of Dialogues be
truly his) did begin pretty well to tell stories: but these are nothing to the
advances made by other Prelates, and great Roman Doctors, in the following
Ages: And I may say confidently that these Romanists are not much short of the
most extravagant Romancers. There you shall read of Constantine the Great being
a Leper, and transferring his Roman Empire upon that Pope that made him clean,
of Wolves, and Lions bringing back Lambs, and restoring them out of their
Entrails, after they had torn them to pieces; of Birds flocking about to hear
Sermons; and of Asses becoming Roman Catholics, at least kneeling to adore the
Mass-Sacrament, etc. They cannot conceive any great man to be a Saint, unless
he has an extraordinary gift for the working of such Miracles. How true they
be, you may best learn of the very Saints, who deny them: As for Example, S.
Bernard, S. Chrysostom, and St. Gregory, and yet they are forced upon them: And
you can hardly pass for a true Catholic, unless you believe that St. Bernard
was saluted, and suckled several times by our Lady in her Image; that St.
Chrysostom did Raise the dead, did cure all sorts of incurable diseases; and
had every night St. Paul himself whispering in his Ear, what he did write on
his Epistles. And as to St. Gregory the Great, he had no meaner whisperer then
the Holy Ghost in Person, under the shape of a Pigeon sitting quietly upon his
head, and sometimes stretching down her Bill into his Mouth, when he was
Preaching. And we know that the Grand Impostor, Mahomet, pretended somewhat the
like about the same time. Now you may be sure all these things are Fabulous,
since disowned by the very men who are pretended to have had them, and who
therefore knew best the truth of all these works, and assistances.

Much like to these are the Miracles of Ignatius Loyola, when he cures Women in
their Travail, if you but set his Seal, or Signet on their Belly; when he makes
the house where he happens to be, horribly shake; and when himself grows as
hot, and as terrible as Mount Aetna, by the fierce motion of that Spirit, which
from a debauched Soldier, made him a holy Jesuit: or when he sees the Soul of
his dearest Friend Hosius mounting up into the Sky, far more gorgeous then the
Soul of any other: or when he works greater Miracles with his own name in a
little piece of paper, Cum nomine suo Chartae inscripto, then Moses and the
Apostles did in Gods name. We cannot deny (says the Bishop of Canaries) but
sometimes very grave men write, and leave to posterity such reports about
Saints Miracles, humouring hereby both themselves and the people, whom they
perceive both prone to believe, and importunate to have them do so.



For the Authority of the above cited Fables, that worthy Divine quotes their
own various Authors, citing the several Books, and Pages, where they are
related; for confirmation of which, I must refer you to the 45 th p. of his
Book before mentioned. And is it not hereby evident to all that will not
wilfully blind themselves to their own delusion, that these Stories, if true,
are no other than Diabolical Cheats; being such, as in no wise can be imagined
to confirm the Evangelical Doctrine, but rather the Superstitions and Orders by
the Romanists, imposed upon the world: Or if they are not true, then may we
conclude them to fall within the number of those lying Wonders foretold of in
the Scripture, by which Antichrist shall endeavor to establish his Blasphemies
amongst a Credulous, and Bigoted Generation. And what can their Fathers, that
report those sottish Legends, be thought to be, but such a sort of people as
are marked out by the Prophet Ezekiel, when he says, The Prophets Prophesy
Lies, and the Priests bear Rule by their means, and my people love to have it
so, and what will you do in the end thereof? O Depraved, and Adulterous Church,
that imposes on her Proselytes the Credit of such Fictions, that thereby she
may procure a reverence, and belief of those Superstitions, and Idolatries,
which her tainted Doctors teach.

Let us now go on to the second sort of Miracles mentioned by Dr. Brevint,
which are such as are made up all of Artifice, and Imposture. Pope Boniface in
this matter once behaved himself like a man, when through a Pipe or Sarbutane,
he conveyed so dexterously this Oracle, Caelestin, get thee away, if thou have
a mind to be saved; that Pope Calestin took it, it seems, notwithstanding his
Infallibility, for an Angelical Warning, and so left the Popedom to the Cheat.
Pope Hildebrand had once another as good intentention of Cheating, but as it
was much more Cruel, it had not so happy a success, when he had ready a huge
stone, which should have fallen from a high Vault, like a Judgment out of
Heaven, upon the head of the Emperor Henry the third, when at his Devotions;
but the poor Wretch, who was employed in that good affair, made too much have,
for he fell down with his great Stone, wherewith he was crushed all to pieces,
before the Emperor came under that place, where he used to kneel at prayer. It
was a pretty trick of the Country Curate, (mentioned by Card. Benno,) who
getting Crabs, with little Candles fastened to their backs, set them a crawling
up and down his Churchyard at night; and persuaded his people in the morning,
after he had taken them in again, that they were poor distressed Souls, which
wanted Masses. Images, and Crucifixes have been found very commodious for
working this kind of Miracles, especially when they are set up close to thick
walls, as the great Serapis of Alexandria was once, for then it is an easy
matter to get up behind by secret ways, to anoint the face of the Saint, and to
put in a Chafing dish, that shall make him both sweat and weep, by heating, and
melting that liquour. Springs, and Wheels; and such like Engines, are of great
use to make them move, and bow, and speak; by such a Miracle the Marry,
Priests unhappily lost their good cause once at Winchester; for when they were
upon the point of winning it, a Crucifix started at it, and declared against
the Priests. This voice in the Synod being well seconded by the Monks, went
presently for an Oracle: So either simple were the Men, or strong the Impostors
of those days; nor are they now much less in many places. Although Syranus
tells all the World, That great delusions are often put upon the People by
Mass-priests, and their counterfeited Wonders and Signs.

But the third and last sort of Roman Miracles reckoned up by the forementioned
Learned Author, are those that indeed come nearest to our purpose, and do
unquestionably prove, that as the Heathens of old under the Images of Serapis,
Molech, Baalim, and Apollo, etc. worshipped base and infernal Spirits; so the
Romanists now adays, (though they have new dressed and inscribed their Idols)
do no less than pay an Adoration to the Apostate Angels, and delusive Spirits,
which Act in, and Actuate those Interdicted Images.

For my part ( says he) when I do read in grave and famous Roman Writers, that
a Consecrated Host will fly and flutter in the Air sometimes, till a
Mass-Priest holds up his Pix to receive it; that shapes of Flesh and Young
Children have appeared upon their Altars, at the Elevation of the said Host;
that by many good Experiences, Horses, and Mules, and Cows, have been cured of
their Diseases, when some Masses were sung for them to the honor of S.
Barbara; that S. Dominick did write Books, which upon several Trials no Fire
could ever burn; that once he was seen perfectly in the shape of a Crucifix,
with the five wounds in his Body, and a Crown of Thorns on his Head, That at
the Consecration at Mass, something like Christ was seen hard by him, with the
same signs of his cruel Passion, dropping out of his own wounds some of his own
dear Blood on this dear Saint; that the B. Virgin beheld all this, and of her
own accord played the Mass-priest, and administered the very Body of her Son, in
one moity of a Consecrated Wafer to this same Saint in token of special
friendship; and all this averred, and sworn as true, by a formal Oath in the
name of the Blessed Trinity, and under pain of all kinds of Gods Curses, in
case of a lie or a mistake, with five hundred such and greater Marvels: I think
it a kinder, and safer part in me to take them for something, then for mere
Tales.

But for my pains of believing so, let me, who by Gods Grace am a Protestant,
have the liberty which the Papists allow themselves, when they control what is
done by Pagans; to say, as perhaps it is true, that when the Emperor Vespasian
once cured a Blind and Lame man, It was the Devil, who hindering the sight of
the one, and the motion of the other, seemed really to heal both, when really
he did but cease from hurting and anoying them. Sometimes Papists will come so
far, as to suspect their own Miracles, and to take them but for sportings of
unhappy and wicked Spirits; and for this he quotes Biel in Canon. lect. 51.
Those ordinary shows of a young Child, or of a Man of complete stature, that
appear sometimes, as they say, among their holiest Mysteries, and upon the
Fists of their best Priests. They might as well, if their Interest would suffer
it, find the like flaws in all the rest, and you may easily do it, if you
compare their own Roman, with all averred Christian Miracles.



I fear there may be some will think I have been too long in this transcript;
but if they consider the consistence of the Argument, and upon what great
Authority it is deduced, will find no reason to complain: And I could heartily
wish that every English Papist had before him those Books to peruse of the
Roman Writers, out of which our Author makes his Citations; I should think it
impossible but the Opinion, and Authority of those of their own Religion, must
certainly prevail with some of them, that are Ingenuous, at least not to pin
their Faith upon the Traditions of some of their over-superstitious Fathers,
but I must again return, and go on with our Excellent Author, to observe how
the Roman Miracles distinguish themselves from those of our Blessed Savior and
his Apostles: And here he admirably distinguishes, 1. The Works in themselves.
2. The tendency and design of them. 3. The Time, or period of their Operation.
Whenas the so much-boasted Popish Miracles have in them, 1. An Intrinsical
Impertinence, and frivolousness. 2. A general Aptitude and Tendency to confirm
any trifling piece of Superstition; rather than any fundamental, solid point of
Religion. 3. An appearing, and exerting themselves in the latter times; and
even those marked out by our Savior for times of a general defection, and
delusion, and are branded for false Miracles, such as Antichrist at his coming
should enchant men with, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Rev. 13.13.



As to the first black Character ( he says) whereas the Ancient Miracles of God
are grave and serious Works, and do carry along with them both some Image of
Gods Wisdom, and some holy Impression of the Divine Hand that causes them: The
Modern and Roman Miracles are commonly such Sports and Pranks, as can become
but Fairies, and Hobgoblins. What is there in the whole World more Impertinent
then to make the most Blessed and Holy Virgin Mary come purposely out of
Heaven, whence it was not heard she came before, to drudge here and there about
Monks, about sick Wives, about Images and such like things? Who could take for
a holy Soul or a good Angel (much less for that ever blessed Saint) that which
appears under her name like a Woman showing her Breast, embracing men, giving
them Suck, enticing them with her Favors, Hoods, Vests, and sometimes fine
Rings which she makes for them of her own Hairs. To such purpose she is said to
have brought down her Heavenly train, and to have sat in S. Ildephons's own
Throne, whilst thousands of her Virgins stood singing about her, and about the
reading Pulpit; and all this great appearance to Compliment the Bishop, and
present him with a White Robe, which she said she had taken out of her Sons
Wardrobe; and it was to be worn only upon her days; and all this because the
Eye of his Faith was continually bent to her Service; (for this is the best Eye
of Roman Faith) he was to wear it in that Church, and after to have joy in her
Closet or Apartment, in Promptuariis meis. This Gown is shown at Toledo.

At another time (they say) she came to Church (having it seems often before
chid Vdo the then Bishop for lying with her Nuns, Thou have had, (says she)
sport enough, do so no more;) notwithstanding afterward she found him a Bed
with no meaner Miss than the Mother Abbess her self: At which she calls her Son
(it is not to be supposed to be the second Person in the Trinity) and caused
their Angels to pluck him off the Bed, where they beat him till at every blow
he vomited up one of those Hosts which he had Consecrated whilst in that sin:
And because of her Sons dirty lying (if there be such a thing as
Transubstantiation, it must be so) she held the Chalice to take both the Wafers
and her Son in it. Then the Queen of Heaven, says the Historian, takes up these
vomited Wafers, and washes them clean with great care, and lays them up
reverently on the Altar.

Abundance more of Feats he reckons up reported in the Roman Historians, and
Authors of the same Spirit, which they would persuade their blinded Bigots to
be the Virgin Mary; as her going to Orleance with a Box of Ointment, to dress
the back of a Dean; giving special Pills to a Monk to purge his Choler; feeding
S. Albert, with a sort of Bread, after which he resolved to feed on naught but
Herbs and Roots: Coming (they say) down from Heaven, but more likely from the
power of the Air, to uncover her breasts, and put her Paps into the Mouth of S.
Hubbert, and S. Bernard; then they make her to woo Sweet-hearts, and give them
Rings of her own Hair, as to S. Alan, and S. Harman, to both which they say she
was married, and that in the presence of all her Saints, (Spirits like her self
relating a thousand other ridiculous, if not blasphemous stories of her, too
tedious here to mention.

Then they bring down (whom they would impose upon us to be the Eternal Son of
the Father) lying as if dead under the hand of a Mass-priest, or showing tricks
of Activity, like a young Child among the Novices, in their Churches and
Covents:

One says, he has seen this little Child creeping out at the mouth of a
Crucifix ('it is all a Sparrow could do, but the Devil can do much more) and
thence jump into the Lap of an Image, thence flying up again the way that he
came. Another says S. Ida had him, and kissed, and embraced him, ut sponsa
sponsum; then he must hang about her Neck whilst she sings an Anthem; S. Agnes
had him too, whilst she stole a little Cross out of his bosom: They say he was
brought by his own Mother, to be kissed by S. Catharine, of the order of Clara
upon a Christmas Eve; and that the same Dame brought him to Bed to S. Boniface,
in swaddling Cloths. They will have it, that S. Lucia of the order of S.
Dominick had him three Days and three Nights, during which time the Image of
the Virgin had no Baby on its left Arm; after that, they marry him to her, when
he looked as if he had been but seven years old. S. Hostradus and others took
this illusion for a real appearance of the Holy Infant, and thereupon offered
him as we do Children, something to eat; some would dandle him on their Knees,
and others play with him, and S. John, who was his companion at it.

Thus, with grief, may pious Souls see according to the Prophesies, Jerusalem
trodden and danced upon by ugly Owls and wild Satyrs. Isa. 13.21. So the Roman
Church is become a Stage for vile Spirits to act upon; for where are the good
Saints or Angels that will represent, much less act Christ and the Blessed
Virgin, under such shameful personages?

Then as for S. Francis, you have Sheep and Asses running to hear his Sermons;
Swine falling dead under his curse, for having hurt a poor Lamb; all sorts of
Cattle recover with the Water he washed his Feet in; Women eased of their Travel
by applying to them some of the Hay his Mule used to eat of.

Again, you may find S. Dominick at Mass, hanging in the Air like a Bird; or at
the Bedside of a sick Woman Transubstantiating Worms into Pearls; or by the
Water side, raising the River into a Flood; or at his Devotions, forcing the
Devil to hold Candle to him, 'till the poor pugg burn his own Fingers in the
Service: Or, sometimes you may find him changing the sex of a young Girl unto a
Boy.

Nor did the Women come behind hand for extraordinary feasts; for if you read
but the Life of S. Christina, you will find that she rose from the dead twice,
before she died for good and all, and so died thrice. She had a mighty knack at
Miracles all her life long; for to save Souls from the pains of Purgatory, she
loved to throw her self into all the hottest Ovens, and burning Fires she could
find, that she might endure here what they suffered there; and to atone for
Gluttons, she resolved to starve her self, till finding the pains of a sharp
hunger, she had Milk came into her Paps, so allayed the cravings of her
Stomach, by sucking her self; she expiated for proud Souls, by applying her
self to the worst way of common begging; she could distinguish too between the
honesty and dishonesty of those which gave her alms, for the Bread that came
from good hands tasted like Bread, but that which came from wicked hands tasted
like Toads-flesh. To satisfy for all Sorts of sins contracted by those which
used much company keeping, she resolved to forsake mankind, and to come near
none but Beasts; at last that she might be safe from all contagion of Flesh and
Blood, she parched her self on the tops of Trees; there her thin body being
made thinner, both by continual fasting, and great fervency of Spirit, she did
at her prayer contract her self into a round form, much like that of a
Hedg-hog. She could climb up the highest Trees like a Squirrel, and swim in
Rivers like a Fish; till her Friends, barbarous, it seems, and not believing
all these Miracles, put her in Chains as a Mad Woman; and there she miserably
lacerated her poor body with struggling hard to free her self; and this
violence in Prison gave occasion to more Miracles, for the Milk in her Breasts
turned into Oil, wherewith she did anoint her sores, and sometimes too, she
used it as Butter to sweeten her Bread. Cardinals and whole Towns can aver
these extravagancies, and therewith we shall conclude the first kind of Roman
Miracles; omitting what might be said of S. Brigit, S. Julia, S. Clara, S.
Vrsula, with hundreds more known and famous in that Church, with whose stories
their Voluminous Legends do crawl all over. In the mean time it will not be
amiss for satisfaction of the curious, to insert the names of those Authors our
Reverend Doctor has made use of in this Section.

Alan. Rediv. part 2. c. 4. Jul. ^omer in vita Ildeph. ap Sur. 23. Jan.
Chronick Deipar. an. 985. Leander in vita Reginald. Robert. Archid. in vita S.
Albert. ap. Sur. 7. Apr. Chronic. Deip. an. 598. Histor. Eccl. Carnot. an.
1020. Chronic. Deip. an. 1152. Ibid. an. 1476. Ibid. an. 1235. Matthew. Paris in
vita S. Godric. Menol. Cisters. 29. October. Bov. 14. anal. an. 1317. n. 2.
Flamin. in vita S Catharin. Henriques Fascicul. S. S. Chronic. ord. praedict.
Henriques 3. Jam Chronic. Deip. an 1285. Ibid. an. 1235. S. Bonavent in vit. S.
Fran. Job. Garg. in vita S. Dominic. Tho. Cantapr. in vita S. Christinae ap.
Sur. Jun. an. 1160. Jacob de Vitriaco, in vita S. Mariae Ocigniar.
CHAP. VIII.
A further evidence of the Confederacy of Roman Priests with evil Spirits.
THE Argument that we are now upon, having already taken up too much Paper for
one Section, I have thought it proper to continue it in the following Chapter,
lest, those who are ignorant of Satan's devices, and of the Artifices of his
Priests, should want so convincing a Demonstration of the danger of Communion
with them, as is laid before them in the subsequent lines. I must therefore
resume the Discourse as it is continued in the forecited Book of the Reverend
Dr. Brevint; and having already transcribed the sum of what he speaks upon the
first Head, namely, That the Miracles of the Roman Church, are ordinary, such
trifling, and Ludicrous pranks, as cannot possibly seem to hold any proportion
with those solid and Divine Operations, which attested the Truth and Excellency
of the Doctrine of the Holy Gospel: The Second Evidence that he mentions is,
the Tendency and Design of the Popish Miracles; which look quite another way
from those wrought by our Blessed Savior, and his Apostles: For whereas those
last confirmed the Faith, and Doctrine of the first Preachers of the Doctrine
of Salvation; and those which anciently were wrought at the Sepulchers of the
Primitive Martyrs, cannot be thought to justify or assert any other Faith, or
Doctrine than what was Taught, Believed, and Practiced by those Holy Men; Aug.
de Civit. l. 22. c. 9. says, What is it that these Miracles will attest but the
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ? St. Paul tells us, that they taught
nothing, but what was concluded within the Law and the Prophets; and it cannot
be supposed that the extraordinary things done by them should confirm any other
Doctrine than what they Taught. So at this day, tho all sorts of Operations
were to be seen at the Sepulcher of St. Paul; they could not be presumed to
confirm the Popes Bulls, or the Innovations of the Roman Church, but those
truths which were contained in his Preachings, and his Epistles. But as for
Roman Miracles, they follow their Novel Doctrines, which sometimes are contrary
to, and always quite different from the true Christian Gospel. How many Volumes
would be required to contain all the revelations, and the strange wonders, that
encourage, and excite men in general to the Worship of the Virgin Mary. As many
more are bestowed upon the doing it by special ways, and at her particular
Feasts; for upon that score great Indulgences are promised to her Adorers; or
else what mean those swarms of Monks that lie hid under her Coats, or the
Ladders whited with her Milk, from which no body (that takes that way to
Heaven) can ever tumble down? Or those Quires of supposed Angels heard in the
bottom of a deep Well to sing her praises? What can be thought of those Images
that bleed, or speak, or fly as light as Feathers, unless it be to bring
mankind to the Worshipping of Wood, or Stone, or something more sordid and
abominable, which seems to give motion to those inanimate Stocks? What all
those thousands of sad Souls to ramble up and down the World, since the time of
Pope Gregory, but to reveal Purgatory, and recommend Masses for the dead? What
abundance of strange Feats have been done by St. Francis, and St. Dominic, on
purpose to confirm their new orders, and ways? What can signify those heaps of
excommunicated Flies; and a poor Raven pining to death under the same Curse,
for having fled away with a Bishops Ring, but to show the Terror of the Roman
Keys? And those multitude of small and great Toads crawling in and out of men's
mouths, when they do observe well or ill the rules of Auricular Confession, but
to justify that juggling piece of Priestcraft? Or the many little Children
standing upon consecrated Wafers, but to maintain the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation? What can the many pretended Miracles wrought by the five
wounds in the body of St. Francis, or the Rope about his Loins signify, but to
keep up an Opinion of the Sanctity of that Order? Then the Doctor asks your
Opinion of the following Miracle, which he thus relates.

A Bishop moved with passion against a Covent of Franciscans, was resolved to
turn them out of his City, and to do it the next day: The night before, behold
their Sacrist sees in a vision the Image of St. Paul, and the Image of St.
Francis, both painted in the Church window, talking earnestly one with the
other. He hears St. Paul extremely blaming St. Francis for no better defending
his own Order; and St. Francis answering to him, What shall I do? says he, I
have but a Cross, and that is no defensive Weapon; but had I a sword, as you
have (for commonly they represent them so) perhaps I might do somewhat more.
The man being awaked, starts out of his bed, and his imagination being full of
this, runs to the Church, finds the two Pictures had exchanged their Arms: Paul
in the window had the Cross, and St. Francis had the Sword.

This amazed the whole Covent; but that which is more then all the rest, St.
Francis had not St. Paul's Sword in vain, for that same night the Bishop had his
throat cut. What Evangelical Doctrine can be confirmed by these three Wonders?
Pictures that can speak and move; St. Paul, that exhorts to revenge; and a
Saint, who during his life, made Conscience, as they say, to kill a Louse, now
can cut his Bishops throat: What can be infer^d from this, unless it be this
wholesome Doctrine, that Bishops are not Jure Divino, but Friars are? All these,
and whole Millions of other such Roman Miracles, are not fit for Christ's
Calendar, because they never were accommodated for persuading men of the truth
of Christ's Gospel, and upon that account must needs proceed from any other than
his Spirit. Authors quoted for proof of this second mark are.

S. Anth. 3. part Hist. l. 23. c. 3. Ser. 1. Chron. Diep. an. 1231. Hist.
Carnat. an. 1116. Archiev. Buburg. in fraud. an. 1383. Menol. Cistere. 28.
April. Leand. in vita Hyacinthi ap. Sur. 16. August. Gregor. in Dialog. passim.
Specul. Exemp. Tit. Excommunicatio Exemp. 5. Ibid. Exemp. 4. Ibid. Tit.
Confessio Exemp. 22. Ibid. Tit. Eucharistia. S. Bonav. in vita Franc. Hieron.
Platus de bono statu Relig. l. 5. c. 33.
The third foul mark he mentions of Roman Miracles, and which will put it
beyond all doubt, that they are the effect of Diabolical Confederacies, and
Impostures, is, that besides the evil tendency of them, they appear, and show
themselves unto the world in such suspicious times, as may justly discredit,
and call in question even true, and real Miracles. The gift of Miracles being
unto Teachers, what credential Letters, and Royal Colors are unto public
Officers, which signify much unto good Subjects, whilst they know them granted
to none but such as the King does really send; but very little, after they see
those in the hands, these on the backs of every dirty Carrier, who has a mind
for his own ends to Counterfeit them, and rant with them. No man takes for good
payment whatsoever has Caesar's Image, after he hears of false Coiners, who
have dispersed vast sums abroad, and marked them with the same stamp We are not
now in the privileged days either of Moses, or Elias, or of Jesus Christ, or
his Apostles; when neither all the Magicians could make one Louse; nor all the
Baalims light fire on one Altar; nor all the workers of false wonders open
their mouth against the Son of God. We live in such times, when the Devils in
all men's account, are let loose from such a restraint, and the Church left
unguarded of such a protection: When false Prophets may arise with such
Prophesies, and false Christ's with such Miracles, as, if it were possible,
might deceive the very Elect.

Now the Mirabilarians, as St. Augustine calls them, are abroad, against whom,
says he, Cautum me fecit Dominus. The Lord himself, and his Apostles after
him, have given us all sufficient warning; so that it would be a great folly in
us to take notice, or run after such, as have a permitted power of
Counterfeiting true Miracles, therewith to amuse the simple. The glorious work
of our Blessed Savior, his Disciples, and other Apostolical Fathers, were done
in such clear days, as dissipated, and scattered all suspicions, and imaginable
Clouds of Imposture; the Devils had not so much as the liberty to preach the
Truth, Mark 1.25. If either Simon Magus, or Elimas, tho Sorcerers of the
highest rank, did but offer to play their old Game, and show their devilish
Feats, you read in the Acts, how they were kept in. Thus this mighty
restraining hand, rather than the intrinsecal greatness of the work, was an
infallible Evidence, which in those days shined about all true Miracles;
whereas the Revelations, and Feats of the Romanists must needs be full of
suspicion, and noted for such by all good Christians, since they came forth,
when all false Christ's, and false Prophets have the liberty to work them. Then
come up the Apparitions of sad Souls, by thousands, to acquaint their Friends
with their condition underneath: and what neither Moses, nor the Prophets, nor
Jesus Christ himself, nor his Apostles ever thought to mind us of; distressed
groaning Spirits make it their principal business to throng about, craving for
help, for Pilgrimages, and Masses. Then come Images to bleed, or sing or mourn,
as occasion requires: and the Consecrated Elements, the better to justify what
they are not, appear with blood, with flesh, and even sometimes with whole
Children. It passes all understanding, how the Virgin Mary, who kept her self
so long above, would not come down among us Mortals, either sooner, or in less
suspected times, or on more serious Errands. Five hundred years may be
accounted, when all good Authors will justify that she continued as quiet
above; and that she, after so long rest and abode in the blessed Mansions,
should take such an unlucky, and obnoxious time to come down, and show her self
to men, when the Devil, and his foul Spirits are permitted to play their
pranks; this indeed is very admirable! It can hardly be imagined, that she who
never did appear to any of the Primitive Holy Fathers, in a less suspected
juncture, should in these last and Branded times, show her self to a dirty
Monk. Did not St. Austin, before he died, being besieged by Barbarians, deserve
as well her protection, and a guard of her armed Angels, as St. Dominick did,
whilst he held a poor pitiful Heretic about the neck with his Rosary?
wherefore had none of these holy men, St. Athanasius, St. Hillary, St. Cyprian
as well the comfort of a kiss, or an embrace, as Loyola, Stephen the Minime,
and a thousand more less deserving it? Or how comes she, who never was known to
take notice of any trouble, disease, or imprisonment of true Saints, as the
Headache of St. Chrysostom, the sickliness of St. Basil, the infirm body of St.
Gregory Nazianzen, the Prisons, and Tortures of all the Martyrs; now to be
running up and down to relieve all sorts of persons: to cure a Jesuit with her
Child, whom she laid by him in his bed: to cure whole Countries of purple
Fevers; and to free several Rogues, that had well deserved hanging, from the
Gallows, from Dungeons, and from all imaginable sorts of dangers? How comes
this fancy to take her so late of bringing down out of Heaven, Crosses, Hoods,
Books, Robes, Holy Water, and such other Utensils, which the Fathers in former
times never had, nor expected from her? The truth is, these kind of Apparitions
and Miracles were most advisedly reserved until such times, as these latter
are, dark, and confused, and more propitious to Imposture; and these strange
new transactions have another reason besides, which I wish Roman Catholics
would seriously consider, and it is this.

As long as the Blessed Virgin had no more honor in the Church, then what
became a Creature, and was allowed to her by the Fathers, to be Honored, not
Adored; no Ancient Author will tell you that she ever appeared among men. But
as soon as the latter times brought in public Services to pray with unto her,
and Images to pray to her by; then she (or rather some other Spirit under her
name) began first to bestir her self: then she, and a multitude of other Saints
with her, seem to come down, and appear at the voice of these new Prayers, just
as the Soul of Samuel did, (or rather seemed to) come up at the Mysteries of
Endor. Ever after the pretended Queen was seen in the Roman Church, as in her
Heavenly Palace: and she had more Angels to wait on her in the least of her
ordinary Progresses, then our Blessed Savior himself had in any of his most
solemn appearings: But as when the Devils will look like Angels, you may still,
they say, either perceive a Cloven Foot, or smell a stinking vapor, that
betrays the pretended glorious appearance, so Roman Miracles, and Visions, have
commonly some black mark, which may convince any sober man, that they are not
really what they seem to be. Consider in the Holy Scriptures what the true
Saints and Angels of God have done, whenever they met with more Honor then was
their due: or ask St. Austin what those Spirits are, who take it when it is
given, or call for it when it is not: No Saint, nor Angel, says the good
Father, will take of others what they know to be due only to God: as it
appeared by Paul and Barnabas, who tore their clothes, when the people offered
to worship them, to show they were mere men: And by that Angel who rejected
Adoration. They are unclean Spirits that are for Worship, and tho they care
little for flesh; yet they pride themselves in Sacrifices, because God, under
the Law, appointed them for his own service* And in another place he says, Good
Angels are for this one thing, that with them we may serve God, in whose
contemplation they are happy: but they who invite us to serve themselves, are
like proud men, etc. only the serving of proud Devils is more hurtful. And in
another place he says, Celestial, and happy Spirits will have us Sacrifice
(not unto themselves, but) unto God, whose Oblation they are, as well as we;
and therefore, all Revelations, and Miracles that invite us to serve more than
one God, are such seductions of Devils, as any pious, and prudent men must
needs throw off; for this is their proud Malice, who by that Token are noted,
neither to be good Angels themselves, nor the Angels of a good God. For the
good Angels love us so well, that they will not have us to serve them, but the
true God only.

This was the Opinion of St. Austin in his time, by which it appears what his
thoughts were of Saint, and Idol-Adoration. Let us now bring to these Christian
Rules, most of the Roman Miracles, and Apparitions. Let us see when ever this
humble Spirit did (with the good Angel) reject one Worshipping, or devout
Adoration; show, wherever she once tore her clothes at the hearing of Te Deum,
and the whole Psalter of David sung, and applied most Blasphemously from God to
her. Certain it is, that for several Centuries of years, the steps of another
Spirit are to be found in her ways, seeking continually for more honor. We may
behold one who strokes, and kisses pious men, because they both begin and end
their best devotions with her praises: who teaches in what godly form they must
pray to her for all Blessings: who calls them into brakes of Thorns, and
Nettles, and sometimes into holes under ground, to find, and Adore her Images:
one who can put on the shape of a Stag, or a Pigeon, or a great Queen,
purposely to show the place, and stone where she must needs have an Altar, or a
Chapel, or a great Church that there she may be served and Worshipped to the
worlds end; and there walk, and delight her self; one who in all these
Churches, brags among Men, as if she were the Mother of Compassions, the Lady
of the House of Prayer, and the Fountain of all Blessings: Lastly, one who
spreads forth about her a great Mantle, therewith to betoken the largeness of
her Mercies and Favors; which she says, she denies to none that will come to
her with faith. And now let St* Austin, or any good Christian judge what kind
of Creatures these Spirits are; and what great difference there is between
those which among the Pagans did perpetually labor for Sacrifices, and these,
which now among the Papists, are all for Masses, and the greatest oblations
that can be set on Romes Altars. Mean while we may be confident, that none but
God alone can own Sacrifices, Altars, and Churches to be served with; none but
Devils ever owned Images to speak, move, or any wise to work in; such Spirits
as these may be the Authors of all the boasted Miracles, Apparitions, and
Revelations among the Romanists; and such appearances, and delusive Operations
are very fit for such Spirits: and both foretold, and reserved for the last
times? And so it may be guessed what that Church is that has her proper
establishment both from such Wonders, and such Saints.

For proof of what is spoken upon this third head, relating to the timing of
Popish Miracles, see the following Authors.

Aug. in Joh. Trac. 13. sub fin. ibid. Specul. Exemp. Tit. Ros. Exemp. 1.
Attich. Cron. Ord. Minim. an 1612. Chron. Diep. an. 1561. Oliver L. Mirac. Mar.
Montis. Albert. de viris Illust. Ord. Praedic. Epiphan. Contr. Haeres. l. 3.
adv. Collyrid. August. contr. Faust. l. 20. c. 21, 22. Idem de vera Relig. c.
25. Idem de Civit. l. 10. c. 7. Ibid. c. 16. Ibid. c. 7. item l. 9. c. 23.
Caesarius l. 7. Hist. c. 25. Leander. de viris Illust. Chron. Diep. an. 1372.
Chron. Diep. an. 1178. Franc. Hierasc. in vita Henr. Silice. Odo Gisseus Hist.
virg. Aniciensis. In vita Manaveriap. sur. 5. Jun. Arch. Gian. cent. 3. Annal.
l. 4. c. 9. Od. Gissaeus supra. Niceph. Eccl. Hist. l. 15. c. 25. Blosius in
Monili. Menol. Cisterc. 22. Dec. Chron. Diep. an. 1467. Tho. Malvenda Tom. 1.
Annal. Ord. Praed. an. 1221.
Much more does the learned Doctor urge, to prove that what the Papists offer
to the Shrine of that which they call the Blessed Virgin, can be nothing less
than giving Divine Honor and Adoration to an unclean Spirit; but I fear I have
been tedious in transcribing this; tho it were to be wished that all professed
Christians were truly convinced of the danger, and damnableness of this Roman
Doctrine. For, if

That which was never commanded by God in his Word, ought not to be introduced
into his Worship: If,

Whatsoever pretended Saint or Angel claims a Religious Adoration, be to be
reputed Diabolical, and unclean; Then what can be concluded of those
Worshippers, and these Saints in the Roman Church, unless it be this, that they
have not introduced only the Doctrine, but the downright Worshipping of Devils.

It is not for nothing that the Holy Spirit of God does in the Sacred Writings,
by his inspired Penmen so often warn, and call off his People from Idolatry;
it is not for nothing that the Eternal Fountain of Blessedness expresses such
an inflamed Jealousy against the Israelites for departing after strange Gods;
and that the Divine Vengeance always followed that Impious Abomination with
such tremendous, and smoking Judgments: For when once the profligated Spirits
can obtain for Deities in their Temples and Altars; it is not to be expected
that the true, and Eternal God should have any place in the heart of such a
People. Therefore the Scripture calls Idolatry a departing from the Holy One, a
going a Whoring from him. The Samaritans had that Opinion of the works which
Simon the Sorcerer performed by Witchcraft, and a Diabolical Confederacy, that
they called him the mighty power of God, in the 8 th Chap. of the Acts. But by
the verse preceding, it appears that he had fascinated their minds, and laid
his Charms on their understandings, that they were in such a condition as Paul
terms the Galatians, they were bewitched, that they should not Obey the Truth.
And it cannot be supposed that any thing short of some forcible Enchantment
could prevail with those of the Roman Communion, to give faith to those lying
Wonders, and Divine Worship to those eluding Spirits, which upon that account,
have the Shrines erected amongst them.

By what has been said, it is evident, that those Ghosts, or Spirits which
require Temples, and Worship, are no other then some of the Tainted, Expulsed
Legions; and that the strange Miracles performed by the Images, or at the
Shrines of these Deities, are the old delusions continued; whereby they drew
the Ancient Pagans after their Oracles, Groves, and Pythons, etc. and the
Papists now a days into an Adoration of Images, Altars, and Relics. Still the
old Confederacy is kept up, tho under new Forms, and Notions. And perhaps it is
none of the smallest Policies of the Agents of that Communion, to impose upon
their Credulous Ones the belief that there is no such thing as a Witch; that so
their performances of that kind may the better pass under the notion of a
Miracle. But by the following discourse, any one that will not wilfully blind
himself, may discern the strange, and vast power that the Deceiver of the
Nations still maintains amongst the degenerate race of men. And so I have put
an end to the first Part.

THE SECOND PART OF Pandaemonium,
Giving an Account of diverse most Remarkable Witchcrafts. Also a further
Account of Demons, and Specter, never before Published.
BY what has been said in the foregoing pages, it is evident, that the Prince
of Darkness has a very large Dominion among the Sons of Men; That he has his
Temples, Altars, and Sacrifices: and though under new and different names,
still draws off poor biggotted wretches to pay unto his Implous Shrines that
Honor, Homage, and Adoration, which is only due to the most High. There are
besides these, another sort of the Infernal Disciples, who give themselves up
immediately to the Conduct, and disposal of the Apostate Angel, by entering into
League, and Covenant with him, and giving themselves up to those Black, and
Interdicted Mysteries, which justly are punished with death, both by the
Divine, and Human Law. These have their Familiars of the dark Region, that
assist them in the Execution of their Hellish purposes; by this means they
attain to performances vastly transcending the capacity of Human Agents, as
much as can be supposed that Spiritual, and Angelical Beings exceed in
Subtilty, Agility, and Power, whatsoever can be pretended to by mere Mortals.
It would swell this Volume to too large a bulk, should I speak of the diverse
ways and manners, by which they enter themselves Scholars to the School of
Darkness; besides, diverse learned and famous Authors have taken great pains
herein. I shall therefore no longer detain the Reader from an account of diverse
very Remarkable Relations, never yet Printed; the Truth of which will be
averred from Persons of unquestionable Reputation now alive; the things
themselves having been done within the compass of these very few years: And if
some sober, and ingenious Persons would undertake but to commend to the public
the Occurrences of this nature in every County; It would doubtless be a work
very acceptable to all good men; and of great use for the conviction of others.

The first Relation.
An Account of the Troubles that happened in the house of Peter Pain, a
Shoemaker, living in Mary Poel Street, in the City of Bristol, extracted out
of a Letter sent me from Mr. J. R. a Gentleman of good Ingenuity, and
Reputation, an Inhabitant of the City aforesaid. Dated, June 25. 1683.
Sir,
ACcording to your desire in a Letter I received from you on Saturday last, I
have here sent you the true, and real Account of the passages you desired. That
which was related by our late Dean, was thus; That about 45 years since, the
house of Peter Pain, then a Shoemaker in St. Mary Poel Street in this City,
was extremely disturbed with most surprising, and unaccountable noises for some
time; and one night above the rest, about 12 of the Clock, the usual noise was
accompanied with so great a light through the whole House, as if every Room had
been full of burning Tapers, or Torches; These repeated scenes of Horror so
amused the whole Family, that they applied themselves to Mr. Toogood, the then
Minister of St. Nicholas, who was easily prevailed withal to visit the House;
which he had no sooner entered, but he became an Ear-witness of the most
dreadful, and accustomed noises; so, together with the whole Family, he
repaired into a Chamber at one end of a Gallery, at the other end of which, was
a large bulky Trunk, full of old lumber, and so heavy, that four or five men
were not able to lift it: Having shut the door to them, the Minister went to
Prayers, during part of which time, the noise continued, and on a sudden
something was flung against the Chamber door, with extraordinary violence, upon
which the noise immediately ceased. When Prayer was ended, they went to go
forth of the Chamber door, but could by no means force it open, until they had
called for the assistance of some of the Neighbors, who running in to their
relief, found the door barred close with the great Trunk aforesaid; upon which
they all concluded that it was cast there in that violent manner, when they
heard that mighty shock against the door, just before the ceasing of the noise.
This is a true account of that passage, which the Gentleman aforesaid had from
the Son of the late Dean above mentioned, who was then an Apprentice in the
house; and the whole Transaction is still recent in the memories of the
Neighbors, who were Witnesses of the amazing Troubles, which at that time
disturbed that house. Diverse other stupendous circumstances accompanied these
noises, which by reason of the great distance of time, and place, we can have
no particular account of.

The second Relation.
Is an Account of another passage in the same Letter, from the party aforesaid,
relating the strange manner of Fits which seized the Children of Mr. Merideth
of Bristol.
FRom Mr. Merideth I was informed that January last was eight years, he had a
Son, and three Daughters, (all between the age of fourteen, and eight years)
taken with violent Convulsive Fits, within a weeks time of each other, to the
great amazement of many Physicians, and Divines, and multitudes of others that
beheld them. The first symptoms they observed of their coming, was the
Childrens complaining of intolerable pains in their heads, and sides, suddenly
upon which their Limbs, Mouth, and Eyes would be distorted into unimaginable
alterations, and their Arms and Legs, though of those tender years, extended
for some time beyond the strength of the stoutest man to reduce them; during
these Fits, they would sometimes laugh, at other times cry for an hour
together, then on a sudden creep about the floor, up against the Bed-posts and
the Tester of the Beds, like so many Cats, as the Gentleman phrases it. ( A
Lady of the Neighborhood told me they would hang about the walls, and Cieling
of the Room, like Flies, or Spiders.) Sometimes they would foam at the mouth,
then fall down as dead, and in a short time repeat their Actions, appearing in
the room in the same strange, and stupendous postures; Toward night their
fits always left them, and they slept undisturbed most part of the night, but
instantly upon their awaking, their Fits returned, and tormented them more or
less, with very little Intervals all the day. One of the Daughters three days
following, in the height of her Fit repeated in a solemn majestic sort of
manner the same form of speech; which was a praedicting her own death to be in
some few days, and the happy state she was entering into, as also several things
which should speedily befall her Father, and Family; but nothing of it ever came
to pass. Another of them vomited pins; during their whole indisposition, they
were daily attended by Ministers praying with them, and continued in a course
of Physic prepared by the advice of the Ablest Doctors in the City. In the May
following they recovered, and are well ever since to this day; and (which is
very admirable) when their Fits had wholly left them, they did not appear the
least weakened by them.

Advertisement.
THo in the Relation now recited, there be no mention made of any suspected
Witch, by whose power the aforesaid Children were reduced to that deplorable
state, and some of the Physicians that administered to them, are of opinion that
there was nothing of fascination in the case, but what was purely the effect of
a natural distemper. I must crave their pardon if I dissent from them, for
these following Reasons.

1. Though the account Mr. R. gives of it do not make mention of any Witch, or
resemblance of such a one that appeared to the Children, during the time of
their Fits: It is very probable he might have no account of that particular,
and as likely that the Confederate Agent might purposely avoid showing any
personal figure to them, lest the Relations, upon such notice, should detect
and prosecute the peccant party.

2. Here are Symptoms vastly transcending the effects of any natural distemper;
not to insist on the distorting of the Limbs and parts of their Bodies, which
are frequently the Concomitants of Convulsions; but that the Extension of their
Legs and Arms should so vastly transcend the power of a strong man to reduce
them; looks somewhat above what nature alone could pretend to, especially in
Children of their Age.

3. Who can look upon their crawling and hanging about upon the Bed-post and
the Walls, without plainly discerning the Cloven-foot of fascination? Could a
natural Indisposition furnish them with Tallons, or Claws to fasten themselves
to those places after such a manner? This has been observed by others that
have been under the power of With-craft, that the Witch, or her familiar have
lifted the patient by all four against the ceiling, or held them so against the
side of a Wall, where they have seemed to hang in the air; (an example of which
Mr. Glanvil mentions in his third Relation, containing the Witchcraft of
Elizabeth Style) that I think it needless to urge this point any further.

4. But what can possibly be thought of the vomiting of pins? If there could be
imagined any natural distemper that could breed brass wyre in the body, it
would be hard to Imagine how they should come to be pointed, and headed, without
an Artificer; This sort of torture is so familiarly practiced upon the bodies
of persons, under those sad Circumstances, that if there were no other mark of
the black Art; this it self were enough to remove all scruple.

5. Whatever others may think of their being so soon restored to a state of
Convalessence, upon the removing of their fits; by all the violences they
underwent: This alone were enough to evince the distemper to be preternatural:
For if those Torturing pains and Convulsions had been the effect of any natural
Infirmity; it could not be supposed but that bodies so battered would have
required some proportionable time, gradually to arriveo a state of Health.

The third Relation.
A Remarkable passage of one named the Fairy-Boy of Leith in Scotland, given me
by my worthy friend Captain George Burton, and attested under his own hand.
ABout Fifteen years since having business that detained me for some time at
Leith, which is near Edenborough in the Kingdom of Scotland, I often met some
of my acquaintance at a certain house there, where we used to drink a glass of
Wine for our refection; the woman which kept the house, was of honest
Reputation among the neighbors, which made me give the more attention to what
she told me one day about a Fairy-Boy (as they called him) who lived about that
Town; she had given me so strange an account of him, that I desired her I might
see him the first opportunity, which she promised; and not long after passing
that way she told me, there was the Fairy-Boy; but a little before I came by,
and casting her eye into the street, said, look you Sir, yonder he is at play
with those other Boys; and designing him to me, I went, and by smooth words and
a piece of money got him to come into the house with me; where in the presence
of diverse people, I demanded of him several Astrological Questions, which he
answered with great Subtility; and through all his discourse carried it with a
cunning much above his years, which seemed not to exceed ten, or eleven.

He seemed to make a motion like drumming upon the Table with his Fingers, upon
which I asked him, whether he could beat a drum? To which he replied, yes Sir,
as well as any man in Scotland; for every Thursday Night, I beat all points to
a sort of people that use to meet under yonder Hill (pointing to the great Hill
between Edenborough and Leith) how Boy quoth I? What company have you there?
There are Sir, (said he) a great company both of men and women, and they are
entertained with many sorts of Music besides my drum; they have besides plenty
of variety of Meats and Wine, and many times we are carried into France, or
Holland in a night, and return again; and whilst we are there we enjoy all the
pleasures the Country does afford: I demanded of him, how they got under that
Hill? To which he replied, that there were a great pair of gates that opened to
them, though they were invisible to others, and that within there were brave
large rooms as well accommodated as most in Scotland. I then asked him, how I
should know what he said to be true? Upon which he told me he would read my
fortune, saying, I should have two wives, and that he saw the forms of them
sitting on my Shoulders, that both would be very handsome women; as he was thus
speaking, a woman of the neighborhood coming into the room demanded of him
what her fortune should be? He told her that she had had two Bastards before
she was married; which put her in such a rage that she desired not to hear the
rest.

The woman of the House told me that all the People in Scotland could not keep
him from the Rendesvous on Thursday night; upon which by promising him some
more money, I got a promise of him to meet me at the same place, in the
afternoon the Thursday following, and so dismissed him, at that time. The Boy
came again at the place and time appointed, and I had prevailed with some
friends to continue with me (if possible) to prevent his moving that night; he
was placed between us, and answered many questions, without offering to go from
us, until about eleven of the clock he was got away, unperceived of the
company, but I suddenly missing him, hasted to the door, and took hold of him,
and so returned him into the same room; we all watched him, and on a sudden he
was again got out of the doors, I followed him close, and he made a noise in
the street as if he had been set upon; but from that time I could never see him.

George Burton.

Advertisment.
THis Gentleman is so well known to many worthy Persons, Merchants and others
upon the exchange in London, that there can be no need of my justifying for the
Integrity of the relation; I will only say thus much, that I have heard him
very solemnly affirm the truth of what is here related: Neither do I find any
thing in it, more then has been reported (by very unquestionable Pens) to the
same purpose. What this manner of Transvection was, which the boy spoke of,
whether it were corporeal, or in a dream only, I shall not dispute, but I think
there be some relations of this kind that prove it may be either way, and
therefore that I leave to the reader to determine. But the Captain has told me
that at that time he had a virtuous and a handsome wife, who being dead, he
thinks himself in election of another such. That too of the Woman's having had
two Children, happened to be very true, though hardly any of the neighbors
knew it in that place. His getting away in that manner was somewhat strange,
considering how they had planted him, and that besides he had the Temptation of
wine and money, to have detained him; Arguments very powerful with lads of his
Age, and fortune.

The Fourth Relation.
Giving an account of the Demon of Spraiton in the County of Devon, Anno. 1682.
THat which was published in May 1683. concerning the Demon, or Demons of
Spraiton, was the extract of a letter from T. C. Esquire, a near neighbor to
the place; and though it needed little confirmation further then the credit,
that the Learning and Quality of that Gentleman had stamped upon it, yet was
much of it likewise known to and related by the Reverend Minister of
Barnstable, of the vicinity to Spraiton. Having likewise since had fresh
Testimonials of the veracity of that Relation; and it being at first designed
to fill this place; I have thought it not amiss (for the strangeness of it) to
print it here a Second time, exactly as I had transcribed it then.

About the month of November in the year 1682. In the Parish of Spraiton, in
the County of Devon, one Francis Fey (Servant to Mr. Philip Furze) being in a
Field near the dwelling house of his said Master, there appeared unto him, the
resemblance of an Aged Gentleman, like his masters Father, with a Pole or Staff
in his hand, resembling that he was wont to carry when living, to kill the
moles withal: The spectrum approached near the young man, whom you may Imagine
not a little surprised at the appearance of one that he knew to be dead; but
the spectrum bid him not be afraid of him, but tell his Master (who was his
Son) that several Legacies which by his Testament he had bequeathed were
unpaid, naming Ten Shillings to one and Ten Shillings to another, both which
persons he named to the young man, who replied, that the party he last named
was dead, and so it could not be paid to him; The Ghost answered, He knew that,
but it must be paid to the next Relation, whom he also named: The spectrum
likewise ordered him to carry Twenty Shillings to a Gentlewoman, Sister to the
deceased, living near Totness in the said County, and promised if these things
were performed to trouble him no further; but at the same time the spectrum,
speaking of his second wife, (who was also dead, called her wicked woman;
though the Gentleman who writ the letter knew her, and esteemed her a very good
woman: And (having thus related him his mind) the spectrum left the young man;
who according to the direction of the Spirit took care to see the small
Legacies satisfied, and carried the Twenty Shillings, that was appointed to be
paid the Gentlewoman near Totness, but she utterly refused to receive it; being
sent her (as she said) from the Devil: The same night the young man Lodging at
her house, the aforesaid spectrum appeared to him again; whereupon the young
man challenged his promise, not to trouble him any more, saying, he had
performed all according to his appointment, but that the Gentlewoman, his
Sister, would not receive the Money: To which the spectrum replied, that was
true indeed; but withal directed the young man to ride to Totness, and buy for
her a Ring of that value, which the Spirit said she would accept of; which
being provided accordingly, she received: Since the performance of which the
Ghost, or Apparition of the old Gentleman, has seemed to be at rest, having
never given the young man any further trouble.

But the next day after having delivered the ring, the young man was riding
home to his Masters house, accompanied by a Servant of the Gentle woman's near
Totness, and near about the time of their entrance (or a little before they
came) into the Parish of Spraiton aforesaid, there appeared to be upon the
horse behind the young man, the resemblance of the second wife of the old
Gentleman, spoken of before. This Demon often threw the young man off his
horse, and cast him with such violence to the ground, as was great
astonishment, not only to the Gentlewomans Servant (with him) but to diverse
others, who were spectators of the frightful action, the ground resounding with
great noise, by reason of the incredible force, with which he was cast upon it.
At his coming into his Masters yard, the horse which he rid, though very poor,
and out of case, leaped at one spring 25 foot, to the amazement of all that saw
it. Soon after the She-spectre showed her self to diverse in the house ( viz.)
The aforesaid young man, mistress Thomasin Gidly, Ann Langdon born in that
Parish, and a little Child, which by reason of the troublesomenes^ of the
Spirit, they were fain to remove from that house. She appeared sometimes in her
own shape, sometimes in forms very horrid, now and then like a monstrous Dog
belching out fire, at another time it flew out at the window, in the shape of a
Horse, carrying with it only one pane of glass, and a small piece of Iron.

One time the young man's head was thrust into a very strait place, betwixt a
Beds head, and a Wall, and forced by the strength of diverse men to be removed
thence, and that not without being much hurt, and bruised, so that much blood
appeared about it: upon this, it was advised he should be bleeded, to prevent
any ill accident that might come of the bruise; after bleeding, the ligature,
or binder of his Arm was removed from thence, and conveyed about his middle,
where it was strained with such violence, that the girding had almost stopped
his breath, and killed him, and being cut asunder, it made a strange and dismal
noise, so that the standers by were affrighted at it. At diverse other times he
has been in danger to be strangled with Cravats, and Handkerchiefs, that he
has worn about his Neck, which have been drawn so close, that with the sudden
violence he has near been choked, and hardly escaped death.

The Spectre has showed great offense at the Perriwigs which the young man
used to wear, for they are often torn from his head after a very strange
manner, one, that he esteemed above the rest, he put in a small box, and that
box he placed in another, which he set against the wall of his Chamber, placing
a Joint-stool, with other weight, a top of it; but in short time the boxes were
broken in sunder, and the Perriwig rended into many small parts and tatters:
Another time, lying in his Masters Chamber, with his Perriwig on his Head, to
secure it from danger, within a little time it was torn from him, and reduced
into very small fragments. At another time one of his Shoe-strings was observed
(without the assistance of any hand) to come of its own accord out of his Shoe,
and fling itself to the other side of the Room; the other was crawling after
it, but a Maid espying that, with her hand drew it out, and it strangely
clasped, and curled about her hand like a living Eel, or Serpent; this is
testified by a Lady of considerable Quality, too great for exception, who was
an Eyewitness. The same Lady showed Mr. C. one of the young man's Gloves, which
was torn in his pocket, whilst she was by; which is so dexterously tattered,
and so artificially torn, that it is conceived a Cutler could not have
contrived an Instrument, to have laid it abroad so accurately, and all this
done in the pocket, in the compass of one minute.

It is farther observable, that if the aforesaid young man, or another person,
who is a Servant Maid in the house, do wear their own Clothes; they are
certainly torn in pieces on their backs, but if the Clothes belong to any
other, they are not injured after that manner. Many other strange and
fantastical freaks have been done by the said Demon or Spirit, in the view of
diverse persons: a Barrel of Salt of considerable quantity, has been observed
to march from room to room without any human assistance.

An hand-iron has seemed to lay it self cross overthwart a pan of Milk that
has been scalding over the fire; and two flitches of Bacon have of their own
accord descended from the Chimney, where they were hung, and placed themselves
upon the hand-iron.

When the Spectre appears in resemblance of her own person, she seems to be
habited in the same clothes, and dress, which the Gentlewoman of the house (her
Daughter-in-Law) has on at the same time. Diverse times the feet and legs of
the young man aforesaid have been so entangled about his Neck, that he has
been loosed with great difficulty: sometimes they have been so twisted about
the frames of Chairs, and Stools, that they have hardly been set at liberty.
But one of the most considerable instances of the malice of the Spirit against
the young man, happened on Easter Eve, when Mr. C. the Relator, was passing by
the door of the house, and it was thus.

When the young man was returning from his Labor, he was taken up by the skirt
of his doublet, by this Female Demon, and carried a height into the Air: He
was soon missed by his Master, and some other Servants that had been at labor
with him; and after diligent enquiry, no news could be heard of him, until at
length (near half an hour after) he was heard singing, and whistling in a bog,
or quagmire, where they found him in a kind of Trance, or extatick fit, to
which he has sometimes been accustomed, (but whether before the Affliction he
met with from this Spirit, I am not certain) he was affected much after such
sort, as at the time of those Fits; so that the people did not give that
attention, and regard to what he said, as at other times; but when he returned
again to himself (which was about an hour after) he solemnly protested to them,
that the Demon had carried him so high, that his Masters house seemed to him
to be but as a Hay-cock; and that that during all that time, he was in perfect
sense, and prayed to Almighty God not to suffer the Devil to destroy him: and
that he was suddenly set down in that Quagmire.

The Workmen found one Shoe on one side of his Masters house, and the other on
the other side, and in the morning espied his Perriwig hanging on the top of a
Tree: by which it appears he had been carried a considerable height, and that
what he told them was not a Fiction.

After this, it was observed, that that part of the young man's Body, which had
been on the mud in the Quagmire, was somewhat benumbed, and seemingly deader
than the other; whereupon the following Saturday, which was the day before
Low-sunday, he was carried to Crediton, alias Kirton, to be bleeded, which
being done accordingly, and the Company having left him for some little space;
at their return they found him in one of his Fits, with his forehead much
bruised, and swollen to a great bigness, none being able to guess how it
happened, until his recovery from that Fit: When, upon enquiry, he gave them
this account of it; That a Bird had with great swiftness, and force flown in at
the Window, with a stone in its beak, which it had dashed against his forehead,
which had occasioned the swelling which they saw. The people much wondering at
the strangeness of the Accident, diligently sought the stone, and under the
place where he sat, they found not such a stone as they expected, but a weight
of Brass or Copper, which it seems the Demon had made use of on that occasion,
to give the poor young man that hurt in his forehead. The persons present were
at the trouble to break it in pieces, every one taking a part, and preserving
it in memory of so strange an Accident. After this, the Spirit continued to
molest the young man in a very severe and rugged manner, often handling him
with great extremity; and whether it has yet left its violences to him, or
whether the young man be yet alive, I can have no certain account. I leave the
Reader to consider of the extraordinary strangeness of the Relation.

Advertisement.
THE first of these Apparitions seems to be like that of Mistress Bretton,
mentioned in Mr. Glanvills sixteenth Relation, it came not in a tempestuous
boisterous way, nor upon an Errand of Incharitableness, but to see the will of
the Defunct performed, only it left a black Character on the second Wife, by
which, it seems, as if there had not been the best accord between them.

The Female Ghost comes with a great deal of violence, and an impetuous Temper,
as if disgusted for the performance of what the other Spectre enjoined, and
this seems the more probable, if we consider how quickly she gets behind the
young man, after he had answered the desires of the other Ghost; she permits
him not to go home in quiet, but seizes him as soon as he comes within the
verge of the Parish: by which it looks as if these Spirits were tied to some
limits, or bounds, that they cannot pass. This Spectrum has assumed all the
shapes, actions, and ways of operation that we shall find among many; and that
snatching the young man up in the Air, is such an Action as is rarely to be met
withal (after such a manner) unless where Infernal Spirits have immediately
acted. The whole Narrative of that She-Daemon abounds with a great deal of
Malice, and a great many ludicrous passages; but doubtless (were it not for the
restraining power of the Almighty) the Comical part would soon end in dreadful
Tragedy.

The fifth Relation.
Being an account of a strange piece of W^thcraft on the body of the Wife of J.
H. of Seavington, in the County of Somerset, and upon her Son, about 18 years
of Age.
THis Woman had been the Wife of a Vicar belonging to the Quire of Winchester,
and had been very honestly and well educated, and lived in good reputation with
her first husband, and during the time of her Widow-hood, when she taught a
School of Girls in Winchester, which practice she continued in the Country
when the Wife of J.H. And lived with him in modest and virtuous manner: She was
then about 57. Years of Age, and had with her a Son by her former husband aged
about 17. Years or upward. There lived in the village at a house over against
this School-Mistress, a woman that had been of evil fame among the neighbors,
and suspected of diverse ill practices. The first apprehension that she had of
any danger from the suspected party, was upon this occasion; the suspected
agent came to the house of the School-Mistress, and asked her to lend her a
piece of small changing money, which she refused to do; whereupon the other
told her that she knew she had such a piece about her, and it should be better
if she had lent it to her, so she departed from the house muttering: In the
evening the patient standing at the door of her house, saw a monstrous great
Toad walking upon all four like a Cat, and coming from the house of the
supposed, directly toward her; upon which she retired into the house, and
desired her husband to get some Instrument, wherewithal to dispatch that
monstrous vermin; as he was coming toward the door, he met with it in the
entry, and before he had the power to strike at it, it rusht suddenly into
another room, and was never seen afterward. That very night the
School-Mistriss was taken in a most Tormenting Fit (though before she had still
been a brisk healthy woman) with violent prickings and pains, as if her inside
had been stuck with pins, needles or thorns, insomuch that with the great
Tortures of her body, abundance of blood used to come from her in her Urine,
which was very observable the first night. These Fits seized on her very
frequently, sometimes twice or thrice in one day, sometimes whole days
together: And it was very observable, that just before the coming of her fit,
there would come into the Room a vast large Cat, after that another, and so
till the number were seven, or nine; these would crawl about, and stick against
the walls, making a dreadful yelling, hideous noise, and after they had
continued about a quarter of an hour, they would suddenly disappear, when they
were gone a mighty great light, like a flash of lightning, would strike in at
the window, and hang about the walls in heaps of light like fire, and pass from
one room into another, for an hour or more at a time, and sometimes continued
all the night long, shining through the Windows into the Street, and visible to
the Neighbors; all the while this light continued, she was in the highest
extremity of Misery, and would often cry out, naming the suspected party, this
continued upon her for the space of about 17 years, for it came first, when she
was about the age of 40 years; and it had reduced a strait well proportioned
body to a very crooked deformity. The Physicians were all of opinion that the
inner parts of her body were wounded by some Diabolical Art, and ordered her to
remove her Habitation, which she did into a House thereby; but it proved to no
purpose, for the evil Instrument followed her there also, and of many young
Broods of Chickens, which she attempted to nurse up for many years, she could
not raise one; but they would suddenly turn round, twisting their Necks several
times about, until they dropped down dead.

She kept two Cats of her own, for which she had a great fancy; but it is very
observable, that as soon as the other sort of Cats entered the room, they would
fly as if they were Devil-drove, sometimes into the Fire, sometimes the Oven,
sometimes up the Chimny, or any way to avoid the room, whilst the rest were
there, nor could they ever be brought to enjoy themselves after, but starved,
and pined away after a piteous manner. A little time after her removing to the
second house, her Son came from Winchester, about the Age above specified, he
was a strong, and healthful youth for his years; but had not been there above
two or three months, before he was taken after a most dreadful manner, in
raving, and frantic Fits, so that five or six men could not hold him, he would
spring out of their hands, and leap up with his head against the Cieling,
sometimes he would catch up a Knife, Penknife, or Razor, and therewith
endeavor to cut his own. Throat, or do himself some other mischief, roaring
out in most frightful manner, That the suspected was by him, and commanded him
to do it, or else she would strangle him, or choke him with pins, or such like:
So that they very diligently sought up, and laid aside Knives, Scizers, Razors,
or whatsoever else might prove dangerous to him on such Occasions:
Notwithstanding which, (and though they had cleared his Pocket of such Weapons,
at the coming of his Fit) they should see and find in his Hands, and his
Pockets, diverse of those mischievous Instruments they had just before laid
aside. After these Fits, he would cast out of his mouth Pins, and Needles, in
great abundance, and with extreme weakness be forced to keep his Bed several
days.

One day as the young man was in the height of one of his Fits, his Mother saw
the suspected Party scrambling against the wall of the room, and immediately
called out to her Husband, John, John! There is the Witch (naming of the Party)
run her through with your Sword, upon which he darted his Sword at the place
she directed him, and his Wife cried out, you have cut the Witch, John, you
have cut her hand, (naming the hand which she observed to be hurt) and it was
observed that that Party had a lame hand for a considerable time after. This
afflicted Woman would often repair to the Church, but if the Malevolent were
there, she had not the power to enter, but could continue in the Porch, or at
the Window. The Son continued in those amazing Fits for about five years; and
then ran away in one of them, and has neither been seen, nor heard of since.
The Mother continued in that languishing state for about seventeen years, and
then died of pain and grief; but died very sensible, having the use of a good
reason, and vigorous Faculties to the last. She was of Opinion that others,
beside the suspected Party, contributed to her misery; as for the supposed
Malevolent, she lived about five years after the Afflicted.

Advertisement.
AND since they are all in their Graves, I think it not proper to disturb them,
by raking up their Names so long after. I do not understand that for all this
any Justice was applied to, but many Physicians, who all agreed it to be
notorious Withcraft, the Neighbors too were both Ear, and Eyewitnesses of
what is here related; which I had both from the mouth of the Husband himself,
and from diverse of good reputation, who were often with the Mother and Son in
the House, when all that is here related, has occurred.

The sixth Relation.
Giving an Account of the Raising the Devil by the ^alconer, at Sir J F's near
Shirbourn, in Dorsetshire.
I Had an Account of this Passage from my worthy Friend, Dr. B. who had made
good enquiry into the certainty of it; and though it carry along with it an
Air, perhaps, of too much levity for this discourse; yet those who rightly
consider it, will find cause to believe there is somewhat in it that deserves a
more serious, and considerate reflection.

There was in this Gentleman's House a Huntsman, and a Falconer, as is usual
with Persons of such Quality; but it is pretty difficult to determine, whether
the Elements, which nursed up their respective Game, or the complexion, and
humor of the Persons, was most different: One of them, viz. the Huntsman, was
a Fellow much devoted to a glass of Liquour, as is usual with men of his
Function, and therefore when he once laid down his Head upon his Pillow, found
himself very unfit for any other Contemplations, then what his sleep presented
him withal. The Falconer, on the contrary, was of a Temper more Considerate,
and very fond of a Book by night, because he seldom found the other, who was
his Bedfellow, in a humor to discourse: and therefore would often mind him of
the tendency of his drunken Courses, and to bethink himself sometimes of lying
down soberly, lest it might happen he should never awake more in this world.
The Morals wrought little on the stupidity of the Huntsman; who answered him
only with reflection, assuring him that Falconers used to look upwards, and
blaspheme, when the Huntsman looked downwards, and therefore minded him to
regard his own state. In some such sort of discourse they had passed the night,
till the Huntsman composed himself to sleep; the Falconer betook himself to a
certain Book he had got out of the Chaplains Chamber, who used to lend him one
at times, to encourage him in reading: It happened to be of the wrong sort for
the poor Falconer; for he had not read much in it, before he saw something come
to the side of the Bed, which he could have wished farther off: the frightful
Goblin brought to his remembrance what the Huntsman had charged him withal,
viz. looking upwards, and Blaspheming, so that he endeavored to get some
speech of the Huntsman in this extremity, and by much jogging, and importunity,
at last prevailed with him to understand what troublesome company he had in the
Room with him; but all he could get of his drousy Companion, was only this;
Good Devil do not mistake, for that is the Falconer; and so turned him about to
sleep again; which put the poor Falconer into a deeper Consternation; till at
length he had the Courage to call to some of the Neighbor Lodgers, amongst
whom, the Chaplain, being awake, came to his relief; and it is thought in very
good season, for the Company he had unadvisedly raised, began to be very
Troublesome. In fine, the Chaplain discharged the unwelcome Guest, and advised
the Falconer hereafter to peruse no Books, but what he did in part understand
before.

Advertisement.
SOme People, by perusing unlawful Studies, have put themselves in the power of
Evil Spirits. And though some may look on this Relation but as a jest, upon
inquiry it will be found a real Truth.

The seventh Relation.
An Account of a strange, and horrid Spectrum seen by Mr. Edmund Ansty, of
South Petherton, in the County of Somerset.
ABout four years since being in the House of Mr. Josias Ansty, at the place
aforesaid, Mr. Edmond Ansty, who was a very Reverend Old Man, upward of
fourscore, I take it, near a hundred years of Age, and had always been a
temperate and sober Liver, gave me this Relation, That when he was a Shopkeeper
in that place, about sixty years from the time of his relating it to me, he
used to frequent several Fairs for the furnishing his Shop with such goods as
he had occasion for; he had at that time been at a Fair very well known in the
West Country by the name of Woodbery-Hill Fair; and having bestowed such moneys
as he thought convenient for his occasions, he resolved to return home that
night, though the Journey was so long, that another person would hardly have
undertook it; but having a good Horse, and no worse resolution, he set forward
on his return, but was overtaken by a dark night, when he was about a dozen
miles from home; however, being pretty secure of the way, he resolved to pursue
it; till at length coming to a place not far from Yeovil, noted by the name of
Cut-hedge, his Horse rushed very violently with him against one side of the
Bank, snorting and trembling very much, so that he could by no means put him on
his way, but he still pressed nearer to the Bushes: At length Mr. Ansty heard
the Hedges crack with a dismal noise, and perceived coming toward him in the
Road, which is there pretty wide, a large Circle of a duskish light, about the
bigness of a very large Wheel, and in it he perfectly saw the proportion of a
huge Bear, as if it had been by daylight; It passed near by him, and as it
came just over against the place where he was, the horrid Monster looked very
gashfully at him, showing a pair of very large flaming Eyes. As soon as ever it
was gone by, his Horse sprung into the Road, and made homeward with so much
have, that he could not possibly rein him in, and had much ado to keep the
Saddle.

The old Gentleman is lately dead, but there are many of the Neighbors of good
reputation, that have often heard him relate this passage, and upon enquiry can
witness the Truth of it.

The Eighth Relation.
Of diverse strange Appearances of Spirits in a Noblemans House in the West.
ABout the year 1667. being with some Persons of Honor at the House of a
Nobleman in the West Country, which had formerly been a Nunnery: I must confess
I had often heard the Servants, and others that inhabited, or lodged there,
speak much of the noises, stirs, and Apparitions that frequently disturbed the
House, but had at that time no apprehensions of it; for the House being full of
Strangers, the Noblemans Steward, Mr. C. lay with me in a fine Wainscot Room,
called my Ladies Chamber; we went to our Lodging pretty early, and having a
good fire in the Room, we spent some time in reading, in which he much
delighted: then having got into Bed, and put out the Candles, we observed the
Room to be very light, by the brightness of the Moon, so that a Wager was laid
between us, that it was possible to read written hand by that light upon the
Bed where we lay; accordingly I drew out of my Pocket a Manuscript, which he
read distinctly in the place where he lay: We had scarce made an end of
discoursing about that affair, when I saw (my face being toward the door,
which was locked) entering into the Room, through the door, five Appearances of
very fine and lovely Women, they were of excellent stature, and their dresses
seemed very fine, but covered all but their faces, with thin, white Vails:
whose skirts trailed largely on the floor. They entered in a file one after the
other, and in that posture walked round the Room, till the foremost came, and
stood by that side of the Bed where I lay, (with my left hand over the side of
the Bed; for my head rested on that arm, and I determined not to alter the
posture I was in) she struck me upon that hand with a blow that felt very soft,
but I did never remember whether it were cold or hot; I demanded in the name of
the Blessed Trinity what business they had there, but received no answer; then
I spoke to Mr. C. Sir, do you see what fair Guests we have come to visit us?
Upon which they all disappeared: I found him in some kind of Agony, and was
forced to grasp him on the breast with my right hand (which was next him
underneath the Bed-cloaths) before I could obtain speech of him; then he told
me that he had seen the fair Guests I spoke of, and had heard me speak to them;
but withal said, that he was not able to speak sooner unto me, being extremely
affrighted at the sight of a dreadful Monster, which assuming a shape betwixt
that of a Lion, and a Bear, attempted to come upon the Beds foot. I told him, I
thanked God nothing so frightful had presented itself to me; but I hoped
(through his assistance) not to dread the Ambages of Hell. It was a long time
before I could compose him to sleep, and though he had had many disturbances in
his own Room, and understood of others in the House, yet he acknowledged he had
never been so terrified, during many years abode there.

The next day at Dinner he showed to diverse Persons of Principal Quality, the
mark that had been occasioned on his Breast by the gripe I was forced to give
him, to get him to speak, and related all the passages very exactly; after
which, he protested never to lie more in that Room; upon which, I set up a
resolution to lodge in it again, not knowing but something of the reason of
those troubles might by that means be imparted to me.

The next night therefore I ordered a Bible, and another Book to be laid in the
Room, and resolved to spend my time by the fire in reading, and contemplation,
till I found my self inclined to sleep; and accordingly having taken leave of
the Family at the usual hour, I addressed my self to what I had proposed, not
going into Bed till past one in the morning: a little after I was got into Bed,
I heard something walk about the Room, like a Woman with a Tabby Gown trailing
about the Room; it made a mighty rushelling noise, but I could see nothing,
though it was near as light as the night before; it passed by the foot of the
Bed, and a little opened the Curtains, and thence went to a Closet door on that
side, through which it found admittance, although it was close locked; there it
seemed to groan, and draw a great Chair with its foot, in which it seemed to
sit and turn over the leaves of a large Folio; which you know make a loud
clattering noise; so it continued in that posture, sometimes groaning,
sometimes dragging the Chair, and clattering the Book, till it was near day.
Afterward I lodged several times in the same Room, but never met with any
Molestation.

This I can attest to be a true Account of what passed in that Room the two
described nights; and though Mr. C. be lately dead, who was a very Ingenious
Man, and affirmed the first part unto many, with whom he was conversant: It
remains that I appeal to the knowledge of those who have been Inhabitants, or
Lodgers in the said House, for what remains, to justify the Credibility of the
rest.

The ninth Relation.
A Relation of the Apparition of Fairies, their seeming to keep a Fair, and
what happened to a certain man that endeavored to put himself in amongst them.
REading once the Eighteenth of Mr. Glanvils Relations, p. 203. concerning an
Irishman that had like to have been carried away by Spirits, and of the Banquet
they had spread before them in the Fields, etc. it called to mind a passage I
had often heard of Fairies, or Spirits, so called by the Country People, which
showed themselves in great Companies at diverse times; at sometimes they would
seem to dance, at other times to keep a great Fair or Market: I made it my
business to inquire amongst the Neighbors what Credit might be given to that
which was reported of them; and by many of the Neighboring Inhabitants I had
this Account confirmed.

The place near which they most ordinarily showed themselves, was on the side
of a Hill, named Black-down, between the Parishes of Pittminster, and
Chestonford, not many miles from Tanton: Those that have had occasion to Travel
that way, have frequently seen them there, appearing like Men and Women of a
stature, generally, near the smaller size of Men; their habits used to be of
red, blew, or green, according to the old way of Country Garb, with high
crowned hats. One time about 50 years since, a person (living at Comb St.
Nicholas, a Parish lying on one side of that hill, near Chard) was riding
toward his home that way; and saw just before him, on the side of the hill a
great company of People, that seemed to him like Country Folks, Assembled, as
at a Fair; there was all sorts of Commodities to his appearance, as at our
ordinary Fairs; Pewterers, Shoe-makers, Pedlars, with all kind of Trinkets,
Fruit, and drinking Booths; he could not remember any thing which he had
usually seen at Fairs, but what he saw there: It was once in his thought that
it might be some Fair for Chestonford, there being a considerable one at some
time of the year; but then again he considered that was not the season for it;
he was under very great suprize, and admired what the meaning of what he saw
should be; at length it came into his mind what he had heard concerning the
Fairies on the side of that hill: and it being near the Road he was to take, he
resolved to ride in amongst them, and see what they were; accordingly he put on
his Horse that way; and though he saw them perfectly all along as he came, yet
when he was upon the place where all this had appeared to him, he could discern
nothing at all, only seemed to be crowded, and thrust, as when one passes
through a throng of people: all the rest became invisible to him, until he came
at a little distance, and then it appeared to him again as at first. He found
himself in pain, and so hasted home; where being arrived, a Lameness seized him
all on one side, which continued on him as long as he lived, which was many
years; for he was living in Comb, and gave an Account to any that inquired of
this Accicident for more than twenty years afterward: and this Relation I had
from a Person of known Honor, who had it from the Man himself.

There were some, whose names I have now forgot, but they then lived at a
Gentleman's House named Comb Farm, near the place before specified; both the
Man, his Wife, and diverse of the Neighbors assured me that they had at many
times seen this Fair-keeping in the Summer time, as they came from Tanton
Market; but that they durst not adventure in amongst them, for that every one
that had done so, had received great damage by it.

Any Person that is Incredulous of what is here related, may, upon inquiry of
the Neighbor Inhabitants, receive ample satisfaction, not only as to what is
here related, but abundantly more, which I have heard solemnly confirmed by
many of them.

The tenth Relation.
An Account of two Spirits which appeared to two Servant Maids, in the House of
Mrs. Aysh of South Petherton, Anno 1680.
AT South Petherton, in the County of Somerset, lives a Gentlewoman (very well
known to all the Neighboring Gentry, not only for her Ancient Descent, but for
her extraordinary Piety, and Charity more Illustrious,) whom I cannot mention
without an Honorable Respect, having often had the happiness to have been
entertained with most obliging respect, both by the virtuous Mother, and her
Congenerous Issue.

It was on Midsummer day, in the year 1680. I happened to pay a visit to that
worthy Family; and finding the Lady and her Daughters at home, after passing
common Civilities, the eldest of the Daughters, (who is a very Ingenious, and
Accomplished Lady) informed me that there had been the strangest thing done in
their Family the preceding night, that ever was heard on, for their Servant
Maids had raised the Devil, etc. and so went on to give a through relation of
what you will hear by and by: only I think it best to let the Maids themselves
tell the Story, which after the old Lady had called them into the Room, they
did after this manner. One of them, I take it, the tallest, speaking in the
name of both.

We had been told diverse times, that if we fasted on Midsummer Eve, and then at
12 a Clock at night laid a cloth on the Table; with Bread, and Cheese, and a
cup of the best Beer, setting our selves down, as if we were going to eat, and
leaving the door of the Room open; we should see the Persons whom we should
afterward Marry, come into the Room, and drink to us: Accordingly we kept a
true Fast all the day yesterday, unknown to any of the Family; and at night
having disposed of my Mistresses to Bed, we fastened the stair door of their
Rooms, which came down into the Hall, and locked all the doors of the Yard, and
whatever way besides led into the House, except the door of the Kitchen, which
was left open to the Yard for the Sweethearts to enter; it being then near
twelve a Clock, we laid a clean cloth on the Kitchen Table, setting thereon a
Loaf and Cheese, and a Stone Jug of beer, with a drinking glass, seating our
selves together in the inside of the Table, with our faces toward the door: We
had been in this posture but a little while, before we heard a mighty rattling
at the great Gate of the Yard, as if it would have shook the House down, there
was a jingling of Chains, and something seemed to prance about the Yard like a
Horse, which put us into great terror, and affrightment, so that we wished we
had never gone so far in it; but now we knew not how to go back, and therefore
kept the place where we were: my Masters Spaniel (for the young Captain was
then alive) got against the door of the stair foot, and there made so great a
noise with houling, and rattling the door, that we feared they might have taken
notice of the disturbance; but presently came a young man into the Kitchen, (
here one of the young Ladies interrupted her, saying, Housewife, it was the
Devil) to which the Maid replied, Madam I do not believe that, but perhaps it
might be the Spirit of a Man,) and making a bow to me, he took up the Glass,
which was full of Beer, on the Table, and drank to me, filling the Glass again,
and setting it on the Table as before, then making another bow, went out of the
Room. Immediately after which, another came in the same manner, and did the
same to the other Maid (whom she named, but I have forgot) and then all was
quiet, and after we had eaten some Bread and Cheese, we went to Bed. So the
Maid ended what she had to say, and left the Room; but I must not forget that
all this while* the other Maid stood by her, and acknowledged all she had said
to be true.

Then I desired to know of the old Lady, how they came to understand this of
the Maids, for I thought they did not care to have it divulged; upon which she
replied, we saw in their faces the next morning something of an alteration, as
if they had been frighted, and my eldest Daughter going into a Room, where we
use to set aside cold Meat, saw part of an Apple-Pye, which was appointed for
their Dinners the day before, to be there untoucht, and marking some other
little Circumstances, began to be Inquisitive, until she had sifted out the
business. The Ladies were very much troubled at what the Maids had done, and
threatened to put them away upon it: but upon the intercession of Neighbors,
and their being penitent for what they had done, it was passed by. It was not
long after, before the tallest of the Maids was Married to him, which she said
had appeared unto her, and as I remember, he was a Drummer in Sir Edward
Philips's Regiment: but I fear that Weddings sought into by such unwarrantable
means, can hardly expect a Blessing; I wish it may prove otherwise for both
their sakes. The young Ladies after that, would (to mind the Maids of their
indiscretion) call them the Spirits of Men.

Advertisement.
1. I Have often been told of some that have fasted on Midsummer Eve, and then
gone into the Church Porch, to see who should die in that Parish the subsequent
year, and that the Spirits of such would (in the same order they were to die
in) come one after another, and knock at the Church door, I remember I was once
told of one of these Watchers that fell fast asleep, so that none of the
company could awaken her, during the time of which profound sleep, the likeness
of that party appeared, and knocked at the Church door: and that afterward,
when she awaked, she could give no account of any thing that had happened, only
that she had been asleep; until the rest of the company acquainted her of it.

2. Whether the Appearances here were the Spirits of the two young Men, who
taking them Napping at that time of night, might make a visit to their
Sweet-hearts; or whether they were not some Spirits of another nature, that
assumed their likeness, I must leave to the Learned to judge; I must confess I
am apt to believe the latter. It seems to me by the rattling of the Gate, the
noise of the Chains, the prancing of the Horse, and the affrighting of the
Spaniel, (which I knew, and he was a stout Dog;) I say upon all these
Circumstances I should imagine that these Spirits were not of so gentiel, and
smooth a Temper as they showed themselves unto the Maids.

3. What Charm there can be ascribed to fasting on Midsummer Eve, and the
after-Ceremonies, more then to the like abstinence at another time, is that
which many doubt of: But why may there not be Magical Days and Seasons, as well
as Planetary Hours? The Devil is called the Prince of Darkness, because he most
familiarly shows himself in the depth of the night, Conjurers, and Magicians
call upon him most in that Season; he has an aversion to the light, as all
evil Workers have.

Much discourse has been about gathering of Fern-seed (which is looked upon as
a Magical Herb) on the night of Midsummer Eve, and I remember I was told of one
that went to gather it, and the Spirits whiskt by his Ears like Bullets, and
sometimes struck his Hat, and other parts of his Body: in fine, though he
apprehended that he had gotten a quantity of it, and secured it in Papers, and
a Box besides, when he came home, he found all empty. But most probable this
appointing of times, and hours, is of the Devils own Institution, as well as
the Fast, that having once ensnared people to an Obedience to his Rules, he may
with more facility oblige them to a stricter Vassallage.

The tenth Relation.
An Account of the death of the most Eminent of a certain Family presaged by
Rats eating the Hangings of a Room.
AT Kitsford in Devonshire, which is now the Seat of Thomas Wood Esquire I very
well remember, dining in the Parlour there, with the Lady, the Mother of the
abovenamed Gentleman; she showed me in the hangings of the Room, near one of
the Windows, a great hole eaten, as supposed, by Rats; it was almost at the top
of the Room; and this, she said, happened but a few weeks before the death of
her Husband Some time after dining again in the same Room, there was another
hole eaten just under the former; which the Gentlewoman was pleased to say, did
foreshew her death; and truly, in a very little time after, she died on a
Sunday morning, without any previous sickness; being at that time dressing her
self to go to Church, with intent to receive the Communion; and was to all
appearance well in health, and dead, in half an hours time. About a year, or
more after that, another hole was eaten in the same Hanging, soon after which
died Roger Wood Esquire the Heir, and elder Brother to him that now injoys the
Estate. He likewise died very suddenly, for having been out coursing a Hare in
the morning, he came in about noon at his Brother George Powell, Esquires,
(where he then lodged) and leaning his hand to his head, complained that his
Head aked, and died in a few hours.

I had a Relation of my own, who was a Silk-man, and had laid by a parcel of
Ribbons, which he had sold to a Merchant, for the Sea; after a day or two, when
they were to be sent away, there was above 30 yards of them torn out, eaten,
and spoiled by Rats: Within a very short time after the Silk-man died as he was
returning from a Journey to London.

Advertisement.
RAts and Toads are both looked upon as noxious Creatures, and therefore
generally loathed by all people, who generally have a Natural Antipathy against
that sort of Vermin, unless it be Witches, and such, who are said to Cherish
them: And why may there not be Magical Animals, as well as Magical Plants? But
by what kind of Instinct these Creatures should foreknow of such events, or if
they do not foreknow, upon what score they should after this manner fore-bode,
and prognosticate such Catastrophies; is a very hard matter to determine. They
are generally looked upon to be Ominous, so are Crows, Ravens, and Screech
Owls, which generally resort to the Windows, or tops of Houses, where people
are a dying; and most usually the resort of them to Houses, and places, is
attended with an answerable Fatality. Nor is it unusual for people to have
presages of their approach into the other World, which perhaps may be the care
and vigilance of some good Genius, by these notices to prepare us for it.

The twelfth Relation.
An Account of one stripped of all his clothes after he was in Bed, and almost
worried to death by Spirits.
I Had occasion to make mention of a Noblemans House in the West of England,
and to give two Relations of what passed there of my own knowledge: I shall now
add another, known to the Lady, and all the Family; which is thus.

One night, as we were at Supper, one of the Ladies Footmen complained he was
pained in his Head, whereupon he had orders to go to Bed, which he did some
hours before the rest of the Family. His Lodging was by the side of a fair
Gallery, where there were several Alcoves, with Beds, for the Servants, and
they were planted near Sir F's Lodging. When the Lady was disposed to go to her
Chamber, the other Company waited on her up the Stairs (most of us lodging the
same way) we passed into the foresaid Gallery, and when we came over against
the Alcove, where the Page was, we found the door of it open, and out of it
issued a steam, which by the light of the Candles appeared like a thick Fog:
which occasioned some of us to look into the Room, where we saw the poor young
Man lying speechless on the Bed, his Eyes were staring very wide, and fixed on
one side of the Room, his Hands were clutched, his Hair erected, and his whole
body in so violent a sweat, as if he had been in the Bagnio; all the Clothes of
the Bed were flung, some in one part of the Room, and some in another, his very
shirt was drawn off his Body, and cast into one side of the Room; and it was
near half an hour before he could recollect himself, and gather breath, so as
to speak to us: At length, having taken somewhat to recall his Spirits, he gave
us this surprising account of what had past from the time he went to Bed, which
we guessed to be about three hours. He told us that he lay about half an hour,
endeavoring to compose himself to sleep, but could not, because of the pain in
his Head, that about that time there came into the Room to him two in the
appearance of very beautiful young Women, whose presence enlightened the place,
as if it had been day, though there was no Candle near it. That they
endeavored to come into the Bed to him, being one on the one side, the other
on the other side thereof, which he resisted with all the power he could,
striking at them several times with his Fists, but could feel nothing but empty
shadows; yet were they so strong, that they drew all the Bed-clothes off him,
though he endeavored with all his force to hold them, that after that they had
stripped him of his shirt; and he had contested so long with them, that he
concluded within himself he should die under their violencies, during all that
time he had no power to speak, or call for aid; but was at last reduced to that
condition wherein we found him. Some were ordered to continue that night; and
the next day he was bleeded, having been much bruised in the Conflict; however
he had no sickness after it, nor do I hear that ever after he had any
disturbance from them.

Advertisement.
THis is perhaps one of the most stupend^ous accounts of this nature that have
been heard of; I could say much more, only for the regard and Honor I ought to
bear to the Family, I dare not name them, unless I had their leave, but the
thing is so well known to all that were in the house at that time, which were
more than thirty, and by them imparted to so many others, that it is beyond the
skill of the greatest Caviller to contest it.

The thirteenth Relation.
A Relation of a Gentleman that was cruelly Murdered by Witches, who made his
Image of Wax, and stuck pins therein, April 78. whereby he was miserably
tormented, and died the Summer following.
IN the West of Scotland, an Honorable Gentleman, Sir -- Maxwell of Pollock,
was taken with a grievous distemper, which by the vehemence of the Pain,
hindered him from taking any rest, attended with continual sweating, through the
vehemence of the Agony. His Pain resembled that which is caused by Punction, as
if he had had so many Pins stuck in his side, but more vehement than a Pain
excited by that can be conceived to be* Several Physicians were employed to
search into the Cause thereof, but none could find it out; nor could procure
him ease by any Remedies: so that he ^y in a comfortless Condition, expecting
nothing, but to be racked with insupportable Tortures, till that longed for
Remedy, Death, should come. While he lay in this miserable Torment, it happened
that a Woman (then pretending to be dumb) entered his House; and pointing to the
Chamber where he was lying, made signs to those that were at that time in his
House, to follow her out of doors; they at first took no notice of her, but she
persisting therein, they went out with her, to see if they could understand her
meaning. She led them into a House adjacent (a Tenant of this distressed
Gentleman*s,) and having entered the House, she gave signs to them to open a
Chest there; whereupon they desired the Woman of the House to open the Chest,
that they might satisfy their Curiosity in so far humouring her. The Woman
conscious of her own Guilt, refused; whereupon they beginning to suspect there
was more then ordinary in it, that made her so averse from it, broke it open,
which when they had done, they found therein an Image of Wax, which they took
out, and found a great many Pins stuck in the same side of it, as the
Gentleman's Pain held him in his. They took out the Pins, and afterward
returning to the House, they asked the Gentleman how he found himself; who
answered that he was altogether eased of his pain, and in a very good
condition. Then they took the Pins, and stuck in the other side of the Image,
when immediately the Gentleman cried out of a pain that had seized him on his
other side, as vehement as the former was. They took them out again, and he was
eased as formerly. The Witch was had before a Justice, but I never heard that
she was further troubled, whether for that that was not sufficient proof in Law
to take away her life, or for some other reason I know not. The pretended dumb
Woman was afterward seized, and imprisoned at Glasgow, where she pretended to
recover the use of her Tongue, and spoke, whereas before she seemed to be dumb.
Several strange things were reported of her there; which being variously
reported, I would not trouble the Reader with a Relation thereof; mentioning
nothing herein but what I know to be of undoubted truth, and what was
acknowledged by all. After she had been kept there for two or three weeks, she
was transported to Edinburgh, and put in the Cannon-gate Prison, where she
remained above half a year. She was several times had before the Council, and
examined. A great many Persons out of Curiosity visited her, some of whom had
better kept away; for if they were guilty of Love Intrigues, she used
sufficiently to expose them, sparing neither Quality nor Sex. When any
questioned how she came by that Knowledge, and charged her with having
correspondence with the Devil, she made answer in the words of our Savior; If
Satan cast out Satan, how can his Kingdom stand? Denying that she had any
Compact with the Devil, but affirming that it was a gift she had from her
Birth. She was set at liberty, after having been a considerable time in Prison.
But the Gentleman after her seizure, was taken with the same distemper, and
died thereof.

The fourteenth Relation.
An Account of a Person that by carrying of a Girdle from one Witch to another,
was reduced to Madness.
NEar the River of Tweed in Scotland, a Woman suspected to be a Witch, had a
Child very sick, and seeing she could not help it by lawful means, she had her
address to her Diabolical Art; this way she could not free her Child, unless
she laid either the same Disease, or a worse upon another Person, otherwise she
must have thwarted the interest of her Infernal Master, which was not in her
Power, if it had been her inclination, as undoubtedly it was not, to effect:
She, hearing that a Scrivener was going two or three miles to a place where she
had an Acquaintance, who served the same Master with her self, to wit, the
Prince of Darkness, went to him, and desired him to carry a Girdle to her. Her
design in sending it by him was, that her Child might be cured of its
Distemper, and the same or a worse laid on this innocent Person. Whether she
had any Malice against him, I could not be informed; but I rather incline to
think that it was only in Obedience to her Masters Command. He took the Girdle
from her, and when he came to the place, went, and delivered it to the Party.
The Woman at the delivery of it, having never had any prejudice against the
Bearer, was really troubled that he should have been employed therein, knowing
how much it would tend to his hurt, and asked him if her Friend could find no
other Person to impose this trouble upon, but him, to carry it, not daring to
tell him the danger he had thereby involved himself in, lest she should bring
her self into a greater, by being discovered, only pretending that her Friend
was very uncivil in troubling a Person of his Quality with any such thing. He
answered her, that there was no indiscretion in it, adding withal, that it was
his utmost desire to be serviceable to any Person, without respect to their
Quality, to the utmost of his Power. The Woman entertained him with several
Discourses, and seemed very Courteous to him; and at parting she desired him to
have a special care that he did not sleep till he got home, telling him that he
would be strongly inclined to sleep, and withal certifying him that if he slept
any where by the way, he would have cause to repent it while he lived. He
promised to take care to prevent it, beginning then to be somewhat afraid,
recalling to mind that the Person he had the Girdle from, was under the Bruit
of a Witch. As he was going homewards, he found himself mightily assailed by
sleep, and he strove as much against it as was possible; but when he was come
within less then a quarter of a Mile of his own House, it so prevailed upon
him, that he could go no further, but laid himself down upon the Grass to
sleep. When he awaked again, he was raging Mad, and continued so for a long
time after without respite, and during his life he was Mad in the three hot
Months in Summer, and at the Full of the Moon. His Son also, who was born a
considerable time after this, was Heir to the same Distemper, and for ought I
know is still alive, and has the same Fits at the usual times; as also a
Daughter of the Sons.

This Story I have from sure hands, who have heard the Father relate it when he
was in his right Wits, as he used to be for the most part, save at the times
above mentioned. The Son I have spoke with several times, and have seen him run
up and down in his mad Fits.

The fifteenth Relation.
A strange Apparition, which was seen by a Man, as he was going home two Miles
in a Winter night, near Kinneel by the River of Forth in Scotland.
A Certain Man whom I know, a little before Christmas, several years ago, went
in the morning from his dwelling House, to a Seaport Town about two Miles
distant: And having several urgent businesses there, he took up the whole day
in dispatching them, and was necessitated to stay still near eight of the Clock
at night At which time he set forth, being no wise in drink; nor was he at all
of a Timorous Nature. He had no Company with him, and walked on in his Journey
without seeing any thing frightful, or so much as thinking on any such. When he
was come to the top of a Hill, which was half way home, he of a sudden saw the
Appearance of four Men carrying a Dead Corpse on their Shoulders, unattended by
any; which made him easily conjecture what it was; besides, that it is not
usual in that place to bury any in the night time, except it be Persons of the
greatest Quality. This Apparition ye must needs think, did startle him a
little, there being no Houses near him; it being a wild place. He thought to
shun it by going out of the Highway into some by-road; which when he did, he
found himself nothing advantaged thereby; for in the very time that he was
turning himself about, it was transported from the Highway, and walked directly
before him, keeping the same distance as before; which when he observed, he
returned into the High-road again. This he attempted to do several times; but
was served after the same manner as formerly; whereupon he resolved to keep
straight on in his way, without turning either to the right hand or the left,
praying to God to preserve him from the Devil, or any of his Emissaries. The
Spectre kept a little before him, observing always the same distance; so that
if he walked slow, it likewise slackned its pace, and if he hastened his steps,
it likewise moved quicker. He followed it on this wise, till at last it came to
a little Stone Bridge that was over a Brook, about a quarter of a Mile from his
House; the Brook was narrow, but not so narrow, as that a Man could jump over
it; the water in the Winter time would strike a Man above the middle. The four
Ghosts that carried this dead Corpse, when they were come to this place, laid
the Coffin across the Bridge; so that the Man could not go over upon the
Bridge, unless he stepped over the Coffin. The Man when he came up was at a
stand, not knowing what to do in this case; to wade through the Brook he had no
great mind, in regard the season was then cold. To go over the Bridge, and so
step over it, he durst not, not knowing, if he should have hazarded so to do,
what power it might have over him to do him mischief. While he was thus musing,
he bethought himself of one Expedient, which if he could effect, he thought he
might safely go over the Bridge without receiving any hurt: It was this; he
designed to try if he could prize it off the Bridge into the water with his
Cane, for he durst not adventure to touch it with his hands: But when he went
about it, and prized it with all his strength, he found it remained unmovable
as a Rock; yet he continued so doing a considerable time, till at last he broke
his Cane. Afterward, seeing no possibility of getting over the Bridge, he was
necessitated to go through the water, notwithstanding the coldness of the
Season. When he was got on the other side, he saw the four Ghosts take up the
Coffin again on their Shoulders, and carry it off the Highway, he viewed them
till they carried it over a little Eminence (a piece of ground higher then the
rest, resembling a Hill, but not so high) but after that saw it no more.
Afterward he went home to his House, and as soon as he saw the light of the
Candle that was burning in the House, he immediately fell down upon the ground.
(Which they say is usual to Persons that are frightened with Apparitions.) His
Wife and Servants seeing what befell him, instantly took him up, brought him to
life again, and asked him what might be the Cause thereof; he told them that he
knew of no Cause, seeing he found himself very well in his Health all the day
before, unless it were an Apparition he saw by the way as he came home,
rehearsing the story as is above related.

Advertisement.
THis Story I have heard related by several Persons of good Repute, that lived
in the same Town with him, who had it from his own mouth. The Man I have
several times seen, but never had occasion, that I remember of, to be in his
Company, at least at that time when he related the abovementioned Story.

Let no man therefore doubt of Intelligencies in the world, besides what are
hudled up in garments of Clay: We see Agencies above the reach of our
comprehensions, and things performed by Bodies seemingly Aerial, which surpass
the strength, power, and capacity of the most robust Mortal.

FINIS.

