THE HISTORY OF THE VAUDOIS. WHEREIN Is shown their Original; how God has
preserved the Christian Religion among them in its Purity, from the time of the
Apostles, to our days; The Wonders he has done for their preservation, with the
Signal and Miraculous Victories that they have gained over their Enemies; how
they were dispersed, and their Churches ruined; and how at last they were
re-established, beyond the expectation and hope of all the World. By Peter
Boyer, a Minister of the Gospel.

Dedicated to the King of England, and newly translated out of French by a
Person of Quality.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Mory, at the Three Bibles in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M DC XCII.

TO THE KING OF Great BRITAIN.
SIR,

THE wonders that God has done by Your Ministry in England and Ireland, makes
me hope that the History of the Vaudois will not be unacceptable, and makes me
take the liberty of presenting Your Majesty with it. You will in it, as in a
fine mirror, clearly see the wonders God has done for the preservation the of
Churches of Piemont, and the calm they enjoyed from the time of the Apostles
when they received the doctrine of the Gospel, till the year 1488, that Pope
Innocent the VIII. caused the Croisade to be published against them. The number
of those that took upon them the Badge of the Cross, were 18000 men of regular
Troops, and 8000 Volunteers of Piemont, which were all entirely defeated by a
handful of Vaudois. Ever since that time they have been continually persecuted
and disturbed with cruel wars: But as they fought the battle of God in
defending his truth, so it visibly appeared that the God of battle was with
them, and fought for them, without whose aid it had been impossible for them to
have performed such extraordinary exploits, and gained so many victories over
their Enemies, who were often times twenty or thirty, sometimes a hundred
against one. Your Majesty shall see the cruel persecutions that the Enemies of
the Gospel have made them to undergo, and the constancy with which the Martyrs
have sealed this Celestial Verity with their Blood. If the Enemies had any
advantage over them, it was only then in violating the Public Faith, which
should be inviolably sacred among men. In conclusion, Your Majesty will be
astonished, how so few have been able to subsist in the Valleys of Piemont,
till the year 1686, being surrounded with such puissant Enemies, cruel, full of
diabolical artifices, without Faith, without Law; but if their subsisting be
miraculous, their return and re-establishment is no less: One may see every
where that it is the work of God and not of men. I could not, Sir, address this
my Little Work better to any than to Your Majesty, who has seen the God of
Armies march before you, as anciently he marched before the Camp of Israel, and
as he marched, and yet marches before them who are the subject of this History.
You maintain, as they, Sir, the Cause of God, and you fight for his Truth, and
there is no doubt but that he is with you, and fights for you, and with you;
the happy success of Your Enterprises puts it beyond all doubt. I pray God with
all my heart, that he may preserve Your Majestys Sacred Person, that he may
give you a flourishing and happy Kingdom, and bless all Your Just Designs to
his Honor and Glory; this is the Ardent Prayer of him, who with the most
profound respect, is

SIR, Your Majesty's Most Humble, Most Faithful, and Most Obedient Servant. P.
Boyer.

ADVERTISEMENT.
OF all the people that ever have been, from the Creation of the world till our
times, there is none except the ancient people of the Jews, whose History
contains so many wonders as this of the Vaudois of Piemont; for whether one
consider their Perseverance in the profession of the holy doctrine of the
Apostles, or one reflects upon the wars they have maintained these 200 years,
to preserve among them the Purity of the Christian Religion; one sees so many
miracles of Wisdom, Goodness, and Power of God, that it is impossible not to
confess, that God has declared himself plainly to be the God of this people,
and that he is the Protector and Defender of their Persons, as well as Religion.

We learn from the Holy Scripture, that the people of the Jews, whom God had
chosen above all the people of the Earth, to be his people, and in favor of
whom he had done so many miracles in Egypt, in the Red Sea, and the
Wilderness; often fell into Idolatry and polluted thimselves with the
abominations of the Heathens, that dwelt round about them, but we do not find
that the Vaudois did ever fall into Idolatry, after they were once planted in
the field of the Church; we likewise see, that many Heresies were introduced
into the Primitive Church by the craft of Satan, as those of the Eutichians,
Nestorians, and above all that of the Arians; but we can never discover that
any of these Heresies took footing in the Valleys of Piemont; and when all the
world ran after the Beast of the Apocalypse, after the great Harlot, with whom
the Kings of the Earth have committed Whoredom, and who with her wine made all
the Inhabitants of the Earth drunk; the Churches of Piemont only followed Jesus
Christ, and inviolably adhered to his Doctrine. So the Valleys had anciently
for their arms, a Torch environed with thick Darkness, with this Motto, Lux
lucet in tenebris, Light shines in darkness; and as all Egypt was covered over
with palpable Darkness, only in the Land of Goshen shined a clear bright Light,
even so, as long as the Christian world was covered over with the Darkness of
Idolatry and Errors, there were only the Churches of Piemont that were
illuminated with the clear light of the Gospel. Now how was it possible that
this celestial verity should be preserved pure in these Valleys even to our
times, if God, by his infinite power, and adorable wisdom, had not hindered
Satan from sowing his Cockle in the mystical Field of his Church, to corrupt as
he had done in other places, the good seed of his word, by the mixture of
humane Traditions and Pagan Ceremonies, which have corrupted sound Doctrine;
and that which is the greatest cause of admiration, is, that these Valleys are
situated in Italy, where the great Whore has her Seat, and the Princes of
Piemont are subject to her Empire.

As to the wars that the Vaudois have maintained against their Enemies, who
rose against them to destroy them, and to extinguish the bright Lamp of the
Gospel; they are all full of Miracles, where one may see a handful of men,
conducted by Chieftains of no military experience, put to flight great Armies,
commanded by the most valiant and most experienced Captains of the Age; their
Enemies were 20 and 30 and sometimes 100 against one. Now how was it possible
they should have got so many signal victories, if the God of Battle had not
fought for them, and defended them? If God had not given them a most singular
Courage, and had not confounded their Enemies, and struck them with a pannick
fear; but that which is the fullest of miracles, and the greatest cause of
Astonishment is, that neither so many wars raised, by their Enemies, during the
space of 200 years, nor so many Battles they have fought during those long and
bloody wars, nor the cruel Persecutions they have endured, nor the diabolical
artifices of the Emissaries of Antichrist have been able to destroy or to
dissipate these poor Churches, till the year 1686. when Perfidiousness and
Treachery triumphed over their Innocence.

If the subsistence of the Vaudois, in th^s^ Valleys, during so long a space of
time, and among so many obstacles be full of wonders, their return and
re-establishment is not less miraculous.

The King of France and the Duke of Savoy, who were leagued together to destroy
them and drive them out of the Valleys, joined together to oppose their return
and re-establishment. Nine hundred Vaudois, and some Refugees of France pass
the Lake of Geneva, enter into Savoy, cross an Enemies Country of 14 or 15 days
journey, force many difficult passes and defiles guarded with a Force far
greater than theirs, and in spite of all those rubs, they repossessed
themselves of their Country; and while that these two Princes, who are the
bitterest and cruelest Enemies of the Vaudois, and breathed nothing but their
extirpation and ruin, were joining their arms to execute their project, God
blasts their designs, and reduces all into Smoke; he sows a great division
betwixt those two great Friends, they become great Enemies, and turn their arms
one against the other: In conclusion, in despite of their intrigues, God
established the Vaudois in their own Country, even by order of their Prince,
who excused himself to them, for entreating them so ill, and imputed the cause
of it to the King of France; and of those the Duke designed for destruction, he
has made his principal Rampart against France.

The surprising wonders that God has done for them, and the surprising changes
and chances that have happened to them, are in short, and truly represented in
this Book, in which we speak first of all of their Original. Secondly, Of their
Religion, which they have preserved pure from the time of the Apostles even to
our times. Thirdly, Of the great calm they enjoyed during many Ages, even to
the 15th. Age. Fourthly, Of the Croisade made by Innocent the 8th. for to
destroy them, in the year 1488. Fifthly, Of the wars of the Dukes of Savoy and
the Princes of Piemont, from Philip the 8th. to Charles Emmanuel the 2d.
Sixthly, Of the Massacre which was made of them by surprise, in

(...) our days, and were not averred by ey^ witnesses of indubitable credit.

They are called Vaudois, not that they are descended of Peter Valdo of Lions,
as some Historians have thought; but because they are original Inhabitants of
the Valleys: For the word Vaudois or Valdenses comes from the word Val, which
signifies a Valley. So we see the Protestants of Bohemia were at first called
Picards, because they came out of Picardy, the place of their ancient
habitation. The Taborites were likewise so called from the City Tabor, the
place of their ordinary residence; and the Albigenses were so called because
they inhabited the City of Albi, which was full of Protestants, against which
the Pope declared (as they most impiously phrased it) a holy War to destroy
them. From the Vaudois of Piemont are descended the Vaudois of Province, which
is near Piemont. Where some of them took up their habitation, and sowed their
doctrine, and from Province they spread themselves into Languedoc, where they
made a wonderful progress.

This shows that the Vandois of Piemont did not derive themselves from Peter
Waldo, for after that Valdo or Waldo was driven out of Lions by the Archbishop,
according to the order he had received from the Pope, he did not retire into
Piemont but into Flanders, where he sowed the doctrine of the Gospel, which
spread it self into Picardy, which joins to Flanders. These poor People being
persecuted by the King of France, retire into Bohemia, and for that reason were
called Picards, because they came out of Picardy; this we learn from D' Aubigni
in his universal History, where he says that those of the remnant of Waldo who
fled into Picardy did so increase and multiply that to root them out, or at
least to weaken them, Philip Augustus King of France quite destroyed three
hundred Gentlemen's houses.

And what is more, and makes the thing evident beyond any doubt, it is proved by
authentical Records and Acts that the Vaudois of Piemont, had protested against
the errors of the Church of Rome seventy Years bofore Waldo appeared in the
world. For Waldo did not begin to preach against the Roman Church till the Year
1175, but the Vaudois in their own Language, produce diverse acts and monuments
of affairs relating to the Reformation done in the Year 1100, and others in the
Year 1120. 70. or 75. Years before Waldo. These Acts were saved from the Flames
and lamentable Massacre, committed upon these poor people, in the Year 1655.
and the originals were put in the hands of Mr Moreland, the English Ambassador,
and after sent to be kept in the University of Cambridge. One may find Copies
of them in the general History of the Churches of the Vaudois, written by J.
Ledger Minister of the Valleys, printed at Lcyden 1669, and it is not to be
doubted but that the Vaudois of Piemont, had more ancient Acts and Records of
their doctrine, which were buried in the ruins of their Churches, by their
Enemies. In this Book we will only speak of the Vaudois of Piemont, and not of
the descendants of Peter Waldo.

CHAP. I.
Of the Religion of the Vaudois of Piemont.

THE Vaudois or the Inhabitants of the Valleys of Piemont, received the
Doctrine of the Gospel, in the time of the Apostles, either from the Apostles
themselves, or by those who immediately succeeded them.

St. Paul being carried Prisoner to Rome, in the Reign of Nero, sojourned there
two Years, during which space he had the Liberty to go round the City, from
house to house dragging a Chain after him, which was the Badge of a criminal
Prisoner, and there in the capital City, Mistress of the world, he preached the
Gospel of Christ, and laid the Foundation of a flourishing Church, to which he
writ from Corinth, after his departure that excellent Epistle of St. Paul to
the Romans: during his Imprisonment he writ many other learned Epistles to
Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians and Colossians: His fame and doctrine sounded
high in the Court of the Emperor, as it is clear from the Epistle that he then
wrote from Rome to the Philippians, where he says, Phil. 1. 12. and 13. that
what happened to him there, proved the great advancement of the Gospel, so that
his Bonds in Christ were become famous through all the Pretorium (which as
every body knows was the Court of the Emperor, and all other places of Rome.

This great Apostle having gained many Disciples in this famous City, God made
them instruments of planting the Christian Religion in Italy, and in Piemont
which is a part of Italy. For the history of the Church tells us, that those
whom God had illuminated with his holy doctrine, burnt with a desire of
imparting the saving grace, of which they did participate to others.

It it be true also that St. Paul performed his voyage into Spain, as he
designed, Romans 15. 24. he took Rome in his way, it is not to be doubted, but
that if he went by Land he passed through Piemont, for it is in the direct way
from Rome to Spain. And if he went by Sea it was not necessary that in going
from Corinth to Spain, he should pass by Italy; but he was at Corinth when he
writ he had a desire to go into Spain. If he had passed through Piemont, as in
all appearance he did, it is certain he preached there, for he preached every
where where he came.

Since the Valleys of Piemont were enlightened with the bright Rays of the
Gospel, the Inhabitants of these Countries have conserved the purity of the
Christian Religion without any mixture of humane traditions, they never had any
Images or Altars in their Churches; they never invoked the Angels or Saints,
never believed in Purgatory, they never acknowledged other mediator than Jesus
Christ, nor other merit than that of his Death; One never heard them speak of
the Mass, of auricular Confession, of Abstinence from certain sorts of meat, of
the Celibacy of Priests, of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; they always
held the H. Scriptures to be the perpetual rule of Faith, and would never
receive or believe any thing, but what they taught; and their Doctrine was
always the same it is now. This is proved clearly from the Acts that were
preserved from the Flames, that reduced their Churches and houses into Ashes,
among the which, there is one writ in their vulgar tongue in the Year 1100.
called the Lesson, because it gives the rules of holy living and good works,
besides a Catechism of the same Year, where in question and answer are taught
the principal mysteries of the Christian Religion, according to the word of
God, without any mixture of Traditions; besides an explication of the Lords
prayer; in the Year 1120. and an explication of the Apostles Creed, with
several passages of the H. Scripture explaining ever article; to which is
joined an explication of the ten Commandments in short; a little book
entitled, A Treatise of Antichrist.

These three Acts were made, in the Year 1120. the last of these Treatises
shows, that all those are Antichrists that teach Doctrines contrary to the word
of God. They confute the doctrine of Prayers for the dead, Purgatory, Auricular
Confession, Abstinence from Flesh, and reject all traditions that are not in
the word of God, and are not conformable to it.

When these acts were made, the Christian doctrine was not corrupted every
where, there were then many persons in France, Germany and England, who wrote
against the errors which were by Rome and her Doctors introduced into the
Church. If the purity of the Christian Religion had not been conserved in tehse
Valleys of Piemont, from the time of the Apostles, till the beginning of the
Eleventh age, in which these Acts were made, how had it been possible for them
to have made so many famous acts in which the purity of the Christian Religion
is so clearly taught? If they had before received the errors of Rome, by whom,
and when were these errors purged out of the Churches of Piemont? Who was the
Reformer? Where are the Acts that speak of this Reformation, that they may be
produced? If there be none, then there was never any reform, and by a clear
consequence the Christian Religion, has remained from the time that the Vaudois
received it, such as is contained in those Acts, till the time that these Acts
were made.

In the ninth age, about two hundred years before these acts were made, lived
Claudius of Turin, Bishop of that City and the Valleys, who writ sharply
against the errors of the Church of Rome; this Bishop condemned the Invocation
of the Saints, the worshipping of Images, of Relics, and the Cross: he
maintained the doctrine of St. Augustine concerning grace, and by consequence
he rejected the merit of good works; he taught that the Salvation of mankind
does wholly depend upon the merits and death of Christ; he condemned likewise
Pilgrimages made to Rome, which the Monks brought into request. His whole
Diocese, according to the writings of a learned man, followed exactly his
Doctrine, the Sheep lovingly following the Shepherd. The doctrine of
Transubstantiation was not in his time received in France, except in some few
Bishoprics; the greatest stream of writers did strongly oppose it; they did
receive the Communion under both kinds, they did not adore the Sacrament, they
read the Holy Scriptures, and taught it their children; they made no direct
Prayers to Saints as they have done since; they attributed all to the grace and
mercy of God.

The Christian Religion being pure in Piemont in the ninth age, as it appears
by the writings of Claudius of Turin; there is no doubt to be made of its
conserving it self so till the eleventh age, in which those acts of which we
have spoken were made. So we cannot learn from any Historian that those Valleys
were either before or after the time of this great Bishop reformed; and we see
clearly by indubitable acts, that two hundred years after the same Religion was
in those Valleys in its purity, without the allay of humane Traditions and
Ceremonies; and the greatest enemies of the Vandois, for all their boasting,
are not able to show the contrary.

But above all, the purity of their Religion appeared by that excellent
profession of their Faith, made in the year 1120, more than 50 years before
Waldo of Lions. The Articles are as follow.

I. We believe and firmly hold all that is contained in the twelve Articles of
the Symbol of the Apostles, holding for Heresy all doctrine thut does not
agree with the foresaid Articles.

II. We believe in one God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

III. We hold for Holy and Canonical Scriptures the Books of the Holy Bible;
the five Books of Moses, which are, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers,
Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 1 Samuel, 2 Samuel, 1 of Kings, 2 of Kings,
1 of Cronicles, 2 of Cronicles, 1 Esdras, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, the Book of
Psalms, the Proverbs of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, the Song of Solomon, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, the Lamentations of Jeremiah, Ezechiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos,
Obadiah, Jonas, Micah, Nahum, Habbakkuk, Sophoniah, Hagge, Zachariah, Malachiah.

After follow the Apocryphal Books, which are not received by the Jews, but we
read them, as Jerome says in his Preface to the Proverbs, for the instruction
of the people, but not to confirm the authority of Ecclesiastical Doctrine. The
Apocryphal Books are as follow.

The third of Esdras, the fourth of Esdras, Tobie, Judith, Wisdom,
Ecclesiasticus, Baruc, with the Epistle of Jeremiah, Esther from the tenth
Chapter to the end; the History of Susanna, the History of the Dragon, the
first of Maccabees, the second of Maccabees.

The Books of the New Testament. The Gospel of St. Matthew, of St. Mark, St.
Luke and St. John, The Acts of the Apostles, The Epistle of St. Paul to the
Romans, the first to the Corinthians, the second to the Corinthians, to the
Galatians, to the Ephesians, to the Philippians, to the Colossians, the 1 to
the Thessalonians, the 2 to the Thessalonians, the 1 to Timothy, the 2 to
Timothy, to Titus, to Philemon, to the Hebrews, the first Epistle of St. Peter,
the second Epistle of St. Peter, the first Epistle of St. John, the second
Epistle of St. John, the third Epistle of St. John, the Epistle of St. Jude,
the Revelations of St. John.

IV. The foresaid Books teach this, That there is one God Almighty, all wisdom
and goodness, and who by his power has created all things; who made Adam
according to his own Image, but by the malice of the Devil, and the
disobedience of Adam, Sin entered into the World; and that we are Sinners in
Adam, and by Adam.

V. That it was promised to the Fathers who received the Law, that by the Law
knowing their sins, and their own defect of Justice, and their inability of
keeping it, that they should desire the coming of Christ, to satisfy for their
sins, and to accomplish the Law in his own person.

VI. That Christ was born at the time ordained by the father, viz. when all
iniquity abounded, and not for the good works of any, for all were sinners.

VII. That Christ is truth, life, justice, peace, our pastor, advocate,
oblation, sacrificer, that he is dead for the salvation of all believers, and
that he rose for their justification.

VIII. Likewise we firmly believe that there is no other advocate or mediator
for us sinners to the Father but Jesus Christ, and that the blessed Virgin was
holy, humble, full of grace, and the same we believe of all other Saints; and
that they expect in heaven the resurrection of the body at the dayf Judgment.

IX. Item, We believe that after this life that there are but two places, one
for those that are saved, which we call Paradise, and another for those that ae
damned, which we call Hell; totally renouncing the doctrine of Purgatory,
invented by Antichrist and his Ministers.

X. Item, We have always believed that it was an abomination, of which we ought
not to speak in the presence of God, and invented by men, viz. the doctrine of
Feasts and Vigils, of Saints, of Holy Water, of abstinence from flesh and other
meats upon certain days; and above all the doctrine of the Mass.

XI. We have in abomination humane traditions, as being Antichristian, and of
great prejudice to the liberty of the Spirit.

XII. We believe that the Sacraments are the signs or visible forms of holy
things, believing that from time to time the faithful should make use of those
holy signs or visible forms if they can; but nevertheless we believe that the
faithful may be saved if they never received the foresaid signs or visible
forms, when they could not have an opportunity of receiving them.

XIII. We never knew of any other Sacraments than Baptism and the Supper of our
Lord.

XIV. We owe honor to all superior powers, in paying them subjection,
obedience and tribute with alacrity.

It Is now 570 years since this confession of Faith was made by the Churches of
Piemont, at which time all other Churches were corrupted, by the mixture of
humane doctrine and Pagan Ceremonies; the world at that time being overspread
with an Egyptian darkness, and so the Authors of both Religions agree, in
calling that age the dark age.

This confession of Faith being drawn from the writings of the holy Apostles,
and in every respect conformable to their Doctrine, it follows, by a necessary
consequence that the Religion of the Vaudois is the true and pure Religion of
the Apostles, and that they have always kept it pure from the first receiving
of it till the beginning of the eleventh age, and from thence till these times,
since, they now profess the same Faith, and teach the same Doctrine that was
contained in that famous confession. All other Churches, both of the East and
West being infected with diverse Heresies, Satan for to hinder the advancement
of the Reign of Jesus Christ, has from time to time stirred up false Teachers,
who have sown their cursed Seed in the field of our Lord, and by their false
Doctrine, varnished over with a seeming Piety. have corrupted the doctrine of
the Gospel: This is what our Savior foretold, saying to his Disciples, that
false Christ's and false Prophets would arise, and would do signs and wonders to
deceive if it were possible the elect; etc. St. Peter (2 Ep. C. 2. 1, 2, 3.)
prophesied the same thing, there has been false Prophets among the people, as
likewise there will be among you false Teachers, who shall privately introduce
Sects of perdition, and shall deny the Lord who has redeemed them, bringing
upon them sudden perdition, and many shall follow them, by which the ways of
Truth shall be blasphemed: But O the wonderful works of God! who has conserved
by his wise Providence, the purity of his Religion in the Valleys of Piemont,
from the time of the Apostles to our time, by a singular effect of his Goodness
toward these poor people of the Vallys, and has hindered that Satan by his
false Doctors and Teachers could not sow the Cockle of their poisonous
Doctrine, in the mystical field of his Church. Notwithstanding all their crafty
endeavors, God in spite of the Devil and all his works has kept among these
Mountains and Deserts the bright light of his Gospel, and has never suffered
the candle to be extinguished and the great wonders that God has done from time
to time to keep his bright Lamp always shining clear to these happy countries,
makes it evident that this is the place which God (Apoc. 12) has prepared to
keep and defend his Church in, against the furious Attaques of the infernal
Dragon, who gave his power and throne to the Beast, to make war against the
Saints and to vanquish them. For this is the true Desert where the woman (Apoc.
12. 6.) clothed with the Sun, with the Moon under her feet, crowned with
twelve Stars, made her retreat, where God had prepared her a place where she
might be nourished 1260 prophetical days, which make 1260 years; where God
Almighty has kept her safe against all the storms raised by Satan without any
effect, till the year 1686, the term of the Prophecy of the eleventh Chapter of
the Revelations was accomplished; it was then that the Beast which rose out of
the deeps vanquished them and killed them. In another place we shall speak of
these two Witnesses, when we shall show when it was that these poor people were
driven out of their. Country, and when and how it was that they were
re-established by the Duke of Savoy, their Sovereign Prince.

The Vaudois in the second Article of their faith, hold the Holy Scripture for
their rule of faith, and so do teach that nothing is to be believed as an
Article of Faith that they do not prove by clear proofs of Scripture, and so in
the tenth and eleventh Articles they reject all humane traditions as
abominations, and they acknowledge only two Sacraments, viz. Baptism and the
Eucharist. In the thirteenth Article they give us a scantling of their
doctrine, where they say thus, The Sacraments, according to St. Augustine in
his City of God, is an invisible grace represented by a visible thing, and they
say there is a^ great deal of difference between the sign and the thing
signified. The first Sacrament is called Baptism, viz. a washing or sprinkling
of Water, which must be administered in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost.

Behold here also that which is found in the Book of Antichrist, relating to
Baptism. This Book was made in the year 1120, as we have said before.

Those things which are not necessary in the administration of Baptism are
exorcisms, insufflations; the sign of the Cross upon the Head and Breast of the
Infant, Salt which is put in the Child's mouth, Spittle into the Ears and Nose,
the Crysmatical unction upon the Head, and all such like things consecrated by
the Bishops: They likewise say it is unnecessary to put a lighted Torch in the
Child's hand, and after Baptism to put on it a white garment, or to bless the
Water, or to dip it thrice, or to have Godfathers and Godmothers. All these
things done in the administration of the Sacraments, they say are not of the
substance of Baptism, and by consequence unnecessary.

Behold likewise here what they say of the Supper of our Lord, in the same Book
of Antichrist as Baptism, which is taken visibly, and visibly administered, is,
as it were, an enrolling one in the company of the Faithful; and obliges them
to follow Jesus Christ, and observe his Commandments, and to live up to the
rules of the Gospel; so likewise the Holy Supper and the Holy Communion of our
Savior, the breaking of Bread and the giving of thanks is a visible Communion
performed by the members of Jesus Christ: For those that take and break the
same bread, are one body and are members one of another, planted in him, to
whom they protest and promise to persevere in his service even to the end,
without leaving the Faith of the Gospel, or the Union that they have all
promised to God, through and by Jesus Christ. And in the same Book of
Antichrist.

The eating of the Sacramental Bread is the eating of the Body of Christ in
figure only, as often as you shall do this, do it in remembrance of me; for if
it were not a Spiritual Eating, Christ would be obliged to be eaten
continually, and he in truth eats Christ, who believes in him; and Christ says,
That to eat him is to dwell in him.

From whence it follows that the Vaudois did not believe Transubstantiation,
nor the Oral and Corporal Eating of the Body of Christ, but that the signs in
the Supper of our Lord remained as they were before in substance, before they
were employed to this holy use; and that as often as they received these
visible signs by their mouth, they received, by faith, the virtue and efficacy
of the Body of Jesus Christ, broke upon the Cross, signified by the breaking of
Bread, and of his Blood that was spilt, signified and represented by the
pouring of the Wine into the Cup, and that by this action, they celebrated the
memory of the death of Christ, and obeyed his Commandment, Do this in
remembrance of me: Words that St. Paul explains in this manner, As often as you
shall eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, you declare and commemorate the
death of the Lord, till he come.

If the Vaudois have conserved the purity of the Christian Religion, from the
time of the Apostles, till the beginning of the Eleventh Age, as we have shown
by their Confession of Faith, which they made at the beginning of that Age,
they have not kept it less pure from that time till our days, as we shall prove
by another Confession of Faith, which they made in the year 1655. After the
Massacre, which all Christendom has heard spoken of with horror and
detestation, and of which we shall speak hereafter.

A short Confession of the Faith of the Churches of Piemont, published with
their Manifesto, after the dreadful Massacres of the Year 1655.

ARTICLES.
We believe first, That there is but one only God, who is a Spiritual Essence,
Eternal, Infinite, all Mercy, all Wisdom, all Justice; in a word, every way
perfect; and that in this Infinite and Pure Essence there are three Persons,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

II. That this God has manifested himself to men, by his glorious works, as
well by his Creation, as his continual Providence, and by his Word revealed at
first by his Oracles in diverse manners; afterward reduced by writing, into
Books, which we call the Holy Scripture.

III. That these Holy Scriptures ought to be received, as we receive them, for
Divine and Canonical, viz. for the rule of our Faith, and the direction of our
Life, as they are contained in the books of the old and new Testament, and that
in the old Testament there are only these books following to be received as of
divine revelation, and which God only approved of and consigned to the Church
of the Jews, viz. The five Books of Moses, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, the 1 and 2 of
Samuel, the 1 and 2 of Kings, the 1 and 2 of Chronicles, the 1 of Esdras,
Nehemiah. Esther, Job, the Psalms, the Proverbs of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, the
Song of Songs, the 4 greater Prophets, and the 12 lesser. The Books of the new
Testament are, The 4 Gospels, the Acts of the Apostles, the Epistles of St.
Paul to the Romans, 2 Epistles to the Corinthians, 1 to the Galatians, 1 to the
Ephesians, 1 to the Philippians, 1 to the Colossians, 2 to the Thessalonians, 2
to Timothy, 1 to to Timothy, 1 to Titus, 1 to Philemon, 1 to the Hebrews, 1 of
St. James, 1 of St. Peter, 3 of St. John, 1 of St. Jude, the Apocalypse or the
Revelations of St. John.

IV. That we acknowledge the Divinity of these sacred books, not only by the
Testimony of the Church, but principally by the eternal and indubitable truth
of the Doctrine, contained in them, and for the excellent and divine Majesty of
them, and by the operation of the holy Ghost, which makes us receive with
Reverence the Testimony which the Church gives on them, which opens our Eyes to
discover the rays of Celestial light, which shone in these sacred Books, which
rectifies our Understanding to discern and rightly taste the divine things
contained in them.

V. That God has made all things of nothing by his free will, and by the
infinite power of his word.

VI. That he guides and governs all things by his providence, ordering all
things that happen in the World, without being the author or cause of Evil that
the Creatures do; so that he is wholly without blame, and evil can in no manner
be imputed to him.

VII. That the Angels having been created pure and holy, some of them fell into
sin, and irreparable perdition, but others persevered by an effect of the
Divine Goodness, who assisted them and confirmed them in grace.

VIII. That Man who was created Pure, Holy, after the Image of God, deprived
himself by his own fault of this happy state, giving his assent to the captious
discourse of the Devil.

IX. That man has lost by his Transgression the Justice and Holiness he
received, incurring with the indignation of God, death and captivity under the
power of him who has the Empire of Death, viz. the Devil, to that degree, that
his free will is become a Servant and Slave of Sin; so that by nature all men
as well Jews as Gentiles are the Children of wrath, dead in their sins, and by
consequence incapable of having any good motion toward their Salvation, nor to
frame a good thought without Grace, all their imaginations and thoughts being
always evil.

X. That all the posterity of Adam were made guilty by his disobedience,
infected with the same Corruption and fallen into the same Calamity, even young
Children from the Womb of their Mother, from whence comes the name of Original
Sin.

XI. That God withdrew out of this Corruption and Condemnation, the Persons
that he has chosen by his mercy in Jesus Christ his Son, leaving others by an
irreproachable justice of his Liberty.

XII. That Jesus Christ being ordained of God, in his eternal decree, to be the
only Savior, and the only head of his body, which is his Church, he has
redeemed it with his own blood, in the fullness of time, and communicates to it
all his benefits and favors by the Gospel.

XIII. That ther^ are two Natures in Jesus, the divine and humane, truly in one
Person without Confusion, without Division, without Separation, without Change,
each Nature keeping its distinct property; and tha^ Jesus Christ is true God
and man.

XIV. That God has so loved the world, that he has given his only Son for to
save us by his most perfect Obedience, particularly by that, he suffered the
cursed Death of the Cross, and by the victories he gained over the Devil, Sin,
and Death.

XV. That Jesus Christ having made an entire expiation of our Sins, by a most
perfect Sacrifice of himself upon the Cross, it cannot, nor ought not to be
reiterated, upon any pretense whatsoever.

XVI. That Jesus Christ having fully reconciled us to God, by his bloodshed
upon the Cross; it is by his only merit, and not by our works, that we are
absolved and justified before him.

XVII. That we have an Union with Jesus Christ, and Communion of his Benefits
by Faith, which are promised us by his holy Gospel.

XVIII. That this Faith comes from the gracious and efficacious operations of
the holy Ghost, which illuminates our Souls, and carries them to rely upon the
mercy of God, to be applied by the Merits of Jesus Christ.

XIX. That Jesus Christ is our only and true Mediator, not only as to
Redemption, but also as to Intercession; and that by his Merits and Mediation
we have access to the Father, for to invoke him with a holy Confidence to be
heard without any need of having recourse to any other Intercessor than him.

XX. That as God does promise us regeneration in Jesus Christ, those that are
united to him by a lively Faith, should apply themselves with all their heart
to do good works.

XXI. That good works are so necessary to the faithful, that they cannot come
to the Kingdom of Heaven without doing of them, so we must walk in the ways of
Justice and Righteousness; sly all Vices, and exercise our selves in all
Christian Virtues, employing Fasting and all other means, that may conduce to
so holy an end.

XXII. That though we cannot merit any thing by our good Works, our Savior
will notwithstanding recompense them with eternal Life; by a merciful
Continuation of his Grace; and in Virtue of an immovable Constancy of his
Grace and Promises.

XXIII. That those that possess eternal Life, for their Faith and good Works,
must be considered as Saints, and glorified and praised for their Virtues;
intimated in all their excellent Actions: But not adored or invoked, for no
Address of Prayer must be made to any but God alone, through Jesus Christ.

XXIV. That God has gathered together a Church in this world, for the Salvation
of mankind, but she has but one Head and Foundation which is Jesus Christ.

XXV. That this Church is the company of the Faithful, who being elected by
God, before the Foundation of the world, and called by a holy Vocation, are
united together for to follow the word of God, believing that which he teaches,
and living in his Fear.

XXVI. That this Church cannot fail, or be quite destroyed, but that it will
always remain.

XXVII. That every body must be a Member of that Church and keep in her
Communion.

XXVIII. That God does not only instruct us by his word, but that besides he
has instituted Sacraments to be joined to his word, as the means to unite us to
Christ, and to communicate to us his Benefits; and that there are but two
common, to all the Members of the Church under the new Testament, viz. Baptism
and the Supper of our Lord.

XXIX. That he has instituted the Sacrament of Baptism for a Testimony of our
Adoption; and that we are washed from our Sins in the Blood of Jesus Christ,
and renewed in Sanctity of Life.

XXX. That he has instituted that of the Eucharist, or of his Holy Supper, for
the nourishment of our Souls, to the end, that by a true and lively says, by
the incomprehensible virtue of the Holy Ghost, eating effectively his Flesh,
and drinking his Blood, and uniting us most inseparably to Christ, in him, and
by him, we may have Eternal Life.

XXXI. That it is necessary that the Church have Pastors, well instructed and of
good life, instituted by them that have the right to do it, as well to Preach
the Word of God, as to administer the Sacraments, and watch over the Flock of
Christ, following the rules of a good and holy Discipline conjointly with the
Elders and Deacons, according to the practice of the Ancient Church.

XXXII. That God has established Kings and Magistrates for the government of
his People, and the People ought to be subject and obedient to them in virtue
of the said Order, not only for Anger, but for Conscience, in all things that
are conformable to the Word of God, who is the King of kings, and Lord of lords.

XXXIII. That we must receive the Creed of the Apostles, the Lords Prayer, the
Ten Commandments as Fundamental Parts of our belief, and of our Devotions.

We can likewise make it appear, even by evidence drawn out of the Books of the
Adversaries of the Vaudois, that their Doctrine is the same as it is represented
in this confession, and that it has always been so, those that have a mind to
see those Testimonies, may find them in the General History, written by John
Ledger.

The Vaudois having conserved from Father to Son, the purity of the Doctrine of
the Apostles, from the time they received it, down to our days, and made a
constant profession publicly of this Celestial Doctrine, they are by
consequence the true Successors of the Apostles.

CHAP. III.
Of the Ecclesiastical Government of the Churches of the Vaudois of Piemont,
and the Manners of the Vaudois.

BUT if they have succeeded the Apostles, as to their Doctrine, they likewise
succeeded it as to the Order and Government of the Church. In the Primitive
Church, Acts 20. The Apostles established for the government of it, Elders,
Ephesians. 4. 11. and Deacons, as we may learn, as well from the book of the Acts
of the Apostles, as from their Epistles, Tit. 1. 5, 6. the Pastors are likewise
called Bishops and Elders, 1 Timothy 3. they are called Pastors because they are
to feed the Flock of Christ, which are his Sheep, with the good Word of God;
they are called Bishops, which signifies Inspectors or Watchers, because they
are to watch and take care of the Flock which is committed to their charge;
they are called Elders, because they ought to be Sage and Prudent, and edify
those that are committed to them by their good life and conduct; and so there
were two sorts of Elders in the Primitive Church, the one labored in the
Government of the Church only, and the other, besides the care they had of the
affairs of the Church, took also pains in Preaching and Explaining the Word, 1 Timothy 5. 17. The Deacons had the care of the Poor, and Pastors, Elders, and
Deacons altogether had the government of the Church. This is the Discipline
that the Churches of Piemont have always kept, as one may see in their ancient
Manuscripts, translated out of their Language into French, and treated of
succinctly in the Cap. 31. of the First Part of the General History of the
Churches of the Vaudois; in which writing it is said, the Churches there have
always had Pastors, Elders and Deacons to govern them, as they had till the
year 1686. when they were dispersed. The Pastors employed themselves to
instruct and exhort the people to live well and holily, and the Pastors, Elders
and Deacons altogether watched over their Flock, to banish all vice and
scandal. It was requisite that the Governors of the Church should be of a good
Life and holy Conversation, for to edify others by their good Example. There
were Schools kept to breed up Youth in piety: There was likewise a particular
School for to instruct those that aspired to the Ministry, where was taught
Divinity. They made the young Scholars learn by heart all the Chapters of the
Gospels according to St. Matthew, and St. John, and all the Canonical Epistles,
and a good part of the Writings of Solomon, David, and the Prophets. There came
to this School, young men out of Bohemia, and other places where the people of
God dwelt and retained the profession of the ancient verity, to be instructed
in the Ministry.

The Vaudois were not only pure, as to their Doctrine, but likewise as to their
Manners, even their Adversaries witness the same. Reynerus Sacco, who was one
of the first Inquisitors, employed by Rome against those of the Valleys, speaks
thus of them in his Relation which he made of them to the Court of Rome.

After he had told that Court that the Sect of the Vaudois was the eldest that
had ever been, it beginning in the time of the Apostles, or at least of
Sylvester; he adds touching their Manners, that whereas all other Sects did
strike the hearers with horror of their many Blasphemies against God, that this
of the Valleys made great demonstration of piety, for they live justly before
the face of the World: and in Chap. 7. of his Book, he says the Vaudois are
chaste. The President Du, Thou, commonly called Tuaanus, in Chap 27. of his
History, says, that the Vaudois observe the Ten Commandments of the Law, which
gives the rule of living holily and piously, they give no entertainment to any
sort of Vices in their Assemblies, they have in horror and detest all sorts of
unlawful Oaths, Perjuries, Wicked Imprecations, Quarrels, Seditions, Debauches,
Drunkenness, Whoring, Enchantments, Sacrileges, Thest, Usury, Witchcraft, and
the like.

And Claudis de Seissel, Archbishop of Turin, in the Book he wrote against the
Vaudois, in the year 1500. confesses in formal terms, that as to their Life and
Manners, they live in the world without reproach, observing with all their
power the Commandments of God. We could allege many other authorities of the
bitterest Enemies of the Vaudois, which they give of their good life and
conversation; but the curious may find them in the General History of the
Vaudois, if they think these be not sufficient.

CHAP. IV.
Of the great Calm the Vaudois Churches enjoyed many Ages.

WE cannot find in the Ecclesiastical Histories the Vaudois, or Christians of
the Valleys of Piemont were persecuted under the reigns of Nero, Domitian, or
any other of the Pagan Emperors, who so cruelly persecuted the Christians; it is
therefore probable, that during those cruel persecutions, many faithful
Christians retired unto these Valleys to escape persecution, and to save
themselves from the bloody hands of those cruel Butchers, as we saw in France,
during the last persecution, that many of the Reformed Religion fled into the
Woods, Mountains, and hid themselves in Caverns and Rocks to save themselves
from the hands of the cruel and pitiless Dragoons, and to avoid, by their
flight, the danger of renouncing their Religion: So the Church, which is
represented by the Woman, is at the same time, Rev. 12. described flying into
the Wilderness from the fury of the Dragon. And is there a more dreadful
Wilderness than the Mountains of the Alps, which are covered with Snow eight
or nine months of the year, amongst which are these Valleys. It Is said, that in
the Desert, the Woman had a place prepared of God for her, where she might be
nourished 1260 days. The Valleys, have they not been the place which God has
prepared to keep his Church safe in? since the true Church has been always
conserved here from the time of the Apostles, even to our days, without any
interruption or want of succession; that while the whole world ran after the
Beast, only the Inhabitants of these Valleys followed Jesus Christ, etc. walked
according to the truth of his Gospel. This was the true land of Goshen, which
only was enlightened with Celestial Light, while the New Egypt was all covered
over with the thick and palpable darkness of Ignorance and Errors; so they had
for their Arms a Torch lighted, surrounded with thick Darkness, with this
Inscription, Lux lucet in Tenebris.

That which still more persuades us, that these Valleys of Piemont was the
place which God had prepared to keep his Church in, is, that first of all,
these Churches of the Valleys have enjoyed a continual peace and perfect
repose, after the beginning of the first age that the Papal Empire began to
erect its Throne, till toward the end of the fifteenth age, viz. till the year
1487. that Pope Innocent the eighth, made (as they called it) a Holy War
against them to destroy them. Secondly It was then, when their Enemies would
have destroyed them by force of Arms, which they endeavored several times; but
God gave them so great and signal Victories, that it was visible, that the God
of Battle, and the Lord of Hosts covered their Heads and fought with them, and
for them; and in conclusion, when under pretense of Treaties of Peace, and
Solemn Parole that was given them, that they should fear nothing, they were
lulled asleep and surprised, where cruel Massacres were made of these poor
Innocents, deceived by the perfidiousness and treachery of their Enemies,
notwithstanding all these Massacres, Cruelties and Barbarities, which were
exercised on their Persons, and ravaging of the Country, burning and spoiling
their houses and goods, they could never destroy them, they have always
persisted in their holy Religion, and continued firm in the Faith of Jesus
Christ, from Father to Son, from Generation to Generation; and as they were
faithful to God, God has always protected them and assisted them in their
greatest miseries; God by his infinite power has confounded the designs of
their Enemies, and rendered their strongest Efforts inefficacious.

We have told you that the Vaudois of of Piemont having lived in Peace and and
Repose in their Valleys, till the year 1487. which is very true,
notwithstanding the Inquisition of the Pope against them, for although the
Archbishops of Turin and Ambrun, to whom the Pope had given commission, to
inform themselves of their State and Condition, and to proceed by any manner of
way to their Extirpation; and went themselves into the Valleys, and cited
diverse times their Pastors, and the principal Inhabitants, and took
Informations against them, proceeding against them even to Excommunication:
These proceedings, notwithstanding, did them no great harm, nor troubled their
repose, for they never appeared before the Inquisitors, and set light of their
Excommunication, and rather took it for a mark of Gods blessing upon them, who
had distinguished them from other people who followed the Beast, and adored his
Image; since they themselves alone, when all the world was in a manner lost,
followed and adored Jesus Christ.

And this is very remarkable, that they enjoyed a profound peace, while their
Brethren, the Vaudois of France, Germany, England, Spain and Italy, were
greatly persecuted by the Enemies of the truth of the Gospel; and while the
other Vaudois were dispersed by Wars and Persecutions, which their Enemies
raised against them, the Vaudois of Piemont by a particular effect of the
divine Goodness, always were safe in their Valleys, notwithstanding all Wars
and Persecutions which were raised against them, till the year 1686. that the
two witnesses of the eleventh Chapter of the Apocalypse were entirely
vanquished and slain.

CHAP. V.
Of the first War against the Vaudois of Piemont, and of the Croisade, which
was made against them by Pope Innocent VIII.

THE first War that was made against the Vaudois of Piemont, was in the Year
1487. that Albert de Capitaneis Archdeacon of Cremona and Nuntio of Pope
Innocent VIII. having received Commission from his Master to make a Croisade,
or holy war for the utter Extirpation of these poor people. This Papal
Commissary excited by Virtue of his Bull, the Duke of Savoy Prince of Piemont,
the King of France, and all the Neighboring Princes for to aid him, and to
lend their Troops for their Extirpation, he mustered an army of 18. thousand
men, besides five or six thousand Volunteers of Piemont, who came in great
bodies to join this Army: for besides that, the Pope promised all those that
should go to this War, a full and entire Indulgence and Remission of their
Sins; they were likewise made to hope, they should have the pillage of these
Valleys, and the confiscation of all their Goods, who should be dispossessed.

This great Army divided it self into several Bodies, to attacque the Vaudois
in different places, which they did with great Fury: But though the Vaudois
were but few in number in respect of their Enemies and not so well experienced
in warlike Affairs, having lived many Ages in peace, notwithstanding they
sustained with an invincible courage the dangerous Efforts of the enraged
Enemy; and God who sought for them, who most ardently invoked him, struck their
Enemies with a pannick Fear, in such a manner, that by the aid of Heaven this
formidable Army was repulsed, dispersed, and almost entirely defeated: The
broken remains of this Army which stayed upon the Frontiers, durst attacque
them no more among their Rocks, they contented themselves almost a whole year
to make excursions into the open and plain Countries and to keep them always in
an Alarm, which was extremely prejudicial to these poor people, because they
were obliged to be always ready armed to keep themselves from surprise; so that
they could not till the Earth, from which they drew the subsistence of
themselves and their Families.

Philip VII. Duke of Savoy and Prince of Piemont, considering that this war was
little honorable to him, seeing the bad success that did ensue, and that it
was very prejudicial to his Subjects, and particularly those of the Roman
Communion, of which a great number perished in the war, and that others were
very much exhausted by the Troops which they had entertained and given
Subsistence to, was resolved to put an end to it, and to this purpose he
ordered that twelve of them should come to Pignerol, the place where he then
kept his abode, which they having done, he received them kindly, and passed an
Act of oblivion of all that had passed during the War, and avowed to them that
he acknowledged he had been ill informed, not only of what related to their
Persons, but also of their Religion, and declared publicly that he had none so
good or so obedient Subjects as the Vaudois; he confirmed all their Privileges
and Immunities, and promised them that for the future he would take those
measures that they should live in peace.

The Inquisitors established by the Pope being frustrated of their expectation
of prevailing against the Vaudois by an open war, take other measures to
destroy them. If they went out of their Country, they made them be seized on
and put in Prison, making use of the secular power to this end, and when they
had them there, they either let them perish there, or else condemned them to
Death.

The Inquisitors likewise by threatenings, forced Margarite de Foix, Sovereign
Lady of the Marquesate of Saluzzo, to persecute the Vaudois that were in her
Marquisate; the Persecution was so great and so cruel that these poor
Protestants were forced to leave house and home and to save themselves in the
Valely of Lucerne, without carrying any thing off but their precious Souls,
there they stayed five years in this miserable Condition, during which time
they perpetually plied the Duke of Savoy with humble Supplications, that he
would be pleased to mediate for them, that they might berestored to their own
Country, and that the unjust Usurpers of their Lands and Goods, might be forced
to restore: But at last, seeing all Prayers and Submissions did serve to no
purpose, because of the opposition of the Pope, the Clergy, and above all of
the Inquisitors; they resolved to take up Arms, and to endeavor to repossess
themselves of their Lands and Goods, and that which gave them the greater
courage and boldness to do it, was because they were chased out by Force,
without any order of their Sovereign Lady. This Enterprise was attended with a
happy Success, on a sudden they invaded the Usurpers of their Goods, they
chased them away and frighted them so, that they never attempted more a return;
and these poor Vaudois after this happy Exploit, for at least a hundred years
after, enjoyed a profound Peace and Liberty of their Religion through all the
Marquisate.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Second War against the Vaudois of Piemont, by Charles I. Duke of Savoy.

PHilip VII. Duke of Savoy, being dead, Charles his Son succeeded him. This
Prince was mightily importuned by the Archbishop and Inquisitor of Turin, to
deliver over to the secular power his Subjects of the reformed Religion, he
gave commission to Don Pentaleon Bressour Lord of Rocheplate to war against
them, in the Year 1534.

This Nobleman having chosen 1500. select men out of all the Troops of the
Duke, when the Vaudois thought themselves most secure, having not the least
Suspicion of their Enemies Intention, he suddenly attacqued them, surprising,
killing, and massacring, all that came in his way, without sparing Age or Sex,
which caused a great consternation in these Valleys; but at last these people
resuming their innate courage, mustered together, and put themselves in so good
order, that the day following, as their Enemies thought of marching on, and
continuing their Butcheries all along the Valley of Lucerne, they charged them
so courageously in the Rear and in the Front, and in the Flank, that a great
number of these Massacrers were killed upon the field, others saved themselves
by flight, leaving behind them the booty, and the Prisoners they had taken from
the Vaudois.

When the Duke of Savoy saw that the Skin of a Vaudois cost him twenty Roman
Catholics, he would not permit they should be any more persecuted by open
force of Arms, but that more secret means should be taken, as less dangerous;
to bring this about, he established certain Troops of Highway-men and
Assassins, who laid in Ambuscado in places proper for their design, and when
the Vaudois descended from the Mountains, or went out of the Valleys about
their affairs, they were presently seized on; many for a long time fell into
these Snares, and became the Prey of those Villains, who after they had
ransomed them, notwithstanding took away their lives by most exquisite
torments. Catalan Gerard, of St. John in the Valley of Lucerne, was one of
those who fell into their hands, he was burnt alive at Revel, a City of
Piemont, and suffered death with an admirable constancy.

CHAP. VII.
Of the third War against the Vaudois of Piemont, and the Persecution that they
suffered from the Parliament of Turin.

FRancis the First, King of France, having made himself Master of Piemont, and
dispoiled the Duke of Savoy of his Principality, in the year 1536. as well he,
as the Pope incited the Parliament of Turin to proceed against the Vaudois, as
against Pernicious Heretics, in obedience to whom they raised a great
persecution, imitating in that, the Parliaments of France, who persecuted those
of the Reformed Religion. These poor people had recourse to the King,
presenting him an Humble Petition, hoping to obtain some favor from this their
new Lord and Master, and so much the more because it is the custom among
Princes, to pretend a great kindness and tenderness for their new subjects, to
engage them the more in their service. But this did but worsen their condition,
for the King commanded them to live according to the Laws of the Roman Church,
telling them, that if they did not obey his Order, he would severely punish
them as obstinate Heretics, telling them that he did not burn them in France,
to suffer them in the Alps.

The Parliament of Turin being encouraged by this severe Answer, presently
enjoined the Vaudois to put away from them their Ministers, and to receive in
their places Priests, who should come and say Mass to them: They answered it
was impossible to obey Orders so contrary to the Word of God; that they were
willing to give Caesar what appertained to Caesar, as they had always done, but
that they would likewise give to God the things that belong to God, and that in
this case they were resolved, according to the examples of the Apostles, rather
to obey God than man, and rather hold themselves to the Word of God, than the
traditions of man.

The King then having many affairs upon his shoulders, the Parliament judged it
not proper to undertake an Open War against them, but they contented themselves
to give Orders to the Judges and Magistrates to assist vigorously the Monks and
Inquisitors, and to burn all the Vaudois that should fall into their hands;
many laid down their lives this way, but with admirable constancy; above all,
Bartholomew Hector, who was publicly burnt at Turin, in the year 1555. who by
an edifying death, drew a flood of tears, even from the multitude of the
Papists, and not content only with tears, they greatly murmured, and made sharp
invectives against the cruelty of the Monks and Inquisitors.

In the year 1557. Mr. Varaille, an excellent Minister of Angrougne,
unfortunately falling into their hands, was publicly burned in the
Castle-yard, singing with a loud voice the praises of God in the middle of the
flames, even to the last breath. This same year Nicholas Sartoris, Student in
Divinity at Geneva, having a mind to visit his Country, was taken in the Valley
of Auste, and accused of Heresy, and the enemies of the truth seeing they
could not draw him by flattery, nor shake him by threats, ordered him to be
burnt alive, and so he died a glorious death.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the fourth War against the Vaudois of Piemont by Emanuel Philibert, Duke of
Savoy, after the General Peace, in the year 1559.

EManuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy, and Successor of Charles, having recovered
his Estates by the General Peace, in the year 1559. was spurred on by the Monks
and Regulars of Pignerol, to condemn the Vaudois to be burnt, and their goods
confiscated, and given for a recompense to the Instruments of their ruin.

These poor people, seeing themselves upon the brink of ruin and desolation,
after their recourse to him who has the heart of Kings in his hand, by their
Prayers, Fastings and Humiliations, they went and cast themselves at the feet
of the Duke of Savoy, their Prince, and presented an Humble Petition to him,
tending to this, that he would let them live, and enjoy a free exercise of
their Religion; they presented another of the same tenure to the Duchess his
Wife, who had a great share in the knowledge of truth, and who always showed a
great tenderness for them.

But it was all to no purpose, the Pope and the King of Spain, to whom the Duke
of Savoy was extremely obliged, because they had contributed their utmost
endeavors to re-establish him in his Dominions, solicited this Prince, very
pressingly, to destroy the Vaudois, who contrary to his own interests, was
easily persuaded, at the desire of the Monks, who continually solicited him to
make War upon them.

While in the interim, they endeavored to sweeten their Prince, and by their
humble requests, to turn off the storm which threatened them; the Soldiers of
the neighboring Towns surprised the borough of St. German, by the assistance
of the darkness of the night; the Protestants of this place, in so dangerous a
conjuncture, thought of nothing but saving their persons, the greatest part, in
their Shirts, ran to the neighboring Mountains, except twenty five, who being
in the houses that were farthest off, were by consequence the farthest from
this retreat. These seeing they had not time to fly, cast themselves upon their
Knees, and making a short but ardent prayer to God in sight of their Enemies,
went to attaque them with that courage and resolution, that they put them all
to flight, a great many were killed upon the spot, and God striking the rest
with a pannick fear, a great many through their hasty flight, fell into the
River of Cluson, and there perished miserably.

The Duke of Savoy, assisted by the Pope, Spain, and France, raised a powerful
Army against the Vaudois, and made General of it the Count De la Trinita, who
seeing this People weakened and shaken with so many furious shocks of Wars and
Persecution, did not doubt of bringing his designs speedily to his desired
effect, and to extirpate the Vaudois root and branch: He had recourse to
Politics and Stratagems, before he would make use of open force; in short, he
sent for the Ministers and Guides of the Churches, he exhorted them to lay down
their Arms, and to bring them to him; on the one side he represented unto them
the great dangers they were ready to be precipitated into, if they did not
submit themselves to the will of their Prince, seeing the great forces which he
had to compel them, which it was impossible for them to withstand: That the
Pope, the King of Spain, the King of France had engaged the Duke in this War,
and did lend him their Troops, that the General Peace being made, they would
employ all their forces to destroy them if they would not submit and obey. On
the other hand he made them specious and advantageous propositions, giving them
hopes, that if they would submit to the will of their Prince, they should enjoy
peace, and live in liberty, with all their ancient privileges: Many were
shaken and frighted by the treacherous discourse of this Lord; who seeing them
divided, some being willing to submit to save their lives and fortunes to the
will of their Prince, others being of a different sentiment, because of the
dangerous consequences they foresaw this submission might draw after it. In
this dubious estate of their affairs, he took his opportunity, he laid ambushes
for them in several places; and having surprised them in small parties, he made
a cruel butchery without any resistance, exercising all sorts of cruelties
against these innocent Lambs, who were betrayed by trusting to his sugared
words.

This barbarous treachery cast these people into an inexpressible
consternation; but three hundred of those that escaped from the massacre, being
assembled together by the favor of the night, and being fortified by little
and little by their brethren, who were diffident of the Counts promises, and
had saved themselves in the Mountains; with this little Troop of the Vaudois
God did such wonders as almost seem incredible, if we had not seen what their
Successors have done in the wars of the year 1655. and 1664. and the last year,
when seven or 800 Vaudois crossed all Savoy, which was then all in Arms, and
forced several Passes kept by the Regular Troops of France, and Savoy, and in
spite of their Enemies entered into their own Country, and there have endured
fifteen or sixteen bloody fights, which fully persuades us that God is with
this people, and fought for them, and with them; without whose wonderful help
it was impossible they should have performed such extraordinary exploits.

The day after this treachery, the Count Del a Trinita employed his Army from
morning till night in spoiling and ransacking all the places in the Valley of
Lucerne, of which he had made himself Master, after which he marched with seven
or eight thousand select men as high as Angrogne, toward the place called the
Meadow of the Tower, where the greatest part of the Families of these poor
Vaudois were retired, as to the strongest Sanctuary or Azilum they could find
in all the Valley of Lucerne.

He attacqued them in this place by three several ways, and gave them no time
of respite for four days, one assault was no sooner repulsed, but he gave
another with fresh Troops, without gaining any advantage: In these assaults he
lost two Colonels, eight Captains, and seven or eight hundred Soldiers.

The fifth day, he being absolutely bent to carry the Post; and to this end he
made use of Spanish Troops which were fresh, and as yet had never been engaged:
The Spanish Soldiers seeing ^hey advanced nothing, and that they ^ell like
hail, mutined against their Officers that were obstinate to continue the
attacque. The Vaudois having observed the confusion that their Enemies were in,
fell upon them with so much courage and bravery, that they put the whole Army
to the rout, and they were struck with so great a fear, that many of them threw
themselves off the rocks into the river of Angrogne and were drowned in its
whirlpools; they pursued their Enemies the space of two leagues, and killed a
great number of them.

To show that France aided the Duke of Savoy in the War he had begun against
the Vaudois, D' Aubigni, reports in his General History, that this Prince
having desired the King of France to lend him Monsieur de Maugiron with ten
Companies of Foot, and Monsieur de la Motte Gondren, with other Troops, all
composed of picked and expert Soldiers, he says it was granted him, and that the
Troops were joined to the Army commanded by Count de la Trinita; the Vaudois,
in sight of this Army, reinforced with the Troops of France, confiding in the
aid Heaven, went to force the Fortress of the Borough of Villar, in the middle
of the Valley of Lucerne, that the Duke a while before had built to cut that
Pass from the Enemy.

The Count del a Trinita being strengthened with the Troops of France, and some
fresh ones sent by the Duke, attempted several times to attacque them, but in
every one of them they were repulsed with considerable loss, sometimes they
lost 900. men, when the Vaudois lost not above 15. The Army of the Duke being
extremely weakened, what by continual losses, what by desertion of Soldiers, who
seeing they got nothing but blows in this War, deserted in great numbers. The
Duke solicited by his Duchess, whom as we have said, had some knowledge of
the Truth, and had a great deal of tenderness for the Vaudois, gave them Peace
with the free exercise of their Religion, by his Letters Patents, dated at
Cavor the fifth of June 1561. their Goods being restored to them, the Prisoners
released, and those that were condemned to Galleys (for their Religion) were
set at liberty, and they were reestablished in all their Rights and Privileges.

In the year 1565. four years after this Edict was published, at the earnest
desire of the Pope, a new Order was published through all these Valleys, That
all the Subjects of the D. of Savoy, who within ten days after the publication
of the said order did not declare before some of their Magistrates that they
would go to Mass should within two months be gone out of all the Estates of the
said Duke; and at the same time the Magistrates received an express order to
make an exact list of all those that would not obey the said Order, and send it
speedily to his Highness.

The Protestant Princes of Germany were extremely sensible of this new
Vexation, and made by their Letters a great Complaint to the Duke, of the bad
entreatment of the Vaudois, to the Prejudice, and contrary to the Tenor of his
Letter, Patents, and desired him to remedy it for the future, that they might
enjoy the Benefit of his generous Grant, the Prince Palatine sent one of of his
principal Counselors in an Embassy to procure peace, to these poor People;
Margerite of France, wife of the Duke, who was a pious and virtuous Princess,
and who was very tender of the Vaudois, sweetened as much as she could the anger
of her Husband, who by false reports of the Enemies of the Gospel, was much
irritated against them.

The day of St. Bartholomew, in the Year 1572. there was made a most cruel
Massacre of the Protestants at Paris, and in several other places of the
Kingdom of France, Castrocaro Governor of the Valleys, threatened to do as much
to the Vaudois of Piemont; But whether it was that the Duke of Savoy did not
approve of the cruel Butchery which was made of the Protestants of France, or
whether at the earnest Solicitations of his Duchess, who as much as possible
with her natural Sweetness gained, and wrought upon him to show Mercy and
Clemency to the Vaudois, he put forth a Manifesto, and declared to all his
Subjects of the Valleys, who for Fear of the Governor were fled, that they
might return without any Fear or Danger to their own habitations, he gave them
likewise order that they might receive their Brethren of France; assuring them
they might live very securely there, and he kept his word; for even to his
Death, which happened the 13th. of August 1580. they were not molested but
enjoyed a quiet Repose.

CHAP. IX.
Of the fifth War against the Vaudois, under Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, and
chiefly of those of the Marquisate of Saluzzo.

CHarles Emanuel his Son succeeded him, who, a little time after the Decease of
his Father, seized upon the Marquisate of Saluzzo, which belonged to the Duke
of Savoy, Monsieur Del' Esdiguiers by way of reprisal, seized upon the Valleys
of Piemont, and forced the Inhabitants of these Valleys to take the Oath of
Fidelity to the then King of France: The Enemies of the Vaudois were not
wanting under this pretense to irritate the Duke of Savoy against these poor
People, to extirpate them when a fit opportunity should offer, without
considering that they were forced by the powerful arms of the King to take the
Oath, their Prince having given them no succor.

War being begun between Henry VI. King of France, and Charles Emanuel Duke of
Savoy, about the Marquisate of Saluzzo, the King made himself Master of all
Savoy in one Campaign, which the Emperor and the King of Spain seeing, they
desired the Pope, who was about marrying his Neice to the King of France, viz.
Mary de Medicis, to endeavor to make a peace between these two Princes, which
he did, by the Articles of it the King of France restored to the Duke of Savoy,
all that he had taken from him, excepting Bresse which was exchanged for the
Marquisate of Saluzzo.

The Enemies of the Vaudois, as soon as the Duke was at peace abroad, were not
wanting to solicit him to make War upon the Vaudois, but he considering that
his Father had had but ill Success in the War he had made upon them, although
he was assisted by the Forces of Spain and France, would not declare open War
against them, but permitted them to be disturbed in their Affairs, and when the
Inquisitors had put any of them in Prison, for their Religion, and that
Application was made to him for their Enlargement, he would answer, that he did
not intermeddle in those Affairs.

But he acted in another manner with the Vaudois of Saluzzo, than with those of
the Valleys, against those of the Valleys he was content to let their Enemies
act, but against those of the Marquisate he declared himself an open
Persecutor, from the time he was absolute master of it, for about the end of
the Month of June 1601. he made an Edict, by which he commanded, that every one
must declare before the ordinary Magistrate, that within the term of 15 days
that he was resolved to renounce his Religion, and to go to Mass, with which,
if he complied, he might not only enjoy his House and Goods, but other great
Privileges, but for those that were obstinate, and resolved to continue in
their Religion, they absolutely commanded to be gone out of all his Dominions
in two Months time, and never to return again upon pain of Death and
Confiscation of their Goods.

There were 8 flourishing Churches inthis Marquisate, but this Edict being
executed with a great deal of rigor, all these poor Churches were dissipated;
for the Faithful seeing that the Duke would not revoke his Edict, though he was
most earnestly solicited to do it, by the Protestant Princes, retired out of
the Marquisate, with only what they could carry, and went to dwell in Places
where they might enjoy a free exercise of there Religion.

Victor Amadeus his Son and Successor, did likewise make no open war upon the
Vaudois of the Valleys, he was hindered from it by the Wars he had with his
Neighboring Princes, especially the Spaniard, he notwithstanding permitted the
Inquisitors of Rome, and the Monks to persecute them, under the color and
cloak of Justice, and so many of them that fell into their hands either were
put to Death, or else condemned to the Galleys, or perpetual Prison, because
they would not go to Mass and conform to the Romish Religion.

CHAP. X.
Of the abominable methods that the Duchess of Savoy, and the Counsel of
Propagation, took to destroy the Vaudois of Piemont.

AFter the Death of Amadeus, the Duchess his Lady was left Regent of his
Dominions, because his Son Charles Emanuel II. was very young. The Court of
Rome having erected a Congregation, as it was called, for the Propagation of
Faith, and Extirpation of Heresy; there were established such like Councils and
Congregations in the Dominions of all Princes that professed the Roman Religion.

That of Turin was established in the Year 1650. and was divided into two
Bodies, the one was called the Council of men, and the other the Council of
women; the Archbishop was President of the first, and the Marchioness de
Pianesse of the second, the women made great enquiry, for all those that they
called new Converts, and made very much of them; the men entertained Spies
through all the Valleys, to give them an account of the Vaudois that were poor,
or of those that had Suits at Law, to the poor they offered exemption from
Taxes, and to free them from the quartering of Soldiers for many Years: To
those that had Suits at Law, at Turin or other places, they promised them good
Success, provided they would turn Roman Catholics, and by this traffic they
gained several.

But the Council of the Propagation seeing, that notwithstanding all the Care
and Pains they and the religious Orders took, for to convert the Vaudois to the
Romish Religion, that they could draw none but some poor or wicked people; they
bethought themselves of an abominable Stratagem, to destroy them all at once,
and make their Throats be cut by the King of France's Army that was then in
Italy, and was commanded by the Marshal de St. Grance, in the Year 1653. the
King having assigned for the winter quarters of his Army the Provinces of
Delphinate, Province, Languedoc and Burgundy; these Provinces offered to the
Marshal very considerable sums to exempt them from effectual quartering of
Soldiers; and he was the more contented with it, because the Duchess of Savoy
proffered to quarter a part of the Army in Savoy for a share of the Money
proffered. The bargain being struck, the Marshal marched his Army toward the
Valleys, which was the place that the Duchess had assigned for their
winterquarters: In the mean time, although the Council of the propagation knew
full well of the bargain made between the Duchess and the Marshal, they
ordered the Capuchins and some Gentlemen of the Valleys, and even some of the
chief ministers of the Court to persuade the Vaudois, and make them believe
that it was not the intention of the Duchess that those strangers should
quarter there; and by their artificial discourse, full of malice and fraud,
they stirred up the Vaudois to take up Arms, and oppose the Army of the King,
which was already entered into the Valley of Lucerne, and in a condition to
force these poor people to receive them, threatening nothing but Fire and Sword;
and this had been done, if a Minister of the Gospel had not gone and cast
himself at the feet of the Marshal, and discovered to him the diabolical malice
of their Enemies; and desired him to show one billet for quartering, and as
soon as the billet of the Duchess should be shown about, he was certain that
all the Inhabitents of the Valleys would submit without the least resistance:
To which proposition the Marshal accorded, and at the same time sent to Turin
to have the billet for quartering of Soldiers, as the Minister desired, and it
coming in a short time, the Vaudois submitted without the least difficulty. We
must consider that the Army of the King was very powerful, and made up of
expert Troops, and that the Marshal was fully resolved to gain the great sum of
Money that he was to draw from the foresaid Provinces, and to have his bargain
to the full of the Duchess; and that the Vaudois that were in arms had let his
army enter into the Valley of Lucerne, without any oppsition, and that they
were not prepared for a long defense, neither had entrenched themselves in
their usual Fastnesses, and so it is not to be doubted, but that they must have
been conquered by the French, who being enraged at their Boldness, and the at
the Contempt of their great Army, would have put all to the Sword without
distinction of Sex or Age; if God had not made use of the Zeal and Prudence of
this Minister to frustrate the Designs and crafty Contrivances of those Enemies
of God, and his Church.

CHAP. XI.
Of another wicked Stratagem of the Duchess of Savoy, and her Son Charles
Emanuel II. for the Destruction of the Vaudois of Piemont, and establishing the
Irish there, that were driven out of their Country.

IN the year 1655. the Duchess of Savoy, and her Son the Duke, being
solicited by the Court of Rome, and the Council of Propagation to destroy the
Protestants of the Valleys, and to establish in their places the Irish, who
served the King of France in his Royal Army in Italy, and were driven out of
their Country by Cromwell, these Irish were of the number of those that had
played such pranks in Irelend, against the poor Protestants, in the year 1642.
and the last that had laid down their Arms in that Kingdom, after the Death of
King Charles I. to give these Valleys to the Irish; the Protestants who were
the true and natural Inhabitants of these Valleys were all to be extirpated,
for so it was resolved in the Council of the Propagation, and after in the
Duke's, which was for the greater part composed of the former.

To bring this wicked design to effect, they must make use of some specious
pretense, they could not make their pretense to be the affair of the house of
the Capuchins of Villar, which some Protestants privately pushed on by their
Enemies the Papists, had burnt to the ground; this affair had been accommodated
many years and the Accomplices severely punished; they took therefore another
way, they obtained from the Duke a Commission, by Gastaldo his Counselor in
his Chamber of accounts, to drive out all the Protestants that were in the
Valleys of Lucerne, Lucernette, St. John, de la Tour, de Bubbian, de Fenil, de
Campligon, de Briguieras, and of St. Secundus, the Commssion was dispatched the
13th. of January 1655. and the 25th. day of the same Month Gastaldo gave
Orders, and a strict command to all the Protestants of the foresaid places, to
abandon them, and to retire with their Families, within three days after the
publication, into places which his royal Highness did tolerate, which are,
Bobbi, Villar, Angrogne, Roras, and the Country of the Bonnets, under the pain
of Death, and confiscation of all their Goods, if they found them in the
aforesaid Limits, if within twenty days they do not make it appear to us, that
they are become Roman Catholics, or that they have sold their Goods to
Catholics.

Those that gave this pernicious Counsel to the Duke, knew that the
Protetestants were time out of mind, established there even before the Dukes of
Savoy were Princes of Piemont, and the Predecessors of Charles Emanuel II. who
had given this commission to Gastaldo, had maintained them by diverse
declarations and grants, but they belived that the Vaudois who were well
established, in those places that they were commanded to quit, would not obey
the unjust command of Gastaldo, and that so they would take their disobedience
for a pretense to destroy them, or if they obeyed, and they could not be
destroyed or chased out of the rest of the Valleys, the places they should quit
would be enough to receive the Irish, who being a people, that had been long
trained up in the wars, would be a bridle upon the Vaudois, and put them upon
an impossibility of ever recovering their former habitations.

Although the Protestants well knew the injustice of this order, and that they
had sufficient reason not to obey it, nevertheless to take away all pretense
from their Enemies of rendering them odious to their Prince, and to make them
pass for Rebels; they quitted the places named by Gastaldo, and retired into
those assigned in the Proclamation, after which, they sent Deputies to the
Duke, who should go and cast themselves at his Feet, and by a most humble
petition, which they presented him, they supplicated him with a most profound
respect, to revoke the Orders given to Gastaldo, as being conrrary to their
Privileges and the Grants, but their request was without any answer.

The Vaudois seeing that they had no compassion of their miseries, had recourse
to her royal Highness his Mother, to whom they presented a petition full of
Respect and Submission, this Princess sent them back to the Council of the
Propagation their sworn Enemies, and most cruel Persecutors; and this Council
sent them back to the Marquess de Pianesse who long before had received ordets
to go and massacre them, as the event made most evidently appear.

CHAP. XII.
The sixth war against the Vaudois of Piemont, by the Duchess of Savoy' and
Charles Emmanuel her Son.

WHile the Vaudois labored by their humble Supplications and Submissions to
sweeten the Spirit of their Prince, and to incline him to maintain their rights
and privileges, having done nothing that could forfeit them; their Enemies
labored with the Duke, with all their power to destroy them; they raised for
this purpose an Army of 15000 men, formed of all the Troops of the Duke, of
four Regiments of French, of one Regiment of Germans, and twelve hundred of the
Irish, they were all old Troops; Prince Thomas who then commanded the army of
the King in Italy, sent to the Duke, his Nephew, four of the best Regimnets of
the Army, with the Irish, the Duke of Bavaria, his Brother in Law, sent him one
of his best Regiments; the Army was ready the 15th. of April 1655. and in a
condition to execute their wicked design against these innocent people, who
seeing the Enemies army approach their Valleys, began to stand upon their Guard.

In the interim, the Marquess of Pianesse, who commanded the army, amused their
Deputies at Turin, till they were marched near the Valley, and ready to enter
them, the sixteenth he departed incognito, and gave orders before his departure
to stop the Deputies, till they had received advice, that he with his Army was
entered the Valleys, which would have been executed, if a Person of Quality, who
did not approve the Perfidiousuess and Treachery that was made use of to
destroy these poor people, had not whispered them in the ear to be gone
quickly, the Marquess is in the Valleys: in short, he got into the Valley of
Lucerne the day after his departure, which was the 17th. of the Month of April,
the 18th. the Army foraged and sacked all the Communities and Countries of St.
John, and de la Tour without any resistance; the 18th. the Army going about to
force the Vaudois that were retired into the places limited, by the order of
Gastaldo, after they had implored the aid and assistance of the God of battle,
defended themselves courageously, against all this great Army which attacked
them, in four several places, they repulsed them vigorously, and after having
killed a great number of their Enemies, they put them to the rout, though they
were an hundred against one.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the abominable means that the Marquess of Pianesse made use of, to surprise
the Vaudois of Piemont, and to enter into the Valleys, and of the cruel
Massacre he made of these poor Innocents, after his Entry, in the year 1655.

THE Marquess of Pianesse, seeing that he could not destroy the Vaudois by
force of arms, had recourse to a most strange and detestable piece of
Perfidiousness, which Satan had suggested to him: He sent a Trumpeter to them,
to tell them, that they should send their Deputies, and hear from his Mouth the
will and pleasure of his royal Highness, that all was for their good and
advantage, and that they might come with a full assurance; the Vaudois desiring
nothing more than peace, were presently taken in this gin, the the Marquess had
laid for them, they sent away their Deputies with the Trumpet, and were
received with all demonstrations of Kindness: Monsieur de Pianesse entertained
them splendidly at Dinner, made a thousand protestations of Amity, and most
endearing Caresses, but this was all to surprise them, and betray them them as
Judas did, with a kiss.

After he had cast a mist before their Eyes, by his Peotestations and deceitful
Caresses full of Snares, he told them he had nothing to do but with the
Inhabitants of those places forbid by the order of Gastaldo, but as for other
places, they had nothing to fear, if they would only in sign ofObedience and
Fidelity, receive and quarter for 2 or 3 days in every one of their
Communities, a Regiment of Foot, and two Troops of Horse; the Deputies who
believed the protestations of the Marquess were sincere, and far from all
Treachery and Perfidiousness; when they returned to those that had deputed
them, they so strongly persuaded them to do what the Marquess of Pianesse had
counseled them, that there were none of the Communities that were not disposed
to receive them, which they did without any opposition or resistance.

The Regiments of Foot, and the Troops of Horse, which they had agreed to
receive, were no sooner entered and quartered in the several Communities, but
they seized on all the passes, and were followed by all the rest of the Army;
they were desired to quarter in the Towns and Villages below, as being more
commodious for them, they being offered to be furnished with all things
necessary, but they marched on as long as the day would permit, even to the
highest places that were inhabited. One part of the Army mounted upon the
common road to Angrogne, another part upon that of Villar and Bobbi, and the
third part of the Army possessed themselves of the Meadow of Tour, which was
the strongest place of Angrogne, which served as it were for a Fortress for the
Vaudois, and in marching they set fire on every place, and killed all they met
in the way. This strange and barbarous proceeding discovered their Treachery,
then every one fled to save their Lives, the greatest part of the men by the
favor of the night got to the Mountains, and saved part of their Families from
these cruelMassacrers; and sliding down the other side of the mountain, they
gained the Valley of Perouse, a part of the King of France's Territories. This
Army, besprinkled with the blood of Saints, found the houses of Angrogne, and
the Goods as well of the natural Inhabitants, as of those that were fled from
other places, from which they had been chased by the ordinance of Gastaldo, but
they found but few Inhabitants, except it was of Women, Children, Old and Sick
people.

The Enemies of the Vaudois having by this Treachery and Perfidiousness, made
themselves masters of all the Valleys, even of the strongest places, which
would have served them as so many Fortresses against their Persecutors, stayed
two days without exercising their Rage and projected Cruelty, feigning they
would do nothing but refresh themselves in their Quarters, and in the mean time
they strongly persuaded those that remained, to recall those that fled,
assuring them they should have no harm done them, and there were some of them
that through their too great Credulity, cast themselves into the Snares which
they had happily escaped.

The third day the signal being given from the Hill of the Town, which is
called Castelas, all the Innocent creatures that were found in their power were
killed in the most cruel manner imaginable, they did not kill them as Sheep
prepared for the Butchery, or as Enemies vanquished, that were to be cut off
with, out quarter; but in a manner more cruel and more barbarous; the Infants
were pulled violently from the Breasts of their Mothers, and dashed against the
Rocks and Walls, by these most cruel Barbarians; upon which their Brains were
plaistered, or else one Soldier took one of these Innocents by one Leg and
another by the other, and so rent them most miserably asunder, and sometimes
they dashed the Brains of one Child against the other and after killed their
Mothers.

The Sick, as well Women, as Children, were either burnt in their Houses or cut
in pieces, or tied naked with their Heads betwixt their Legs, and thrown down
the Rocks, or tumbled down the Mountains.

The Women and their Daughters were violated and stuffed with Pibbles, and
their Mouth and Ears with Powder, and afterward fire was given to the Train;
and by these sort of Diabolical mines, they, were miserably blown up; others
were empaled alive, and in this dismal posture planted upon the high ways, all
naked, some of them had their Heads, Arms and Breasts cut off; which these
barbarians fricassy'd and eat, Oh the brave Stomachs of the Papist Cannibals!

The men which were neither old nor sick, which fell into the hands of these
cruel Butchers, some of them were flead alive, others, after they had cut off
their privy Members they cut off their heads, and put their Members in their
mouths; some were cut all in pieces limb from limb, as you cut flesh in the
Shambles; those that did signalize themselves most in this sort of Cruelty were
the Irish, who had been used to such sort of Massacres in their own Country in
the year 1642.

After this great Massacre of the poor Vaudois that fell into their power, the
next day they went a hunting after those that had escaped them, of which a
great number were wandering in the Woods, and among the high Mountains covered
with Snow, or hid in the caverns and holes of the Rocks, not being able to save
themselves, partly because of the great quantity of Snow, and partly because of
their weakness, being unable to make their escape, because the Enemy had seized
upon all the Passes.

This murdering Army having finished the Massacre of all the Protestants they
could find in the Valleys, or that were wandering in the Woods and Mountains, or
hid in the caverns and holes of the Rocks, they set fire on all combustible
things, and quickly reduced all their Houses and Churches into ashes; nothing
was preserved but the Town and Church of Villar, which is in the center of the
Valley of Lucerne; and some houses in the Plain for quarters of the Irish, to
whom the Duke of Savoy gave this Country. You may see in the General History of
John Ledger the names and number of the persons massacred, and the cruel manner
in which they were martyred.

The Vaudois some of them being cruelly massacred, others made Prisoners, and
the rest driven out of their Country, the enemies being totally possessed of
the Valleys; and being made masters of all, they established the Irish there,
which being a far greater number than the Vaudois that had escaped out of the
Massacre, there was no appearance that those poor people could ever enter and
establish themselves in their Country, but God, to whom nothing is impossible,
took their cause in hand, and touched the hearts of the Protestant States and
Princes, who gave them charitable assistance, gave them strength and courage,
fought for them, and made them with a handful obtain great and miraculous
victories over their enemies; and by these signal victories, and the
solicitations of Protestant Princes, they were re-established in their lost
Country, and continued there till the year 1686, in despite of all the
artifices of their enemies.

CHAP. XIV.
The Fourteenth War against the Vaudois of Piemont, after the Massacre, in the
year 1655. in which one may see God fighting visibly for them, and with them.

AFter the cruel Massacre of which we have spoken, there was a bloody War
between the Vaudois and the murderers, the Vaudois driving them out of their
Country; in which one may visibly see that the God of Battle sought for them
and with them, by the glorious advantages they every day got upon their
enemies. The first Battle they fought was at Roras, a little Community
consisting of 25 families, and which was far distant from the rest; Count
Christopher who was Lord of the place, and a member of the Council of
Propagating the Faith, being very far from preserving his vassals, as his
interest and duty obliged him, violently carried on with a false zeal, did all
he could to destroy them, and employed to that end force and treachery; for
contrary to the solemn Parole that he had given them on the Marquess of
Pianesse's behalf, that they should be left in quiet, the same day that was
designed for the cruel Butchery of the Vaudois, he sent four or five hundred
Soldiers to Roras, for to treat the Inhabitants of that small place in the same
manner that all the rest of the Valleys were treated; and to surprise them the
better, he showed them a secret way, that the Soldiers might march with more
expedition, which shows that there is no crime, nor wickedness, of which a
blind zeal is not capable of. Captain Ianavel who was fled into Roras with his
Family, perceived a far off the Enemies, he had then not with him above five or
six Country Peasants, with this little Company he went to expect the Enemy at
an advantageous pass, they killed six of the Enemies upon the Spot, and the
other being sorely frighted fled in great Confusion, thinking the Vaudois were
more in number than they were, and in flying they lost fifty four of their
Companions.

The Marquess of Pianesse who commanded the Enemies Army, hearing of the ill
success of his affairs at Roras, the better to lull them in a secure sleep, and
surprise them, he sent them word, that the Soldiers that went to attacque them,
were only Rogues and Vagabonds, and none of his Troops, highly protesting that
he knew nothing of the design, and that he would have been extremely pleased if
they had cut them in pieces, in the mean time, the day following, after he had
sent them these specious protestations, he detached 600 select Soldiers, who
should go and set upon Roras in three several places, and exactly follow the
ordes he had given, Captain Ianavel having discovered them with his little
company, which was now composed of about 18 men, of which 12 were armed with
Fusees, and Pistols, and Faucheons, six other with Slings only and Stones, he
divided them into three little Bands, and placed them in Ambuscado, in an
advantageous post, they charged so home their Enemies, that they seeing
themselves attacqued with so much courage by those that they went to surprise,
they betook themselves to their heels, leaving dead upon the spot 60 of their
men.

This second bad success did not, notwithstanding make the General give over
the Enterprise, but as Treachery and Perfidiousness had had success in other
Valleys, so he was resolved to have recourse to the same; he sent to Roras
Count Christopher who, as I told you before, was Lord of the place, to tell
them that what was done was bottomed upon a false report, but being better
informed by the said Count, and at his entreaty he would for the futurelet them
live in perfect quiet, thinking thus to surprise them, by this cunning Artifice
and Treachery of their own Lord and Master; for the day after he sent a
Detachment of 900 picked men to fall upon those of Roras, in several places at
once, Ianavel with his seventeen Peasants being got before them to the Passes,
when they came fell upon them with so much courage that he quite routed them,
killing a great number in the field and in the pursuit.

The Marquess being ready to burst with despite and rage for this third ill
success of his Troops, rallied together all the forces that he could
conveniently that were in the Valleys for to go and cut the throats of those
poor innocent Lambs that were in this little Community; the Army consisted of
about 8000 effective men, which were at the Rendezvouze ordered by the General.
Captain Mario, a valiant Soldier and a great Massacrer, led the Troops that
came from Bagnols, and came first with a considerable body of men, and thought
himself strong enough to make himself master of Roras, and without expecting
the other Troops, he divided his into two parts, and fell upon the Vaudois in
the front and the rear; but the Vaudois having gained the top of an eminency
that was above the highest Troops of their enemies, so that they could not be
attacked but in the front; from this place they made so vigorous a defense,
that at last they disordered their enemies and put them to flight, having left
sixty five of their companions dead upon the place, besides those that were
wounded, drowned, and killed in the pursuit. Captain Mario in flying fell into
a whirlpool, where without doubt he had been drowned, if two or three of his
Soldiers that were expert in swimming had not drawn him out; he was brought
back to Lucerne in his Shirt, without either Hat or Shoes, and was presently
seized with a dreadful Malady, during which he suffered horrible Torments,
which made him an hundred times cry out, that he felt the fire of hell in his
bowels, for the Houses, Churches and Persons he had burnt in the Valley of
Lucerne, he dyed in these torments and in this estate he went to give an
account of his wickedness before the sovereign Judge of the world.

After so long a fight and so glorious a Deliverance, Ianavel with his little
Troop being retreated to the eminency of a little hill, that there they might
refresh themselves, they had no sooner begun to eat, than they saw another body
of the Army, which came by the way of Villar, and were climbing up the
Mountains to surprise them in the Rear; as soon as they saw the Enemy, they
presently quitted their Dinners, to put themselves in a posture of defense, in
the most advantageous place; he that commanded in chief the Enemies, made a
small Detachment to take a view of the Vaudois, who came very near them,
thinking they might be some of their own Gang; the Vaudois discharged so home,
and thick upon them, that every one killed one or more, which caused so great a
terror and confusion among them that remained, that they fled in great
disorder, and spread the terror and dread of the Vaudois so among the Soldiers
of that great body, that they immediately all betook themselves to their Heels,
believing the Vaudois were considerable in number, whereas they were but 18,
Ianavel with his little Troop pursued and killed a great many of them, after
which he gave thanks to God for so glorious a deliverance, as he was always
accustomed to do, when he gained any Victory over the Enemies.

Three days after these two battles, the Marquess of Pianesse fuming and
storming, biting his Nails for Anger and Madness at the pitiful suceess of all
his Designs; he sent an express, by a Letter, to the people of Roras, by which
he commanded them, on behalf of the Duke, they should all within 24 hours go to
Mass under pain of Death, and seeing their houses reduced to Ashes, and their
Trees cut down.

To this Letter they answered, that they had rather suffer a thousand deaths
than go to Mass, since it could never be clearly proved that either Christ or
his Apostles ever did celebrate it, that if after burning of their houses, they
were resolved to cut down their Wood, they had a Father in Heaven who would
tenderly provide for them.

After these Menaces the Marquess mustered his Army together, composed of 10000
men, of which eight Thousand were old Troops, and 2000 were of the Country
Peasants of Piemont which he listed in the neighboring Communities; he divided
his Army into three Bodies, of which, one had orders to attacque the Vaudois on
Villar side, another on the side of Bagnols, and the third on the side of
Lucerne: Ianavel with his little Troop went before the body of the Army which
first presented themselves, and fought valiantly, and with incredible success
having killed many of the Enemies, but when he saw the other two Bodies had
gained the Post where several poor Families were fled for refuge, and that he
could not succor them, he saved himself with his 17 Country Peasants and his
Son of eight years of Age, whom he carried upon his Shoulders, and retired into
the Valley of Queiras in the Territories of the French King.

The obstinacy of the Enemies of the Vaudois, in their resolution of destroying
the small Town of Roras after so many successless attacques, shows to all the
world the violent passion that a false Zeal can produce, in the Heat of those
that persecute the Truth of the Gospel: Those that are animated with a true
Zeal never violate their promises nor oaths made to their enemies, but those
that are pushed on by a false zeal keep neither their Promise nor Oath, they
regard nothing but satiating their Malice, and contenting their brutal and
blind passion to destroy 24 poor Families of the Vaudois, they were not content
to make use of Force, but they must add to it Treachery and Perfidiousness,
they Promise and Swear they would let them live in quiet, as well on behalf of
the Duke, as of the General of the Army; and the day following they command
their Troops to cut their Throats, and not being able with 500 men to destroy
them, they sent six hundred, and afterward 9 hundred, afterward 8 thousand,
and afterward ten thousand; and that which is remarkable is, that neither the
shame of being repulsed so often, nor the loss of so many hundred of their
companions made them give over their design.

The undaunted courage with which Captain Ianavel and his little company
sustained the shock, and repulsed the violent attacks of his enemies, and the
wonderful victories he gained, shows to the whole world that the God of Battle
was on his side. For otherwise how was it possible? for in the first rencounter
with 7 men only, to put to flight 500, and in the other Battles with 17 or 18
men, of which 6 were only armed with Slings and Stones, to rout sometimes 600,
then 900, and after some thousands? if God had not been with them, and given
them courage and strength? And on the contrary side, if he had not taken
courage from their enemies, and put confusion and terror in their hearts, from
whence followed their destruction and most shameful flight! In short, how was
it possible that Ianavel and his little handful, after so many dangerous fights
should save themselves, not one of them being killed, or as much as wounded,
although they were attacked in the front and in the rear by their enemies, if
God had not covered them with his Shield, and defended them from their enemies;
so that Miracles are not yet ceased.

The enemies Army having made themselves masters of Roras, executed the same
cruelties toward the families of this little place as they had done toward
those of the other Valleys, putting all to Fire and Sword, without sparing age
or sex; but the General was enraged that with so puissant an Army he could only
triumph over women and children, and old decrepit men, neither Ianavel nor any
of his company falling into his hands. The Wife and Daughters of Ianavel were
carried Prisoners, they were kept alive to make him lay down his Arms,
threatening to burn his Wife and Daughters if he continued in his Rebellion, for
so they called his just defense.

All the Valleys and their dependances being in the hands of their Enemies; it
seemed as if these poor people should for ever be exiled from their Country,
but God who would preserve the light of his word, in these Mountains and
Valleys, hastened to restore them: The Massacre of the Valleys was upon the
24th. of April, but the taking and massacre of Roras was not till the beginning
of May. Captain Ianavel after having refreshed himself at Queiras some days,
mustering some of his Brethren in suffering, who had made their escape,
returned into the Valleys with some provisions, and came and posted himself
upon the Mountain called Palea de Iaimet, from whence with his company he
departed the 22d. of the same month of May, with a design to go to Lucernette,
which is a Village between the Towns of Lucerne and Bobiane, to surprise some
Cattle to live upon, and to take some prisoners, to cause them to restore his
Wife and Daughters by way of exchange: But his enterprise had not the success
he desired, for that that place was full of Soldiers. He returned to his post,
and having understood that Captain Iayer with all those he could muster that
had escaped the Massacre, and were fled into the Valleys of Pierouse and
Pragela, in the territories of France, had possessed himself of the Valley of
Lucerne, on Angrogne side; he prayed him by Letters to assign him the time and
place that he might join him, which they did the 27th of the foresaid month of
May.

CHAP. XV.
Of the conjunction of Jayer and Janavel, Captains of the Vaudois; and the
wonderful exploits they did in the Valleys.

THese two Captains were no sooner joined, but they undertook the enterprise of
seizing upon the Town of Garsillane, which was garrisoned by their enemies;
which they found extremely well fortified: The alarm being given, the enemies,
which were very numerous in the neighboring places, as well Horse as Foot,
having notice by the ringing of the Bell, run to the succor of the Town, and
surrounded the Vaudois, who fighting courageously, retreated from the middle of
their enemies, and in their retreat they took from a Village that was near the
Town six pair of Oxen, and a good quantity of other Cattle, and took some
Prisoners, with the loss of only one man.

The 28th of May, they came very early in the morning, near the Town of St.
Secundus to surprise it, after having spent some time in Prayer, according to
their Custom, and encouraged one another, they attacked it with so much vigor
and dexterity that they made themselves Masters of it.

The Garrison, that was made up of Irish and Piemontes, they put all to the
Sword, they burned the Town and the Churches in revenge of what had been done
to their Houses and Temples, and having carried away seven Bells, and all the
Cattle, they retreated; in the taking this Town they killed 800 Irish, and 650
Piemontesses, the Vaudois had only seven men killed, and six wounded very
slightly, the Vaudois were about 600 men, and their Enemies were at the least
1500 well entrenched and fortifyed.

The second of June, the Vaudois went to burn the Forage and Houses upon the
Plain of Briqueras, and retreating by the way of St. John, they were
encountered by the Enemy, whom they charged so briskly in three several places,
that they put them to flight, leaving 150 dead upon the spot, besides those
that were Prisoners and wounded. In this rencounter there was but one Vaudois
killed, and two wounded.

Some days after the Battle of St. John the enemy sent a Convoy to the Fort of
Mirebouc, conducted by 300 men; it is seituated above in the Valley of Lucerne;
Captain Ianavel met them by chance in a straight place upon the road, he having
then only 8 Soldiers with him; he stopped them five or six hours, and killed
and wounded a great number of them, without the loss of a man.

After these glorious exploits, Ianavel having reinforced himself, retired
again to the Mountain called Paleade Iaimet, and sent a message from thence to
Tour and Bobbi, who had revolted to escape the cruelty and barbarity of the
enemy, and were retired to the Town of Villar; that if within 24 hours they did
not all join him, he would treat them as Apostates and Traitors to their
Country: They pesently came with a great deal of joy: seeing some hopes of
their liberty, being very penitent for their former want of courage and
confidence in God.

The Captains Iayer and Ianavel being joined the second time, resolved to fall
upon the Town of Tour, where was the strongest Garrison of the Enemy; who
having some intelligence of their coming, put themselves betimes in a posture
of defense, and killed the first Vaudois that appeared upon the Bridge before
the Gate of the Town: Inshort, they made a great Sally upon the assailants, who
received their Enemies with so much courage that they covered the earth with
their dead Bodies. The Battle continued till night, the Vaudois entrenched
themselves upon a little eminency of a hill they had gained; from whence the
enemy could not force them, though they were a far greater number, and were
reinforced with some Troops that came from Lucerne to their assistance; about
the beginning of the night the enemy retired into the Town, without being able
to carry off their dead, which were more than 300. This happy success gave so
much courage to the Vaudois, that the morrow following they went and posted
themselves before the Gates of the Town, and their enemies durst not sally out
upon them.

After the attack of Tour, the Vaudois retreated into a place of Angrogne
called Verne, there in a Council of War, they resolved to send 450 men which
made up the three fourth parts of their little Army to assault the Community of
Crusol, whose Inhabitants had done them much mischief in the time of the
Massacre. At the first noise of their approach, those of Crusol retired into a
great Cave, which was in a neigbouring Mountain, the Vaudois being not able to
force them out from thence, contented themselves to take away 400 Cows and
Oxen, 600 Sheep and Goats, and whatsoever Booty they could meet with, among
which they met with good store of their own Goods that had been taken from them
in the Massacre.

While the 450 Vaudois were on their march for the expedition of Crusol, the
Papists of St. Sccundus, Lucerne, Tour and Briqueras, burned some houses that
remained in Rocheplatte, and from thence they went to Angrogne, to surprise the
little Garrison that was left there to defend that post, under the command of
the Captains Laurence and Benet. They discovered their enemies as they
approached them with design to fall upon them in several places at once, this
obliged the little Garrison to divide their small number into two little
bodies, of which the one presently gained the top of a mountain, and the other
kept a little below upon a small hill: In conclusion, they placed 17 men in
ambuscade in an advantageous place where the enemies were to join; these men
rushing out upon them on a sudden and killing seven of them, so daunted the
rest that they retreated without daring to attempt any thing further.

After his return from Crusol, Captain Jayer went to the Valley of Pragelas, to
sell a part of his booty, but not returning at the day appointed, Captain
Janavel with 300 men that he had with him, undertook to force the Town of
Lucerne; he came before it early in the morning the sixth of June, and as soon
as he came there he turned out of its course the Channel that brought water to
the Town, and broke their Bridge, which was but a Musket Shot off the Town, to
hinder succors from coming in; after which he attacked it, and defeated two
Corpse de Guard: But the night before, Maroles who was Governor of it, being
entered into it with a new Regiment, it was not possible for him with so small a
company to make himself master of it; so he contented himself with what he had
done, and retreated without any loss.

The 15th of June being in Angrogne with 300 men which he commanded, was
sharply set upon by the enemies Army consisting of 3000 men, which was divided
into four bodies, of which one was to gain the top of a Hill, the other was to
attack him on the right, another on the left, and the fourth in the Front, the
Trumpet which was to give the signal to the Enemies, to fall all at once upon
the Vaudois, having sounded a little sooner than he should have done, gave time
to Captain Janavel to post himself upon an advantageous neighboring hill,,
where with the assistance of God, whom he invoked, he resisted from Morning
till two hours after Noon all the Attacks of the Enemy, and after having killed
a great number of them, they took their heels and fled in great confusion,
Janavel pursued them even below Angrogne, and killed many of them in the
flight, the Enemies confess that on this occasion they lost 500 men, and had a
great many more wounded; of the Vaudois there was but one killed, and two
wounded.

Immediately after the Battle Captain Iayer came with his little Troop, which
gave such courage to Ianavel and his, that although they were extremely
fatigued with fighting all the day, without taking any refreshment, having
remarked that the Enemies seemed to doubt of nothing, and only thought of
dividing themselves, that every one might retire to his own quarter, they
unanimously resolved to attack them, and fell upon them with so much courage,
Iayer on the one side, and Ianavel on the other, that they quite routed them
and killed above an hundred, among whom were three Officers of note: But by a
great misfortune, for the Vaudois, Captain Ianavel at the end of the Fight was
shot with a Musket bullet, which entering in at his breast, went out at his back
betwixt his shoulders, which put him into such a condition that it was thought
he would have dyed immediately; he had notwithstanding the Judgment to desire
Captain Iayer to enterprise no more that night, because his Soldiers could do
no more, and he himself gave advice in what he thought was necessary to be
done, he made himself be carried to Pinache, and about the end of July he was
perfectly cured of his Wounds.

The Enemies of the Vaudois, not being able to withstand the Vaudois in the
Mountains, they made use of a Traitor, to draw Captain Iayer down to the plain;
this perfidious wretch after the battle, of which we have spoke, came to seek
out the Captain, and told him that there were no Troops on Orsacy side, where
he might have a considerable Booty, and repay the Enemies in their own Coin
without danger, in burning their Houses and Cabbins: He took with him an 150
Soldiers of this little Army, and set some Cabbins on fire, near Orsacy, and
took some booty, but in such places where the Cavalry could have no advantage,
the Traitor who led him out to slaughter told him that a little lower there
were some Cabbins and good store of Cattle, which would cost him nothing but
taking, and persuaded him to go thither, he no sooner came to the place, where
he led him, than he was surrounded with a Squadron of Savoyards, which defeated
him with 40 Soldiers that had followed him; seeing himself betrayed, he killed
the Tray tor with his own hand, and three Captains of Horse; his Son and his
Soldiers sold their Lives dear, but having to do with so many Enemies, they
were all cut in pieces, except one who saved himself in a Morass.

The Death of Captain Iayer, and the wounding of Captain Ianavel, which was
believed mortal, happening the same day, caused a great consternation among the
Vaudois: But notwithstanding they took fresh courage, and under the conduct of
Captain Laurence, and a Brother of Captain Iayer who succeeded him, under his
command they mustered upon the Mountain of Vachere, where they resolved to meet
their Enemies that were coming to assault them, and they fell upon them with
that Resolution, Courage and Dexterity, that they put them to flight in a very
great Disorder, after having left more than 200 of their Companions dead upon
the place, among whom was a Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Bavaria, and
several Officers of note, besides the wounded and Prisoners; the Vaudois lost
in this fight, only Captain Bertin, and a common Soldier, and that which is
most to be admired is, that they were but 550 men, and their Enemies 6000.
according to the report of the Prisoners, and this is particularly remarkable
and full of admiration, that as soon as Captain Bertin was killed, his Son and
Heir out of his filial Piety, having carried off the body of his Father,
presently placed himself at the head of his Fathers Company, and began his
charge with these words, Take heart my Brethren, for though my Father be dead,
our celestial Father can give me the same Courage and Conduct, as by his Grace,
he has filled me with the same Zeal.

The day following the Vaudois were in continual Skirmishes with their Enemies
at Tour and Taileret, where many of their Enemies were killed and wounded, and
the Vaudois had but one Soldier slightly wounded.

Their Enemies knowing that all the Protestant Princes would interest
themselves in the affairs of the Vaudois* they reinforced their Army with new
Troops, to do the utmost to destroy the Vaudois, before the Ambassadors of
England and Holland should arrive at the Court of Savoy: The 11th. of July all
the Army of the Enemies came to attack them upon the Mountain of Vachere, where
the Vaudois were posted before. Colonel Andrion of Geneva, and John Ledger
Minister, were newly arrived in these Valleys, they observed the Vaudois had
made their Lodgments too far asunder, that they might the better make use of
the shelter of some Stables that were in that place, they exhorted them for the
better avoiding of surprises, to assemble altogether in one place of the
Mountain, where they had made some Barricadoes, the better to defend
themselves, but it was impossible to oblige them to it: The day following,
which was the day of the attack, they sent 4 Soldiers, 2 hours before day, to
observe the Enemy, of which were two who made a halt near the Church of
Angrogne, they spoke Piemontese, which was the reason that they took them to be
some of their own, but a little after they stealing away, when with great
precipitation they took the way of the Mountain, they shot after them, which
served the Vaudois for an Alarm, and at the same time, they put themselves in a
posture of defense. The Enemy divided themselves into 4 bodies, for to fall
upon the Vaudois in 4 several places, as presently after they did, the battle
was sharp and lasted about six, hours, the Enemies being strong, refreshed
themselves, and encouraged one another; they had now made themselves Masters of
the first Barricado, and cried Victory: But the Vaudois that were retreated
into their last Retrenchment, after a short but ardent Prayer to God, sallied
out, and fell upon them with so much Fury, that they obliged them to retreat,
which they did without any disorder. Colonel Andrion would not permit of a
pursuit for fear of the Enemies Horse that was below; in this Fight the Enemies
lost about 400 men, among whom were many Officers of Note, and 180 Soldiers of
the Regiment of Bavaria; the Vaudois had only some few Soldiers slightly
wounded.

After this battle, the Enemies having lost all hopes of reaping the Corn of
Angrogne, as they had done that of the Plain, enterprized the burning of it;
but the Vaudois came in so quickly upon them that they obliged them to quit
their design, for after having killed about a dozen of them, they fell upon the
rest and put them to flight, of which a great number, to be the more nimble,
threw away their arms to save their Lives. Captain Bertin pursued them to Tour,
and killed and wounded a great many of them, he killed likewise the Sentinel,
and 4 Soldiers that appeared upon the Ramparts of the Fort, and struck the
Enemies with so great a terror, that they vowed afterward that if he had
followed his blow he might have made himself Master of the place.

Among all the Battles that we have spoke of, it appeared visibly that God had
declared himself the protecter and defender of the Vaudois, otherwise how was
it possible that a handful of men of little or no experience in War, should
have been able to resist, much less to gain so many Victories over their
enemies, which were expert and tried Soldiers, as we have seen they have done
to the 15th of July, when they fought alone, without the aid or assistance of
any foreign help; and that which is considerable, they had to do with their
Prince, whom the emissaries of the Pope had armed against them only in hatred
of their Religion. Their Prince was assisted by the King of France and the D.
of Bavaria, of which the one was his Brother-in-law and the other his
Cousin-ge^man. The Vaudois were not the hundredth part of his Subjects and
Estates: The Prince and all his other Subjects were armed against them, and
notwithstanding they gained no advantage, but on the contrary they were foiled,
and in most occasions most shamefully put to flight:

The Protestants of France hearing of the cruel Massacre that was committed
upon their Brethren of Piemont, made extraordinary prayers to God for them, and
large Collections to assist those that had escaped: Some Provinces celebrated a
Fast for them, and that of Cevenne celebrated one by order of the Synod,
assembled at Sale, in the month of June 1655. Upon the News that was divulged,
that those that had escaped the Massacre were re-entered into the Valley, and
defended themselves there courageously; many Officers and Soldiers of Cevenne
and the lower Languedoc, went to the succor of their Brethren, who in little
Companies, by several ways, got into the Valleys; and so the Army of the
Vaudois that had not been till the 14. or 15. of July, above 600. men,
consisted of 1800. the 17th. or 18th. of July. The Lord of Combies, of the City
of Anduse in Cevenne, was of the number of those, that went to succor their
Brethren; and because he had had considerable imploys in the Armies of the King
of France, he was by general consent chosen General of the Army, after the
example of those of the lower Languedoc and Cevenne, many Soldiers out of the
Delphinate came and joined them in the Valleys.

The Army being two thirds stronger than it was, it was resolved in a council
of War, to go and force the Town and Fort of Tour; they departed at night, the
18th. of July, for this expedition; and they arrived the day following, before
day, within a mile of Tour, where they halted till day break, and then Monsieur
Combies sent some to view the Fortifications of the Fort, and those that were
sent made a report to the General, that the place was impregnable against a
greater Army, upon which, Monsieur Combies ordered to sound a retreat, being
apprehensive of ill success in his first design.

But Captain Bertin who was of a contrary opinion, would not retreat with his
Company, but desperately assaulted the Town, he was soon followed by the rest
of the Vaudois, and some two or three French men: this Captain who was a
Townsman of Tour, knew all the weak places about it, and presently broke
through the Wall, near the Convent of Capuchius, before the Enemy took the
Alarm, made himself Master of the Borough, and of the Convent, which he burnt
down to the Ground; and there is no doubt to be made, that if all the Army of
the Vaudois had followed Captain Bertin, but that they had taken the Fort;
notwithstanding the Succors that Maroles, Governor of Lucerne brought, as
soon as he had News of the attempt. Monsieur Combies having seen what Captain
Bertin had done, was much concerned that he had sounded a Retreat.

And here ends the War of the year 1655. which was followed by a cruel Massacre
that was made of the Vaudois, in the month of April, in the same year, but
before we speak of Peace, it is necessary that we make some Reflections upon
this War.

CHAP. XVI.
Reflections upon the War in the year 1655. and of the ensuing Peace made at
Pignerol by the mediation of the Ambassador of France, and the Ambassadors of
the Protestant Cantons.

It Is certain that the Duke of Savoy had no better nor more faithful Subjects
than the Vuudois, who always followed their Prince as well in his wars abroad
as at home. They never took up arms but when they would force their
Consciences, and deprive them of the free exercise of their Religion: This
appears in this, that every time that war was made upon them, they were
commanded first to renounce their Religion and go to Mass, and that they let
alone in peace all those that obeyed, and gave them several privileges and
immunities; all the crime the Vaudois, for which they were so severely handled,
was because they would not abandon their Religion which they had received from
Father to Son, from the time of the Apostles, and was in every thing
conformable to their Doctrine.

Those that escaped out of the Massacre, had just reason to take up Arms, the
Enemies had unjustly murdered the Fathers and Mothers of some, the Wives and
Children of others; some had lost their Brothers and Sisters, and they would
have done the same to them, if they had fallen into the hands of these cruel
Butchers: So much Blood unjustly spilt cried to Heaven for vengeance, and God
would make use of the hands of those that escaped to revenge it, as the event
showed by the victories they gained over their Massacrers, and by the great
slaughter they made of them, though they were inferior in number, and that
which is more, they were driven from their own Houses, Goods and Country,
against the Laws of Nature and Nations, which orders, that every one enjoy his
own in quiet, if he have committed no crimes that make him unworthy of it: Now
these poor people had committed no crime, they were of the Religion they
professed, before the Dukes of Savoy had any thing to do with Piemont, and
besides it was confirmed to them by diverse grants and privileges.

If God had not been willing to reestablish them in their Country, would he
have given them courage to return without being recalled by their Prince after
having been driven out by a cruel Massacre and a puissant Army. When Captain
Ianavel returned home, which was about fifteen or twenty days after he was
driven from Roras, he had but about 200 men, and they had established in the
Valleys 1200 Irish, all Soldiers; there were besides that 3000 men of the old
Troops of the Duke of Savoy, and all the Inhabitants were Papists, so that
there were more than an hundred against one. But though their Enemies were in
so great a number, and were Masters of the Country, Ianavel notwithstanding
returned, and not barely content to make excursions, but they carried away a
good Booty from Lucernette, which was a place full of the Enemies, and situate
between the Towns of Lucerne and Bobiane, where the Duke had strong Garrisons.
If God had not given the Vaudois courage, how would they have undertaken the
enterprise of St. Secundus, where there were 800 Irish and 650 Piemonteses in
garrison strongly fortified and entrenched, and they were not above 500; so
small a number, could they have forced the Town if God had not been with them,
and fought for them, and delivered these Massacrers of their Brethren into
their hands to revenge the blood they had so inhumanly and without cause spilt.

Although this war continued but three months, it was nevertheless very bloody,
for the enemies of the Vaudois lost in the several rencounters and battles we
have spoke of, more than 4000 men, of which the greatest part were of the
number of the Massacrers, who were sent to God in a short time to give an
account of their barbarities and cruelties toward these poor Innocents. The
Vaudois, during the whole war lost not above ninety five men, reckoning in this
number the forty who were killed with Captain Iayer by a signal piece of
treachery, of which we have spoke above.

And this is very remarkable, that the enemies of the Vaudois never had any
advantage over them, but by their treachery and perfidiousness, in violating
the public Faith and Treaties; but when they were upon their guard and fought
for the maintenance of their Religion, they were always victorious over their
enemies; and as they maintained the celestial verity contained in the Holy
Scriptures, so Heaven took them under its protection, and defended their Cause;
God covered them with his Buckler every where where they went, and fought for
them, giving them courage, and striking their enemies with confusion and
terror, otherwise they had never gained so many victories, who, as I said
before, were oftentimes more than an hundred to one.

The Duke of Savoy seeing that neither the Massacre he had made of the Vaudois,
nor the war that had followed the Massacre, had answered his designs, and the
Consederates expectation, was desirous of a peace, and was very willing to be
solicited by the Protestant Princes and States to condescend to it; for it was
probable, if he had continued the war three months more, he would have been
obliged to ask it of those he had been so unjust to. His Army was very much
weakened, and that of the Vaudois was very well reinforced. Of the 1200 Irish,
which in the beginning of the war were planted there 800 were cut off at St.
Secundus, and the rest either perished of Distempers, or in other battles that
they fought in afterward; the French Troops were retreated, and the Lieutenant
Colonel of the Regiment of Bararia, and many of his best Officers, and more
than 200 common Soldiers were killed in this war, and besides all this he had
lost more than 3000 of his own Troops: The Army of the Vaudois, when the Peace
was made, consisted of 1800 men, and increased every day; many famous Officers
and Protestant Soldiers out of France, joining them in this Holy War; and if
the Vaudois, when they were but between 500 and 600, always were victorious
over their Enemies, and in spite of all their opposition, had recovered all
they had lost; it might reasonably be hoped that in three months more they
might have quite destroyed the Enemies Army, or at least have driven them out
of the Valleys.

The Ambassadors of the Protestant Cantons had been a good while at Turin for
to assist these poor people, they offered their mediation for a lasting peace,
but the Duke excused himself, saying, That he had long ago reserred that affair
to the King of France, and that he durst not take it out of the hands of so
great a King: That which obliged the Duke to speak so was, that he knew the
King of France was perfectly linked to him by interest, and that he had lent
him his Troops, and that he being the Umpire betwixt him and the Vaudois, he
would decide more for his advantage than for that of the Vaudois. Monsieur de
Servient the Ambassador of the King of France in that Court was the Mediator of
peace, and Monsieur de Servient knowing that the Ambassadors from Cromwell and
the States of Holland were upon their journey to be employed upon that affair,
and that these two States had made great Collections for the Vaudois, and that
the Protector of England did very much interest himself in the business, the
better to please the zealous Protestants of England, did precipitate the peace,
and conclude it before their arrival at Turin. There is no doubt to be made,
but that if these Ambassadors had arrived before the conclusion of the peace,
that it would have been much more advantageous to the Vaudois than it was, they
would have obtained a restitution of all that had been unjustly taken from them
by the order of Gastaldo, and have forced them to demolish the Fort of Tour,
without suffering the Duke to build another: It Is true, that by a private
Article they were promised the Fort should be demolished, and in effect it was
done after the peace, but it was but to build another more strong in the place
where the Old first was, which the Predecessors of the Vaudois had caused to be
pulled down; and even this was against the promise made to them, that they
should not build another. The Duke gave them a Patent, signed at Pignerol the
9th of August 1655. by which he pardoned the Vaudois for taking up Arms against
him; he established them in their Goods and Privileges, and in a free exercise
of their Religion, except in some places, excepted in the Patent. The
Ambassador of France and the Ministers of the Duke drew the Patent so, for to
desend, as they said, the Honor of his Royal Highness, but to defend the
honor of their Prince, they made innocent Subjects, who had been unjustly
Massacred and chased out of their Country, to pass for Rebels, and to be
reputed Criminals; and they deprived them of certain places which they had
enjoyed from Father to Son many ages, even before the Dukes of Savoy were
Princes of Piemont, and in which places they were confirmed by the Concessions
and Declarations of the Predecessors of his Highness, and which he himself had
confirmed in the year 1653.

CHAP. XVII.
Containing the wicked Artifices, of which the Enemies of the Vaudois made use
of for to complete the destruction of those that had escaped the Massacre and
War of 1655. With the breaking of the Peace of Pignerol.

THE Duke of Savoy and his Council not being able to destroy the Vaudois,
neither by the Massacre they had made of them, nor by the cruel and continual
war; instead of letting them live in peace, after the treaty of Pignerol, as
they had promised the Ambassadors, the took more cunning and subtle ways, but
which were not less dangerous and diabolical, for to destroy the remainder of
these poor distressed Innocents.

The first artifice their enemies made use of to destroy them, was to set them
together by the ears about the Charitable Collections that were made for them
in foreign Countries, by spreading round about a report of a great abuse
pretended to be committed in the distribution of the money; to this end they
made use of a Jesuit, called Longuiel, a famous Impostor, who came into these
Valleys, and pretended he came from Longuedoc, where he had, as he said,
renounced the Roman Religion. This Wolf disguised in Sheeps clothing, had
obtained the School of Villar, which is ^n the center of the Valley of Lucerne.
There he associated to him Michael Ber^am of Ville Nuve in Piemont, an ancient
^ervant of the Marquess of Pianesse, and ^ith John Virtue of Lucerne, and John
^agnan of Provence, who had been for ^me time in those Valleys: This Jesuit and
his Associates did all that was possible to gain the poor and silly people of
the Valleys, suggesting to them, that the sums, gathered out of Charity, were
so considerable, that if they were distributed according to the intentions of
those that had given them, every one at least would have for his share 14 or
1500 Livres, and by this seditious discourse they designed to arm them one
against the other, and so to destroy them by their own Swords; and not content
with this, they writ to the foreign Countries, France, Swizerland, Ireland and
England, where their Charitable Collections were gathered, that the chief
Inhabitants had divided it among themselves, and made merry with it, and let
the Poor perish with hunger, giving them no part, and by these lies and shams
they designed to hinder strangers from being any more touched with compassion
of their miseries.

The second Artifice of their Enemies was, to build a Fort at Tour, against the
secret Article of Pignerol, in which they placed a strong Garrison; as soon as
it was built they committed all sorts of excesses and violences against the
Vaudois, taking away their Fruit and the Wine out of their Cellars, pillaging
likewise the movables of their houses, beating and killing whom they pleased,
violating their Wives and Daughters, committing all sorts of Villainies and
Rogueries, without any remedy or the least offer of redress; and to crown the
misfortunes of the Vaudois, the Government of the Valleys was given to the
Count of Bagnols, who had signalized himself so much in the Massacre in the
year 1655.

The third Artifice that was made use of to destroy them after the Treaty of
Pignerol was, to make criminal Processes against the principal of them, upon
false accusations, before the Court of Turin against their privileges, which
were, that all Causes should be tried in the Valleys before the ordinary
Judges; if they remitted themselves to the Court of Turin, they were kept two
or three years prisoners, sometimes without being heard, where they either
spent all their fortunes, or died of hunger; if they did not submit, they were
condemned to death or to the Galleys, and their Goods were confiscated: Those
that were condemned for default, if they did not forsake their Goods and
Habitations, they were seized on by the Soldiers of the Garrison of the
Citadel, and brought into the Fortress, where they made them suffer a thousand
ills worse than death.

The fourth Artifice that the Enemies of the Vaudois made use of to destroy
them was, that they hindered them from keeping Schools, and likewise the free
use of their Religion in several places, permitted by the Patent of Pignerol,
and established time out of mind.

The Vaudois seeing that the Treaty of Pignerol was broken, and violated almost
in every Article, had recourse to their Prince and his Ministers, to whom they
made most humble remonstrances, reiterated several times, but finding that all
was to no purpose, they addressed themselves to Monsieur de Servient,
Ambassador of France, who was also at Turin, and had been the Mediator of the
Peace; they writ likewise to the Ambassadors of the Protestant Cantons that
were at that Court, and most humbly begged as well the Ambassador of France, as
those of the Swisse to interceed for them to his Royal Highness.

But instead of doing justice to these poor oppressed people, they prepared
fresh Forces to quite root them out; and when they were near executing their
wicked design, Seignior Rica, Treasurer General of the Duke, came to Pignerol,
a Town of the King of France, and near Neighbor of the Valleys; where he
called before him the principal Agents of all the Communities of the Valleys,
told them with tears in his eyes (a true Popish Crocodile) that he was very
sorry to see them fall into inevitable ruin, and that the only means to avoid
it, was to send a large and full deputation to Turin, to his Royal Highness,
who was resolved to put an end to their miseries, and that by the means of an
humble and cordial submission, which they could and ought to do, they would
without any doubt obtain their desires.

While the Treasurer General did amuse, with fair words, the principal Agents
of the Valleys, at Pignerol, the Generals of the Army that was in the Valley of
Lucerne, called likewise before them all the chief Conductors of the Vaudois,
and told them, that if in sign of obedience and confidence, they would but
guard a convey that was to be sent to the Fort of Mirebouc, they might all
return in peace to their Habitations.

The Vaudois, who desired nothing but the peace and repose of their Families,
did what those Generals commanded, believing what they said was true, but the
consequence made them sensible, that it was only to entrap and destroy them;
for while one part of the Vaudois were employed in guarding the Convoy, and
another in getting their Families together, following the Order of his Royal
Highness, that every one should retire home and bring back his Family; and
while the Principal Agents were amused and staid, some at Pignerol with the
Treasurer, and others by the Generals of the Army, the Troops of the Duke,
commanded by the Marquesses of Fleuri and Angrogne, and by the Count of
Bagnols, in number more than 800 men, fell upon the Valleys about break of day,
in four several places with great fury, for to surprise and massacre the
Vaudois as they had done in the year 1655. and that which made them hope for
good success in their design was, that they saw that these poor people were
dispersed in several places, and as it were lulled asleep upon the confidence
they had in the Orders of his Royal Highness, and the fair promises made them
by the Generals, and did not in the least suspect such a piece of treachery and
perfidiousness: But if on the one side they separated them one from another,
and took from them their Chieftains, that they might the more easily vanquish
them: So on the other side they furnished with Men and Ammunition the Fort of
Mirebouc, which was in the highest part of the Valley of Lucerne, to stop their
passage into the Delphinate, and hinder them from saving themselves in the
territories of France, as they did in the Massacre in the year 1655. and
employed them as guards for the Convey, which was a double piece of treachery.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Eighth War made against the Vaudois of Piemont in the year 1662 and
1663, by Charles Emanuel, Second Duke of Savoy.

THE Marquess of Fleuri and Angrogne, who attacqued them, the one by the way of
Secundus, and the other by the way of Briqueras, joined themselves together
upon the top of a Hill, which is between the Valley of Lucerne, and the Valley
of Perouse, from whence they might easily win the place called Bal, upon the
Mountains of Vachere at the height of Angrogne, which is as it were a most
important Fort, and the center of the three Valleys, from whence one may easily
descend into those of Lucerne, Perouse and St. Martin: They came to the top of
this Hill about break of day, and designed to seize upon the Fort of Vachere,
they were stopped in their carreers by a Body of about sixty men, who had posted
themselves in a straight place, called the Gate of Angrogne; without this the
Vaudois had been ruined, for if they had lost this place they had been utterly
undone, it being the only place that served them for a refuge, and as it were a
Sanctuary, against the utmost efforts of their Enemies.

Those that were commanded by the Marquesses of Fleuri and Angrogne, who were
at least 4000. seeing themselves stopped by the foresaid body, posted
themselves upon the top of a little eminency they had gained, and with green
Turf made themselves an Intrenchment, the height of a man; the Vaudois not
being able to hinder them, and whiles some wrought to fortify this Post, others
did their utmost to gain the straight pass kept by the sixty Vaudois.

The other part of the Army commanded by the Count of Bagnols, consisting of
equal number, was likewise* divided into two parts, of which, one took the way
of Chebas, and the other the way of St. John, and another party took that of
Angrogne; and the Vaudois were constrained to retreat, though they had there
the greatest part of their Forces, they fought nevertheless in their retreat,
even to Rochemanant, which was a more advantageous post, higher up toward
Angrogne; and there under the shelter of the Rocks, and some old Walls, they
stood their ground, and stopped the further progress of their Enemy, they being
repulsed from the post after several sharp Assaults, and the loss of three
hundred men, God struck them with so great fear, that they fled in great
disorder, tumbling one upon another down the Hills: The Vaudois pursued them to
the Foot of the Hill, where their Cavalry was, and killed a great many of them;
and after having sufficiently provided for the post, from which they had so
shamefully driven their Enemies, they ran to succor their Brethren, who fought
where the two Marquesses were, which they did with very great success.

The sixty Vaudois, that kept the pass of Angrogne, were weary, having fought
above half the day; but when they saw that their Brethren came to their succor,
they took fresh courage, two of them creeping upon their Bellies, being hid by
a part of the Rock, came so near the Enemies Retrenchments that they killed two
of their Sentinels, and with their Swords in their hands, fell upon their Camp,
who being quickly followed by all the rest, they quickly made themselves
masters of it, killing and cutting to pieces all that opposed them, putting the
rest to flight, who ran away in great Confusion, the two Marquesses were none
of the hindermost in the Flight: The Vaudois pursued their Enemies to
Briqueiras, and killed a great many of them; there were more than 600. of the
Enemy killed, and a great many wounded, of which, the greatest part dyed of
their Wounds: The Vaudois lost but five or six men and had but a dozen slightly
wounded. So God did wonderfully deliver the Vaudois, and punish the Treachery
of their Persecutors; and one may say that as in old times, the Sword of God
was with that of Gideon, so in this Rencounter we may truly say, that it was
with Captain Ianavel and his little Troop, otherwise how should 500 men, who
were extremely fatigued, having fought above half the day, have driven their
Enemies out of their Camp, fortified the height of a man; the Vaudois were not
then above 500. for they had left one part of their little Army to guard the
place, from whence they had chased the Count of Bagnols, and they had not in
all above 700. men. After they had beaten their Enemies, they gave thanks to
God for their Deliverance, and the Victory he had given them, and gave him all
the Glory.

The Vaudois after having defeated their Enemies, went often out in parties to
seek them out, in every place, where the Cavalry could not incommode them, nor
surprise them; and by this means they diminished their Army, there scarce being
a day that a good number of Savoyards and Piemonteses did not fall into the
hands of the Vaudois.

From the 6th. of July, till the 10th. of the Month of August, all that time,
there were continual Skirmishes, where, every where, the Vaudois had the
Advantage over their Enemies.

The Marquesses of Fleuri and Angrogne, who commanded the Army of the Duke,
recruited their Army with all the Militia, of the States, of his Royal
Highness, or with Troops drawn out of Garrisons; and with this great Army they
undertook a memorable enterprise, they attacqued Roras, where some Vaudois were
retired. This Community as we have remarked before, was separated from the rest
of the Valleys, and by consequence could not be succored before the Massacre
and War of 1655. it consisted of but 25 Families, the Enemies that were an
hundred against one, fell upon this little place by so many ways, that at last
they made themselves Masters of it, they killed 23 Vaudois who defended it, but
they lost above 200 men; this was the greatest loss that the Vaudois sustained
in this war of 1663. and the greatest Exploit of the Generals of Savoy.

After that the Enemies had made themselves Masters of the Rocks and Deserts of
Roras,. with so considerable loss, the day after they made an excursion to St.
Margarite, which is a little Village of the Community of Tour, consisting of 20
or 25 houses, which they burnt to Ashes; the Vaudois being assembled together
in a small number, upon the Mountains of Tour, as soon as they saw the Town on
a Flame, fell with that Swiftness and Resolution upon these Incendiaries, that
they put them to Flight, and covered the ground with their dead Carcasses, and
killed more of them than they had burnt beams of houses, of the Vaudois side
there were none either killed or wounded, for it was remarked, that these
Massacrers were struck with so great a fear, that they had neither Hands to
fight, nor Legs to fly.

Toward the end of the Month of August, Captain Janavel entirely defeated an
Ambuscade that the Enemies had laid at the place of the Vines to surprise him,
but they themselves were surprised and cut in pieces.

The Council of the Propagation of the Faith seeing, that the Marquess of
Fleuri had had ill Success in all his designs, thought it was requisite to
change the General; and so the Mraquess was recalled to Court, and the Marquess
of St. Damian was put in his place, who made a Levy of a greater Army than
before, but with worse Success; The Soldiers seeing, that in this War, nothing
could be got but blows, the first having carried away all the Booty, went only
by force to this War, and where they found any resistance, they turned their
backs and fled from the Vaudois; their Officers being not able to stay their
Flight.

CHAP. XIX.
The Second Peace, made betwizt Charles Emanuel and the Vaudois, by the
mediation of the Protestant Cantons, in the month of February 1664. which has
continued till the year 1686. during which time, the Vaudois did signal Service
to the Duke of Savoy.

THE War of the year 1663. having had as ill Success as that of the year 1655.
the Duke of Savoy would have been glad of Peace, but he durst not ask it of the
Vaudois, for fear it should show his weakness, or at least he should be obliged
to grant them more than he had done by his former Patent, granted at Pignerol;
because of the Advantages they had gained over him: For this Prince had drained
his Revenues, ruined by these Wars a part of his Dukedom, lost more than 4000
men, and the Vaudois but sixty: They durst go no more into the Mountains to
seek them, and the Vaudois often descended into the Plains to attack their
Enemies, who being struck with a pannick Fear, because of the many Victories of
the Vaudois, fled before them, like a Flock of Sheep before a Troop of hungry
enraged Wolfs: The Suisse having private notice, that the Duke was weary of the
War, sent an honorable Embassy to to solicit a peace, between the Vaudois and
their Prince, the Ambassadors came to Turin the 15th. of December 1663, and
were very well received by the Duke, and the whole Court, which was not so in
the year 1655. after the Massacre, nor in the year 1686. when the Duke was
leagued with the King of France, for the destruction of the Vaudois, and to
force them to go to Mass, as he in the precedent year had forced the
Protestants of France. This good reception of the Ambassadors, made it clear
that the Duke was weary of the War, and willing to make a Peace; after they had
had Audience, they sent their Secretary to the Valleys, to tell the Vaudois,
that they should send their Deputies to Turin, who being arrived there, a
solemn Promise was made them, that during the Treaty, there should be no more
Acts of Hostility done against the Vaudois.

The event made it apparent, that this promise was only made them to lull them
asleep, that he might the better surprise them, while the Treaty was on foot,
for by an unheard of Perfidiousness, even among the most barbarous Nations,
notwithstanding this promise, made in the presence of the Ambassadors, the
21st. of the same Month, twelve hundred men of the lower Piemont, were sent to
reinforce the Army, under the command of the Marquess of St. Damian, and on the
25th. at break of day they attacked Tillaret, Angrogne, Rocheplate, and St.
German, without giving any notice that they would do any thing to the prejudice
of the solemn Promise. The first and strongest attack was at Tillaret, where
the Vaudois had like to have been born down with numbers, but they of Angrogne
sending them, in the nick of time, an hundred men, this seasonable succor did
so encourage them, that they broke the Enemies Troops commanded by the Count of
Bagnols, and put them to flight, and forced them to fly for safety to the Town
and Citadel of Tour, in great disorder; they pursued them with so much heat
and vigor, that many of the Vaudois entered with them pell mell into the Town,
and came out again, without the least damage, to the great astonishment of all
the world, and confusion of their Euemies.

On the side of Angrogne, the Enemies could not make the Vaudois give back one
foot of ground, for all their furious Assaults, but after having done their
utmost to make them quit their post, after having lost a great number of their
men, they most shamefully fled, the Vaudois pursued them to the Plain, and
killed a great number of them, and encamped afterward near them upon the
Plain, where their Enemies durst not molest them.

All the harm the Vaudois suffered was on St. Germans side, which was a very
advantageous post, and of great importance, by the means of which, they had
till then kept clear the passage betwixt the Valleys of Lucerne and those of
Perouse, and St. Martin, the Enemies unfortunately surprised this place, which
was not guarded, because that Famine had obliged the Country people, who
believed there was no danger, during the Treaty, to go and seek victuals for
themselves and their Families, they killed there a man, and two women, the rest
saved themselves miraculously, they burnt likewise, greatest part of the
houses, and cut down or pilled the Bark of all the Fruit Trees.

The Vaudois had great cause of Joy that day, for that they happened to be
dispersed in diverse places, and were not upon their Guard, confiding in the
solemn promise made at Turin, but God not only delivered them out of the hand
of their Enemies, but gave them a signal victory: The Enemies Army consisted of
18000 men, viz. 6000 that the Marquess of St Damian had in his Army, and 12000
Piemontese, that had newly joined him, and the Vaudois had but 700 men, and on
this day the latter lost but 6 men, but the first according to their own
relation, lost fifteen hundred, among whom were the Counts of St. Front and de
la Trinita, and many Officers of Note.

The Deputies of the Vaudois, who were at Turin, having received Intelligence
of this perfidious dealing, against the solemn promise, desired the Lords
Ambassadors from the Swisse Cantons, to present their just complaints to the
Duke, which they did with a great deal of heat and resentment, but that
produced only a truce for twelve days, which was at several times prolonged and
renewed, till the Lords Ambassadors had ended and fully concluded a peace and
agreement, contained in the Patent of the 14th of February 1664. by which the
Vaudois were established in a full enjoyment of all their Goods; and in the
free exercise of their Religion in all places where it had been established by
the treaty of Pignerol, in the year 1655.

But this Patent was no better executed and observed than the former, although
the Duke had engaged himself by his Letter to the Protestant Cantons, the 28th
of February 1664. to observe it punctually. It Is no easy matter to represent
here all the tricks that the Council of the Propagation made use of to make
this peace ineffectual; as to the Vaudois it is enough to say, that it had been
impossible for them to defend themselves against so many subtilties and crafty
policies of their Adversaries of the Propagation, if God, who holds the hearts
of Princes and Kings in his hand, had not changed the heart of Charles Emanuel
the Second to favor the Vaudois. This Prince having examined the conduct of
all their doings, began to know that it was without any good ground that the
Vaudois were made so odious; and calling to mind the great zeal they had
testified on diverse occasions for his service, and particularly in 1638 and
1640, when the greatest part of his Estate was revolted against him, and that
the Cardinal of Savoy, and Prince Thomas his Uncle had made themselves Heads of
the Revolt, being assisted by the Troops of Spain, had seized almost all
Piemont, and even of the City of Turin it self, and besieged Madam Royal his
Mother in the Citadel, whither she had fled to save her self; and that without
the succors of Lewis the XIII. his Uncle by the Mothers side, and the help of
the Vaudois, it was probable that this Prince had been deprived of all his
Principality.

In the year 1672. the Duke of Savoy made War upon the Genoeses, and the
Vaudois served him with so much zeal and courage, that this Prince was not
content only to praise their Conduct, Courage and Fidelity, by a Letter which
he writ to them the fifth of November the same year, but he gave them many
sensible marks of his esteem and good will toward them, even to his death,
which happened toward the end of the year 1678. Madam Royal, his Widow, treated
them likewise, not only with a great deal of sweetness and goodness, but she
also engaged her self to the Protestant Cantons, by a Letter writ the 28th of
January 1679. to maintain the Vaudois in the free exercise of their Religion,
and in all other privileges and immunities.

CHAP. XX.
The Ninth War against the Vaudois, by Lewis the XIV. King of France, and
Victor Amadeus II. Duke of Savoy; with the perfidious treacheries of their
Enemies, which was the cause of the ruin and dispertion of these poor Churches.

THE sweetness of peace, which the Vaudois enjoyed after the war against
Genoua, till the death of Charles Emanuel II. and after the death of this
Prince, under the Regency of Madam Royal, his Widow, till the year 1685. made
them hope to enjoy a durable tranquillity, under the reign of Victor Amadeus II.
who is at present Duke of Savoy; and that which flattered them with this hopes
was, the considerable services they had done him in the year 1684. in the war
against those of Mondovi, in which they had signalized their courage and zeal
for his service. This very Prince had given them authentical assurances of his
great satisfaction, by a Letter that he writ to them on this occasion: But they
quickly lost their hopes, when the Governor of the Valleys made Proclamation,
about the end of the year 1685, That no Stranger should come and stay in the
Valleys above 3 days without his permission, and that any that should entertain
them any longer should be most severely punished. The Vaudois had intelligence
of the great violences that were made use of in France, to force the
Protestants there to change their Religion; they had likewise news, that that
King had cancelled the Edict of Nants, and they judged very well, that the
prohibition that was made them of giving a safe retreat to their Brethren of
France was of a dangerous consequence, but they did not foresee all the misery
that happened to them since, nor all the evils that were prepared for them.

They were strangely surprised when there was published in the Valleys an order
of the Duke of Savoy, on the 31st of January 1686. which did generally forbid
the exercise of the Protestant Religion, under pain of death and confiscation
of all their Goods, and their Churches to be demolished, and all their
Ministers to be sent into banishment; all Infants born hereafter to be baptized
and brought up in the Roman Religion under penalty of condemning their Fathers
to the Galleys: it is impossible to express the grief and fears of the Vaudois
at the sight of so surprising, vigorous and unjust order, so contrary to their
rights and privileges, the for^er orders only tended to the restraining them
in narrower bounds, but the Ordinance of the 31st of January, entirely deprived
them of the exercise of their Religion and liberty of Conscience. In this sad
condition into which they were plunged, by the malice of their Enemies, they
had recourse to submissions and supplications; according to their custom they
addressed the Duke of Savoy four times to revoke the Order, but they could
obtain nothing but some delay, that he might be the better prepared to execute
the order; they saw their misfortune was without remedy, and of this they were
the more certain when they understood that the King of France, who for reasons
of state and interest, had always protected them, and had declared himself the
Warrantee of the Patents of 1655 and 1664. had now not only obliged the Duke to
pass this Order, but had also made his Troops advance toward Piemont for to
see the execution of the Order performed.

The Protestant Cantons being informed of this Order, and of the measures that
were taken for the execution of it, thought themselves obliged not to forsake a
people persecute^ upon the score of Religion, and that they ought to appear on
their behalf on this occasion, as well as they had done on the former;
therefore they resolved in an Assembly held at Basil, in the month of February
1686. to send a splendid Embassy to the Duke of Savoy, to interceed for the
Vaudois. These Ambassadors arrived at Turin the beginning of March, and made to
the Duke their Proposals for the revoking of the late Orders of the 31st of
January; they showed the Duke that they were interested in this affair, not
only as Brethren of the Vaudois, making profession of the same Religion, but
because also the Patents of 1655 and 1664. which this last Order destroyed, was
the fruits of their former Mediation; and they supported their demand with many
strong and solid considerations. The Court of Turin did not impugn these
reasons, but thought it was sufficient to tell the Ambassadors, that the
engagements that the Duke had entered into with the King of France, opposed the
success of their negotiation. This Answer obliged the Ambassadors to give in a
Memorial to the Duke to this purpose; That the Predecessors of his Royal
Highness having engaged their Royal Word to many Sovereign Princes, and
particularly to the Protestant Cantons, for the due observing of the Patents
granted the Vaudois, such formal and authentical engagements ought to stand
good, for that the Patents were not mere tolleration for a time, but perpetual
grants and irrevocable Laws; and besides the Patents were granted at the
intercession of many Sovereign Princes, and according to the Laws of Nations
they are eternal monuments of the public faith, and the promises of Princes
ought to be sacred and inviolable: They demonstrated likewise by many strong
arguments, drawn out of the Schools of Politics, that the Duke of Savoy acted
against his own interest in these proceedings, and that he ought to maintain
the Vaudois in their ancient privileges, and the rules of justice and clemency
would not permit him to bring Fire, and Sword and Desolation into his Estate;
and that he destroyed a people which implored his Grace and Mercy, and that had
done nothing to draw this Cruel Order upon their Heads, which put them in
despair: But neither the excellent reasons of the Ambassadors, nor their
pressing solicitations, nor the Letters of intercession that many Protestant
Princes wrote in their behalf, produced the desired effect; they only confirmed
the Ambassadors in the certainties of the engagements that the Duke was entered
into with the King of France, for to extinguish the Protestant Religion in the
Valleys, as it had been done in France; and that the same methods would be made
use of to obtain their ends in this wicked design.

In the interim the Vaudois were wholly ignorant of what passed at Turin,
because their enemies had seized upon two men who were going into the Valleys
to carry them the news; it is true, they knew at length by common fame, that the
Swisse Ambassadors were at Turin to demand a revocation of the Order of the
31st of January, but they knew nothing for certain of the subject of their
negotiation, and could not go themselves to Turin to be informed without great
danger, because the time was elapsed that was given them for conforming to the
foresaid Order; and which is more, that Court had refused the Ambassadors to
grant Letters of safe conduct for the Deputies of the Vaudois; to come and
maintain their right, as it had been practiced in former negotiations.

The Duke of Savoy returned the Ambassadors this Answer, by the Marquess of St.
Thomas, one of his Ministers of State, who had the direction of foreign
affairs, that he could not revoke the Order he had given, because he was not
Master of it, but in case the Order were executed, his Royal Highness would be
willing to consider of some expedients; he likewise told them, that in respect
to their Masters, his Royal Highness would not refuse to give the Vaudois leave
to go out of his Estates, and to dispose of their Goods at their pleasure.

The Ambassadors considering that the Vaudois had no Head nor regular Troops,
and that they could not be able to maintain a War against the King of France
and the Duke of Savoy, who were leagued together for their destruction, they
thought the best way to shelter the Vaudois from this storm that threatened them
was, to procure a safe retreat, and the free disposal of their Goods. But
before they entered into this negotiation, they thought it proper, first to know
the sentiments of the Vaudois: Upon this subject the Ambassadors concerted
measures with the Court of Turin to make a Voyage into the Valleys, and the
Duke himself gave them a Letter upon this subject, for the Governor of that
Country; but the event has made clear beyond dispute, that the sentiment of the
Court was not to let the Vaudois go out of Piemont, but to force them to quit
their Religion, in the same manner as they had forced the Protestants of
France, and to destroy all those that would not conform to their Superstition.
And the consent that was given to the Vaudois of having liberty of quitting the
Country, was only a trick to divide them; they knew well that there were a
great many that would not abandon their Goods and Estates, and lead a
languishing and disconsolate life in foreign Countries; and that those would
sooner quit their Religion than submit to so hard conditions: And as for those
that would resolve to go out of the Country, they would find means to trick
them, either in taking away their Children, and bringing them up in the Roman
Religion, or in hindering them of disposing of their Goods; or in imprisoning
some, and massacring others, as they did in the year 1655. without the least
regard to the most Solemn Promises or Public Faith.

The Ambassadors arrived in the Valleys the 22d of March, and the day after
they caused all the Communities to be assembled by their Deputies, to whom they
gave an account of what they had done; they told them in short, that
considering the condition they were in, and that they could have no hopes of
succor, they had no better way to take, than to retire; and in case that this
could be obtained, with liberty of disposing of their Goods and Lands, and that
if they were resolved upon it, they would present their Proposals to the Court
of Savoy, as coming from themselves. The Deputies of the Communities were
extremely surprised to understand that they must hope for no success upon such
an occasion, that all the reformed part of Europe ought to be interested in:
They told the Ambassadors, that they were persuaded that they could do no
better than follow their advice, but to fully determine an affair of that
importance, it was necessary first to have a general assembly.

And the necessary orders being given for this Assembly, the Ambassadors
returned to Turin, and informed the Marquess of St. Thomas of the success of
their negotiation; who told them that their endeavors would be very agreeable
to that Court. After which, they petitioned for a safe conduct for some of the
Inhabitants of the Valleys to come and bring the result of the deliberations of
the Assembly; but this was refused upon two frivolous pretenses, the one was,
that the Duke of Savoy would have none of the Vaudois to appear and follow his
Court, and the other was, that he pretended to do nothing on this occasion, but
only upon the account and respect to the Ambassadors; and this was the reason
that they were constrained to send their Secretary into the Valleys, to go and
bring back the deliberations of the Assembly. The Secretary found the
Communities assembled at Angrogne, the 28th of March, unresolved what to do;
for on the one side they foresaw the dangerous consequences of a Bloody War, on
the other side they saw insuperable difficulties and dangers in quitting their
Country, but at last they concluded to send to the Ambassadors a memorial of
the dangers and difficulties that opposed their retreat; and the same time they
writ them a Letter, by which, after having humbly supplicated them to make a
reflection upon the foresaid difficulties, they notwithstanding submitted all
to their prudence and conduct.

By virtue of these Letters, the Ambassadors acted vigorously to obtain leave
for the Vaudois to have peaceable egress out of the Dukes Dominions, and
freedom of disposing of their Goods; but the Duke, to whom these propositions
were carried, made this answer be returned them, That before he would give them
a Categorical Answer to their Proposals, he expected the Communities of the
Valleys should send their Deputies with an ample power of making the
submissions that were due to him, and to ask him leave of going out of his
Dominions, as a particular favor that they implored of him. This change makes
it clear, that he consented to the retiring of the Vaudois, for no other end
but to divide them, as it after happened, to the great satisfaction of their
Enemies. The Ambassadors thought this Answer very strange, and plainly saw that
themselves were played upon, and the poor Vaudois only mocked. They had refused
to grant at their intercession, a safe conduct for the Deputies of the Valleys
to come to Turin. They had been assured several times, that if the Vaudois had
liberty to go out of the Country, that it should be only granted at the
intercession and mediation of the Ambassadors, and now it must not be the
Ambassadors that must obtain leave, but the Vaudois themselves must come, and
by their own humble supplications must obtain this cruel permission; and people
that had done nothing, but serve God according to the purity of the Gospel,
must come and ask it as a great favor to be banished from their Country, and
to abandon their Houses and Lands, to go and beg in a Foreign Country; this ill
treatment of the Ambassadors notwithstanding did not make them desist from
assisting the Vaudois, and to take away all pretenses from their Enemies, they
petitioned for a safe conduct for the Deputies, that the Duke demanded, and
they sent it to the Valleys by their Secretary, who caused the Communities to
be assembled that the Deputies might be nominated.

But as on the one side, there were many who never had any design of quitting
the Country, and on the other, many who suspected some new Tricks of their
Enemies; the Communities were not all of the same Sentiment, nor were the
Instructions they gave to their Deputies conformable one to another, some of
them asked leave to go out of their Country, and the free disposal of their
Goods; others demanded by their Deputies, the continuance of the free Exercise
of their Religion, and all their other Rights and Privileges. The Deputies
being come to Turin, the Ambassadors saw it was to no purpose for them to
appear at Court so divided, therefore they sent them back again into the
Valleys, to endeavor a union, and in the interim they would endeavor to put a
stop to the execution of the order above mentioned.

The Enemies of the Vaudois, who had people a purpose in the Valleys engaged to
divide them, were extremely pleased to hear of their divisions, they saw that
this was an assured means to destroy them; to foment their divisions, an Edict
was made and signed the 9th of April, which permitted them a safe Egress, and
free Disposal of their goods under certain Conditions, but we must observe that
the Deputies of the Valleys did not ask leave to quit the Country, nor did the
Ambassadors then insist upon it any more, at that time, but only they
petitioned to gain some time for the better assembling of the Communities, and
the freer Deliberation of what was expedient to be done in this affair.

This Edict had an effect contrary to the Intentions and Sentiments of their
Adversaries, it united the Vaudois, instead of dividing them, for having
examined it, they saw it was a snare that had been laid for their more easy
Destruction. First, This Edict did not revoke the order of the 31st. of
January, which commanded them to demolish all their Churches in 8 days, but it
confirmed it: they were put upon this Dilemma, that either they must demolish
them themselves, during the delay, and at the same time prepare themselves for
to quit their Houses and Lands for ever, and dispose of their Goods, which was
impossible in so short a time, or else their Enemies must demolish them, during
the delay; otherwise they would be incapable of the oblivion promised in the
Edict, and fallen from all hopes of future Favor; their Enemies would not dare
to demolish the Churches of the Vaudois, before the Army was entered into the
Valleys, and made it self Mistress of them. Secondly, The Edict that they
should lay down their Arms, and retire to their Houses within 8 days, and not
to assemble in any hostile manner whatsoever; the Vaudois had not forgot what
happened to them in 1655. for having then given entrance to the Army of the
Duke into the Valleys, for to quarter there only 2 or 3 days, as it was
pretended, for a mark of their Submission and Obedience, they committed that
cruel Massacre of which we have spoke.

And what followed made it apparent, that the Order commanding laying down of
arms, and prohibiting any more Military Assemblys, only tended to this, to make
them abandon their Religion and to massacre them with more ease, as they
afterward did in several places, after the Enemies Troops were entered into the
Valleys. Thirdly, The Vaudois were by the Edict, obliged to go out of their
Country in three separate Companies, and to appear in such places without arms,
where the Troops of the Duke were encamped, and so expose themselves to the
Discretion of the Soldiers, and perchance to be massacred. Fourthly, They saw
that the permission that the Edict gave of selling their Goods would serve them
in no stead, for that the Sale could not be made till after their retreat, and
that to Roman Catholics only, and by Roman Catholic Trustees; they were sure
that in the first place, out of the price of them, would be deducted all
damages pretended to be sustianed by the Friars, Missionaries, and all
Catholics, as well ancient as modern; which perchance they would have
pretended came to more than the value of their Goods. Fifthly, If they would
permit them to depart without any molestation, why did they not suspend the
execution of the order of the 31st. of January? and why gave they them so
little time to demolish their Churches in, and to prepare themselves for their
departure? Sixthly, The Ambassadors were not named in the Edict, and the
Vaudois had no security for the execution of what was contained in it; and had
very great reason to be diffident; considering what had formerly past.
Seventhly, The Duke of Savoy had told the Ambassadors that he was not master of
this affair, because of the engagements he had made with the King of France, it
was therefore to be presumed, that this Monarch on whom this affair depended
would not have the Vaudois better treated, than he had treated his own Subjects
of the reformed Religion in France; in conclusion, this Edict made the Vaudois
pass for the most wicked and criminal people of the World, for not obeying the
order of the 31st. of January, which was an order that destroyed all their
Privileges, and took from them Liberty of Conscience, and would have forced
them to sacrifice their Children to Idols; and by consequence the D. of Savoy
could not give out such an order without manifest Injustice, and invading the
Empire of God, who alone is Sovereign of the Consciences of men.

The Vaudois were established in the Valleys when this order was made, and
possessed the same Estates, and made profession of the same Religion that they
had professed many ages, before the Dukes of Savoy were Princes of Piemont, for
it was but in the year 1233. that Thomas Earl of Savoy made himself master of
the Town of Pignerol, under pretense that the race of the Princes of Piemont
was extinct; but the Vaudois have possessed these Valleys ever since they were
first inhabited, for it is from these Valleys that they borrow their name, as
the Greeks from Greece, and the Italians from Italy; and as to their Religion
we have showed they have kept it from Father to Son, even from the time of the
Apostles; if the people could not deprive their Sovereigns of their Rights and
Privileges, for what reason can the Sovereigns deprive Subjects of their
Liberties, if they have not committed crimes that may justly forfeit them?

Sovereign Princes are established to govern and guide their Subjects, and to
hinder injustice, not to destroy and dispoil them of their Goods and
Privileges, but to defend and maintain all their Rights and Immunities.

The Edict was published in the Valleys the 11th. of April, and commanded that
in 8 days they should demolish their Temples, banish their Ministers, baptize
their Children after the Roman fashion, instruct others in the Roman Religion,
lay down their arms, exercise no Soldiers, receive the Friars and Missionaries,
and the old and new Catholics, and all the whole Enemies army; they would give
no assurance to the Ambassadors that their Troops should not enter the Valleys
till the departure of the Vaudois: For the army was ready to enter even before
the Edict was published, and some days after the publication of it was made,
the Duke of Savoy appeared himself in the Field, the more to dishearten the
Vaudois by his presence, and the more easily oblige them to undergo their
rigorous conditions imposed on them: the 19th. all that was commanded by the
order of the 31st. of January was to be put in execution, and those of Lucerne
were to depart the 21st. those of Angrogne the 22d. those of St. Martin and
Perouse the 23d. of April, if they failed in the least tittle of the order,
they were to be seized on, and deprived of the liberty of departing, and
condemned as most enormous and criminal Rebels, for so says the Edict.

The Communities which were assembled at Rocheplate the 14th of the month,
after having maturely weighed the words and conditions of the Edict, judged
that their Enemies had nothing less in their intentions than to let them pass
safe out of the Country, and this Edict was only a Trap laid the more easily to
take them and destroy them, the result then was not to accept of the
conditions, for the reasons we have already mentioned; which reasons they sent
to the Ambassadors, who did their utmost to procure the Vaudois more secure and
more advantageous conditions, than those contained in the Edict, but neither
their reasons nor solicitations produced any Effect, they were always
answered, that as long as the Vaudois were in arms nothing further should be
granted them, nor positively promised them.

The Vaudois, being fully persuaded that they were not to be disarmed, but in
order to be destroyed the more easily and without resistance, were resolved not
to aid their own ruin, they therefore persisted in the resolution of defending
themselves if they were artacked.

That which confirmed them in this resolution was, that two or three days after
the publication of the Edict, 15 or 16 Vaudois went to the Judge of the
Valleys, to tell him, they and their Families designed to depart, and desired
him to give them a passport, which he refused them, under pretense that they
must expect till others went, and he was not only contented to deny them a
passport, which was necessary for them to obey the Edict; but he solicited
them to change their Religion, and because they would not do it, he put them in
prison, where some of anguish of mind, and other evils, incident to
imprisonments, dyed, and others were kept there 7 or 8 months, till they were
delivered with other Prisoners, this shows that a plot was laid to destroy the
Vaudois that would not confirm to the Romish superstition, and forsake the
ancient Apostolical Faith.

And that which confirmed it the more was, that one of the Directors of the
Church of Villa secca, in the Valley of St. Martin, writ to the Ambassadors,
who were as yet at Turin just ready to depart, a Letter on the 20th. of April,
by which, he declared in the name of himself and his Brethren of the Robe, that
they would put in execution the Edict, and desired them to procure them a safe
passport, and some more time to make their departure; and one of the
Ambassadors took the pains to go to the Camp for to demand a passport, but it
was refused him upon pretense that it was not asked in time; it was always too
soon or too late, and they never could find a proper time to grant their
passports.

There were two armies that were to attack the Vaudois, that of the Dukes was
commanded by Don Gabriel of Savoy, Uncle to the Duke; and that of France was
commanded by Monsieur Catinat, Governor of Casal: The Army of the Duke
consisted of the Household, of all the Cavalry and Infantry, and of the Militia
of Mondovi, Barjes, Bagnols, and other places of Piemont: That of France,
consisted of many Regiments of Cavalry and Dragoons* of eight battalions of
foot which had passed the Mountains, and of a part of the Garrison of Casal and
Pignerol. The Duke before he left the Camp, took a review, as well of his own
Troops, as of those of France, and put all things in order to attacque the
Vaudois, as soon as that short time he had given should be elapsed; having
designed one part of his Army to force the Valley of Lucerne, and the Community
of Angrogne, and the Army of France to force the Valleys of St. Martin and
Perouse.

The Vaudois had taken some measures to defend themselves; they had but one
part of the Valley of Lucerne, and another part of the Community of Angrogne,
in the Valley of Perouse; they only had some advantageous Passes that were in
places belonging to the Duke of Savoy; there being a part of this Valley that
depended on the Crown of France, but they were possessed of all the Valley of
St. Martin, the strongest of all by situation; they were fortified in every
one of these Valleys with many retrenchments, made of Turf and Stone, and were
about 2500 men in arms, two thirds more than they were in the year 1655 and
1663. They had made their Commanders and Officers of the most considerable
persons among themselves, they had no strangers to assist them, and they waited
the enemies coming with a great deal of resolution, but they wanted regular
Troops and experienced Commanders; there were many that were corrupted and grew
slack during the negotiation. The greatest fault they committed was, that they
resolved to guard all the Posts, for if they had abandoned the Posts that were
the nearest the enemy, and had retreated within the retrenchments that were
within the Mountains and Rocks, it is probable they could not have been reduced
to the extremity they after were.

The 22d the two Armies attacqued the Vaudois in several places; the Army of
the Duke being advanced as far as the Plain of St John, divided it self into
several bodies, who attacqued at the same time diverse retrenchments that the
Vaudois had in the Valleys of Lucerne and Angrogne; the Vaudois not being able
to stand the fury of the Enemies Cannon in those open retrenchments, were
constrained, after some resistance, to abandon a part of their retrenchments
and to put themselves into another stronger retrenchment above Angrogne, where
were 500 men: The enemies after having burned all their Houses, and whatso ever
came in their way, came to attacque the Fort, the Vaudois defended themselves
so stoutly against the whole Army, that they kept that Post a whole day, with
the loss of only five men, and the enemies lost above 300, although they were
very well covered with retrenchments; the Vaudois fearing they could not longer
keep this Post, deserted it and put themselves into another, which was about
200 paces higher above the former, and far more advantageous; there they
expected their enemies with a great deal of resolution and courage, who
advanced to attacque them, when news was brought them that those of the Valley
of St. Martin had yielded themselves up to the French, who came to fall upon
them in the rear: This Valley, as we have said, was the strongest of all the
Valleys, and from thence they might easily enter into the Valleys of Lucerne
and Angrogne: They did not know upon what Conditions they had surrendered, nor
how their Brethren there had been treated by the French. This melancholy news
obliged the Vaudois to enter into a treaty with Don Gabriel de Savoy, Uncle to
the Duke, and General of the Army, and with the other Generals, who after
having known the sentiments of his Royal Highness, who was at Lucerne, promised
positively on his behalf and their own, that all past should be pardoned, and
that they should have the conditions promised in the Edict of the 9th of April,
provided they would surrender themselves up to His Most Serene Royal Highness's
Clemency; but the Vaudois making some difficulty to trust this bare promise,
Don Gabriel who was advertised of it, sent them a promise in writing, signed
with his own hand, in the name of His Most Serene Royal Highness, in these
words, Lay your Arms down speedily, and throw your selves upon His Royal
Highness's Clemency, and assure your selves he will extend his grace and favor
to you, and none shall touch your persons, nor those of your Wives and
Children: An anssurance of this nature, one would think, was security enough
for the lives and liberties of the Vaudois: This promise was made in the name
of the Duke, but if it had but been in the name of Don Gabriel, and the General
Officers, it ought not to be less inviolable, for we do not read among the
Turks, nor the most Barbarous Nations that are, that ever such promises were
violated. The Vaudois laid down their Arms upon confidence of this promise, and
the most part surrendered themselves up to their enemies, but all those that
came within their power were made Prisoners, and sent to the Town of Lucerne,
under pretense that they should be conducted thither to make their submissions.
The enemies presently seized on all the Posts that the Vaudois had possessed in
the Community of Angrogne, and not content to have violated their faith and
promise they had given, that they would not meddle with their persons, in
making them Prisoners, they sacked, pillaged and burnt the Houses of these
people, and put a great many of them to the Edge of the Sword of all Ages and
Sexes, and violated many Women and Maids, and committed such brutal actions,
that may astonish all that have any sentiments of humanity.

After this treaty, many of the Vaudois retreated afar off, and would not
deliver themselves into the hand of their Enemies, till they knew what became
of the first that had surrendered; and these seeing that the Army committed
execrable cruelties every where, where they went, and that they kept all those
that surrendered prisoners, they hid themselves in the Woods, and sent by one of
St. John's a Petition to Don Gabriel to desire him to release their Brethren
that were kept prisoners against his solemn promise, and to cease all acts of
hostility, that the Army committed with such barbarity.

Don Gabriel returned them no answer, but some Officers answered him that
brought the Petition, they were only carried to Lucerne to make their
submissions to His Royal Highness, and after that they should be released,
which notwithstanding was not done. The treaty made with Don Gabriel in one of
the Articles was, that the Vaudois should enjoy the benefit of the Edict of the
9th of April, which promised them liberty of going out of the Duke's Dominions,
and carrying with them their movables, and what effects they pleased, and to
sell their effects and goods that they should leave behind; all these
conditions were violated, they took and pillaged all their effects, and burned
their Houses, and all they could not carry away.

The Vaudois who were in the Post, of which we have spoke, having surrendered
themselves to their enemies upon the terms we have mentioned, Don Gabriel made
one part of his Army possess themselves of the high places of the Valley of
Angrogne, who finding no more resistance, came to the Meadow of Tour, the most
considerable Fort of the Vaudois, and in which was the greatest part of their
Cattle; the Marquess of Parelle, who commanded this body of men, told the
Vaudois that were in the Fort, that peace was made by the capitulation of
Angrogne, and that they had nothing to do but to enjoy the fruit of it: He
assured them at the same time, upon the word of a person of honor, that if
they would put themselves into his hands, he would neither meddle with their
persons, nor the persons of their Wives and Children, and that they might carry
with them what they would, without the least fear or danger of any thing being
taken from them, and that they had nothing to do but to come to Lucerne, where
His Most Serene Royal Highness was to make their Submissions, and after that
all those that would become Catholics might return in all security, to their
Houses and Estates, and that those that would go out of his Highnesses
Dominions might have Liberty, according to the Edict of the 9th. of April.

The Vaudois who were in the Fort of Tour, surrendered themselves likewise, upon
the promises of the Marquess of Parelle, which were no better observed than
those of Don Gabriel; for the Enemies were no sooner entered into the Fort of
Tour, than all that the Vaudois had was given to the plunder of the Soldidrs,
and the Bandits of Mondovi, their most Capital Enemies, who enriched themselves
with their Spoils, and those that were in the Fort, of which the greatest
number were old men, and sick women, and children, were made Prisoners with
some Ministers, and driven on with that Fury, that those whom Age or Sickness
would not permit of march fast enough, were killed out to hand, or thrown off
the Rocks and Precipices: Behold the Prowess and inviolable Faith of the Army
of the Duke! Let us now see what the French Army did.

At the same time that the Dukes army attacked the Valleys of Lucerne and
Angrogne, that of France, commanded by Monsieur Catinat, fell upon those of
Perouse and St. Martin, the 22d. of April, they marched two hours before day,
by Torch-light, and followed for some time the Banks of the River of Cluson,
which is in the Territories of France; this General made a Detachment of Foot
commanded by Villevielle Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Limosin, who
having passed the River upon a Bridge, entered into the Valley of Perouse,
belonging to the Duke, they seized upon St. German, a Village that the Vaudois
had abandoned, and came to force a Retrenchment which they had above, in which
there was 200 men, the Vaudois after some resistance quitted that post, and
entrenched themselves in another more advantageous; in the interim, a new
Detachment of Horse and Dragoons, having past the River, came to support those
who were engaged in battle, they did their utmost both together to master the
Vaudois retrenchments, and they thought to carry them, being ten against one,
but they found so great resistance, that after having lost a great many men,
they entrenched themselves about a Pistol shot off, and they continually fired
one upon another more than ten hours, but at last the Vaudois came out of their
Retrenchment, with their Swords in their hands, which much surprised the French
who did not expect so daring an action, and chased them into the Plain, beyond
Cluson, where by good Fortune they found a Bridge that saved them from
drowning; in this action there were more than 500 French men killed and
wounded, the Vaudois had but 2 men killed, and some few wounded in this rout.
Villevielle fortified himself in the Church of St. German, with 70 Soldiers and
some Officers, he was summoned to surrender, and they proffered him good
quarter, but he refused and gave many proofs of great Valor and Resolution,
although a great part of his men were wounded and killed; the Vaudois without
doubt had forced it, but the night coming on they found themselves so harrassed
with the fatigue they had endured all day, that they were constrained, after
having lost some Soldiers at the Church door, to go and seek some refreshment,
Villevielle was disengaged the day following, early in the morning, by some
Troops that the Governor of Pignerol made to march thither all night long; the
Vaudois betook themselves to their Retrenchments, thinking that they came to
attack them, but the Enemies being now a greater number than they were the day
before, contented themselves to entrench out of Pistol shot, without firing for
two days together on either side, only some random shot.

While things went thus in Perouse, the body of the French army marched up by
the River of Cluson to the Fort of Perouse, in the Territories of France;
Catinat then made a Detachment of Cavalry commanded by Melac, which having
passed the River, over two Bridges, marched to gain the Eminencies which
separated the Valley of St. Martin from the Delphinate, the rest of the Army
having passed the River went to incamp with Catinat at Clos de Bolards, one
part of the night, and the morrow following being the 23d. he attacked the
Valley of St. Martin at a Village called Rioclaret: But as those that commanded
in this Valley, did not believe they should be attacked after the proffers they
had made of submitting themselves to the Edict of the 9th. of April, and above
all because the appointed day was not elapsed, for their departure out of the
Valleys; so the Vaudois of this Valley had not put themselves in a posture of
defense, and so made no resistance; they thought it best to lay down their
arms, and implore the Mercy and Clemency of the Conqueror; but the French being
enraged at what happened near St. German, did not content themselves to pillage
and burn their houses, but they massacred, without distinction of Age or Sex,
with an incredible Fury, all that could not fly from their Barbarity.

We are to observe, that the Valley of St. Martin had entered into all the
engagements with the other Valleys by a general consent of that Community, by
their Deputies, at the general Assembly held at Angrogne, the 14th. of April,
and this Valley which was the strongest of all, having changed their sentiments
some days after sent to the Court, that they accepted of the Edict of the 9th.
of April: This unexpected change was very prejudicial to the others, who seeing
the Enemies were Masters of this Valley, from whence they might easily pass
into the rest, began to despair of defending themselves; this heartbreaking
news obliged the Vaudois to enter into Treaty, and make the best terms they
could for themselves: If the Inhabitants of these Valleys had defended
themselves, as they might and ought, and that those of the other Valleys had
contented themselves to guard the strongest passes of the Mountains, it had
been hard for the Enemies to root them out. And two great Armies, as were those
of France and Savoy, could not have subsisted long there without perishing,
either by Famine or by the Sword of the Vaudois, as it had happened to other
Armies, in the precedent wars, that were sent to make war upon them, and
destroy them.

Catinat after having ravaged the whole Country of Rioclaret, in a strange
manner; left some Troops in the Valley of St. Martin, and with a part of his
Army crossed over the Mountains, that divide this Valley from that of Perouse,
and encamped himself without finding any Resistance in the Community of Parmol,
in the Valley of Perouse; the Soldiers massacred all those that fell into their
hands, having no pity of women; children, old or sick. The Detachment that
Melac commanded, having encamped one night upon the Eminencies of the Valley of
St. Martin, entered by diverse ways into this Valley, by passes unknown to any
but the Inhabitants of this Valley, without any resistance; he left every where
where he went, marks of an unparalleled Cruelty, and marched to join the Army
that was encamped at Pramol: we shall not here give you the particulars of the
Barbarity and Inhumanity exercised upon these poor people, as well by the body
of the French Army, as by the Detachment commanded by Melac, that not being
convenient for an Abridgment, as this is; it is sufficient to say that the
French did yield in nothing to the Cruelty, Barbarity, and Inhumanity of the
Savoyards and Piemonteses; but that which was the most astonishing was, they
exercised these infernal Cruelties upon people that had submitted to the orders
and decrees of their Sovereign, and against people that had laid down their
arms, and made no kind of resistance.

The Army of the King of France, was encamped in a part of the Commu^ty of
Pramol, called Rua, about half a League from Peumian, whither a part of the
Communities of Pramol, St. German, Prarustin, and Rocheplate were retreated to
the number of 1500 persons, men, women, and children; the Vaudois who had so
valiantly defended themselves against Villevielle, seeing that the French that
were encamped at Rua, might fall upon them in the Rear, quitted their post, and
put themselves into Peumian, where there Brethren where, and while they
consulted upon the measures to be taken, to defend themselves against the
French, who prepared themselves to come and attack them, some Inhabitants of
the Valleys being gained to the Enemies party, came and told them, that the
Valleys of Angrogne and Lucerne had submitted themselves to the will of their
Prince, who had been gracious to them and had given them the benefit of the
Edict of the 9th. of April; they likewise told them, that none but themselves
stood out, and that it was impossible for them to bear the whole burden of the
war, and that it was better now, while it was proffered, to accept of an
advantageous peace: This news daunted the Vaudois, and made them resolve to
send their Deputies with a Drum to the General of the French army to compose
all matters; this General who desired no better, told him, that the intention
of his Royal Highness was to pardon them, and promised them positively, as well
on the behalf of the Duke, as of his own, life and liberty, with permission to
return without any danger to their houses and estates, provided they would
speedily lay down their arms; and as to what the Deputies said, that they were
afraid that the French being enraged at what happened at St. German, should
revenge themselves upon the Vaudois when disarmed, he made great protestations,
with horrible Oaths, That if all their Army went by their houses, they would
not kill so much as a Chick. This agreement being made, Catinat kept with him
one of the Deputies, and sent the rest to tell the Vaudois what was done, and
to oblige all those that were fled into the Mountains to surrender themselves
the day following, being the 25th. of April, at Peumian, that every one might
return to his own home after they were informed of the peace: While the Vaudois
gathered together at Peumian the dispersed Families, Catinat gave notice of
this Capitulation to Don Gabriel, who sent him the same day a Courier, which
passed through Peumian, and assured the Vaudois that were there that he was the
Messenger of Peace, and the day after at his return he told them that Peace was
concluded; they were so persuaded and secure of it, that the day before they
laid down their arms, confiding entirely in the promises of Catinat, in this
estate they expected news of the Confirmation of it at Peumian; but this French
General observed no better the Treaty with the Vaudois, that were assembled at
Peumian, than the General of the Duke's army did with those of Angrogne; for he
sent thither a Captain of the Garrison of the Fort of Perouse, followed by many
Dragoons, he was well known to the Vaudois, who afresh reiterated the
assurances of Peace, but they were fraudulent assurances, as were those of the
Generals; in conclusion, he put the men in one quarter, and the women and
children in another, the French Troops being come the same time, told the men
they had orders to carry them back to their own houses, and made them march
four and four; these poor people being constrained to leave their Wives and
Children, exposed to the Discretion of the Soldiers, were conducted not to
their houses, as it was promised, but to Don Gabriel, who was encamped upon the
Mountain of Vachere, who ordered them to be carried Prisoners to Lucerne; while
they treated the men thus, they experienced all that Fury and Brutality is
capable to inspire enraged and insolent Soldiers with; these Barbarians were
not content to rob them of all their Money, but they likewise violated many
women and maids, with circumstances that are an abomination to nature, and
massaceed those that fled to save their honor. Catinat was not present at what
was done at Peumian, he left the conduct of that affair to some Officers, that
he might not be obliged to hear the just complaints of the Vaudois about their
breach of promise, and more than barbarous perfidiousness; or else that he
might not be spectator of the design that was upon these poor distressed
people: but howsoever it was, it is certain, that except those women that were
killed, and those that escaped by flight the persecution of these Monsters, and
saved themselves in the neighboring wood from the danger of the shot, that was
made after them to stop them, all the rest were dragged into diverse Prisons,
with monstrous Inhumanity.

The Valley of Perouse being reduced by the Capitulation of Peumian, one part
of the Fr. Army quitted that Valley, and marched to join the Army of the Duke,
which was encamped upon the Mountain of Vachere; and then it was that from all
sides they gathered together the dispersed Vaudois, and dragged them into
several Prisons and Castles, under pretense that they carried them to his most
serene Royal Highness to beg his pardon; but that which affected these poor
people the more sensibly, and made them the greatest object of compassion was,
that at their most earnest entreaty and tears they refused to put whole
Families together, they separated the Father from his Son, and the Husband from
the Wife, that they might not have the means to comfort and help one another;
their Enemies were not content to violate the public Faith of the Treaty and
Oaths, which always were counted sacred among men, but they violated the Bonds
of Nature and Blood, to the end they might be less able to undergo the evils
intended them; there was a great number of Young Boys and Girls, which they did
not imprison, but dispersed into several houses though Piemont; not through a
motive of equity or compassion, but to make them change their Religion, and to
bring them up in the Roman Superstition; and by this means to quite alienate
their affections from their Fathers and Mothers.

There was yet a great number of Vaudois, who had not surrendered, and had not
been taken prisoners; those of Villar, Bobbi, and some other places of the
Valley of Lucerne would not enter into a treaty as the rest had done, lest they
should be served the same sauce: Many of those of Angrogne had joined
themselves with them, having seen the breach of treaty and solemn parole. A
great many of the Vaudois of the Valley of St. Martin had sought for themselves
places to retreat in among the Woods and Rocks, to save themselves from the
barbarity of the French, who gave no quarter. The enemies resolved either by
force or policy to make themselves masters of these Vaudois, as well as of the
other; and to this end, while the Duke's Army was employed against those that
as yet were in Arms in the Valley of Lucerne, the French returned into the
Valley of St. Martin, with the Marquess of Parelle, a person well known to the
Vaudois, and very proper to persuade them; this Marquess knew by experience,
that craft and wicked policy was a more sure method to gain their design than
open force. Behold here the policy, or rather treachery which he made use of;
there were some of the chief among the Vaudois who had surrendered themselves
upon the Public Faith of the treaty, and in whom the people had great
confidence; he made these march in the Front of the Army, and clapping Pistols
to their Heads, not only forced them to serve for guards to the French Army to
discover the Vaudois in their most secret fastnesses, but also to write Letters
to their Countrymen in the Valley of St. Martin to exhort them to surrender
themselves to the Clemency of their Prince, whose grace and favor would be
extended to all that would in due time make experience of it; and because the
conduct hitherto made use of toward those that had hitherto surrendered, might
make them diffident of this solicitation, they added to many of their Letters,
that all prisoners speedily should be released. Upon the credit of these
Letters, they knowing perfectly their Hands and Characters, and upon the
assurance that the Marquess of Parelle, and the other Officers gave them of
peace, and the favor of their Prince, many of these poor people yielded
themselves up into their hands; many of the rest were either taken or Massacred
by the Soldiers; but those that yielded and those that were taken, had both the
same destiny, and were equally dragged with great inhumanity into several
Prisons.

Whilst craft and cruelty despoiled the Valley of St. Martin of its
Inhabitants, we must go see what passed in the Valley of Lucerne. The Vaudois,
as yet, possessed two considerable Posts, the one called Iaimet, and the other
Chamrama above Tour, into which a part of those that had saved themselves from
the Massacre of Angrogne, had put and fortified themselves; these two Posts
covered Villars, where there were about a thousand Souls, Old Men, Women and
Children: A detachment of the Army of the Duke, supported by the Bandit's of
Mondovi, attacqued these two Posts, where the Vandois defended themselves a
whole day with a great deal of courage and extraordinary valor; they killed a
great number of the Enemy, amongst whom were several Officers of Note; the
Commander of the Bandit's there also lost his life; the Vaudois had but six men
killed, and as many wounded.

The Enemy being sore fatigued, began to want Ammunition, and began to think of
a retreat; but considering they might be easily pursued and defeated in their
retreat, they made use of this stratagem; many Officers having laid their Arms
and Hats upon the ground, approached about the closing of the evening the
retrenchment of Chamruma with a Handcherchief about the end of a stick, and
demanded a parley, and made propositions of peace; they showed likewise a
Paper, and told the Vaudois that they had received Letters, which brought the
news that peace was made all over the Valleys; that His Royal Highness had
extended his grace and favor to all his Subjects, and if they would not
further provoke his Arms, they might be comprised in it; they added that they
had received orders to shoot no more, and to retreat, and exhorted the Vaudois
to do the same, and accept of the clemency and favor of their Prince, of which
the Prodesta Prat; who was there present, could assure them; this Prodesta, who
was well known to the Vaudois, having joined his protestations to those of the
Officers, and they having altogether promised them their lives and liberties,
provided they would retreat: The Vaudois confiding in these promises, did not
only give over shooting, but they gave likewise to their enemies, whom they
might have defeated, liberty of retreating, and they themselves quitted the
Post, being fully persuaded that peace was made. Many of the Communities, who
surrendered themselves at Tour, to enjoy the fruits of this peace, were
presently seized on and put in Prison. The Vaudois had no sooner abandoned the
Post of Chamruma, but the enemies possessed it, being of extraordinary
importance.

Those that were at Iaimet, and had not entered into the treaty, were obliged to
quit their Post, because it was commanded by the other, and marched to another
Post near Villar; the enemy followed them close, and encamped themselves at
Bonnet, upon the avenues of Villars and Bobbi, and staid there two days,
without giving the least disturbance to the Vaudois, who were joined, and made
up about four or five hundred men. The Officers of the Army in the interim made
them several propositions of peace, promising great matters if they would
surrender, and terribly threatening them if they defended themselves. The
Vaudois made answer, that they desired nothing more than peace; but that the
peace that was presented them was more dangerous than war, since it could not
be bought, but at the price of their liberty; that notwithstanding the peace
they had promised them of Chamruma, and upon confidence of which the had
quitted their advantageous Post, they had imprisoned all that surrendered; that
the example of their Brethren taught them what they must expect from such
proposals: This notwithstanding did not hinder many of these poor innocents
from yielding themselves up to their enemies, grounding their confidence upon
Oath that was made them, that all would quickly be set at liberty, and they
were only carried before his Royal Highness to make their submission and beg
his pardon; but these credulous innocents were likewise put in prison, and
treated as the rest.

The Vaudois being sore weakened, abandoned Villars, of which the enemy
presently possessed themselves. The Vaudois were very quiet till the fourth of
May, that the enemies Troops being reinforced, marched to attack Bobbi, where
the Vaudois were retreated, but they were repulsed by 150 Vaudois, who were
posted upon the Mountain of Subjusque, and who, without the loss of a man,
killed several Officers and a great number of Soldiers. The 12th of the same
month the two Armies being joined, resolved to force Bobbi, but the Vaudois
defended it so well, that after a fight that lasted a whole day, their enemies
were forced to retreat with great loss.

The day following the Marquess of Parelle, who came from the Valley of St.
Martin, passed St. Juliane, a Mountain which was then believed to be
inaccessible, and he was in a condition to attack the Vaudois from above; this
obliged them to quit Bobbi, and place themselves among the Woods and Rocks. The
Marquess of Parelle, and the Count of Brichanteau, having possessed the Posts
that the Vaudois had quitted, sent to them in their Fastnesses, diverse persons
to exhort them to yield, and offered them the pardon of their Prince. One part
of these poor people, being sorely harrassed and pressed with famine and other
miseries, laid hold on the proffer, but they lost their liberty as well as the
rest; there were some also who surrendered themselves to the Governor of the
Fort of Mirebouc, upon promise that he made them of life and liberty; but this
Governor paid their confidence with a rigorous imprisonment. Those who had
posted themselves in the Mountain of Vandelin, after having fought manfully for
some time, suffered themselves at last to be seduced by the Count de la Roche,
Governor of the Valleys; he did promise them positively, by a Writing under
his Hand, that they should return to their Houses without the least
molestation; but they had no sooner quitted their Post, than he made them be
seized on and imprisoned, taking from them the Paper he had signed with his own
hand. The ill treatment they gave those that surrendered, was the cause that
there was a little party of Vaudois, who chose rather to suffer famine, and all
sorts of miseries among the Woods and Rocks, where they had hid themselves,
than to put themselves into the hands of their enemies. The General sent a part
of his Troops after them, to seek them out, they found some who were massacred
in the endeavoring to make their ascape, others were presently hanged upon the
Trees, others were carried Prisoners to Lucerne, and afterward cruelly hanged;
among whom was Monsieur Leidet, a Minister in the Valley of St. Martin, who
died a most Christian death.

Those that fell not into the hands of their enemies, led a languishing life
among the Woods and Rocks, where they had hid themselves, living on Roots and
wild Herbs that they gathered on the Mountains; and in this sad condition some
remained one month, and some two.

The enemies of the Vaudois, having by their perfidiousness and treachery,
killed more than three thousand of them, and deprived above ten thousand of
their liberty; and taken and dispersed above two thousand Children, they
thought they had finished their design, and fell to confiscating all the Goods
and Lands of the Vaudois.

CHAP. XXI.
Containing a just diffidence of a part of the Vaudois, which was the cause of
their preservation: Their courage and firm resolution to defend themselves,
which procured them a safe retreat out of the Duke's Dominions, with Letters of
safe Conduct.

ABout the end of the month of June the French Army and the Bandit's of Mondovi
retired, the Vaudois that would not hearken to the fraudulent propositions of
peace that were offered them, nor confide in the deceitful promises of their
enemies, being not so straightened by the Army of the Duke, which alone staid
behind in the Valleys, came out of the places where they had hid themselves, to
seek for Victuals, to sustain their languishing life, there were about
fourscore in the Valley of Lucerne, and fifty in that of St. Martin, with some
Women and Children. As soon as they were assembled together, they seized upon
an advantageous Post, that their enemies had quitted, after that they made
several excursions into the Plain, and allways carried off good store of booty
and provisions: They beat upon several occasions, many detachments of the
enemy, killed a great number of the Savoyards that were come to inhabit in the
Valleys, and did for some months such bold and courageous actions, that they
put their enemies under Contribution, and forced them to furnish them with
Victuals, to hinder their excursions into the Plain. The Court of Turin, having
to no purpose employed force to chase them out of Valleys, made them under hand
an offer of safe conduct, and Hostages for the security of their safe retreat
out of the Country. Those that brought this proposal to the Vaudois, did not
avow that they acted by order of the Court of Turin; on the contrary, they told
them, they spoke without any directions from thence, but on their own heads,
and promised them that they did not doubt but to procure them passports and
hostages by their own interest in that Court, but it is certain that this was
not transacted without leave of the Court; for besides that no one particular
person durst of his own head intermeddle in the affair, the safe conducts that
were after expedited, showed clearly that all was done by order of the Court;
the Vaudois refused to hearken to these propositions, whether it was because
they had no confidence in their promises, or because they were resolved to dye,
or release their Brethren out of Captivity, Death being more sweet to them than
life, as long as their Brethren groaned under the Chains of their Enemies, in
Prison; to oblige the Vaudois to accept of these offers, they were told that
the Duke of Savoy had declared, that as long as they were in arms he would not
release the Prisoners; but they were positively promised, that as soon as they
were gone out of the Country, their Brethren should be set at Liberty. The
Vaudois considering that their Resistance might furnish their Enemies with a
pretense of detaining the Prisoners, thought themselves obliged to retire out
of the Dominions of the D. of Savoy. It was at last agreed, that they should go
out of the Valleys with their Wives and Children, Arms and Baggage in two
Troops or Brigades, their charges to be born, and conducted safe into
Switzerland, at two several times, by a Captain of his Royal Highnesses called
Perret, with passports in due form; that for the security of of the first
Troop, there should Hostages be left in the Valleys, in the hands of the
second, who should keep them till they had certain intelligence of the safe
arrival of the first at the place agreed on, and after that the first Troop
should be safe arrived, that Captain Perret should give an Officer of his
Kindred for Hostage, till the second Troop should be arrived there in safety.
If the Vaudois that treated with Don Gabriel, and with Catinat, had had these
precautions, and had not laid down their arms, but taken Hostages for the
performance of the promises that were made them, they had not been imprisoned
by thousands, neither had their Children been taken away and their Wives and
Daughters violated.

The Vaudois that were in the Valley of St. Martin did almost the same, that
those had done who were in the Valley of Lucerne; for though they were fewer in
number, they notwithstanding defended themselves with so much courage and
resolution, that they forced their Enemies to grant them safe conduct and
security to pass into Switzerland, with their Wives and Children, Arms and
Baggage; those that were in one of these Valleys, knew not what was done in the
other, the Enemy having seized on all the passes, hindered all Communication; if
they could have had intelligence one of another, they would without all doubt
have had more advantageous terms, and perchance might have procured the Liberty
of their Brethren. For whether it was that the Court of Turin, was obliged to
maintain an Army in the Valleys, to hinder the excursions of the Vaudois; or
whether it was that there was a design to people this Country with Savoyards,
who had no mind to go and live there, as long as the Vaudois were there in
arms; it is highly propable that to oblige them to go out, the Court would have
consented to the enlargement of the Prisoners.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the ill treatment of the Vaudois that had laid down their arms upon the
security of the public Faith, with a relation of the Cruelties that were
exercised on them in the Prisons; and at last of their Enlargement, at the
entreaty of the Swisse Cantons.

WHile these brave Vaudois defended themselves most courageously, and procured,
by their Valor, safe conducts and hostages to retire in security into
Switzerland; the Protestant Cantons, animated with a true Christian Zeal and
Charity, met in a general Assembly at Arau, in the month of September, the same
year, 1686. In which they resolved to demand of the Duke of Savoy, an
enlargement of all the Prisoners, and to this end, they sent two Deputies to
the Count de Govon Resident of the Duke of Savoy, at Lucerne in Switzerland;
these Deputies having proposed the business to the Resident, and having showed
him the reasons that engaged the Protestant Cantons to interest themselves in
the affairs of the Vaudois, they entered into a treaty with him, in the
beginning of October, upon certain Articles to be ratified by their respective
Superiors; the substance of it was, that the Duke of Savoy should give Liberty
to all the Vaudois to come safe to Switzerland, and that he should cloth them,
conduct them, and defray their charges till they came to the Frontiers of
Switzerland, and there the Cantons would receive them, and conduct them into
their Country: The Swisse presently ratified this Treaty, but the Duke did not
ratify it, till some time after; the Duke started some difficulties, concerning
the way these people should take, in going out of his Territories, he would
have them go over the Mountains which thenwere inaccessible, by reason of the
great Snow with which they were covered, by the Country of Velay, which neither
belongs to the Duke of Savoy, nor the Swisse, but to the Bishop of Sion. The
Protestant Cantons seeing unnecessary scruples raised, to hinder the execution
of the Treaty, made their complaint to the Count de Govon, who upon this wrote
to the Duke his Master; the Duke at last gave them leave to pass through that
part of Savoy that confines upon Bearne, and parts the Territory of Geneva from
Savoy, he made the Prisons be opened, but this was not done till the heart of
winter, and in such a rigorous season, that according to all probability those
that had escaped in Prison must perish by the way.

The Vaudois who by their Valor had procured themselves safe conduct, arrived
in Switzerland about the end of October, but those that had been Prisoners did
not arrive at Geneva till Christmas.

It would be a hard matter to represent all the miseries and Calamities these
Prisoners suffered during their Captivity, they were dispersed to the number of
about 10000 men, women, and children in 14 Prisons, or Castles of the state of
Piemont, and they were more or less ill treated according to the humors of
those that had the command of those Prisons; but it is certain that they were in
every Prison exposed to great inconveniences and miseries.

They had nothing in the several Prisons, but Bread and Water for their
ordinary Food, and not enough of that neither in some Prisons; they gave them
course black bread, without any substance in it, which they did knead with
dirty water, that they took out of the Channels of the streets, and in the
bread they often found Lime, Glass, and other filth; in other places they gave
them nothing but stinking corrupt water, that they could scarce drink off; in
some places they were obliged to fetch it themselves, at places where the
Cattle were watered, and where they washed their Dogs and other Nastiness; in
other places they would not permit them that they should take the water, as it
came out of the Wells, but as it ran through pipes, exposed to the heat of the
Sun, to the end they might drink nothing but hot water; in other places they
gave them water only at certain set times, and if they were ready to be burnt
up with thirst they would not give them a glass to save their Lives, and this
was the occasion of the death of several; they had no Beds but the hard Bricks,
with which the Chambers of Piemont are paved, and that without Straw, and if in
some places they allowed them Straw, it was rotten and full of Vermin.

They were so thronged in the Prisons that they could scarce stir, and when
some of them dyed, which happened almost every day, they put in more fresh
Prisoners that they might be always equally thronged: The great heat of the
Summer, and the corruption that the Chambers were infected with, by reason of
the great number of the sick, had engendered a great quantity of Vermin, which
would not let the Prisoners sleep, either night or day; there were likewise
great Worms which eat and made holes in their Skins, and many even alive became
the food of these Vermin, which are wont only to prey upon the dead; they did
not only endure all the Inconveniences of heat, which is excessive great in
Piemont; but likewise of horrible cold, for in the very heart of winter they
neither allowed Fire nor Coverlets, although they were in the Chambers above,
of which the greatest part wanted glass in the windows, and so were exposed to
the extreme rigor of the season which is very sharp, being near those
Mountains of eternal Snow; they allowed them no Candles in the night, neither
Summer nor Winter, although they were often submissively asked, that they might
with the more convenience help the sick; a great number of women in their
Labor expired for want of help, and necessary women on those occasions, and
the Children had the same fate their with distressed Mothers, receiving their
deaths-wound the first moment of Life; but as if what they suffered in their
bodies was not enough alone, their Souls were persecuted in a most dangerous
manner, for their Clergy and Regulars did their utmost by their sly
insinuations, to make them change their Religion: but God gave them the Grace
of Perfeverance, and there were but few that yielded to the strength of the
Temptation.

The Vaudois Prisoners were in this sad condition, when the Duke of Savoy made
Proclamation they should be released, and have Liberty of retiring into
Swtizerland; but this Proclamation was not made in the same manner, nor at the
same time every where, but successively, according to what number were
permitted to go first together; it was made by an Auditor of the Dukes, who
first made all the Prisoners be brought before him, who told them, that all
those that would retire out of the Dukes estate were at Liberty to do so, even
those that had promised to change their Religion, for promises that were were
made in Prison were looked upon as forced, and consequently null; that they
were at Liberty to go or to change their Religion: All that the Auditor said
was only to try them, for their Priests and Keepers of the Prisons did what was
possible to hinder its effects; they told them that the rigor of the season,
and the cruelty of the Soldiers would destroy a great many of them in the way,
which happened to the Prisoners that were at Mondovi, whom they made to begin
their march at five of the Clock at night, the same day that the liberty of
going was proclaimed; these distressed people were most of them distempered
with diverse Diseases, yet they made them march that bitter cold night upon Snow
and Ice, four or five leagues without any rest, which was the cause that more
than an hundred and fifty sunk under the burden of their maladies and
fatigues, and dyed, their Brethren not being able to assist them in the least;
the same thing happened to the Prisoners that were at Fossan, there was a
company of them that lay all night, at the foot of Mount Sonis, who when they
were ready to march the next morning, perceived that there was a terrible
Tempest upon the Mountain, they told the Officer of it, and desired him, that
they might have leave to stay till it were past, and to have pity of so many
weak and sick people; but this Officer having less sense of pity than the very
Rocks, had the Cruelty to make them march immediately, and so to sacrifice a
part of them to his Barbarity, for fourscore and six of them dyed, and were
buried by that horrible tempest of Snow; they were most of them old men, women
and children, who had not strength to resist the rigor of the season, and the
violence of the storm; their Relations were forced to leave them there to
become the food of wild Beasts, and take a sorrowful leave of them, not being
able to pay them the last debt due to so near Relations. Some Merchants that
afterward passed over the Mountains saw the bodies of these miserable people,
extended upon the Snow, the Mothers having their Children in their arms; in
other places they cruelly whipped the Prisoners that would not change their
Religion, particularly at Ast.

The Officers that conducted the rest, used them more mercifully and
charitably, whether it was their natural inclination to do so, or that the
complaints that the Deputies of the Cantons made, at the Court of Turin upon
this subject, made them change the orders that they had given to those that
conducted them, I am not able to determine.

They violated likewise the Treaty that was made with the Count de Govon in
several Articles, first of all, in the way they took from the Parents several
Children. Secondly, They would not release the Ministers, but kept them close
Prisoners. Thirdly, In that they were promised to be clothed, before they went
out of the Dukes dominions, which was very just it should be done, since they
detained all their Goods, and sent them into perpetual Banishment, in a most
rigorous season, and instead of clothing them as they ought, they only gave
them some old pitiful Coats, and little useless Breeches.

These poor people came to Geneva about Christmas, at diverse times, and in
several little Companies, which consisted in all of about 2500 persons. One may
judge from hence, how rigorous and severe their imprisonment was by the number
of those that dyed in this miserable estate, since of 10000 Prisoners only 2500
escaped; they were all in such a miserable condition, that when they came to
Geneva they dyed between the two gates of the City, finding the end of their
Life in the beginning of their Liberty; some were so sick that their death was
expected every moment, in the arms of those that had the charity to support
them; others through the extremity of cold, had lost the use of their tongues;
some were scarce able to make a step further; others had lost the use of their
hands, that they could not stretch them out to receive the charity that was
proffered them; the greatest part of them were half naked, and without either
Shoes or Stockins; in short every one of them had so many marks of their
sufferings, that the most cruel and pitiless persons would have been touched
with a sense of their miseries. After they had reposed themselves at Geneva,
and had taken necessary refreshments before they went into Switzerland, the
first that came, went to meet those that came after, to inform themselves of
their relations, of whom they had heard no news since the surrendering of the
Valleys: The Father asked for his Children, the Children for their Father; the
Husband sought for the Wife, and the Wife for her Husband; and every one
endeavored to hear some news of their friends and relations, but in vain, for
the greatest part of them were dead in Prison. This made such a spectacle that
the by standers melted into tears, while these miserable people oppressed with
the excess of grief, had not power to weep or make their complaints.

By this relation we have made of the sufferings of the Vaudois, one may see
that they had the simplicity of Doves, but they had not the prudence of
Serpents, since they let themselves so often and so easily be cheated by their
Enemies. But the Vaudois were not so simple and innocent in their conduct, as
their Enemies were wicked, malicious, cruel and fraudulent; regarding neither
Faith, nor solemn promises.

The advantages that the Vaudois had over their Enemies, in the year 1686. in
defending the most advantageous posts, shows evidently that if they had
contented themselves in guarding those posts, they had without all doubt,
destroyed both the French and the Dukes army, and kept themselves in their
Country; but their misfortune was, that they were for keeping more of the
Country than they were able to defend: They likewise* committed a second
oversight, in that, when they entered into any Treaty with the Enemy, having so
often had experience of their frauds and breach of promise, they did not demand
Hostages, for the due performance of the Treaty, as it is commonly done, but
they confided in their words and fraudulent promises, which were always
violated as soon as their turn was served.

Those who to excuse the Court of Turin say, that the Vaudois were rebellious
Subjects, who had taken up arms against their Prince, are ridiculous and
impertinent; for when the Vaudois took up arms they were forced to it, they saw
before they offered to stir, great Armies raised for their Destruction; now the
Law of Nature, as well as that of Nations, permits every one to defend his life
against those that would unjustly take it, and Princes are established by God,
not to destroy, but to defend and conserve their people. Now if God, who is
absolute Sovereign, Lord, and Creator of the world, notwithstanding always
keeps his promise to man, and never violates his word; how much more should
Princes, who are but his Ministers and Servants, keep their word, and promises
made to their Subjects, that are men as well as themselves, and are subject to
the Law of God, as well as the meanest of their Subjects.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the good reception that the Vaudois of Piemont, unjustly driven out of
their Country, received from the Republic of Geneva, and the Protestant
Cantons, and Protestant Princes of Germany.

BUt the enemies of the Vaudois were not so cruel, inhumane and barbarous
toward them, as the Republic of Geneva was courteous and charitable; for as
soon as they heard of their coming they went to meet them, and every one strove
who should bring the most to his house, that he might have the greater occasion
of exercising his Charity: They did not only treat them as dear and tender
Children, but as persons that brought peace and blessings into their families:
All those that were naked were clothed, either at the expense of those that
charitably had received them into their house, or by the purse of the Italian
Church; the Directors of which, from the beginning to the end, gave
extraordinary marks of a tender compassion, and most ardent Charity. It was not
only at Geneva that the Vaudois found consolation in their miseries, but they
received great comfort and assistance in Switzerland, where the Protestant
Cantons at the same time opened to them their Country, and the bowels of
compassion, in the most generous, Christian and charitable manner in the World.
The Elector of Brandenburg having news of their arrival in Switzerland, desired
the Protestant Cantons to send a part of them into his Dominions, and he
promised them a comfortable subsistence. The United Provinces made for them a
great and generous Collection, which was sent them from time to time, and
distributed according to their necessities.

Behold how the Valleys of Piemont were dispeopled of its ancient Inhabitants,
and how the Torch of the Gospel, that had shined bright here so many ages, was
extinguished; how at last perfidiousness and treachery triumphed over the
innocence and Dove-like simplicity of the Vaudois: How the Council of the
Propagation and their enemies executed the wicked designs they had so long
contrived for their utter extirpation; and how the Vaudois have suffered
unjustly, and only for the sake of Religion, this horrible persecution and
dreadful dissipation.

After the Vaudois were driven out of their Country, the D. of Savoy and the
Council of Propagation employed all their care and study to re-people these
Valleys with Savoyards and Piemonteses; to the end that the Vaudois, who either
for fear of death or imprisonment, had abjured their Religion, might not assist
those that were sent into exile to return into their Country again: They
transported most of them into the Diocese of Verceil, to inhabit there,
contrary to the promise made them of establishing them in their own houses.

The Valleys being repeopled with new Inhabitants of the Roman Religion, the
Protestant Vaudois banished or in prison, and those that had forsaken their
Religion being transported a great way off, there was none that believed that
ever they could establish themselves again, or so much as enter into their
Country; they must of necessity cross the Lake of Geneva, and all Savoy, pass
many defiles, climb up high mountains, force several straight passes, where ten
men might stop a whole army.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Return of the Vaudois into their Country, of their courage and valor,
of the great exploits they did, or rather God did, for their Re-establishment
in their Country.

THE Vaudois saw all these difficulties, but this did not hinder, but that
(after they had led a languishing kind of Life about three years, in
Switzerland and Germany) thoughts came into their heads of returning into their
Country, and of surmounting all Obstacles whatsoever; for they were, for the
most part, a sort of people that lived by the good management of their Goods
and Lands, and because they had neither of them in Switzerland or Germany, they
could not employ themselves. Tho they wanted for nothing, they grew very weary,
and thought every day a year till they were repossessed of their Lands and
Habitations, out of which they had been so unjustly driven, as we have related;
to this end they assembled together about 8 or 900 in the wood of Nion, 4
Leagues from Geneva, amongst whom there were more than 300 French Protestants,
who had quitted their Country likewise for their Religion; they did it so
secretly, that neither the Lords of Bern, nor the Savoyards knew any thing of
it, till they had passed the Lake, and that they were entered into Savoy. They
crossed the Lake in the night, in twelve Barks that they had partly hired, and
partly seized on at Nion, and the adjacent places; this was in the beginning of
September 1689 that they entered into Savoy; they had then no head, but they
chose two to conduct and command them, one of them was a Minister called
Arnold, the other was a Mason called Turel, both brave and courageous, but
without experience in the affairs of war; they landed without any resistance,
and had the prudence to invest two Villages which were near the place where
they made their descent, the Inhabitants of which would have rung their Bell,
and given the alarm to the whole Country, but they threatened to burn their
houses if they did, and made them give them Victuals for their Money. They had
likewise the precaution to send a Detachment to seize upon the bridge of
Trembliers before their Enemies perceived them, and so they passed without any
let or molestation the deep and rapid river Arve? but if they found no
difficulty in the beginning, it was not so in the conclusion: The Court of
Savoy, and that of France, were presently advertised of their march, and orders
were given to the Governors of places, that were near their passage, to do
their utmost to stop them in the narrow passes, but they surmounted all these
difficulties with their Swords in their hands. They had four or five dangerous
Rencounters before they got into their country, but the most dangerous of all
was, that they had with the Marquess of Laree, who would needs stop them at a
straight pass near Salbetran; he had with him a Regiment of Dragoons, and la
great body of Foot, but at last, after an obstinate and long fight they gained
this pass as well as the rest, the Marquess was mortally wounded, many French
Officers lost their lives, and more than 200 Soldiers. After having surmounted
all these difficulties, they entered into their Country, chased out those that
had seized upon their Lands and Houses, and killed those that would not restore
them, and this was done with an inconsiderable loss on their side.

CHAP. XXV.
Where it is shown how the King of France and the Duke of Savoy leagued together
to oppose their return, as they had been leagned to drive them out in the year
1686.

THE King of France and the Duke of Savoy having understood that the Vaudois
were arrived in the Valleys, and that they had made themselves masters of them;
presently gave orders to their Troops to march, and to chase them out: They
constrained them to quit one of their Valleys, and the For^ of Bobbi, after
having defended it a long time, and killed a great number of Savoyards, who
attacked this Fort, after which they retreated to the Mountain of Sezarna,
where they entrenched themselves. This Post was in the Valley of Lucerne, but
they had others in the Valley of St. Martin which were most advantageous, and
out of which their Enemies could not drive them, though they did the utmost
after eight battles or rather rencounters, that they had maintained after their
departure out of Switzerland, till the month of December. They had not as yet
lost an hundred men, and the enemy had lost above a thousand; and in the places
in which they were entrenched, they wanted neither victuals nor any sort of
ammunition. About the end of month of December they entirely defeated a
regiment of French Dragoons, who had undertaken to drive them out of one of
their Posts. In the month of January, 1690. the Marquess of Parelle, who
commanded the Army of the Duke, being reinforced with some French Regiments,
attacked them several times, but without any effect. In the months of February
and March this Marquess continued his attacks, but he lost a great many of his
men, without being able to annoy much the Vaudois, or chase them out again as
he had promised the Duke his Master. In the month of April, the Court of France
being informed that the Vaudois made excursions into the Delphinate, and that
the Allies prepared to send them succors; that the Vaudois that were in
Brandenburg and Wirtenburg, were making preparations likewise to go and join
their Brethren; the Marquess of Feuquiers was sent with about five or six
thousand Foot and Dragoons to join the Troops of His Royal Highness, and chase
them, if possible out of the Valley, before the Succors came; the Marquess
obliged them to quit some Posts, but do what he could, he was not able to drive
them out of the Posts they had made themselves masters of in the High
Mountains, where they were strongly entrenched.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the disunion and discord between the King of France and the Duke of Savoy,
which caused the re-establishment of the Vaudois in in their own Country, by
order of their Prince, and of the wonders that God wrought for their
reestablishment.

THE Duke of Savoy seeing that the Allies were in a condition to succor the
Vaudois, and that the Emperor and King of Spain did solicit him to take their
parts, he thought that in declaring himself neuter, he might hinder the
intended succors; but the Court of France, which till then was Mistress of the
Duke of Savoy, and his Estate, would not hear speak of neutrality, and would
have the Duke declare wholly for France; and to oblige him to it, the King
demanded of him, for the better assurance all his Troops, and that he would put
into his hands the Citadel of Turin and Verceil, that he might in them lay up
magazins, and all sorts of ammunition; hoping that the Duke would rather
declare for France, than submit himself to so hard conditions; but seeing that
the Duke demurred and was dubious, he made Catinat march with sixteen thousand
men toward Piemont, with orders to enter into it, and constrain the Duke to do
what was demanded.

The Duke of Savoy considering that if the King of France had Garrisons in the
Citadel of Turin and in Verceil, and that if all his Troops were in the
service of France, that that King would not only be master of his Estate, but
also of his Person, he desired time to give in his answer to the King: He
offered him at the same time three thousand men of his best Troops, viz. a
thousand Horse and two thousand Foot for an assurance of the neutrality, and in
the interim he sent to the Allies to be secure of their succors, in case he
were attacked by the French. The Spaniards being his next Neighbors, by reason
of the Duchy of Milan, offered him eight thousand men in case the French fell
upon him. The haughtiness with which France treated him, caused him to embrace
the part of the Allies, and he entered into diverse treaties with them,
especially with the Emperor and the King of Spain; and being reinforced with
the Troops of Spain, that were in the Duchy of Milan, he declared war against
France, and commanded Catinat, who was General of the French Army, to be gone
out of his Dominions.

We are to consider that the Duke of Savoy is a Prince of the Empire, that the
Emperor and his Allies were powerful and his Neighbors, above all Spain, and
that they might do him great harm in succouring the Vaudois, as their interest
obliged them, because they were neighbors of France, and that by their means
they might make a great diversion by making excursions into the Delphinate,
which is a Province of France near the Valleys, where there were great store of
Protestants who would join with the Vaudois, or at least favor them. And to
hinder these excursions, the French would be obliged to keep on foot a powerful
army in the Delphinate: The Duke likewise knew that the Protestant Cantons kept
a good correspondence with France; and above all, the Canton of Berne, who had
beheaded one of their Burghers, for making levys in that Canton, without their
leave, for to aid the Vaudois, and so there was no probability that the Canton
of Berne would give passage to those that should go to succor the Vaudois. As
for the Roman Catholic Cantons, he was assured that neither the Vaudois, nor
any that had a mind to succor them, would offer to pass through their Country,
because they had seized of the Vaudois that had attempted to pass that way, and
had delivered them up into his hands: There were none but the Grisons that
could favor their passage, but that was not enough for to go from the Country
of the Grisons into Piemont, they must necessarily cross the whole Duchy of
Milan. Now the Duke hoped, that in declaring himself neuter, he would hinder
the Spaniards from giving passage to the Vaudois through the Duchy, and that
France would always assist him, as she had done for the time past, to chase out
again the Vaudois that were entered Valleys: It Is not to be doubted, but that if
France had been contented to leave the Duke in the state of neutrality that he
demanded, but that he would inviolably have kept it, for it was his interest
not to break with France. This Prince had excellent Counselors, who saw that
the King of France had his foot upon the Neck of their Duke, if I may so
express my self. Savoy lay open to the Troops of France by the Fort of Barraue,
which the King of France held, and by diverse other places; and that there being
but one strong place in Savoy, which is Montmelian, it was easy for the King
in a short time to make himself Master of all Savoy; and as to Piemont, the
King had Pignerol, but eight leagues from Turin, and at the entrance of
Piemont; and on the other side he had Cazal, and all Monferrat; and so the
Dominions of this Prince were surrounded by the Territories and strong places
of France, and so by consequence he could not declare for the Allies, without
running an evident risque of being ruined.

If the Duke of Savoy had entered into treaty with the Allies, before the French
army had entered into Piemont, it is certain that this Prince, who wants neither
courage, nor conduct, nor good council, would have precautioned himself against
the attempts of France, would have recalled his Troops out of the French
service, to employ them against the Vaudois, or the Spaniards, in case they had
enterprized any thing in the Duchy of Milan; and their Arms being joined
against the Vaudois, France would not have had the least umbrage of this
demand. But where are the treaties that the Duke made with the Emperor or with
Spain? Have any been produced? All those that are publicly seen are after the
French army was entered into Piemont; and so all that is said to excuse France
for her conduct toward His Most Serene Royal Highness, are impostures, and
invented at leisure, without any foundation.

That which has obliged, or rather forced the Duke of Savoy to embrace the part
of the Allies was, the ill treatment of the King of France, who treated him not
as a Sovereign Prince, but as a little Vassal. This haughtiness of France so
irritated the Duke, that he chose rather to hazard all, than to do those mean
things, and make those submissions that were exacted of him; and in this estate
he had recourse to the Allies, and to his Neighbors, as it is manifest by the
Letters that he wrote to them, which have since been made public.

The Duke of Savoy being forced to break with France, by reason of the
hardships that were imposed upon him; this rupture was the cause of the liberty
and deliverance of the Vaudois: For having understood that France did solicit
them to embrace his part, with offers of re-establishing them in the Valleys,
and giving them liberty of Conscience, with free and public exercise of their
Religion, which would have been very prejudicial to his interest, for instead
of one enemy, he would have had two upon his back, and would have been deprived
of the succors that the Protestant Princes promised the Vaudois, and of the
considerable service that they might do him, in keeping the Passes, and
hindering the communication of the Troops that were in the Delphinate, with the
Army commanded by Monsieur Catinat. This Prince resolved to draw them to his
own party, and to this effect he set at liberty all the Vaudois that were in
Prison, as well Ministers as others; he sent an act of Oblivion to all those
that were in arms in the Valleys, and gave to those that were in foreign
Countries leave to return home, with necessary passports, with orders to all to
turn their arms against the French, whom they most look upon as their true
persecutors, and the cause of all their miseries. He made be brought before him
all those that were prisoners at Turin, and told them that he was touched with
a deep sense of their miseries, and commanded them in his presence to be
clothed, and to be furnished with all things necessary: He excused himself
that he had handled them so roughly, and cast all upon the King of France, as
the true Author of all that had befallen them; and because the number of the
Vaudois was much diminished, that there were scarce two thousand left after the
last persecution, the Duke of Savoy made proclamation, that all those
Protestants that were fled out of France, that would come and dwell in the
Valleys, and join themselves with the Vaudois, might do it, and be safe under
his protection, and have necessary passports: He ordered likewise that at their
entrance into Savoy, both the Vaudois and the French should be furnished with
arms, and all things necessary for to pass into the Valley, which was
punctually put in execution.

The return of the Vaudois into their Country, their entrance into the Valleys,
and their subsisting there for eight months, are so many wonders and miracles.
Is it not a miracle that eight or nine hundred should undertake to cross an
enemies Country of 14, or 15 days journey, where they must climb up high
Mountains, force diverse strait passes, where an hundred men might not only
stop, but beat three thousand? and that which is most astonishing is, that
these Passes were guarded with great numbers, and more expert Soldiers than the
Vaudois; they notwithstanding forced all those Passes with their Swords in
their hands, and routed them that guarded them, killing a great number in
gaining them, with very little loss on their side.

It Is likewise another miracle, that they got entrance into the Valleys, the
entrances being so difficult, being peopled with Roman Catholics, who might
have hindered their entrance, being more in number than they, or at least they
might have possessed themselves of the most advantageous Posts which were in
the Mountains, and defend themselves easily, till the succors of France and
Savoy, which were in readiness, could come and second them; but a dreadful
fright from God fell upon them, so that they had neither courage nor conduct to
defend themselves against the Vaudois, who without any trouble or resistance
chased them out of the Valleys: Is it not likewise a great miracle, that a
handful of people without any Commanders experienced in warlike affairs, should
subsist eight months in the Valleys, and fight nine or ten battles against the
Army of France and Savoy, who were sometimes twenty, but oftener thirty against
one, without being able to drive them out of their fastnesses, having killed
more than two thousand of their enemies? So many happy successes makes it
clear, that the God of battle inspired them with the generous courage of
returning into their own Country, to kindle again the Candle of his Word, that
the Emissaries of Satan had extinguished there, that he marched before them,
and fought for them, without which it had been impossible to have forced so
many difficult Passes, and gained such signal victories.

The King of England being informed of their design of returning unto their
country, blamed their enterprise, as rash and ill grounded, and looked upon
those 900 Vaudois as lost men: The States of Holland were of the same opinion,
and refused to assist them, looking upon it as to no purpose; but when they
saw, that contrary to the hopes of all the world, that they subsisted in the
Country, last May 1690. they sent them Money, and procured some of the French
Protestants that were in Switzerland, and the Elector of Brandenburgs
Territories, to go and assist them.

If the Vaudois had not been entered into their Country, and had not generously
defended themselves against their Enemies, the D. of Savoy when he broke with
France had not thought of setting at liberty those that were unjustly
imprisoned, nor of recalling those that were dispersed in Foreign Countries,
and the Allies would have contented themselves with the Dukes declaration for
themselves, and embracing their party, without troubling their heads about
establishing the Vaudois, though driven out against all right and justice.

The conduct of God in the Re-establishment of the Vaudois is admirable, and
makes it evident that his divine providence has Judgment, and ways
incomprehensible, surpassing all human understanding. The King of France, in
the year 1686. pushed on the Duke of Savoy to compel the Vaudois to forsake
their Religion, and to take the same measures he had taken against the
Protestants of France; they joined their arms together to force them, and to
compass their design; they violated not only the treaty made with the
Predecessors of the Duke, but likewise all Treaties, Oaths, and Promises made
by their Generals; took them Prisoners, killed and massacred them, violated
their Wives and Daughters, killed their little Children, and made use of all
sorts of Cruelty against these innocent people, after they had laid down their
arms; and in the year 1690 God sent a Spirit of Division between the King of
France and the Duke of Savoy, insomuch, that they strove who should first gain
the Vaudois to their party; and by this division the Duke of Savoy was forced
to re-establish the Vaudois in their Rights and Privileges, and to set all at
liberty that had been imprisoned, and to recall all those that were dispersed
in Foreign Countries: And so the King of France, who had been the principal
cause of their ruin, became against his will the cause of their
Re-establishment, by forcing the D. of Savoy by his Haughtiness, to join with
the Allies; this shows that God mocks, and derides the designs and councils of
Princes, when they are levelled against Jesus Christ and his Church; and with
the breath of his mouth makes all their enterprises vanish in Smoke. Oftentimes
he makes use of the Enemies of his Church to protect and defend it. Henry the
2d. King of France, while he persecuted the Protestants of his own Kingdom,
succored the Protestant Princes of Germany against the Emperor Charles the
5th. Lewis the 13th. did the same against the Emperor Ferdinand 2d. and Lewis
the 14th while he did his best to ruin the Protestants in France, succored
the Protestants of Hungary, against the Emperor Leopold. Henry the 3d. King of
France; when he was but Duke of Anjou, gave advice in an Assembly that was held
at St. Clou, to commit the Massacre of St. Bartholomew, and when he was King of
France, he emoloyed all his Forces to finish the destruction of those that
remained after the Massacre; but while he busied himself wholly, and took the
most probable measures to put in execution his wicked designs, God stirred up
the Duke of Guise against him, who under the specious pretense of destroying
the Protestants of France, made a League against Henry, and drove him out of
Paris, seized upon his Guards, and constrained him to throw himself upon the
Protestants, and implore their aid and assistance, without which he had been
lost; the Duke would have put him in a Cloister, as Charles Martel did
Chilperick the 3d. and seized upon his Crown. Henry in acknowledgment of the
Services that he had received of the Protestants began to be very favorable to
them, gave them places of security, and many other Privileges, and appointed
Henry de Borbon, who was a Protestant, his lawful Successor to the Crown.

And so God by a secret and unhop'd for way, of a cruel and implacable Enemy of
the Protestants, made him against his will their Defender and Protector. King
Henry and the Duke of Guise were both in arms against the Protestants, they
jointly made war upon them, and had equally sworn their ruin: God permits they
should be divided, and by their division the one to destroy, the other to
deliver the Protestants, who were sore oppressed and persecuted; almost the
same thing happened in the delivery of the Vaudois, God sent the Spirit of
division between the King of France and the Duke of Savoy, to punish them for
the cruel persecution they had raised against the Protestants; these two
Princes were equally their Enemies, and had resolved and vowed their
destruction; and when their malice was at the highest pitch against these poor
innocent Creatures, and all things seemed desperate, God Almighty blasted their
design, and made them turn their arms the one against the other, to destroy the
one by the other; as he destroyed the Duke of Guise, by Henry whom he caused to
be assassinated at Blois, in the sight of all France, assembled in the persons
of those that composed the States general, and after God had punished the Duke
of Guise, for the evils he had done to the Protestants, he likewise punished
Henry, who was assassinated in the Castle of St. Cloy by a Friar in the same
Hall, where the consult was held, and the Massacre of St. Bartholomew was
resolved on, of which, Henry and the Duke of Guise were the principal
Counselors and Ringleaders of that horrible Butchery.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the two Prophesies of the Scripture, accomplished in the History of the
Vaudois of Piemont, the one contained in the 11th. Chapter, and the other in
the 12th. of the Revelation.

THE History of the Vaudois shows us clearly the accomplishment of two
Prophesies of Scripture, the one contained in the 11th. and the other in the
12th. Chapter of the Revelation of St. John. We have made mention of the last,
when we showed that the Churches of Piemont have conserved the Doctrine of the
Apostles, in its purity, from the time of the Apostles even to our days, and
that the Roman Church was corrupted in adopting and receiving Pagan Doctrine
and Ceremonies, and communicated her Corruptions to the other Churches of the
West, only the Churches of Piemont were preserved pure and undefiled; from
whence it follows, by a necessary consequence, that these Mountains and Valleys
were the places assigned by God Almighty for his Church, when she fled before
the Dragon; and this corruption began to infect the Church about the beginning
of the fifth Age (for about the beginning of this Age, Popery began to triumph
over Truth) without staining or defiling the Churches of Piemont, who after
this corruption were publicly nourished with the bread of the word of God,
without any mixture of humane Traditions, or Pagan Ceremonies. Now from the
time that this corruption began in the Church, till the year 1686. that these
poor Churches were dissipated, are past 1260 years, which are the 1260
prophetical days that the Church was to be nourished in the desert, neither the
Devil nor his Imps being able in so long a tract of time by all their craft and
subtilty, to introduce their errors into the Church; and that which is the
greatest proof of this verity, and confirms us the most in this sentiment, that
this was the place that God prepared to preserve his Church in, is, that
neither the Inquisition that the Popes have established, in Italy, so many ages
ago, nor the Croisade that Pope Innocent the 8th. made to destroy them, nor so
many wars that Antichrist and his Emissaries raised against them; nor so many
bloody Battles they have sustained, nor so many Persecutions and Massacres that
have been made of them, that professed the truth in these Churches, could force
them to forsake their Faith, or dissipate them, till the year 1686. For it was
then that the time of the Prophecy was accomplished, in respect of these
Churches. If God had not prepared this place to preserve his Church in, why
would he have done such wonders, to make them subsist in spite of the Devil
and all his works? How should she have been preserved pure and immaculate among
these Mountains, if God had not declared himself her Protector and Defender,
and had not fought for her, and with her; and brought to confusion all the
plots and frauds of Antichrist, who raged like a roaring Lion seeking to devour
her?

The two witnesses of the Eleventh Chapter of the Revelation, are the faithful,
who after that the Church was corrupted, taught either by word of mouth, or by
writings, the pure doctrine of the Gospel; and confuted the errors that the
false Doctors introduced into the Church, by their fraudulent Dealings, and
false Interpretations of the Scriptures; and it is apparent, by the writings of
many Protestant Doctors, that there has no age passed, in which God has not
raised up some holy and learned men, who writ and preached against these errors
from the beginning of the fifth Age, till our times. These holy persons are
represented to us by the two witnesses, for they borrowed their Testimony from
the old and new Testaments, which are the true witnesses and the true
treasuries of Celestial verity; and with the doctrine drawn out of the old and
new Testament, they confuted all errors, and confounded the false Doctors.

It Is said of these two witnesses, that they shall prophesy 1260 days, which
are prophetical days, as is apparent by the event, for that false doctrines
were introduced into the Church in the fifth age; it was then that Innocent the
1st. Bishop of Rome, elevated himself above the other Bishops, which they
tamely submitted to, he performing the Office of universal Bishop, in receiving
appeals, from the sentences of the Bishops of Asia and Africa, and in
excommunicating Arcadius the Emperor of the East, who was not under his
jurisdiction, but under the jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople;
who likewise declared by a Bull, that none should presume to judge the Pope: It
was in the Pontificate of this Pope, that the Eucharist, or Supper of our Lord,
began to be called Mass, and that Pelagius began in England to sow his Doctrine
of Merits, from whence sprung the Doctrines of Indulgencies, Pilgrimages,
Celibacy of the Clergy, and Abstinence from certain sorts of meat; it was about
this time that the doctrine, as well as manners of the Church began to be
corrupted. And if we reckon from the Death of Pope Innocent the 1st. till the
year 1686. we shall find that 1260 years, the time that these two witnesses
were to prophesy are past. Now the Holy Ghost says, that when they shall have
finished their Prophesy, and the time that God has allotted to preach and cry
out against the errors of the Church of Rome, to leave her inexcusable, before
he pour out upon her the Vials of his just wrath and indignation; it is said,
that the Beast that rises out of the deep, shall make war against the two
Witnesses, and shall vanquish them and kill them; now this was fulfilled, first
of all in France, and afterward in Piemont; in France the Witnesses were
vanquished and killed by the cruel war, that was made against them; all the
Ministers were banished, and others that would not abjure their Religion,
either dyed under the heavy burden of their sufferings, or were imprisoned, or
condemned to the Galleys, or driven into perpetual Banishment; those that have
abjured are dead to heaven, if they do not rise by a serious and true
Repentance. Perpetual Banishments, and Imprisonments, according to all the
Lawyers, are civil deaths; those whom God gave the grace to rise after their
fall, and dyed in France; their bodies were dragged through the streets, and
after they had been publicly exposed, thrown upon the Dunghills; in Piemont,
the witnesses were vanquished and killed as well as in France, the Ministers
some were hanged, some imprisoned, others massacred, and those that remained
after in the Country, were condemned to the Galleys, or else to perpetual
Banishment; some were killed in cold blood, others in endeavoring their
escape, lest they should fall into the hands of their Enemies, and their bodies
left without burial to be devoured by wild beasts: A great number perished in
Prison, and the remainder were driven into perpetual exile; the True Religion
was then totally extinguished in the Valleys, and in the sad estate that the
Vaudois were then, one may say they were killed.

The Prophecy says in the second place, that the dead bodies of the Witnesses
shall lie exposed in the most public place of the City, and that those of the
Tribes, Languages, and Nations shall see their dead bodies three days and an
half, and shall not permit them to be buried. Those of France, as well as the
Vaudois of Piemont, who escaped the hands of their Persecutors, were banished
and dispersed in foreign Countries, amongst diverse Nations, People and
Languages, and those that kindly received them, hindered their bodies, condemned
to death by a perpetual banishment, from being buried and put in the Sepulcher,
which is a state of corruption and total dissolution of the body, by the great
charity they bestowed upon these distressed people; and these Nations have seen
them in this sad estate of which we have spoke, three days and an half, which
are prophetical days, every day being counted a year, according to the twelve
hundred and sixty days of the Prophecy.

It Is said in the same Prophecy, that after these three days and an half, the
spirit of life coming from God, shall enter into them, and they shall live
again; and that great fear shall seize upon them that shall see them, and that
they shall hear a great voice from Heaven, saying to them, ascend hither, and
they shall ascend up to Heaven in a Cloud, and their Enemies, to their great
confusion, shall see them; this was exactly fulfilled in respect of the
Vaudois, who after three years and an half, were as it were revived again, and
freed from the miserable estate and condition into which they were reduced by
the furious malice of their Enemies; for the Prisoners were set at liberty, the
Banished were recalled home, and all by order of their Prince, re-established
in their Country in a better condition than ever. In the year 1686, the Duke of
Savoy, at the earnest entreaty of the Protestant Cantons, freed out of Prison
the greatest part of the Vaudois, but it was only to send them into banishment
in a strange Country; but those whom he set at liberty the last June, were sent
home in peace, and had greater privileges and advantages given them than ever:
He promised to Cloth those that he set at liberty in the year 1686, which
notwithstanding he did not; but those that he freed after three years and an
half he clothed very well; he excused himself to them, was sorry for what had
passed, imputed the cause of all their suffering to the King of France. The
Duke of Savoy and his Predecessors, these two hundred years past, have applied
themselves with all their power to dispeople these Valleys of Protestants, as
we have sufficiently related above: But after the three years and an half there
has been an extraordinary care taken to people them again with Protestants; for
the Duke has not only reestablished the Vaudois, as well Prisoners as Exiles,
but he has given free leave and encouragement to the Protestant Refugees of
France, to come and inhabit the Valleys. The Duke of Savoy, and his Council,
made use of the wickedest methods imaginable, to destroy the Protestant
Religion in these Valleys; but after the death of the Witnesses, viz. after the
three years and an half, he did not only give free exercise of Religion in the
Valleys, but even in Turin it self, the Capital City of his Dominions: And this
miraculous change happened almost in an instant, to the great confusion of
their Enemies, who looked upon them as lost men. This shows evidently, that the
re-establishment of the Vaudois was the work of Heaven, and not of men; for so
the Prophecy says, that the spirit of life shall enter into them, and they
shall live again.

The Author of the Fifth Empire, Printed at the Hague, by Meyndert Vytwert,
closes with our Opinion, and discourses excellently to our purpose, concerning
the three years and an half, of the death of the two Witnesses. I hope it will
not be troublesome to give them his own words, out of the 13th Chapter of his
Book.

The time, says this excellent Author, that the two Witnesses should remain in
the state we have represent them in the precedent Chapter, is limited to three
days and an half, after which they shall be revived: These three days and an
half are prophetical days, as 1260 days are, and every day must be taken for a
year; it is not easy to determine whether the three years and an half, after
the death of the Witnesses, should commence after that the Edict of Nants was
cancelled and revoked, and the Ministers of France condemned to perpetual
banishment, or when the Faithful of the Valleys of Piemont, who from the time
of the Apostles have maintained and concerted the truth among them, were driven
out of their Country, after which the Author gives his sentiment in these
words, It Is probable that these three years and an half should commence when
the Churches of Piemont were destroyed, which were the visible conservers of
the Truth, that was always preached and professed among them; and after three
years and an half were most gloriously re-established; for the Vaudois were not
totally driven out of the Valleys, till about the end of October 1686. Then
those that were hid in the Caverns, and Rocks, and Woods, coming out of their
safe and hidden retreats, after that the Army of France was retreated, and that
the Troops of Mondovy, and other places of Piemont were returned into their own
Country, seized upon some advantageous Posts in the Valleys of Lucerne and St.
Martin, and made excursions upon their Enemies, and forced them to furnish them
with Provisions, and all things necessary; and their Enemies not being able to
chase them out of those advantageous Posts, granted them Letters of safe
conduct to go into Switzerland. Before the banishment of these, we cannot say
that the Vaudois were killed and dead, for that they made their Enemies pay
contribution. Now they were established by order of their Prince in the
beginning of June 1690. three years and an half after their total dissipation;
for this was only one month after the three years and an half that were past;
so the Prophecy speaks not of their re-establishment till this time be
completed; and that which is to be considered more exactly is, that in the
month of May the Vaudois began to revive, the spirit of God then entering into
them; for having this month received succors from the Allies, as well of Men
as Money, instead of their Enemies chasing them, they chaced their Enemies out
of their strong holds; and so we see in them the Prophecy fulfilled of the 11th
Chapter of the Revelation, in the time set down by the Penman of that Holy
Mysterious Book.

The Churches of Piemont, being the root of the Protestant Churches, they have
been the first established; the Churches of France, Hungary and other places,
being but the branches, shall be established in due time. God will not stay to
do his own work to the shame and confusion of his Enemies; the thing will come
to pass in the re-establishment of the Protestant Churches, that has been done
in the re-establishment of the Churches of Israel, those of Judah returned
first out of Captivity, though they were the last that were transported; but
God did not stay long to deliver the rest, though at different times and on
different occasions: The same thing without doubt will come to pass in respect
of the Christian Churches that groan under the captivity of Antichrist. God
will deliver them speedily, he has already delivered the Mother, and he will
not long leave the Daughter behind, he will finish what he has gloriously
begun, and not leave his work imperfect, he will gather together the dispersed
Churches, and bring back to the Fold the Sheep that have gone astray; then
Israel and Judah shall dwell together in peace, none shall be able to give them
the least disturbance.

Since the Vaudois were re-established in the Valleys, by order of their
Prince, they have chaced the French out of them, have beaten the Marquess of
Feuquiers, and slain 1500 men of his Army, among whom were two Colonels, forty
Captains, and a great number of subalterne Officers.

They have sometimes defeated two hundred, sometimes one hundred and fifty
Dragoons of the King of France, taken several Conveys that were going to the
Army commanded by Monsieur Catinat, have made many excursions into the
Delphinate, and have carried away a good booty and several Prisoners; one may
say without any hyperbole, that the Vaudois in one Campaign have endamaged the
French more than all the Allies with their great Armies: The great services
that they have done the Duke of Savoy, without doubt will oblige him to augment
their privileges, and all the Allied Princes to make a firm and lasting treaty
between the Duke and the Vaudois, in case that peace be made between France and
the Allies, of which the Protestant Princes will be guarantee. I have only
extended the History of the Vaudois till the beginning of October 1690. If they
perform any considerable action hereafter, I will continue their History if God
give me life and health; to whom be all honor and glory, world without end,
Amen.

FINIS.

