EXPERIMENTS AND CONSIDERATIONS Touching COLORS.

First occasionally Written, among some other Essays, to a Friend; and now
suffered to come abroad as THE BEGINNING Of An Experimental History OF COLORS.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

Non fingendum, aut excogitandum, sed inveniendum, quid Natura faciat, aut
ferat. Bacon.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman at the Anchor in the Lower walk of the
New-Exchange. MDCLXIV.

THE PREFACE.
HAving in convenient places of the following Treatise, mentioned the Motives,
that induced me to write it, and the Scope I proposed to my self in it, I think
it superfluous to entertain the Reader now, with what he will meet with
hereafter. And I should judge it needless, to trouble others, or my self, with
any thing of Preface: were it not that I can scarce doubt, but this Book will
fall into the hands of some Readers, who being unacquainted with the difficulty
of attempts of this nature, will think it strange that I should publish any
thing about Colors, without a particular Theory of them. But I dare expect
that Intelligent and Equitable Readers will consider on my behalf: That the
professed Design of this Treatise is to deliver things rather Historical than
Dogmatical, and consequently if I have added diverse new speculative
Considerations and hints, which perhaps may afford no despicable Assistance
toward the framing of a solid and comprehensive Hypothesis, I have done at
least as much as I promised, or as the nature of my Undertaking exacted. But
another thing there is, which if it should be objected, I fear I should not be
able so easily to answer it, and that is; That in the following Treatise
(especially in the Third part of it) the Experiments might have been better
Marshalled, and some of them delivered in fewer words. For I must confess that
this Essay was written to a private Friend, and that too, by snatches, at
several times, and places, and (after my manner) in loose sheets, of which I
oftentimes had not all by me that I had already written, when I was writing
more, so that it needs be no wonder if all the Experiments be not ranged to the
best Advantage, and if some connections and consecutions of them might easily
have been mended. Especially since having carelessly laid by the loose Papers,
for several years after they were written, when I came to put them together to
dispatch them to the Press, I found some of those I reckoned upon, to be very
unseasonably wanting. And to make any great change in the order of the rest,
was more than the Printers importunity, and that, of my own avoavocations (and
perhaps also considerabler solicitations) would permit. But though some few
preambles of the particular Experiments might have (perchance) been spared, or
shortened, if I had had all my Papers under my View at once; Yet in the most of
those Introductory passages, the Reader will (I hope) find hints, or
Advertisements, as well as Transitions. If I sometimes seem to insist long upon
the circumstances of a Trial, I hope I shall be easily excused by those that
both know, how nice diverse experiments of Colors are, and consider, that I was
not barely to relate them, but so as to teach a young Gentleman to make them.
And if I was not sollicitous, to make a nicer division of the whole Treatise,
than into three parts, whereof the One contains some Considerations about
Colors in general. The Other exhibits a specimen of an Account of particular
Colors, Exemplifi'd in whiteness and Blackness. And the Third promiscuous
Experiments about the remaining Colors (especially Red) in order to a Theory
of them. If, I say, I contented my self with this easy Division of my
Discourse, it was perhaps because I did not think it so necessary to be Curious
about the Method or Contrivance of a Treatise, wherein I do not pretend to
present my Reader with a complete Fabric, or so much as Model; but only to
bring in Materials proper for the Building; And if I did not well know how
Ingenious the Curiosity and Civility of Friends makes them, to persuade Men by
specious allegations, to gratify their desires; I should have been made to
believe by persons very well qualified to judge of matters of this nature, that
the following Experiments will not need the addition of accurate Method and
speculative Notions to procure Acceptance for the Treatise that contains them:
For it has been represented, That in most of them, as the Novelly will make
them surprising, and the Quickness of performance, keep them from being
tedious; so the sensible changes, that are effected by them, are so manifest,
so great, and so sudden, that scarce any will be displeased to see them, and
those that are any thing Curious will scarce be able to see them, without
finding themselves excited, to make Reflections upon Them. But though with me,
who love to measure Phyfical things by their use, not their strangeness, or
prettiness, the partiality of others prevails not to make me over value these,
or look upon them in themselves as other than Trifles: Yet I confess, that ever
since I did diverse years ago show some of them to a Learned Company of
Virtuosi: so many persons of differing Conditions, and even Sexes, have been
Curious to see them, and pleased not to Dislike them, that I cannot Despair,
but that by complying with those that urge the Publicaion of them, I may both
gratify and excite the Curious, and lay perhaps a Foundation whereon either
others or my self may in time superstruct a substantial Theory of Colors. And
if Aristotle, after his Master Plato, have rightly observed Admiration to be
the Parent of Philosophy, the wonder, some of these Trifles have been wont to
produce in all sorts of Beholders, and the access they have sometimes gained
even to the Closets of Ladies, seem to promise, that since the subject is so
pleasing, that the Speculation appears as Delightful as Difficult, such easy
and recreative Experiments, which require but little time, or charge, or
trouble in the making, and when made are sensible and surprising enough, may
contribute more than others, (far more important but as much more difficult) to
recommend those parts of Learning (Chemistry and Corpuscular Philosophy) by
which they have been produced, and to which they give Testimony even to such
kind of persons, as value a pretty Trick more than a true Notion, and would
scarce admit Philosophy, if it approached them in another Dress: without the
strangeness or endearments of pleasantness to recommend it. I know that I do
but ill consult my own Advantage in the consenting to the Publication of the
following Treatise: For those things, which, whilst men knew not how they were
performed, appeared so strange, will, when the way of making them, and the
Grounds on which I devised them, shall be Public, quickly lose all that their
being Rarityes, and their being thought Mysteries, contributed to recommend
them. But it is fitter for Mountebancks than Naturalis to desire to have their
discoverys rather admired than understood, and for my part I had much rather
deserve the thanks of the Ingenious, than enjoy the Applause of the Ignorant.
And if I can so far contribute to the discovery of the nature of Colors, as
to help the Curious to it, I shall have reached my End, and saved my self some
Labor which else I may chance be tempted to undergo in prosecuting that
subject, and adding to this Treatise, which I therefore call a History, because
it chiefly contains matters of fact, and which History the Title declares me to
look upon but as Begun: Because though that above a hundred, not to say a
hundred and fifty Experiments, (some loose, and others interwoven amongst the
discourses them selves) may suffice to give a Beginning to a History not
hitherto, that I know, begun by any; yet the subject is so fruitful, and so
worthy, that those that are Curious of these Matters will be far more wanting
to themselves than I can suspect, if what I now publish prove any more than a
Beginning. For, as I hope my End avours may afford them some assistance toward
this work, so those Endeavors aremuch too Vnfinish'd to give them any
discouragement, as if there were little left for others to do toward the
History of Colors.

For (first) I have been willing to leave unmention'd the most part of those
Phenomenon of Colors, that Nature presents us of her own accord, (that is,
without being guided or overruld by man) such as the different Colors that
several sorts of Fruits pass through before they are perfectly ripe, and those
that appear upon the fading of flowers and leaves, and the putrefaction (and
its several degrees) of fruits, etc. together with a thousand other obvious
Instances of the changes of colors. Nor have I much meddled with those familiar
Phenomenon wherein man is not an Idle spectator; such as the Greenness produced
by salt in Beef much powdered, and the Redness produced in the shells of
Lobsters upon the boiling of those fisles; For I was willing to leave the
gathering of Observations to those that have not the Opportunity to make
Expements. And for the same Reasons, among others, I did purposly omit the
Lucriferous practice of Tradesmen about colors; as the ways of making
Pigments, of Bleanching wax, of dying Scarlet, etc. though to diverse of them I
be not a stranger, and of some I have myself made Trial.

Next; I did purposely pass by diverse Experiments of other Writers that I had
made Trial of (and that not without registring some of their Events) unless I
could some way or other improve them, because I wanted leisure to insert them,
and had thoughts of prosecuting the work once begun of laying together those I
had examined by themselves in case of my not being prevented by others
diligence. So that there remains not a little, among the things that are
already published, to employ those that have a mind to exercise themselves in
repeating and examining them. And I will not undertake, that none of the things
delivered, even in this Treatise, though never so faithfully set down, may not
prove to be thus far of this Sort, as to afford the Curious somewhat to add
about them. For I remember that I have somewhere in the Book itself
acknowledged, that having written it by snatches, partly in the Country, and
partly at unseasonable times of the year, when the want of fit Instruments, and
of a competent variety of flowers, salts, Pigments, and other materials made me
leave some of the following Experiments, (especialy those about Emphatical
Colors) far more unfinishd than they should have been, if it had been as easy
for me to supply what was wanting to complete them, as to discern. Thirdly to
avoid discouraging the young Gentleman I call Pyrophilus, whom the less
Familiar, and more Laborious operations of Chemistry would probably have
frighted, I purposely declined in what I writ to him, the setting down any
Number of such Chymicall Experiments, as, by being very elaborate or tedious,
would either require much skill, or exercise his patience. And yet that this
sort of Experiments is exceedingly Numerous, and might more than a little
enrich the History of Colors, those that are versed in Chemical processes,
will, I presume, easily allow me.

And (Lastly) for as much as I have occasion more than once in my several
Writings to treat either porposely or incidentally of matters relating to
Colors; I did not, perhaps, conceive my self obliged, to deliver in one
Treatise all that I would say concerning that subject.

But to conclude, by summing up what I would say concerning what I have and
what I have not done, in the following Papers; I shall not (on the one side)
deny, that considering that I pretended not to write an accurate Treatise of
Colors, but an Occasional Essay to acquaint a private firiend with what then
occurrd to me of the things I had thought or tried concerning them; I might
presume I did enough for once, if I did clearly and faithfully set down, though
not all the Experiments I could, yet at least such a variety of them, that an
attentive Reader that shall consider the Grounds on which they have been made,
and the hints that are purposely (though dispersedly) couched in them, may
easily compound them, and otherwise vary them, so as very much to increase
their Number. And yet (on the other side) I am so sensible both of how much I
have, either out of necessity or choice, left undone, and of the fruitfullness
of the subject I have begun to handle; that though I had performed far more
then it is like many Readers will judge I have, I should yet be very free to let
them apply to my Attempts that of Seneca, where having spoken of the Study of
Natures Mysteries, and Particularly of the Cause of Earthquakes, he subjoins.
Nullares consummata est dum incipit. Nec in hac tantum reomnium maxima ac
involutissima, in qua etiam cum multum actum erit, omnis L. Annae. 1 Senecae
Nature. Quest. l. 6. c. 5.
aetas, quod agat inveniet; sed in omni alio Negotio, long semper a perfecto
fuere Principia.

The Publisher to the READER.
Friendly Reader,
HEre is presented to thy view one of the Abstrusest as well as the Gentilest
Subjects of Natural Philosophy, the Experimental History of Colors; which
though the Noble Author be pleased to think but Begun, yet I must take leave to
say, that I think it so well begun, that the work is more than half dispatched.
Concerning which I cannot but give this advertisement to the Reader, that I
have heard the Author express himself, that it would not surprise him, if it
should happen to be objected, that some of these Experiments have been already
published, partly by Chemists, and partly by two or three very fresh Writers
upon other Subjects. And though the number of these Experiments be but very
small, and though they be none of the considerablest, yet it may on this
occasion be further represented, that it is easy for our Author to name
several men, (of whose number I can truly name my self) who remember either
their having seen him make, or their having read, his Accounts of the
Experiments delivered in the following Tract several years since, and long
before the publication of the Books, wherein they are mentioned. Nay in diverse
passages (where he could do it without any great inconvenience) he has struck
out Experiments, which he had tried many years ago, because he since found them
divulged by persons from whom he had not the least hint of them; which yet is
not touched, with design to reflect upon any Ingenious Man, as if he were a
Plagiary: For, though our Generous Author were not reserved enough in showing
his Experiments to those that expressed a Curiosity to see them (amongst whom a
very Learned Man has been pleased publicly to acknowledge it several years
ago He that desires more instances of this kind and matter, that according to
this doctrine may much help the Theory of colors, and particularly the force
both of Sulphurous and volatile, as likewise of Alcalizate and Acid Salts, and
in what particulars, Colors likely depend not in their causation from any Salt
at all, may beg his information from M. Boil, who has some while since
honored me with the sight of his papers concerning this subject, containing
many excellent experiments, made by him for the Elucidation of this doctrine,
etc. Dr. R. Sharrock in his ingenious and useful History of the Propagation
and Improvement of Vegetables, published in the year 1660.
; yet the same thing may be well enough lighted on by persons that know nothing
of one another. And especially Chemical Laboratories may many times afford the
same Phenomenon about Colors to several persons at the same or differing
times. And as for the few Phenomenon mentioned in the same Chemical writers, as
well as in the following Treatise, our Author has given an account, why he did
not decline rejecting them, in the Anotations upon the 47th Experiment of the
third part. Not here to mention, what he elsewhere says, to show what use may
be Justifiably made of Eperiments not of his own devising by a writer of
Natural History, if, what he employes of others men's, be well examined or
verified by himself.

In the mean time, this Treatise is such, that there needs no other invitation
to peruse it, but that it is composed by one of the Deepest and Most
indefatigable searchers of Nature, which, I think the World, as far as I know
it, affords. For mine own part, I feel a secret Joy within me, to see such
beginings upon such Themes, it being demonstratively true, Mota facilius
moveri, which causes me to entertain strong hopes, that this Illustrious
Virtuoso and Restless Inquirer into Nature's Secrets will not stop here, but go
on and prosper in the Disquisition of the other principal Colors, Green, Red,
and Yellow. The Reasoning faculty set once a sloat, will be carried on, and
that with ease, especially, when the productions thereof meet, as they do here,
with so greedy an Entertainment at home and a broad. I am confident, that the
ROYAL SOCIETY, lately constituted by his MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY for improving
Natural knowledge, will Judge it their interest to exhort our Author to the
prosecution of this Argument, considering, how much it is their design and
business to accumulate a good stock of such accurate Observations and
Experiments, as may afford them and their Offpring genuine Matter to raise a
Masculine Philosophy upon, whereby the Mind of Man may be enobled with the
Knowledge of solid Truths, and the Life of Man benefited with ampler
accommodations, than it has been hitherto.

Our Great Author, one of the Pillars of that Illustrious Corporation, is
constantly furnishing large Symbola's to this work, and is now falln, as you
see, upon so comprehensive and important a theme, as will, if insisted on and
completed, prove one of the considerablest pieces of that structure. To which,
if he shall please to add his Treatise of Heat and Flame, as he is ready to
publish his Experimental Accounts of Cold, I esteem, the World will be obliged
to Him for having showed them both the Right and Left Hand of Nature, and the
Operations thereof.

The considering Reader will by this very Treatise see abundant cause to
solicit the Author for more; sure I am, that of whatever of the Productions of
his Ingeny comes into Foreign parts (where I am happy in the acquaintance of
many intelligent friends) is highly valued; And to my knowledge, there are
those among the French, that have lately begun to learn English, on purpose to
enable themselves to read his Books, being impatient of their Traduction into
Latin. If I durst say all, I know of the Elogies received by me from abroad
concerning Him, I should perhaps make this Preamble too prolix, and certainly
offend the modesty of our Author.

Wherefore I shall leave this, and conclude with desiring the Reader, that if
he meet with other faults besides those, that the Errata take notice of (as I
believe he may) he will please to consider both the weakness of the Authors
eyes, for not reviewing, and the manifold Avocations of the Publisher for not
doing his part; who takes his leave with inviting those, that have also
considered this Nice subject experimentally, to follow the Example of our Noble
Author, and impart such and the like performances to the now very inquisitive
world. Farewell.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Author shows the Reason, first of his Writing on this Subject
(1.) Next of his present manner of Handling it, and why he partly declines a
Methodical way (2.) and why he has partly made use of it in the History of
Whiteness and Blackness. (3.)

Chap. 2. Some general Considerations are premised, first of the Insignificancy
of the Observation of Colors in many Bodies (4, 5.) and the Importance of it
in others (5.) as particularly in the Tempering of Steel (6, 7, 8.) The reason
why other particular Instances are in that place omitted (9.) A necessary
distinction about Color premised (10, 11.) That Color is not Inherent in the
Object (11.) proved first by the Phantasms of Colors to Dreaming men, and
Lunaticks; Secondly by the sensation or apparition of Light upon a Blow given
the Eye or the Distemper of the Brain from internal Vapors (12.). The Author
recites a particular Instance in himself; another that hapn'd to an Excellent
Person related to him (13.) and a third told him by an Ingenious Physician (14,
15.) Thirdly, from the change of Colors made by the Sensory Disaffected (15,
16.) Some Instances of this are related by the Author, observed in himself (16,
17.) others told him by a Lady of known Veracity (18.) And others told him by a
very Eminent Man (19.) But the strange Instances afforded by such as are Bit by
the Tarantula are omitted, as more properly delivered in another place. (20.)

Chap. 3. That the Color of Bodies depends chiefly on the disposition of the
Superficial parts, and partly upon the Variety of the Texture of the Object
(21.) The former of these are confirmed by several Persons (22.) and two
Instances, the first of the Steel mentioned before, the second of melted Lead
(23, 24.) of which last several Observables are noted (25.) A third Instance is
added of the Porousness of the appearing smooth Surface of Cork (26, 27.) And
that the same kind of Porousness may be also in the other Colored Bodies; And
of what kind of Figures, the Superficial reflecting Particles of them may be
(28.) and of what Bulks, and closeness of Position (29.) How much these may
conduce to the Generation of Color instanced in the Whiteness of Froth, and in
the mixtures of Dry colored Powders (30.) A further explication of the Variety
that may be in the Superficial parts of Colored Bodies, that may cause that
Effect, by an example drawn from the Surface of the Earth (31.) An Apology for
that gross Comparison (32.) That the appearances of the Superficial asperities
may be Varied from the position of the Eye, and several Instances given of such
appearances (33, 34, 35.) That the appearance of the Superficial particles may
be Varied also by their Motion, confirmed by an Instance of the smoking Liquor
(35.) especially if the Superficial parts be of such a Nature as to appear
diverse in several Postures, explained by the variety of Colors exhibited by
the shaken Leaves of some Plants (36.) and by changeable Taffities (37, 38,
39.) The Authors wish that the Variety of Colors in Mother of Pearl were
examined with a Microscope (40.) And his Conjectures, that possibly good
Microscopes might discover those Superficial inequalities to be Real, which we
now only imagine, with his reasons drawn partly from the Discoveries of the
Telescope, and Microscope (41.) And partly also from the Prodigiously strange
example of a Blind man that could feel Colors (42.) whose History is Related
(43, 44, 45.) The Authors conjecture and thoughts of it (46, 47, 48, 49.) and
several Conclusions and Corollaries drawn from it about the Nature of Blackness
and Black Bodies (50, 51, 52.) and about the Asperities of several other
Colored Bodies (53.) And from these, and some premised Considerations, are
proposed some Conjectures; That the reason of the several Phenomenon of
Colors, afterward to be met with, depends upon the Disposition of the Seen
parts of the Object (54.) That Liquors may alter the Colors of each other, and
of other Bodies, first by their Insinuating themselves into the Pores, and
filling them, whence the Asperity of the Surface of a Body becomes altered,
explicated with some Instances (55, 56.) Next by removing those Bodies, which
before hindered the appearance of the Genuine Color, confirmed by several
examples (57) Thirdly, by making a Fissure or Separation either in the
Contiguous or Continued Particles of a Body (58.) Fourthly, by a Union or
Conjunction of the formerly separated Particles; Illustrated with diverse
Instances of precipitated Bodies (59.) Fifthly, by Dislocating the parts, and
putting them both into other Orders and Postures, which is Illustrated with
Instances (60, 61.) Sixthly, by Motion, which is explained (62.) And lastly,
and chiefly, by the Union of the Saline Bodies, with the Superficial parts of
another Body, whereby both their Bigness and Shape must necessarily be altered
(63, 64.) Explained by Experiments (65, 66.) That the Color of Bodies may be
Changed by the concurrence of two or more of these ways (67.) And besides all
these, Eight Reflective causes of Colors, there may be in Transparent Bodies
several Refractive (68, 69.) Why the Author thinks the Nature of Colors
deserves yet a further Inquiry (69.) First, for that the little Motes of Dust
exhibited very lovely Colors in a darkened Room, whilst in a convenient posture
to the Eye, which in other Postures and Lights they did not (70.) And that
though the smaller Parts of some Colored Bodies are Transparent, yet of others
they are not, so that the first Doubt's, whether the Superficial parts create
those Colors, and the second, whether there be any Refraction at all in the
later (71, 72, 73.) A famous Controversy among Philosophers, about the Nature
of Color decided. (74. 75.)

Chap. 4. The controversy stated about Real and Emphatical Colors (75, 76.)
That the great Disparity between them seems to be, partly their Duration in the
same state, and partly, that Genuine Colors are produced in Opacous Bodies by
Reflection, and Emphatical in Transparent by Refraction (78.) but that this is
not to be taken in too large a Sense, the Cautionary instance of Froth is
alleged and insisted on (78, 79.) That the Duration is not a sufficient
Characteristick, exemplified by the duration of Froth, and other Emphatical
Colors, and the sudden fading of Flowers, and other Bodies of Real ones (80.)
That the position of the Eye is not necessary to the discerning Emphatical
Colors, showed by the seeing white Froth, or an Iris cast on the Wall by a
Prism, in what place of the Room soever the Eye be (81.) which proceeds from
the specular Reflection of the Wall (82.) that Emphatical Colors may be
Compounded, and that the present Discourse is not much concerned, whether there
be, or be not made a distinction between Real and Emphatical Colors. (83.)

Chap. 5. Six Hypotheses about Color recited (84, 85) Why the Author cannot
more fully Speak of any of these (86.) nor Acquiesce in them (87, 88.) What
Pyrophilus is to expect in this Treatise (88, 89.) What Hypothesis of Light and
Color the Author most inclines too (90.) Why he thinks neither that nor any
other sufficient; and what his Difficulties are, that make him decline all
Hypotheses, and to think it very difficult to stick to any. (91, 92.)

Part the Second. Of the Nature of Whiteness and Blackness.
CHAP. I. THe reason why the Author chose the Explication of Whiteness and
Blackness (93.) Wherein Democritus thought amiss of these (94.) Gassendus his
Opinion about them (95.) What the Author approves, and a more full Explication
of White, making it a Multiplicity of Light or Reflections (96, 97.) Confirmed
first by the Whiteness of the Meridian Sun, observed in Water (98.) and of a
piece of Iron glowing Hot (99.) Secondly, by the Offensiveness of Snow to the
Travelers eyes, confirmed by an example of a Person that has Traveled much in
Russia (100.) and by an Observation out of Olaus Magnus (100.) and that the
Snow does inlighten and clear the Air in the Night, confirmed by the Mosco
Physician, and Captain James (101.) But that Snow has no inherent Light, proved
by Experience (102.) Thirdly, by the great store of Reflections, from white
Bodies observed in a darkened Room, and by their unaptness to be Kindled by a
Burning-glass (103.) Fourthly, the Specularness of White Bodies is confirmed by
the Reflections in a dark Room from other Bodies (104.) and by the appearance
of a River, which both to the Eye and in a darkened Room appeared White (105.
106.) Fifthly, by the Whiteness of distilled Mercury, and that of the Galaxie
(107, 108.) and by the Whiteness of Froth, raised from whites of Eggs beaten;
that this Whiteness comes not from the Air, showed by Experiments (109. 110.)
where occasionally the Whiteness of Distilled Oils, Hot water, etc. are showed
(111.) That it seems not necessary the Reflecting Surfaces should be
Sphaerical, confirmed by Experiments (112, 113.) Sixthly, by the Whiteness of
the Powders of transparent Bodies (114.) Seventhly, by the Experiment of
Whitening and Burnishing Silver. (115. 116.)

Chap. 2. A Recital of some Opinions about Blackness, and which the Author
inclines to (117.) which he further insists on and explicates (118, 119.) and
shows for what reasons he embraced that Hypothesis (120.) First, from the
contrary Nature of Whiteness and Blackness, White reflecting most Beams
outward, Black should reflect most inward (120.) Next, from the Black
appearance of all Bodies, when Shadowed; And the manner how this paucity of
Refection outward is caused, is further explicated, byshewing that the
Superficial parts may be Conica and Pyramical (121.) This and other
Considrations formerly delivered, Illustrated by Experiments with black and
white Marble (122, 123.) Thirdly, from the Black appearance of Holes in whit
Linen, and from the appearance of Velvet stroak'd several ways, and from an
Observation of Carrots (124, 125.) Fourthly, from the small Reflection from
Black in a darkened Room (125, 126.) Fifthly, from the Experiment of a Checkered
Tile exposed to the Sunbeams (127.) which is to be preferred before a Similar
Experiment tried in Italy, with black and white Marble (128.) Some other
congruous Observations (129.) Sixthly, from the Roasting black'd Eggs in the
Sun (130.) Seventhly, by the Observation of the Blind man lately mentioned, and
of another mentioned by Bartholine (130.) That notwithstanding all these
Reasons, the Author is not absolutely Positive, but remains yet a Secker after
the true Nature of Whiteness and Blackness. (131, 132.)

Experiments in Consort, touching Whiteness and Blackness.

The first Experiment, with a Solution of Sublimate, made White with Spirit of
Urine, etc. (133, 134.)

The second Experiment, with an Infusion of Galls, made Black with Vitriol,
etc. (135, 136) further Discoursed of (137.)

The third Experiment, of the Blacking of Hrtshorn, and Ivory, and Tartar, and
by a father Calcination making them White (138, 139.

The fourth Experiment, limiting the Chmist's principle, Adusta nigra sed
perusta a^a, by several Instances of Calcined Alabaster Lead, Antimony,
Vitriol, and by the Testimony of Bellonius, about the white Charcoles of
Oxy-caedar, and by that of Camphire (140, 141, 142.) That which follows about
Inks was misplaced by an Error of the Printer, for it belongs to what has been
formerly said of Galls (142, 143.)

The fifth Experiment, of the black Smoke of Camphire (144.)

The sixth Experiment, of a black Caput Mortuum, of Oil of Vitriol, with Oil of
Wormwood, and also with Oil of Winter-Savory (145.)

The seventh Experiment, of whitening Wax (146.)

The eighth Experiment, with Tin-glass, and Sublimate (147, 148.)

The ninth Experiment, of a Black powder of Gold in the bottom of Aquafortis,
and of the Blacking of Refined Gold and Silver (148, 149.)

The tenth Experiment, of the staining Hair, Skin, Ivory, etc. Black, with
Crystals of Silver (150, 151.)

The eleventh Experiment, about the Blackness of the Skin, and Hair of Negroes,
and Inhabitants of Hot Climates. Several Objections are made, and the whole
Matter more fully discoursed, and stated from several notable Histories and
Observations (from the 151 to the 167.)

The twelfth Experiment, of the white Powders, afforded by Precipitating
several Bodies, as Crabs Eyes, Minium, Coral, Silver, Lead, Tin, Quicksilver,
Tin-glass, Antimony, Benzoin, and Resinous Gumms out of Spirit of Wine, etc.
but this is not Universal, since other Bodies, as Gold, Antimony, Quicksilver,
etc. may be Precipitated of other Colors (168, 169, 170.)

The thirteenth Experiment, of Changing the Blackness of some Bodies into other
Colors (171, 172.) and of Whitening what would be Minium, and Copper, with
Tin, and of Copper with Arsnick, which with Coppilling again Vanishes; of
covering the Color of that of of Gold with of Silver melted in a Mass together
(173, 174.)

The fourteenth Experiment, of turning the black Body of Horn into a White
immediately with Scraping, without changing the Substantial form, or without
the Intervention of Salt, Sulphur, or Mercury (176.)

The fifteenth Experiment, contains several Instances against the Opinion of
the Chemists, that Sulphur Adust is the cause of Blackness, and the whole
Matter is fully discussed and stated (from 176 to 184.)

Part the Third. Concerning Fromiscuous Experiments about Colors.
Experiment the First. IN confirmation of a former Conjecture about the
Generation of Colors from diversity of Reflections are set down several
Observations made in a darkened Room (186, 187.)

Experiment the second, That white Linen seemed Tinged with the Red of Silk
placed near it in a light Room (188, 189.)

Experiment the third, Of the Trajection of Light through Colored Papers (189,
190.)

Experiment the fourth, Observations of a Prism in a dark Room (191, 192.)

Experiment the fifth, Of the Refracting and Reflecting Prismatical Colors in
a light Room (193.)

Experiment the sixth, Of the Vanishing of the Iris of the Prism, upon the
access of a greater adventitious Light (194.)

Experiment the seventh, Of the appearances of the same Colored Papers by
Candlelight (195, 196.)

Experiment the eighth, Of the Yellowness of the Flame of a Candle (197.)

Experiment the ninth, Of the Greenish Blew transparency of Leaf Gold (198.)

Experiment the tenth, Of the curious Tinctures afforded by Lignum Nephriticum
(from 199 to 203.) Several trials for the Investigation of the Nature of it
(from 204 to 206.) Kircher' s relation of this Wood set down, and examined
(from 206 to 212.) A Corollary on this tenth Experiment, showing how it may be
applicable for the Discovering, whether any Salt be of an Acid, or a
Sulphurous, and Alcalizate Nature (from 213 to 216.)

The eleventh Experiment, Of certain pieces of Glass that afforded this Variety
of Colors; And of the way of so Tinging any Plate of Glass with Silver (from
216 to 219.)

The twelfth Experiment, Of the Mixing and Tempering of Painters Pigments (219,
220, 221.)

The thirteenth Experiment, Of compounding several Colors by Trajecting the
Sunbeams through Tinged Glasses (from 221 to 224.)

The fourteenth Experiment, Of the Compounding of Real and Fantastical
Colors, and the Results (224, 225, 226.) as also the same of Fantastical
Colors (226, 227.)

The fifteenth Experiment, Of Varying the Trajected Iris by a Colored Prism
(228, 229.)

The sixteenth Experiment, Of the Red fumes of Spirit of Nitre, and the
resembling Redness of the Horizontal Sunbeams (230, 231.)

The seventeenth Experiment, Of making a Green by nine Kinds of Compositions
(from 231 to 236.) And some Deductions from them against the necessity of
recurring to Substantial forms and Hypostatical principles for the production
of Colors (from 237 to 240.)

The eighteenth Experiment, Of several Compositions of Blew and Yellow which
produce not a Green, and of the production of a Green by other Colors (241,
242.)

The nineteenth Experiment, contains several Instances of producing Colors,
without the alteration of any Hypostatical principle, by the Prism, Bubbles,
and Feathers (from 242 to 245.)

The twentieth Experiment, Of turning the Blew of Violets into a Red by Acid
Salts, and to a Green by Alcalizate (245, 246.) and the use of it for
Investigating the Nature of Salts (247, 248.)

The one and twentieth Experiment, of the same Changes effected by the same
means on the Blew Tinctures of Corn-flowers (249, 250.) And some Restrictions
to show it not to be so general a propriety as one might imagine (251.)

The twenty second Experiment, of turning a Solution of Verdigrease into a
Blew, with Alcalizate and Urinous Salts (252, 253, 254.)

The twenty third Experiment, of taking away the Color of Roses with the
Steams of Sulphur, and heightning them with the Steams Condensed into Oil of
Sulphur per Campanam (254, 255.)

The twenty fourth Experiment, of Tinging a great quantity of Liquor with a
very little Tinged Substance, Instanced in Cochineel (from 255 to 257.)

The twenty fifth Experiment, of the more general use of Alcalizate and
Sulphurous Salts in the Tinctures of Vegetables, further Instanced in the
Tincture of Privet Berries, and of the Flowers of Mesereon and Pease (from 257
to 259.) An Annotation, showing that of the three Hypostatical principles, Salt
according to Paracelsus is the most, active about Colors (from 259 to 261.)
Some things Praecursory premised to three several Instances next following,
against the forementioned Operations of Salts (261, 262.)

The twenty sixth Experiment, containing Trials with Acid and Sulphurous Salts
on the Red Tinctures of Clove-july-flowers, Buck thorn Berries, Red-Roses,
Brasil, etc. (262, 263.)

The twenty seventh Experiment, of the changes of the Color of Jasmin flowers,
and Snow drops, by Alcalizate and Sulphurous Salts (263, 264.)

The twenty eighth Experiment, of other differing Effects on Mary-golds,
Prim-roses, and fresh Madder (265.) with an Admonition, that these Salts may
have differing Effects in the changing of the Tinctures of diverse other
Vegetables (266, 267.)

The twenty ninth Experiment, of the differing Effects of these Salts on Ripe
and Unripe Juices, instanced in Black-berries, and the Juices of Roses (from
267 to 270.) Two reasons, why the Author added this twenty ninth Experiment,
the last of which is confirmed by an Instance of Mr. Parkinson, consonant to
the Confession of the Makers of such Colors (272.)

The thirtieth Experiment, of several changes in Colors by Digestion,
exemplified by an Amalgam of and and by Spirit of Hartshorn. And (to such as
believe it) by the changes of the Elixir.

The thirty first Experiment, showing that most Tinctures drawn by Digestion
incline to a Red, instanced in Jalap, Guaicum, Amber, Benzoin, Sulphur,
Antimony, etc. (276, 277.)

The thirty second Experiment, That some Reds with Diluting turn Yellow, others
not, exemplified by the Tincture of Cochineel, and by Balsam of Sulphur,
Tinctures of Amber, etc. (277, 278, 279.)

The thirty third Experiment, of a Red Tincture of Saccarum and Oil of
Turpentine made by Digestion (279.)

The thirty fourth Experiment, of drawing a Volatile red Tincture of Mercury,
whose Steams were white, but it would Tinge the Skin black (279, 280.)

The thirty fifth Experiment, of a sudden way of making a Blood red Color
with Oil of Vitriol, and Oil of Anniseeds, two transparent Liquors (280, 281.)

The thirty sixth Experiment, of the Degenerating of several Colors
exemplified in the last mentioned Blood red, and by Mr. Parkinsons relation of
Turnsol, by some Trials with the Juice of Buck-thorn Berries, and other
Vegetables, to which several notable Considerations and Advertisements backed
with Experiments are adjoined (from 281 to 288.)

The thirty seventh Experiment, Of Varying the Color of the Tinctures of
Cochineel, Redcherries, and Brasil, with Acid and Sulphurous Salts, and diverse
Considerations thereon (from 288 to 290.)

The thirty eighth Experiment, About the Red fumes of some, and White of other
distilled Bodies, and of their Coalition for the most part into a transparent
Liquor (290, 291.) And of the various Colors of dry Sublimations, exemplified
with several Experiments (292, 293, 294.)

The thirty ninth Experiment, Of Varying the Decoction of Balaustiums with Acid
and Urinous Salts (294, 295.) Some Annotations wherein two Experiments of
Gassendus are Related, Examined, and Improved (from 295 to 302.)

The fortieth Experiment, Of the no less Strange than Pleasant changes made
with a Solution of Sublimate (from 302 to 306.) The difference between a
Chemical and Philosophical Solution of a Phenomenon (307, 308.) The Authors
Chemical Explication of the Phenomenon, confirmed by several Experiments made
on Mercury, with several Saline Liquors (from 308 to 310.) An Improvement of
the fortieth Experiment, by a fresh Decoction of Antimony in a Lixivium (311,
312, 313.) Reflections on the tenth, twentieth, and fortieth Experiments,
compared together, showing away with this Tincture of Sublimate to distinguish
whether any Saline Body to be examined be of a Urinous or Alcalizate Nature
(from 314 to 317.) The Examination of Spirit of Sal-armoniack, and Spirit of
Oak by these Principles (from 316 to 319.) That the Author knows ways of making
highly Operative Saline Bodies, that produce none of the before mentioned
Effects (319, 320.) Some notable Experiments about Solutions and Precipitations
of Gold and Silver (320, 321.)

The one and fortieth Experiment, Of Depriving a deep Blew Solution of Copper
of its Color (322.) to which is adjoined the Discoloring or making
Transparent a Solution of Verdigrease, etc. and another of Restoring or
Increasing it (322, 323.)

The forty second Experiment, Of changing a Milk white Precipitate of Mercury
into a Yellow, by Affusion of fair Water, with several Considerations thereon
(from 323 to 326.)

The forty third Experiment, Of Extracting a Green Solution with fair Water out
of imperfectly Calcined Vitriol (327.)

The forty fourth Experiment, Of the Deepning and Diluting of several
Tinctures, by the Affusions of Liquors, and by Conical Glasses that contained
them, Exemplified in the Tinctures of Cochineel, Brasil, Verdigrease, Glass,
Litmus, of which last on this occasion several pleasant Phenomenon are related
(from 328 to 335.) To which are adjoined certain Cautional Corollaries (335,
336.) The Water-drinker and some of his Legerdemain tricks related (337.)

The forty fifth Experiment, Of the turning Rhenish and White Wine into a
lovely Green, with a preparation of Steel (338, 339. Some further Trial made
about these Tinctures, and a Similar Experiment of Olaus VVormius (340.)

The forty sixth Experiment, Of the Internal Color of Metalls exhibittd by
Calcination (341, 342, 343.) Annotation the first, That several degrees of Fire
may disclose a differing Color (343.) Annotation the second, That the Glasses
of Metalls may exhibit also other Kinds of Colors (344.) Annotation the third,
That Minerals by several degrees of Fire may disclose several Colors (345.)

Experiment the forty seventh, Of the Internal Colors of Metalls disclosed by
their Dissolutions in several Menstruums (from 345 to 350.) Annotation the
first, The Authors Apology for Recording some already known Experiments,
without mentioning their Authors (from 350 to 352. Annotation the second, That
some Minerals also by Dissolutions in Menstruums may exhibit diverse Colors
(353.) Annotation the third, That Metalls disclose other Colors by
Precipitations, instanced in Mercury (from 353 to 355.)

The forty eighth Experiment, Of Tinging Glass Blew with Leaf Silver, and with
Calcined Copper, and White with Putty (from 355 to 358.) Annotation the first,
That this white Glass is the Basis of Ammels (358.) Annotion the second, That
Colored Glasses may be Compounded like Colored Liquors in Dying Fats (359.)
Annotation the third, Of Tinging Glass with Mineral Substances, and of trying
what Metalls they contain by this means (from 360 to 362.) Annotation the
fourth, That Metalls may be Tinged by Mineralls (362, 363.) Annotation the
fifth, Of making several Kinds of Amauses or Counterfeit Stones (from 363 to
365.) Annotation the sixth, Of the Scarlet Dye, of the Stains of dissolved Gold
and Silver (366, 367.) Of the Greenness of Salt Beef, and Redness of Neats
Tongues from Salts; of Gilding Silver with Bathe Water (368, 369.) And Tinging
the Nails and Skin with Alcanna (369)

The forty ninth Experiment, Of making Lakes (369.) A particular example in
Turmerick (370, 371.) Annotation the first, That in Precipitations wherein
Alum is a Coefficient, a great part of them may consist of the Stony particles
of that Compound Body (from 372 to 375.) Annotation the second, That Lakes may
be made of other Substances, as Madder, Rue, etc. but that Alcalizate Salts do
not always Extract the same Color of which the Vegetable appears (from 376 to
378.) Annotation the third, That the Experiments related may Hint diverse others
(378.) Annotation the fourth, That Alum is useful for the preparing other than
Vegetable Pigments (379.)

The fiftieth Experiment, Of the Similar effects of Saccarum and Alkalies, of
Precipitating with Oil of Vitriol out of Aquafortis, and Spirit of Vinegar;
and of diverse Varyings of the Colors, with these Compounded (from 380 to 384.)
Another very pretty Experiment, with a Solution of Minium (384, 385.) That
these Experiments Skilfully digested may hint diverse matters about Colors
(386.) The Authors Apologetick conclusion, in which is Cursorily hinted the Bow
or Scarlet Dye (387.) The Authors Letter to Sir Robert Moray, concerning his
Observations on the Shining Diamond (391. etc.) And the Observations themselves.

Errata.
Page 142. l. 20. These words, And to manifest, with the rest of what is by a
mistake further printed in this fourth Experiment, belongs, and is to be
referred to the end of the second Eperiment, p. 137. page 145. l. 1. leg.
matter. 146. l. 4. log. Bolts-head. page 161. in the marginal note l. 2. dele
de. ib. l. 3. lege lib. 1. p. 163. l. ult. insert where between the words
places and the. p. 164 l. 1. dele that. ibid. l. 8. leg Epidermis. ibid. l. 19.
leg. 300 for 200. p. 169. l. 22. leg. into it. p. 170. l. 23. and 24. leg. Some
Solutions hereafter to be mentioned, for the Solution of Potashes, and other
Lixiviate Salts. p. 171. l. 6. insert part of between the words most and
dissolved p. 176. l. ult. insert theparticle it between the words Judged and
not p. 234. l. 4. log. Woud-wax or Wood-wax. p. 320l. 29. leg. urine for Urne.

THE EXPERIMENTAL HISTORY OF COLORS BEGUN.
THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I.
I Have seen you so passionately addicted, Pyrophilus to the delightful Art of
Limning and Painting, that I cannot but think my self obliged to acquaint you
with some of those things that have occurred to me concerning the changes of
Colors. And I may expect that I shall as well serve the Virtuosi in general,
as gratify you in particular, by furnishing a person, who, I hope, will both
improve my Communications, and communicate his Improvements, with such
Experiments and Observations as may both invite you to enquire seriously into
the Nature of Colors, and assist you in the Investigation of it. This being
the principal scope of the following Tract, I should do that which might
prevent my own design, if I should here attempt to deliver you an accurate and
particular Theory of Colors; for that were to present you with what I desire
to receive from you; and, as far as in me lay, to make that study needless,
to which I would engage you.

2 Wherefore my present work shall be but to divert and recreate, as well as
excite you by the delivery of matters of fact, such as you may for the most
part try with much ease, and possibly not without some delight: And lest you
should expect any thing of Elaborate or Methodical in what you will meet with
here, I must confess to you beforehand, that the seasons I was wont to choose
to devise and try Experiments about Colors, were those days, wherein having
taken Physic, and finding my self as unfit to speculate, as unwilling to be
altogether idle, I chose this diversion, as a kind of Mean betwixt the one and
the other. And I have the less scrupled to set down the following Experiments,
as some of them came to my mind, and as the Notes wherein I had set down the
rest, occurred to my hands, that by declining a Methodical way of delivering
them, I might leave you and my self the greater liberty and convenience to add
to them, and transpose them as shall appear expedient.

3 Yea, that you may not think me too reserved, or look upon an Enquiry made
up of mere Narratives, as somewhat jejune, I am content to premise a few
considerations, that now offer themselves to my thoughts, which relate in a
more general way, either to the Nature of Colors, or to the study of it. And I
shall insert an Essay, as well Speculative as Historical, of the Nature of
Whiteness and Blackness, that you may have a Specimen of the History of
Colors, I have sometimes had thoughts of; and if you dislike not the Method I
have made use of, I hope, you, and some of the Virtuosi, your friends, may be
thereby invited to go through with Red, Blew, Yellow, and the rest of the
particular Colors, as I have done with White and Black, but with far more
sagacity and success. And if I can invite Ingenious men to undertake such
Tasks, I doubt not but the Curious will quickly obtain a better Account of
Colors, than as yet we have, since in our Method the Thecrical part of the
Enquiry being attended, and as it were interwoven with the Historical, whatever
becomes of the disputable Conjectures, the Philosophy of Colors will be
promoted by the indisputable Experiments.

CHAP. II.
1 TO come then in the first place to our more general Considerations, I shall
begin with saying something as to the Importance of examining the Colors of
Bodies. For there are some, especially Chemists, who think, that a considerable
diversity of Colors does constantly argue an equal diversity of Nature, in the
Bodies wherein it is conspicuous; but I confess I am not altogether of their
mind; for not to mention changeable Taffaties, the blew and golden necks of
Pigeons, and diverse Waterfowl, Rainbows Natural and Artificial, and other
Bodies, whose Colors the Philosophers have been pleased to call not Real, but
Apparent and Fantastical; not to insist on these, I say, (for fear of
needlessly engaging in a Controversy) we see in Parrots, Goldfinches, and
diverse other Birds, not only that the contiguous feathers which are probably as
near in properties as place, are some of them Red, and others White, some of
them Blew, and others Yellow, etc. but that in the several parts of the
self-same feather there may often be seen the greatest disparity of Colors;
and so in the leaves of Tulips, July-flowers, and some other Vegetables the
several leaves, and even the several parts of the same leaf, although no
difference have been observed in their other properties, are frequently found
painted with very different Colors. And such a variety we have much more
admired in that lovely plant which is commonly, and not unjustly called the
Marvayl of Peru; for of diverse scores of fine Flowers, which in its season that
gaudy Plant does almost daily produce, I have scarce taken notice of any two
that were dyed perfectly alike. But though Pyro: such things as these, among
others, keep me from daring to affirm, that the Diversity and change of
Colors does always argue any great difference or alteration, betwixt, or in,
the Bodies, wherein it is to be discerned, yet that oftentimes the Alteration
of Colors does signify considerable Alterations in the disposition of parts
of Bodies, may appear in the Extraction of Tinctures, and diverse other Chemical
Operations, wherein the change of Colors is the chief, and sometimes the only
thing, by which the Artist regulates his proceeding, and is taught to know when
it is seasonable for him to leave off. Instances of this sort are more obvious
in diverse sorts of fruits, as Cherries, Plums, etc. wherein, according a^ the
Vegetable sap is sweetened, or otherwise ripened, by passing from one degree to
another of Maturation, the external part of the fruit passes likewise from one
to anothor Color. But one of the noblest Instances I have met with of this
kind, is not so obvious; and that is the way of tempering Steel to make
Gravers, Drills, Springs, and other Mechanical Instruments, which we have
diverse times both made Artificers practice in our presence, and tried our
selves, after the following manner. First, the slender Steel to be tempered is
to be hardened by heating as much of it as is requisite among glowing Coals,
till it be glowing hot, but it must not be quenched as soon as it is taken from
the fire (for that would make it too brittle, and spoil it) but must be held
over a basin of water, till it descend from a White heat to a Red one, which
as soon as ever you perceive, you must immediacely quench as much as you desire
to harden in the cold water. The Steel thus hardened, will, if it be good, look
somewhat White and must be made bright at the end, that its change of Colors
may be there conspicuous; and then holding it so in the flame of a Candle, that
the bright end may be, for about half an inch, or more, out of the flame, that
the smoke do not stain or fully the brightness of it, you shall after a while
see that clean end, which is almost contiguous to the flame, pass very nimbly
from one Color to another, as from a brighter Yellow, to a deeper and reddish
Yellow, which Artificers call a sanguine, and from that to a fainter first, and
then a a deeper Blew. And to bring home this Experiment to our present purpose,
it is found by daily Experience, that each of these succeeding Colors argue
such a change made in the texture of the Steel, that if it be taken from the
flame, and immediately quenched in the tallow (whereby it is settled in whatever
temper it had before) when it is Yellow, it is of such a hardness as makes it
fit for Gravers Drills, and such like tools; but if it be kept a few minutes
longer in the flame till it grow Blew, it becomes much softer, and unfit to
make Gravers for Metalls, but fit to make Springs for Watches, and such like
Instruments, which are therefore commonly of that Color; and if the Steel be
kept in the flame, after that this deep Blew has disclosed it self, it will
grow so soft, as to need to be new hardened again, before it can be brought to
a temper, fit for Drills or Penknives. And I confess Pyro. I have taken much
pleasure to see the Colors run along from the parts of the Steel contiguous to
the flame, to the end of the Instrument, and succeed one another so fast, that
if a man be not vigilant, to thrust the Steel into the tallow at the very nick
of time, at which it has attained its due Color, he shall miss of giving his
tool the right temper. But because the flame of a Candle is offensive to my
weak eyes, and because it is apt to either black or sully the contiguous part
of the Steel which is held in it, and thereby hinder the change of Colors from
being so long and clearly discerned, I have sometimes made this Experiment by
laying the Steel to be tempered upon a heated bar of Iron, which we find also
to be employed by some Artificers in the tempering of such great Instruments,
as are too big to be soon heated sufficiently by the flame of a Candle. And you
may easily satisfy your self Pyro: of the differing hardness and toughness,
which is ascribed to Steel tempered at different Colors, if you break but some
slender wires of Steel so tempered, and observe how they differ in brittleness,
and if with a file you also make trial of their various degrees of hardness.

2 But Pyrophilus, I must not at present any further prosecute the
Consideration of the importance of Experiments about Colors, not only because
you will in the following papers find some Instances, that would here be
presented you out of their due place, of the use that may be made of such
Experiments, in discovering in diverse bodies, what kind the salt is, that is
predominant in them; but also because a speculative Naturalist might justly
enough allege, that as Light is so pleasing an object, as to be well worth our
looking on, though it discovered to us nothing but its self; so modifi'd Light
called Color, were worth our contemplation, though by understanding its Nature
we should be taught nothing else. And however, I need not make either you or my
self excuses for entertaining you on the subject I am now about to treat of,
since the pleasure Pyro: takes in mixing and laying on of Colors, will I
presume keep him, and will (I am sure) keep me from thinking it troublesome to
set down, especially after the tedious processes (about other matters)
wherewith I fear I may have tyr*d him, some easy, and not unpleasant
Experiments relating to that subject.

3 But, before we descend to the more particular considerations, we are to
present you concerning Colors, I presume it will be seasonable to propose at
the very entrance a Distinction; the ignorance or neglect of which, seems to
me to have frequently enough occasioned either mistakes or confusion in the
Writings of diverse Modern Philosophers; for Color may be considered, either as
it is a quality residing in the body that is said to be colored, or to modifie
the light after such or such a manner; or else as the Light it self, which so
modifi'd, strikes upon the organ of sight, and so causes that Sensation which
we call Color; and that this latter may be looked upon as the more proper,
though not the usual acception of the word Color, will be made probable by
diverse passages in the ensuing part of our discourse; and indeed it is the
Light it self, which after a certain manner, either mingled with shades, or
some other ways troubled, strikes our eyes, that does more immediately produce
that motion in the organ, upon whose account men say they see such or such a
Color in the object; yet, because there is in the body that is said to be
colored, a certain disposition of the superficial particles, whereby it sends
the Light reflected, or refracted, to our eyes thus and thus altered, and not
otherwise, it may also in some sense be said, that Color depends upon the
visible body; and therefore we shall not be against that way of speaking of
Colors that is most used among the Modern Naturalists, provided we be allowed
to have recourse when occasion shall require to the premised distinction, and
to take the more immediate cause of Color to be the modifi'd Light it self, as
it affects the Sensory; though the disposition also of the colored body, as
that modifies the Light, may be called by that name Metonimically (to borrow a
School term) or Efficiently, that is in regard of its turning the Light, that
rebounds from it, or passes through it, into this or that particular Color.

4 I know not whether I may not on this occasion add, that Color is so far
from being an Inherent quality of the object in the sense that is wont to be
declared by the Schools, or even in the sense of some Modern Atomists, that, if
we consider the matter more attentively, we shall see cause to suspect, if not
to conclude, that though Light do more immediately affect the organ of sight,
than do the bodies that send it thither, yet Light it self produces the
sensation of a Color, but as it produces such a determinate kind of local
motion in some part of the brain; which, though it happen most commonly from
the motion whereinto the slender strings of the Retina are put, by the appulse
of Light, yet if the like motion happen to be produced by any other cause,
wherein the Light concurrs not at all, a man shall think he sees the same
Color. For proof of this, I might put you in mind, that it is usual for
dreaming men to think they see the Images that appear to them in their sleep,
adorned some with this, and some with that lively Color, whilst yet, both the
curtains of their bed, and those of their eyes are close drawn. And I might add
the confidence with which distracted persons do oftentimes, when they are
awake, think, they see black fiends in places, where there is no black object
in sight without them. But I will rather observe, that not only when a man
receives a great stroke upon his eye, or a very great one upon some other part
of his head, he is wont to see, as it were, flashes of lightning, and little
vivid, but vanishing flames, though perhaps his eyes be shut: But the like
apparitions may happen, when the motion proceeds not from something without,
but from something within the body, provided the unwonted fumes that wander up
and down in the head, or the propagated concussion of any internal part in the
body, do cause about the inward extremities of the Optic Nerve, such a motion
as is wont to be there produced, when the stroke of the Light upon the Retina
makes us conclude, that we see either Light, or such and such a Color: This
the most ingenious Des Carts has very well observed, but because he seems not
to have exemplifi'd it by any unobvious or peculiar observation, I shall
endeavor to illustrate this doctrine by a few Instances.

5 And first, I remember, that having, through Gods goodness, been free for
several years, from troublesome Coughs, being afterward, by an accident,
suddenly cast into a violent one, I did often, when I was awaked in the night
by my distempers, observe, that upon coughing strongly, it would seem to me,
that I saw very vivid, but immediately disappearing flames, which I took
particular notice of, because of the conjecture I am now mentioning.

6 An excellent and very discreet person, very near allied both to you and me,
was relating to me, that some time since, whilst she was talking with some
other Ladies, upon a sudden, all the objects, she looked upon, appeared to her
dyed with unusual Colors, some of one kind, and some of another, but all so
bright and vivid, that she should have been as much delighted, as surpised
with them, but that finding the apparition to continue, she feared it portended
some very great alteration as to her health: As indeed the day after she was
assaulted with such violence by Hysterical and Hypocondrical Distempers, as
both made her rave for some days, and gave her, during that time, a Bastard
Palsy.

7 Being a while since in a Town, where the Plague had made great havoc, and
inquiring of an ingenious man, that was so bold, as without much scruple to
visit those that were sick of it, about the odd symptoms of a Disease that had
swept away so many there; he told me, among other things, that he was able to
tell diverse Patients, to whom he was called, before they took their beds, or
had any evident symptoms of the Plague, that they were indeed infected, upon
peculiar observations, that being asked, they would tell him that the
neighboring objects, and particularly his cloths, appeared to them beautified
with most glorious Colors, like those of the Rainbow, oftentimes succeeding
one another; and this he affirmed to be one of the most usual, as well as the
most early symptoms, by which this odd Pestilence disclosed it self: And when
I asked how long the Patients were wont to be thus affected, he answered, that
it was most commonly for about a day; and when I further inquired whether or no
Vomits, which in that Pestilence were usually given, did not remove this
symptom (For some used the taking of a Vomit, when they came ashore, to cure
themselves of the obstinate and troublesome giddiness caused by the motion of
the ship) replied, that generally, upon the evacuation made by the Vomit, that
strange apparition of Colors ceased, though the other symptoms were not so
soon abated, yet he added (to take notice of that upon the by, because the
observation may perchance do good) that an excellent Physician, in whose
company he was wont to visit the sick, did give to almost all those to whom he
was called, in the beginning before Nature was much weakened, a pretty odd
Vomit consisting of eight or ten dramms of Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, and
about half a dramm, or much more, of White Vitriol, with such success, that
scarce one of ten to whom it was seasonably administered, miscarried.

8 But to return to the consideration of Colors: As an apparition of them may
be produced by motions from within, without the assistance of an outward
object, so I have observed, that it is sometimes possible that the Color that
would otherwise be produced by an outward object, may be changed by some
motion, or new texture already produced in the Sensory, as long as that unusual
motion, or new disposition lasts; for I have diverse times tried, that after I
have through a Telescope looked upon the Sun, though through a thick, red, or
blew glass, to make its splendour supportable to the eye, the impression upon
the Retina, would be not only so vivid, but so permanent, that if afterward I
turned my eye toward a flame, it would appear to me of a Color very
differing from its usual one. And if I did diverse times successively shut and
open the same eye, I should see the adventitious Color (if I may so call it)
changed or impaired by degrees, till at length (for this unusual motion of the
eye would not presently cease) the flame would appear to me, of the same hew
that it did to other beholders; a not unlike effect I found by looking upon the
Moon, when she was near full, through an excellent Telescope, without colored
Glass to screen my eye with; But that which I desire may be taken notice of,
because we may elsewhere have occasion to reflect upon it, and because it seems
not agreeable to what Anatomists and Optical Writers deliver, touching the
relation of the two eyes to each other, is this circumstance, that though my
Right eye, with which I looked through the Telescope, were thus affected by the
over-strong impression of the light, yet when the flame of a Candle, or some
other bright object appeared to me of a very unusual Color, whilst looked upon
with the Discomposed Eye, or (though not so notably) with both eyes at once;
yet if I shut that Eye, and looked upon the same object with the other, it
would appear with no other than its usual Color, though if I again opened, and
made use of the Dazzled eye, the vivid adventitious Color would again appear.
And on this occasion I must not pretermit an Observation which may persuade us,
that an overvehement stroke upon the Sensory, especially if it be naturally of
a weak constitution, may make a more lasting impression than one would imagine,
which impression may in some cases, as it were, mingle with, and vitiate the
action of vivid objects for a long time after.

For I know a Lady of unquestionable Veracity, who having lately, by a
desperate fall, received several hurts, and particularly a considerable one
upon a part of her face near her Eye, had her sight so troubled and disordered,
that, as she has more than once related to me, not only when the next morning
one of her servants came to her bed side, to ask how she did, his clothes
appeared adorned with such variety of dazzling Colors, that she was fain
presently to command him to withdraw, but the Images in her Hangings, did, for
many days after, appear to her, if the Room were not extraordinarily darkened,
embellished with several offensively vivid Colors, which no body else could
see in them; And when I inquired whether or no White Objects did not appear to
her adorned with more luminous Colors than others, and whether she saw not
some which she could not now well describe to any, whose eyes had never been
distempered, she answered me, that sometimes she thought she saw Colors so
new and glorious, that they were of a peculiat kind, and such as she could not
describe by their likeness to any she had beheld either before or since, and
that White Objects did so much disorder her sight, that if several days after
her fall, she looked upon the inside of a Book, she fancied she saw there
Colors like those of the Rainbow, and even when she thought her self pretty
well recovered, and made bold to leave her Chamber, the coming into a place
where the Walls and Ceeling were whited over, made those Objects appear to her
clothed with such glorious and dazzling Colors, as much offended her sight,
and made her repent her venturousness, and she added, that this Distemper of
her Eyes lasted no less than five or six weeks, though, since that, she has
been able to read and write much without finding the least Inconvenience in
doing so. I would gladly have known, whether if she had shut the Injured Eye,
the Phenomenon would have been the same, when she employed only the other, but
I heard not of this accident early enough to satisfy that Enquiry.

9 Wherefore, I shall now add, that some years before, a person exceedingly
eminent for his profound Skill in almost all kinds of Philological Learning,
coming to advise with me about a Distemper in his Eyes, told me, among other
Circumstances of it, that, having upon a time looked too fixedly upon the Sun,
through a Telescope, without any colored Glass, to take off from the dazzling
splendor of the Object, the excess of Light did so strongly affect his Eye,
that ever since, when he turns it toward a Window, or any White Object, he
fancies, he sees a Globe of Light, of about the bigness the Sun then appeared
of to him, to pass before his Eyes: And having inquired of him, how long he had
been troubled with this Indisposition, he replied, that it was already nine or
ten years, since the Accident, that occasioned it, first befell him.

10 I could here subjoyn, Pyrophilus, some memorable Relations that I have met
with in the Account given us by the experienced Epiphanius Ferdinandus, of the
Symptoms he observed to be incident to those that are bitten with the
Tarantula, by which (Relations) I could probably show, that without any change
in the Object, a change in the Instruments of Vision may for a great while make
some Colors appear Charming, and make others Provoking, and both to a high
degree, though neither of them produced any such Effects before. These things,
I say, I could here subjoyn in confirmation of what I have been saying, to
show, that the Disposition of the Organ is of great Importance in the
Dijudications we make of Colors, were it not that these strange Stories
belonging more properly to another Discourse, I had rather, (contenting my self
to have given you an Intimation of them here) that you should meet with them
fully delivered there.

CHAP. III.
1 BUt, Pyrophilus, I would not by all that I have hitherto discoursed, be
thought to have forgotten the Distinction (of Color) that I mentioned to you
about the beginning of the third Section of the former Chapter; and therefore,
after all I have said of Color, as it is modifi'd Light, and immediately
affects the Sensory, I shall now re-mind you, that I did not deny, but that
Color might in some sense be considered as a Quality residing in the body that
is said to be Colored, and indeed the greatest part of the following
Experiments referr to Color principally under that Notion, for there is in the
bodies we call Colored, and chiefly in their Superficial parts, a certain
disposition, whereby they do so trouble the Light that comes from them to our
Eye, as that it there makes that distinct Impression, upon whose Account we
say, that the Seen body is either White or Black, or Red or Yellow, or of any
one determinate Color. But because we shall (God permiting) by the Experiments
that are to follow some Pages hence, more fully and particularly show, that the
Changes, and consequently in diverse places the Production and the appearance of
Colors depends upon the continuing or altered Texture of the Object, we shall
in this place intimate (and that too but as by the way) two or three things
about this Matter.

2. And first it is not without some Reason, that I ascribe Color (in the
sense formerly explan'd) chiefly to the Superficial parts of Bodies, for not to
question how much Opacous Corpuscles may abound even in those Bodies we call
Diaphanous, it seems plain that of Opacous bodies we do indeed see little else
than the Superficies, for if we found the beams of Light that rebound from the
Object to the Eye, to pierce deep into the Colored body, we should not judge
it Opacous, but either Translucid, or at least Semi-diaphanous, and though the
Schools seem to teach us that Color is a Penetrative Quality, that reaches to
the Innermost parts of the Object, as if a piece of Sealing-wax be broken into
never so many pieces, the Internal fragments will be as Red as the External
surface did appear, yet that is but a Particular Example that will not
overthrow the Reason lately offered, especially since I can allege other
Examples of a contrary Import, and two or three Negative Instances are
sufficient to overthrow the Generality of a Positive Rule, especially if that
be built but upon One or a Few Examples. Not (then) to mention Cherries, Plums,
and I know not how many other Bodies, wherein the skin is of one Color, and
what it hides of another, I shall name a couple of Instances drawn from the
Colors of Durable bodies that are thought far more Homogeneous, and have not
parts that are either Organical, or of a Nature approaching thereunto.

3 To give you the first Instance, I shall need but to remind you of what I
told you a little after the beginning of this Essay, touching the Blew and Red
and Yellow, that may be produced upon a piece of tempered Steel, for these
Colors though they be very Vivid, yet if you break the Steel they adorn, they
will appear to be but Superficial; not only the innermost parts of the Metal,
but those that are within a hairs breadth of the Superficies, having not any of
these Colors, but retaining that of the Steel it self. Besides that, we may as
well confirm this Observation, as some other particulars we elsewhere deliver
concerning Colors, by the following Experiment which we purposely made.

4. We took a good quantity of clean Lead, and melted it with a strong Fire,
and then immediately pouring it out into a clean Vessel of a convenient shape
and matter, (we used one of Iron, that the great and sudden Heat might not
injure it) and then carefully and nimbly taking off the Scum that floated on
the top, we perceived, as we expected, the smooth and grossie Surface of the
melted matter, to be adorned with a ve^ glorious Color, which being as
Transitory as Delightful, did almost immediately give place to another vivid
Color, and that was as quickly succeeded by a third, and this as it were
chased away by a fourth, and so these wonderfully vivid Colors successively
appeared and vanished, (yet the same now and then appearing the second time)
till the Metal ceasing to be hot enough to afford any longer this pleasing
Spectacle, the Colors that chanced to adorn the Surface, when the Lead thus
began to cool, remained upon it; but were so Superficial, that how little
soever we scraped off the Surface of the Lead, we did in such places scrape off
all the Color, and discover only that which is natural to the Metal it self,
which receiving its adventitious Colors, only when the heat was very Intense,
and in that part which was exposed to the comparatively very cold Air, (which
by other Experiments seems to abound with subtle Saline parts, perhaps not
incapable of working upon Lead so disposed:) These things I say, together with
my observing that whatever parts of the so strongly melted Lead were exposed a
while to the Air, turned into a kind of Scum or Litharge, how bright and clean
soever they appeared before, suggested to me some Thoughts or Ravings, which I
have not now time to acquaint You with. One that did not know me, Pyrophilus,
would perchance think I endeavored to impose upon You by relating this
Experiment, which I have several times tried, but the Reason why the Phenomenon
mentioned have not been taken notice of, may be, that unless Lead be brought to
a much higher degree of Fusion or Fluidity than is usual, or than is indeed
requisite to make it melt, the Phenomenon I mentioned will scarce at all
disclose themselves; And we have also observed that this successive appearing
and vanishing of vivid Colors, was wont to be impaired or determined whilst
the Metal exposed to the Air remained yet hotter than one would readily
suspect. And one thing I must further Note, of which I leave You to search
after the Reason, namely, that the same Colors did not always and regularly
succeed one another, as is usually in Steel, but in the diversified Order
mentioned in this following Note, which I was scarce able to write down, the
succession of the Colors was so very quick, whether that proceeded from the
differing degrees of Heat in the Lead exposed to the cool Air, or from some
other Reason, I leave you to examine. [Blew, Yellow, Purple, Blew; Green,
Purple, Blew, Yellow, Red; Purple, Blew, Yellow and Blew, Yellow, Blew, Purple,
Green mixed, Yellow, Red, Blew, Green, Yellow, Red, Purple, Green.]



5. The Atomists of Old, and some Learned men of late, have attempted to
explicate the variety of Colors in Opacous bodies from the various Figures of
their Superficial parts; the attempt is Ingenious, and the Doctrine seems
partly True, but I confess I think there are diverse other things that must be
taken in as concurrent to produce those differing forms of Asperity, whereon
the Colors of Opacous bodies seem to depend. To declare this a little, we must
assume, that the Surfaces of all such Bodies how Smooth or polite soever they
may appear to our Dull Sight and Touch, are exactly smooth only in a popular,
or at most in a Physical sense, but not in a strict and rigid sense.

6. This, excellent Microscopes show us in many Bodies, that seem Smooth to our
naked Eyes; and this not only as to the little Hillocks or Protuberancies that
swell above that which may be conceived to be the Plain or Level of the
considered Surface, for it is obvious enough to those that are any thing
conversant with such Glasses, but as to numerous Depressions beneath that
Level, of which sort of Cavities by the help of a Microscope, which the
greatest Artificer that makes them, judges to be the greatest Magnifying Glass
in Europe, except one that equals it, we have on the Surface of a thin piece of
Cork that appeared smooth to the Eye, observed about sixty in a Row, within the
length of less then an 31 and 32 part of an Inch, (for the Glass takes in no
longer a space at one view) and these Cavities (which made that little piece of
Cork look almost like an empty Honeycomb) were not only very distinct, and
figured like one another, but of a considerable bigness, and a scarce credible
depth; insomuch that their distinct shadows as well as sides were plainly
discerned and easily to be reckoned, and might have been well distinguished,
though they had been ten times lesser than they were; which I thought it not
amiss to mention to you Pyrophilus upon the by, that you may thence make some
Estimate, what a strange Inequality, and what a multitude of little Shades,
there may really be, in a scarce sensible part of the Physical superficies,
though the naked Eye sees no such matter. And as Excellent Microscopes show us
this Ruggedness in many Bodies that pass for Smooth, so there are diverse
Expements, though we must not now stay to urge them, which seem to persuade us
of the same thing as to the rest of such Bodies as we are now treating off; So,
that there is no sensible part of an Opacous body, that may not be conceived to
be made up of a multitude of singly insensible Corpuscles, but in the giving
these Surfaces that disposition, which makes them alter the Light that reflects
thence to the Eye after the manner requisite to make the Object appear Green;
Blew, etc. the Figures of these Particles have a great, but not the only
stroke. It Is true indeed that the protuberant Particles may be of very great
variety of Figures, Sphaerical, Elliptical, Conical, Cylindrical, Polyedrical,
and some very irregular, and that according to the Nature of these, and the
situation of the Lucid body, the Light must be variously affected, after one
manner from Surfaces (I now speak of Physical Surfaces) consisting of
Sphaerical, and in another from those that are made up of Conical or
Cylindrical Corpuscles; some being fitted to reflect more of the incident Beams
of Light, others less, and some toward one part, others toward another. But
besides this difference of Shape, there may be diverse other things that may
eminently concur to vary the forms of Asperity that Colors so much depend on.
For, willingly allowing the Figure of the Particles in the first place, I
consider secondly, that the superficial Corpuscles, if I may so call them, may
be bigger in one Body, and less in another, and consequently fitted to allay
the Light falling on them with greater shades. Next, the protuberant Particles
may be set more or less close together, that is, there may be a greater or a
smaller number of them within the compass of one, than within the compass of
another small part of the Surface of the same Extent, and how much these
Qualities may serve to produce Color may be somewhat guessed at, by that which
happens in the Agitation of Water; for if the Bubbles that are thereby made be
Great, and but Few, the Water will scarce acquire a sensible Color, but if it
be reduced to a Froth, consisting of Bubbles, which being very Minute and
Contiguous to each other, are a multitude of them crowded into a narrow Room,
the Water (turned to Froth) does then exhibit a very manifest White Color, (to
which these last named Conditions of the Bubbles do as well as their Unequal See
the Discourse of the Nature of Whiteness and Blackness.
figure contribute) and that for Reasons to be mentioned anon. Besides, it is
not necessary that the Superficial particles that exhibit one Color, should be
all of them Round, or all Conical, or all of any one Shape, but Corpuscles of
differing Figures may be mingled on the Surface of the Opacous Body, as when
the Corpuscles that make a Blew color, and those that make a Yellow, come to
be Accurately and Skilfully mixed, they make up a Green, which though it seem
one simple Color, yet in this case appears to be made by Corpuscles of very
differing Kinds, duly commix'd. Moreover the Figure and Bigness of the little
Depressions, Cavities, Furrows or Pores intercepted betwixt these protuberant
Corpuscles, are as well to be considered as the Sizes and Shapes of the
Corpuscles themselves: For we may conceive the Physical superficies of a Body,
where (as we said) its Color does as it were reside, to be cut Transversly by
a Mathematical plain, which you know is conceived to be without any Depth or
Thickness at all, and then as some parts of the Physical superficies will be
Protuberant, or swell above this last plain, so others may be depressed beneath
it, as (to explane my self by a gross Comparison) in diverse places of the
Surface of the Earth, there are not only Neighboring Hills, Trees, etc. that
are raised above the Horizontal Level of the Valley, but Rivers, Wells, Pits
and other Cavities that are depressed beneath it, and that such Protuberant and
Concave parts of a Surface may remit the Light so differingly, as much to vary
a Color, some examples and other things, that we shall hereafter have occasion
to take notice off in this Tract, will sufficiently declare, till when, it may
suffice to put you in mind, that of two Flat-sides of the same piece of, for
example, red Marble, the one being diligently Polished, and the other left to
its former Roughness, the differing degrees or sorts of Asperity, for the side
that is smooth to the Touch wants not its Roughness, will so diversifie the
Light reflected from the several Plains to the Eye, that a Painter would employ
two differing Colors to represent them.

7. And I hope, Pyrophilus, you will not think it strange or impertinent, that
I employ in diverse passages of these Papers, examples drawn from Bodies and
Shadows far more Gross, than those minute Protuberances and shady Pores on
which in most cases the Color of a Body as it is an Inherent Quality or
Disposition of its Surface, seems to depend. For sometimes I employ such
Examples, rather to declare my Meaning, than prove my Conjecture; things, whom
their Smallness makes Insensible; being better represented to the Imagination
by such familiar Objects, as being like them enough in other respects, are of a
Visible bulk. And next, though the Beams of Light are such subtle Bodies, that
in respect of them, even Surfaces that are sensibly Smooth, are not exactly so,
but have their own degree of Roughness, consisting of little Protuberances and
Depressions; and though consequently such Inequalities may suffice to give
Bodies differing Colors, as we see in Marble that appears White or Black, or
Red or Blew, even when the most carefully Polished, yet it is plain by the late
Instance of Red Marble; and many others, that even bigger Protuberances and
greater Shades may likewise so Diversifie the Roughness of a Bodies
Superficies, as manifestly to concur to the varying of its Color, whereby
such Examples appear to be proper enough to be employed in such a Subject as we
have now in hand. And having hinted thus much on this Occasion, I now proceed.

8. The Situation also of the Superficial particles is considerable, which I
distinguish into the Posture of the single Corpuscles, in respect of the Light,
and of the Eye, and the Order of them in reference also to one another; for a
Body may otherwise reflect the Light, when its Superficial particles are more
erected upon the Plain that may be conceived to pass along their Basis, and
when the Points or Extremes of such Particles are Obverted to the Eye, than
when those Particles are so Inclined, that their Sides are in great part
Discernable, as the Color of Plush or Velvet will appear Varied to you, if you
carefully stroke part of it one way, and part of it another, the posture of the
particular Thrids, in reference to the Light, or the Eye, becoming thereby
different. And you may observe in a Field of ripe Corn blown upon by the Wind,
that there will appear as it were Waves of a Color (at least Gradually)
differing from that of the rest of the Field, the Wind by Depressing some of
the Ears, and not at the same time others, making the one Reflect more from the
Lateral and Strawy parts, than do the rest. And so, when Dogs are so angry, as
to Erect the Hairs upon their Necks, and upon some other parts of their Bodies,
those Parts seem to acquire a Color varied from that which the same Hairs
made, when in their usual Posture they did far more stoop. And that the Order
wherein the Superficial Corpuscles are Ranged is not to be neglected, we may
guess by turning of Water into Froth, the beating of Glass, and the scraping of
Horns, in which cases the Corpuscles that were before so marshalled as to be
Perspicuous, do by the troubling of that Order become Disposed to terminate and
reflect more Light, and thereby to appear Whitish. And there are other ways in
which the Order of the Protuberant parts, in reference to the Eye, may much
contribute to the appearing of a particular Color, for I have often observed,
that when Pease are Planted, or Set in Parallel Lines, and are Shot up about
half a Foot above the Surface of the Ground, by looking on the Field or Plot of
Ground from that part toward which the Parallel Lines tended, the greater part
of the Ground by far would appear of its own dirty Color, but if I looked
upon it Transversly, the Plot would appear very Green, the upper parts of the
Pease hindering the intercepted parts of the Ground, which as I said retained
their wonted Color, from being discovered by the Eye. And I know not,
Pyrophilus, whether I might not add, that even the Motion of the Small Parts of
a Visible Object may in some cases contribute, though it be not so easy to say
how, to the Producing or the Varying of a Color; for I have several times made
a Liquor, which when it has well settled in a close Vial, is Transparent and
Colorless, but as soon as the Glass is unstopp'd, begins to fly away very
plentifully in a White and Opacous fume; and there are other Bodies, whose
Fumes, when they fill a Receiver, would make one suspect it contains Milk, and
yet when these Fumes settle into a Liquor, that Liquor is not White, but
Transparent; And such White Fumes I have seen afforded by unstopping a Liquor I
know, which yet is it self Diaphanous and Red; Nor are these the only Instances
of this Kind, that our Trials can supply us with. And if the Superficial
Corpuscles be of the Grosser sort, and be so Framed, that their differing Sides
or Faces may exhibit differing Colors, then the Motion or Rest of those
Corpuscles may be considerable, as to the Color of the Superficies they
compose, upon this account, that sometimes more, sometimes fewer of the Sides
disposed to exhibit such a Color may by this means become or continue more
Obverted to the Eye than the rest, and compose a Physical Surface, that will be
more or less sensibly interrupted; As, to explane my meaning, by proposing a
gross Example, I remember, that in some sorts of Leavy Plants thick set by one
another, the two sides of whose Leaves were of somewhat differing Colors,
there would be a notable Disparity as to Color, if you looked upon them both
when the Leaves being at Rest had their upper and commonly exposed sides
Obverted to the Eye, and when a breath of Wind passing through them, made great
Numbers of the usually Hidden sides of the Leaves become conspicuous. And
though the Little Bodies, we were lately speaking of, may Singly and Apart seem
almost Colorless, yet when Many of them are placed by one another, so near,
that the Eye does not easily discern an Interruption, within a sensible space,
they may exhibit a Color; as we see, that though a Slenderest Third of Died
Silk does, whilst looked on Single, seem almost quite Devoyd of Redness, (for
Instance) yet when numbers of these Thrids are brought together into one Skein,
their Color becomes notorious.

9. But the same Occasion that invited me to say what I have mentioned
concerning the Leaves of Trees, invites me also to give you some account of
what happens in Changeable Taffities, where we see differing Colors, as it
were, Emerge and Vanish upon the Ruffling of the same piece of Silk: As I have
diverse times with Pleasure observed, by the help of such a Microscope, as,
though it do not very much Magnify the Object, has in recompense this great
Convenience, that you may easily, as fast as you please, remove it from one
part to another of a Large Object, of which the Glass taking a great part at
once, you may thereby presently Survey the Whole. Now by the help of such a
Microscope I could easily (as I began to say) discern, that in a piece of
Changeable Taffity, (that appeared, for Instance, sometimes Red, and sometimes
Green) the Stuff was composed of Red thrids and Green, passing under and over
each other, and crossing one another in almost innumerable points; and if I
looked through the Glass upon any considerable portion of the Stuff, that (for
example sake) to the naked Eye appeared to be Red, I could plainly see, that in
that Position, the Red thrids were Conspicuous, and reflected a vivid Light;
and though I could also perceive, that there were Green ones, yet by reason of
their disadvantagious Position in the Physical Surface of the Taffity, they
were in part hid by the more Protuberant Thrids of the other Color; and for
the same cause, the Reflection from as much of the Green as was discovered, was
comparatively but Dim and Faint. And if, on the contrary, I looked through the
Microscope upon any part that appeared Green, I could plainly see that the Red
thrids were less fully exposed to the Eye, and obscured by the Green ones,
which therefore made up the Predominant Color. And by observing the Texture of
the Silken Stuff, I could easisy so expose the Thrids either of the one Color
or of the other to my Eye, as at pleasure to exhibit an apparition of Red or
Green, or make those Colors succeed one another: So that, when I observed
their Succession by the help of the Glass, I could mark how the Predominant
Color did as it were start out, when the Thrids that exhibited it came to be
advantagiously placed; And by making little Folds in the Stuff after a certain
manner, the Sides that met and terminated in those Folds, would appear to the
naked Eye, one of them Red, and the other Green. When Thrids of more than two
differing Colors chance to be Interwoven, the resulting changeableness of the
Taffity may be also somewhat different. But I choose to give an Instance in the
Stuff I have been speaking off, because the mixture being more Simple, the way
whereby the Changeableness is produced, may be the more easily apprehended: and
though Reason alone might readily enough lead a considering Man to guess at the
Explication, in case he knew how Changeable Taffities are made: yet I thought
it not impertinent to mention it, because both Scholars and Gentlemen are wont
to look upon the Inquiry into Manufactures, as a Mechanic employment, and
consequently below Them; and because also with such a Microscope as I have been
mentioning, the discovery is as well Pleasant as Satisfactory, and may affor'd
Hints of the Solution of other Phenomenon of Colors. And it were not amiss,
that some diligent Inquiry were made, whether the Microscope would give us an
account of the Variableness of Color, that is so Conspicuous and so
Delightful in Mother of Pearl, in Opalls, and some other resembling Bodies:
For though I remember I did formerly attempt something of that Kind (fruitlesly
enough) upon Mother of Pearl, yet not having then the advantage of my best
Microscope, nor some Conveniences that might have been wished, I leave it to
you, who have better Eyes, to try what you can do further; since 'twill be Some
discovery to find, that, in this case, the best Eyes and Microscopes themselves
can make None.

10. I confess, Pyrophilus; that a great part of what I have delivered, (or
proposed rather) concerning the differing forms of Asperity in Bodies, by which
Differences the incident Light either comes to be Reflected with more or less
of Shade, and with that Shade more or less Interrupted, or else happens to be
also otherwise Modified or Troubled, is but Conjectural. But I am not sure,
that if it were not for the Dullness of our Senses, either these or some other
Notions of Kin to them, might be better Countenanced; for I am apt to suspect,
that if we were Sharp sighted enough, or had such perfect Microscopes, as I
fear are more to be wished than hoped for, our promoted Sense might discern in
the Physical Surfaces of Bodies, both a great many latent Ruggidnesses, and the
particular Sizes, Shapes, and Situations of the extremely little Bodies that
cause them, and perhaps might perceive among other Varieties that we now can
but imagine, how those little Protuberances and Cavities do Interrupt and
Dilate the Light, by mingling with it a multitude of little and singly
undiscernable Shades, though some of them more, and some of them less Minute,
some less, and some more Numerous, according to the Nature and Degree of the
particular Color we attribute to the Visible Object; as we see, that in the
Moon we can with Excellent Telescopes discern many Hills and Valleys, and as it
were Pits and other Parts, whereof some are more, and some less Vividly
illustrated, and others have a fainter, others a deeper Shade, though the naked
Eye can discern no such matter in that Planet. And with an Excellent
Microscope, where the Naked Eye did see but a Green powder, the Assisted Eye as
we noted above, could discern particular Granules, some of them of a Blew, and
some of them of a Yellow color, which Corpuscles we had beforehand caused to
be exquisitly mixed to compound the Green.

11. And, Pyrophilus, that you may not think me altogether extravagant in what
I have said of the Possibility, (for I speak of no more) of discerning the
differing forms of Asperity in the Surfaces of Bodies of several Colors, I Will
here set down a Memorable particular that chanced to come to my Knowledge,
since I writ a good part of this Essay; and it is this. Meeting casually the
other Day, with: the deservedly Famous Since for his eminent Qualities and
Loyalty Graced, by his Majesty, with the Honor of Knighthood.
Dr. J. Finch, Extraordinary Anatomist to that Great Patron of the Virtuosi,
the now Great Duke of Toscany, and enquiring of this Ingenious Person, what
might be the chief Rarity he had seen in his late return out of Italy into
England, he told me, it was a Man at Maestricht in the Low-Countrys, who at
certain times can discern and distinguish Colors by the Touch with his
Fingers. You Will easily Conclude, that this is far more strange, than what I
proposed but as not Impossible; since the Sense of the Retina seeming to be
much more Tender and quick than that of those Grosser Filaments, Nerves or
Membrances of our Fingers, wherewith we use to handle Gross and Hard Bodies, it
seems scarce credible, that any Accustomance, or Diet, or peculiarity of
Constitution, should enable a Man to distinguish with such Gross and Unsuitable
Organs, such Nice and Subtle Differences as those of the forms of Asperity,
that belong to differing Colors, to receive whose Languid and Delicate
Impressions by the Intervention of Light, Nature seems to have appointed and
contexed into the Retina the tender and delicate Pith of the Optic Nerve.
Wherefore I confess, I proposed diverse Scruples, and particularly whether the
Doctor had taken care to bind a Napkin or Hankerchief over his Eyes so
carefully, as to be sure he could make no use of his Sight, though he had but
Counterfeited the want of it, to which I added diverse other Questions, to
satisfy my Self, whether there were any Likelihood of Collusion or other
Tricks. But I found that the Judicious Doctor having gone far out of his way,
purposely to satisfy Himself and his Learned Prince about this Wonder, had
been very Watchful and Circumspect to keep Himself from being Imposed upon.
And that he might not through any mistake in point of Memory mis-inform Me, he
did me the Favor at my Request, to look out the Notes he had Written for his
Own and his Princes Information, the sum of which Memorials, as far as we
shall mention them here, was this, That the Doctor having been informed at
Utrecht, that there Lived one at some Miles distance from Maestricht, who could
distinguish Colors by the Touch, when he came to the last named Town, he sent
a Messenger for him, and having Examined him, was told upon Enquiry these
Particulars:

That the Man's name was John Vermaasen, at that time about 33 Years of Age;
that when he was but two years Old, he had the Small Pox, which rendered him
absolutely Blind: That at this present he is an Organist, and serves that
Office in a public Quire.

That the Doctor discoursing with him over Night, the Blind man affirmed, that
he could distinguish Colors by the Touch, but that he could not do it, unless
he were Fasting; Any quantity of Drink taking from him that Exquisitness of
Touch, which is requisite to so Nice a Sensation.

That hereupon the Doctor provided against the next Morning seven pieces of
Ribbon, of these seven Colors, Black, White, Red, Blew, Green, Yellow, and
Gray, but as for mingled Colors, this Vermaasen would not undertake to discern
them, though if offered, he would tell that they were Mixed.

That to discern the Color of the Ribbon, he places it betwixt the Thumb and
the Forefinger, but his most exquisite perception was in his Thumb, and much
better in the right Thumb than in the left.

That after the Blind man had four or five times told the Doctor the several
Colors, (though Blinded with a Napkin for fear he might have some Sight) the
Doctor found he was twice mistaken, for he called the White Black, and the Red
Blew, but still, he, before his Error, would lay them by in Pairs, saying,
that though he could easily distinguish them from all others, yet those two
Pairs were not easily distinguished amongst themselves, whereupon the Doctor
desired to be told by him what kind of Discrimination he had of Colors by his
Touch, to which he gave a reply, for whose sake chiefly I insert all this
Narrative in this place, namely, That all the difference was more or less
Asperity, for says he, (I give you the Doctor's own words) Black feels as if
you were feeling Needles points, or some harsh Sand, and Red feels very Smooth.

That the Doctor having desired him to tell in Order the difference of Colors
to his Touch, he did as follows;

Black and White are the most asperous or unequal of all Colors, and so like,
that it is very hard to distinguish them, but Black is the most Rough of the
two, Green is next in Asperity, Gray next to Green in Asperity, Yellow is the
fifth in degree of Asperity, Red and Blew are so like, that they are as hard to
distinguish as Black and White, but Red is somewhat more Asperous than Blew, so
that Red has the sixth place, and Blew the seventh in Asperity.

12. To these Informations the Obliging Doctor was pleased to add the welcome
present of three of those very pieces of Ribbon, whose Colors in his presence
the Blind man had distinguished, pronouncing the one Gray, the other Red, and
the third Green, which I keep by me as Rarities, and the rather, because he
feared the rest were miscarried.

13. Before I saw the Notes that afforded me the precedent Narrative, I confess
I suspected this man might have thus discriminated Colors, rather by the Smell
than by the Touch; for some of the Ingredients employed by Dyers to Color
things, have Sents, that are not so Languid, nor so near of Kin, but that I
thought it not impossible that a very Critical Nose might distinguish them, and
this I the rather suspected, because he required, that the Ribbons, whose
Colors he was to Name, should be offered him Fasting in the morning; for I
have observed in Setting Dogs; that the feeding of them (epecially with some
sorts of Aliments) does very much impair the exquisite sent of their Noses. And
though some of the foregoing particulars would have prevented that Conjecture,
yet I confess to you (Pyrophilus) that I would gladly have had the Opportunity
of Examining this Man my self, and of Questioning him about diverse particulars
which I do not find to have been yet thought upon. And though it be not
incredible to me, that since the Liquors that Dyers employ to tinge, are
qualified to do so by multitudes of little Corpuscles of the Pigment or Dying
stuff, which are dissolved and extracted by the Liquor, and swim to and fro in
it, those Corpuscles of Color (as the Atomists call them) insinuating
themselves into, and filling all the Pores of the Body to be Dyed, may Asperate
its Superficies more or less according to the Bigness and Texture of the
Corpuscles of the Pigment; yet I can scarce believe, that our Blind man could
distinguish all the Colors he did, merely by the Ribbons having more or less
of Asperity, so that I cannot but think, notwithstanding this History, that the
Blind man distinguished Colors not only by the Degrees of Asperity in the
Bodies offered to him, but by Forms of it, though this (latter) would perhaps
have been very difficult for him to make an Intelligible mention of, because
those Minute disparities having not been taken notice of by men for want of
touch as Exquisite as our Blind Man's, are things he could not have Intelligibly
expressed, which will easily seem Probable, if you consider, that under the
name of Sharp, and Sweet, and Sour, there are abundance of, as it were,
immediate peculiar Relishes or Tastes in differing sorts of Wine, which though
Critical and Experienced Palats can easily discern themselves, cannot make them
be understood by others, such Minute differences not having hitherto any
Distinct names assigned them. And it seems that there was something in the Forms
of Asperity that was requisite to the Distinction of Colors, besides the
Degree of it, since he found it so difficult to distingush Black and White from
one another, though not from other Colors. For I might urge, that he seems not
consonant to himself about the Red, which as you have seen in one place, he
represents as somewhat more Asperous than the Blew; and in another, very
Smooth: But because he speaks of this Smoothness in that place, where he
mentions the Roughness of Black, we may favorably presume that he might mean
but a comparative Smoothness; and therefore I shall not Insist on this, but
rather Countenance my Conjecture by this, that he found it so Difficult, not
only, to Discriminate Red and Blew, (though the first of our promiscuous
Experiments will inform you, that the Red reflects by great Odds more Light
than the other) but also to distinguish Black and White from one another,
though not from other Colors. And indeed, though in the Ribbonds that were
offered him, they might be almost equally Rough, yet in such slender Corpuscles
as those of Color, there may easily enough be Conceived, not only a greater
Closeness of Parts, or else Paucity of Protuberant Corpuseles, and the little
extant Particles may be otherwise Figured, and Ranged in the White than in the
Black, but the Cavities may be much Deeper in the one than the other.

14. And perhaps, (Pyrophilus) it may prove some Illustration of what I mean,
and help you to conceive how this may be, if I Represent, that where the
Particles are so exceeding Slender, we may allow the Parts exposed to the Sight
and Touch to be a little Unequal in comparison of the Erected Particles of Black
Bodies, as if there were Wyres I know not how many times Slenderer than a Hair:
whether you suppose them to be Figured like Needles, or Cylindrically, like the
Hairs of a Brush, with Hemisphaerical (or at least Unequal) Tops, they will be
so very Slender, and consequently the Points both of the one sort and the other
so very Sharp, that even an exquisite Touch will be able to distinguish no
greater Difference between them, than that which our Blind man allowed, when
comparing Black and White Bodies, he said, that the latter was the less Rough
of the two. Nor is every Kind of Roughness, though Sensible enough,
Inconsistent with Whiteness, there being Cases, wherein the Physical
Superficies of a Body is made by the same Operation both Rough and white, as
when the Level Surface of clear Water being by agitation Asperated with a
multitude of Unequal Bubbles, does thereby acquire a Whiteness; and as a Smooth
piece of Glass, by being Scratched with a Diamond, does in the Asperated part
of its Surface disclose the same Color. But more (perchance) of this elsewhere.

15. And therefore, we shall here pass by the Question, whether any thing might
be considered about the Opacity of the Corpuscles of Black Pigments, and the
Comparative Diaphaneity of those of many White Bodies, applied to our present
Case; and proceed, to represent, That the newly mentioned Exiguity and Shape of
the extant Particles being supposed, it will then be considerable what we
lately but Hinted, (and therefore must now somewhat Explane) That the Depth of
the little Cavities, intercepted between the extant Particles, without being so
much greater in Black Bodies than in White ones, as to be perceptibly so to the
Gross Organs of Touch, may be very much greater in reference to their
Disposition of Reflecting the imaginary subtle Beams of Light. For in Black
Bodies, those Little intercepted Cavities, and other Depressions, may be so
Figured, so Narrow and so Deep, that the incident Beams of Light, which the
more extant Parts of the Physical Superficies are disposed to Reflect inwards,
may be Detained there, and prove unable to Emerge; whilst in a White Body, the
Slender Particles may not only by their Figure be fitted to Reflect the Light
copiously outward, but the intercepted Cavities being not Deep, nor perhaps
very Narrow, the Bottoms of them may be so Constituted, 'as to be fit to
Reflect outward much of the Light that falls even upon Them; as you may
possibly better apprehend, when we shall come to treat of Whiteness and
Blackness. In the mean time it may suffice, that you take Notice with me, that
the Blind man's Relations import no necessity of Concluding, that, though,
because, according to the Judgment of his Touch, Black was the Roughest, as it
is the Darkest of Colors, therefore White, which (according to us) is the
Lightest, should be also the Smoothest: since I observe, that he makes Yellow
to be two Degrees more Asperous than Blew, and as much less Asperous than
Green; whereas indeed, Yellow does not only appear to the Eye a Lighter Color
than Blew, but (by our first Experiment hereafter to be mentioned) it will
appear, that Yellow reflected much more Light than Blew, and manifestly more
than Green, (which we need not much wonder at, since in this Color and the two
others (Blew and Yellow) it is not only the Reflected Light that is to be
considered, since to produce both these, Refraction seems to Intervene, which
by its Varieties may much alter the Case:) which both seems to strengthen the
Conjecture I was formerly proposing, that there was something else in the Kinds
of Asperity, as well as in the Degrees of it, which enabled our Blind man to
Discriminate Colors, and does at least show, that we cannot in all Cases from
the bare Difference in the Degrees of Asperity betwixt Colors, safely
conclude, that the Rougher of any two always Reflects the least Light.

16. But this notwithstanding, (Pyrophilus) and what ever Curiosity I may have
had to move some Questions to our Sagacious Blind man, yet thus much I think
you will admit us to have gained by his Testimony, that since many Colors may
be felt with the Circumstances above related, the Surfaces of such Colored
Bodies must certainly have differing Degrees, and in all probability have
differing Forms or Kinds of Asperity belonging to them, which is all the Use
that my present attempt obliges me to make of the History above delivered, that
being sufficient to prove, that Color does much depend upon the Disposition of
the Superficial parts of Bodies, and to show in general, wherein it is probable
that such a Disposition does (principally at least) consist.

17. But to return to what I was saying before I began to make mention of our
Blind Organist, what we have delivered touching the causes of the several Forms
of Asperity that may Diversifie the Surfaces of Colored Bodies, may perchance
somewhat assist us to make some Conjectures in the general, at several of the
ways whereby it is possible for the Experiments hereafter to be mentioned, to
produce the sudden changes of Colors that are wont to be Consequent upon
them; for most of these Phenomenon being produced by the Intervention of
Liquors, and these for the most part abounding with very Minute, Active, and
Variously Figured Saline Corpuscles, Liquors so Qualified may well enough very
Nimbly alter the Texture of the Body they are employed to Work upon, and so may
change the form of Asperity, and thereby make them Remit to the Eye the Light
that falls on them, after another manner than they did before, and by that
means Vary the Color, so far forth as it depends upon the Texture or
Disposition of the Seen Parts of the Object, which I say, Pyrophilus, that you
may not think I would absolutely exclude all other ways of Modifying the Beams
of Light between their Parting from the Lucid Body, and their Reception into
the common Sensory.

18. Now there seen to me diverse ways, by which we may conceive that Liquors
may Nimbly alter the Color of one another, and of other Bodies, upon which
they Act, but my present haste will allow me to mention but some of them,
without Insisting so much as upon those I shall name.

19. And first, the Minute Corpuscles that compose a Liquor may easily
insinuate themselves into those Pores of Bodies, whereto their Size and Figure
makes them Congruous, and these Pores they may either exactly Fill, or but
Inadequately, and in this latter Case they will for the most part alter the
Number and Figure, and always the Bigness of the former Pores. And in what
capacity soever these Corpuscles of a Liquor come to be Lodged or Harbored in
the Pores that admit them, the Surface of the Body will for the most part have
its Asperity altered, and the Incident Light that meets with a Grosser Liquor
in the little Cavities that before contained nothing but Air, or some yet
Subtiler Fluid, will have its Beams either Refracted, or Imbibed, or else
Reflected more or less Interruptedly, than they would be, if the Body had been
Unmoistned, as we see, that even fair Water falling on white Paper, or Linen,
and diverse other Bodies apt to soak it in, will for some such Reasons as those
newly mentioned, immediately alter the Color of them, and for the most part
make it Sadder than that of the Unwetted Parts of the same Bodies. And so you
may see, that when in the Summer the Highways are Dry and Dusty, if there
falls store of Rain, they will quickly appear of a much Darker Color than they
did before, and if a Drop of Oil be let fall upon a Sheet of White Paper, that
part of it, which by the Imbibition of the Liquor acquires a greater
Continuity, and some Transparency, will appear much Darker than the rest, many
of the Incident Beams of Light being now Transmitted, that otherwise would be
Reflected toward the Beholders Eyes.

20. Secondly, A Liquor may alter the Color of a Body by freeing it from those
things that hindered it from appearing in its Genuine Color; and though this
may be said to be rather a Restoration of a Body to its own Color, or a
Retection of its native Color, than a Change, yet still there Intervenes in it
a change of the Color which the Body appeared to be of before this Operation.
And such a change a Liquor may work, either by Dissolving, or Corroding, or by
some such way of carrying off that Matter, which either Veiled or Disguised the
Color that afterward appears. Thus we restore Old pieces of Dirty Gold to a
clean and nitid Yellow, by putting them into the Fire, and into Aquafortis,
which take off the adventitious Filth that made that pure Metal look of a
Dirty Color. And there is also an easy way to restore Silver Coyns to their
due Luster, by fetching off that which Discolored them. And I know a Chemical
Liquor, which I employed to restore pieces of Cloth spotted with Grease to
their proper Color, by Imbibing the Spotted part with this Liquor, which
Incorporating with the Grease, and yet being of a very Volatile Nature, does
easily carry it away with it Self. And I have sometimes tried, that by Rubbing
upon a good Touchstone a certain Metalline mixture so Compounded, that the
Impression it left upon the Stone appeared of a very differing Color from that
of Gold, yet a little of Aquafortis would in a Trice make the Golden Color
disclose it self, by Dissolving the other Metalline Corpuscles that concealed
those of the Gold, which you know that Menstruum will leave Untouched.

21. Thirdly, A Liquor may alter the Color of a Body by making a Comminution
of its Parts, and that principally two ways, the first by Disjoyning and
Dissipating those Clusters of Particles, if I may so call them, which stuck
more Loosely together, being fastened only by some more easily Dissoluble
Ciment, which seems to be the Case of some of the following Experiments, where
you will find the Color of many Corpuscles brought to cohere by having been
Precipitated together, Destroyed by the Affusion of very peircing and incisive
Liquors. The other of the two ways I was speaking of, is, by Dividing the
Grosser and more Solid Particles into Minute ones, which will be always Lesser,
and for the most part otherwise Shaped than the Entire Corpuscle so Divided, as
it will happen in a piece of Wood reduced into Splinters or Chips, or as when a
piece of Crystal heated red Hot and quenched in Cold water is cracked into a
multitude of little Fragments, which though they fall not asunder, alter the
Disposition of the Body of the Crystal, as to its manner of Reflecting the
Light, as we shall have Occasion to show hereafter.

22. There is a fourth way contrary to the third, whereby a Liquor may change
the Color of another Body, especially of another Fluid, and that is, by
procuring the Coalition of several Particles that before lay too Scattered and
Dispersed to exhibit the Color that afterward appears. Thus sometimes when I
have had a Solution of Gold so Dilated, that I doubted whether the Liquor had
really Imbibed any true Gold or no, by pouring in a little Mercury, I have been
quickly able to satisfy my Self, that the Liquor contained Gold, that Metal
after a little while Clothing the Surface of the Quicksilver, with a Thin
Film of its own Livery. And chiefly, though not only by this way of bringing
the Minute parts of Bodies together in such Numbers as to make them become
Notorious to the Eye, many of these Colors seem to be Generated which are
produced by Precipitations, especially by such as are wont to be made with fair
Water, as when Resinous Gumms dissolved in Spirit of Wine, are let fall again,
if the Spirit be Copiously diluted with that weakening Liquor. And so out of the
Rectified and Transparent Butter of Antimony, by the bare Mixture of fair
Water, there will be plentifully Precipitated that Milk-white Substance, which
by having its Looser Salts well washed off, is turned into that Medicine, which
Vulgar Chemists are pleased to call Mercurius Vitae.

23. A fifth way, by which a Liquor may change the Color of a Body, is, by
Dislocating the Parts, and putting them out of their former Order into another,
and perhaps also altering the Posture of the single Corpuscles as well as their
Order or Situation in respect of one another. What certain Kinds of Commotion
or Dislocation of the Parts of a Body may do toward the Changing its Color,
is not only evident in the Mutations of Color observable in Quicksilver, and
some other Concretes long kept by Chemists in a Convenient Heat, though in
close Vessels, but in the Obvious Degenerations of Color, which every Body may
take notice of in Bruised Cherries, and other Fruit, by comparing after a while
the Color of the Injured with that of the Sound part of the same Fruit. And
that also such Liquors, as we have been speaking of, may greatly Discompose the
Textures of many Bodies, and thereby alter the Disposition of their Superficial
parts, the great Commotion made in Metalls, and several other Bodies by
Aquafortis, Oil of Vitriol, and other Saline Menstruums, may easily persuade
us, and what such Varied Situations of Parts may do toward the Diversifying of
the manner of their Reflecting the Light, may be Guessed in some Measure by the
Beating of Transparent Glass into a White Powder, but far better by the
Experiments lately Pointed at, and hereafter Delivered, as the Producing and
Destroying Colors by the means of subtle Saline Liquors, by whose Affusion the
Parts of other Liquors are manifestly both Agitated, and likewise Disposed
after another manner than they were before such Affusion. And in some Chemical
Oils, as particularly that of Lemmon Pills, by barely Shaking the Glass, that
holds it, into Bubbles, that Transposition of the Parts which is consequent to
the Shaking, will show you on the Surfaces of the Bubbles exceeding Orient and
Lively Colors, which when the Bubbles relapse into the rest of the Oil, do
immediately Vanish.

24. I know not, Pyrophilus, whether I should mention as a Distinct way,
because it is of a somewhat more General Nature, that Power, whereby a Liquor
may alter the Color of another Body, by putting the Parts of it into Motion;
For though possibly the Motion so produced, does, as such, seldom suddenly
change the Color of the Body whose Parts are Agitated, yet this seems to be
one of the most General, however not Immediate causes of the Quick change of
Colors in Bodies. For the Parts being put into Motion by the adventitious
Liquor, diverse of them that were before United, may become thereby Disjoined,
and when that Motion ceases or decays, others of them may Stick together, and
that in a new Order, by which means the Motion may sometimes produce Permanent
changes of Colors, as in the Experiment you will meet with hereafter, of
presently turning a Snowy White Body into a Yellow, by the bare Affusion of
fair Water, which probably so Dissolves the Saline Corpuscles that remained in
the Calx, and sets them at Liberty to Act upon one another, and the Metal, far
more Powerfully than the Water without the Assistance of such Saline Corpuscles
could do. And though you rubb Blew Vitriol, how Venereal and Unsophisticated
soever it be, upon the Whetted Blade of a Knife, it will not impart to the Iron
its Latent Color, but if you moisten the Vitriol with your Spittle, or common
Water, the Particles of the Liquor disjoyning those of the Vitriol, and thereby
giving them the Various Agitation requisite to Fluid Bodies, the Metalline
Corpuscles of the thus Dissolved Vitriol will Lodge themselves in Throngs in
the Small and Congruous Pores of the Iron they are Rubbed on, and so give the
Surface of it the Genuine Color of the Copper.

25. There remains yet a way, Pyrophilus, to be mentioned, by which a Liquor
may alter the Color of another Body, and this seems the most Important of all,
because though it be named but as One, yet it may indeed comprehend Many, and
that is, by Associating the Saline Corpuscles, or any other Sort of the more
Rigid ones of the Liquor, with the Particles of the Body that it is employed to
Work upon. For these Adventitious Corpuscles Associating themselves with the
Protuberant Particles of the Surface of a Colored Body, must necessarily alter
their Bigness, and will most commonly alter their Shape. And how much the
Colors of Bodies depend upon the Bulk and Figure of their Superficial
Particles, you may Guess by this, that eminent ancient Philosophers, and diverse
Moderns, have thought that all Colors might in a general way be made out by
these two; whose being Diversified, will in our Case be attended with these two
Circumstances, the One, that the Protuberant Particles being Increased in Bulk,
they will oftentimes be Varied as to the Closeness or Laxity of their Order,
fewer of them being contained within the same Sensible (though Minute) space
than before; or else by approaching to one another, they must Straighten the
Pores, and it may be too, they will by their manner of Associating themselves
with the Protuberant Particles, intercept new Pores. And this invites me to
consider farther, that the Adventitious Corpuscles, I have been speaking of,
may likewise produce a great Change as well in the Little Cavities or Pores as
in the Protuberances of a Colored Body; for besides what we have just now
taken notice of, they may by Lodging themselves in those little Cavities, fill
them up, and it may well happen, that they may not only fill the Pores they
Insinuate themselves into, but likewise have their Upper Parts extant above
them; and partly by these new Protuberances, partly by Increasing the Bulk of
the former, these Extraneous Corpuscles may much alter the Number and Bigness
of the Surfaces Pores, changing the Old and Intercepting new ones. And then
it is Odds, but the Order of the Little Extancies, and consequently that of the
Little Depressions in point of Situation will be altered likewise: as if you
dissolve Quicksilver in some kind of Aquafortis, the Saline Particles of the
Menstruum, Associating themselves with the Mercurial Corpuscles, will make a
Green Solution, which afterward easily enough Degenerates. And Red Lead or
Minium being Dissolved in Spirit of Vinegar, yields not a Red, but a Clear
Solution, the Redness of the Lead being by the Liquor Destroyed. But a better
Instance may be taken from Copper, for I have tried, that if upon a
Copper-plate you let some Drops of weak Aquafortis rest for a while, the
Corpuscles of the Menstruum joining with those of the Metal, will produce a
very sensible Asperity upon the Surface of the Plate, and will Concoagulate
that way into very minute Grains of a Pale Blew Vitriol; whereas if upon
another part of the same Plate you suffer a little strong Spirit of Urine to
rest a competent time, you shall find the Asperated Surface adorned with a
Deeper and Richer Blew. And the same Aquafortis, that will quickly change the
Redness of Red Lead into a Darker Color, will, being put upon Crude Lead,
produce a Whitish Substance, as with Copper it did a Bluish. And as with Iron
it will produce a Reddish, and on White Quills a Yellowish, so much may the
Coalition of the Parts of the same Liquor, with the differingly Figured
Particles of Stable Bodies, diverse ways Asperate the differingly Disposed
Surfaces, and so Diversifie the Color of those Bodies. And you will easily
believe, that in many changes of Color, that happen upon the Dissolutions of
Metalls, and Precipitations made with Oil of Tartar, and the like Fixed Salts,
there may Intervene a Coalition of Saline Corpuscles with the Particles of the
Body Dissolved or Precipitated, if you examine how much the Vitriol of a Metal
may be Heavier than the Metalline part of it alone, upon the Score of the
Saline parts Concoagulated therewith, and, that in several Precipitations the
weight of the Calx does for the same Reason much exceed that of the Metal,
when it was first put in to be Dissolved.

26. But, Pyrophilus, to consider these Matters more particularly would be to
forget that I declared against Adventuring, at least for this time, at
particular Theories of Colors, and that accordingly you may justly expect from
me rather Experiments than Speculations, and therefore I shall Dismiss this
Subject of the Forms of Superficial Asperity in Colored Bodies, as soon as I
shall but have named to you by way of Supplement to what we have hitherto
Discoursed in this Section, a Couple of Particulars, (which you will easily grant
me) The one, That there are diverse other ways for the speedy Production even of
True and Permanent Colors in Bodies, besides those Practicable by the help of
Liquors; for proof of which Advertisement, though several Examples might be
alleged, yet I shall need but Re-mind you of what I mentioned to you above,
touching the change of Colors suddenly made on Tempered Steel, and on Lead, by
the Operation of Heat, without the Intervention of a Liquor. But the other
particular I am to observe to you is of more Importance to our present Subject,
and it is, That though Nature and Art may in some cases so change the Asperity
of the Superficial parts of a Body, as to change its Color by either of the
ways I have proposed Single or Unassisted, yet for the most part it is by two or
three, or perhaps by more of the forementioned ways Associated together, that
the Effect is produced, and if you consider how Variously those several ways
and some others Allied unto them, which I have left unmention'd, may be
Compounded and Applied, you will not much wonder that such fruitful, whether
Principles (or Manners of, Diversification) should be fitted to Change or
Generate no small store of Differing Colors.

27. Hitherto, Pyrophilus, we have in discoursing of the Asperity of Bodies
considered the little Protuberances of other Superficial particles which make
up that Roughness, as if we took it for granted, that they must be perfectly
Opacous and Impenetrable by the Beams of Light, and so, must contribute to the
Variety of Colors as they terminate more or less Light, and reflect it to the
Eye mixed with more or less of thus or thus mingled Shades. But to deal
Ingenuously with you, Pyrophilns, before I proceed any further, I must not
conceal from you, that I have often thought it worth a Serious Enquiry, whether
or no Particles of Matter, each of them singly Insensible, and therefore Small
enough to be capable of being such Minute Particles, as the Atomists both of
old and of late have (not absurdly) called Corpuscula Coloris, may not yet
consist each of them of diverse yet Minuter Particles, betwixt which we may
conceive little Commissures where they Adhere to one another, and, however, may
not be Porous enough to be, at least in some degree, Pervious to the
unimaginably subtle Corpuscles that make up the Beams of Light, and
consequently to be in such a degree Diaphanous. For, Pyrophilus, that the
proposed Enquiry may be of moment to him that searches after the Nature of
Color, you will easily grant, if you consider, that whereas Perfectly Opacous
bodies can but reflect the incident Beams of Light, those that are Diaphanous
are qualified to refract them too, and that Refraction has such a stroke in the
Production of Colors, as you cannot but have taken notice of, and perhaps
admired in the Colors generated by the Trajection of Light through Drops of
Water that exhibit a Rainbow, through Prismatical glasses, and through diverse
other Transparent bodies. But it is like, Pyrophilus, you will more easily allow
that about this matter it is rather Important to have a Certainty, than that
it is Rational to entertain a Doubt; wherefore I must mention to you some of the
Reasons that make me think it may need a further Enquiry, for I find that in a
Darkened Room, where the Light is permitted to enter but at One hole, the little
wandering Particles of Dust, that are commonly called Motes, and, unless in the
Sunbeams, are not taken notice of by the unassisted Sight, I have, I say,
often observed, that these roving Corpuscles being looked on by an Eye placed
on one side of the Beams that entered the Little hole, and by the Darkness
having its Pupil much Enlarged, I could discern that these Motes as soon as
they came within the compass of the Lumihous, whether Cylinder or Inverted
Cone, if I may so call it, that was made up by the Unclouded Beams of the Sun,
did in certain positions appear adorned with very vivid Colors, like those of
the Rainbow, or rathen like those of very Minute, but Sparkling fragments of
Diamonds; and as soon as the Continuance of their Motion had brought them to an
Inconvenient position in reference to the Light and the Eye, they were only
visible without Darting any lively Colors as before, which seems to argue that
these little Motes, or minute Fragments, of several sorts of bodies reputed
Opacous, and only crumbled as to their Exterior and Looser parts into Dust,
did not barely Reflect the Beams that fell upon them, but remit them to the Eye
Refracted too. We may also observe, that several Bodies, (as well some of a
Vegetable, as others of an Animal nature) which are wont to pass for Opacous,
appear in great part Transparent, when they are reduced into Thin parts, and
held against a powerful Light. This I have not only taken notice of in pieces
of Ivory reduced but into Thick Leaves, as also in diverse considerable Thick
shells of Fishes, and in shaving of Wood, but I have also found that a piece of
Deal, far thicker than one would easily imagine, being purposly interposed
betwixt my Eye placed in a Room, and the clear Daylight, was not only somewhat
Transparent, but (perhaps by reason of its Gummous nature) appeared quite
through of a lovely Red. And in the Darkened Room above mentioned, Bodies held
against the hole at which the Light entered, appeared far less Opacous than
they would elsewhere have done, insomuch that I could easily and plainly see
through the whole Thickness of my Hand, the Motions of a Body placed (at a very
near distance indeed, but yet) beyond it. And even in Minerals, the Opacity is
not always so great as many think, if the Body be made Thin, for White Marble
though of a pretty Thickness, being within a Due distance placed betwixt the
Eye and a Convenient Light, will suffer the Motions of ones Finger to be well
discerned through it, and so will pieces, Thick enough, of many common Flints.
But above all, that Instance is remarkable, that is afforded us by Muscovie
glass, (which some call Selenites, others Lapis Specularis) for though plates
of this Mineral, though but of a moderate Thickness, do often appear Opacous,
yet if one of these be Dexterously split into the thinnest Leaves it is made up
of, it will yield such a number of them, as scarce any thing but Experience
could have persuaded me, and these Leaves will afford the most Transparent sort
of consistent Bodies, that, for ought I have observed, are yet known; and a
single Leaf or Plate will be so far from being Opacous, that 'twill scarce be
so much as Visible. And multitudes of Bodies there are, whose Fragments seem
Opacous to the naked Eye, which yet, when I have included them in good
Microscopes, appeared Transparent; but, Pyrophilus, on the other side I am not
yet sure that there are no Bodies, whose Minute Particles even in such a
Microscope as that of mine, which I was lately mentioning, will not appear
Diaphanous. For having considered Mercury Precipitated perse, the little
Granules that made up the powder, looked like little fragments of Coral beheld
by the naked Eye at a Distance (for very Near at hand Coral will sometimes,
especially if it be Good, show some Transparency.) Filings likewise of Steel
and Copper, though in an excellent Microscope, and a fair Day, they showed like
pretty Big Fragments of those Metalls, and had considerable Brightness on some
of their Surfaces, yet I was not satisfied, that I perceived any Reflection
from the Inner parts of any of the Filings. Nay, having looked in my best
Microscope upon the Red Calx of Lead, (commonly called Minium) neither I, nor
any I showed it to, could discern it to be other than Opacous, though the Day
were Clear, and the Object strongly Enlightened. And the deeply Red Color of
Vitriol appeared in the same Microscope (notwithstanding the great Comminution
effected by the Fire) but like Grossy beaten Brick. So that, Pyrophilus, I
shall willingly resign you the care of making some further Enquiries into the
Subject we have now been considering; for I confess, as I told you before, that
I think that the Matter may need a further Scrutiny, nor would I be forward to
Determine how far or in what cases the Transparency or Semi-diaphaniety of the
Superficial Corpuscles of Bigger Bodies, may have an Interest in the Production
of their Colors, especially because that even in diverse White bodies, as
Beaten Glass, Snow and Froth, where it seems manifest that the Superficial
parts are singly Diaphanous, (being either. Water, or Air, or Glass) we see not
that such Variety of Colors are produced as usually are by the Refraction of
Light, even in those Bodies, when by their Bigness, Shape, etc. they are
conveniently qualified to exhibit such Various and Lively Colors as those of
the Rainbow, and of Prismatical Glasses.

28. By what has been hitherto discoursed, Pyrophilus, we may be assisted to
judge of that famous Controversy which was of Old disputed betwixt the
Epicureans and other Atomists on the one side, and most other Philosophers on
the other side. The former Denying Bodies to be Colored in the Dark, and the
Latter making Color to be an Inherent quality, as well as Figure, Hardness;
Weight, or the like. For though this Controversy be Revived, and hotly
Agitated among the Moderns, yet I doubt whether it be not in great part a
Nominal dispute, and therefore let us, according to the Doctrine formerly
delivered, Distinguish the Acceptions of the word Color, and say, that if it
be taken in the Stricter Sense, the Epicureans seem to be in the Right, for if
Color be indeed, though not according to them, but Light Modified, how can we
conceive that it can Subsist in the Dark, that is, where it must be supposed
there is no Light; but on the other side, if Color be considered as a certain
Constant Disposition of the Superficial parts of the Object to Trouble the
Light they Reflect after such and such a Determinate manner, this Constant,
and, if I may so speak, Modifying disposition persevering in the Object,
whether it be Shined upon or no, there seems no just reason to deny, but that
in this Sense, Bodies retain their Color as well in the Night as Day; or, to
Speak a little otherwise, it may be said, that Bodies are Potentially Colored
in the Dark, and Actually in the Light. But of this Matter discoursing more
fully elsewhere, as it is a difficulty that concerns Qualities in general, I
shall forbear to insist on it here.

CHAP. IV.
1. OF greater Moment in the Investigation of the Nature of Colors is the
Controversy, Whether those of the Rainbow, and those that are often seen in
Clouds, before the Rising, or after the Setting of the Sun; and in a word,
Whether those other Colors, that are wont to be called Emphatical, ought or
ought not to be accounted True Colors. I need not tell you that the Negative
is the Common Opinion, especially in the Schools, as may appear by that Vulgar
distinction of Colors, whereby these under Consideration are termed Apparent,
by way of Opposition to those that in the other Member of the Distinction are
called True or Genuine. This question I say seems to me of Importance, upon
this Account, that it being commonly Granted, (or however, easy enough to be
Proved) that Emphatical Colors are Light it self Modified by Refractions
chiefly, with a concurrence sometimes of Reflections, and perhaps some other
Accidents depending on these two; if these Emphatical Colors be resolved to be
Genuine, it will seem consequent, that Colors, or at least diverse of them, are
but Diversified Light, and not such Real and Inherent qualities as they are
commonly thought to be.

2. Now since we are wont to esteem the Echoes and other Sounds of Bodies, to
be True Sounds, all their Odours to be True Odours, and (to be short) since we
judge other Sensible Qualities to be True ones, because they are the proper
Objects of some or other of our Senses, I see not why Emphatical Colors, being
the proper and peculiar Objects of the Organ of Sight, and capable to Affect it
as Truly and as Powerfully as other Colors, should be reputed but Imaginary
ones.

And if we have (which perchance you will allow) formerly evinced Color, (when
the word is taken in its more Proper sense) to be but Modified Light, there
will be small Reason to deny these to be true Colors, which more manifestly
than others disclose themselves to be produced by Diversifications of the Light.

3. There is indeed taken notice of a Difference betwixt these Apparent
colors, and those that are wont to be esteemed Genuine, as to the Duration,
which has induced some Learned Men to call the former rather Evanid than
Fantastical. But as the Ingenious Gassendus does somewhere Judiciously observe,
if this way of Arguing were Good, the Greeness of a Leaf ought to pass for
Apparent, because, soon Fading into a Yellow, it scarce lasts at all, in
comparison of the Greeness of an Emerauld. I shall add, that if the Sunbeams
be in a convenient manner trajected through a Glass-prism, and thrown upon some
wellshaded Object within a Room, the Rainbow thereby Painted on the Surface of
the Body that Terminates the Beams, may oftentimes last longer than some
Colors I have produced in certain Bodies, which would justly, and without
scruple be accounted Genuine Colors, and yet suddenly Degenerate, and lose
their Nature.

4. A greater Disparity betwixt Emphatical Colors, and others, may perhaps be
taken from this, that Genuine Colors seem to be produced in Opacous Bodies by
Reflection, but Apparent ones in Diaphanous Bodies, and principally by
Refraction, I say Principally rather than Solely, because in some cases
Reflection also may concur, but still this seems not to conclude these Latter
Colors not to be True ones. Nor must what has been newly said of the
Differences of True and Apparent Colors, be interpreted in too Unlimited a
Sense, and therefore it may perhaps somewhat Assist you, both to Reflect upon
the two foregoing Objections, and to judge of some other Passages which you will
meet with in this Tract, if I take this Occasion to observe to you, that if
Water be Agitated into Froth, it exhibits you know a White color, which soon
after it Loses upon the Resolution of the Bubbles into Air and Water, now in
this case either the Whiteness of the Froth is a True Color or not, if it be,
then True Colors, supposing the Water pure and free from Mixtures of any thing
Tenacious, may be as Short-lived as those of the Rainbow; also the Matter,
wherein the Whiteness did Reside, may in a few moments perfectly Lose all
footsteps or remains of it. And besides, even Diaphanous Bodies may be capable
of exhibiting True Colors by Reflection, for that Whiteness is so produced, we
shall anon make it probable. But if on the other side it be said, that the
Whiteness of Froth is an Emphatical Color, then it must no longer be said,
that Fantastical Colors require a certain Position of the Luminary and the
Eye, and must be Varied or Destroyed by the Change thereof, since Froth appears
White, whether the Sun be Rising or Setting, or in the Meridian, or any where
between it and the Horizon, and from what (Neighboring) place soever the
Beholders Eye looks upon it. And since by making a Liquor Tenacious enough, yet
without Destroying its Transparency, or Staining it with any Color, you may
give the Little Films, whereof the Bubbles consist, such a Texture, as may make
the Froth last very many Hours, if not some Days, or even Weeks, it will render
it somewhat Improper to assign Duration for the Distinguishing Character to
Discriminate Genuine from Fantastical Colors. For such Froth may much outlast
the Undoubtedly true Colors of some of Nature's Productions, as in that Gaudy
Plant not undeservedly called the Mervail of Peru, the Flowers do often Fade,
the same Day they are Blown; And I have often seen a Virginian Flower, which
usually Withers within the compass of a Day; and I am credibly Informed; that
not far from hence a curious Herborist has a Plant, whose Flowers perish in
about an Hour. But if the Whiteness of Water turned into Froth must therefore
be reputed Emphatical, because it appears not that the Nature of the Body is
Altered, but only that the Disposition of its Parts in reference to the
Incident Light is Changed, why may not the Whiteness be accounted Emphatical
too, which I shall show anon to be Producible, barely by such another change in
Black Horn? and yet this so easily acquired Whiteness seems to be as truly its
Color as the Blackness was before, and at least is more Permanent than the
Greenness of Leaves, the Redness of Roses, and; in short, than the Genuine
Colors of the most part of Nature's Productions. It may indeed be further
Objected, that according as the Sun or other Luminous Body changes place, these
Emphatical Colors alter or vanish. But not to repeat what I have just now
said, I shall add, that if a piece of Cloth in a Drapers Shop (in such the
Light being seldom Primary) be variously Folded, it will appear of differing
Colors, as the Parts happen to be more Illuminated or more Shaded, and if you
stretch it Flat, it will commonly exhibit some one Uniform Color, and yet
these are not wont to be reputed Emphatical, so that the Difference seems to be
chiefly this, that in the Case of the Rainbow, and the like, the Position of
the Luminary Varies the Color, and in the Cloth I have been mentioning, the
Position of the Object does it. Nor am I forward to allow that in all Cases the
Apparition of Emphatical Colors requires a Determinate position of the Eye,
for if Men will have the Whiteness of Froth Emphatical, you know what we have
already Inferred from thence. Besides, the Sunbeams trajected through a
Triangular Glass, after the manner lately mentioned, will, upon the Body that
Terminates them, Paint a Rainbow, that may be seen whether the Eye be placed
on the Right Hand of it or the Left, or Above or Beneath it, or Before or
Behind it; and though there may appear some Little Variation in the Colors of
the Rainbow, beheld from Differing parts of the Room, yet such a Diversity may
be also observed by an Attentive Eye in Real Colors, looked upon under the
like Circumstances. Nor will it follow, that because there remains no
Footsteps of the Color upon the Object, when the Prism is Removed, that
therefore the Color was not Real, since the Light was truly Modified by the
Refraction and Reflection it Suffered in its Trajection through the Prism; and
the Object in our case served for a Specular Body, to Reflect that Color to
the Eye. And that you may not be Startled, Pyrophilus, that I should Venture to
say, that a Rough and Colored Object may serve for a Speculum to Reflect the
Artificial Rainbow I have been mentioning, consider what usually happens in
Darkened Rooms, where a Wall, or other Body conveniently Situated within, may so
Reflect the Colors of Bodies, without the Room, that they may very clearly be
Discerned and Distinguished, and yet it is taken for granted, that the Colors
seen in a Darkened Room, though they leave no Traces of themselves upon the Wall
or Body that Receives them, are the True Colors of the External Objects,
together with which the Colors of the Images are Moved or do Rest. And the
Error is not in the Eye, whose Office is only to perceive the Appearances of
things, and which does Truly so, but in the Judging or Estimative faculty,
which Mistakingly concludes that Color to belong to the Wall, which does
indeed belong to the Object, because the Wall is that from whence the Beams of
Light that carry the Visible Species, do come in Straight Lines directly to the
Eye, as for the same Reason we are wont at a certain Distance from Concave
Sphaerical Glasses, to persuade our selves that we see the Image come forth to
Meet us, and Hang in the Air betwixt the Glass and Us, because the Reflected
Beams that Compose the Image cross in that place, where the Image seems to be,
and thence, and not from the Glass, do in Direct Lines take their Course to the
Eye, and upon the like Cause it is, that diverse Deceptions in Sounds and other
Sensible Objects do depend, as we elsewhere declare.

5. I know not, whether I need add, that I have purposely Tried, (as you will find
some Pages hence, and will perhaps think somewhat strange) that Colors that
are called Emphatical, because not Inherent in the Bodies in which they Appear,
may be Compounded with one another, as those that are confessedly Genuine may.
But when all this is said, Pyrophilus, I must Advertise you, that it is but
Problematically Spoken, and that though I think the Opinion I have endeavored
to fortify Probable, yet a great part of our Discourse concerning Colors may
be True, whether that Opinion be so or not.

CHAP. V.
1. THere are you know, Pyrophilus, besides those Obsolete Opinions about
Colors which have been long since Rejected, very Various Theories that have
each of them, even at this day, Eminent Men for its Abetters; for the
Peripatetick Schools, though they dispute amongst themselves diverse particulars
concerning Colors, yet in this they seem Unanimously enough to Agree, that
Colors are Inherent and Real Qualities, which the Light does but Disclose, and
not concur to Produce. Besides there are Moderns, who with a slight Variation
adopt the Opinion of Plato, and as he would have Color to be nothing but a
Kind of Flame consisting of Minute Corpuscles as it were Darted by the Object
against the Eye, to whose Pores their Littleness and Figure made them
congruous, so these would have Color to be an Internal Light of the more Lucid
parts of the Object, Darkened and consequently Altered by the Various Mixtures
of the less Luminous parts. There are also others, who in imitation of some of
the Ancient Atomists, make Color not to be Lucid steam, but yet a Corporeal
Effluvium issuing out of the Colored Body, but the Knowingst of these have of
late Reformed their Hypothesis, by acknowledging and adding that some External
Light is necessary to Excite, and as they speak, Solicit these Corpuscles of
Color as they call them, and Bring them to the Eye. Another and more principal
Opinion of the Modern Philosophers, to which this last named may by a
Favorable explication be reconciled, is that which derives Colors from the
Mixture of Light and Darkness, or rather Light and Shadows. And as for the
Chemists it is known, that the generality of them ascribes the Origin of
Colors to the Sulphurous Principle in Bodies, though I find, as I elsewhere
largely show, that some of the Chiefest of them derive Colors rather from Salt
than Sulphur, and others, from the third Hypostatical Principle, Mercury. And
as for the Cartesians I need not tell you, that they, supposing the Sensation
of Light to be produced by the Impulse made upon the Organs of Sight, by
certain extremely Minute and Solid Globules, to which the Pores of the Air and
other Diaphanous bodies are pervious, endeavor to derive the Varieties of
Colors from the Various Proportion of the Direct Progress or Motion of these
Globules to their Circumvolution or Motion about their own Center, by which
Varying Proportion they are by this Hypothesis supposed qualified to strike the
Optic Nerve after several Distinct manners, so to produce the perception of
Differing Colors.

2. Besides these six principal Hypotheses, Pyrophilus, there may be some
others, which though Less known, may perhaps as well as these deserve to be
taken into consideration by you; but that I should copiously debate any of them
at present, I presume you will not expect, if you consider the Scope of these
Papers, and the Brevity I have designed in them, and therefore I shall at this
time only take notice to you in the general of two or three things that do more
peculiarly concern the Treatise you have now in your hands.

3. And first, though the Embracers of the several Hypotheses I have been
naming to you, by undertaking each Sect of them to explicate Colors
indefinitely, by the particular Hypotheses they maintain, seem to hold it forth
as the only Needful Theory about that Subject, yet for my part I doubt whether
any one of all these Hypotheses have a right to be admitted Exclusively to all
others, for I think it Probable, that Whiteness and Blackness may be explicated
by Reflection alone without Refraction, as you will find endeavored in the
Discourse you will meet with e're long Of the Origin of Whiteness and Blackness,
and on the other side, since I have not found that by any Mixture of White and
True Black, (for there is a Bluish Black which many mistake for a Genuine)
there can be a Blew, a Yellow, or a Red, to name no other Colors, produced,
and since we do find that these Colors may be produced in the Glass-prism and
other Transparent bodies, by the help of Refractions, it seems that Refraction
is to be taken in into the Explication of some Colors, to whose Generation
they seem to concur, either by making a further or other Commixture of Shades
with the Refracted Light, or by some other way not now to be discoursed. And as
it seems not improbable, that in case the Pores of the Air, and other
Diaphanous bodies be every where almost filled with such Globuli as the
Cartesians suppose, the Various kind of Motion of these Globuli, may in many
cases have no small stroke in Varying our Perception of Color, so without the
Supposition of these Globuli, which it is not so easy to evince, I think we may
probably enough conceive in general, that the Eye may be Variously affected,
not only by the Entire Beams of Light that fall upon it as they are such, but
by the Order, and by the Degree of Swiftness, and in a word by the Manner
according to which the Particles that compose each Particular Beam arrive at
the Sensory, so that whatever be the Figure of the Little Corpuscles, of which
the Beams of Light consist, not only the Celerity or Slowness of their
Revolution or Rotation in reference to their Progressive Motion, but their more
Absolute Celerity, their Direct or Undulating Motion, and other Accidents,
which may attend their Appulse to the Eye, may fit them to make Differing
Impressions on it.

4. Secondly, For these and the like Considerations, Pyrophilus, I must desire
that you would look upon this little Treatise, not as a Discourse written
Principally to maintain any of the forementioned Theories, Exclusively to all
others, or substitute a New one of my Own, but as the beginning of a History of
Colors, upon which, when you and your Ingenious friends shall have Enriched
it, a Solid Theory may be safely built. But yet because this History is not
meant barely for a Register of the things recorded in it, but for an Apparatus
to a sound and comprehensitive Hypothesis, I thought fit, so to temper the
whole Discourse, as to make it as conducible, as conveniently I can to that
End, and therefore I have not scrupled to let you see that I was willing, as to
save you the labor of Cultivating some Theories that I thought would never
enable you to reach the Ends you aim at, so to contract your Enquiries into a
Narrow compass, for both which purposes I thought it requisite to do these two
things, the One, to set down some Experiments which by the help of the
Reflections and Insinuations that attend them, may assist you to discover the
Infirmness and Insufficiency both of the common Peripatetick Doctrine, and of
the now more applauded Theory of the Chemists about Color, because these two
Doctrines having Possessed themselves, the one of the most part of the Schools,
and the other of the Esteem of the Generality of Physicians and other Learned
Men, whose Professions and Ways of Study do not exact that they should
Scrupulously examine the very First and Simplest Principles of Nature, I feared
it would be to little purpose, without doing something to discover the
Insufficiency of these Hypotheses, that I should, (which was the Other thing I
thought requisite for me to do) set down among my other Experiments those in
the greatest Number, that may let you see, that, till I shall be Better
Informed, I incline to take Color to be a Modification of Light, and would
invite you chiefly to Cultivate that Hypothesis, and Improve it to the making
out of the Generation of Particular Colors, as I have Endeavored to apply it
to the Explication of Whiteness and Blackness.

5. Thirdly. But, Pyrophilus, though this be at present the Hypothesis I
prefer, yet I propose it but in a General Sense, teaching only that the Beams
of Light, Modified by the Bodies whence they are sent (Reflected or Refracted)
to the Eye, produce there that Kind of Sensation, Men commonly call Color; But
whether I think this Modification of the Light to be performed by Mixing it
with Shades, or by Varying the Proportion of the Progress and Rotation of the
Cartesian Globuli Caelestes, or by some other way which I am not now to
mention, I pretend not here to Declare. Much less do I pretend to Determine, or
scarce so much as to Hope to know all that were requisite to be Known, to give
You, or even my Self, a perfect account of the Theory of Vision and Colors,
for in Order to such an undertaking I would first Know what Light is, and if it
be a Body (as a Body or the Motion of a Body it seems to be) what Kind of
Corpuscles for Size and Shape it consists of, with what Swiftness they move
Forwards, and Whirl about their own Centres. Then I would Know the Nature of
Refraction, which I take to be one of the Abstrusest things (not to explicate
Plausibly, but to explicate Satisfactorily) that I have met with in Physics; I
would further Know what Kind and what Degree of Commixture of Darkness or
Shades is made by Refractions or Reflections, or both, in the Superficial
particles of those Bodies, that being Shined upon, constantly exhibit the one,
for Instance, a Blew, the other a Yellow, the third a Red Color; I would
further Know why this Contemperation of Light and Shade, that is made, for
Example, by the Skin of a Ripe Cherry, should exhibit a Red, and not a Green,
and the Leaf of the same Tree should exhibit a Green rather than a Red; and
indeed, Lastly, why since the Light that is Modified into these Colors
consists but of Corpuscles moved against the Retina or Pith of the Optic
Nerve, it should there not barely give a Stroke, but produce a Color, whereas
a Needle wounding likewise the Eye, would not produce Color but Pain. These,
and perhaps other things I should think requisite to be Known, before I should
judge my Self to have fully Comprehended the True and Whole Nature of Colors;
and therefore, though by making the Experiments and Reflections delivered in
this Paper, I have endeavored somewhat to Lessen my Ignorance in this Matter,
and think it far more Desirable to discover a Little, than to discover
Nothing, yet I pretend but to make it Probable by the Experiments I mention,
that some Colors may be Plausibly enough Explicated in the General by the
Doctrine here proposed; For whenever I would Descend to the Minute and
Accurate Explication of Particulars, I find my Self very Sensible of the great
Obscurity of things, without excepting those which we never see but when they
are Enlightened, and confess with Scaliger, Latet natura haec, (says he,
Speaking of that Exercitat. 325. Parag. 4.
of Color) and sicut aliarum rerum species in profundissima caligine inscitiae
humanae.

THE EXPERIMENTAL HISTORY OF COLORS.
PART. II. Of the Nature of Whiteness and Blackness.
CHAP. I.
1. THough after what I have acknowledged, Pyrophilus, of the Abstruse Nature
of Colors in particular, you will easily believe, that I pretend not to give
you a Satisfactory account of Whiteness and Blackness; Yet not wholly to
frustrate your Expectation of my offering something by way of Specimen toward
the Explication of some Colors in particular, I shall make choice of These as
the most Simple Ones, (and by reason of their mutual Opposition the Least
hardly explicable) about which to present you my Thoughts, upon condition you
will take them at most to be my Conjectures, not my Opinions.

2. When I applied my Self to consider, how the cause of Whiteness might be
explan'd by Intelligible and Mechanical Principles, I remembered not to have met
with any thing among the Ancient Corpuscularian Philosophers, touching the
Quality we call Whiteness, save that Democritus is by Aristotle said to have
ascribed the Whiteness of Album quippe and nigrum, hoc quidem asperum esse
dicit, hoe vero laeve. de Sensu 3. and Sensil. 3.
Bodies to their Smoothness, and on the contrary their Blackness to their
Asperity. But though about the Latter of those Qualities his Opinion be
allowable, as we shall see anon, yet that he needs a Favorable Interpretation
in what is Delivered concerning the First, (at least if his Doctrine be not
Misrepresented in this point, as it has been in many others) we shall quickly
have Occasion to manifest. But amongst the Moderns, the most Learned Gassendus
in his Ingenious Epistle published in the Year 1642. De apparente Magnitudine
solis humilis and sublimis, reviving the Atomical Philosophy, has, though but
Incidentally, delivered something toward the Explication of Whiteness upon
Mechanical Principles: And because no Man that I know of, has done so before
him, I shall, to be sure to Epist. 2. page 45.
do him Right, give you his Sense in his own Words: Cogites velim (says he)
lucem quidem in Diaphano nullius coloris videri, sed in Opaco tamen terminante
Candicare, ac tanto magis, quanto densior sea collectior fuerit. Deinde aquam
non esse quidem coloris ex se candidi and radium tamen ex ea reflexum versus
oculum candicare. Rursus cum plana aquae Superficies non nifi ex una part eam
reflexionem faciat: si contigerit tamen illam in aliquot bullas intumescere,
bullam unamquamque reflectionem facere, and candoris speciem creare certa
Superficiei part. Ad haec Spumam ex aqua pura non alia ratione videri
candescere and albescerere quam quod sit congeries confertissima minutissimarum
bullarum, quarum unaquaeque suum radium reflectit, unde continens candor
alborve apparet. Denique Nivem nihil aliud videri quam speciem purissimae
spumae ex bullulis quam minutissimis and confertissimis cohaerentis. Sed
ridiculum me exhibeam, si sales meas nugas uberius proponem.

3. But though in this passage, that very Ingenious Person has Anticipated part
of what I should say; Yet I presume you will for all that expect, that I should
give you a fuller Account of that. Notion of Whiteness, which I have the least
Exceptions to, and of the Particulars whence I deduce it, which to do, I must
mention to you the following Experiments and Observations.

Whiteness then considered as a Quality in the Object, seems chiefly to depend
upon this, That the Superficies of the Body that is called White, is Asperated
by almost innumerable Small Surfaces, which being of an almost Specular Nature,
are also so Placed, that some Looking this way, and some that way, they yet
Reflect the Rays of Light that fall on them, not toward one another, but
outward toward the Spectators Eye. In this Rude and General account of
Whiteness, it seems that besides those Qualities, which are common to Bodies of
other Colors, as for instance the Minuteness and Number of the Superficial
parts, the two chief things attributed to Bodies as White are made to be,
First, that its Little Protuberances and Superficial parts be of somewhat a
Specular Nature, that they may as little Looking-glasses each of them Reflect
the Beams it receives, (or the little Picture of the Sun made on it) without
otherwise considerably Altering them; whereas in most other Colors, they are
wont to be much Changed, by being also Refracted, or by being Returned to the
Eye, mixed with Shades or otherwise. And next, that its Superficial parts be so
Situated, that they Retain not the Incident Rays of Light by Reflecting them
Inwards, but Send them almost all Back, so that the Outermost Corpuscles of a
White Body, having their Various Little Surfaces of a Specular Nature, a Man
can from no place Behold the Body, but that there will be among those
Innumerable Superficieculae, that Look some one way, and some another, enough
of them Obverted to his Eye, to afford like a broken Looking-glass, a confused
Idaea, or Representation of Light, and make such an Impression on the Organ, as
that for which Men are wont to call a Body White. But this Notion will perhaps
be best Explan'd by the same Experiments and Observations, on which it is
Built, And therefore I shall now advance to Them.

4. And in the first place I consider, that the Sun and other Powerfully Lucid
Bodies, are not only wont to Offend, which we call to Dazzle our Eyes, but that
if any Color be to be Ascribed to them as they are Lucid, it seems it should
be Whiteness: For the Sun at Noonday, and in Clear weather, and when his Face
is less Troubled, and as it were Stained by the Steams of Sublunary Bodies, and
when his Beams have much less of the Atmosphere to Traject in their Passage to
our Eyes, appears of a Color more approaching to White, than when nearer the
Horizon, the Interposition of certain Sorts of Fumes and Vapors make him
oftentimes appear either Red, or at least more Yellow. And when the Sun Shines
upon that Natural Looking-glass, a Smooth water, that part of it, which appears
to this or that particular Beholder, the most Shined on, does to his Eye seem
far Whiter than the rest. And here I shall add, that I have sometimes had the
Opportunity to observe a thing, that may make to my present purpose, namely,
that when the Sun was Veiled over as it were, with a Thin White Cloud, and yet
was too Bright to be Looked upon Directly without Dazzling, by casting my Eyes
upon a Smooth water, as we sometimes do to observe Eclipses without prejudice
to our Eyes, the Sun then not far from the Meridian, appeared to me not Red,
but so White, that 'twas not without some Wonder, that I made the Observation.
Besides, though we in English are wont to say, a thing is Red hot, as an
Expression of its being Superlatively Ignitum, (if I may so Speak for want of a
proper English word) yet in the Forges of Smiths, and the Furnaces of other
Artificers, by that which they call a White heat, they mean a further Degree of
Ignition, than by that which both they and we call a Red heat.

5. Secondly, I consider, that common Experience informs us, that as much Light
Over-powers the Eye, so when the Ground is covered with Snow, (a Body extremely
White) those that have Weak Eyes are wont to complain of too much Light: And
even those that have not, are generally Sensible of an Extraordinary measure of
Light in the Air; and if they are fain to Look very long upon the Snow, find
their Sight Offended by it. On which occasion we may call to mind what Xenophon
relates, that his Cyrus marching his Army for diverse days through Mountains
covered with Snow, the Dazzling splendour of its Whiteness prejudiced the Sight
of very many of his Soldiers, and Blinded some of them; and other Stories of
that Nature may be met with in Writers of good Note. And the like has been
affirmed to me by credible Persons of my own Acquaintance, and especially by
one who though Skilled in Physic and not Ancient confessed to me when I
purposely asked him, that not only during his stay in Muscovy, he found his
Eyes much Impaired, by being reduced frequently to Travel in the Snow, but that
the Weakness of his Eyes did not Leave him when he left that Country, but has
followed him into these Parts, and yet continues to Trouble him. And to this
does agree what I as well as others have observed, namely, that when I
Traveled by Night, when the Ground was all covered with Snow, though the Night
otherwise would not have been Lightsome, yet I could very well see to Choose my
way. But much more Remarkable to my present purpose is that, which I have met
with in Olaus Magnus, concerning the way of Traveling in Winter Gent. Septen.
Histor. lib. 4. cap. 13.
in the Northern Regions, where the Days of that Season are so very Short; for
after other things not needful to be here Transcribed: Iter, says he, Diurnum
duoscilicet montana milliaria (quae 12 Italica sunt) conficiunt. Nocte vero sub
splendissima luna, duplatum iter consumunt aut triplatum. Neque id incommode
fit, cum nivium reverberatione lunaris splendour sublimes and declives campos
illustret, ac etiam montium praecipitia ac noxias feras a long prospiciant
evitandas. Which Testimony I the less Scruple to allege, because that it agrees
very well with what has been Affirmed to me by a Physician of Mosco, whom the
Notion I have been Treating of concerning Whiteness invited me to ask whether
he could not See much farther when he Traveled by Night in Russia than he
could do in England, or elsewhere, when there was no Snow upon the Ground; For
this Ingenious Person informed me, that he could See Things at a far greater
Distance, and with more Clearness, when he Traveled by Night on the Russian
Snow, though without the Assistance of Moonshine, than we in these Parts would
easily be persuaded. Though it seems not unlikely to me, that the Intenseness
of the Cold may contribute something to the considerableness of the Effect, by
much Clearing the Air of Darkish Steams, which in these more Temperate Climates
are wont to Thicken it in Snowy weather: For having purposely inquired of this
Doctor, and consulted that Ingenious Navigator Captain James's Voyage hereafter
to be further mentioned, I find both their Relations agree in this, that in
Dark Frosty Nights they could Discover more Stars, and See the rest Clearer
than we in England are wont to do.

6. I know indeed that diverse Learned Men think, that Snow so strongly Affects
our Eyes, not by a Borrowed, but a Native Light; But I venture to give it as a
Proof, that White Bodies reflect more Light than Others, because having once
purposely placed a parcel of Snow in a Room carefully Darkened, that no
Celestial Light might come to fall upon it; neither I, nor an ingenious Person,
(Skilled in Optics) whom I desired for a Witness, could find; that it had any
other Light than what it received. And however, it is usual among those that
Travel in Dark Nights, that the Guides wear something of White to be Discerned
by, there being scarce any Night so Dark, but that in the Free Air there
remains some Light, though Broken and Debilitated perhaps by a thousand
Reflections from the Opacous Corpuscles that Swim in the Air, and send it to
one another before it comes to arrive at the Eye.

7. Thirdly, And the better to show that White Bodies reflect store of Light,
in comparison of those that are otherwise Colored, I did in the Darkn'd Room,
formerly mentioned, hold nor far from the Hole, at which the Light was
admitted, a Sheet only of White Paper, from whence casting the Sunbeams upon a
White Wall, whereunto it was Obverted, it manifestly appeared both to Me, and
to the Person I took for a Witness of the Experiment, that it Reflected a far
greater Light; than any of the other Colors formerly mentioned, the Light so
thrown upon the Wall notably Enlightening it, and by it a good part of the Room.
And yet further to show you, that White Bodies Reflect the Beams From them, and
not Toward themselves, Let me add, that Ordinary Burning-glasses, such as are
wont to be employed to light Tobacco, will not in a great while Burn, or so
much as Discolor a Sheet of White Paper. Insomuch that even when I was a Boy,
and Loved to make Trials with Burning-glasses, I could not but wonder at this
Odd Phenomenon, which set me very Early upon Guessing at the Nature of
Whiteness, especially because I took notice, that the Image of the Sun upon a
White Paper was not so well Defined (the Light seeming too Diffused) as upon
Black, and because I tried, that Blacking over the Paper with Ink, not only the
Ink would be quickly Dried up, but the Paper that I could not Burn before,
would be quickly set on Fire. I have also tried, that by exposing my Hand with
a Thin Black Glove over it to the Warm Sun; it was thereby very quickly and
considerably more Heated, than if I took off the Glove, and held my Hand Naked,
or put on it another Glove of Thin but White Leather. And having thus shown
you, Pyrophilus, that White Bodies reflect the most Light of any, let us now
proceed, to consider what is further to be taken notice of in them, in order to
our present Enquiry.

8. And Fourthly, whereas among the Dispositions we attributed to White Bodies,
we also intimated this, That such Bodies are apt, like Speculums, though but
Imperfect ones, to Reflect the Light that falls on them Untroubled or
Unstained, we shall besides other particulars to be met with in these Papers,
offer you this in favor of the Conjecture; That in the Darkened Room several
times mentioned in this Treatise, we tried that the Sunbeams being cast from a
Colored Body upon a neighboring White Wall, the Determinate Color of the
Body was from the Wall reflected to the Eye; whereas we could in diverse cases
manifestly Alter the Color arriving at the Eye, by Substituting at a
convenient Distance, a (conveniently) Colored (and Glossy) Body instead of the
White Wall. As by throwing the Beams from a Yellow Body upon a Blew, there
would be Exhibited a kind of Green, as in the Experiments about Colors is more
fully Declared.

9. I know not whether I should on this Occasion take notice, that when, as
when looking upon the Calm and Smooth Surface of a River betwixt my Eye and the
Sun, it appeared to be a natural Speculum, wherein that Part which Reflected to
my Eye the Entire and defined Image of the Sun, and the Beams less remote from
those which exhibited That Image, appeared indeed of a great and Whitish
Brightness, but the rest Comparatively Dark enough: if afterward the
Superficies chanced to be a little, but not much troubled, by a gentle Breath
of Wind, and thereby reduced into a Multitude of Small and Smooth Speculums,
the Surface of the River would suitably to the Doctrine lately delivered, at a
Distance appear very much of Kin to White, though it would lose that Brightness
or Whiteness upon the Return of the Surface to Calmness and an Uniform Level.
And I have sometimes for Trials sake brought in by a Lenticular Glass, the
Image of a River, Shined upon by the Sun, into an Upper Room Darkn'd, and
Distant about a Quarter of a Mile from the River, by which means the Numerous
Declining Surfaces of the Water appeared so Contracted, that upon the Body that
received the Images, the whole River appeared a very White Object at two or
three paces distance. But if we drew Near it, this Whiteness appeared to
proceed from an Innumerable company of Lucid Reflections, from the several
Gently waved Superficies of the Water, which looked Near at hand like a
Multitude of very Little, but Shining Scales of Fish, of which many did every
moment Disappear, and as many were by the Sun, Wind and River generated anew.
But though this Observation seemed Sufficiently to discover, how the Appearing
Whiteness in that case was Produced, yet in some other cases Water may have the
Same, though not so Vivid a Color upon other Accounts; for oftentimes it
happens that the Smooth Surface of the Water does appear Bright or Whitish, by
reason of the Reflection not immediately of the Images of the Sun, but of the
Brightness of the Sky; and in such cases a Convenient Wind may where it passes
along make the Surface look Black, by causing many such Furrows and Cavities,
as may make the Inflected Superficies of the Water reflect the Brightness of
the Sky rather Inward than Outward. And again, if the Wind increase into a
Storm, the Water may appear White, especially near the Shore and the Ship,
namely because the Rude Agitation Breaks it into Foam or Froth. So much do
Whiteness and Blackness depend upon the Disposition of the Superficial parts of
a Body to Reflect the Beams of Light Inward or Outward. But that as White
Bodies reflect the most Light of any, so there Superficial Particles are, in
the Sense newly Delivered, of a Specular Nature, I shall now further endeavor
to show both by the making of Specular bodies White, and the making of a White
body Specular.

10. In the Fifth place then, I will inform You, that (not to repeat what
Gassendus observes concerning Water) I have for Curiosity sake Distilled
Quicksilver in a Cucurbit, fitted with a Capacious Glass-head, and observed
that when the Operation was performed by the Degrees of Fire requisite for my
purpose, there would stick to the Inside of the Alembick a multitude of Little
round drops of Mercury. And as you know that Mercury is a Specular Body, so
each of these Little drops was a small round Looking-glass, and a Multitude of
them lying Thick and Near one another, they did both in my Judgment, and that
of those I Invited to see it, make the Glass they were fastened to, appear
manifestly a White Body. And yet as I said, this Whiteness depended upon the
Minuteness and Nearness of the Little Mercurial Globuli, the Convexity of whose
Surfaces fitted them to represent in a Narrow compass a Multitude of Little
Lucid Images to differingly situated Beholders. And here let me observe a thing
that seems much to countenance the Notion I have been recommending: namely,
that whereas diverse parts of the Sky, and especially the Milkyway, do to the
naked Eye appear White, (as the name it self imports) yet the Galaxie looked
upon through the Telescope, does not show White, but appears to be made up of a
Vast multitude of Little Stars; so that a Multitude of Lucid Bodies, if they
be so Small that they cannot Singly or apart be discerned by the Eye, and if
they be sufficiently Thick set by one another, may by their confused beams
appear to the Eye One White Body. And why it is not possible, that the like may
be done, when a Multitude of Bright and Little Corpuscles being crowded
together, are made to send together Vivid beams to the Eye, though they Shine
but as the Planets by a Borrowed Light?

11. But to return to our Experiments. We may take notice, That the White of an
Egg, though in part Transparent, yet by its power of Reflecting some Incident
Rays of Light, is in some measure a Natural Speculum, being long agitated with
a Whisk or Spoon, loses its Transparency, and becomes very White, by being
turned into Froth, that is into an Aggregate of Numerous small Bubbles, whose
Unequal Superficies fits them to Reflect the Light every way Outward. And it is
worth Noting, that when Water, for instance, is Agitated into Froth, if the
Bubbles be Great and Few, the Whiteness will be but Faint, because the number
of Specula within a Narrow compass is but Small, and they are not Thick set
enough to Reflect so Many Little Images or Beams of the Lucid Body, as are
requisite to produce a Vigorous Sensation of Whiteness: And partly least it
should be said, that the Whiteness of such Globulous Particles proceeds from
the Air Included in the Froth; (which to make good, it should be proved that
the Air it self is White) and partly to illustrate the better the Notion we
have proposed of Whiteness, I shall add, that I purposely made this Experiment,
I took a quantity Fair water, and put to it in a clear Glass phial, a
convenient quantity of Oil or Spirit of Turpentine, because that Liquor will
not Incorporate with Water, and yet is almost as Clear and Colorless as it;
these being Gently Shaken together, the Agitation breaks the Oil (which as I
said, is Indisposed to Mix like Wine or Milk per minima with the Water) into a
Multitude of Little Globes, which each of them Reflecting Outward a Lucid
Image, make the Imperfect Mixture of the two Liquors appear Whitish; but if by
Vehemently Shaking the Glass for a competent time you make a further
Comminution of the Oil into far more Numerous and Smaller Globuli, and thereby
confound it also better with the Water, the Mixture will appear of a Much
greater Whiteness, and almost like Milk; whereas if the Glass be a while let
alone, the Color will by degrees Impair, as the Oily globes grow Fewer and
Bigger, and at length will quite Vanish, leaving both the Liquors Distinct and
Diaphanous as before. And such a Trial has not ill succeeded, when instead of
the Colorless Oil of Turpentine I took a Yellow Mixture made of a good
Proportion of Crude Turpentine dissolved in that Liquor; and (if I mis-remember
not) it also succeeded better than one would expect, when I employed an Oil
brought by Filings of Copper infused in it, to a deep Green. And this (by the
way) may be the Reason, why often times when the Oils of some Spices and of
Anniseeds etc. are Distilled in a Limbec with Water, the Water (as I have
several times observed) comes over Whitish, and will perhaps continue so for a
good while, because if the Fire be made too Strong, the subtle Chemical Oil is
thereby much Agitated and Broken, and Blended with the Water in such Numerous
and Minute Globules, as cannot easily in a short time Emerge to the Top of the
Water, and whilst they Remain in it, make it, for the Reason newly intimated,
look Whitish; and perhaps upon the same Ground a cause may be rendered, why Hot
water is observed to be usually more Opacous and Whitish, than the same Water
Cold, the Agitation turning the more Spirituous or otherwise Conveniently
Disposed Particles of the Water into Vapors, thereby Producing in the Body of
the Liquor a Multitude of Small Bubbles, which interrupt the Free passage, that
the Beams of Light would else have Every way, and from the Innermost parts of
the Water Reflect many of them Outward. These and the like Examples,
Pyrophilus, have induced me to Suspect, that the Superficial Particles of White
bodies, may for the Most part be as well Unequal as Smooth; I content my self to
say Suspect and for the most part, because it seems not Easy to prove, that
when Diaphanous bodies, as we shall see by and by, are reduced into White
Powders, each Corpuscle must needs be of a Unequal Superficies, since perhaps it
may Suffice that Specular Surfaces look severally ways. For (as we have seen)
when a Diaphanous Body comes to be reduced to very Minute parts, it thereby
requires a Multitude of Little Surfaces within a Narrow compass. And though
each of these should not be of a Figure Convenient to Reflect a Round Image of
the Sun, yet even from such an Inconveniently Figured body, there may be
Reflected some (either Straight or Crooked) Physical Line of Light, which Line
I call Physical, because it has some Breadth in it, and in which Line in many
cases some Refraction of the Light falling upon the Body it depends on, may
contribute to the Brightness, as if a Slender Wire; or Solid Cylinder of Glass
be exposed to the Light, you shall see in some part of it a vivid Line of
Light, and if we were able to draw out and lay together a Multitude of these
Little Wires or Thrids of Glass, so Slender, that the Eye could not discern a
Distance betwixt the Luminous Lines, there is little doubt (as far as I can
guess by a Trial purposely made with very Slender, but far less Slender Thrids
of Glass, whose Aggregate was Looked upon one way White) but the whole Physical
Superficies composed of them, would to the Eye appear White, and if so, it will
not be always necessary that the Figure of those Corpuscles, that make a Body
appear White, should be Globulous. And as for Snow it self, though the Learned
Gassendus (as we have seen above) makes it to seem nothing else but a pure
Frozen Froth, consisting of exceedingly Minute and Thick set Bubbles; yet I see
no necessity of Admitting that, since not only by the Variously and Curiously
Figured Snow, that I have diverse times had the Opportunity with Pleasure to
observe, but also by the Common Snow, it rather does appear both to the Naked
Eye, and in a Microscope, often, if not most commonly, to consist principally
of Little Slender Icicles of several Shapes, which afford such Numerous Lines
of Light, as we have been newly Speaking of.

12. Sixthly, If you take a Diaphanous Body, as for instance a Piece of Glass,
and reduce it to Powder, the same Body, which when it was Entire, freely
Transmitted the Beams of Light, acquiring by Contusion a multitude of Minute
Surfaces, each of which is as it were a Little, but Imperfect Speculum, is
qualified to Reflect in a Confused manner, so many either Beams, or Little and
Singly Unobservable Images of the Lucid Body, that from a Diaphanous it
Degenerates into a White Body. And I remember, I have for Trials sake taken
Lumps of Rock Crystal, and Heating them Red hot in a Crucible, I found
according to my Expectation, that being Quenched in Fair water, even those that
remained in seemingly entire Lumps, exchanged their Translucency for Whiteness,
the Ignition and Extinction having as it were Cracked each Lump into a
multitude of Minute Bodies, and thereby given it a great multitude of new
Surfaces. And even with Diaphanous Bodies, that are Colored, there may be this
way a Greater Degree of Whiteness produced, than one would lightly think; as I
remember, I have by Contusion obtained Whitish Powders of Granates, Glass of
Antimony, and Emeralds finely Beaten, and you may more easily make the
Experiment, by taking Good Venereal Vitriol of a Deep Blew, and comparing with
some of the Entire Crystalls purposely reserved, some of the Subtle Powder of
the same Salt, which will Comparatively exhibit a very considerable degree of
Whitishness.

13. Seventhly; And as by a Change of Position in the Parts, a Body that is not
White, may be made White, so by a Slight change of the Texture of its Surface,
a White Body may be Deprived of its Whiteness. For if, (as I have tried in
Goldsmiths Shops) you take a piece of Silver that has been freshly Boiled, as
the Artificers call it, (which is done by, first Brushing, and then Decocting
it with Salt and Tartar, and perhaps some other Ingredients) you shall find it
to be of a Lovely White. But if you take a piece of Smooth Steel, and therewith
Burnish a part of it, which may be presently done; you shall find that Part
will Lose its Whiteness, and turn a Speculum, looking almost every where Dark,
as other Looking-glasses do, which may not a little confirm our Doctrine. For
by this we may guess, what it is chiefly that made the Body White before, by
considering that all that was done to deprive it of that Whiteness, was only to
Depress the Little Protuberances that were before on the Surface of the Silver
into one Continued Superficies, and thereby effect this, that now the Image of
the Lucid Body, and consequently a Kind of Whiteness shall appear to your Eye;
but in some place of the greater Silver Looking-glass (whence the Beams
reflected at an Angle Equal to that wherewith they fall on it, may reach your
Eye) whilst the Asperity remained Undestroy'd, the Light falling on innumerable
Little Specula Obverted some one way, and some another, did from all Sensibly
Distinguishable parts of the Superficies reflect confused Beams or
Representations of Light to the Beholders Eye, from whence soever he chance to
Look upon it. And among the Experiments annexed to this Discourse, you will
find One, wherein by the Change of Texture in Bodies, Whiteness is in a Trice
both Generated and Destroyed.

CHAP. II.
1. WHat we have Discoursed of Whiteness, may somewhat Assist us to form a
Notion of Blackness, those two Qualities being Contrary enough to Illustrate
each other. Yet among the Ancient Philosophers I find less Assistance to form a
Notion of Blackness than of Whiteness, only Democritus in the passage above
Recited out of Aristotle has given a General Hint of the Cause of this Color,
by referring the Blackness of Bodies to their Asperity. But this I call but a
General Hint, because those Bodies that are Green, and Purple, and Blew, seem
to be so as well as Black ones, upon the Account of their Superficial Asperity.
But among the Moderns, the formerly mentioned Gassendus, perhaps invited by
this Hint of Democritus, has Incidentally in another Epistle given us, though a
very Short, yet a somewhat Clearer account of the Nature of Blackness in these
words: Existimare par est corpora suapte Natura nigra constare ex particulis,
quarum Superficieculae scabrae sint, nec facile lucem extrorsum reflectant. I
wish this Ingenious Man had enlarged himself upon this Subject; For indeed it
seems, that as that which makes a Body White, is chiefly such a Disposition of
its Parts, that it Reflects (I mean without much Interruption) more of the
Light that falls on it, than Bodies of any other Color do, so that which makes
a Body Black is principally a Peculiar kind of Texture, chiefly of its
Superficial Particles, whereby it does as it were Dead the Light that falls on
it, so that very little is Reflected Outward to the Eye.

2. And this Texture may be Explicated two, and perhaps more than two several
ways, whereof the first is by Supposing in the Superficies of the Black Body a
Particular kind of Asperity, whereby the Superficial Particles reflect but Few
of the incident Beams Outward, and the rest Inwards toward the Body it self.
As if for Instance, we should conceive the Surface of a Black Body to be
Asperated by an almost Numberless throng of Little Cylinders, Pyramids, Cones,
and other such Corpuscles, which by their being Thick Set and Erected, reflect
the Beams of Light from one to another Inwards, and send them too and fro so
often, that at length they are Lost, before they can come to Rebound out again
to the Eye. And this is the first of the two mentioned ways of Explicating
Blackness. The other way is by Supposing the Texture of Black Bodies to be
such, that either by their Yielding to the Beams of Light, or upon some other
Account, they do as it were Dead the Beams of Light, and keep them from being
Reflected in any Plenty, or with any Considerable Vigor of Motion, Outward.
According to this Notion it may be said, that the Corpuscles that make up the
Beams of Light, whether they be Solary Effluviums, or Minute Particles of some
Aetherial Substance, Thrusting on one another from the Lucid Body, do, falling
on Black Bodies, meet with such a Texture, that such Bodies receive Into
themselves, and Retain almost all the Motion communicated to them by the
Corpuscles that make up the Beams of Light, and consequently Reflect but Few of
them, or those but Languidly, toward the Eye, it happening here almost in like
manner as to a Ball, which thrown against a Stone or Floor, would Rebound a
great way Upwards, but Rebounds very Little or not at all, when it is thrown
against Water, or Mud, or a Loose Not, because the Parts yield, and receive
into themselves the Motion, on whose Account the Ball should be Reflected
Outward. But this Last way of Explicating Blackness, I shall content my Self
to have Proposed, without either Adopting it, or absolutely Rejecting it. For
the Hardness of Touch-stones, Black Marble, and other Bodies, that being Black
are Solid, seem to make it somewhat Improbable, that such Bodies should be of
so Yielding a Texture, unless we should say, that some Bodies may be more
Disposed to Yield to the Impulses of the Corpuscles of Light by reason of a
Peculiar Texture, than other Bodies, that in other Trials appear to be Softer
than they. But though the Former of these two Explications of Blackness be
that, by which we shall Endeavor to give an Account of it, yet as we said, we
shall not Absolutely Reject this Latter, partly because they both Agree in
this, that Black Bodies Reflect but Little of the Light that falls on them, and
partly because it is not Impossible, that in some Cases both the Disposition of
the Superficial particles, as to Figure and Position, and the Yielding of the
Body, or some of its Parts, may Jointly, though not in an Equal measure concur
to the rendering of a Body Black. The Considerations that induced me to propose
this Notion of Blackness, as I Explan'd it, are principally these:

3. First, That as I lately said, Whiteness and Blackness being generally
reputed to be Contrary Qualities, Whiteness depending as I said upon the
Disposition of the Parts of a Body to Reflect much Light, it seems likely, that
Blackness may depend upon a Contrary Disposition of the Black Bodies Surface;
But upon this I shall not Insist.

4. Next then we see, that if a Body of One and the same Color be placed, part
in the Sunbeams, and part in the Shade, that part which is not Shined on will
appear more of Kin to Blackness than the other, from which more Light Rebounds
to the Eye; And Dark Colors seem the Blacker, the less Light they are Looked
upon in, and we think all Things Black in the Dark, when they send no Beams to
make Impressions on our Organs of Sight, so that Shadows and Darkness are near
of Kin, and Shadow we know is but a Privation of Light, and accordingly
Blackness seems to proceed from the Paucity of Beams Reflected from the Black
Body to the Eye, I say the Paucity of Beams, because those Bodies that we call
Black, as Marble, Jeat, etc. are Short of being perfectly so, else we should
not See them at all. But though the Beams that fall on the Sides of those
Erected Particles that we have been mentioning, do Few of them return Outward,
yet those that fall upon the Points of those Cylinders, Cones, or Pyramids, may
thence Rebound to the Eye, though they make there but a Faint Impression,
because they Arrive not there, but Mingled with a great Proportion of Little
Shades. This may be Confirmed by my having procured a Large piece of Black
Marble well Polished, and brought to the Form of a Large Sphaerical and Concave
Speculum; For on the Inside this Marble being well Polished, was a kind of Dark
Looking-glass, wherein I could plainly see a Little Image of the Sun, when that
Shined upon it. But this Image was very far from Offending and Dazzling my Eyes,
as it would have done from another Speculum; Nor, though the Speculum were
Large, could I in a Long time, or in a Hot Sun set a piece of Wood on Fire,
though a far less Speculum of the same Form, and of a more Reflecting Matter,
would have made it Flame in a Trice.

5. And on this Occasion we may as well in Reference to something formerly
delivered concerning Whiteness, as in Reference to what has been newly said,
Subjoyn what we further observed touching the Differing Reflections of Light
from White and Black Marble, namely, that having taking a pretty Large Mortar
of White Marble, New and Polished in the Inside, and Exposed it to the Sun, we
found that it Reflected a great deal of Glaring Light, but so Dispersed, that
we could not make the Reflected Beams concur in any such Conspicuous Focus, as
that newly taken notice of in the Black Marble, though perhaps there may enough
of them be made to meet near the Bottom, to make some Kind of Focus, especially
since by holding in the Nightime a Candle at a convenient Distance, we were
able to procure a Concourse of some, though not many of the Reflected Beams, at
about two Inches distant from the Bottom of the Mortar: But we found the Heat
even of the Sunbeams so Dispersedly Reflected to be very Lanquid, even in
Comparison of the Black Marbles Focus. And the Little Picture of the Sun, that
appeared upon the White Marble as a Speculum, was but very Faint and exceeding
ill Defined. Secondly, That taking two pieces of Plain and Polished Surfaces,
and casting on them Successively the Beams of the same Candle, in such manner,
as that the Neighboring Superficies being Shaded by an Opacous and Perforated
Body, the Incident Beams were permitted to pass but through a Round Hole of
about Half an Inch Diameter, the Circle of Light that appeared on the White
Marble was in Comparison very Bright, but very ill Defined; whereas that on the
Black Marble was far less Luminous, but much more precisely Defined.

6. Thirdly, When you Look upon a piece of Linen that has Small Holes in it,
those Holes appear very Black, and Men are often deceived in taking Holes for
Spots of Ink; And Painters to represent Holes, make use of Black, the Reason of
which seems to be, that the Beams that fall on those Holes, fall into them so
Deep, that none of them is Reflected back to the Eye. And in narrow Wells part
of the Mouth seems Black, because the Incident Beams are Reflected Downwards
from one side to another, till they can no more Rebound to the Eye.

We may consider too, that if Differing parts of the same piece of Black Velvet
be stroak'd Opposite ways, the piece of Velvet will appear of two Distinct
kinds of Blackness, the one far Darker than the other, of which Disparity the
Reason seems to be, that in the Less obscure part of the Velvet, the Little
Silken Piles whereof it is made up, being Inclined, there is a Greater part of
each of them Obverted to the Eye, whereas in the other part the Piles of Silk
being more Erected, there are far Fewer Beams Reflected Outward from the
Lateral parts of each Pile, so that most of those that Rebound to the Eye, come
from the Tops of the Piles, which make but a Small part of the whole
Superficies, that may be covered by the piece of Velvet. Which Explication I
propose, not that I think the Blackness of the Velvet proceeds from the Cause
assigned, since each Single Pile of Silk is Black by reason of its Texture, in
what Position soever you Look upon it; But that the Greater Blackness of one of
these Tuffts seems to proceed from the Greater Paucity of Beams Reflected from
it, and that from the Fewness of those Parts of a Surface that Reflect Beams,
and the Multitude of those Shaded Parts that Reflect none. And I remember, that
I have oftentimes observed, that the Position of Particular Bodies far greater
than Piles of Silk in reference to the Eye, may notwithstanding their having
each of them a Color of its own, make one part of their Aggregate appear far
Darker than the other; For I have near Great Towns often taken notice, that a
Cart-load of Carrots packed up, appeared of a much Darker Color when Looked
upon, where the Points of the Carrots were Obverted to the Eye, than where the
Sides of them were so.

7. Fourthly, In a Darkened Room, I purposely observed, that if the Sunbeams,
which came in at the Hole were received upon White or any other Color, and
directed to a Convenient place of the Room, they would Manifestly, though not
all Equally, Increase the Light of that Part; whereas if we Substituted, either
a piece of Black Cloth or Black Velvet, it would so Dead the Incident Beams,
that the place (newly mentioned) whereto I Obverted the Black Body, would be
Less Enlightened than it was before, when it received its Light but from the
Weak and Oblique Reflections of the Floor and Walls of a pretty Large Room,
through which the Beams that came in at the Hole were Confusedly and Brokenly
Dispersed.

8. Fifthly, And to show that the Beams that fall on Black Bodies, as they do
not Rebound Outward to the Eye, so they are Reflected toward the Body it
self, as the Nature of those Erected Particles, to which we have imputed
Blackness, requires, we will add an Experiment that will also confirm our
Doctrine touching Whiteness; Namely, that we took a Broad and Large Tile, and
having Whitened over one half of the Superficies of it, and Black'd the other,
we exposed it to the Summer Sun; And having let it lie there a convenient time
(for the Difference is more Apparent, if it have not lain there too long) we
found, as we expected, that whilst the Whited part of the Tile remained Cool
enough, the Black'd part of the same Tile was grown not only Sensible, but very
Hot, (sometimes to a strong Degree.) And to satisfy some of our Friends the
more, we have sometimes left upon the Surface of the Tile, besides the White
and Black parts thereof, a part that Retained the native Red of the Tile it
self, and Exposing them to the Sun, we observed this Last mentioned to have
Contracted a Heat in comparison of the White, but a Heat Inferior to that of
the Black, of which the Reason seems to be, that the Superficial Particles of
Black Bodies, being, as we said, more Erected, than those of White or Red ones,
the Corpuscles of Light falling on their sides, being for the most part
Reflected Inwards from one Particle to another, and thereby engaged as it were
and kept from Rebounding Upwards, they communicate their brisk Motion,
wherewith they were impelled against the Black Body, (upon whose account had
they fallen upon a White Body, they would have been Reflected Outward) to the
Small parts of the Black Body, and thereby Produce in those Small parts such an
Agitation, as (when we feel it) we are wont to call Heat. I have been lately
informed, that an Observation near of Kin to Ours, has been made by some
Learned Men in France and Italy, by long Exposing to a very Hot Sun, two pieces
of Marble, the one White, the other Black; But though the Observation be worthy
of them, and may confirm the same Truth with Our Experiment, yet besides that
our Trial needs not the Summer, nor any Great Heat to succeed, It seems to have
this Advantage above the other, that whereas Bodies more Solid, and of a Closer
Texture, though they use to be more Slowly Heated, are wont to receive a
Greater Degree of Heat from the Sun or Fire, than (Caeteris paribus) Bodies of
a Slightet Texture; I have found by the Information of Stone-cutters, and by
other ways of Enquiry, that Black Marble is much Solider and Harder than White,
so that possibly the Difference betwixt the Degrees of Heat they receive from
the Sunbeams will by many be ascribed to the Difference of their Texture,
rather than to that of their Color, though I think our Experiment will make it
Probable enough that the greater part of that Difference may well be ascribed
to that Disposition of Parts, which makes the one Reflect the Sunbeams Inward,
and the other Outward. And with this Doctrine accords very well, that Rooms
hung with Black, are not only Darker than else they would be, but are wont to
be Warmer too; Insomuch that I have known a great Lady, whose Constitution was
somewhat Tender, complain that she was wont to catch Cold, when she went out
into the Air, after having made any long Visits to Persons, whose Rooms were
hung with Black. And this is not the only Lady I have heard complain of the
Warmth of such Rooms, which though perhaps it may be partly imputed to the
Effluvia of those Materials wherewith the hangings were Died, yet probably the
Warmth of such Rooms depends chiefly upon the same Cause that the Darkness
does; As (not to repeat what I formerly Noted touching my Gloves,) to satisfy
some Curious Persons of that Sex, I have convinced them, by Trial, that of two
Pieces of Silken Stuff given me by themselves, and exposed in their Presence,
to the same Window, Shined onby that Sun, the White was considerably Heated,
when the Black was not so much as Sensibly so.

9. Sixthly, I remember, that Acquainting one Day a Virtuoso of Unsuspected
Credit, that had Visited Hot Countries, with part of what I have here Delivered
concerning Blackness, he Related to me by way of Confirmation of it, a very
notable Experiment, which he had both Seen others make, and Made himself in a
Warm Climate, namely, that having carefully Black'd over Eggs, and Exposed them
to the Hot Sun, they were thereby in no very Long time well Roasted, to which
Effect I conceive the Heat of the Climate must have Concurred with the
Disposition of the Black Surface to Reflect the Sunbeams Inward, for I
remember, that having made that among other Trials in England, though in
Summertime, the Eggs I Exposed, acquired indeed a considerable Degree of Heat,
but yet not so Intense a One, as proved sufficient to Roast them.

10. Seventhly, and Lastly, Our Conjectures at the Nature of Blackness may be
somewhat Confirmed by the (formerly mentioned) Observation of the Blind
Dutchman, that Discerns Colors with his Fingers; for he says, that he Feels a
greater Roughness upon the Surfaces of Black Bodies, than upon those of Red, or
Yellow, or Green. And I remember, that the Diligent Bartholinus says, that a
Blind Earl of Mansfield could Distinguish White from Black Hist. Anatom. Cent.
3. Hist. 44.
only by the Touch, which would sufficiently Argue a great Disparity in the
Asperities, or other Superficial Textures of Bodies of those two Colors, if
the Learned Relator had Affirmed the Matter upon his own Knowledge.

11. These, Pyrophilus, are the chief things that Occurr to me at present,
about the Nature of Whiteness and Blackness, which if they have Rendered it so
much as Probable, that in Most, or at least Many Cases, the Causes of these
Qualities may be such as I have Adventured to Deliver, it is as much as I
Pretend to; for till I have Opportunity to Examine the Matter by some further
Trials, I am not sure, but that in some White and Black Bodies, there may
Concur to the Color some peculiar Texture or Disposition of the Body, whereby
the Motion of the Small Corpuscles that make up the Incident Beams of Light,
may be Differingly Modified, before they reach the Eye, especially in this,
that White Bodies do not only Copiously Reflect those Incident Corpuscles
Outward, but Reflect them Briskly, and do not otherwise Alter them in the
manner of their Motion. Nor shall I now stay to Enquire, whether some of those
other ways, (as a Disposition to Alter the Velocity, the Rotation, or the Order
and Manner of Appulse to the Eye of the Reflected Corpuscles that Composed the
Incident Beams of Light) which we mentioned when we considered the Production
of Colors in General, may not in some Cases be Applicable to those of White
and Black Bodies: For I am yet so much a Seeker in this Matter, and so little
Wedded to the Opinions I have proposed, that what I am to add shall be but the
Beginning of a Collection of Experiments and Observations toward the History
of VVhiteness and Blackness, without at present interposing my Explications of
them, that so, I may assist your Enquires without much Fore-stalling or
Biassing your Judgment.

EXPERIMENT IN CONSORT, Touching Whiteness and Blackness.
EXPERIMENT I.
HAving promised in the 114, and 115. Pages of the foregoing Discourse of
Whiteness and Blackness, to show, that those two Colors may by a change of
Texture in bodies, each of them apart Diaphanous and Colorless, be at pleasure
and in a trice as well Generated as Destroyed, We shall begin with Experiments
that may acquit us of that promise.

Take then what Quantity you please of Fair Water, and having Heated it, put
into it as much good Common Sublimate, as it is able to Dissolve, and (to be
sure of having it well glutted:) continue putting in the Sublimate, till some
of it lie Untouched in the bottom of the Liquor, Filter this Solution through
Cap-paper, to have it clear and limpid, and into a spoonful or two thereof,
(put into a clean glass vessel,) shake about four or five drops (according as
you took more or less of this Solution) of good limpid Spirits of Urine, and
immediately the whole mixture will appear White like Milk, to which mixture if
you presently add a convenient proportion of Rectified Aqua Fortis (for the
number of drops is hard to determine, because of the Differing Strength of the
liquor, but easily found by trial) the Whiteness will presently disappear, and
the whole mixture become Transparent, which you may, if you please, again
reduce to a good degree of Whiteness (though inferior to the first) only by a
more copious affusion of fresh Spirit of Urine. N. First, That it is not so
necessary to employ either Aqua Fortis or Spirit of Urine about this
Experiment, but that we have made it with other liquors instead of these; of
which perhaps more elsewhere. Secondly, That this Experiment, though not made
with the same Menstruums, nor producing the same Color, is yet much of Kin to
that other to be mentioned in this Tract among our other Experiments of
Colors, about turning a Solution of Praecipitate into an Orange-colour, and
the Chemical Reason being much alike in both, the annexing it to one of them
may suffice FOR both.

EXPERIMENT II.
Make a strong Infusion of broken Galls in Fair Water, and having Filtred it
into a clean Vial, add more of the same liquor to it, till you have made it
somewhat Transparent, and sufficiently diluted the Color, for the credit of
the Experiment, lest otherwise the Darkness of the liquor might make it be
objected, that 'twas already almost Ink; Into this Infusion snake a convenient
quantity of a Clear, but very strong Solution of Vitriol, and you shall
immediately see the mixture turn Black almost like Ink, and such a way of
producing Blackness is vulgar enough; but if presently after you do upon this
mixture drop a small quantity of good oil of Vitriol, and, by shaking the Vial
disperse it nimbly through the two other liquors, you shall (if you perform
your part well, and have employed oil of Vitriol Clear and Strong enough) see
the Darkness of the liquor presently begin to be discussed, and grow pretty
Clear and Transparent, losing its Inky Blackness, which you may again restore
to it by the affusion of a small quantity of a very strong Solution of Salt of
Tartar. And though neither of these Atramentous liquors will seem other than
very Pale Ink, if you write with a clean Pen dipped in them, yet that is common
to them with some sorts of Ink that prove very good when Dry, as I have also
found, that when I made these carefully, what I wrote with either of them,
especially with the Former, would when thoroughly Dry grow Black enough not to
appear bad Ink. This Experiment of taking away and restoring Blackness from and
to the liquors, we have likewise tried in Common Ink; but there it succeeds not
so well, and but very slowly, by reason that the Gum wont to be employed in the
making it, does by its Tenacity oppose the operations of the above mentioned
Saline liquors. But to consider Gum no more, what some kind of Praecipitation
may have to do in the producing and destroying of Inks without it, I have
elsewhere given you some occasion and assistance to enquire; But I must not now
stay to do so my self, only I shall take notice to you, that though it be taken
for granted that bodies will not be Praecipitated by Alcaliz at Salts, that
have not first been dissolved in some Acid Menstruums, yet I have found upon
trials, which my conjectures lead me to make on purpose, That diverse Vegetables
barely infused, or, but slightly decocted in common water, would, upon the
affusion of a Strong and Clear Lixivium of Potashes, and much more of some
other Praecipitating liquors that I sometimes employ, afford good store of a
Crudled matter, such as I have had in the Praecipitations of Vegetable
substances, by the intervention of Acid things, and that this matter was easily
separable from the rest of the liquor, being left behind by it in the Filtre;
and in making the first Ink mentioned in this Experiment, I found that I could
by Filtration separate pretty store of a very Black pulverable substance, that
remained in the Filtre, and when the Ink was made Clear again by the Oil of
Vitriol, the affusion of dissolved Sal Tartari seemed but to Praecipitate, and
thereby to Unite and render Conspicuous the particles of the Black mixture that
had before been dispersed into very Minute and singly Invisible particles by
the Incisive and resolving power of the highly Corrosive Oil of Vitriol.

EXPERIMENT III.
If pieces of White Hartshorn be with a competent degree of fire distilled in
a Glassretort, they will, after the avolation of the Phlegm, Spirit, Volatile
Salt, and the looser and lighter parts of the Oleagenous substance, remain
behind of a Cole-black color. And even Ivory it self being skilfully Burnt
(how I am wont to do it, I have elsewhere set down) affords Painters one of the
best and deepest Blacks they have, and yet in the Instance of distilled
Hartshorn, the operation being made in Glass-vessels carefully closed, it
appears there is no Extraneous Black substance that Insinuates it self into
White Hartshorn, and thereby makes it turn Black; but that the Whiteness is
destroyed, and the Blackness generated, only by a Change of Texture, made in
the burnt Body, by the Recess of some parts and the Transposition of others.
And though I remember not that in many Distillations of Hartshorn I ever found
the Cap. Mort. to pass from Black to a true Whiteness, whilst it continued in
Closed vessels, yet having taken out the Cole-black fragments, and Calcined
them in Open vessels, I could in few hours quite destroy that Blackness, and
without sensibly changing their Bulk or Figure, reduce them to great Whiteness.
So much do these two Colors depend upon the Disposition of the little parts,
that the Bodies wherein they are to be met with do consist of. And we find,
that if Whitewine Tartar, or even the white Crystalls of such Tartar be burnt
without being truly Calcined, the Cap. Mortuum (as the Chemists call the more
Fixed part) will be Black. But if you further continue the Calcination till you
have perfectly Incinerated the Tartar, and kept it long enough in a Strong
fire, the remaining Calx will be White. And so we see that not only other
Vegetable substances, but even White woods, as the Hazel, will yield a Black
Charcoal, and afterward Whitish ashes; And so Animal substances naturally
White, as Bones and Eggshels, will grow Black upon the being Burnt, and White
again when they are perfectly Calcined.

EXPERIMENT IV.
But yet I much Question whether that Rule delivered by diverse, as well
Philosophers as Chemists, adusta nigra, sed perasta alba, will hold as
Universally as is presumed, since I have several Examples to allege against it:
For I have found that by burning Alablaster, so as both to make it appear to
boil almost like Milk, and to reduce it to a very fine Powder, it would not at
all grow Black, but retain its Pure and Native Whiteness, and though by keeping
it longer than is usual in the fire, I produced but a faint Yellow, even in
that part of the Powder that lay nearest the top of the Crucible, yet having
purposely enquired of an Experienced Stone-cutter, who is Curious enough in
trying Conclusions in his own Trade, he told me he had found that if Alablaster
or Plaster of Paris be very long kept in a Strong fire, the whole heap of
burnt Powder would exchange its Whiteness for a much deeper Color than the
Yellow I observed. Lead being Calcined with a Strong fire turns (after having
perhaps run thorough diverse other Colors) into Minium, whose Color we know is
a deep Red; and if you urge this Minium, as I have purposely done with a Strong
fire, you may much easier find a Glassie and Brittle Body darker than Minium,
than any white Calx or Glass. It Is known among Chemists, that the white Calx of
Antimony, by the further and more vehement operation of the fire may be melted
into Glass, which we have obtained of a Red Color, which is far deeper than
that of the Calx of Burnt Antimony, and though common Glass of Antimony being
usually Adulterated with Borax, have its Color thereby diluted, oftentimes to
a very pale Yellow; yet not only ours made more sincerily, was, as we said, of
a Color less remote from Black, than was the Calx; but we observed, that by
Melting it once or twice more, and so exposing it to the further operation of
the Fire, we had, as we expected, the Color heightened. To which we shall add
but this one Instance, (which is worth the taking notice of in Reference to
Colors:) That, if you take Blew, but Unsophisticated, Vitriol, and burn it
very Slowly, and with a Gentle degree of Heat, you may observe, that when it is
Burnt but a Little, and yet so far as that you may rub it to Powder betwixt
your fingers, it will be of a White or Whitish Color; But if you Prosecute the
Calcination, this Body which by a light Adustion was made White, will pass
through other Colors, as Gray, Yellowish, and Red; and if you further burn it
with a Long and Vehement fire, by that time it comes to be Perustum, it will be
of a dark Purple, nearer to Black, not only than the first Calx, but than the
Vitriol before it at all felt the fire. I might add that Crocus Martis (per se
as they call it) made by the Lasting violence of the Reverberated flames is not
so near a Kin to White, as the Iron or Steel that afforded it was before its
Calcinations; but that I suppose, these Instances may suffice to satisfy you,
that Minerals are to be excepted out of the forementioned Rule, which perhaps,
though it seldom fail in substances belonging to the Vegetable or Animal
Kingdom, may yet be Questioned even in some of these, if that be true, which
the Judicious Traveller Bellonius affirms, that Charcoales made out of the Wood
of Oxycaeder are White; And I could not find, that though in Retorts Hartshorn
and other White Bodies will be Denigrated by Heat, yet Camphire would not at
all lose its Whiteness, though I have purposely kept it in such a heat, as made
it melt and boil. And to manifest, Pyrophilus, that Galls are not so requisite
as many suppose to the making Atramentous Liquors, we have sometimes made the
following Experiment, We took dried Rose leaves and Decocted them for a while
in Fair Water, into two or three spoonfulls of this Decoction we shook a few
drops of a strong and well filtrated Solution of Vitriol (which perhaps had it
been Green would have done as well) and immediately the mixture did turn Black,
and when into this mixture presently after it was made, we shook a just
Proportion of Aqua Fortis, we turned it from a Black Ink to a deep Red one,
which by the affusion of a little Spirit of Urine may be reduced immediately to
an Opacous and Blackish Color. And in regard, Pyrophilus, that in the former
Experiments, both the Infusion of Galls, and the Decoction of Roses, and the
Solution of Copperis employed about them, are endowed each of them with its own
Color, there may be a more noble Experiment of the sudden production of
Blackness made by the way mentioned in the Second Section of the Second Part of
our Essays, for though upon the Confusion of the two Liquors there mentioned,
there do immediately emerge a very Black mixture, yet both the Infusion of
Orpiment and the Solution of Minium were before their being joined together,
Limpid and Colorless.

EXPERIMENT V.
And now I speak of Camphire, it puts me in mind of adding this Experiment,
That, though as I said in Closed Glasses, I could not Denigrate it by Heat, but
it would Sublime to the sides and top of the Glass, as it was before, yet not
only it will, being set on fire in the Free Air, send forth a Copious smoke,
but having purposely upon some of it that was Flaming, clapped a Large Glass,
almost in the form of a Hive, (but more Slender only) with a Hole at the top;
(which I caused to be made to try Experiments of Fire and Flame in) it
continued so long burning that it Lined all the Inside of the Glass with a Soot
as Black as Ink, and so Copious, that the Cioseness of the Vessel considered,
almost all that part of the White Camphire that did take Fire, seemed to have
been changed into that deep Black Substance.

EXPERIMENT VI.
And this also brings into my mind another Experiment that I made about the
production of Blackness, whereof, for Reasons too long to be here deduced, I
expected and found a good Success, an it was this: I took Rectified Oil of
Vittiol (that I might have the Liquor Clean as well as Strong) and by degrees
mixed with it a convenient proportion of the Essential Oil, as Chemists call it,
of Wormwood, drawn over with store of Water in a Limbec, and warily Distilling
the mixture in a Retort, there remained a scarce credible quantity of dry
Matters, Black as a Coal. And because the Oil of Wormwood, though a Chemical
Oil drawn by a Virtuoso, seemed to have somewhat in it of the Color of the
Plant, I Substituted in its Room, the Pure and Subtle Essential Oil of
Winter-Savory, and mixing little by little this Liquor, with (if I mis-remember
not) an Equal weight of the formerly mentioned Rectified Oil of Vitriol, and
Distilling them as before in a Retort, besides what there passed over into the
Receiver, even these two clear Liquors left me a Considerable Proportion,
(though not so great as the two former) of a Substance Black as Pitch, which I
yet Keep by me as a Rarity.

EXPERIMENT VII.
A way of Whiting Wax Cheaply and in Great Quantity may be a thing of good
Oeconomical Use, and we have elsewhere set down the Practice of Tradesmen that
Blanch it; But here Treating of Whiteness only in Order to the Philosophy of
Colors, I shall not Examine which of the Slow vvayes may be best Employed, to
free Wax from the Yellow Melleous parts, but shall rather set down a Quick way
of making it White, though but in very Small Quantities. Take then a little
Yellow Wax, scraped or thinly sliced, and putting it into a Colts-head or some
other Convenient Glass, pour to it a pretty deal of Spirit of Wine, and placing
the Vessel in Warm Sand, Increase the Heat by degrees, till the Spirit of Wine
begin to Simper or to Boil a little; and continuing that degree of Fire, if you
have put Liquor enough, you will quickly have the Wax dissolved, then taking it
off the fire, you may either suffer it to Cool as hastily as with Safety to the
Glass you can, or Pour it whilst it is yet Hot into a Filtre of Paper, and
either in the Glass where it Cools, or in the Filtre, you will soon find the
Wax and Menstruum together reduced into a White Substance, almost like Butter,
which by letting the Spirit Exhale will shrink into a much Lesser Bulk, but
still retaining its Whiteness. And that which is pretty in the working of this
Magistery of Wax, is, that the Yellowness vanishes, neither appearing in the
Spirit of Wine that passes Limpid through the Filtre, nor in the Butter of
Wax, if I may so call it, that, as I said, is White.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
There is an Experiment, Pyrophilus, which though I do not so exactly remember,
and though it be somewhat Nice to make, yet I am willing to Acquaint You with,
because the thing Produced, though it be but a Curiosity, is wont not a little
to please the Beholders, and it is a way of turning by the help of a Dry
Substance, an almost Golden-Colour'd Concrete, into a White one, the several
Trials are not at present so fresh in my Memory to enable me to tell you
Certainly, whether an Equal only or a Double weight of Common Sublimate must
be taken in reference to the Tinglass, but if I mistake not, there was in the
Experiment that succeeded best, Two parts of the Former taken to One of the
Latter. These Ingredients being finely Powdered and Exactly mixed, we Sublimed
together by degrees of fire (the due Gradation of which is in this Experiment a
thing of main Importance) there ascended a matter of a very peculiar Texture,
for it was for the most part made up of very Thin, Smooth, Soft and Slippery
Plates, almost like the finest sort of the Scales of Fishes, but of so Lovely a
White Inclining to Pearl-Colour, and of so Curious and Shining a Gloss, that
they appeared in some respect little Inferior to Orient Pearls, and in other
Regards, they seemed to Surpass them, and were Applauded for a sort of the
Prettiest Trifles that we had ever prepared to Amuse the Eye. I will not
undertake that though you will hardly miss changing the Color of your shining
Tin-glass, yet you will the first or perhaps the second time hit Right upon the
way of making the Glistring Sublimate I have been mentioning.

EXPERIMENT IX.
When we Dissolve in Aqua Fortis a mixture of Gold and Silver melted into one
Lump, it usually happens that the Powder of Gold that falls to the bottom, as
not being Dissoluble by that Menstruum, will not have its own Yellow, but
appear of a Black Color, though neither the Gold, nor the Silver, nor the Aqua
Fortis did before manifest any Blackness. And diverse Alchymists, when they make
Solutions of Minerals they would Examine, are very Glad, if they see a Black
Powder Praecipirated to the Bottom, taking it for a Hopeful Sign, that those
Particles are of a Golden Nature, which appear in a Color so ordinary to Gold
parted from other Metalls by Aqua Fortis, that it is a trouble to the Refiner
to Reduce the Praecipitated Calx to its Native Color. For though, (as we have
tried,) that may be Quickly enough done by Fire, which will make this Gold look
very Gloriously (as indeed it is at least one of the Best ways that is
Practiced for the Refining of Gold,) yet it requires both Watchfulness and
Skill, to give it such a Degree of Fire as will serve to Restore it to its
Luster, without giving it such a One, as may bring it to Fusion, to which the
Minuteness of the Corpuscles it consists of makes the Powder very apt. And this
brings into my Mind, that having taken a Flat and Bright piece of Gold, that
was Refined by a Curious and Skillful Person on purpose to Try to what height
of Purity Gold could be brought by Art, I found that this very piece, as
Glorious as it looked, being rubbed a little upon a piece of fine clean Linen,
did sully it with a kind of Black; and the like I have observed in Refined
Silver, which I therefore mention, because I formerly suspected that the
Impurity of the Metal might have been the only Cause of what I have diverse
times observed in wearing Silver-hilted Swords, Namely, that where they rubbed
upon my Clothes, if they were of a Light-Colour'd Cloth, the Affriction would
quickly Black them; and Congruously hereunto I have found Pens Blackt almost
all over, when I had a while carried them about me in a Silver Ink-case. To
which I shall only add, that whereas in these several Instances of Denigration,
the Metalls are worn off, or otherwise Reduced into very Minute Parts, that
Circumstance may prove not Unworthy your Notice.

EXPERIMENT X.
That a Solution of Silver does Dye Hair of a Black Color, is a Known
Experiment, which some persons more Curious than Dextrous, have so Unluckily
made upon themselves as to make their Friends very Merry. And I remember that
the other day, I made my self some Sport by an Improvement of this Observation,
for having dissolved some Pure Silver in Aqua Fortis, and Evaporated the
Menstruum ad siccitatem, as they speak, I caused a Quantity of fair Water to be
poured upon the Calx two or three several times, and to be at each Evaporated,
till the Calx was very Dry, and all the Greenish Blewness that is wont to
appear in Common Crystals of Silver, was quite carried away. Then I made those
I meant to Deceive, Moisten some part of their Skin with their own Spittle, and
slightly Rub the moistened parts with a little of this Prepared Silver,
Whereupon they Admired to see, that a Snow-white Body laid upon the White Skin
should presently produce a deep Blackness, as if the stains had been made with
Ink, especially considering that this Blackness could not, like that produced
by ordinary Ink, be readily Washed off, but required many Hours, and part of it
some days to its Obliteration. And with the same White Calx and a little Fair
Water we likewise Stained the White Hafts of Knives, with a lasting Black in
those parts where the Calx was Plentifully enough laid on, for where it was
laid on but very Thinly, the Stain was not quite of so Deep a Color.

EXPERIMENT XI.
The Cause of the Blackness of those many Nations, which by one common Name we
are wont to call Negroes, has been long since Disputed of by Learned Men, who
possibly had not done amiss, if they had also taken into Consideration, why
some whole races of other Animals besides Men, as Foxes and Hares, are
Distinguished by a Blackness not familiar to the Generality of Animals of the
same Species; The General Opinion (to be mentioned a little lower) has been
rejected even by some of the Ancient Geographers, and among the Moderns
Ortelius and diverse other Learned Men have Questioned it. But this is no place
to mention what thoughts I have had to and fro about these Matters: Only as I
shall freely Acknowledge, that to me the Enquiry seems more Abstruse than it
does to many others, and that because consulting with Authors, and with Books
of Voyages, and with Travelers, to satisfy my self in matters of Fact, I have
met with some things among them, which seem not to agree very well with the
Notions of the most Classick Authors concerning these things; for it being my
Present Work to deliver rather matters Historical than Theorys, I shall Annex
some few of my Collections, instead of a Solemn Disputation. It is commonly
presumed that the Heat of the Climates wherein they live, is the reason, why so
many Inhabitants of the Scorching Regions of Africa are Black; and there is
this familiar Observation to Countenance this Conjecture, That we plainly see
that Mowers, Reapers, and other Countreypeople, who spend the most part of the
Hot Summer days exposed to the Sun, have the skin of their Hands and Faces,
which are the parts immediately Exposed to the Sun and Air, made of a Darker
Color than before, and consequently tending to Blackness; And Contrariwise we
observe that the Danes and some other people that Inhabit Cold Climates, and
even the English who feel not so Rigorous a Cold, have usually Whiter faces
than the Spaniards, Portugalls and other European Inhabitants of Hotter
Climates. But this Argument I take to be far more Specious than Convincing; for
though the Heat of the Sun may Darken the Color of the Skin, by that
Operation, which we in English call Sun-burning; yet Experience does not
Evince, that I remember, That that Heat alone can produce a Discoloring that
shall amount to a true Blackness, like that of Negroes, and we shall see by and
by that even the Children of some Negroes not yet 10. days Old (perhaps not so
much by three quarters of that time) will notwithstanding their Infancy be of
the same Hue with their Parents. Besides, there is this strong Argument to be
alleged against the Vulgar Opinion, that in diverse places in Asia under the
same Parallel, or even of the same Degree of Latitude with the African Regions
Inhabited by Blacks, the People are at most but Tawny; And in Africa it self
diverse Nations in the Empire of Ethiopia are not Negroes, Olearius Voy. age de
Mosco. et de Perse live. 3.
though Situated in the Torrid Zone, and as near the Aequinoctial, as other
Nations that are so (as the Black Inhabitants of Zeylan and Malabar are not in
our Globes placed so near the Line as Amara the Famousest place in Ethiopia.)
Moreover, (that which is of no small Moment in our present Disquisition) I find
not by the best Navigators and Travelers to the West Indies, whose Books or
themselves I have consulted on this Subject, that excepting perhaps one place
or two of small extent, there are any Blacks Originally Natives of any part of
America (for the Blacks now there have been by the Europeans long Transplanted
thither) though the New World contain in it so great a Variety of Climates, and
particularly reach quite Cross the Torri'd Zone from one Tropic to another.
And though it be true that the Danes be a Whiter People than the Spaniards, yet
that may proceed rather from other causes (not here to be enquired into) than
from the Coldness of the Climate, since not only the Swedes and other
Inhabitants of those Cold Countries, are not usually so White as the Danes, nor
Whiter than other Nations in proportion to their Vicinity to the Pole. [And
since the Writing of the former part of this Essay, having an opportunity on a
Solemn occasion to take Notice of the Numerous Train of some Extraordinary
Ambassadors sent from the Russian Emperor to a great Monarch, observed, that
(though it were then Winter) the Color of their Hair and Skin was far less
Whitish than the Danes who Inhabit a milder Region is wont to be, but rather
for the most part of a Darkish Brown; And the Physician to the Ambassador with
whom those Russes came, being asked by me whether in Muscovy it self the
Generality of the People were more inclined to have Dark-colour'd Hair than
Flaxen, he answered Affirmatively; but seemed to suspect that the True and
Ancient Russians, a Sept of whom he told me he had met with in one of the
Provinces of that vast Empire, were rather White like the Danes, than any
thing near so Brown as the present Muscovites whom he guesses to be descended
of the Tartars, and to have inherited their Color from them.] But to Prosecute
our former Discourse, I shall add for further Proof of the Conjecture I was
countenancing that good Authors inform us that there are Negroes in Africa not
far from the Cape of good Hope, and consequently beyond the Southern Tropic,
and without the Torrid Zone, much about the same Northern Latitude (or very
little more) wherein there are diverse American Nations that are not Negroes,
and wherein the Inhabitants of Candia, some parts of Sicily, and even of Spain
are not so much as Tawny-Mores. But (which is a fresh and strong Argument
against the common Opinion,) I find by our recent Relations of Greenland, (our
Accounts whereof we owe to the Curiosity of that Royal Virtuoso the present
King of Denmark,) that the Inhabitants are Olive-colour'd, or rather of a
Darker Hiew. But if the Case were the same with Men, and those other kinds of
Animals I formerly named, I should offer something as a considerable proof,
That, Cold may do much toward the making Men White or Black, and however I
shall set down the Observation as I have met with it, as worthy to come into
the History of Whiteness and Blackness, and it is, that in some parts of Russia
and of Livonia it is affirmed by Olaus Magnus and others, that Hares and Foxes
(some add Partridges) which before were Black, or Red, or Gray, do in the depth
of Winter become White by reason of the great Cold; (for that it should be, as
some conceive, by Looking upon the Snow, seems improbable upon diverse accounts)
And I remember that having purposely inquired of a Virtuoso who lately
Traveled through Livonia to Mosca, concerning the Truth of this Tradition, he
both told me, he believed it, and added, that he saw diverse of those lately
named Animals either in Russia or Livonia (for I do not very well remember
whether of the two) which, though White when he saw them in Winter, they
assured him had been Black, or of other Colors before the Winter began, and
would be so again when it was over. But for further satisfaction, I also
consulted one that had for some years been an Eminent Physician in Russia, who
though he rejected some other Traditions that are generally enough believed
concerning that Country, told me nevertheless, that he saw no cause to doubt
of this Tradition of Olaus Magnus as to Foxes and Hares, not only because it is
the common and uncontrolled Assertion of the Natives, but also because he
himself in the Winter could never that he remembered see Foxes and Hares of any
other Color than White; And I my self having seen a small White Fox brought
out of Russia into England toward the latter end of Winter, foretold those
that showed him me, that he would change Color in Summer, and accordingly
coming to look upon him again in July, I found that the Back and Sides,
together with the upper part of the Head and Tail were already grown of a Dark
Color, the lower part of the Head and Belly containing as yet a Whiteness. Let
me add, that were it not for some scruple I have, I should think more than what
Olaus relates,: confirmed by the Judicious Olearius, who was twice employed
into those parts as a Public Minister, who in his Account of Moscovy has this
Passage: The Hares there are Gray; but in some Provinces they grow White in the
Winter. And within some few Lines after: It is not very Difficult to find the
Cause of this Change, which certainly proceeds only from the Outward Cold,
since I know that even in Summer, Hares will change Color, if they be kept a
competent time in a Cellar; I say, were it not for some Scruple, because I take
notice, that in the same Page the Author Affirms, that the like change of
Color that happens to Hares in some Provinces of Muscovy, happens to them also
in Livonia, and yet immediately subjoyns, that in Curland the Hares vary not
their Color in Winter, though these two last named Countries be contiguous,
(that is) severed only by the River of Dugna; For it is scarce conceivable how
Cold alone should have, in Countries so near, so strangely differing an
operation, though no less strange a thing is confessed by many, that ascribe
the Complexion of Negroes to the Heat of the Sun, when they would have the
River of Cenega so to bound the Moors, that though on the North-side they are
but Tawny, on the other side they are Black.

There is another Opinion concerning the Complexion of Negroes, that is not
only embraced by many of the more Vulgar Writers, but likewise by that
ingenious Traveller Mr. Sandys, and by a late most learned Critic, besides
other men of Note, and these would have the Blackness of Negroes an effect of
Noah's Curse ratified by God's, upon Cham; But though I think that even a
Naturalist may without disparagement believe all the Miracles attested by the
Holy Scriptures, yet in this case to fly to a Supernatural Cause, will, I
fear, look like Shifting off the Difficulty, instead of Resolving it; for we
enquire not the First and Universal, but the Proper, Immediate, and Physical
Cause of the Jetty Color of Negroes; And not only we do not find expressed in
the Scripture, that the Curse meant by Noah Cham, was the Blackness of his
Posterity, but we do find plainly enough there that the Curse was quite another
thing, namely, that he should be a Servant of servants, that is by an Ebraism,
a very Abject Servant to his Brethren, which accordingly did in part come to
pass, when the Israelites of the posterity of Sem, subdued the Canaanites, that
descended from Cham, and kept them in great Subjection. Nor is it evident that
Blackness is a Curse, for Navigators tell us of Black Nations, who think so
much otherwise of their own condition, that they paint the Devil White. Nor is
Blackness inconsistent with Beauty, which even to our European Eyes consists
not so much in Color, as an Advantageous Stature, a Comely Symmetry of the
parts of the Body, and Good Features in the Face. So that I see not why
Blackness should be thought such a Curse to the Negroes, unless perhaps it be,
that being wont to go Naked in those Hot Climates, the Color of their Skin
does probably, according to the Doctrine above delivered, make the Sunbeams
more Scorching to them, than they would prove to a people of a White
Complexion.

Greater probability there is, That the Principal Cause (for I would not
exclude all concurrent ones) of the Blackness of Negroes is some Peculiar and
Seminal Impression, for not only we see that Blackmore boys brought over into
these Colder Climates lose not their Color; But good Authors inform us, That
the Offspring of Negroes Transplanted out of Africa, above a hundred years
ago, retain still the Complexion of their Progenitors, though possibly in Tract
of time it will decay; As on the other side, the White people removing into
very Hot Climates, have their Skins by the Heat of the Sun scorched into Dark
Colors; yet neither they, nor their Children have been observed, even in the
Countries of Negroes, to descend to a Color amounting to that of the Natives;
whereas I remember I have Read in Pisos excellent account of Brasile, Piso Not.
and Med. Hist. de Brasil. lib. in fine.
that betwixt the Americans and Negroes are generated a distinct sort of Men,
which they call Cabocles, and betwixt Portugalls and Ethiopian women, He tells
us, he has sometimes seen Twins, whereof one had a White skin, the other a
Black; not to mention here some other instances, he gives, that the productions
of the mixtures of differing people, that is (indeed,) the effects of Seminal
Impressions which they consequently argue to have been their Causes; and we
shall not much scruple at this, if we consider, that even Organical parts may
receive great Differences from such peculiar Impressions, upon what account
soever they came to be settled in the first Individual persons, from whom they
are Propagated to Posterity, as we see in the Blobber-Lips and Flat-Noses of
most Nations of Negroes. And if we may Credit what Learned men deliver
concerning the Little Feet of the Chinesses, the Macrocephali taken notice of
by Hippocrates, will not be the only Instance we might apply to our present
purpose. And on this occasion it will not perchance be Impertinent to add
something of what I have observed in other Animals, as that there is a sort of
Hens that want Rumps; And that (not to mention that in several places there is
a sort of Crows or Daws that are not Cole-black as ours, but partly of a
Whitish Color) in spite of Porphyries examples of Inseparable Accidents, I
have seen a perfectly White Raven, as to Bill as well as Feathers, which I
attentively considered, for fear of being imposed upon. And this recalls into
my Memory, what a very Ingenious Physician has diverse times related to me of a
young Lady, to whom being called, he found that though she much complained of
want of Health, yet there appeared so little cause either in her Body, or her
Condition to Guess that She did any more than fancy her self Sick, that
scrupling to give her Physic, he persuaded her Friends rather to divert her
Mind by little Journeys of Pleasure, in one of which going to Visit St.
Winifrids Well, this Lady, who was a Catholic, and devout in her Religion, and
a pretty while in the Water to perform some Devotions, and had occasion to fix
her Eyes very attentively upon the Red pipple-stones, which in a scattered
order made up a good part of those that appeared through the water, and a while
after growing Bigg, she was delivered of a Child, whose White Skin was
Copiously speckl'd with spots of the Color and Bigness of those Stones, and
though now this Child have already lived several years, yet she still retains
them. I have but two things to add concerning the Blackness of Negroes, the one
is, that the Seat of that Color seems to be but the thin Epidermes, or outward
Skin, for I knew a young Negroe, who having been lightly Sick of the Small Pox
or Measles, (for it was doubted which of the two was his Disease) I found by
enquiry of a person that was concerned for him, that in those places the
little Tumors that had broke their passage through the Skin, when they were
gone, they left VVhitish specks behind them; And the lately commended Piso
assures us, that having the opportunity in Brasil to Dissect many Negroes, he
clearly found that their Blackness went no deeper than the very outward Skin,
which Cuticula or Epiderms being removed, the undermost Skin or Cutis appeared
just as White as that of Europaean Bodies. And the like has been affirmed to
me by a Physician of our own, whom, hearing he had Dissected a Negroe here in
England, I consulted about this particular. The other thing to be here taken
notice of concerning Negroes is, That having inquired of an Intelligent
acquaintance of mine (who keeps in the Indies about 200. of them as well Women
as Men to work in his Plantations,) whether their Children come Black into the
world; he answered, That they did not, but were brought forth of almost the
like Reddish Color with our European Children; and having further inquired,
how long it was before these Infants appeared Black, he replied, that 'twas not
wont to be many days. And agreeable to this account I find that, given us in a
freshly published French Book written by a Jesuit, that had good opportunity of
Knowing the Truth of what he Delivers, for being one of the Missionaries of his
Order into the Southern America upon the Laudable Design of Converting
In-sidels to Christianity, he Baptized several Infants, which when newly Born,
were much of the same Color with European Babes, but within about a Week began
to appear of the Hue of their Parents. But more Pregnant is the Testimony of
our Countryman Andrew Battle, who being sent Prisoner by the Portugalls to
Angola, lived there, and in the adjoining Regions, partly as a Prisoner, partly
as a Pilot, and partly as a Soldier, near 18. years, and he mentioning the
African Kingdom of Longo, peopled with Blacks, has this passage: The Children
in this Country are Born White, and change their Purchase Pilgrim. Second part,
Seventh Book. 3. Chap. Sect. 5.
Color in two days to a Perfect Black. As for Example, The Portugalls which
dwell in the Kingdom of Longo have sometimes Children by the Negroe- women,
and many times the Fathers are deceived, thinking, when the Child is Born, that
it is theirs, and within two days it proves the Son or Daughter of a Negroe,
which the Portugalls greatly grieve at; And the same person has elsewhere a
Relation, which, if he have made no use at all of the liberty of a Traveller,
is very well worth our Notice, since this, together with that we have formerly
mentioned of Seminal Impressions, shows a possibility, that a Race of Negroes
might be begun, though none of the Sons of Adam for many Precedent Generations
were of that Complexion. For I see not why it should not be at least as
possible, that White Parents may sometimes have Black Children, as that African
Negroes should sometimes have lastingly White ones, especially since concurrent
causes may easily more befriend the Productions of the Former kind, than under
the scorching Heat of Africa those of the Latter. And I remember on the
occasion of what he delivers, that of the White Raven formerly mentioned, the
Possessor affirmed to me, that in the Nest out of which he was taken White,
they found with him but one other Young one, and that he was of as Jetty a
Black as any common Raven. But let us hear our Author himself: Here are (says
he, speaking of the formerly mentioned Regions) Born in this Country white
Children, which is very rare among them, for their Parents are Negroes;
Purchase. Ibid.
And when any of them are Born, they are presented to the King, and are called
Dondos; These are as White as any White Men. These are the Kings Witches, and
are brought up in Witchcraft, and always wait on the King: There is no man
that dare meddle with these Dondos, if they go to the Market they may take what
they list, for all Men stand in awe of them. The King of Longo has four of
them. And yet this Country in our Globes is placed almost in the midst of the
Torrid Zone (four or five Degrees Southward of the Line.) And our Author
elsewhere tells us of the Inhabitants, that they are so fond of their
Blackness, that they will not suffer any that is not of that Color (as the
Portugalls that come to Trade thither) to be so much as Buried in their Land,
of which he annexes a particular example, that Purchase Ibid. in sin.
may be seen in his Voyage preserved by our Industrious Countreyman Mr.
Purchase. But it is high time for me to dismiss Observations, and go on with
Experiments.

EXPERIMENT XII.
The way, Pyrophilus, of producing Whiteness by Chemical Praecipitations is
very well worth our observing, for thereby Bodies of very Differing Colors as
well as Natures, though dissolved in Several Liquors, are all brought into
Calces or Powders that are White. Thus we find that not only Crab's-eyes, that
are of themselves White, and Pearls that are almost so, but Coral and Minium
that are Red, being dissolved in Spirit of Vinegar, may be uniformly
Praecipitated by Oil of Tartar into White Powders. Thus Silver and Tin
separately dissolved in Aqua Fortis, will the one Praecipitate it self, and the
other be Praecipitated by common Salt Water into a White Calx, and so will
Crude Lead and Quicksilver first dissolved likewise in Aqua Fortis. The like
Calx will be afforded as I have tried by a Solution of that shining Mineral
Tinglass dissolved in Aqua Fortis, and Praecipitated out of it; and diverse of
these Calces may be made at least as Fair and White, if not better Colored, if
instead of Oil of Tartar they were Praecipitated with Oil of Vitriol, or with
another Liquor I could Name. Nay, that Black Mineral Antimony it self, being
reduced by and with the Salts that concur to the Composition of common
Sublimate, into that Clear though Unctuous Liquor that Chemists commonly call
Rectified Butter of Antimony, will by the bare affusion of store of Fair Water
be struck down into that Snow-white Powder, which when the adhering Saltness is
well washed off, Chemists are pleased to call Mercurius Vitae, though the like
Powder may be made of Antimony, without the addition of any Mercury at all. And
this Lactescence if I may so call it, does also commonly ensue when Spirit of
Wine, being Impregnated with those parts of Gums or other Vegetable
Concretions, that are supposed to abound with Sulphurous Corpuscles, fair
Water is suddenly poured upon the Tincture or Solution. And I remember that
very lately I did, for Trial sake, on a Tincture of Benjamin drawn with Spirit
of Wine, and brought to be as Red as Blood, pour some fair Water, which
presently mingling with the Liquor, immediately turned the whole Mixture White.
But if such Seeming Milks be suffered to stand unstirr'd for a convenient
while, they are wont to let fall to the bottom a Resinous Substance, which the
Spirit of Wine Diluted and Weakened by the Water poured in it, was unable to
support any longer. And something of Kin to this change of Color in Vegetables
is that, which Chemists are wont to observe upon the pouring of Acid Spirits
upon the Red Solution of Sulphur, dissolved in an Infusion of Potashes, or in
some other sharp Lixivium, the Praecipitated Sulphur before it subsides,
immediately turning the Red Liquor into a White one. And other Examples might
be added of this way of producing Whiteness in Bodies by Praecipitating them
out of the Liquors wherein they have been Dissolved; but I think it may be more
useful to admonish you, Pyrophilus, that this observation admits of
Restrictions, and is not so Universal, as by this time perhaps you have begun
to think it; For though most Praecipitated Bodies are White, yet I know some
that are not; For Gold Dissolved in Aqua Regis, whether you Praecipitate it
with Oil of Tartar, or with Spirit of Sal Armoniack, will not afford a White
but a Yellow Calx. Mercury also though reduced into Sublimate, and
Praecipitated with Liquors abounding with Volatile Salts, as the Spirits drawn
from Urine, Hartshorn, and other Animal substances, yet will afford, as we
Noted in our first Experiment about Whiteness and Blackness, a White
Praecipitate, yet with the Solution of Potashes and other Lixiviate Salts, it
will let fall an Orange-Tawny Powder. And so will Crude Antimony, if, being
dissolved in a strong Lie, you pour (as far as I remember) any Acid Liquor
upon the Solution newly Filtrated, whilst it is yet Warm. And if upon the
Filtrated Solution of Vitriol, you pour a Solution of one of these fixed Salts,
there will subside a Copious substance, very far from having any Whiteness,
which the Chemists are pleased to call, how properly I have elsewhere examined,
the Sulphur of Vitriol. So that most Dissolved Bodies being by Praecipitation
brought to White Powders, and yet some affording Praecipitates of other
Colors, the reason of both the Phoenomena may deserve to be inquired into.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
Some Learned Modern Writers are of Opinion, that the Account upon which
VVhiteness and Blackness ought to be called, as they commonly are, the two
Extreme Colors, is, See Scaliger Exercit. 325. Sect. 9.
That Blackness (by which I presume is meant the Bodies endowed with it)
receives no other Colors; but VVhiteness very easily receives them all; whence
some of them compare VVhiteness to the Aristotelian Materia prima, that being
capable of any sort of Forms, as they suppose White Bodies to be of every kind
of Color. But not to Dispute about Names or Expressions, the thing it self
that is affirmed as Matter of Fact, seems to be True enough in most Cases, not
in all, or so, as to hold Universally. For though it be a common observation
among Dyers, That Clothes, which have once been thoroughly imbued with Black,
cannot so well afterward be Died into Lighter Colors, the praeexistent Dark
Color infecting the Ingredients, that carry the Lighter Color to be
introduced, and making it degenerate into some more Sad one; Yet the
Experiments lately mentioned may show us, that were the change of Color in
Black Bodies is attempted, not by mingling Bodies of Lighter Colors with them,
but by Addition of such things as are proper to alter the Texture of those
Corpuscles that contain the Black Color, it is no such difficult matter, as the
lately mentioned Learned Men imagine, to alter the Color of Black Bodies. For
we saw that Inks of several Kinds might in a trice be deprived of all their
Blackness; and those made with Log-wood and Red-Roses might also be changed,
the one into a Red, the other into a Reddish Liquor; and with Oil of Vitriol I
have sometimes turned Black pieces of Silk into a kind of Yellow, and though
the Taffaty were thereby made Rotten, yet the spoiling of that does no way
prejudice the Experiment, the change of Black Silk into Yellow, being never the
less True, because the Yellow Silk is the less good. And as for Whiteness, I
think the general affirmation of its being so easily Destroyed or Transmuted by
any other Color, ought not to be received without some Cautions and
Restrictions. For whereas, according to what I formerly Noted, Lead is by
Calcination turned into that Red Powder we call Minium; And Tin by Calcination
reduced to a White Calx, the common Putty that is sold and used so much in
Shops, instead of being, as it is pretended and ought to be, only the Calx of
Tin, is, by the Artificers that make it, to save the charge of Tin, made, (as
some of themselves have confessed, and as I long suspected by the Cheap rate it
may be bought for) but of half Tin and half Lead, if not far more Lead than
Tin, and yet the Putty in spite of so much Lead is a very White Powder,
without disclosing any mixture of Minium. And so if you take two parts of
Copper, which is a High-colour'd Metal, to but one of Tin, you may by Fusion
bring them into one Mass, wherein the Whiteness of the Tin is much more
Conspicuous and Predominant than the Reddishness of the Copper. And on this
occasion it may not be Impertinent to mention an Experiment, which I relate
upon the Credit of a very Honest man, whom I purposely inquired of about it,
being my self not very fond of making Trials with Arsenick, the Experiment is
this, That if you Colliquate Arsenick and Copper in a due proportion, the
Arsenick will Blanch the Copper both within and without, which is an Experiment
well enough Known; but when I inquired, whether or no this White mixture being
skilfully kept a while upon the Cupel would not let go its Arsenick, which made
Whiteness its praedominant Color, and return to the Reddishness of Copper, I
was assured of the Affirmative; so that among Mineral Bodies, some of those
that are White, may be far more capable, than those I am reasoning with seem to
have known, of Eclipsing others, and of making their Color Praedominant in
Mixtures. In further Confirmation of which may be added, that I remember that I
also took a lump of Silver and Gold melted together, wherein by the Aestimate
of a very Experienced Refiner, there might be about a fourth or third part of
Gold, and yet the Yellow Color of the Gold was so hid by the White of the
Silver, that the whole Mass appeared to be but Silver, and when it was rubbed
upon the Touchstone, an ordinary beholder could scarce have distinguished it
from the Touch of common Silver; though if I put a little Aqua Fortis upon any
part of the White Surface it had given the Touchstone, the Silver in the
moistened part being immediately taken up and concealed by the Liquor, the
Golden Particles would presently disclose that native Yellow, and look rather
as if Gold, than if the above mentioned mixture, had been rubbed upon the Stone.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
I took a piece of Black-horn, (polished as being part of a Comb) this with a
piece of broken glass I scraped into many thin and curdled flakes, some shorter
and some longer, and having laid a pretty Quantity of these scrapings together,
I found, as I looked for, that the heap they composed was White, and though, if
I laid it upon a clean piece of White Paper, its Color seemed somewhat
Eclipsed by the greater Whiteness of the Body it was compared with, looking
somewhat like Linen that had been sulli'd by a little wearing, yet if I laid
it upon a very Black Body, as upon a Beaver Hatt, it then appeared to be of a
good White, which Experiment, that you may in a trice make when you please,
seems very much to Disfavour both their Doctrine that would have Colors to
flow from the substantial Forms of Bodies, and that of the Chemists also, who
ascribe them to one of other of their three Hypostatical Principles; for though
in our Case there was so great a Change made, that the same Body without being
substantially either Increased or Lessened, passes immediately from one extreme
Color to another (and that too from Black to White) yet this so great and
sudden change is effected by a slight Mechanical Transposition of parts, there
being no Salt or Sulphur or Mercury that can be pretended to be Added or Taken
away, nor yet any substantial Form that can reasonably be supposed to be
Generated and Destroyed, the Effect proceeding only from a Local Motion of the
parts which so varied their Position as to multiply their distinct Surfaces,
and to Qualify them to Reflect far more Light to the Eye, than they could
before they were scraped off from the entire piece of Black horn.

EXPERIMENT XV.
And now, Pyrophilus, it will not be improper for us to take some notice of an
Opinion touching the cause of Blackness, which I judged not so seasonable to
Question, till I I had set down some of the Experiments, that might justify my
dissent from it. You know that of late diverse Learned Men, having adopted the
three Hypostatical Principles, besides other Notions of the Chemists, are very
inclinable to reduce all Qualities of Bodies to one or other of those three
Principles, and Particularly assign for the cause of Blackness the Sootie steam
of adust or Torrifi'd Sulphur. But I hope that what we have delivered above to
countenance the Opinion we have proposed about the Cause of Blackness, will so
easily supply you with several Particulars that may be made use of against this
Opinion, that I shall now represent to You but two things concerning it.

And First it seems that the favorers of the Chymicall Theories might have
pitched upon some more proper term, to express the Efficient of Blackness than
Sulphur adust; for we know that common Sulphur, not only when Melted, but even
when Sublimed, does not grow Black by suffering the Action of the fire, but
continues and ascends Yellow, and rather more than less White, than it was
before its being exposed to the fire. And if it be set on fire, as when we make
that acid Liquor, that Chemists call Oleum Sulphuris per campanam, it affords
very little Soot, and indeed the flame yields so little, that it will scarce in
any degree Black a sheet of White Paper, held a pretty while over the flame and
smoke of it, which is observed rather to Whiten than Infect linen, and which
does plainly make Red Roses grow very Pale, but not at all Black, as far as the
Smoke is permitted to reach the leaves. And I can show you of a sort of fixed
Sulphur made by an Industrious Laborant of your acquaintance, who assured me
that he was wont to keep it for diverse weeks together night and day in a naked
and Violent fire, almost like that of the Glass-house, and when, to satisfy my
Curiosity, I made him take out a lump of it, though it were glowing hot (and
yet not melted,) it did not, when I had suffered it to cool, appear Black, the
true Color of it being a true Red. I know it may be said, that Chemists in the
Opinion above recited mean the Principle of Sulphur, and not common Sulphur
which receives its name, not from its being all perfectly of a Sulphurous
Nature, but for that plenty and Predominancy of the Sulphurous Principle in
it. But allowing this, it is easy to reply, that still according to this very
Reason, torrifi'd Sulphur should afford more Blackness, than most other
concretes, wherein that Principle is confessed to be far less copious. Also
when I have exposed Camphire to the fire in Close Vessels, as Inflamable, and
consequently (according to the Chemists) as Sulphurous a Body as it is, I
could not by such a degree of Heat, as brought it to Fusion, and made it Boil
in the glass, impress any thing of Blackness, or of any other Color, than its
own pure White, upon this Vegetable concrete. But what shall we say to Spirit
of Wine, which being made by a Chemical Analysis of the Liquor that affords it,
and being totally Inflamable, seems to have a full right to the title they give
it of Sulphur Vegetabile, and yet this fluid Sulphur not only contracts not any
degree of Blackness by being often so heated, as to be made to Boil, but when
it burns away with an Actual flame, I have not found that it would discolor a
piece of White Paper held over it, with any discernable Soot. Tin also, that
wants not, according to the Chemists, a Sulphur Joviale, when thoroughly burned
by the fire into a Calx, is not Black, but eminently White. And I lately noted
to you out of Bellonius, that the Charcoals of Oxy-cedar are not of the former
of these two Colors, but of the latter. And the Smoke of our Tinby coals here
in England, has been usually observed, rather to Blanch linen then to Black
it. To all which, other Particulars of the like nature might be added, but I
rather choose to put you in mind of the third Experiment, about making Black
Liquors, or Ink, of Bodies that were non of them Black before. For how can it
be said, that when those Liquors are put together actually Cold, and continne
so after their mixture, there intervenes any new Adustion of Sulphur to produce
the emergent Blackness? (and the same question will be appliable to the
Blackness produced upon the blade of a Knife, that has cut Lemmons and some
kind of Sour apples, if the juice (though both Actually and Potentially Cold)
be not quickly wiped of) And when by the instilling either of a few drops of
Oil of Vitriol as in the second Experiment, or of a little of the Liquor
mentioned in the Passage pointed at in the fourth Experiment, (where I teach at
once to Destroy one black Ink, and make another) the Blackness produced by
those Experiments is presently destroyed; if the Color proceeded only from the
Plenty of Sulphurous parts, torrify'd in the Black Bodies, I demand, what
becomes of them, when the Color so suddenly dissappears? For it cannot
Reasonably be said, that all those that sufficed to make so great a quantity of
Black Matter, should resort to so very small a proportion of the Clarifying
Liquor, (if I may so call it) as to be deluted by it, with out at all
Denigrating it. And if it be said that the Instilled Liquor dispersed those
Black Corpuscles, I demand, how that Dispersion comes to destroy their
Blackness, but by making such a Local Motion of their part, as destroys their
former Texture? which may be a Matter of such moment in cases like ours, that I
remember that I have in few hours, without addition, from Soot it self,
attained pretty store of Crystalline Salt, and good store of Transparent
Liquor, and (which I have on another occasion noted as remarkable) this so
Black substance had its Color so altered, by the change of Texture it received
from the fire, wherewith it was distilled, that it did for a great while afford
such plenty of very white Exhalations, that the Receiver, though large, seemed
to be almost filled with Milk.

Secondly, But were it granted, as it is in some cases not Improbable, that
diverse Bodies may receive a Blackness from a Sootie Exhalation^, occasioned by
the Adustion of their Sulphur, which (for the Reasons lately mentioned I should
rather call their Oily parts;) yet still this account is applicable but to some
Particular Bodies, and will afford us no General Theory of Blackness. For if,
for example, White Hartshorn, being, in Vessels well luted to each other,
exposed to the fire, be said to turn Black by the Infection of its own Smoke, I
think I may justly demand, what it is that makes the Smoke or Soot it self
Black, since no such Color, but its contrary, appeared before in the
Hartshorn? And with the same Reason, when we are told, that torrify'd Sulphur
makes bodies Blakc, I desire to be told also, why Torrefaction makes Sulphur it
self Black? nor will there be any Satisfactory Reason assigned of these
Quaeries, without taking in those Fertile as well as Intelligible Mechanical
Principles of the Position and Texture of the Minute parts of the body in
reference to the Light and the Eye; and these applicable Principles may serve
the turn in many cases, where the Adustion of Sulphur cannot be pretended; as
in the appearing Blackness of an Open window, looked upon at a somewhat remote
distance from the house, as also in the Blackness Men think they see in the
Holes that happen to be in White linen, or Paper of the like Color; and in
the Increasing Blackness immediately Produced barely by so rubbing Velvet, whose
Piles were Inclined before, as to reduce them to a more Erected posture, in
which and in many other cases formerly alleged, there appears nothing requisite
to the Production of the Blackness, but the hindering of the incident Beams of
Light from rebounding plentifully enough to the Eye. To be short, those I
reason with, do concerning Blackness, what the Chemists are wont also to do
concerning other Qualities, namely to content themselves to tell us, in what
Ingredient of a Mixed Body, the Quality inquired after, does reside, instead of
explicating the Nature of it, which (to borrow a comparison from their own
Laboratories) is much as if in an enquiry after the cause of Salivation, they
should think it enough to tell us, that the several Kinds of Praecipitates of
Gold and Mercury, as likewise of Quicksilver and Silver (for I know that make
and use of such Praecipitates also) do Salivate upon the account of the
Mercury, which though Disguised abounds in them, whereas the Difficulty is as
much to know upon what account Mercury it self, rather than other Bodies, has
that power of working by Salivation. Which I say not, as though it were not
something (and too often the most we can arrive at) to discover in which of the
Ingredients of a Compounded Body, the Quality, whose Nature is fought, resides,
but because, though this Discovery it self may pass for something, and is
oftentimes more than what is taught us about the same subjects in the Schools,
yet we ought not to think it enough, when more Clear and Particular accounts
are to be had.

THE Experimental History OF COLORS Begun.
The Third PART. Containing Promiscuous Experiments About COLORS.
EXPERIMENT I.
BEcause that, according to the Conjectures I have above proposed, one of the
most General Causes of the Diversity of Colors in Opacous Bodies, is, that
some reflect the Light mingled with more, others with less of Shade (either as
to Quantity, or as to Interruption) I hold ir not unfit to mention in the first
place, the Experiments that I thought upon to examine this Conjecture. And
though coming to transcribe them out of some Physiological Adversaria I had
written in loose Papers, I cannot find one of the chief Records I had of my
Trials of this Nature, yet the Papers that escaped miscarrying, will, I presume,
suffice to manifest the main thing for which I now allege them; I find then
among my Adversaria, the following Narrative.

October the 11. About ten in the Morning in Sun-shiny Weather, (but not
without fleeting Clouds) we took several sorts of Paper Stained, some of one
Color, and some of another; and in a Darkened Room whose Window looked
Southward, we cast the Beams that came in at a hole about three Inches and a
half in Diameter, upon a White wall that was placed on one side, about five
foot distance from them.

The White gave much the Brightest Reflection.

The Green, Red, and Blew being Compared together, the Red gave much the
strongest Reflection, and manifestly enough also threw its Color upon the
Wall; The Green and Blew were scarce Discernable by their Colors, and seemed
to reflect an almost EqualLight.

The Yellow Compared with the two last named, Reflected somewhat more Light.

The Red and Purple being Compared together, the former manifestly Reflected a
good deal more Light.

The Blew and Purple Compared together, the former seemed to Reflect a little
more Light, though the Purple Color were more manifestly seen.

A Sheet of very well sleek'd Marbl'd Paper being Applied as the others, did
not cast any of its Distinct Colors upon the Wall; nor throw its Light upon it
with an Equal Diffusion; but threw the Beams Unstained and Bright to this and
that part of the Wall, as if it is Polish had given it the Nature of a specular
Body. But comparing it with a sheet of White Paper, we found the Reflection of
the latter to be much Stronger, it diffusing almost as much Light to a good
Extent as the Marble Paper did to one part of the Wall.

The Green and Purple left us somewhat in suspense which Reflected the most
Light; only the Purple seemed to have some little Advantage over the Green,
which was Dark in its kind.

Thus much I find in our above mentioned Collections, among which there are
also some Notes concerning the Production of Compounded Colors, by Reflection
from Bodies differingly Colored. And these Notes we intended should supply us
with what we should mention as our second Experiment: but having lost the Paper
that contained the Particulars, and remembering only in General, that if the
Objects which Reflected the Light were not Strongly Colored and somewhat
Glossy, the Reflected Beams would not manifestly make a Compounded Color upon
the Wall, and even then but very Faintly, we shall now say no more of that
Matter, only reserving our selves to mention hereafter the Composition of a
Green, which we still retain in Memory.

EXPERIMENT II.
We may add, Pyrophilus, on this Occasion, that though a Darkened Room be
Generally thought requisite to make the Color of a Body appear by Reflection
from another Body, that is not one of those that are commonly agreed upon to be
Specular (as Polished Metal, Quick silver, Glass, Water, etc.) Yet I have
often observed that when I wore Doublets Lined with some silken Stuff that was
very Glossy and Vividly Colored, especially Red, I could in an Enlightened Room
plainly enough Discern the Color, upon the Pure White Linen that came out at
my Sleeve and reached to my Cufs; as if that Fine White Body were more
Specular, than Colored and Unpolished Bodies are thought Capable of being.

EXPERIMENT III.
Whilst we were making the newly mentioned Experiments, we thought fit to try
also what Composition of Colors might be made by Altering the Light in its
Passage to the Eye by the Interposition not of Perfectly Diaphanous Bodies,
(that having been already tried by others as well as by us (as we shall soon
have occasion to take notice) but of Semi-opacous Bodies, and those such as
looked upon in an ordinary Light, and not held betwixt it and the Eye, are not
wont to be Discriminated from the rest of Opacous Bodies; of this Trial, our
mentioned Adversaria present us the following Account.

Holding these Sheets, sometimes one sometimes the other of them, before the
Hole betwixt the Sun and the Eye, with the Colored sides obverted to the Sun;
we found them single to be somewhat Transparent, and appear of the same Color
as before, only a little altered by the great Light they were placed in; but
laying two of them one over another and applying them so to the Hole, the
Colors were compounded as follows.

The Blew and Yellow scarce exhibited any thing but a Darker Yellow, which we
ascribed to the Coarseness of the Blew Papers, and its Darkness in its Kind.
For applying the Blew parts of the Marbl'd Paper with the Yellow Paper after
the same manner, they exhibited a good Green.

They Yellow and Red looked upon together gave us but a Dark Red, somewhat (and
but a little,) inclining to an Orange Color.

The Purple and Red looked on together appeared more Scarlet.

The Purple and Yellow made an Orange.

The Green and Red made a Dark Orange Tawny.

The Green and Purple made the Purple appear more Dirty.

The Blew and Purple made the Purple more Lovely, and far more Deep.

The Red parts of the Marbl'd Paper looked upon with the Yellow appeared of a
Red far more like Scarlet than without it.

But the Fineness or Coarseness of the Papers, their being carefully or
slightly Colored, and diverse other Circumstances, may so vary the Events of
such Experiments as these, that if, Pyrophilus, you would Build much on them,
you must carefully Repeat them.

EXPERIMENT IV.
The Triangular Prismatical Glass being the Instrument upon whose Effects we
may the most Commodiously speculate the Nature of Emphatical Colors, (and
perhaps that of Others too;) we thought it might be useful to observe the
several Reflections and Refractions which the Incident Beams of Light suffer in
Rebounding from it, and Passing through it. And this we thought might be Best
done, not (as is usual,) in an ordinary Inlightn'd Room, where (by reason of
the Difficulty of doing otherwise) even the Curious have left Particulars
Unheeded, which may in a convenient place be easily taken notice of; but in a
Darkened Room, where by placing the Glass in a convenient Posture, the Various
Reflections and Refractions may be Distinctly observed; and where it may appear
what Beams are Unting'd, and which they are, that upon the Bodies that
terminate them, do Paint either the Primary or Secondary Iris. In pursuance of
this we did in the above mentioned Darkened Room, make observation of no less
than four Reflections, and three Refractions that were afforded us by the same
Prism, and thought that notwithstanding what was taught us by the Rules of
Catoptricks and Dioptricks, it would not be amiss to find also, by hiding
sometimes one part of the Prism, and sometimes another, and observing where the
Light or Color Vanished thereupon, by which Reflection and by which Refraction
each of the several places whereon the Light rebounding from, or passing
through, the Prism appeared either Sincere or Tincted, was produced. But
because it would be Tedious and not so Intelligible to deliver this in Words,
I have thought fit to Referr You to the Annexed Scheme where the Newly
menrion'd particulars may be at one View taken Notice of.

EXPERIMENT V.
I know not whether you will think it Inconsiderable to annex to this
Experiment, That we observed in a Room not The Explication of the Scheme.
P P P. An Aequilaterotriangular Crystalline Prism, one of whose edges P. is
placed directly toward the Sun.

A B and a b Two rays from the Sun falling on the Prism at B b. and thence
partly reflected toward C and g. and partly refracted toward D and d.

B C and b g. Those reflected Rays.

B D and b d. Those refracted Rays which are partly refracted toward E and e.
and there paint an Iris 1 2 3 4 5. denoting the five consecutions of colors
Red, Yellow, Green, Blew, and Purple; and are partly reflected toward F and z.

D F and d z. Those Reflected Rays which are partly refracted toward G and m.
colorless, and partly reflected, toward H and TH.

F H and z TH. Those reflected Rays which are refracted toward I and i. and
there paint an other fainter Iris, the colors of which are contrary to the
former 5 4 3 2 1. signifying Purple, Blew, Green, Yellow, Red, so that the
Prism in this posture exhibits four Rainbows.

Place this Scheme between the 192 and 193. Pages.

depiction of a prism bending light Darkened, that the Prismatical Iris (if I
may so call it) might be Reflected without losing any of its several Colors
(for we now consider not their Order) not only from a plain Looking-glass and
from the calm Surface of Fair Water, but also from a Concave Looking-glass; and
that Refraction did as little Destroy those Colors as Reflection. For by the
help of a large (double Unequal) Burning-glass through which we Refracted the
Suns Beams, we found that one part of the Iris might be made to appear either
beyond, or on this side of the other Parts of the same Iris; but yet the same
Vivid Colors would appear in the Displaced part (if I may so term it) as in
the other. To which I shall add, that having, by hiding the side of the Prism,
obverted to the Sun with an Opacous Body, wherein only one small hole was left
for the Light to pass through, reduced the Prismatical Iris (cast upon White
Paper) into a very narrow compass, and looked upon it through a Microscope; the
Colors appeared the same as to kind that they did to the naked Eye.

EXPERIMENT VI.
It may afford matter of Speculation to the Inquisitive, such as you,
Pyrophilus, that as the Colors of outward Objects brought into a Darkened
Room, do so much depend for their Visibility upon the Dimness of the Light they
are there beheld by; that the ordinary Light of the day being freely let in
upon them, they immediately disappear: so our Trials have informed us, that as
to the Prismatical Iris painted on the Floor by the Beams of the Sun Trajected
through a Triangular-glass; though the Colors of it appear very Vivid even at
Noonday, and in Sun shiny Weather, yet by a more Powerful Light they may be
made to disappear. For having sometimes, (in prosecution of some Conjectures of
mine not now to be Insisted on,) taken a large. Metalline Concave Speculum, and
with it cast the converging Beams of the Sun upon a Prismatical Iris which I
had caused to be projected upon the Floor, I found that the over-powerfull
Light made the Colors of the Iris disappear. And if I so Reflected the Light
as that it crossed but the middle of the Iris, in that part only the Colors
vanished or were made Invisible; those parts of the Iris that were on the right
and left hand of the Reflected Light (which seemed to divide them, and cut the
Iris asunder) continuing to exhibit the same Colors as before. But upon this
we must not now stay to Speculate.

EXPERIMENT VII.
I have sometimes thought it worth while to take notice, whether or no the
Colors of Opacous Bodies might not appear to the Eye some what Diversified,
not only by the Disposition of the Superficial parts of the Bodies themselves
and by the Position of the Eye in Reference to the Object and the Light, (for
these things are No orious enough;) but according also to the Nature of the
Lucid Body that shines upon them. And I remember that in Prosecution of this
Curiosity, I observed a manifest Difference in some Kinds of Colored Bodies
looked on by Daylight; and afterward by the light of the Moon; either
directly falling on them or Reflected upon them from a Concave Looking-glass.
But not finding at present in my Collections about Colors any thing set down
of this Kind, I shall, till I have opportunity to repeat them, content my self
to add what I find Registered concerning Colors looked on by Candlelight, in
regard that not only the Experiment is more easy to be repeated, but the
Objects being the same sorts of Colored Paper lastly mentioned, the Collation
of the two Experiments may help to make the Conjectures they will suggest
somewhat the less uncertain.

Within a few days of the time above mentioned, diverse Sheets of Colored
Paper that had been looked upon before in the Sunshine were looked upon at
night by the light of a pretty big Candle, (snuff'd) and the Changes that were
observed were these.

The Yellow seemed much fainter than in the Day, and inclinable to a pale Straw
Color.

The Red seemed little Changed; but seemed to Reflect Light more strongly than
any other Color (for White was none of them.)

A fair Deep Green looked upon by it self, seemed to be a Dark Blew: But being
looked upon together with a Dark Blew, appeared Greenish; and beheld together
with a Yellow appeared more Blew than at first.

The Blew looked more like a Deep Purple or Murray than it had done in the
Daylight.

The Purple seemed very little altered.

The Red looked upon with the Yellow made the Yellow look almost like Brown
Cap-paper.

N. The Caution Subjoyned to the third Experiment, is also Applicable to this.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
But here I must not omit to subjoyn, that to satisfy our Selves, whether or
no the Light of a Candle were not made unsincere, and as it were Tinged with a
Yellow Color by the Admixtion of the Corpuscles it assumes from its Fuel; we
did not content our selves with what appears to the Naked Eye, but taking a
pretty thick Red or Cylinder (for thin Pieces would not serve the turn) of deep
Blew Glass, and looking upon the Candles flame at a Convenient distance through
it, we perceived as we expected, the Flame to look Green; which as we often
note, is the Color wont to emerge from the Composition of Opacous Bodies,
which were apart one of them Blew, and the other Yellow. And this perchance may
be the main Reason of that which some observe, that a sheet of very White Paper
being looked upon by Candle light, it is not easy at first to discern it from a
light Yellow or Lemon Color; White Bodies (as we have elsewhere observed)
having more than those that are otherwise Colored, of a Specular Nature; in
regard that though they exhibit not, (unless they be Polished,) the shape of
the Luminary that shines on them, yet they Reflect its Light more Sincere and
Untroubl'd, by either Shades or Refractions, than Bodies of other Colors (as
Blew, or Green, or Yellow or the like.)

EXPERIMENT IX.
We took a Leaf of such Foliated Gold as Apothecaries are wont to Gild their
Pills with; and with the Edge of a Knife, (lightly moysten'd by drawing it over
the surface of the Tongue, and afterward) laid upon the edge of the Gold Leaf;
we so fastened it to the Knife, that being held against the light, it continued
extended like a little Flagg. This Leaf being held very near the Eye, and
obverted to the Light, appeared so full of Pores, that it seemed to have such a
kind of Transparency as that of a Sive, or a piece of Cyprus, or a Love-Hood;
but the Light that passed by these Pores was in its Passages so Tempered with
Shadow, and Modified, that the Eye discerned no more a Golden Color, but a
Greenish Blew. And for other's satisfaction, we did in the Night look upon a
Candle through such a Leaf of Gold; and by trying the Effect of several
Proportions of Distance betwixt the Leaf, the Eye and the Light, we quickly hit
upon such a Position for the Leaf of Gold, as that the flame, looked on through
it, appeared of a Greenish Blew, as we have seen in the Day time. The like
Experiment tried with a Leaf of Silver succeeded not well.

EXPERIMENT X.
We have sometimes found in the Shops of our Druggists, a certain Wood, which
is there called Lignum Nephriticum, because the Inhabitants of the Country
where it grows, are wont to use the Infusion of it made in fair Water against
the Stone of the Kidneys, and indeed an Eminent Physician of our Acquaintance,
who has very Particularly inquired into that Disease, assures me, that he has
found such an Infusion one of the most effectual Remedies, which he has ever
tried against that formidable Disease. The ancientest Account I have met: with
of this Simple, is given us by the Experienced Monardes in these Words. Nobis,
says he, Nova Hispania mittit quoddam ligni genus crassum and enode, cujus usus
jam diu receptus fuit in his Regionibus ad Renum vitia and Urinae difficultates
ac arenulas pellendas. Fit Nicolaus Monardes lib. simplic. ex India allator.
cap. 27.
autem hac ratione, Lignum assulatim and minutim concisum in limpidissima aqua
fontana maceratur, inque earelinquitur, donec aqua a bibentibus absumpta fit,
dimidia hora post injectum lignum aqua Coeruleum colorem contrahit, quisensim
intenditur pro temporis diuturnitate, tametsi lignum candidum sit. This Wood,
Pyrophilus, may afford us an Experiment, which besides the singularity of it,
may give no small assistance to an attentive Considerer toward the detection
of the Nature of Colors. The Experiment as we made it is this. Take Lignum
Nephriticum, and with a Knife cut it into thin Slices, put about a handful of
these Slices into two three or four pound of the purest Spring Water, let them
infuse there a night, but if you be in have, a much shorter time may suffice;
decant this Impregnated Water into a clear Glass Vial, and if you hold it
directly between the Light and your Eye, you shall see it wholly Tincted
(excepting the very top of the Liquor, wherein you will some times discern a
Sky-colour'd Circle) with an almost Golden Color, unless your Infusion have
been made too Strong of the Wood, for in that case it will against the Light
appear somewhat Dark and Reddish, and requires to be diluted by the addition of
a convenient quantity of fair Water. But if you hold this Vial from the Light,
so that your Eye be placed betwixt the Window and the Vial, the Liquor will
appear of a deep and lovely Coeruleous Color, of which also the drops, if any
be lying on the outside of the Glass, will seem to be very perfectly; And thus
far we have tried the Experiment, and found it to succeed even by the Light of
Candles of the larger size. If you so hold the Vial over against your Eyes,
that it may have a Window on one side of it, and a Dark part of the Room both
before it and on the other side, you shall see the Liquor partly of a Bluish
and partly of a Golden Color. If turning your back to the Window, you power out
some of the Liquor toward the Light and toward your Eyes, it will seem at the
coming out of the Glass to be perfectly Coeruleous, but when it is sallen down
a little way, the drops may seem Part Colored, according as the Beams of Light
do more or less fully Penetrate and Illustrate them. If you take a Basin about
half full of Water, and having placed it so in the Sunbeams Shining into a
Room, that one part of the Water may be freely Illustrated by the Beams of
Light, and the other part of it Darkened by the shadow of the Brim of the Basin,
if then I say you drop of our Tincture, made somewhat strong, both into the
Shaded and Illuminated parts of the Water, you may by looking upon it from
several places, and by a little Agitation of the water, observe diverse pleasing
Phoenomena which were tedious to particularize. If you power a little of this
Tincture upon a sheet of White Paper, so as the Liquor may remain of some depth
upon it, you may perceive the Neighboring drops to be partly of one Color,
and partly of the other, according to the position of your Eye in reference to
the Light when it looks upon them, but if you power off all the Liquor, the
Paper will seem Died of an almost Yellow Color. And if a sheet of Paper with
some of this Liquor in it be placed in a window where the Sunbeams may shine
freely on it, then if you turn your back to the Sun and take a Pen or some such
slender Body, and hold it over-thwart betwixt the Sun and the Liquor, you may
perceive that the Shadow projected by the Pen upon the Liquor, will not all of
it be a vulgar and Dark, but in part a curiously Colored shadow, that edge of
it, which is next the Body that makes it, being almost of a lively Golden
Color, and the remoter verge of a Coeruleous one.

These and other Phoenomena, which I have observed in this delightful
Experiment, diverse of my friends have looked upon not without some wonder, and
I remember an excellent Oculist finding by accident in a friends Chamber a fine
Vial full of this Liquor, which I had given that friend, and having never heard
any thing of the Experiment, nor having any Body near him that could tell him
what this strange Liquor might be, was a great while apprehensive, as he
presently after told me, that some strange new distemper was invading his Eyes.
And I confess that the unusualness of the Phoenomena made me very sollicitous
to find out the Cause of this Experiment, and though I am far from pretending
to have found it, yet my enquiries have, I suppose, enabled me to give such
hints, as may lead your greater sagacity to the discovery of the Cause of this
wonder. And first finding that this Tincture, if it were too copious in the
water, Kept the Colors from being so lively, and their Change from being so
discernable, and finding also that the Impregnating Virtue of this Wood did by
its being frequently Infused in New Water by degrees Decay, I Conjectured that
the Tincture afforded by the Wood must proceed from some Subtiler parts of it
drawn forth by the Water, which swimming too and fro in it did so Modifie the
Light, as to exhibit such and such Colors; and because these Subtle parts
were so easily Soluble even in Cold water, I concluded that they must abound
with Salts, and perhaps contain much of the Essential Salt, as the Chemists
call it, of the Wood. And to try whether these Subtle parts were Volatile
enough to be Distilled, without the Dissolution of their Texture, I carefully
Distilled some of the Tincted Liquor in very low Vessels, and the gentle heat
of a Lamp Furnace; but found all that came over to be as Limpid and Colorless
as Rock-water, and the Liquor remaining in the Vessel to be so deeply
Coeruleous, that it required to be opposed to a very strong Light to appear of
any other Color. I took likewise a Vial with Spirit of Wine, and a little Salt
of Hartshorn, and found that there was a certain proportion to be met with
betwixt the Liquor and the Salt, which made the Mixture fit to exhibit some
little Variety of Colors not Observable in ordinary Liquors, as it was
variously directed in reference to the Light and the Eye, but this Change of
Color was very far short from that which we had admired in our Tincture. But
however, I suspected that the Tinging Particles did abound with such Salts,
whose Texture, and the Color springing from it, would probably be altered by
peircing Acid Salts, which would in likelihood either make some Dissipation of
their Parts, or Associate themselves to the like Bodies, and either way alter
the Color exhibited by them; whereupon Pouring into a small Vial full of
Impregnated Water, a very little Spirit of Vinegar, I found that according to
my Expectation, the Coeruleous Color immediately vanished, but was deceived in
the Expectation I had, that the Golden Color would do so too; for, which way
soever I turned the Vial, either to or from the Light, I found the Liquor to
appear always of a Yellowish Color and no other: Upon this I imagined that the
Acid Salts of the Vinegar having been able to deprive the Liquor of its
Coeruleous Color, a Sulphurous Salt being of a contrary Nature, would be able
to Mortify the Saline Particles of Vinegar, and Destroy their Effects; And
accordingly having placed my Self betwixt the Window, and the Vial, and into
the same Liquor dropped a few drops of Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, (as Chemists
call it) I observed with pleasure, that immediately upon the Diffusion of this
Liquor, the Impregnated Water was restored to its former Coeruleous Color; And
this Liquor of Tartar being very Ponderous, and falling at first to the Bottom
of the Vial, it was easy to observe that for a little while the Lower part of
the Liquor appeared deeply Coeruleous, whilst all the Upper part retained its
former Yellowness, which it immediately lost as soon as either Agitation or
Time had made a competent Diffusion of the Liquor of Tartar through the Body of
the former Tincture; and this restored Liquor did, as it was Looked upon
against or from the Light, exhibit the same Phenomenon as the Tincted Water
did, before either of the Adventitious Liquors was poured into it.

Having made, Pyrophilus, diverse Trials upon this Nephritick Wood, we found
mention made of it by the Industrious Jesuit Kircherus, who having received a
Cup Turned of it from the Mexican Procurator of his Society, has probably
received also from him the Information he gives us concerning that Exotic
Plant, and therefore partly for that Reason, and partly because what he Writes
concerning it, does not perfectly agree with what we have delivered, we shall
not Scruple to acquaint you in his own Words, with as much of what he writes
concerning our Wood, as is requisite to our present purpose. Hoc loco (says he)
neutiquam omittendum duximus quoddam ligni candidi Mexicani genus, quod
Indigenae Coalle and Kircher. Art. Mag. Ducis and umbrae, lib. 1. part. 3.
Tlapazatli vocant, quod etsi experientia hucusque non nisi Coeruleoaquam
color tingere docuerit, nos tamen continua experientia invenimus id aquam in
omne Colorum genus transformare, quod merito cuipiam Paradoxum videri posset;
Ligni frutex grandis, ut aiunt, non raro in molem arboris excrescit, truncus
illius est crassus, enodis, instar piri arboris, folia ciceris foliis, aut
rutae haud absimilia, flores exigui, oblongi, lutei and spicatim digesti; est
frigida and humida planta, licet parum recedat a medio temperamento. Hujus
itaque descriptae arboris lignum in poculum efformatum, aquam eidem infusam
primu in aquam intense Coeruleam, color floris Baglossae, tingit, and quo
diutius in eo steterit, tanto intensiorem colorem acquirit. Hanc igitur aquam
si Vitreu Sphaerae infuderis, lucique exposueris, ne ullum quidem Coerulei
coloris vestigium apparebit, sed instar aquae purae putae fontanae limpidam
claramque aspicientibus se praebebit. Porro si hanc phialam vitream versus
locum magis umbrosum direxeris, totus humor gratissimum virorem referet; si
adhuc umbrosioribus locis, subrubrum, and sic pro rerum objectarum condition,
mirum dictu, colorem mutabit; in tenebris vero vel in vase opaco posita,
Coeruleum colorem suum resumet.

In this passage we may take notice of the following Particulars. And first, he
calls it a White Mexican Wood, whereas (not to mention that Mornardes informs
us that it is brought out of Nova Hispania) the Wood that we have met with in
several places, and employed as Lignum Nephriticum, was not White, but for the
most part of a much Darker Color, not unlike that of the Sadder Colored Wood
of Juniper. It Is true, that Monardes himself also says, that the Wood is White;
and it is affirmed, that the Wood which is of a Sadder Color is Adulterated by
being Imbued with the Tincture of a Vegetable, in whose Decoction it is
steeped. But having purposely inquired of the Eminentest of our English
Druggists, he peremptorily denied it. And indeed, having considered some of the
fairest Round pieces of this Wood that I could meet with in these Parts, I had
Opportunity to take notice that in one or two of them it was the External part
of the Wood that was White, and the more Inward part that was of the other
Color, the contrary of which would probably have appeared, if the Wood had
been Adulterated after the afore-mentioned manner. And I have at present by me
a piece of such Wood, which for about an Inch next the Bark is White, and then
as it were abruptly passes to the abovementioned Color, and yet this Wood by
the Tincture, it afforded us in Water, appears to have its Colored part
Genuine enough; for as for the White part, it appears upon trial of both at
once, much less enriched with the tingent Property.

Next, whereas our Author tells us, that the Infusion of this Wood exposed in a
Vial to the Light, looks like Spring Water, in which he afterward adds, that
there is no Tincture to be seen in it, our Observation and his agree not, for
the Liquor, which opposed to the Darker part of a Room exhibits a Sky-colour,
did constantly, when held against the Light, appear Yellowish or Reddish,
according as its Tincture was more Dilute or Deep; and then, whereas it has
been already said, that the Coeruleous Color was by Acid Salts a bolished,
this Yellowish one survived without any considerable Alteration, so that unless
our Author's Words be taken in a very Limited Sense, we must conclude, that
either his Memory mis-inform'd him, or that his White Nephritick Wood, and the
Sadder Colored one which we employed, were not altogether of the same Nature:
What he mentions of the Cup made of Lignum Nephriticum, we have not had
Opportunity to try, not having been able to procure pieces of that Wood great
enough, and otherwise fit to be turned into Cups; but as for what he says in
the Title of his Experiment, that this Wood tinges the Water with all sorts of
Colors, that is much more than any of those pieces of Nephritick Wood that we
have hitherto employed, was able to make good; The change of Colors
discernable in a Vial full of Water, Impregnated by any of them, as it is
directed toward a place more Lightsome or Obscure, being far from affording a
Variety answerable to so promising a Title. And as for what he tells us, that
in the Dark the Infusion of our VVood will resume a Coeruleous Color, I wish
he had Informed us how he Tried it.

But this brings into my mind, that having sometimes for Curiosity sake,
brought a round Vial with a long Neck filled with the Tincture of Lignum
Nephriticum into the Darkened Room already often mentioned, and holding it
sometimes in, sometimes near the Sunbeams that entered at the hole, and
sometimes partly in them, and partly out of them, the Glass being held in
several postures, and looked upon from several Neighboring parts of the Room,
disclosed a much greater Variety of Colors than in ordinary inlightn'd Rooms
it is wont to do; exhibiting, besides the usual Colors, a Red in some parts,
and a Green in others, besides Intermediate Colors produced by the differing
Degrees, and odd mixtures of Light and Shade.

By all this You may see, Pyrophilus, the reasonableness of what we elsewhere
had occasion to mention, when we have diverse times told you, that it is useful
to have New Experiments tried over again, though they were, at first, made by
Knowing and Candid Men, such Reiterations of Experiments commonly exhibiting
some New Phoenomena, detecting some Mistake or hinting some Truth, in reference
to them, that was not formerly taken notice of. And some of our friends have
been pleased to think, that we have made no unusefull addition to this
Experiment, by showing a way, how in a moment our Liquor may be deprived of its
Blewness, and restored to it again by the affusion of a very few drops of
Licuors, which have neither of them any Color at all of their own. And that
which deserves some particular wonder, is, that the Coeruleous Tincture of our
Wood is subject by the former Method to be Destroyed or Restored, the Yellowish
or Reddish Tincture continuing what it was. And that you may see, that Salts
are of a considerable use in the striking of Colors, let me add to the many
Experiments which may be afforded us to this purpose by the Dyers Trade, this
Observation; That as far as we have hitherto tried, those Liquors in general
that are strong of Acid Salts have the Power of Destroying the Blewness of the
Infusion of our Wood, and those Liquors indiscriminatly that abound with
Sulphurous Salts, (under which I comprehend the Urinous and Volatile Salts of
Animal Substances, and the Alcalisate or fixed Salts that are made by
Incineration) have the virtue of Restoring it.

A Corollary of the Tenth Experiment.
That this Experiment, Pyrophilus, may be as well Useful as Delightful to
You, I must mind You, Pyrophilus, that in the newly mentioned Observation, I
have hinted to You a New and Easy way of Discovering in many Liquors (for I
dare not say in all) whether it be an Acid or Sulphurous Salt, that is
Predominant; and that such a Discovery is oftentimes of great Difficulty, and
may frequently be of great Use, he that is not a Stranger to the various
Properties and Effects of Salts, and of how great moment it is to be able to
distinguish their Tribes, may readily conceive. But to proceed to the way of
trying other Liquors by an Infusion of our Wood, take it briefly thus. Suppose
I have a mind to try whether I conjecture aright, when I imagine that Allom,
though it be plainly a Mixed Body, does abound rather with Acid than Sulphurous
Salt. To satisfy my self herein, I turn my back to the Light, and holding a
small Vial full of the Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum, which looked upon in
that Position, appears Coeruleous, I drop into it a little of a strong Solution
of Allom made in Fair Water, and finding upon the Affusion and shaking of this
New liquor, that the Blewness formerly conspicuous in our Tincture does
presently vanish, I am thereby incited to suppose, that the Salt Praedominant
in Allom belongs to the Family of Sour Salts; but if on the other side I have a
mind to examine whether or no I rightly conceive that Salt of Urine, or of
Hartshorn is rather of a Saline Sulphurous (if I may so speak) than of an
Acid Nature, I drop a little of the Saline Spirit of either into the Nephritick
Tincture, and finding that the Coeruleous Color is rather thereby Deepned than
Destroyed, I collect that the Salts, which constitute these Spirits, are rather
Sulphurous than Acid. And to satisfy my self yet farther in this particular,
I take a small Vial of fresh Tincture, and placing both it and my self in
reference to the Light as formerly, I drop into the Infusion just as much
Distilled Vinegar, or other Acid liquor as will serve to Deprive it of its
Blewness (which a few drops, if the Sour Liquor be strong, and the Vial small
will suffice to do) then without changing my Posture, I drop and shake into the
same Vial a small proportion of Spirit of Hartshorn or Urine, and finding that
upon this affusion, the Tincture immediately recovers its Coeruleous Color, I
am thereby confirmed in my former Opinion, of the Sulphurous Nature of these
Salts. And so, whereas it is much doubted by some Modern Chemists to what sort
of Salt, that which is Praedominant in Quicklime belongs, we have been
persuaded to referr it rather to Lixiviate than Acid Salts, by having observed,
that though an Evaporated Infusion of it will scarce yield such a Salt, as
Ashes and other Alcalizate Bodies are wont to do, yet if we deprive our
Nephritick Tincture of its Blewness by just so much Distilled Vinegar as is
requisite to make that Color Vanish, the Lixivium of Quicklime will
immediately upon its Affusion recall the Banished Color; but not so Powerfully
as either of the Sulphurous Liquors formerly mentioned. And therefore I allow
my self to guess at the Strength of the Liquors examined by this Experiment, by
the Quantity of them which is sufficient to Destroy or Restore the Coeruleous
Color of our Tincture. But whether concerning Liquors, wherein neither Acid
nor Alcalisate Salts are Eminently Praedominant, our Tincture will enable us to
conjecture any thing more than that such Salts are not Praedominant in them, I
take not upon me to determine here, but leave to further Trial; For I find not
that Spirit of Wine, Spirit of Tartar freed from Acidity, or Chemical Oil of
Turpentine, (although Liquors which must be conceived very Saline, if Chemists
have, which is here no place to Dispute, rightly ascribed tastes to the Saline
Principle of Bodies,) have any Remarkable Power either to deprive our Tincture
of its Coeruleous Color, or restore it, when upon the Affusion of Spirit of
Vinegar it has disappeared.

EXPERIMENT XI.
And here I must not omit, Pyrophilus, to inform You, that we can show You even
in a Mineral Body something that may seem very near of Kin to the Changeable
Quality of the Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum, for we have several flat pieces
of Glass, of the thickness of ordinary Panes for Windows, one of which being
interposed betwixt the Eye and a clear Light, appears of a Golden Color, not
much unlike that of the moderate Tincture of our Wood, but being so looked upon
as that the Beams of light are not so much Trajected thorough it as Reflected
from it to the Eye, that Yellow seems to degenerate into a pale Blew, somewhat
like that of a Turquoise. And that which may also appear strange, is this, that
if in a certain posture you hold one of these Plates Perpendicular to the
Horizon, so that the Sunbeams shine upon half of it, the other half being
Shaded, You may see that the part Shined upon will be of a much Diluter Yellow
than the Shaded part which will appear much more Richly Colored; and if You
alter the Posture of the Glass, so that it be not held Perpendicular, but
Parallel in reference to the Horizon, You may see, (which perhaps you will
admire) the Shaded part look of a Golden Color, but the other that the Sun
shines freely on, will appear considerably Blew, and as you remove any part of
the Glass thus held Horizontally into the Sunbeams or Shade, it will in the
twinkling of an Eye seem to pass from one of the above mentioned Colors to the
other, the Sunbeams Trajected through it upon a sheet of White Paper held near
it, do color it with a Yellow, somewhat bordering upon a Red, but yet the
Glass may be so opposed to the Sun, that it may upon Paper project a mixed
Color here and there more inclined to Yellow, and here and there more to Blew.
The other Phoenomena of this odd Glass, I fear it would be scarce worth while
to Record, and therefore I shall rather advertise You, First, that in the
trying of these Experiments with it, you must take notice that one of the sides
has either alone, or at least principally its Superficial parts disposed to the
Reflection of the Blew Color above named, and that therefore you must have a
care to keep that side nearest to the Eye. And next, that we have our selves
made Glasses not unfit to exhibit an Experiment not unlike that I have been
speaking of, by laying upon pieces of Glass some very finely foliated Silver,
and giving it by degrees a much stronger Fire than is requisite or usual for
the Tinging of Glasses of other Colors. And this Experiment, not to mention
that it was made without a Furnace in which Artificers that Paint Glass are
wont to be very Curious, is the more considerable, because, that though a
Skillful Painter could not deny to me that 'twas with Silver he Colored his
Glasses Yellow; yet he told me, that when to Burn them (as they speak) he lays
on the plates of Glass nothing but a Calx of Silver Calcined without Corrosive
Liquors, and Tempered with Fair Water, the Plates are Tinged of a fine Yellow
that looks of a Golden Color, which part soever of it you turn to or from the
Light; whereas (whether it be what an Artificer would call Over-doing, or
Burning, or else the employing the Silver Crude that makes the Difference,) we
have found more than once, that some Pieces of Glass prepared as we have
related, though held against the Light they appeared of a Transparent Yellow,
yet looked on with ones back turned to the Light they exhibited an
Untransparent Blew.

EXPERIMENT XII.
If you will allow me, Pyrophilus, for the avoiding of Ambignity, to employ the
Word Pigments, to signify such prepared materials (as Cochinele, Vermilion,
Orpiment,) as Painters, Dyers and other Artificers make use of to impart or
imitate particular Colors, I shall be the better understood in diverse passages
of the following papers, and particularly when I tell you, That the mixing of
Pigments being no inconsiderable part of the Painters Art, it may seem an
Incroachment in me to meddle with it. But I think I may easily be excused
(though I do not altogether pass it by) if I restrain my self to the making of
a Transient mention of some few of their Practices about this matter; and that
only so far forth, as may warrant me to observe to you, that there are but few
Simple and Primary Colors (if I may so call them) from whose Various
Compositions all the rest do as it were Result. For though Painters can imitate
the Hues (though not always the Splendour) of those almost Numberless differing
Colors that are to be met with in the Works of Nature, and of Art, I have not
yet found, that to exhibit this strange Variety they need employ any more than
White, and Black, and Red, and Blew, and Yellow; these five, Variously
Compounded, and (if I may so speak) Decompounded, being sufficient to exhibit a
Variety and Number of Colors, such, as those that are altogether Strangers to
the Painters Pallets, can hardly imagine.

Thus (for Instance) Black and White differingly mixed, make a Vast company of
Lighter and Darker Grays.

Blew and Yellow make a huge Variety of Greens.

Red and Yellow make Orange Tawny.

Red with a little White makes a Carnation.

Red with an Eye of Blew, makes a Purple; and by these simple Compositions
again Compounded among themselves, the Skillful Painter can produce what kind
of Color he pleases, and a great many more than we have yet Names for. But, as
I intimated above, it is not my Design to prosecute this Subject, though I
thought it not unfit to take some Notice of it, because we may hereafter have
occasion to make use of what has been now delivered, to illustrate the
Generation of Intermediate Colors; concerning which we must yet subjoyn this
Caution, that to make the Rules about the Emergency of Colors, fit to be
Relied upon, the Corpuscles whereof the Pigments consist must be such as do not
Destroy one another Texture, for in case they do, the produced Color may be
very Different from that which would Result from the Mixture of other harmless
Pigments of the same Colors, as I shall have Occasion to show ere long.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
It may also give much light to an Enquirer into the Nature of Colors, to know
that not only in Green, but in many (if not all) other Colors, the Light of
the Sun passing through Diaphanous Bodies of differing Hues may be tinged of
the same Compound Color, as if it came from some Painters Colors of the same
Denomination, though this later be exhibited by Reflection, and be (as the
former Experiment declares) manifestly Compounded of material Pigments.
Wherefore to try the Composition of Colors by Trajection, we provided several
Plates of Tinged Glass, which being laid two at a time one on the top of
another, the Object looked upon through them both, appeared of a Compounded
Color, which agrees well with what we have observed in the second Experiment,
of Looking against the Light through differingly Colored Papers. But we
thought the Experiment would be more Satisfactory, if we procured the Sunbeams
to be so Tinged in their passage through Plates of Glass, as to exhibit the
Compounded Color upon a Sheet of White Paper. And though by reason of the
Thickness of the Glasses, the Effect was but Faint, even when the Sun was High
and Shined forth clear, yet, we easily remedied that by Contracting the Beams
we cast on them by means of a Unequal Burning-glass, which where it made the
Beams much converge Increased the Light enough to make the Compounded Color
very manifest upon the Paper. By this means we observed, that the Beams
trajected through Blew and Yellow composed a Green, that an intense and
moderate Red did with Yellow make differing degrees of Saffron, and Orange
Tawny Colors, that Green and Blew made a Color partaking of both, such as
that which some Latin Writers call Pavonaceus, that Red and Blew made a Purple,
to which we might add other Colors, that we produced by the Combinations of
Glasses differingly Tinged, but that I want proper Words to express them in our
Language, and had not when we made the Trials, the Opportunity of consulting
with a Painter, who perchance might have Supplied me with some of the terms I
wanted.

I know not whether it will be requisite to subjoyn on this Occasion, what I
tried concerning Reflections from Colored Glasses, and other Transparent
Bodies, namely, that having exposed four or five sorts of them to the Sun, and
cast the Reflected Beams upon White Paper held near at hand, the Light appeared
not manifestly Tinged, but as if it had been Reflected from the Impervious
parts of a Colorless Glass, only that Reflected from the Yellow was here and
there stained with the same Color, as if those Beams were not all Reflected
from the Superficial, but some from the Internal parts of the Glass; upon which
Occasion you may take notice, that a Skillful Tradesman, who makes such
Colored Glass told me, that where as the Red Pigment was but Superficial, the
Yellow penetrated to the very midst of the Plate. But for further Satisfaction,
not having the Opportunity to Foliate those Plates, and so turn them into
Looking-glasses, we Foliated a Plate of Muscovy Glass, and then laying on it a
little Transparent Varnish of a Gold Color, we exposed it to the Sunbeams, so
as to cast them upon a Body fit to receive them, on which the Reflected Light,
appearing, as we expected, Yellow, manifested that Rebounding from the Specular
part of the Selenitis, it was Tinged in its return with the Color of the
Transparent Varnish through which it passed.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
After what we have said of the Composition of Colors, it will now be
seasonable to annex some Experiments that we made in favor of those Colors,
that are taught in the Schools not to be Real, but only Apparent and
Fantastical; For we found by Trials, that these Colors might be Compounded,
both with True and Stable Colors, and with one another, as well as
unquestionably Genuine and Lasting Colors, and that the Colors resulting from
such Compositions, would respectively deserve the same Denominations.

For first, having by the Trajection of the Sunbeams through a Glass-prism
thrown an Iris on the Floor, I found that by placing a Blew Glass at a
convenient distance betwixt the Prism and the Iris, that part of the Iris that
was before Yellow, might be made to appear Green, though not of a Grass Green,
but of one more Dilute and Yellowish. And it seems not improbable, that the
narrow Greenish List (if I may so call it) that is wont to be seen between the
Yellow and Blew parts of the Iris, is made by the Confusion of those two
Bordering Colors.

Next, I found, that though the want of a sufficient Liveliness in either of
the Compounding Colors, or a light Error in the manner of making the following
Trials, was enough to render some of them Unsuccessfull, yet when all necessary
Circumstances were duly observed, the Event was answerable to our Expectation
and Desire.

And (as I formerly Noted) that Red and Blew compound a Purple, so I could
produce this last named Color, by casting at some Distance from the Glass the
Blew part of the Prismatical Iris (as I think it may be called for Distinction
sake) upon a Lively Red, (for else the Experiment succeeds not so well.) And I
remember, that sometimes when I tried this upon a piece of Red Cloth, that
part of the Iris which would have been Blew, (as I tried by covering that part
of the Cloth with a piece of White Paper) and Compounded with the Red,
wherewith the Cloth was Imbued before, appeared of a fair Purple, did, when I
came to View it near at hand, look very Odly, as if there were some strange
Reflection or Refraction or both made in the Hairs of which that Cloth was
composed.

Casting likewise the Prismatical Iris upon a very Vivid Blew, I found that
part of it, which would else have been the Yellow, appear Green. (Another
somewhat differing Trial, and yet fit to confirm this, you will find in the
fifteenth Experiment.)

But it may seem somewhat more strange, that though the Prismatical Iris being
made by the Refraction of Light through a Body that has no Color at all, must
according to the Doctrine of the Schools consist of as purely Emphatical
Colors, as may be, yet even these may be Compounded with one another, as well
as Real Colors in the Grossest Pigments. For I took at once two Triangular
Glasses, and one of them being kept fixed in the same Posture, that the Iris it
projected on the Floor might not Waver, I cast on the same Floor another Iris
with the other Prism, and Moving it too and fro to bring what part of the
second Iris I pleased, to fall upon what part of the first I thought fit, we
did sometimes (for a small Error suffices to hinder the Success) obtain by
this means a Green Color in that part of the more Stable Iris, that before was
Yellow, or Blew, and frequently by casting those Beams, that in one of the
Iris's made the Blew upon the Red parts of the other Iris, we were able to
produce a lovely Purple, which we can Destroy or Recompose at pleasure, by
Severing and Reapproaching the Edges of the two Iris's.

EXPERIMENT XV.
On this occasion, Pyrophilus, I shall add, that finding the Glass-prism to be
the usefullest Instrument Men have yet employed about the Contemplation of
Colors, and considering that Prisms hitherto in use are made of Glass
Transparent and Colorless, I thought it would not be amiss to try, what change
the Superinduction of a Color, without the Destruction of the Diaphaneity,
would produce in the Colors exhibited by the Prism. But being unable to
procure one to be made of Colored Glass, and fearing also that if it were not
carefully made, the Thickness of it would render it too Opacous, I endeavored
to substitute one made of Clarified Rosin, or of Turpentine brought (as I
elsewhere teach) to the consistence of a Transparent Gum. But though these
Endeavors were not wholly lost, yet we found it so difficult to give these
Materials their true Shape, that we chose rather to Varnish over an ordinary
Prism with some of those few Pigments that are to be had Transparent; as
accordingly we did first with Yellow, and then with Red, or rather Crimson,
made with Lake tempered with a convenient Oil, and the Event was, That for want
of good Transparent Colors, (of which you know there are but very few) both
the Yellow and the Red made the Glass so Opacous, (though the Pigment were laid
on but upon two Sides of the Glass, no more being absolutely necessary) that
unless I looked upon an Enlightened Window, or the Flame of a Candle, or some
other Luminous or very Vivid object, I could scarce discern any Colors at all,
especially when the Glass was covered with Red. But when I did look on such
Objects, it appeared (as I expected) that the Color of the Pigment had
Vitiated or Drowned some of those which the Prism would according to its wont
have exhibited, and mingling with others, Altered them: as I remember, that
both to my Eyes, and others to whom I showed it, when the Prism was covered
with Yellow, it made those Parts of bright Objects, where the Blew would else
have been Conspicuous, appear of a light Green. But, Pyrophilus, both the
Nature of the Colors, and the Degree of Transparency, or of Darkness in the
Pigment, besides diverse other Circumstances, did so vary the Phenomenon of
these Trials, that till I can procure small Colored Prisms, or Hollow ones
that may be filled with Tincted Liquor, or obtain some better Pigments than
those I was reduced to employ, I shall forbear to Build any thing upon what has
been delivered, and shall make no other use of it, than to invite you to
prosecute the Inquiry further.

EXPERIMENT XVI.
And here, Pyrophilus, since we are treating of Emphatical Colors, we shall
add what we think not unworthy your Observation, and not unfit to afford some
Exercise to the Speculative. For there are some Liquors, which though
Colorless themselves, when they come to be Elevated, and Dispersed into
Exhalations, exhibit a conspicuous Color, which they lose again, when they
come to be Reconjoyn'd into a Liquor, as good Spirit of Nitre, or upon its
account strong Aquafortis, though devoid of all appearance of Redness whilst
they continue in the form of a Liquor, if a little Heat chance to turn the
Minute parts of them into Vapors, the Steam will appear of a Reddish or deep
Yellow Color, which will Vanish when those Exhalations come to resume the form
of a Liquor.

And not only if you look upon a Glass half full of Aquafortis, or Spirit of
Nitre, and half full of Nitrous steams proceeding from it, you will see the
Upper part of the Glass of the Color freshly mentioned, if through it you look
upon the Light. But which is much more considerable, I have tried, that putting
Aquafortis in a long clear Glass, and adding a little Copper or some such open
Metal to it, to excite Heat and Fumes, the Light trajected through those
Fumes, and cast upon a sheet of White Paper, did upon that appear of the Color
that the Fumes did, when directly Looked upon, as if the Light were as well
Tinged in its passage through these Fumes, as it would have been by passing
through some Glass or Liquor in which the same Color was Inherent.

To which I shall further add, that having sometimes had the Curiosity to
observe whether the Beams of the Sun near the Horizon trajected through a very
Red Sky, would not (though such Rednesses are taken to be but Emphatical
Colors) exhibit the like Color, I found that the Beams falling within a Room
upon a very White Object, placed directly opposite to the Sun, disclosed a
manifest Redness, as if they had passed through a Colored Medium.

EXPERIMENT XVII.
The emergency, Pyrophilus, of Colors upon the Coalition of the Particles of
such Bodies as were neither of them of the Color of that Mixture whereof they
are the Ingredients, is very well worth our attentive Observation, as being of
good use both Speculative and Practical; For much of the Mechanical use of
Colors among Painters and Dyers, does depend upon the Knowledge of what
Colors may be produced by the Mixtures of Pigments so and so Colored. And (as
we lately intimated) it is of advantage to the contemplative Naturalist, to know
how many and which Colors are Primitive (if I may so call them) and Simple,
because it both eases his Labor by confining his most sollicitious Enquiry to
a small Number of Colors upon which the rest depend, and assists him to judge
of the nature of particular compounded Colors, by showing him from the Mixture
of what more Simple ones, and of what Proportions of them to one another, the
particular Color to be considered does result. But because to insist on the
Proportions, the Manner and the Effects of such Mixtures would oblige me to
consider a greater part of the Painters Art and Dyers Trade, than I am well
acquainted with, I confined my self to make Trial of several ways to produce
Green, by the composition of Blew and Yellow. And shall in this place both
Recapitulate most of the things I have Dispersedly delivered already concerning
that Subject, and Recruit them.

And first, whereas Painters (as I noted above) are wont to make Green by
tempering Blew and Yellow, both of them made into a soft Consistence, with
either Water or Oil, or some Liquor of Kin to one of those two, according as
the Picture is to be Drawn with those they call Water Colors, or those they
term Oil Colors, I found that by choosing fit Ingredients, and mixing them in
the form of Dry Powders, I could do, what I could not if the Ingredients were
tempered up with a Liquor; But the Blew and Yellow Powders must not only be
finely Ground, but such as that the Corpuscles of the one may not be too
unequal to those of the other, lest by their Disproportionate Minuteness the
Smaller cover and hide the Greater. We used with good success a slight Mixture
of the fine Powder of Bise, with that of Orpiment, or that of good Yellow Oker,
I say a slight Mixture, because we found that an exquisite Mixture did not do
so well, but by lightly mingling the two Pigments in several little Parcels,
those of them in which the Proportion and Manner of Mixture was more Lucky,
afforded us a good Green.

2. We also learned in the Dye-houses, that Cloth being Died Blew with Woad, is
afterward by the Yellow Decoction of Luteola or Wood-wax Died into a Green
Color.

3. You may also remember what we above Related, where we intimated, that
having in a Darkn'd Room taken two Bodies, a Blew and a Yellow, and cast the
Light Reflected from the one upon the other, we likewise obtained a Green.

4. And you may remember, that we observed a Green to be produced, when in the
same Darkn'd Room we looked at the Hole at which alone the Light entered,
through the Green and Yellow parts of a sheet of Marbl'd Paper laid over one
another.

5. We found too, that the Beams of the Sun being trajected through two pieces
of Glass, the one Blew and the other Yellow, laid over one another, did upon a
sheet of White paper on which they were made to fall, exhibit a lovely Green.

6. I hope also, that you have not already forgot, what was so lately
delivered, concerning the composition of a Green, with a Blew and Yellow; of
which most Authors would call the one a Real, and the other an Emphatical.

7. And I presume, you may have yet fresh in your memory, what the fourteenth
Experiment informs you, concerning the exhibiting of a Green, by the help of a
Blew and Yellow, that were both of them Emphatical.

8. Wherefore we will proceed to take notice, that we also devised a way of
trying whether or no Metalline Solutions though one of them at least had its
Color Adventitious, by the mixture of the Menstruum employed to dissolve it,
might not be made to compound a Green after the manner of other Bodies. And
though this seemed not easy to be performed by reason of the Difficulty of
finding Metalline Solutions of the Color requisite, that would mix without
Praecipitating each other; yet after a while having considered the matter, the
first Trial afforded me the following Experiment. I took a High Yellow Solution
of good Gold in Aqua-Regis, (made of Aquafortis, and as I remember half its
weight of Spirit of Salt) To this I put a due Proportion of a deep and lovely
Blew Solution of Crude Copper, (which I have elsewhere taught to be readily
Dissoluble in strong Spirit of Urine) and these two Liquors though at first
they seemed a little to Curdle one another, yet being thoroughly mingled by
Shaking, they presently, as had been Conjectured, united into a Transparent
Green Liquor, which continued so for diverse days that I kept it in a small
Glass wherein 'twas made, only letting fall a little Blackish Powder to the
Bottom. The other Phenomenon of this Experiment belong not to this place, where
it may suffice to take notice of the Production of a Green, and that the
Experiment was more than once repeated with Success.

9. And lastly, to try whether this way of compounding Colors would hold even
in Ingredients actually melted by the Violence of the Fire, provided their
Texture were capable of safely enduring Fusion, we caused some Blew and Yellow
Ammel to be long and well wrought together in the Flame of a Lamp, which being
Strongly and Incessantly blown on them kept them in some degree of Fusion, and
at length (for the Experiment requires some Patience as well as Skill) we
obtained the expected Ammel of a Green Color.

I know not, Pyrophilus, whether it be worth while to acquaint you with the
ways that came into my Thoughts, whereby in some measure to explicate the first
of the meant on'd ways of making a Green; for I have sometimes Conjectured, that
the mixture of the Bise and the Orpiment produced a Green by so altering the
Superficial Asperity, which each of those Ingredients had apart, that the Light
Incident on the mixture was Reflected with differing Shades, as to Quantity, or
Order, or both, from those of either of the Ingredients, and such as the Light
is wont to be Modified with, when it Reflects from Grass, or Leaves, or some of
those other Bodies that we are wont to call Green. And sometimes too I have
doubted, whether the produced Green might not be partly at least derived from
this, That the Beams that Rebound from the Corpuscles of the Orpiment, giving
one kind of stroke upon the Retina, whose Perception we call Yellow, and the
Beams Reflected from the Corpuscles of the Bise, giving another stroke upon the
same Retina, like to Objects that are Blew, the Contiguity and Minuteness of
these Corpuscles may make the Appulse of the Reflected Light fall upon the
Retina within so narrow a Compass, that the part they Beat upon being but as it
were a Physical point, they may give a Compounded stroke, which may
consequently exhibit a Compounded and new Kind of Sensation, as we see that two
Strings of a Musical Instrument being struck together, making two Noises that
arrive at the Ear at the same time as to Sense, yield a Sound differing from
either of them, and as it were Compounded of both; Insomuch that if they be
Discordantly tuned, though each of them struck apart would yield a Pleasing
Sound, yet being struck together they make but a Harsh and troublesome Noise.
But this not being so fit a place to prosecute Speculations, I shall not
insist, neither upon these Conjectures nor any others, which the Experiment we
have been mentioning may have suggested to me. And I shall leave it to you,
Pyrophilus, to derive what Instruction you can from comparing together the
Various ways whereby a Yellow and a Blew can be made to Compound a Green. That
which I now pretend to, being only to show that the first of those mentioned
ways, (not to take at present notice of the rest) does far better agree with
out Conjectures about Colors, than either with the Doctrine of the Schools, or
with that of the Chemists, both which seem to be very much Disfavour'd by it.

For first, since in the Mixture of the two mentioned Powders I could by the
help of a very excellent Microscope (for ordinary ones will scarce serve the
turn) discover that which seemed to the naked Eye a Green Body, to be but a
heap of Distinct, though very small Grains of Yellow Orpiment and Blew Bise
confusedly enough Blended together, it appears that the Colored Corpuscles of
either kind did each retain its own Nature and Color; By which it may be
guessed, what mere Transposition and Juxtaposition of Minute and Singly
unchanged Particles of Matter can do to produce a new Color; For that this
Local Motion and new Disposition of the small parts of the Orpiment did
Intervene is much more manifest than it is easy to Explicate how they should
produce this new Green otherwise than by the new Manner of their being put
together, and consequently by their new Disposition to Modifie the Incident
Light by Reflecting it otherwise than they did before they were Mingled
together.

Secondly, The Green thus made being (if I may so speak) Mechanically produced,
there is no pretense to derive it from I know not what incomprehensible
Substantial Form, from which yet many would have us believe that Colors must
flow; Nor does this Green, though a Real and Permanent, not a Fantastical and
Vanid Color, seem to be such an Inherent Quality as they would have it, since
not only each part of the Mixture remains unaltered in Color, and consequently
of a differing Color from the Heap they Compose, but if the Eye be assisted by
a Microscope to discern things better and more distinctly than before it could,
it sees not a Green Body, but a Heap of Blew and Yellow Corpuscles.

And in the third place, I demand what either Sulphur, or Salt, or Mercury has
to do in the Production of this Green; For neither the Bise nor the Orpiment
were indu'd with that Color before, and the bare Juxtaposition of the
Corpuscles of the two Powders that work not upon each other, but might if we
had convenient Instruments be separated, unaltered, cannot with any probability
be imagined either to Increase or Diminish any of the three Hypostatical
Principles, (to which of them soever the Chemists are pleased to ascribe
Colors) nor does there here Intervene so much as Heat to afford them any
color to pretend, that at least there is made an Extraversion (as the
Helmontians speak) of the Sulphur or of any of the two other supposed
Principles; But upon this Experiment we have already Reflected enough, if not
more than enough for once.

EXPERIMENT XVIII.
But here, Pyrophilus, I must advertise you, that it is not every Yellow and
every Blew that being mingled will afford a Green; For in case one of the
Ingredients do not Act only as endowed with such a Color, but as having a
power to alter the Texture of the Corpuscles of the other, so as to Indispose
them to Reflect the Light, as Corpuscles that exhibit a Blew or a Yellow are
wont to Reflect it, the emergent Color may be not Green, but such as the
change of Texture in the Corpuscles of one or both of the Ingredients qualifies
them to show forth; as for instance, if you let fall a few Drops of Syrrup of
Violets upon a piece of White Paper, though the Syrrup being spread will appear
Blew, yet mingling with it two or three Drops of the lately mentioned Solution
of Gold, I obtained not a Green but a Reddish mixture, which I expected from
the remaining Power of the Acid Salts abounding in the Solution, such Salts or
Saline Spirits being wont, as we shall see anon, though weakn'd, so to work
upon that Syrrup as to change it into a Red or Reddish Color. And to confirm
that for which I allege the former Experiment, I shall add this other, that
having made a very strong and high-colour'd Solution of Filings of Copper with
Spirit of Urine, though the Menstruum seemed Glutted with the Metal, because I
put in so much Filings that many of them remained for diverse days Undissolv'd
at the Bottom, yet having put three or four Drops of Syrrup of Violets upon
White Paper, I found that the deep Blew Solution proportionably mingled with
this other Blew Liquor did not make a Blew mixture, but, as I expected, a fair
Green, upon the account of the Urinous Salt that was in the Menstruum.

EXPERIMENT XIX.
To show the Chemists, that Colors may be made to Appear or Vanish, where
there intervenes no Accession or Change either of the Sulphurous, or the
Saline, or the Mercurial principle (as they speak) of Bodies: I shall not make
use of the Iris afforded by the Glass-prism, nor of the Colors to be seen in a
fair Morning in those drops of Dew that do in a convenient manner Reflect and
Refract the Beams of Light to the Eye; But I will rather mind them of what they
may observe in their own Laboratories, namely, that diverse, if not all,
Chemical Essential Oils, as also good Spirit of Wine, being shaken till they
have good store of Bubbles, those Bubbles will (if attentively considered)
appear adorned with various and lovely Colors, which all immediately Vanish,
upon the relapsing of the Liquor that affords those Bubbles their Skins, into
the rest of the Oil, or Spirit of Wine, so that a Colorless Liquor may be made
in a trice to exhibit variety of Colors, and may lose them in a moment without
the Accession or Diminution of any of its Hypostatical Principles. And, by the
way, it is not unworthy our notice, that some Bodies, as well Colorless, as
Colored, by being brought to a great Thinness of parts, acquire Colors though
they had none before, or Colors differing from them they were before endued
with: For, not to insist on the Variety of Colors, that Water, made somewhat
Glutinous by Soap, acquires, when it is blown into such Sphaerical Bubbles as
Boys are wont to make and play with; Turpentine (though it have a Color deep
enough of its own) may (by being blown into after a certain manner) be brought
to afford Bubbles adorned with variety of Orient Colors, which though they
Vanish after some while upon the breaking of the Bubbles, yet they would in
likelihood always exhibit Colors upon their Superfices, (though not always the
same in the same Parts of them, but Varied according to the Incidence of the
Sight, and the Position of the Eye) if their Texture were durable enough: For I
have seen one that was Skilled at fashioning Glasses by the help of a Lamp,
blowing some of them so strongly as to burst them, whereupon it was found, that
the Tenacity of the Metal was such, that before it broke it suffered it self
to be reduced into Films so extremely thin, that being kept clean they
constantly showed on their Surfaces (but after the manner newly mentioned) the
varying Colors of the Rainbow, which were exceedingly Vivid, as I had often
opportunity to observe in some, that I caused purposely to be made, to keep by
me.

But lest it should be objected, that the above mentioned Instances are drawn
from Transparent Liquors, it may possibly appear, not impertinent to add, what
I have sometimes thought upon, and several times tried, when I was considering
the Opinions of the Chemists about Colors. I took then a Feather of a
convenient Bigness and Shape, and holding it at a fit distance betwixt my Eye
and the Sun when he was near the Horizon, me thought there appeared to me a
Variety of little Rain-bows, with differing and very vivid Colors, of which
none was constantly to be seen in the Feathers; the like Phenomenon I have at
other times (though not with altogether so good success) produced, by
interposing at a due distance a piece of Black Ribband betwixt the almost
setting Sun and my Eye, not to mention the Trials I have made to the same
purpose, with other Bodies.

EXPERIMENT XX.
Take good Syrrup of Violets, Impraegnated with the Tincture of the flowers,
drop a little of it upon a White Paper (for by that means the Change of Color
will be more conspicuous, and the Experiment may be practiced in smaller
Quantities) and on this Liquor let fall two or three drops of Spirit either of
Salt or Vinegar, or almost any other eminently Acid Liquor, and upon the
Mixture of these you shall find the Syrrup immediately turned Red, and the way
of Effecting such a Change has not been unknown to diverse Persons who have
produced the like, by Spirit of Vitriol, or juice of Limmons, but have
Groundlessly ascribed the Effect to some Peculiar Quality of those two Liquors,
whereas, (as we have already intimated) almost any Acid Salt will turn Syrrup
of Violets Red. But to improve the Experiment, let me add what has not (that I
know of) been hitherto observed, and has, when we first showed it them,
appeared something strange, even to those that have been inquisitive into the
Nature of Colors; namely, that if instead of Spirit of Salt, or that of
Vinegar, you drop upon the Syrrup of Violets a little Oil of Tartar per
Deliquium, or the like quantity of Solution of Potashes, and rubb them together
with your finger, you shall find the Blew Color of the Syrrup turned in a
moment into a perfect Green, and the like may be performed by diverse other
Liquors, as we may have occasion elsewhere to Inform you.

Annotation upon the twentieth Experiment.
The use of what we lately delivered concerning the way of turning Syrrup of
Violets, Red or Green, may be this; That, though it be a far more common and
procurable Liquor than the Infusion of Lignum Nephriticum, it may yet be easily
substituted in its Room, when we have a mind to examine, whether or no the Salt
predominant in a Liquor or other Body, wherein it is Loose and Abundant, belong
to the Tribe of Acid Salts or not. For if such a Body turn the Syrrup of a Red
or Reddish Purple Color, it does for the most part argue the Body (especially
if it be a distilled Liquor) to abound with Acid Salt. But if the Syrrup be
made Green, that argues the Predominant Salt to be of a Nature repugnant to
that of the Tribe of Acids. For, as I find that either Spirit of Salt, or Oil
of Vitriol, or Aquafortis, or Spirit of Vinegar, or Juice of Lemmons, or any
of the Acid Liquors I have yet had occasion to try, will turn Syrrup of
Violets, of a Red, (or at least) of a Reddish Color, so I have found, that not
only the Volatile Salts of all Animal Substances I have used, as Spirit of
Hartshorn, of Urine, of Sal-Armoniack, of Blood, etc. but also all the
Alcalizate Salts I have employed, as the Solution of Salt of Tartar, of
Potashes, of common Wood-ashes, Limewater, etc. will immediately change the
Blew Syrrup, into a perfect Green. And by the same way (to hint that upon the
by) I elsewhere show you, both the changes that Nature and Time produce, in the
more Saline parts of some Bodies, may be discovered, and also how even such
Chymically prepared Bodies, as belong not either to the Animal Kingdom, or to
the Tribe of Alcali's, may have their new and superinduced Nature successfully
Examined. In this place I shall only add, that not alone the Changing the
Color of the Syrrup, requires, that the Changing Body be more strong, of the
Acid, or other sort of Salt that is Predominant in it, than is requisite for
the working upon the Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum; but that in this also, the
Operation of the formerly mentioned Salts upon our Syrrup, differs from their
Operation upon our Tinctures, that in this Liquor, if the Caeruleous Color be
Destroyed by an Acid Salt, it may be Restored by one that is either Volatile,
or Lixiviate; whereas in Syrrup of Violets, though one of these contrary Salts
will destroy the Action of the other, yet neither of them will restore the
Syrrup to its native Blew; but each of them will Change it into the Color
which it self does (if I may so speak) affect, as we shall have Occasion to
show in the Notes on the twenty fifth Experiment.

EXPERIMENT XXI.
There is a Weed, more known to Plowmen than beloved by them, whose Flowers
from their Color are commonly called Blew-bottles, and Herbarists are wont to
call this Plant Cyanus vulgaris minor.
Corn-weed from their Growing among Corn. These Flowers some Ladies do, upon
the account of their Lovely Color, think worth the being Candied, which when
they are, they will long retain so fair a Color, as makes them a very fine
Sallad in the Winter. But I have tried, that when they are freshly gathered,
they will afford a Juice, which when newly expressed, (for in some cases 'twill
soon enough degenerate) affords a very deep and pleasant Blew. Now, (to draw
this to our present Scope) by dropping on this fresh Juice, a little Spirit of
Salt, (that being the Acid Spirit I had then at hand) it immediately turned (as
I predicted) into a Red. And if instead of the Sour Spirit I mingled with it a
little strong Solution of an Alcalizate Salt, it did presently disclose a
lovely Green; the same Changes being by those differing sorts of Saline
Liquors, producible in this Natural juice, that we lately mentioned to have
happened to that factitious Mixture, the Syrrup of Violets. And I remember,
that finding this Blew Liquor, when freshly made, to be capable of serving in a
Pen for an Ink of that Color, I attempted by moistning one part of a piece of
White Paper with the Spirit of Salt I have been mentioning, and another with
some Alcalizate or Volatile Liquor, to draw a Line on the leisurely dried
Paper, that should, even before the Ink was dry, appear partly Blew, partly
Red, and partly Green: But though the latter part of the Experiment succeeded
not well, (whether because Volatile Salts are too Fugitive to be retained in
the Paper, and Alcalizate ones are too Unctuous, or so apt to draw Moisture
from the Air, that they keep the Paper from drying well) yet the former Part
succeeded well enough; the Blew and Red being Conspicuous enough to afford a
surprising Spectacle to those, I acquaint not with (what I willingly allow you
to call) the Trick.

Annotation upon the one and twentieth Experiment.
But lest you should be tempted to think (Pyrophilus) that Volatile or
Alcalizate Salts change Blews into Green, rather upon the score of the easy
Transition of the former Color into the latter, than upon the account of the
Texture, wherein most Vegetables, that afford a Blew, seem, though otherwise
differing, to be Allied, I will add, that when I purposely dissolved Blew
Vitriol in fair Water, and thereby imbued sufficiently that Liquor with that
Color, a Lixiviate Liquor, and a Urinous Salt being Copiously poured upon
distinct Parcels of it, did each of them, though perhaps with some Difference,
turn the Liquor not Green, but of a deep Yellowish Color, almost like that of
Yellow Oker, which Color the Precipitated Corpuscles retained, when they had
Leisurely subsided to the Bottom. What this Precipitated Substance is, it is
not needful now to Enquire in this place, and in another, I have shown you,
that notwithstanding its Color, and its being Obtainable from an Acid
Menstruum by the help of Salt of Tartar, it is yet far enough from being the
true Sulphur of Vitriol.

EXPERIMENT XXII.
Our next Experiment (Pyrophilus) will perhaps seem to be of a contrary Nature
to the two former, made upon Syrrup of Violets, and Juice of Blew-bottles. For
as in them by the Affusion of Oil of Tartar, a Bluish Liquor is made Green, so
in this, by the sole Mixture of the same Oil, a Greenish Liquor becomes Blew.
The hint of this Experiment was given us by the practice of some Italian
Painters, who being wont to Counterfeit Ultra-marine Azure (as they call it) by
Grinding Verdigrease with Sal-Armoniack, and some other Saline Ingredients, and
letting them Rot (as they imagine) for a good while together in a Dunghill, we
supposed, that the change of Color wrought in the Verdigrease by this way of
Preparation, must proceed from the Action of certain Volatile and Alcalizate
Salts, abounding in some of the mingled Concretes, and brought to make a
further Dissolution of the Copper abounding in the Verdigrease, and therefore
we Conjectured, that if both the Verdigrease, and such Salts were dissolved in
fair Water, the small Parts of both being therein more subdivided, and set at
liberty, would have better access to each other, and thereby Incorporate much
the more suddenly; And accordingly we found, that if upon a strong Solution of
good French Verdigrease (for it is that we are wont to employ, as the best) you
pour a just quantity of Oil of Tartar, and shake them well together, you shall
immediately see a notable Change of Color, and the Mixture will grow thick,
and not transparent, but if you stay a while, till the Grosser part be
Precipitated to, and settled in the Bottom, you may obtain a clear Liquor of a
very lovely Color, and exceeding delightful to the Eye. But, you must have a
care to drop in a competent Quantity of Oil of Tartar, for else the Color will
not be so Deep, and Rich; and if instead of this Oil you employ a clear
Lixivium of Potashes, you may have an Azure somewhat Lighter or Paler than,
and therefore differing from, the former. And if instead of either of these
Liquors, you make use of Spirit of Urine, or of Hartshorn, you may according
to the Quantity and Quality of the Spirit you pour in, obtain some further
Variety (though scarce considerable) of Caeruleous Liquors. And yet lately by
the help of this Urinous Spirit we made a Blew Liquor, which not a few
Ingenious Persons, and among them, some, whose Profession makes them very
Conversant with Colors, have looked upon with some wonder. But these Azure
Colored Liquors should be freed from the Subsiding matter, which the Salts of
Tartar or Urine precipitate out of them, rather by being Decanted, than by
Filtration. For by the latter of these ways we have sometimes found, the Color
of them very much Impaired, and little Superior to that of the grosser
Substance, that it left in the Filtre.

EXPERIMENT XXIII.
That Roses held over the Fume of Sulphur, may quickly by it be deprived of
their Color, and have as much of their Leaves, as the Fume works upon, burned
pale, is an Experiment, that diverse others have tried, as well as I. But
(Pyrophilus) it may seem somewhat strange to one that has never considered the
Compounded nature of Brimstone, That, whereas the Fume of Sulphur will, as we
have said, Whiten the Leaves of Roses; That Liquor, which is commonly called
Oil of Sulphur per Campanam, because it is supposed to be made by the
Condensation of these Fumes in Glasses shaped like Bells, into a Liquor, does
powerfully heighten the Tincture of Red Roses, and make it more Red and Vivid,
as we have easily tried by putting some Red-Rose Leaves, that had been long
dried, (and so had lost much of their Color) into a Vial of fair Water. For a
while after the Affusion of a convenient Quantity of the Liquor we are speaking
of, both the Leaves themselves, and the Water they were Steeped in, discovered
a very fresh and lovely Color.

EXPERIMENT XXIV.
It may (Pyrophilus) somewhat serve to Illustrate, not only the Doctrine of
Pigments, and of Colors, but diverse other Parts of the Corpuscular Philosophy;
as that explicates Odours, and many other things, not as the Schools by Aerie
Qualities, but by Real, though extremely Minute Bodies; to examine, how much of
a Colorless Liquor, a very small Parcel of a Pigment may Imbue with a
discernable Color. And though there be scarce any thing of Preciseness to be
expected from such Trials, yet I presumed, that (at least) I should be able to
show a much further Subdivision of the Parts of Matter into Visible Particles,
than I have hitherto found taken notice of, and than most men would imagine; no
Body, that I know of, having yet attempted to reduce this Matter to any Measure.

The Bodies, the most promising for such a purpose, might seem to be the
Metalls, especially Gold, because of the Multitude, and Minuteness of its
Parts, which might be argued from the incomparable Closeness of its Texture:
But though we tried a Solution of Gold made in Aqua Regia first, and then in
fair Water; yet in regard we were to determine the Pigment we employed, not by
Bulk but Weight, and because also, that the Yellow Color of Gold is but a
faint one in Comparison of the deep Color of Cochineel, we rather chose this
to make our Trials with. But among diverse of these it will suffice to set down
one, which was carefully made in Vessels conveniently Shaped; (and that in the
presence of a Witness, and an Assistant) the Sum whereof I find among my
Adversaria, Registered in the following Words. To which I shall only premise,
(to lessen the wonder of so strange a diffusion of the Pigment) That Cochineel
will be better Dissolved, and have its Color far more heightn'd by Spirit of
Urine, than (I say not by common Water, but) by Rectified Spirit of Wine it
self.

The Note I spoke off is this. [One Grain of Cochineel dissolved in a pretty
Quantity of Spirit of Urine, and then dissolved further by degrees in fair
Water, imparted a discernable, though but a very faint Color, to about six
Glass-fulls of Water, each of them containing about forty three Ounces and an
half, which amounts to above a hundred twenty five thousand times its own
Weight.]

EXPERIMENT XXV.
It may afford a considerable Hint (Pyrophilus) to him, that would improve the
Art of Dying, to know what change of Colors may be produced by the three
several sorts of Salts already often mentioned, (some or other of which may be
procured in Quantity at reasonable Rates) in the Juices, Decoctions, Infusions,
and (in a word) the more soluble parts of Vegetables. And, though the design of
this Discourse be the Improvement of Knowledge, not of Trades: yet thus much I
shall not scruple to intimate here, That the Blew Liquors, mentioned in the
twentieth and one and twentieth Experiments, are fat from being the only
Vegetable Substances, upon which Acid, Urinous, and Alcalizate Salts have the
like Operations to those recited in those two Experiments. For Ripe Privet
Berries (for instance) being crushed upon White Paper, though they stain it
with a Purplish Color, yet if we let fall on some part of it two or three
drops of Spirit of Salt, and on the other part a little more of the strong
Solution of Potashes, the former Liquor immediately turned that part of the
Thick Juice or Pulp, on which it fell, into a lovely Red, and the latter turned
the other part of it into a delightful Green. Though I will not undertake,
that those Colors in that Substance shall not be much more. Orient, than
Lasting; and though (Pyrophilus) this Experiment may seem to be almost the same
with those already delivered concerning Syrrup of Violets, and the Juice of
Blew-bottles, yet I think it not amiss to take this Occasion to inform you,
that this Experiment reaches much farther, than perhaps you yet imagine, and
may be of good Use to those, whom it concerns to know, how Dying Stuffs may be
wrought upon by Saline Liquors. For, I have found this Experiment to succeed in
so many Various Berries, Flowers, Blossoms, and other finer Parts of
Vegetables, that neither my Memory, nor my Leisure serves me to enumerate them.
And it is somewhat surprising to see, by how Differingly-colour'd Flowers, or
Blossoms, (for example) the Paper being stained, will by an Acid Spirit be
immediately turned Red, and by any Alcaly or any Urinous Spirit turned Green;
insomuch that even the crushed Blossoms of Meserion, (which I gathered in
Winter and frosty Weather) and those of Pease, crushed upon White Paper, how
remote soever their Colors be from Green, would in a moment pass into a deep
Degree of that Color, upon the Touch of an Alcalizate Liquor. To which let us
add, That either of those new Pigments (if I may so call them) may by the
Affusion of enough of a contrary Liquor, be presently changed from Red into
Green, and from Green into Red, which Observation will hold also in Syrrup of
Violets; Juices of Blew-bottles, etc.

Annotation.
After what I have formerly delivered to evince, That there are many Instances,
wherein new Colors are produced or acquired by Bodies, which Chemists are wont
to think destitute of Salt, or to whose change of Colors no new Accession of
Saline Particles does appear to contribute, I think we may safely enough
acknowledge, that we have taken notice of so many Changes made by the
Intervention of Salts in the Colors of Mixed Bodies, that it has lessened our
Wonder, That though many Chemists are wont to ascribe the Colors of such
Bodies to their Sulphurous, and the rest to their Mercurial Principle; yet
Paracelsus himself directs us in the Indagation of Colors, to have an Eye
principally upon Salts, as we find in that passage of his, wherein he takes
upon him to Oblige his Readers much by Instructing them, of what things they
are to expect the Knowledge from each of the three distinct Principles of
Bodies. Alias (says he) Colorum similis ratio est: De quibus brevem
institutionem hanc attendite, quod scilicet colores omnes ex Sale prodeant. Sal
enim dat colorem, dat Balsamum. And a little beneath. Iam natura Paracelsus de
Mineral. tract. 1. page m. 242.
Ipsa colores protrahit ex sale, cuique speciei dans illum, qui ipsi competit,
etc. After which he concludes; Itaque qui rerum omnium corpora cognoscere vult,
huic opus est, ut ante omnia cognoscat Sulphur, Ab hoc, qui desiderat novisse
Colores is scientiam istorum petat a Sale, Qui scire vult Virtutes, is
scrutetur arcana Mercurii. Sic nimirum fundamentum hauserit Mysteriorum, in
quolibet crescenti indagandorum, prout natura cuilibet speciei ea ingessit. But
though Paracelsus ascribes to each of his beloved Hypostatical Principles, much
more than I fear will be found to belong to it; yet if we please to consider
Colors, not as Philosophers, but as Dyers, the concurrence of Salts to the
striking and change of Colors, and their Efficacy, will, I suppose, appear so
considerable, that we shall not need to quarrel much with Paracelsus, for
ascribing in this place (for I dare not affirm that he uses to be still of one
Mind) the Colors of Bodies to their Salts, if by Salts he here understood, not
only Elementary Salts, but such also as are commonly taken for Salts, as Al^m,
Crystals of Tartar, Vitriol, etc. because the Saline principle does chiefly
abound in them, though indeed they be, as we elsewhere declare, mixed Bodies,
and have most of them, besides what is Saline, both Sulphurous, Aqueous, and
Gross or Earthy parts.

But though (Pyrophilus) I have observed a Red and Green to be produced, the
former, by Acid Salts, the later by Salts not Acid, in the expressed Juices of so
many differing Vegetable Substances, that the Observation, if persued, may
prove (as I said) of good Use: yet to show you how much even these Effects
depend upon the particular Texture of Bodies, I must subjoyn some cases wherein
I (who am somewhat backwards to admit Observations for Universal) had the
Curiosity to discover, that the Experiments would not Uniformly succeed, and of
these Exceptions, the chief that I now remember, are reducible to the following
three.

EXPERIMENT XXVI.
And, (first) I thought fit to try the Operation of Acid Salts upon Vegetable
Substances, that are already and by their own Nature Red. And accordingly I
made Trial upon Syrrup of Clove-july-flowers, the clear expressed Juice of the
succulent Berries of Spina Cervina, or Buck-thorn (which I had long kept by me
for the sake of its deep Color) upon Red Roses, Infusion of Brazil, and diverse
other Vegetable Substances, on some of which crushed (as is often mentioned)
upon White Paper, (which is also to be understood in most of these Experiments,
if no Circumstance of them argue otherwise) Spirit of Salt either made no
considerable Change, or altered the Color but from a Darker to a Lighter Red.
How it will succeed in many other Vegetable Juices, and Infusions of the same
Color, I have at present so few at hand, that I must leave you to find it our
your self. But as for the Operation of the other sorts of Salts upon these Red
Substances, I found it not very Uniform, some Red, or Reddish Infusions, as of
Roses, being turned thereby into a dirty Color, but yet inclining to Green.
Nor was the Syrrup of Clove-july-flowers turned by the Solution of Potashes to
a much better, though somewhat a Greener, Color. Another sort of Red Infusions
was by an Alcaly not turned into a Green, but advanced into a Crimson, as I
shall have occasion to note ere long. But there were other sorts, as
particularly the lovely Colored juice of Buckthorn Berries, that readily
passed into a lovely Green.

EXPERIMENT XXVII.
Among other Vegetables, which we thought likely to afford Exceptions to the
General Observation about the differing Changes of Colors produced by Acid and
Sulphurous Salts, we thought fit to make Trial upon the Flowers of Jasmin,
they being both White as to Color, and esteemed to be of a more Oily nature
than other Flowers. Whereupon having taken the White parts only of the Flowers,
and rubbed them somewhat hard with my Finger upon a piece of clean Paper, it
appeared very little Discolored. Nor had Spirit of Salt, wherewith I moistened
one part of it, any considerable Operation upon it. But Spirit of Urine, and
somewhat more effectually a strong Alcalizate Solution, did immediately turn
the almost Colorless Paper moistened by the Juice of the Jasmin, not as those
Liquors are wont to do, when put upon the Juices of other Flowers, of a good
Green, but of a Deep, though somewhat Greenish Yellow, which Experiment I did
afterward at several times repeat with the like success. But it seems not that
a great degree of Unctuousness is necessary to the Production of the like
Effects, for when we tried the Experiment with the Leaves of those purely White
Flowers that appear about the end of Winter, and are commonly called Snow
drops, the event, was not much unlike that, which, we have been newly
mentioning.

EXPERIMENT XXVIII.
Another sort of Instances to show, how much changes of Colors effected by
Salts, depend upon the particular Texture of the Colored Bodies, has been
afforded me by several Yellow Flowers, and other Vegetables, as Mary-gold
Leaves, early Prim-roses, fresh Madder, etc. For being rubbed upon White Paper,
till they imbued it with their Color, I found not, that by the addition of
Alcalizate Liquors, nor yet by that of an Urinous Spirit, they would be turned
either Green or Red: nor did so Acid a Spirit, as that of Salt, considerably
alter their Color, save that it seemed a little to Dilute it. Only in some
early Prim-roses it destroyed the greatest part of the Color, and made the
Paper almost White again. And Madder also afforded some thing peculiar, and very
differing from what we have newly mentioned: For having gathered some Roots of
it, and, (whilst they were recent) expressed upon White Paper the Yellow Juice,
an Alcalizate Solution dropped upon it did not turn it either Green or White,
but Red. And the bruised Madder it self being drenched with the like Alcalizate
Solution, exchanged also its Yellowishness for a Redness.

An admonition touching the four preceding Experiments.
Having thus (Pyrophilus) given you diverse Instances, to countenance the
General observation delivered in the twenty fifth Experiment, and diverse
Exceptions whereby it ought to be Limited; I must leave the further Inquiry
into these Matters to your own Industry. For not remembering at present many of
those other Trials, long since made to satisfy my self about Particulars, and
not having now the Opportunity to repeat them, I must content my Self to have
given you the Hint, and the ways of prosecuting the search your Self; and only
declare to you in general, that, As I have made many Trials, unmention'd in
this Treatise, whose Events were agreeable to those mentioned in the twenty
fifth Experiment, so (to name now no other Instances) what I have tried with
Acid and Sulphurous Salts upon the Pulp of Juniper Berries, rubbed upon White
Paper, inclines me to think, That among that vast Multitude, and strange
Variety of Plants that adorn the face of the Earth, perhaps many other
Vegetables may be found, on which such Menstruums may not have such Operations,
as upon the Juice of Violets, Pease-blossoms, etc. no nor upon any of those
three other sorts of Vegetables, that I have taken notice of in the three
foregoing Experiments. It sufficiently appearing even by these, that the
effects of a Salt upon the Juices of particular Vegetables do very much depend
upon their particular Textures.

EXPERIMENT XXIX.
It may be of some Use toward the discovery of the nature of these Changes,
which the Alimental Juice receives in some Vegetables, according to the
differing degrees of their Maturity, and according to the differing kinds of
Plants of the same Denomination, to observe what Operation Acid, Urinous, and
Alcalizate Salts will have upon the Juices of the several sorts of the
Vegetable Substances I have been mentioning.

To declare my meaning by an Example, I took from the same Cluster, one
Blackberry full Ripe, and another that had not yet gone beyond a Redness, and
rubbing a piece of White Paper, with the former, I observed, that the Juice
adhering to it was of a dark Reddish Color, full of little Black Specks, and
that this Juice by a drop of a strong Lixivium, was immediately turned into a
Greenish Color deep enough, by as much Urinous Spirit into a Color much of
Kin to the former, though somewhat differing, and fainter; and by a drop of
Spirit of Salt into a fine and lightsome Red: where as the Red Berry being in
like manner rubbed upon Paper, left on it a Red Color, which was very little
altered by the Acid Spirit newly named, and by the Urinous and Lixiviate Salts
received changes of Color differing from those that had been just before
produced in the dark Juice of the Ripe Blackberry.

I remember also, that though the Infusion of Damask-Roses would as well,
though not so much, as that of Red; be heightened by Acid Spirits to an intense
degree of Redness, and by Lixiviate Salts be brought to a Darkish Green; yet
having for Trials sake taken a Rose, whose Leaves, which were large and
numerous, like those of a Province Rose, were perfectly Yellow, though in a
Solution of Salt of Tartar, they afforded a Green Bluish Tincture, yet I did
not by an Acid Liquor obtain a Red one; all that the Saline Spirit I employed,
performed, being (if I much mis-remember not) to Dilute somewhat the Yellowness
of the Leaves. I would also have tried the Tincture of Yellow Violets, but
could procure none. And if I were in those Islands of Banda, which are made
Famous as well as Rich, by being the almost only places, where Cloves will
prosper, I should think it worth my Curiosity to try, what Operation the three
differing Kinds of Salts, I have so often mentioned, would have upon the Juice
of this Sipce, (expressed at the several Seasons of it) as it grows upon the
Tree. Since good Authors inform us, (of what is remarkable) that these whether
Fruits, or Rudiments of Fruits, are at first white, afterward Green, and then
Reddish, before they be beaten off the Tree, after which being Dried before
they are put up, they grow Blackish as we see them. And one of the recentest
Herbarists informs us, that the Flower grows upon the top of the Clove it self,
consisting of four small Leaves, like a Cherry Blossom, but of an excellent
Blew. But (Pyrophilus) to return to our own Observations, I shall add, that I
the rather choose, to mention to you an Example drawn from Roses, because that
though I am apt to think, as I elsewhere advertise, that something may be
guessed at about some of the Qualities of the Juices of Vegetables, by the
Resemblance or Disparity that we meet with in the Changes made of their
Colors, by the Operation of the same kinds of Salts; yet that those
Conjectures should be very warily made, may appear among other things, by the
Instance I have chosen to give in Roses. For though, (as I formerly told you)
the Dried Leaves, both of the Damask, and of Red ones, give a Red Tincture to
Water sharpened with Acid Salts, yet the one sort of Leaves is known to have
See Parkinson Th. Botan. Trib. 9. cap. 26.
a Purgative faculty, and the other are often, and diverse ways, employed for
Binding.

And I also choose (Pyrophilus) to subjoyn this twenty ninth Experiment to
those that precede it, about the change of the Colors of Vegetables by Salts,
for these two reasons: The first, that you may not easily entertain Suspicions,
if in the Trials of an Experiment of some of the Kinds formerly mentioned, you
should meet with an Event somewhat differing from what my Relations may have
made you expect. And the second, That you may hereby be invited to discern,
that it may not be amiss to take notice of the particular Seasons wherein you
gather the Vegetables which in Nicer Experiments you make use of. For, if I
were not hindered both by haste and some justifiable Considerations, I could
perhaps add considerable Instances, to those lately delivered, for the making
out of this Observation; but for certain reasons I shall at present substitute
a remarkable passage to be met with in that Laborious Herbarist Mr. Parkinson,
where treating of the Virtues of the (already diverse times mentioned) Buckthorn
Berries, he subjoyns the following account of several Pigments that are made of
them, not only according to the several ways of Handling them, but according to
the differing Seasons of Maturity, at which they are Gathered; Of these
Berries, (says he) are made three several sorts of Colors as they shall be
gathered, that is, being gathered while they are Green, and kept Dry, are
called Sapberries, which being steeped into some Allom-water, or fresh bruised
into Allom-water, they give a reasonable fair Yellow Color which Painters use
for their Work, and Book-binders to Color the edges of Books, and
Leatherdressers to Color Leather, as they use also to make a Green Color,
called Sap-green, taken from the Berries when they are Black, being bruised and
put into a Brass or Copper Kettle or Pan, and there suffered to abide three or
four Days, or a little heated upon the Fire, and some beaten Allom put unto
them, and afterward pressed forth, the Juice or Liquor is usually put in great
Bladders tied with strong thread at the Head and hung up until it be Dry, which
is dissolved in Water or Wine, but Sack (he affirms) is the best to preserve
the Color from Starving, (as they call it) that is, from Decaying, and make it
hold fresh the longer. The third Color (where of none (says he) that I can
find have made mention but only Tragus) is a Purplish Color, which is made of
the Berries suffered to grow upon the Bushes until the middle or end of
November, that they are ready to drop from the Trees.

And, I remember (Pyrophilus) that I tried, with a success that pleased me well
enough, to make such a kind of Pigment, as Painters call Sap-green, by a way
not unlike that, delivered here by our Author, but I cannot now find any thing
relating to that matter among my loose Papers. And my Trials were made so many
years ago, that I dare not trust my Memory for Circumstances, but will rather
tell you, that in a noted Colour-shop, I brought them by Questions to confess
to me, that they made their Sap-green much after the ways by our Botanist here
mentioned. And on this occasion I shall add an Observation, which though it
does not strictly belong to this place, may well enough be mentioned here,
namely, that I find by an account given us by the Learned Clusius, of
Alaternus, that even the Grosser Parts of the same Plant, are some of them one
Color, and some another; For speaking of that Plant, he tells us, that the
Portugalls use the Bark to Dye their Nets into a Red Color, and with the Chips
of the Wood, which are Whitish, they Dye a Blackish Blew.

EXPERIMENT XXX.
Among the Experiments that tend to show that the change of Colors in Bodies
may proceed from the Varied Texture of their Parts, and the consequent change
of their Disposition to Reflect or Refract the Light, that sort of Experiments
must not be left unmention'd, which is afforded us by Chemical Digestions. For,
if Chemists will believe several famous Writers about what they call the
Philosophers Stone, they must acknowledge that the same Matter, sealed up
Hermetically in a Philosophical Egg, will by the continuance of Digestion, or
if they will have it so (for it is not Material in our case which of the two it
be) of Decoction, run through a great Variety of differing Colors, before it
come to that of the Noblest Elixir; whether that be Scarlet, or Purple, or what
ever other Kind of Red. But without building any thing on so Obtruse and
Questionable an Operation, (which yet may be pertinently represented to those
that believe the thing) we may observe, that diverse Bodies digested in
carefully-clos'd Vessels, will in tract of time, change their Color: As I have
elsewhere mentioned my having observed even in Rectified Spirit of Hartshorn,
and as is evident in the Precipitations of Amalgams of Gold, and Mercury,
without Addition, where by the continuance of a due Heat the Silver-Colour'd
Amalgam is reduced into a shining Red Powder. Further Instances of this Kind
you may find here and there in diverse places of my other Essays. And indeed it
has been a thing, that has much contributed to deceive many Chemists, that
there are more Bodies than one, which by Digestion will be brought to exhibit
that Variety and Succession of Colors, which they imagine to be Peculiar to
what they call the True matter of the Philosophers. But concerning this, I
shall referr you to what you may elsewhere find in the Discourse written
touching the passive Deceptions of Chemists, and more about the Production of
Colors by Digestion you will meet with presently. Wherefore I shall now make
only this Observation from what has been delivered, That in these Operations
there appears not any cause to attribute the new Colors emergent to the Action
of a new Substantial form, nor to any Increase or Decrement of either the Salt,
Sulphur, or Mercury of the Matter that acquires new Colors: For the Vessels
are closed, and these Principles according to the Chemists are Ingenerable and
Incorruptible; so that the Effect seems to proceed from hence, that the Heat
agitating and shuffling the Corpuscles of the Body exposed to it, does
improcess of time so change its Texture, as that the Transposed parts do
Modifie the incident Light otherwise, than they did when the Matter appeared of
another Color.

EXPERIMENT XXXI.
Among the several changes of Color; which Bodies acquire or disclose by
Digestion, it it very remarkable, that Chemists find a Redness rather than any
other Color in most of the Tinctures they Draw, and even in the more Gross
Solutions they make of almost all Concretes, that abound either with Mineral or
Vegetable Sulphur, though the Menstruum employed about these Solutions or
Tinctures be never so Limpid or Colorless.

This we have observed in I know not how many Tinctures drawn with Spirit of
Wine from Jalap, Guaicum, and several other Vegetables; and not only in the
Solutions of Amber, Benzoin, and diverse other Concretes made with the same
Menstruum, but also in diverse Mineral Tinctures. And, not to urge that familiar
Instance of the Ruby of Sulphur, as Chemists upon the score of its Color, call
the Solution of Flowers of Brimstone, made with the Spirit of Turpentine, nor
to take notice of other more known Examples of the aptness of Chemical Oils, to
produce a Red Color with the Sulphur they extract, or dissolve; not to insist
(I say) upon Instances of this nature, I shall further represent to you, as a
thing remarkable, that, both Acid and Alcalizate Salts, though in most other
cases of such contrary Operations, in reference to Colors, will with many
Bodies that abound with Sulphurous, or with Oily parts, produce a Red; as is
manifest partly in the more Vulgar Instances of the Tinctures, or Solutions of
Sulphur made with Lixiviums, either of Calcined Tartar or Potashes, and other
Obvious examples, partly by this, that the true Glass of Antimony extracted
with some Acid Spirits, with or without Wine, will yield a Red Tincture, and
that I know an Acid Liquor, which in a moment will turn Oil of Turpentine into
a deep Red. But among the many Instances I could give you of the easy
Production of Redness by the Operation of Saline Spirit, as well as of Spirit
of Wine; I remember two or three of those I have tried, which seem remarkable
enough to deserve to be mentioned to you apart.

EXPERIMENT XXXII.
But before we set them down, it will not perhaps appear impertinent to premise;

That there seems to be a manifest Disparity betwixt Red Liquors, so that some
of them may be said to have a Genuine Redness in comparison of others, that
have a Yellowish Redness: For if you take (for example) a good Tincture of
Chochineel, dilute it never so much with fair Water, you will not (as far as I
can judge by what I have tried) be able to make it a Yellow Liquor. Insomuch
that a Single drop of a rich Solution of Cochineel in Spirit of Urine, being
Diluted with above an Ounce of fair Water, exhibited no Yellowishness at all,
but a fair (though somewhat faint) Pinck or Carnation; and even when Cochineel
was by degrees Diluted much beyond the newly mentioned Color, by the way
formerly related to you in the twenty fourth Experiment, I remember not, that
there appeared in the whole Trial any Yellow. But if you take Balsom of Sulphur
(for Instance) though it may appear in a Glass, where it has a good Thickness,
to be of a deep Red, yet if you shake the Glass, or pour a few drops on a sheet
of White Paper, spreading them on it with your Finger, the Balsom that falls
back along the sides of the Glass, and that which stains the Paper, will appear
Yellow, not Red. And there are diverse Tinctures, such as that of Amber made
with Spirit of Wine, (to name now no more) that will appear either Yellow or
Red, according as the Vessels that they fill, are Slender or Broad.

EXPERIMENT XXXIII.
But to proceed to the Experiments I was about to deliver; First, Oil or Spirit
of Turpentine, though clear as fair Water, being Digested upon the purely White
Sugar of Lead, has, in a short time, afforded us a high Red Tincture, that some
Artists are pleased to call the Balsom of Saturn, which they very much (and
probably not altogether without cause) extol as an excellent Medicine in
diverse Outward affections.

EXPERIMENT XXXIV.
Next, take of common Brimstone finely powdered five Ounces, of Sal-Armoniack
likewise pulverized an equal weight, of beaten Quicklime six Ounces, mix these
Powders exquisitely, and Distill them through a Retort placed in Sand by
degrees of Fire, giving at length as intense a Heat as you well can in Sand,
there will come over (if you have wrought well) a Volatile Tincture of Sulphur,
which may probably prove an excellent Medicine, and should have been mentioned
among the other Preparations of Sulphur, which we have elsewhere imparted to
you, but that it is very pertinent to our present Subject, The change of
Colors. For though none of the Ingredients be Red, the Distilled Liquor will
be so: and this Liquor if it be well Drawn, will upon a little Agitation of the
Vial first unstop'd (especially if it be held in a Warmer hand) send forth a
copious Fume, not Red, like that of Nitre, but White; And sometimes this Liquor
may be so Drawn, that I remember, not long since, I took pleasure to observe in
a parcel of it, that Ingredients not Red, did not only yield by Distillation a
Volatile Spirit that was Red, but though that Liquor did upon the bare opening
of the Bottle it was kept in, drive us away with the plenty and Sulphurous
sent of a White steam which it sent forth, yet the Liquor it self being touched
by our Fingers, did immediately Dye them Black.

EXPERIMENT XXXV.
The third and last Experiment I shall now mention to show, how prone Bodies
abounding in Sulphurous parts are to afford a Red Color, is one, wherein by
the Operation of a Saline Spirit upon a White or Whitish Body, which according
to the Chemists should be altogether Sulphurous, a Redness may be produced,
not (as in the former Experiments) slowly, but in the twinkling of an Eye. We
took then of the Essential Oil of Anniseeds, which has this Peculiarity, that
in Cold weather it loses its Fluidity and the greatest part of its
Transparency, and looks like a White or Whitish Ointment, and near at hand
seems to consist of a Multitude of little soft Scales: Of this Coagulated Stuff
we spread a little with a Knife upon a piece of White Paper, and letting fall
on it, and mixing with it a drop or two of Oil of Vitriol, immediately (as we
foresaw) there emerg'd together with some Heat and Smoke, a Blood-Red Color,
which therefore was in a trice produced by two Bodies, whereof the one had but
a Whitish Color, and the other (if carefully rectified) had no Color at all.

EXPERIMENT XXXVI.
But on this Occasion (Pyrophilus) we must add once for all, that in many of
the above-recited Experiments, though the changes of Color happened as we have
mentioned them: yet the emergent or produced Color is often times very subject
to Degenerate, both quickly and much. Notwithstanding which, since the Changes,
we have set down, do happen presently upon the Operation of the Bodies upon
each other, or at the times by us specified; that is sufficient both to
justify our Veracity, and to show what we Intend; it not being Essential to
the Genuineness of a Color to be Durable. For a fading Leaf, that is ready to
Rot, and moulder into Dust, may have as true a Yellow, as a Wedge of Gold,
which so obstinately resists both Time and Fire. And the reason, why I take
occasion from the former Experiment to subjoyn this general Advertisement, is,
that I have several times observed, that the Mixture resulting from the Oils of
Vitriol, and of Anniseeds, though it acquire a thicker consistence than either
of the Ingredients had, has quickly lost its Color, turning in a very short
time into a dirty Gray, at least in the Superficial parts, where it is exposed
to the Air; which last Circumstance I therefore mention, because that, though
it seem probable, that this Degeneration of Colors may often times and in diverse
cases proceed from the further Action of the Saline Corpuscles, and the other
Ingredients upon one another, yet in many cases much of the Quick change of
Colors seems ascribeable to the Air, as may be made probable by several
reason: The first whereof may be fetched from the newly recited Example of the
two Oils; The next may be, that we have sometimes observed long Window-Curtains
of light Colors, to have that part of them, which was exposed to the Air, when
the Window, was open, of one Color, and the lower part, that was sheltred from
the Air by the Wall, of another Color: And the third Argument may be fetched
from diverse Observations, both of others, and our own; For of that Pigment so
well known in Painters Shops, by the name of Turnso, our Industrious Parkinson,
in the particular account he gives of the Plant that bears it, tells us also,
That the Berries when they are at their full Maturity, have within them between
the outer Skin and the inward Parkinson, Thea, Bot. Trib. 4. cap. 12.
Kirnel or Seed, a certain Juice or Moisture, which being rubbed upon Paper or
Cloth, at the first appears of a fresh and lovely Green Color, but presently
changes into a kind of Bluish Purple, upon the Cloth or Paper, and the same
Cloth afterward wet in Water, and wrung forth, will Color the Water into a
Claret Wine Color, and these (concludes he) are those Rags of Cloth, which
are usually called Turnsol in the Druggists or Grocers Shops. And to this
Observation of our Botanist we will add an Experiment of our own, (made before
we met with That) which, though in many Circumstances, very differing, serves
to prove the same thing; for having taken of the deeply Red Juice of Buckthorn
Berries, which I bought of the Man that uses to sell it to the Apothecaries, to
make their Syrrup de Spina Cervina, I let some of it drop upon a piece of White
Paper, and having left it there for many hours, till the Paper was grown dry
again, I found what I was inclined to suspect, namely, That this Juice was
degenerated from a deep Red to a dirty kind of Greyish Color, which, in a
great part of the stained Paper seemed not to have so much as an Eye of Red:
Though a little Spirit of Salt or dissolved Alcaly would turn this unpleasant
Color (as formerly I told you it would change the not yet altered Juice) into
a Red or Green. And to satisfy my self, that this Degeneration of Color did
not proceed from the Paper, I dropped some of the deep Red or Crimson Juice upon
a White glazed Tile, and suffering it to dry on there, I found that even in
that Body, on which it could not Soak, and by which it could not be Wrought, it
nevertheless lost its Color. And these Instances (Pyrophilus) I am the more
careful to mention to you, that you may not be much Surprised or Discouraged,
if you should sometimes miss of performing punctually what I affirm my self to
have done in point of changing Colors; since in these Experiments the
oversight or neglect of such little Circumstances, as in many others would not
be perhaps considerable, may occasion the mis-carrying of a Trial. And I was
willing also to take this occasion of Advertising you in the repeating of the
Experiments mentioned in this Treatise, to make use of the Juices of
Vegetables, and other things prepared for your Trials, as soon as ever they are
ready, lest one or other of them grow less fit, if not quite unfit by delay;
and to estimate the Event of the Trials by the Change, that is produced
presently upon the due and sufficient Application of Actives to Passives, (as
they speak) because in many cases the effects of such Mixtures may not be
lasting, and the newly produced Color may in a little time degenerate. But,
(Pyrophilus) I forgot to add to the two former Observations lately made about
Vegetables, a third of the same Import, made in Mineral substances, by telling
you, That the better to satisfy a Friend or two in this particular, I
sometimes made, according to some Conjectures of mine, this Experiment; That
having dissolved good Silver in Aquafortis, and Precipitated it with Spirit of
Salt, upon the first Decanting of the Liquor, the remaining Matter would be
purely White; but after it had lain a while uncovered, that part of it, that
was Contiguous to the Air, would not only lose its Whiteness, but appear of a
very Dark and almost Blackish Color, I say that part that was Contiguous to
the Air, because if that were gently taken off, the Subjacent part of the same
Mass would appear very White, till that also, having continued a while exposed
to the Air, would likewise Degenerate. Now whether the Air perform these things
by the means of a Subtle Salt, which we elsewhere show it not to be destitute
of, or by a peircing Moisture, that is apt easily to insinuate it self into the
Pores of some Bodies, and thereby change their Texture, and so their Color: Or
by soliciting the Avolation of certain parts of the Bodies, to which it is
Contiguous; or by some other way, (which possibly I may elsewhere propose and
consider) I have not now the leisure to discourse. And for the same reason,
though I could add many other Instances, of what I formerly noted touching the
emergency of Redness upon the Digestion of many Bodies, insomuch that I have
often seen upon the Borders of France (and probably we may have the like in
England) a sort of Pears, which digested for some time with a little Wine, in a
Vessel exactly closed, will in not many hours appear throughout of a deep Red
Color, (as also that of the Juice, wherein they are Stewed, becomes) but even
on pure and white Salt of Tartar, pure Spirit of Wine, as clear as Rock-water,
will (as we elsewhere declare) by long Digestion acquire a Redness; Though I
say such Instances might be Multiplied, and though there be some other Obvious
changes of Colors, which happen so frequently, that they cannot but be as well
Considerable as Notorious; such as is the Blackness of almost all Bodies burned
in the open Air: yet our haste invites us to resign you the Exercise of
enquiring into the Causes of these Changes. And certainly, the reason both why
the Soots of such differing Bodies are almost all of them all Black, why so
much the greater part of Vegetables should be rather Green than of any other
Color, and particularly (which more directly concerns this place) why gentle
Heats do so frequently in Chemical Operations produce rather a Redness than
another Color in digested Menstruums, not only Sulphurous, as Spirit of Wine,
but Saline, as Spirit of Vinegar, may be very well worth a serious Inquiry;
which I shall therefore recommend to Pyrophilus and his Ingenious Friends.

EXPERIMENT XXXVII.
It may seem somewhat strange, that if you take the Crimson Solution of
Cochineel, or the Juice of Black Cherries, and of some other Vegetables that
afford the like Color, (which because many take but for a deep Red, we do with
them sometimes call it so) and let some of it fall upon a piece of Paper, a
drop or two of an Acid Spirit, such as Spirit of Salt, or Aquafortis, will
immediately turn it into a fair Red. Whereas if you make an Infusion of Brazil
in fair Water, and drop a little Spirit of Salt or Aquafortis into it, that
will destroy its Redness, and leave the Liquor of a Yellow, (sometimes Pale) I
might perhaps plausibly enough say on this occasion, that if we consider the
case a little more attentively, we may take notice, that the action of the Acid
Spirit seems in both cases, but to weaken the Color of the Liquor on which it
falls. And so though it destroy Redness in the Tincture of Brazil, as well as
produce Red in the Tincture of Chochineel, its Operations may be Uniform
enough, since as Crimson seems to be little else than a very deep Red, with
(perhaps) an Eye of Blew, so some kinds of Red seem (as I have lately noted) to
be little else than heightened Yellow. And consequently in such Bodies, the
Yellow seems to be but a diluted Red. And accordingly Alcalizate Solutions and
Urinous Spirits, which seem disposed to Deepen the Colors of the Juices and
Liquors of most Vegetables, will not only restore the Solution of Cochineel and
the Infusion of Brazil to the Crimson, whence the Spirit of Salt had changed
them into a truer Red; but will also (as I lately told you) not only heighthen
the Yellow Juice of Madder into Red, but advance the Red Infusion of Brazil to
a Crimson. But I know not whether it will not be much safer to derive these
Changes from varied Textures, than certain kinds of Bodies; and you will
perhaps think it worth while, that I should add on this occasion, That it may
deserve some Speculation, why, notwithstanding what we have been observing,
though Blew and Purple seem to be deeper Colors than Red, and therefore the
Juices of Plants of either of the two former Colors may (congruously enough to
what has been just now noted) be turned Red by Spirit of Salt or Aquafortis,
yet Blew Syrrup of Violets and some Purples should both by Oil of Tartar and
Spirit of Urine be changed into Green, which seems to be not a deeper but a
more diluted Color than Blew, if not also than Purple.

EXPERIMENT XXXVIII.
It would much contribute to the History of Colors, if Chemists would in their
Laboratories take a heedfull notice, and give us a faithful account of the
Colors observed in the Steams of Bodies either Sublimed or Distilled, and of
the Colors of those Productions of the Fire, that are made up by the Coalition
of those Steams. As (for Instance) we observe in the Distilling of pure
Saltpeter, that at a certain season of the Operation, the Body, though it seem
either Crystalline, or White, affords very Red Fumes: whereas though Vitriol be
Green or Blew, the Spirit of it is observed to come over in Whitish Fumes. The
like Color I have taken notice of in the Fumes of several other Concretes of
differing Colors, and Natures, especially when Distilled with strong Fires.
And we elsewhere note, that even Soot, as Black as it is, has filled our
Receivers with such copious White Fumes, that they seemed to have had their
In-sides washed with Milk. And no less observable may be, the Distilled
Liquors, into which such Fumes convene, (for though we will not deny, that by
skill and care a Reddish Liquor may be obtained from Nitte) yet the common
Spirit of it, in the making even of which store of these Red Fumes are wont to
pass over into the Receiver, appears not to be at all Red. And besides, that
neither the Spirit of Vitriol, nor that of Soot is any thing White; And,
besides also, that as far as I have observed, most (for I say not all) of the
Empyreumatical Oils of Woods, and other Concretes, are either of a deep Red, or
of a Color between Red and Black; besides this, I say, it is very remarkable,
that notwithstanding that great Variety of Colors to be met with in the Herbs,
Flowers, and other Bodies wont to be Distilled in Balneo: yet (as far at least
as our common Distillers Experience reaches) all the Waters and Spirits that
first come over by that way of Distillation, leave the Colors of their
Concretes behind them, though indeed there be one or two Vegetables not
commonly taken notice of, whose Distilled Liquors I elsewhere observe to carry
over the Tincture of the Concrete with them. And as in Distillations, so in
Sublimations, it were worth while to take notice of what comes up, in reference
to our present scope, by purposely performing them (as I have in some cases
done) in conveniently shaped Glasses, that the Color of the ascending Fumes
may be discerned; For it may afford a Naturalist good Information to observe
the Congruities or the Differences betwixt the Colors of the ascending Fumes,
and those of the Flowers, they compose by their Convention. For it is evident,
that these Flowers, do many of them in point of Color, much differ, not only
from one another, but often times from the Concretes that afforded them. Thus,
(not here to repeat what I formerly noted of the Black Soots of very
differingly Colored Bodies) though Camphire and Brimstone afford Flowers much
of their own Color, save that those of Brimstone are wont to be a little
Paler, than the Lumps that yielded them; yet even of Red Benzoin, that sublimed
Substance, which Chemists call its Flowers, is wont to be White or Whitish. And
to omit other Instances, even one and the same Black Mineral, Antimony, may be
made to afford Flowers, some of them Red, and some Gray, and, which is more
strange, some of them purely White. And it is the Prescription of some Glass-men
by exquisitely mingling a convenient proportion of Brimstone, Sal-Armoniack,
and Quicksilver, and Subliming them together, to make a Sublimate of an
excellent Blew; and though having caused the Experiment to be made, we found
the produced Sublimate to be far from being of a lovely Color, (as was
promised) that there and there, it seemed Bluish, and at least was of a Color
differing enough from either of the Ingredients, which is sufficient for our
present purpose. But a much finer Color is promised by some of the Empiricks,
that pretend to Secrets, who tell us, that Orpiment, being Sublimed, will
afford among the Parts of it that fly Upward, some little Masses, which, though
the Mineral it self be of a good Yellow, will be Red enough to emulate Rubies,
both in Color and Translucency. And this Experiment may, for ought I know,
sometimes succeed; for I remember, that having in a small Bolt-head purposely
sublimed some powdered Orpiment, we could in the Lower part of the Sublimate
discern here and there some Reddish Lines, though much of the Upper part of the
Sublimate consisted of a matter, which was not alone purely Yellow, but
transparent almost like a Powder. And we have also this way obtained a
Sublimate, the Lower part whereof though it consisted not of Rubies, yet the
small pieces of it, which were Numerous enough, were of a pleasant Reddish
Color, and Glister'd very prettily. But to insist on such kind of Trials and
Observations, (where the ascending Fumes of Bodies differ in Color from the
Bodies themselves) though it might indeed Enrich the History of Colors, would
Robb me of too much of the little time I have to dispatch what I have further
to tell you concerning them.

EXPERIMENT XXXIX.
Take the dried Buds (or Blossoms) of the Pomegranate Tree, (which are commonly
called in the Shops (Balaustiums) pull off the Reddish Leaves, and by a gentle
Ebullition of them in fair Water, or by a competent Infusion of them in like
Water well heated, extract a faint Reddish Tincture, which if the Liquor be
turbid, you may Clarify it by Filtrating it. Into this, if you pour a little
good Spirit of Urine, or some other Spirit abounding in the like sort of
Volatile Salts, the Mixture will presently turn of a dark Greenish Color, but
if instead of the forementioned Liquor, you drop into the simple Infusion a
little rectified Spirit of Sea Salt, the Pale and almost Colorless Liquor will
immediately not only grow more Transparent, but acquire a high Redness, like
that of Rich Claret Wine, which so suddenly acquired Color, may as quickly be
Destroyed and turned into a dirty Bluish Green, by the affusion of a competent
quantity of the abovementioned Spirit of Urine.

Annotation.
This Experiment may bring some Light to, and receive some from a couple of
other Experiments, that I remember I have met with in the Ingenious Gassendus's
Animadversions upon Epicurus's Philosophy, whilst I was turning over the Leaves
of those Learned Commentaries; (my Eyes being too weak to let me read such
Voluminous Books quite thorough) And I the less scruple (notwithstanding my
contrary Custom in this Treatise) to set down these Experiments of another,
because I shall a little improve the latter of them, and because by comparing
there with that which I have last recited, we may be assisted to Conjecture
upon what account it is, that Oil of Vitriol heightens the Tincture of Red-rose
Leaves, since Spirit of Salt, which is a highly Acid Menstruum, but otherwise
differing enough from Oil of Vitriol, does the same thing. Our Authors
Experiments then, as we made them, are these; We took about a Glass-full of
lukewarm Water, and in it immerg'd a quantity of the Leaves of Senna, and
presently upon the Immersion there did not appear any Redness in the Water, but
dropping into it a little Oil of Tartar, the Liquor soon discovered a Redness
to the watchful Eye, whereas by a little of that Acid Liquor of Vitriol, which
is like the former, undeservedly called Oil, such a Color would not be
extracted from the infused Senna. On the other side we took some Red-rose
Leaves dried, and having shaken them into a Glass of fair Water, they imparted
to it no Redness, but upon the affusion of a little Oil of Vitriol the Water
was immediately turned Red, which it would not have been, if instead of Oil of
Vitriol, we had employed Oil of Tartar to produce that Color: That these were
Gassendus his Experiments, I partly remember, and was assured by a Friend, who
lately Transcribed them out of Gassendus his Book, which I therefore add,
because I have not now that Book at hand. And the design of Gassendus in these
Experiments our Friend affirms to be, to prove, that of things not Red a
Redness may be made only by Mixture, and the Varied position of parts, wherein
the Doctrine of that Subtle Philosopher does not a little Authorize, what we
have formerly delivered concerning the Emergency and Change of Colors. But the
instances, that we have out of him set down, seem not to be the most Eminent,
that may be produced of this truth: For our next Experiment will show the
production of several Colors out of Liquors, which have not any of them any
such Color, nor indeed any discernable one at all; and whereas though our
Author tells us, that there was no Redness either in the Water, or the Leaves
of Senna, or the Oil of Tartar; And though it be true, that the Predominant
Color of the Leaves of Senna be another than Red, yet we have tried, that by
steeping that Plant a Night even in Cold water, it would afford a very deep
Yellow or Reddish Tincture without the help of the Oil of Tartar, which seems
to do little more than assist the Water to extract more nimbly a plenty of that
Red Tincture, wherewith the Leaves of Senna do of themselves abound, and having
taken off the Tincture of Senna, made only with fair Water, before it grew to
be Reddish, and Decanted it from the Leaves, we could not perceive, that by
dropping some Oil of Tartar into it, that Color was considerable, though it
were a little heightened into a Redness, which might have been expected, if the
particles of the Oil did eminently Cooperate, otherwise than we have
expressed, to the production of this Redness.

And as for the Experiment with Red-rose Leaves, the same thing may be alleged,
for we found that such Leaves by bare Infusion for a Night and Day in fair
Water, did afford us a Tincture bordering at least upon Redness, and that
Color being conspicuous in the Leaves themselves, would not by some seem so
much to be produced as to be extracted by the affusion of Oil of Vitriol. And
the Experiment tried with the dried Leaves of Damask-roses succeeded but
imperfectly, but that is indeed observable to our Authors purpose, that Oil of
Tartar will not perform in this Experiment what Oil of Vitriol does; but
because this last named Liquor is not so easily to be had, give me leave to
Advertise you, that the Experiment will succeed, if Instead of it you employ
Aquafortis. And though some Trials of our own formerly made, and others easily
deducible from what we have already delivered, about the different. Families
and Operations of Salt, might enable us to present you an Experiment upon
Red-rose Leaves, more accommodated to our Authors purpose, than that which he
has given us; yet our Reverence to so Candid a Philosopher, invites us rather
to improve his Experiment, than substitute another in its place. Take therefore
of the Tincture of Red-rose Leaves, (for with Damask-rose Leaves the Experiment
succeeds not well) made as before has been taught with a little Oil of
Vitriol, and a good quantity of fair Water, pour off this Liquor into a clear
Vial, half filled with Limpid water, till the Water held against the Light have
acquir*d a competent Redness, without losing its Transparency, into this
Tincture drop leisurely a little good Spirit of Urine, and shaking the Vial,
which you must still hold against the Light, you shall see the Red Liquor
immediately turned into a fine Greenish Blew, which Color was not to be found
in any of the Bodies, upon whose Mixture it emerg'd, and this Change is the
more observable, because in many Bodies the Degenerating of Blew into Red is
usual enough, but the turning of Red into Blew is very unfrequent. If at every
drop of Spirit of Urine you shake the Vial containing the Red Tincture, you may
delightfully observe a pretty variety of Colors in the passage of that
Tincture from a Red to a Blew, and sometimes we have this way hit upon such a
Liquor, as being looked upon against and from the Light, did seem faintly to
emulate the abovementioned Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum. And if you make the
Tincture of Red-roses very high, and without Diluting it with fair Water, pour
on the Spirit of Urine, you may have a Blew so deep, as to make the Liquor
Opacous, but being dropped upon White Paper the Color will soon disclose it
self. Also having made the Red, and consequently the Blew Tincture very
Transparent, and suffered it to rest in a small open Vial for a Day or two, we
found according to our Conjecture, that not only the Blew but the Red Color
also was Vanished; the clear Liquor being of a bright Amber Color, at the
bottom of which subsided a Light, but Copious feculency of almost the same
Color, which seems to be nothing but the Tincted parts of the Rose Leaves
drawn out by the Acid Spirits of the Oil of Vitriol, and Precipitated by the
Volatile Salt of the Spirit of Urine, which makes it the more probable, that
the Redness drawn by the Oil of Vitriol, was at least as well an extraction of
the Tinging parts of the Roses, as a production of Redness; and lastly, if you
be destitute of Spirit of Urine, you may change the Color of the Tincture of
Roses with many other Sulphurous Salts, as a strong Solution of Potashes, Oil
of Tartar, etc. which yet are seldom so free from Feculency, as the Spirituous
parts of Urine becomes by repeated Distillation.

Annotation.
On this occasion, I call to mind, that I found, a way of producing, though not
the same kind of Blew, as I have been mentioning, yet a Color near of Kin to
it, namely, a fair Purple, by employing a Liquor not made Red by Art, instead
of the Tincture of Red-roses, made with an Acid Spirit; And my way was only to
take Log-wood, (a Wood very well known to Dyers) having by Infusion the Powder
of it a while in fair Water made that Liquor Red, I dropped into it a Tantillum
of an Urinous Spirit, as that of Sal-Armoniack, (and I have done the same thing
with an Alcali) by which the Color was in a moment turned into a Rich, and
lovely Purple. But care must be had, that you let not fall into a Spoonful
above two or three Drops, left the Color become so deep, as to make the Liquor
too Opacous. And (to answer the other part of Gassendus his Experiment) if
instead of fair Water, I infused the Log-wood in Water made somewhat sour by
the Acid Spirit of Salt, I should obtain neither a Purple Liquor, nor a Red,
but only a Yellow one.

EXPERIMENT XL.
The Experiment I am now to mention to you, Pyrophilus, is that which both you,
and all the other Virtuosi that have seen it, have been pleased to think very
strange; and indeed of all the Experiments of Colors, I have yet met with, it
seems to be the fittest to recommend the Doctrine proposed in this Treatise,
and to show that we need not suppose, that all Colors must necessarily be
Inherent Qualities, flowing from the Substantial Forms of the Bodies they are
said to belong to, since by a bare Mechanical change of Texture in the Minute
parts of Bodies, two Colors may in a moment be Generated quite De novo, and
utterly Destroyed. For there is this difference betwixt the following
Experiment, and most of the others delivered in these Papers, that in this, the
Color that a Body already had, is not changed into another, but betwixt two
Bodies, each of them apart devoid of Color, there is in a moment generated a
very deep Color, and which if it were let alone, would be permanent; and yet
by a very small Parcel of a third Body, that has no Color of its own, (lest
some may pretend I know not what Antipathy betwixt Colors) this otherwise
permanent Color will be in another trice so quite Destroyed, that there will
remain no foot-stepts either of it or of any other Color in the whole Mixture.

The Experiment is very easy, and it is thus performed: Take good common
Sublimate, and fully satiate with it what quantity of Water you please, Filtre
the Solution carefully through clean and close Paper, that it may drop down as
Clear and Colorless as Fountain water. Then when you will show the Experiment,
put of it about a Spoonful into a small Wine-glass, or any other convenient
Vessel made of clear Glass, and droping in three or four drops of good Oil of
Tartar, per Deliquium, well Filtred that it may likewise be without Color,
these two Limpid Liquors will in the twinkling of an Eye turn into an Opacous
mixture of a deep Orange Color, which by keeping the Glass continually shaking
in your hand, you must preserve from settling too soon to the Bottom; And when
the Spectators have a little beheld this first Change, then you must presently
drop in about four or five drops of Oil of Vitriol, and continuing to shake the
Glass pretty strongly, that it may the Nimbler diffuse it self, the whole
Color, if you have gone Skilfully to work, will immediately disappear, and all
the Liquor in the Glass will be Clear and Colorless as before, without so much
as a Sediment at the Bottom. But for the more graceful Trial of this
Experiment, 'twill not be amiss to observe, First, That there should not be
taken too much of the Solution of Sublimate, nor too much of the Oil of Tartar
dropped in, to avoid the necessity of putting in so much Oil of Vitriol as may
make an Ebullition, and perhaps run over the Glass. Secondly, That it is
convenient to keep the Glass always a little shaking, both for the better
mixing of the Liquors, and to keep the Yellow Substance from Subsiding, which
else it would in a short time do, though when it is subsided it will retain its
Color, and also be capable of being deprived of it by the Oil newly mentioned.
Thirdly, That if any Yellow matter stick at the sides of the Glass, it is but
inclining the Glass, till the clarified Liquor can wash along it, and the
Liquor will presently imbibe it, and deprive it of its Color.

Many have somewhat wondered, how I came to light upon this Experiment, but the
Notions or Conjectures I have about the differing Natures of the several Tribes
of Salts, having led me to devise the Experiment, it will not be difficult for
me to give you the Chemical Reason, if I may so speak, of the Phenomenon.
Having then observed, that Mercury being dissolved in some Menstruums, would
yield a dark Yellow Precipitate, and supposing that, as to this, common Water,
and the Salts that stick to the Mercury would be equivalent to those Acid
Menstruums, which work upon the Quicksilver, upon the account of their Saline
particles, I substituted a Solution of Sublimate in fair Water, instead of a
Solution of Mercury in Aquafortis, or Spirit of Nitre, that simple Solution
being both clearer and free from that very offensive smell, which accompanies
the Solutions of Mercury made with those other corrosive Liquors; then I
considered, that That, which makes the Yellow Color, is indeed but a
Precipitate made by the means of the Oil of Tartar, which we drop in, and
which, as Chemists know, does generally precipitate Metalline Bodies corroded
by Acid Salts; so that the Color in our case results from the Coalition of the
Mercurial particles with the Saline ones, wherewith they were formerly
associated, and with the Alcalizate particles of the Salt of Tartar that swim
up and down in the Oil. Wherefore considering also, that very many of the
effects of Lixiviate Liquors, upon the Solutions of other Bodies, may be
destroyed by Acid Menstruums, as I elsewhere more particularly declare, I
concluded, that if I chose a very potently Acid Liquor, which by its Incisive
power might undo the work of the Oil of Tartar, and disperse again those
Particles, which the other had by Precipitation associated, into such minute
Corpuseles as were before singly Inconspicuous, they would become Inconspicuous
again, and consequently leave the Liquor as Colorless as before the
Precipitation was made.

This, as I said, Pyrophilus seems to be the Chemical reason of this
Experiment, that is such a reason, as, supposing the truth of those Chemical
Notions I have elsewhere I hope evinced, may give such an account of the
Phenomenon as Chemical Notions can supply us with; but I both here and
elsewhere make use of this way of speaking, to intimate that I am sufficiently
aware of the difference betwixt a Chemical Explication of a Phenomenon, and
one that is truly Philosophical or Mechanical; as in our present case, I tell
you something, when I tell you that the Yellowness of the Mercurial Solution,
and the Oil of Tartar is produced by the Precipitation occasioned by the
affusion of the latter of those Liquors, and that the destruction of the Color
proceeds from the Dissipation of that Curdl'd matter, whose Texture is
destroyed, and which is dissolved into Minute and Invisible particles by the
potently Acid Menstruum, which is the reason, why there remains no Sediment in
the Bottom, because the infused Oil takes it up, and resolves it into hidden or
invisible Parts, as Water does Salt or Sugar. But when I have told you all
this, I am far from thinking I have told all that such an Inquisitive Person as
your self would know, for I presume you would desire as well as I to learn (at
least) why the Particles of the Mercury, of the Tartar, and of the Acid Salts
convening together, should make rather an Orange Color than a Red, or a Blew,
or a Green, for it is not enough to say what I related a little before, that
diverse Mercurial Solutions, though otherwise made, would yield a Yellow
precipitate, because the Question will recurr concerning them; and to give it a
satisfactory answer, is, I freely acknowledge, more than I dare as yet pretend
to.

But to confirm my conjecture about the Chemical reason of our Experiment, I
may add, that as I have (viz. page 34th. of this Treatise) elsewhere (on
another occasion) told you, with Saline Liquors of another kind and nature than
Salt of Tartar, (namely, with Spirit of Urine, and Liquors of kin to that) I
can make the Mercury precipitate out of the first simple Solution quite of
another Color than that hitherto mentioned; Nay, if instead of altering the
Precipitating Liquor, I altered the Texture of the Sublimate in such a way as
my Notions about Salt required, I could produce the same Phenomenon. For
having purposely Sublimed together Equal parts (or thereabout) of Sal-Armoniack
and Sublimate, first diligently Mixed, the ascending Flowers being dissolved in
fair Water, and Filtred, gave a Solution Limpid and Colorless, like that of
the other Sublimates, and yet an Alcaly dropped into this Liquor did not turn it
Yellow but White. And upon the same Grounds we may with Quicksilver, without
the help of common Sublimate, prepare another sort of Flowers dissoluble in
Water without Discoloring it, with which I could likewise do what I newly
mentioned; to which I shall add, (what possibly you will somewhat wonder at) That
so much does the Color depend upon the Texture resulting from the Convention
of the several sorts of Corpuseles, that though in our Experiment, Oil of
Vitriol destroys the Yellow Color, yet with Quicksilver and fair Water, by
the help of Oil of Vitriol alone, we may easily make a kind of Precipitate of a
fair and permanent Yellow, as you will e're long (in the forty second Expement
of this third Part) be taught. And I may further add, that I chose Oil of
Vitriol, not so much for any other or peculiar Quality, as for its being, when
it is well rectified, (which it is somewhat hazardous to bring it to be) not only
devoid of Color and in Smells, but extremely Strong and Incisive; For though
common and undephlegmated Aquafortis will not perform the same thing well, yet
that which is made exceeding Strong by being carefully Dephlegm'd, will do it
pretty well, though not so well as Oil of Vitriol which is so Strong, that even
without Rectification it may for a need be made use of. I will not here tell
you what I have tried, that I may be able to deprive at pleasure the
Precipitate that one of the Sulphurous Liquors had made, by the copious
Affusion of the other: Because I found, though this Experiment is too ticklish
to let me give a full account of it in few words, I shall therefore tell you,
that it is not only for once, that the other abovementioned Experiment may be
made, the same Numerical parcels of Liquor being still employed in it; for
after I have Clarified the Orange Colored Liquor, by the addition of as little
of the Oil of Viriol as will suffice to perform the effect, I can again at
pleasure re-produce the Opacous Color, by the dropping in of fresh Oil of
Tartar, and destroy it again by the Re-affusion of more of the Acid Menstruum;
and yet oftener if I please, can I with these two contrariant Liquors recall and
disperse the Color, though by reason of the addition of so much new Liquor, in
reference to the Mercurial particles, the Color will at length appear more
dilute and faint.

An improvement of the fortieth Experiment.
And, Pyrophilus, to confirm yet further the Notions that led me to think on
the proposed Experiment, I shall acquaint you with another, which when I had
convenience I have sometimes added to it, and which has to the Spectators
appeared little less Odd than the first; And though because the Liquor,
requisite to make the Trial succeed well, must be on purpose prepared anew a
while before, because it will not long retain its fitness for this work, I do
but seldom annex this Experiment to the other, yet I shall tell you how I
devised it, and how I make it. If you boil Crude Antimony in a strong and clear
Lixivium, you shall separate a Substance from it, which some Modern Chemists
are pleased to call its Sulphur, but how deservedly I shall not here examine,
having elsewhere done it in an Opportune place; wherefore I shall now but need
to take notice, that when this supposed Sulphur (not now to call it rather a
kind of Crocus) is let fall by the Liquor upon its Refrigeration, it often
settles in Flakes, or such like parcels of a Yellow Substance, (which being by
the precedent dissolution reduced into Minute parts, may peradventure be made
to take Fire much more easily than the Grosser Powder of unprepared Antimony
would have done.) Considering therefore, that common Sulphur boiled in a
Lixivium may be Precipitated out of it by Rhenishwine or White Wind, which are
Sowrish Liquors, and have in them, as I elsewhere show, an Acid Salt; and
having found also by Trial, that with other Acid Liquors I could Precipitate
out of Lixiviate Solvents some other Mineral concretions abounding with
Sulphureons parts, of which sort is crude Antimony, I concluded it to be easy
to Precipitate the Antimony dissolved, as was lately mentioned, with the Acid
Oil of Vitriol; and though common Sulphur yields a White Precipitate, which the
Chemists call Lac Sulphuris, yet I supposed the Precipitated Antimony would be
of a deep Yellow Color, as well, if made with Oil of Vitriol, as if made only
by Refrigeration and length of Time. From this 'twas easy to deduce this
Experiment, that if you put into one Glass some of the freshly Impregnated and
Filtrated Solution of Antimony, and into another some of the Orange-Colour'd
Mixture, (which I formerly showed you how to make with a Mercurial Solution and
Oil of Tartar) a few drops of Oil of Vitriol dropped into the last mentioned
Glass, would, as I told you before, turn the Deep Yellow mixture into a Clear
Liquor; whereas a little of the same Oil dropped out of the same Viol into the
other Glass would presently (but not without some ill sent) turn the moderately
clear Solution into a Deep Yellow Substance. But this, as I said, succeeds not
well, unless you employ a Lixivium that has but newly dissolved Antimony, and
has not yet let it fall. But yet in Summer time, if your Lixivium have been
duly Impregnated and well Filtred after it is quite cold, it will for some
days (perhaps much longer than I had occasion to try) retain Antimony enough
to exhibit, upon the Affusion of the Corrosive Oil, as much of a good Yellow
Substance as is necessary to satisfy the Beholders of the Possibility of the
Experiment.

Reflections upon the X L. Experiment Compared with the X. and XX.
The Knowledge of the Distinction of Salts which we have proposed, whereby they
are discriminated into Acid, Volatile, or Salsuginous (if I may for Distinction
sake so call the Fugitive Salts of Animal Substances) and fix d or Alcalizate,
may possibly (by that little part which we have already delivered, of what we
could say of its Applicableness) appear of so much Use in Natural Philosophy
(especially in the Practick part of it) that I doubt not but it will be no
Unwelcome Corollary of the Preceding Experiment, if by the help of it I teach
you to distinguish, which of those Salts is Predominant in Chemical Liquors, as
well as whether any of them be so or not. For though in our Notes upon the X.
and XX. Experiments I have shown you a way by means of the Tincture of Lignum
Nephriticum, or of Syrrup of Violets, to discover whether a propounded Salt be
Acid or not, yet you can thereby only find in general that such and such Salts
belong not to the Tribe of Acids, but cannot determine whether they belong to
the Tribe of Urinous Salts (under which for distinction sake I comprehend all
those Volatile Salts of Animal or other Substances that are contrary to Acids)
or to that of Alcalies. For as well the one as the other of these
Salino-Sulphurous Salts will restore the Caeruleous Color to the Tincture of
Lignum Nephriticum, and turn that of Syrrup of Violets into Green. Wherefore
this XL. Experiment does opportunely supply the deficiency of those. For being
sollicitous to find out some ready ways of discriminating the Tribes of
Chemical Salts, I found that all those I thought fit to make Trial of, would,
if they were of a Lixiviate Nature, make with Sublimate dissolved in Fair Water
an Orange Tawny Precipitate; whereas if they were of an Urinous Nature the
Precipitate would be White and Milky. So that having always by me some Syrrup
of Violets and some Solution of Sublimate, I can by the help of the first of
those Liquors discover in a trice, whether the propounded Salt or Saline Body
be of an Acid Nature or no, if it be I need (you know) inquire no further; but
if it be not, I can very easily, and as readily distinguish between the other
two kinds of Salts, by the White or Orange-Colour that is immediately produced,
by letting fall a few Drops or Grains of the Salt to be examined, into a
spoonful of the clear Solution of Sublimate. For Example, it has been supposed
by some eminently Learned, That when Sal Armoniack being mingled with an Alcaly
is forced from it by the Fire in close Vessels, the Volatile Salt that will
thereby be obtained (if the Operation be skilfully performed,) is but a more
fine and subtle sort of Sal Armoniack, which, it is presumed, this Operation
does but more exquisitely purify, than common Solutions, Filtrations, and
Coagulations. But this Opinion may be easily thown to be Erroneous, as by other
Arguments, so particularly by the lately delivered Method of distinguishing the
Tribes of Salts. For the Saline Spirit of Sal Armoniack, as it is in many other
manifest Qualities very like the Spirit of Urine, so like, that it will in a
trice make Syrrup of Violets of a Lovely Green, turn a Solution of good
Verdigrease into an Excellent Azure, and make the Solution of a Sublimate yield
a White Precipitate, insomuch that in most (for I say not all of the
Experiments) where I Aim only at producing a sudden change of Color, I
scruple not to use Spirit of Sal Armoniack when it is at hand, instead of
Spirit of Urine, as indeed it seems chiefly to consist (besides the phlegm that
helps to make it fluid) of the Volatile Urinous Salt (yet not excluding that of
Soot) that abounds in the Sal Armoniack and is set at liberty from the Sea Salt
wherewith it was formerly associated, and clogged, by the Operation of the
Alcaly, that divides the Ingredients of Sal Armoniack, and retains that Sea
Salt with it self. What use may be made of the like way of exploration in that
inquiry which puzzles so many Modern Naturalists, whether the Rich Pigment
(which we have often had occasion to mention) belongs to the Vegetable or
Animal Kingdom, you may find in another place where I give you some account of
what I tried about Cocheneel. But I think it needless to exemplify here our
Method by any other Instances, many such being to be met with in diverse parts
of this Treatise; but I will rather advertise you, that, by this way of
examining Chemical Liquors, you may not only in most Cases conclude
Affirmatively, but in some Cases Negatively. As since Spirit of Wine, and as
far as I have tried, those Chemical Oils which Artists call Essential, did not
(when I used them as I had used the several Families of Salts upon that Syrrup)
turn Syrrup of Violets. Red or Green, nor the Solution of Sublimate White or
Yellow, I inferred it may thence be probably argued, that either they are
destitute of Salt, or have such as belongs not to either of the three Grand
families already often mentioned. When I went to examine the Spirit of Oak or
of such like Concretes forced over through a Retort, I found by this means
amongst others, that (as I elsewhere show) those Chemists are much mistaken in
it, that account it a simple Liquor, and one of their Hypostatical Principles:
for not to mention what phlegm it may have, I found that with a few drops of one
of this sort of Spirits mixed with a good proportion of Syrrup of Violets, I
could change the Color and make it Purplish, by the affinity of which Color
to Redness, I conjectured that this Spirit had some Acid Corpuseles in it, and
accordingly I found that as it would destroy the Blewness of a Tincture of
Lignum Nephriticum, so being put upon Corals it would Corrode them, as common
Spirit of Vinegar, and other Acid Liquors are wont to do. And farther to
examine whether there were not a great part of the Liquor that was not of an
Acid nature, having separated the Sour or Vinegar-like part from the rest,
which (if I mistake not) is far the more Copious, we concluded as we had
conjectured, the other or remaining part, though it had a strong taste as well
as smell, to be of a nature differing from that of either of the three sorts of
Salts above mentioned, since it did as little as Spirit of Wine, and Chemical
Oils, alter the Color either of Syrrup of Violets or Solution of Sublimate,
whence we also inferred that the change that had been made of that Syrrup into
a Purple Color, was effected by the Vinegar, that was one of the two
Ingredients of the Liquor, which was wont to pass for a Simple or Uncompounded
Spirit. And, upon this account, 'twas of the Spirit of Oak (and the like
Concretes) freed from it is Vinegar that I elsewhere told you, that I had not
then observed it, (and I have repeated the Trial but very lately) to destroy
the Caeruleous Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum. But this only, en passant; for
the Chief thing I had to add was this, That by the same way may be examined and
discovered, diverse changes that are produced in Bodies either by Nature only,
or by Art; either of them being able by changing the Texture of some Concretes
I could name, to qualify them to Operate after a New manner upon the above
mentioned Syrrup, or Solution, or both. And by this means, to tell you that
upon the by, I have been able to discover, that there may be made Bodies, which
though they run per Deliquium, as readily as Salt of Tartar, belong in other
respects, not to the family of Alcaliz, much less to that of Salsuginous, or
that of Acid Salts. Perhaps too, I may know a way of making a highly operative
Saline Body that shall neither change the Color of Syrrup of Violets, nor
Precipitate the Solution of Sublimate; And, I can likewise if I please conceal
by what Liquors I perform such changes of Color, as I have been mentioning to
you, by quite altering the Texture of some ordinary Chemical productions, the
Exploration of which is the main use of the fortieth Experiment, which I think
teaches not a little, if it teach us to discover the nature of those things (in
reference to Salt) that are obtained by the ordinary Chemical Analysis of mixed
Bodies, though perhaps there may be other Bodies prepared by Chemistry which
may have the same Effects in the change of Colors; and yet be produced not
from what Chemists call the Resolution of Bodies, but from their Composition.
But the discoursing of things of this nature is more proper for another place.
I shall now only add, what might perhaps have been more seasonably told you
before; That the Reason why the way of Exploration of Salts hitherto delivered,
succeeds in the Solution of Sublimate, depends upon the particular Texture of
that Solution, as well as upon the differing Natures of the Saline Liquors
employed to Precipitate it. For Gold dissolved in Aqua Regia, whether you
Precipitate it with Oil of Tartar which is an Alcaly, or with Spirit of Urne,
or Sal Armoniack which belongs to the family of Volatile Salts, will either way
afford a Yellow substance: though with such an Acid Liquor, as, I say not
Spirit of Salt, the Body that yields it, being upon the matter an Ingredient of
Aqua Regis, but Oil of Vitriol it self, I did not find that I could Precipitate
the Metal out of the Solution; or destroy the Color of it, though the same
Oil of Vitriol would readily Precipitate Silver dissolved in Aquafortis. And
if you dissolve pure Silver in Aquafortis, and suffer it to shoot into
Crystals, the clear Solution of these made in fair Water, will afford a very
White Precipitate, whether it be made with an Alcaly, or an Acid Spirit, as
that of Salt, whereas, which may seem somewhat strange, with Spirit of Sal
Armoniack (that I used was made of Quicklime) I could obtain no such White
Precipitate; that Volatile Spirit, nor (as I remember) that of Urine, scarce
doing any more than striking down a very small quantity of Matter, which was
neither White nor Whitish, so that the remaining Liquor being suffered to
evaporate till the superfluous Moisture was gone, the greatest part of the
Metalline Corpuscles with the Saline ones that had imbibed them, concoagulated
into Salt, as is usual in such Solutions, wherein the Metal has not been
Precipitated.

EXPERIMENT XLI.
Of Kin to the last or fortieth Experiment is another which I remember I have
sometimes shown to Virtuosi that were pleased not to dislike it. I took Spirit
of Urine made by Fermentation, and with a due proportion of Copper brought into
small parts, I obtained a very lovely Azure Solution, and when I saw the Color
was such as was requisite, pouring into a clean Glass, about a spoonful of
this tincted Liquor, (of which I used to keep a Quantity by me,) I could by
shaking into it some drops of Strong Oil of Vitriol, deprive it in a trice of
its Deep Color, and make it look like Common-water.

Annotation.
This Experiment brings into my mind this other, which oftentimes succeeds well
enough, though not quite so well as the former; Namely, that if into about a
small spoonful of a Solution of good French Verdigrease made in fair Water, I
dropped and shak'd some strong Spirit of Salt, or rather deflegm'd Aqua Fortis,
the Greenness of the Solution would be made in a trice almost totally to
disappear, and the Liquor held against the Light would scarce seem other than
Clear or Limpid, to any but an Attentive Eye, which is therefore remarkable,
because we know that Aquafortis corroding Copper, which is it that gives the
Color to Verdigrease, is wont to reduce it to a Green Blew Solution. But if
into the other altogether or almost Colorless Liquor I was speaking of, you
drop a just quantity either of Oil of Tartar or Spirit of Urine, you shall find
that after the Ebullition is ceased, the mixture will disclose a lively Color,
though somewhat differing from that which the Solution of Verdigrease had at
first.

EXPERIMENT XLII.
That the Color (Pyrophilus) of a Body may be changed by a Liquor which of it
self is of no Color, provided it be Saline, we have already manifested by a
multitude of instances. Nor does it seem so strange, because Saline Particles
swimming up and down in Liquors, have been by many observed to be very
operative in the Production and change of Colors. But diverse of our Friends
that are not acquainted with Chemical Operations have thought it very strange
that a White Body, and a Dry one too, should immediately acquire a rich new
Color upon the bare affusion of Spring Water destitute as well of adventitious
Salt as of Tincture. And yet (Pyrophilus) the way of producing such a change of
Colors may be easily enough lighted on by those that are conversant in the
Solutions of Mercury. For we have tried, that though by Evaporating a Solution
of Quicksilver in Aquafortis, and abstracting the Liquor till the remaining
matter began to be well, but not too strongly dried, fair Water poured on the
remaining Calx made it but somewhat Yellowish; yet when we took good
Quicksilver, and three or four times its weight of Oil of Vitriol, in case we
in a Glass Retort placed in Sand drew off the Saline Menstruum from the
Metalline Liquor, till there remained a dry Calx at the bottom, though this
Precipitate were a Snow White Body, yet upon pouring on it a large quantity of
fair Water, we did almost in a moment perceive it to pass from a Milky Color
to one of the loveliest Light Yellows that ever we had beheld. Nor is the
Turbith Mineral, that Chemists extol for its power to Salivate, and for other
virtues, of a Color much inferior to this, though it be often made with a
differing proportion of the Ingredients, a more troublesome way. For Beguinus,
who calls it Mercurius praecipitatus optimus, takes Beguinus. Tyr. Chy. Lib.
2o. Cap. 13o.
to one part of Quicksilver, but two of Liquor, and that is Rectified Oil of
Sulphur, which is (in England at least) far more scarce and dear than Oil of
Vitriol; he also requires a previous Digestion, two or three Cohobations, and
frequent Ablutions with hot Distilled Water, with other prescriptions, which
though they may conduce to the Goodness of the Medicine, which is that he aims
at, are troublesome, and, our Trials have informed you unnecessary to the
obtaining the Lemmon Color which he regards not. But though we have very
rarely seen either in Painters Shops, or elsewhere a finer Yellow than that
which we have diverse times this way produced (which is the more considerable,
because durable and pleasant Yellows are very hard to be met with, as may
appear by the great use which Painters are for its Colors sake fain to make of
that pernicious and heavy Mineral, Orpiment) yet I fear our Yellow is too
costly, to be like to be employed by Painters, unless about Choice pieces of
Work, nor do I know how well it will agree with every Pigment, especially, with
Oiled Colors. And whether this Experiment, though it have seemed somewhat
strange to most we have shown it to, be really of another Nature than those
wherein Saline Liquors are employed, may, as we formerly also hinted, be so
plausibly, doubted, that whether the Water poured on the Calx, do barely by
imbibing some of its Saline parts alter its Color by altering its Texture, or
whether by dissolving the Concoagulated Salts, it does become a Saline
Menstruum, and, as such, work upon the Mercury, I freely leave to you
(Pyrophilus) to consider. And that I may give you some Assistance in your
Enquiry, I will not only tell you, that I have several times with fair Water
washed from this Calx, good store of strongly tasted Corpuscles, which by the
abstraction of the Menstruum, I could reduce into Salt; but I will also subjoyn
an Experiment, which I devised, to show among other things, how much a real and
permanent Color may be as it were drawn forth by a Liquor that has neither
Color, nor so much as Saline or other Active parts, provided it can but bring
the parts of the Body it imbibes to convene into clusters disposed after the
manner requisite to the exhibiting of the emergent Color. The Experiment was
this.

EXPERIMENT XLIII.
We took good common Vitriol, and having beaten it to Powder, and put it into a
Crucible, we kept it melted in a gentle heat, till by the Evaporation of some
parts, and the shuffling of the rest, it had quite lost its former Color, what
remained we took out, and found it to be a friable Calx, of a dirty Gray. On
this we poured fair Water, which it did not Color Green or Blew, but only
seemed to make a muddy mixture with it, then stopping the Vial wherein the
Ingredients were put, we let it stand in a quiet place for some days, and
after many hours the water having dissolved a good part of the imperfectly
calcined Body, the Yitriolate Corpuscles swiming to and fro in the Liquor, had
time by their opportune Occursions to constitute many little Masses of Vitriol,
which gave the water they impregnated a fair Vitriolate Color; and this Liquor
being poured off, the remaining dirty Powder did in process of time communicate
the like Color, but not so deep, to a second parcel of clear Water that we
poured on it. But this Experiment Pyrophilus is, (to give you that hint by the
way) of too Luciferons a Nature to be fit to be fully prosecuted, now that I am
in haste, and willing to dispatch what remains. And we have already said of it,
as much as is requisite to our present purpose.

EXPERIMENT XLIV.
It may (Pyrophilus) somewhat contribute toward the showing how much some
Colors depend upon the less or greater mixture, and (as it were,)
Contemperation of the Light with shades, to observe, how that sometimes the
number of Particles, of the same Color, received into the Pores of a Liquor,
or swimming up and down in it, do seem much to vary the Color of it. I could
here present you with particular instances to show, how in many (if not most)
consistent Bodies, if the Color be not a Light one, as White, Yellow, or the
like, the closeness of parts in the Pigments makes it look Blackish, though
when it is displayed and laid on thinly, it will perhaps appear to be either
Blew, or Green, or Red. But the Colors of consistent Pigments, not being those
which the Preamble of this Experiment has lead you to expect Examples in, I
shall take the instances I am now to give you, rather from Liquors than Dry
Bodies. If then you put a little fair Water into a clear and slender Vial, (or
rather into one of those pipes of Glass, which we shall by and by mention;) and
let fall into it a few drops of a strong Decoction or Infusion of Cochineel, or
(for want of that) of Brazil; you may see the tincted drops descend like:
little Clouds into the Liquor; through which, if, by shaking the Vial, you
diffuse them, they will turn the water either of a Pinck Color, or like that
which is wont to be made by the washing of raw flesh in fair Water; by dropping
a little more of the Decoction, you may heighten the Color into a fine Red,
almost like that which ennobles Rubies; by continuing the affusion, you may
bring the Liquor to a kind of a Crimson, and afterward to a Dark and Opacous
Redness, some what like that of Clotted Blood. And in the passage of the Liquor
from one of these Colors to the other, you may observe, if you consider it
attentively, diverse other less noted Colors belonging to Red, to which it is
not easy to give Names; especially considering how much the proportion of the
Decoction to the fair Water, and the strength of that Decoction, together with
that of the trajected Light and other Circumstances, may vary the Phoenomena of
this Experiment. For the convenienter making whereof, we use nstead of a Vial,
any slender Pipe of Glass ofabout a foot or more in length, and about the
thickness of a man's little finger; For, if leaving one end of this Pipe open,
you Seal up the other Hermetically, (or at least stop it exquisitely with a
Cork well fitted to it, and over-laid with hard Sealing Wax melted, and rubbed
upon it;) you shall have a Glass, wherein may be observed the Variations of the
Colors of Liquors much better than in large Vials, and wherein Experiments of
this Nature may be well made with very small quantities of Liquor. And if you
please, you may in this Pipe produce variety of Colors in the various parts of
the Liquor, and keep them swimning upon one another unmixed for a good while.
And some have marveil'd to see, what variety of Colors we have sometimes (but
I confess rather by chance than skill) produced in those Glasses, by the bare
infusion of Brazil, variously diluted with fair Water, and altered by the
Infusion of several Chemical Spirits and other Saline Liquors devoid themselves
of Color, and when the whole Liquor is reduced to an Uniform degree of Color,
I have taken pleasure to make that very Liquor seem to be of Colors gradually
differing, by filling with it Glasses of a Conical figure, (whether the Glass
have its basis in the ordinary position, or turned upwards.) And yet you need
not Glasses of an extraordinary shape to see an instance of what the vari'd
mixture of Light and Shadow can do in the diversifying of the Color. For if
you take but a large round Vial, with a somewhat long and slender Neck, and
filling it with our Red Infusion of Brazil, hold it against the Light, you will
discern a notable Disparity betwixt the Color of that part of the Liquor which
is in the Body of the Vial, and that which is more pervious to the Light in the
Neck. Nay, I remember, that I once had a Glass and a Blew Liquor (consisting
chiefly (or only, if my memory deceive me not,) of a certain Solution of
Verdigreafe) so fitted for my purpose, that though in other Glasses the
Experiment would not succeed, yet when that particular Glass was filled with
that Solution, in the Body of the Vial it appeared of a Lovely Blew, and in the
neck, (where the Light did more dilute the Color,) of a manifest Green; and
though I suspected there might be some latent Yellowness in the substance of
the neck of the Glass, which might with the Blew compose that Green, yet was I
not satisfied my self with my Conjecture, but the thing seemed odd to me, as
well as to diverse curious persons to whom it was shown. And I lately had a
Broad piece of Glass, which being looked on against the Light seemed clear
enough, and held from the Light appeared very lightly discolored, and yet it
was a piece knocked off from a great lump of Glass, to which if we rejoined it,
where it had been broken off, the whole Mass was as green as Grass. And I have
several times used Bottles and stopples that were both made (as those, I had
them from assured me) of the very same Metal, and yet whilst the bottle
appeared but inclining toward a Green, the Stopple (by reason of its great
thickness) was of so deep a Color that you would hardly believe they could
possibly be made of the same materials. But to satisfy some Ingenious Men, on
another occasion, I provided my self of a flat Glass (which I yet have by me,)
with which if I look against the Light with the Broad side obverted to the Eye,
it appears like a good ordinary window Glass; but if I turn the Edge of it to
my Eye, and place my Eye in a convenient posture in reference to the Light, it
may contend for deepness of Color with an Emerald. And this Greenness puts me
in mind of a certain thickish, but not consistent Pigment I have sometimes
made, and can show you when you please, which being dropped on a piece of White
Paper appears, where any quantity of it is fallen, of a somewhat Crimson
Color, but being with ones finger spread thinly on the Paper does presently
exhibit a fair Green, which seems to proceed only from its disclosing its
Color upon the Extenuation of its Depth into Superficies, if the change be not
somewhat helped by the Colors degenerating upon one or other of the Accounts
formerly mentioned. Let me add, that having made diverse Trials with that Blew
substance, which in Painters Shops is called Litmase, we have sometimes taken
Pleasure to observe, that being dissolved in a due proportion of fair Water,
the Solution either opposed to the Light, or dropped upon White paper, did
appear of a deep Color betwixt Crimson and Purple; and yet that being spread
very thin on the Paper and suffered to dry on there, the Paper was wont to
appear Stained of a Fine Blew. And to satisfy my self, that the diversity
came not from the Paper, which one might suspect capable of inbibing the
Liquor, and altering the Color, I made the Trial upon a flat piece of purely
White Glass'd Earth, (which I sometimes make use of about Experiments of
Colors) with an Event not unlike the former.

And now I speak of Litmass, I will add, that having this very day taken a
piece of it, that I had kept by me these several years, to make Trials about
Colors, and having let fall a few drops of the strong Infusion of it in fair
water, into a fine Crystal Glass, shaped like an inverted Cone, and almost full
of fair Water, I had now (as formerly) the pleasure to see, and to show others,
how these few tincted drops variously dispersing themselves through the Limpid
Water, exhibited diverse Colors, or varieties of Purple and Crimson. And when
the Corpuscles of the Pigment seemed to have equally diffused themselves
through the whole Liquor, I then by putting two or three drops of Spirit of
Salt, first made an odd change in the Color of the Liquor, as well as a
visible commotion among its small parts, and in a short time changed it wholly
into a very Glorious Yellow, like that of a Topaz. After which if I let fall a
few drops of the strong and heavy Solution of Potashes, whose weight would
quickly carry it to the sharp bottom of the Glass, there would soon appear
four very pleasant and distinct Colors; Namely, a Bright, but Dilute Color at
the picked bottom of the Glass; a Purple, a little higher; a deep and glorious
Crimson, (which Crimson seemed to terminate the operation of the Salt upward)
in the confines betwixt the Purple and the Yellow; and an Excellent Yellow, the
same that before enobled the whole Liquor, reaching from thence to the top of
the Glass. And if I pleased to pour very gently a little Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, upon the upper part of this Yellow, there would also be a Purple or
a Crimson, or both, generated there, so that the unaltered part of the Yellow
Liquor appeared intercepted betwixt the two Neighboring Colors.

My scope in this 3d. Experiment (Pyrophilus) is manifold, as first to invite
you to be wary in judging of the Color of Liquors in such Glasses as are
therein recommended to you, and consequently as much, if not more, when you
employ other Glasses. Secondly, That you may not think it strange, that I often
content my self to rub upon a piece of White paper, the Juice of Bodies I would
examine, since not only I could not easily procure a sufficient Quantity of
the juices of diverse of them; but in several Cases the Trials of the quantities
of such Juices in Glasses would make us more liable to mistakes, than the way
that in those cases I have made use of. Thirdly, I hope you will by these and
diverse other particulars delivered in this Treatise, be easily induced to think
that I may have set down many Phoenomena. very faithfully, and just as they
appeared to me, and yet by reason of some unheeded circumstance in the
conditions of the matter, and in the degree of Light, or the manner of trying
the Experiment, you may find some things to vary from the Relations I make of
them. Lastly, I designed to give you an opportunity to free your self from the
amazement which possesses most Men, at the Tricks of those Mountebancks that
are commonly called Water-drinkers. For though not only the vulgar, but even
many persons that are far above that Rank, have so much admired to see, a man
after having drunk a great deal of fair water, to spurt it out again in the
form of Claret Wine, Sack, and Milk, that they have suspected the intervening
of Magic, or some forbidden means to effect what they conceived above the
power of Art; yet having once by chance had occasion to oblige a Wanderer that
made profession of that and other Juggling Tricks, I was easily confirmed by his
Ingenious confession to me, That this so much Admired Art, indeed consisted
rather in a few Tricks, than in any great Skill, in altering the Nature and
Colors of things. And I am easy to be persuaded, that there may be a great
deal of Truth in a little Pamphlet Printed diverse years ago in English, wherein
the Author undertakes to discover, and that (if I mistake not) by the
confession of some of the Accomplices themselves, That a famous Water-drinker
then much Admired in England, performed his pretended Transmutations of Liquors
by the help of two or three inconsiderable preparations and mixtures of not
unobvious Liquors, and chiefly of an Infusion of Brazil variously diluted and
made Pale or Yellowish, (and otherwise altered) with Vinegar, the rest of their
work being performed by the shape of the Glasses, by Craft and Legerdemane. And
for my part, that which I marvel at in this business; is, the Drinkers being
able to take down so much Water, and spout it out with that violence; though
Custom and a Vomit seasonably taken before hand, may in some of them much
facilitate the work. But as for the changes made in the Liquors, they were but
few and slight in comparison of those, that the being conversant in Chemical
Experiments, and dextrous in applying them to the Transmuting of Colors; may
easily enough enable a man to make, as even what has been newly delivered in
this, and the foregoing Experiment; especially if we add to it the things
contained in the XX, the XXXIX and the XL. Experiments, may perhaps have
already persuaded You.

EXPERIMENT XLV.
You may I presume (Pyrophilus) have taken notice, that in this whole Treatise,
I purposely decline (as far as I well can) the mentioning of Elaborate Chemical
Experiments, for fear of frighting you by their tediousness and difficulty; but
yet in confirmation of what I have been newly telling you about the possibility
of Varying the Colors of Liquors, better than the Water-drinkers are wont to
do, I shall add, that Helmont used to make a preparation of Steel, which a very
Ingenious Chemist, his Sons Friend, whom you know, sometimes employes for a
succedaneum to the Spawwaters, by Diluting this Essentia Martis Liquida (as he
calls it) with a due proportion of Water. Now that for which I mention to you
this preparation, (which as he communicated to me, I know he will not refuse to
Pyrophilus) is this, that though the Liquor (as I can show you when you please)
be almost of the Color of a German (not an Oriental) Amethyst, and
consequently remote enough from Green, yet a very few drops being let fall into
a Large proportion of good Rhenish, or (in want of that) White Wine (which yet
does not quite so well) immediately turned the Liquor into a lovely Green, as I
have not without delight shown several curious Persons. By which Phoenomenon
you, may learn, among other things, how requisite it is in Experiments about
the changes of Colors heedfully to mind the Circumstances of them; for Water
will not, as I have purposely tried, concur to the production of any such
Green, nor did it give that Color to moderate Spirit of Wine, wherein I
purposely dissolved it, and Wine it self is a Liquor that few would suspect of
being able to work suddenly any such change in a Metalline preparation of this
Nature; and to satisfy my self that this new Color proceeds rather from the
peculiar Texture of the Wine, than from any greater Acidity, that Rhenish or
White Wind (for that may not absurdly be suspected) has in comparison of Water;
I purposely sharpened the Solution of this Essence in fair Water, with a good
quantity of Spirit of Salt, notwithstanding which, the mixture acquired no
Greenness. And to vary the Experiment a little, I tried, that if into a Glass
of Rhenish Wine made Green by this Essence, I dropped an Alcalizate Solution,
or Urinous Spirit, the Wine would presently grow Turbid, and of an odd Dirty
Color: But if instead of dissolving the Essence in Wine, I dissolved it in
fair Water sharpened perhaps with a little Spirit of Salt, then either the
Urinious Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or the Solution of the fixed Salt of
Potashes would immediately turn it of a Yellowish Color, the fixed or Urinous
Salt Precipitating the Vitriolate substance contained in the Essence. But here
I must not forget to take notice of a circumstance that deserves to be compared
with some part of the foregoing Experiment, for whereas our Essence imparts a
Greenness to Wine, but not to Water, the Industrious Libr. 2^o. Cap. 340.
Olaus Wormius in his late Musaeum tells us of a rare kind of Turn-Sole which
he calls Bezetta Rubra given him by an. Apothecary that knew not how it was
made, whose lovely Redness would be easily communicated to Water, if it were
immersed in it; but scarce to Wine, and not at all to Spirit of Wine, in which
last circumstance it agrees with what I lately told you of our Essence,
notwithstanding their disagreement in other particulars.

EXPERIMENT XLVI.
We have often taken notice, as of a remarkable thing, that Metalls as they
appear to the Eye, before they come to be farther altered by other Bodies, do
exhibit Colors very different from those which the Fire and the Menstruum,
either apart, or both together, do produce in them; especially considering that
these Metalline Bodies are after all these disguises reducible not only to
their former Metalline Consistence and other more radical properties, but to
their Color too, as if Nature had given diverse Metalls to each of them a
double Color, an External, and an Internal; But though upon a more attentive
Consideration of this difference of Colors, it seemed propable to me, that
diverse (for I say not all) of those Colors which we have just now called
Internal, are rather produced by the Coalition of Metalline Particles with
those of the Salts, or other Bodies employed to work on them, than by the bare
alteration of the parts of the Metalls themselves: and though therefore we may
call the obvious Colors, Natural or Common, and the others Adventitious, yet
because such changes of Colors, from whatsoever cause they be resolved to
proceed may be properly enough taken in to illustrate our present Subject, we
shall not scruple to take notice of some of them, especially because there are
among them such as are produced without the intervenvention of Saline
Menstruums. Of the Adventitious Colors of Metalline Bodies the Chief sorts
seem to be these three. The first, such Colors as are produced without other
Additaments by the Action of the fire upon Metalls. The next such as emerge
from the Coalition of Metalline Particles with those of some Menstruum employed
to Corrode a Metal or Precipitate it; And the last, The Colors afforded by
Metalline Bodies either Colliquated with, or otherwise Penetrating into, other
Bodies, especially fusible ones. But these (Pyrophilus,) are only as I told
you, the Chief sorts of the adventitious Colors of Metalls, for there may
others belong to them, of which I shall hereafter have occasion to take notice
of some, and of which also there possibly may be others that I never took
notice of.

And to begin with the first sort of Colors, it is well enough known to
Chemists, that Tin being Calcined by fire alone is wont to afford a White Calx,
and Lead Calcined by fire alone affords that most Common Red-Powder we call
Minium: Copper also Calcined per se, by a long or violent fire, is wont to
yield (as far as I have had occasion to take notice of it) a very Dark or
Blackish Powder; That Iron likewise may by the Action of Reverberated flames be
turned into a Color almost like that of Saffron, may be easily deduced from
the Preparation of that Powder, which by reason of its Color and of the Metal
it is made of is by Chemists called, Crocus Martis per se. And that Mercury made
by the stress of Fire, may be turned into a Red Powder, which Chemists call
Precipitate per se, I elsewhere more particularly declare.

Annotation I.
It is not unworthy the Admonishing you, (Pyrophilus,) and it agrees very well
with our Conjectures about the dependence of the change of a Body's Color upon
that of its Texture, that the same Metal may be the successive operation of
the fire receive diverse Adventitious Colors, as is evident in Lead, which
before it come to so deep a Color as that of Minium, may pass through diverse
others.

Annotation II.
Not only the Calces, but the Glasses of Metalls, Vitrify'd per se, may be of
Colors differing from the Natural or Obvious Color of the Metal; as I have
observed in the Glass of Lead, made by long exposing Crude Lead to a violent
fire, and what I have observed about the Glass or Slagg of Copper, (of which I
can show you some of an odd kind of Texture,) may be elsewhere more
conveniently related. I have likewise seen a piece of very Dark Glass, which an
Ingenious Artificer that showed it me professed himself to have made of Silver
alone by an extreme Violence (which seems to be no more than is needful) of
the fire.

Annotation III.
Minerals also by the Action of the Fire may be brought to afford Colors very
differing from their own, as I not long since noted to you about the variously
Colored Flowers of Antimony, to which we may add the Whitish Grey-Colour of
its Calx, and the Yellow or Reddish Color of the Glass, where into that Calx
may be flux'd.

And I remember, that I elsewhere told you, that Vitriol Calcined with a very
gentle heat, and afterward with higher and higher degrees of it, may be made
to pass through several Colors before it descends to a Dark Purplish Color,
whereto a strong fire is wont at length to reduce it. But to insist on the
Colors produced by the Operation of fire upon several Minerals would take up
far more time than I have now to spare.

EXPERIMENT XLVII.
The Adventitious Colors produced upon Metalls, or rather with them, by Saline
Liquors, are many of them so well known to Chemists, that I would not here
mention them, but that besides a not un-needed Testimony, I can add something
of my own, to what I shall repeat about them, and diverse Experiments which are
familiar to Chemists, are as yet unknown to the greatest part of Ingenious Men.

That Gold dissolved in Aqua Regia ennobles the Menstruum with its own Color,
is a thing that you cannot (Pyrophilus,) but have often seen. The Solutions of
Mercury in Aquafortis are not generally taken notice of, to give any notable
Tincture to the Menstruum; but sometimes when the Liquor first falls upon the
Quick Silver, I have observed a very remarkable, though not durable, Greenness,
or Blewness to be produced, which is a Phoenomenon not unfit for you to
consider, though I have not now the leisure to discourse upon it. Tin Corroded
by Aquafortis till the Menstruum will work no farther on it, becomes exceeding
White, but as we else where note, does very easily of it self acquire the
consistence, not of a Metalline Calx, but of a Coagulated matter, which we have
observed with pleasure to look so like, either to curdled Milk, or curdled
Whites of Eggs, that a person unacquainted with such Solutions may easily be
mistaken in it. But when I purposely prepared a Menstruum that would dissolve
it as Aquafortis dissolves Silver, and not barely Corrode it, and quickly let
it fall again, I remember not that I took notice of any particular Color in
the Solution, as if the more Whitish Metalls did not much Tinge their
Menstruums, though the conspicuously Colored Metalls as Gold, and Copper, do.
For Lead dissolved in Spirit of Vinegar or Aquafortis gives a Solution clear
enough, and if the Menstruum be abstracted appears either Diaphanous or White.
Of the Color of Iron we have elsewhere said something: And it is worth noting,
that, though if that Metal be dissolved in oil of Vitriol diluted with water,
it affords a Salt or Magistery so like in color, as well as some other
Qualities, to other green Vitriol, that Chemists do not improperly call it
Vitriolum Martis; yet I have purposely tried, that, by changing the Menstruum,
and pouring upon the filings of Steel, instead of oil of Vitriol, Aqua Fortis,
(whereof as I remember, I used 4 parts to one of the Metal) I obtained not a
Green, but a Saffron Color Solution; or rather a thick Liquor of a deep but
yellowish Red. Common Silver, such as is to be met with in Coins, being
dissolved in Aqua fortis, yields a Solution tincted like that of Copper, which
is not to be wondered at, because in the coining of Silver, they are wont (as we
elsewhere particularly inform you) to give it an Allay of Copper, and that
which is sold in shops for refined silver, is not (so far as we have tried) so
perfectly free from that ignobler Metal, but that a Solution of It in Aqua
fortis, will give a Venereal Tincture to the Menstruum. But we could not
observe upon the solution of some Silver, which was perfectly refined, (such as
some that we have, from which 8 or 10 times its weight of Lead has been blown
off) that the Menstruum though held against the Light in a Crystal Vial did
manifestly disclose any Tincture, only it seemed sometimes not to be quite
destitute of a little, but very faint Blewishness.

But here I must take notice, that of all the Metalls, there is not any which
does so easily and constantly disclose its unobvious color as Copper does. For
not only in acid Menstruums as Aqua Fortis and Spirit of Vinegar, it gives a
Bluish green solution, but if it be almost any way corroded, it appears of one
of those two colors, as may be observed in Verdigreese made several ways, in
that odd preparation of Venus, which we elsewhere teach you to make with
Sublimate, and in the common Vitriols of Venus delivered by Chemists; and so
constant is the disposition of Copper, notwithstanding the disguise Artists put
upon it, to disclose the color we have been mentioning, that we have by
forcing it up with Sal Armoniack obtained a Sublimate of a Bluish Color. Nay
a famous Spagyrist affirms, that the very Mercury of it is green, but till he
teach us an intelligible way of making such a Mercury, we must content our
selves to inform you, that we have had a Cupreous Body, that was Praecipitated
out of a distilled Liquor, that seemed to be the Sulphur of Venus, and seemed
even when flaming, of a Greenish Color. And indeed Copper is a Metal so
easily wrought upon by Liquors of several kinds; that I should tell you, I know
not any Mineral, that will concur to the production of such a variety of
Colors as Copper dissolved in several Menstruums, as Spirit of Vinegar, Aqua
fortis, Aqua Regis, Spirit of Nitre, of Urine, of Soot, Oils of several kinds,
and I know not how many other Liquors, if the variety of somewhat differing
colors (that Copper will be made to assume, as it is wrought upon by several
Liquors) where not comprehended within the Limits of Greenish Blew, or Bluish
Green.

And yet I must advertise you (Pyrophilus) that being desirous to try if I
could not make with crude Copper a Green Solution without the Blewishness that
is wont to accompany its Vulgar Solutions, I bethought my self of using two
Menstruums, which I had not known employed to work on this Metal, and which I
had certain Reasons to make Trial of, as I successfully did. The one of these
Liquors (if I much misremember not) was Spirit of Sugar distilled in a Retort,
which must be warily done, (if you will avoid breaking your glasses) and the
other, Oil or Spirit of Turpentine, which affords a fine Green Solution that is
useful to me on several occasions. And yet to show that the adventitious color
may result, as well from the true and permanent Copper it self, as the Salts
wherewith it is corroded, I shall add, that if you take a piece of good Dantzick
Copperis, or any other Vitriol wherein Venus is praedominant, and having
moistened it in your Mouth, or with fair water, rubb it upon a whetted knife,
or any other bright piece of Steel or Iron, it will (as we have formerly told
you) presently stain the Steel with a Reddish color, like that of Copper; the
reason of which, we must not now stay to inquire.

Annotation I.
I presume you may have taken notice (Pyrophilus) that I have borrowed some of
the Instances mentioned in this 47th Experiment, from the Laboratories of
Chemists, and because in some (though very few) other passages of this Essay, I
have likewise made use of Experiments mentioned also by some Spagyrical
Writers, I think it not amiss to represent to you on this Occasion once for
all, some things besides those which I intimated in the praeamble of this
present Experiment; For besides, that it is very allowable for a Writer to
repeat an Experiment which he invented not, in case he improve it; And besides
that many Experiments familiar to Chemists are unknown to the generality of
Learned Men, who either never read Chemical processes, or never understood
their meaning, or never durst believe them; besides these things, I say, I
shall represent, That, as to the few Experiments I have borrowed from the
Chemists, if they be very Vulgar, 'twould perhaps be difficult to ascribe each
of them its own Author, and it is more than the generality of Chemists
themselves can do: and if they be not of very known and familiar practice among
them, unless the Authors wherein I found them had given me cause to believe,
themselves had tried them, I know not why I might not set them down, as a part
of the Phenomenon of Colors which I present you; Many things unanimously
enough delivered as matters of fact by (I know not how many Chemical Writers)
being not to be relied on, upon the single Authority of such Authors: For
Instance, as some Spagyrists deliver (perhaps amongst several deceitful
processes) that Saccarum Saturni with Spirit of Turpentine will afford a
Balsom, so Beguinus and many more tell us, that the same Concrete (Saccaram
Saturni) will yield an incomparably fragrant Spirit, and a pretty Quantity of
two several Oils; and yet since many have complained; as well as I have done,
that they could find no such odoriferous; but rather an ill-sented Liquor, and
scarce any oil in their Distillation of that sweet Vitriol, a wary person would
as little build any thing on what they say of the former Experiment, as upon
what they averr of the later; and therefore I scrupled not to mention this Red
Balsom of which I have not seen any; (but what I made) among my other
Experiments about redness.

Annot. II.
We have sometimes had the Curiosity to try what Colors Minerals, as
Tin-glass, Antimony, Spelter, etc. would yield in several Menstruums, nor have
we forborne to try the Colors of Stones, of which that famous one, (which
Helmont calls Paracelsus's Ludus) though it be dug out of the Earth and seem
a true stone; has afforded in Menstruums capable to dissolve so solid a stone,
sometimes a Yellowish; sometimes a Red solution of both which I can show you.
But though I have from Minerals obtained with several Menstruums very differing
Colors, and some such as perhaps you would be surpised to see drawn from such
Bodies: yet I must now pass by the particulars, being desirous to put an End to
this Treatise, before I put an end to your Patience and my own.

Annotation III.
And yet before I pass to the next Experiment, I must put you in mind, that the
Colors of Metals may in many cases be further altered by employing, either
praecipitating Salts, or other convenient Substances to act upon their
Solutions. Of this you may remember, that I have given you several Instances
already, to which may be added such as these, That if Quicksilver be dissolved
in Aqua fortis, and Praecipitated out of the Solution, either with water
impregnated with Sea salt, or with the spirit of that Concrete, it falls to the
Bottom in the form of a white powder, whereas if it be Praecipitated with an
Alcaly, it will afford a Yellowish or tawny powder, and if there be no
Praecipitation made; and the Menstruum be drawn off with a convenient fire, the
corroded Mercury will remain in the Bottom, in the form of a substance that may
be made to appear of differing Colors by differing degrees of Heat; As I
remember that lately having purposely abstracted Aqua fortis from some
Quicksilver that we had dissolved in it, so that there remained a white Calx,
exposing that to several degrees of Fire, and afterward to a naked one, we
obtained some new Colors, and at length the greatest part of the Calx lying at
the Bottom of the Vial, and being brought partly to a Deep Yellow, and partly
to a Red Color, the rest appeared elevated to the upper part and neck of the
Vial, some in the form of a Reddish, and some of an Ash Color Sublimate. But
of the differing Colors which by differing ways and working of Quick Silver
with Fire, and Saline Bodies, may be produced in Precipitates, I may elsewhere
have occasion to take further notice. I also told you not long since, that if
you corrode Quicksilver with Oil of Vitriol instead of Aquafortis, and
abstract the Menstruum, there will remain a White Calx which by the Affusion of
Fair Water presently turns into a Lemmon Color. And even the Succedaneum to a
Menstruum may sometimes serve the turn to change the Colors of a Metal. The
lovely Red which Painters call Vermillion; is made of Mercury, which is of the
Color of Silver, and of Brimstone which is of Kin to that of Gold, Sublimed up
together in a certain proportion, as is vulgarly known to Spagyrists.

EXPERIMENT XLVIII.
The third chief sort of the Adventitious Colors of Metals, is, that which is
produced by associating them (especially when Calcined) with other fusible
Bodies, and Principally Venice, and other fine Glass devoid of Color.

I have formerly given you an Example, whereby it may appear, that a Metal may
impart to Glass a Color much differing from its own, when I told you, how with
Silver, I had given Glass a lovely Golden Color. And I shall now add, that I
have Learned from one of the Chief Artificers that sells Painted Glass, that
those of his Trade Color it Yellow with a preparation of the Calx of Silver.
Though having lately had occasion among other Trials to mingle a few grains of
Shell-silver (such as is employed with the Pensil and Pen) with a convenient
proportion of povvder'd Crystal Glass, having kept them two or three hours in
fusion, I was surpised to find the Colliquated Mass to appear upon breaking
the Crucible of a lovely Saphirine Blew, which made me suspect my Servant might
have brought me a wrong Crucible, but he constantly affirmed it to be the same
wherein the Silver was put, and considerable Circumstances countenanced his
Assertion, so that till I have opportunity to make farther Trial, I cannot but
suspect, either that Silver which is not (which is not very probable) brought
to a perfect Fusion and Colliquation with Glass, may impart to it other Colors
than when Neal'd upon it, or else (which is less unlikely) that though Silver
Beaters usually choose the finest Coin they can get, as that which is most
extensive under the Hammer, yet the Silver-leaves of which this Shel-silver was
made, might retain so much Copper as to enable it to give the predominant
Tincture to the Glass.

For, I must proceed to tell you (Pyrophilus) as another instance of the
Adventitious Colors of Metals, that which is something strange, Namely, That
though Copper Calcined per se affords but a Dark and basely Colored Calx, yet
the Glasmen do with it, as themselves inform me, Tinge their Glass green. And I
remember, that when once we took some crude Copper, and by frequent Igintion
quenching it in Water had reduced it to a Dark and Illcolour'd Powder, and
afterward kept it in Fusion in about a 100. times its weight of fine Glass, we
had, though not a Green, yet a Blew colored Mass, which would perhaps have
been Green, if we had hit right upon the Proportion of the Materials, and the
Degree of Fire, and the Time wherein it ought to be kept in Fusion, so
plentifully does that Metal abound in a Venerial Tincture, as Artists call it,
and in so many ways does it disclose that Richness. But though Copper do as we
have said give somewhat near the like Color to Glass, which it does to
Aquafortis, yet it seems worth inquiry, whether those new Colors which
Mineral Bodies disclose in melted Glass, proceed from the Coalition of the
Corpuscles of the Mineral with the Particles of the Glass as such, or from the
Action (excited or actuated by fire) of the Alcalizate Salt (which is a main
Ingredient of Glass,) upon the Mineral Body, or from the concurrence of both
these Causes, or else from any other. But to return to that which we were
saying, we may observe that Putty made by calcining together a proportion of
Tin and Lead, as it is it self a White Calx, so does it turn the Pitta di
Crystalio (as the Glassmen call the matter of the Purer sort of Glass,
wherewith it is Colliquated into a White Mass, which if it be opacous enough is
employed, as we elsewhere declare, for White Amel. But of the Colors which the
other Metals may be made 'to produce in Colorless Glass, and other Vitrifiable
Bodies, that have native Colors of their own, I must leave you to inform you
self upon Trial, or at least must forbear to do it till another time,
considering how many Annotations are to follow, upon what has in this and the
two former Experiments been said already.

Annotation I.
When the Materials of Glass being melted with Calcined Tin, have composed a
Mass Undiaphanous and White, this White Amel is as it were the Basis of all
those fine Concretes that Goldsmiths and several Artificers employ in the
curious Art of Enamelling. For this White and Fusible substance will receive
into it self, without spoiling them, the Colors of diverse other Mineral
substances, which like it will endure the fire.

Annotation II.
So that as by the present (XLVIII.) Experiment it appears, that diverse
Minerals will impart to fusible Masses, Colors differing from their own; so by
the making and compounding of Amels, it may appear, that diverse Bodies will
both retain their Color in the fire, and impart the same to some others
wherewith they were vitrifi'd, and in such Trials as that mentioned in the 17.
Experiment, where I told you, that even in Amels a Blew and Yellow will
compound a Green. It Is pretty to behold, not only that some Colors are of so
fixed a Nature, as to be capable of mixture without receiving any detriment by
the fire, that does so easily destroy or spoil those of other Bodies; but
Mineral Pigments may be mingled by fire little less regularly and successfully,
than in ordinary Dyeing Fatts, the vulgar Colors are wont to be mingled by the
help of Water.

Annotation III.
It Is not only Metalline, but other Mineral Bodies, that may be employed, to
give Tinctures unto Glass (and it is worth noting how small a quantity of some
Mineral substances, will Tinge a Comparatively vast proportion of Glass, and we
have sometimes attempted to Color Glass, even with Precious Stones, and had
cause to think the Experiment not cast away. And it is known by them that have
looked into the Art of Glass; that the Artificers use to tinge their Glass
Blew, with that Dark Mineral Zaffora, (some of my Trials on which I elsewhere
acquaint you) which some would have to be a Mineral Earth, others a Stone, and
others neither the one, nor the other, but which is confessedly of a Dark, but
not a Blew Color, though it be not agreed of what particular Color it is.
It Is likewise though a familiar yet a remarkable practice among those that Deal
in the making of Glass, to employ (as some of themselves have informed me) what
they call Manganess, and some Authors call Magnesia (of which I make particular
mention in another Treatise) to exhibit in Glass not only other Colors than
its own, (which is so like in Darkness or Blackishness to the Lodestone, that
it is given by Mineralists, for one of the Reasons of its Latin Name) but
Colors differing from one another. For though they use it, (which is somewhat
strange) to Clarifye their Glass, and free it from that Bluish Greenish
Color, which else it would too often be subject to, yet they also employ it in
certain proportions, to tinge their Glass both with a Red color, and with a
Purplish or Murry, and putting in a greater Quantity, they also make with it
that deep obscure Glass which is wont to pass for Black, which agrees very well
with, and may serve to confirm what we noted near the beginning of the 44th
Experiment, of the seeming Blackness of those Bodies that are overcharged with
the Corpuscles of such Colors, as Red, or Blevv, or Green, etc. And as by
several Metals and other Minerals we can give various Colors to Glass, so on
the other side, by the differing Colors that Mineral Oars, or other Mineral
Povvders being melted with. Glass disclose in it, a good Conjecture may be
oftentimes made of the Metal or known Mineral, that the Oar proposed, either
holds, or is most of kin to. And this easy way of examining Oars, may be in
some cases of good use, and is not ill delivered by Glauber, to whom I shall
at present refer you, for a more particular account of it: unless your
Curiosity command also what I have observed about these matters; only I must
here advertise you, that great circumspection is requisite to keep this way
from proving fallacious, upon the account of the variations of Color that may
be produced by the differing proportions that may be used betwixt the Oar and
the Glass, by the Richness or Poorness of the Oar it self, by the Degree of
Fire, and (especially) by the Length of Time, during which the matter is kept
in fusion; as you will easily gather from what you will quickly meet with in
the following Annotation upon this present 48th Experiment.

Annotation IV.
There is another way and differing enough from those already mentioned, by
which Metalls may be brought to exhibit adventitious Colors: For by This, the
Metal does not so much impart a Color to another Body, as receive a Color
from it, or rather both Bodies do by the new Texture resulting from their
mistion produce a new Color. I will not insist to this purpose upon the
Examples afforded us by yellow Orpiment, and common Sea Salt, from which,
sublimed together, Chemists unanimously affirm their White or Crystalline
Arsenick to be made: But it is not unworthy our nothing, That though Yellow
Orpiment be acknowledged to be the Copiousest by far of the two Ingredients of
Arsenick, yet this last named Body being duly added to the highest Colored
Metal Copper, when it is in fusion, gives it a whiteness both within and
without. Thus Lapis Calaminaris changes and improves the Color of Copper by
turning it into Brass. And I have sometimes by the help of Zincle duly mixed
after a certain manner, given Copper one of the Richest Golden Colors that
ever I have seen the Best true Gold Ennobled with. But pray have a care that
such Hints fall not into any hands that may mis-imploy them.

Annotation V.
Upon the Knowledge of the differing ways of making Minerals and Metalls
produce their adventitious Colors in Bodies capable of Vitrification, depends
the pretty Art of making what Chemists by a Barbarous Word are pleased to call
Amanses, that is counterfeit, or factitious Gemms, as Emeralds, Rubies,
Saphires, Topazes, and the like. For in the making of these, though pure Sand
or Calcined Crystal give the Body, yet it is for the most part some Metalline or
Mineral Calx, mingled in a small proportion that gives the Color. But though I
have many years since taken delight, to divert my self with this pleasing Art,
and have seen very pretty Productions of it, yet besides that I fear I have now
forgot most of the little Skill I had in it, this is no place to entertain you
with what would rather take up an entire Discourse, than be comprehended in an
Annotation; wherefore the few things which I shall here take notice of to you,
are only what belong to the present Argument, Namely,

First, That I have often observed that Calcined Lead Colliquated with fine
White Sand or Crystal, reduced by ignitions and subsequent extinctions in Water
to a subtle Powder, will of it self be brought by a due Decoction to give a
clear Mass Colored like a German Amethyst. For though this glass of Lead, is
looked upon by them that know no better way of making Amanses, as the grand
Work of them all, yet which is an inconvenience that much blemishes this way,
the Calcined Lead it self does not only afford matter to the Amanses, but has
also as well as other Metals a Color of its own, which as I was saying, I have
often found to be like that of German (as many call them) not Eastern Amethysts.

Secondly, That nevertheless this Color may be easily over-powr'd by those of
diverse other Mineral Pigments (if I may so call them) so that with a glass of
Lead, you may Emulate (for Instance) the fresh and lovely Greenness of an
Emerald, though in diverse cases the Color which the Lead it self upon
Vitrification tends to, may vitiate that of the Pigment, which you would
introduce into the Mass.

Thirdly, That so much even these Colors depend upon Texture, that in the
Glass of Lead it self made of about three parts of Lytharge or Minium
Colliquated with one of very finely Powdered Crystal or Sand, we have taken
pleasure to make the mixture pass through differing Colors, as we kept it more
or less in the Fusion. For it was not usually till after a pretty long
Decoction that the Mass attained to the Amethystin Color.

Fourthly and lastly, That the degrees of Coction and other Circumstances may
so vary the Color produced in the same mass, that in a Crucible that was not
great I have had fragments of the same Mass, in some of which perhaps not so
big as a Hazel-Nut, you may discern four distinct Colors.

Annotation VI.
You may remember (Pyrophilus) that when I mentioned the three sorts of
adventitious Colors of Metals, I mentioned them but as the chief, not the
only. For there may be other ways, which though they do not in so strict a
sense belong to the adventitious Colors of Metals, may not inconveniently be
reduced to them. And of these I shall name now a couple, without denying that
there may be more.

The first may be drawn from the practice of those that Dye Scarlet. For the
famousest Master in that Art, either in England or Holland, has confessed to
me, that neither others, nor he can strike that lovely Color which is now wont
to be called the Bow-Dye, without their Materials be Boiled in Vessels, either
made of, or lined with a particular Metal. But of what I have known attempted
in this kind, I must not as yet for fear of prejudicing See the latter end of
the fiftieth Experiment.
or displeasing others give you any particular Account.

The other way (Pyrophilus) of making Metals afford unobvious Colors, is by
imbuing diverse Bodies with Solutions of them made in their proper Menstruum's,
As (for Instance) though Copper plentifully dissolved in Aqua fortis, will
imbue several Bodies with the Color of the Solution; Yet some other Metalls
will not (as I elsewhere tell you) and have often tried. Gold dissolved in Aqua
Regia, will, (which is not commonly known) Dye the Nails and Skin, and Hafts of
Knives, and other things made of Ivory, not with a Golden, but a Purple Color,
which thought it manifest it self but slowly, is very durable, and scarce ever
to be washed out. And if I misremember not, I have already told you in this
Treatise, that the purer Crystals of fine Silver made with Aqua fortis, though
they appear White, will presently Dye the Skin and Nails, with a Black, or at
least a very Dark Color, which Water will not wash off, as it will ordinary
Ink from the same parts. And diverse other Bodies may the same way be Died, some
of a Black, and others of a Blackish Color.

And as Metalline, so likewise Mineral Solutions may produce Colors differing
enough from those of the Liquors themselves. I shall not fetch an Example of
this, from what we daily see happen in the powdring of Beef, which by the Brine
employed about it (especially if the flesh be over salted) does oftentimes
appear at our Tables of a Green, and sometimes of a Reddish Color, (deep
enough) nor shall I insist on the practice of some that deal in Salt Petre,
who, (as I suspected, and as themselves acknowledged to me) do, with the
mixture of a certain proportion of that, and common Salt, give a fine Redness,
not only to Neats Tongues, but which is more pretty as well as difficult, to
such flesh, as would otherwise be purely White; These Examples, I say, I shall
deeline insisting on, as choosing rather to tell you, that I have several times
tried, that a Solution of the Sulphur of Vitriol, or even of common Sulphur,
though the Liquor appeared clear enough, would immediately tinge a piece of new
Coin, or other clean Silver, sometimes with a Golden, sometimes with a deeper,
and more Reddish color, according to the strength of the Solution, and the
quantity of it, that chanced to adhere to the Metal, which may take off your
wonder that the water of the hot Spring at Bath, abounding with dissolved
Substances of a very Sulphurous Nature, should for a while, as it were gild,
the new or clean pieces of Silver coin, that are for a due time immersed in it.
And to these may be added those formerly mentioned Examples of the adventitious
Colors of Mineral Bodies; which brings into my mind, that, even Vegetable
Liquors, whether by degeneration, or by altering the Texture of the Body that
imbibes them, may stain other Bodies with Colors differing enough from their
own, of which very good Herbarists have afforded us a notable Example, by
affirming that the Juice of Alcanna being green (in which state I could never
here procure it) does yet Dye the Skin and Nails of a Lasting Red. But I see
this Treatise is like to prove too bulky without the addition of further
Instances of this Nature.

EXPERIMENT XLIX.
Meeting the other day, Pyrophilus, in an Italian book, that treats of other
matters, with a way of preparing what the Author calls a Lacca of Vegetables,
by which the Italians mean a kind of Extract fit for Painting, like that rich
Lacca in English commonly called Lake, which is employed by Painters as a
glorious Red. And finding the Experiment not to be inconsiderable, and very
defectively set down, it will not be amiss to acquaint you with what some
Trials have informed us, in reference to this Experiment, which both by our
Italian Author, and by diverse of his Countrymen, is looked upon as no trifling
Secret.

Take then the root called in Latin Curcuma, and in English Turmerick, (which I
made use of, because it was then at hand, and is among Vegetables fit for that
purpose one of the most easiest to be had) and when it is beaten, put what
Quantity of it you please into fair Water, adding to every pound of Water about
a spoonful or better of as strong a Lixivium or Solution of Potashes as you
can well make, clarifying it by Filtration before you put it to the Decocting
water. Let these things boil, or rather simper over a soft Fire in a clean
glazed Earthen Vessel, till you find by the Immersion of a sheet of White Paper
(or by some other way of Trial) that the Liquor is sufficiently impregnated
with the Golden Tincture of the Turmerick, then take the Decoction off the
Fire, and Filter or Strain it that it may be clean, and leisurely dropping into
it a strong Solution of Roch Alum, you shall find the Decoction as it were
curdl'd, and the tincted part of it either to emerge, to subside, or to swim up
and down, like little Yellow flakes; and if you pour this mixture into a Tunnel
lined with Cap Paper, the Liquor that Filtred formerly so Yellow, will now pass
clean through the Filtre, leaving its tincted, and as it were curdled parts in
the Filtre, upon which fair Water must be so often poured, till you have
Dulcifi'd the matter therein contained, the sign of which Dulcification is (you
know) when the Water that has passed through it, comes from it as tastless as
it was poured on it. And if without Filtration you would gather together the
flakes of this Vegetable Lake, you must pour a great Quantity of fair Water
upon the Decoction after the affusion of the Alluminous Solution, and you shall
find the Liquor to grow clearer, and the Lake to settle together at the bottom,
or emerge to the top of the Water, though sometimes having not poured out a
sufficient Quantity of fair Water, we have observed the Lake partly to subside,
and partly to emerge, leaving all the middle of the Liquor clear. But to make
this Lake fit for use, it must by repeated affusions of fresh Water, be
Dulcifi'd from the adhering Salts, as well as that separated by Filtration, and
be spread and suffered to dry leisurely upon pieces of Cloth, with Brown Paper,
or Chalk, or Bricks under them to imbibe the Moisture The Curious Reader that
desires further Information concerning Lakes, may Resort to the 7th Book of
Neri's Art of Glass, Englished (6 or 7 years since the Writing of this 49th
Experiment) and Illustrated with Learned Observations, by the Inquisitive and
Experienced Dr. Charles Merret.
.

Annotation I.
Whereas it is presumed that the Magistery of Vegetables obtained this way
consists but of the more. Soluble and Colored parts of the Plants that afford
it, I must take the liberty to Question the Supposition. And for my so doing, I
shall give you this account.

According to the Notions (such as they were) that I had concerning Salts;
Allom, though to sense a Homogeneous Body, ought not to be reckoned among true
Salts, but to be it self looked upon as a kind of Magistery, in regard that as
Native Vitriol (for such I have had) contains both a Saline substance and a
Metal, whether Copper, or Iron, corroded by it, and associated with it; so
Allom which may be of so near a kin to Vitriol, that in some places of England
(as we are assured by good Authority the same stone will sometimes afford both)
seems manifestly to contain a peculiar kind of Acid Spirit, generated in the
Bowels of the Earth, and some kind of stony matter dissolved by it. And though
in making our ordinary Allom, the Workmen use the Ashes of a Sea Weed (vulgarly
called Kelp) and Urine: yet those that should know, inform us, that, here in
England, there is besides the factitious Allom, Allom made by Nature without
the help of those Additaments. Now (Pyrophilus) when I considered this
composition of Allom, and that Alcalizate Salts are wont to Praecipitate what
acid Salts have dissolved, I could not but be prone to suspect that the Curdled
Matter, which is called the Magistery of Vegetables, may have in it no
inconsiderable proportion of a stony substance Praecipitated out of the Allom
by the Lixivium, wherein the Vegetable had been decocted, and to show you, that
there is no necessity, that all the curdl'd substance must belong to the
Vegetable, I shall add, that I took a strong Solution of Allom, and having
Filtred it, by pouring in a convenient Quantity of a strong Solution of
Potashes, I presently, as I expected, turned the mixture into a kind of white
Curds; which being put to Filtre, the Paper retained a stony Calx, copious
enough, very White, and which seemed to be of a Mineral Nature, both by some
other signs, and this, that little Bits of it being put upon a live Coal,
which was Gently Blown whilst they were on it, they did neither melt nor fly
away, and yon n ay keep a Quantity of this White substance for a good while,
(nay for ought I can guess for a very long one) in a red hot Crucible without
losing or spoiling it; nor did not Water wherein I purposely kept another
parcel of such Calx, seem to do any more than wash away the looser adhering
Salts from the stony Substance, which therefore seemed unlikely to be separable
by abiutions (though reiterated) from the Praecipitated parts of the Vegetable,
whose Lake is intended. And to show you, that there is likewise in Allom a
Body, with which the fixed Salt of the Alcalizare Solution will concoaguiare
into a Saline Substance differing from either of them, I shall add, that I have
taken pleasure to recover out of the slowly exhaled Liquor, that passed through
the filtre, and left the forementioned Calx behind, a Body that at least seemed
a Salt very pretty to look on, as being very White, and consisting of an
innumerable company of exceeding slender, and shining Particles, which would in
part easily melt at the flame of a Candle, and in part fly away with some
little noise. But of this substance, and its odd Qualities more perhaps
elsewhere; for now I shall only take notice to you, that I have likewise with
Urinous Salts, such as the Spirit of Sal Armoniack, as well as with the Spirit
of Urine it self, Nay, (if I much mistake not) even with Stale Urine
undistil'd, easily Precipitated such a White Calx, as I was formerly speaking
of, out of a Limpid Solution of Allom, so that there is need of Circumspect on
in judging of the Natures of Liquors by Precipitations wherein Allom
intervenes, else we may sometimes mistakingly imagine that to be Precipitated
out of a Liquor by Allom, which is rather Precipitated out of Allom by the
Liquor: And this puts me in mind to tell you, that it is not unpleasant to
behold how quickly the Solution of Allom (or injected lumps of Allom) does
occasion the severing of the colored parts of the Decoction from the Liquor
that seemed to have so perfectly imbibed them.

Annot. 11.
The above mentioned way of making Lakes we have tried not only with Turmerick,
but also with Madder, which yielded us a Red Lake; and with Rue, which afforded
us an extract, of (almost if not altogether) the same Color with that of the
leaves.

But in regard that it is Principally the Alcalizate Salt of the Potashes,
which enables the water to Extract so powerfully the Tincture of the Decocted
Vegetables, I fear that our Author may be mistaken by supposing that the
Decoction will always be of the very same Color with the Vegetable it is made
off. For Lixiviate Salts, to which Potashes eminently belong, though by
peircing and opening the Bodies of Vegetables, they prepare and dispose them to
part readily with their Tincture, yet some Tinctures they do not only draw out,
but likewise alter them, as may be easily made appear by many of the
Experiments already set down in this Treatise, and though Allom being of an
Acid Nature, its Solutions may in some Cases destroy the Adventitious Colors
produced by the Alcaly, and restore the former: yet besides that Allom is not,
as I have lately shown, a mere Acid Salt, but a mixed Body, and besides, that
its operations are languid in comparison of the activity of Salts freed by
Distillation, or by Incineration and Dissolution, from the most of their Earthy
parts, we have seen already Examples, that in diverse Cases an Acid Salt will
not restore a Vegetable substance to the Color of which an Alcalizate one had
deprived it, but makes it assume a third very differing from both, as we
formerly told you, that if Syrrup of Violets were by an Alcaly turned Green,
(which Color, as I have tried, may be the same way produced in the
Violetleaves themselves without any Relation to a Syrrup) an Acid Salt would
not make it Blew again, but Red. And though I have by this way of making Lakes,
made Magisteries (for such they seem to be) of Brazil, and as I remember of
Cochinele it self, and of other things, Red, Yellow or Green which Lakes were
enobled with a Rich Color, and others had no bad one; yet in some the color
of the Lake seemed rather inferior than otherwise to that of the Plant, and in
others it seemed both very differing, and much worse; but Writing this in a
time and place where I cannot provide my self of Flowers and other Vegetables
to prosecute such Trials in a competent variety of Subjects, I am content not
to be positive in delivering a judgment of this way of Lakes, till Experience,
or You, Pyrophilus, shall have afforded me a fuller and more particular
Information.

Annotation III.
And on this occasion (Pyrophilus) I must here (having forgot to do it sooner)
advertise you once for all, that having written several of the foregoing
Experiments, not only in haste but at seasons of the year, and in places
wherein I could not furnish my self with such Instruments, and such a variety
of Materials, as the design of giving you an Introduction into the History of
Colors required, it can scarce be otherwise but that diverse of the
Experiments, that I have set down, may afford you some matter of new Trials, if
you think fit to supply the deficiencies of some of them (especially the
freshly mentioned about Lakes, and those that concern Emphatical Colors) which
deficiencies for want of being befriended with accommodations I could better
discern than avoid.

Annotation IV.
The use of Allom is very great as well as familiar in the Dyers Trade, and I
have not been ill pleased with the use I have been able to make of it in
preparing other pigments than those they employ with Vegetable Juices. But the
Lucriferous practices of Dyers and other Tradesmen, I do, for Reasons that you
may know when you please, purposely forbear in this Essay, though not strictly
from pointing at, yet from making it a part of my present work explicitly and
circumstantially to deliver, especially since I now find (though late and not
without some Blushes at my prolixity) that what I intended but for a short
Essay, is already swelled into almost a Volume.

EXPERIMENT L.
Yet here, Pyrophilus, I must take leave to insert an Experiment, though
perhaps you will think its coming in here an Intrusion, For I confess its more
proper place would have been among those Experiments, that were brought as
proofs and applications of our Notions concerning the differences of Salts; but
not having remembered to insert it in its fittest place, I had rather take
notice of it in this, than leave it quite unmention'd: partly because it does
somewhat differ from the rest of our Experiments about Colors, in the way
whereby it is made; and partly because the grounds upon which I devised it, may
hint to you somewhat of the Method I use in Designing and Varying Experiments
about Colors, and upon this account I shall inform you, not only What I did,
but Why I did it.

I considered then that the work of the former Experiments was either to change
the Color of a Body into another, or quite to destroy it, without giving it a
successor, but I had a mind to give you also a way, whereby to turn a Body
endued with one Color into two Bodies, of Colors, as well as consistencies,
very distinct from each other, and that by the help of a Body that had it self
no Color at all. In order to this, I remembered, that finding the Acidity of
Spirit of Vinegar to be wholly destory'd by its working upon Minium (or
calcined Lead) whereby the Salin particles of the Menstruum have their Taste
and Nature quite altered, I had, among other Conjectures I had built upon that
change, rightly concluded, that the Solution of Lead in Spirit of Vinegar would
alter the Color of the Juices and Infusions of several Plants, much after the
like manner that I had found Oil of Tartar to do; and accordingly I was quickly
satisfied upon Trial, that the Infusion of Rose-leaves would by a small
quantity of this Solution well mingled with it, be immediately turned into a
somewhat sad Green.

And further, I had often found, that Oil of Vitriol, though a potently Acid
Menstruum, will yet Praecipitate many Bodies, both Mineral and others,
dissolved not only in Aqua fortis (as some Chemists have observed) but
particularly in Spirit of Vinegar, and I have further found, that the Calces or
Powders Praecipitated by this Liquor were usually fair and White.

Laying these things together, 'twas not difficult to conclude, that if upon a
good Tincture of Red Rose-leaves made with fair Water, I dropped a pretty
quantity of a strong and sweet Solution of Minium, the Liquor would be turned
into the like muddy Green Substance, as I have formerly intimated to You, that
Oil of Tartar would reduce it to, and that if then I added a convenient
quantity of good Oil of Vitriol, this last named Liquor would have two distinct
operations upon the Mixture, the one, that it would Praecipitate that resolved
Lead in the form of a White Powder; the other, that it would Clarify the muddy
Mixture, and both restore, and exceedingly heighten the Redness of the Infusion
of Roses, which was the most copious Ingredient of the Green composition, and
accordingly trying the Experiment in a Wine glass sharp at the bottom (like an
inverted Cone) that the subsiding Powder might seem to take up the more room,
and be the more conspicuous, I found that when I had shaken the Green Mixture,
that the colored Liquor might be the more equally dispersed, a few drops of
the rectified Oil of Vitriol did presently turn the opacous Liquor into one
that was clear and Red, almost like a Rubie, and threw down good store of a
Powder, which when 'twas settled, would have appeared very White, if some
interspersed Particles of the red Liquor had not a little Allayed the Purity,
though not blemished the Beauty of the Color. And to show you, Pyrophilus,
that these Effects do not flow from the Oil of Vitriol, as it is such, but as
it is a strongly Acid Menstruum, that has the property both to Praecipitate
Lead, as well as some other Concretes out of Spirit of Vinegar, and to heighten
the Color of Red Rose-leaves, I add, that I have done the same thing, though
perhaps not quite so well with Spirit of Salt, and that I could not do it with
Aqua-sortis, because though that potent Menstruum does as well as the others
heighthen the Redness of Roses, yet it would not like them Precipitate Lead out
of Spirit of Vinegar, but would rather have dissolved it, if it had not found
it dissolved already.

And as by this way we have produced a Red Liquor, and a White Precipitate out
of a Dirty Green magistery of Rose-leaves, so by the same Method, you may
produce a fair Yellow, and sometimes a Red Liquor, and the like Precipitate,
out of an Infusion of a curious Purple Color. For you may call to mind, that
in the Annotation upon the 39th. Experiment I intimated to you, that I had with
a few drops of an Alcaly turned the Infusion of Logg-wood into a lovely Purple.
Now if instead of this Alcaly I substituted a very strong and well Filtrated
Solution of Minium, made with Spirit of Vinegar, and put about half as much of
this Liquor as there was of the Infusion of Logg-wood, (that the mixture might
afford a pretty deal of Precipitate,) the affusion of a conventent proportion
of Spirit of Salt, would (if the Liquors were well and nimbly stirred together)
presently strike down a Precipitate like that formerly mentioned, and turn the
Liquor that swam above it, for the most part into a lovely Yellow.

But for the advancing of this Experiment a little further, I considered, that
in case I first turned a spoonful of the infusion of Logg-wood Purple, by a
convenient proportion of the Solution of Minium, the Affusion of Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, would Precipitate the Corpuscles of Lead concealed in the Solution
of Minium, and yet not destory the Purple color of the Liquor; whereupon I
thus proceeded; I took about a spoonful of the fresh Tincture of Logg-wood,
(for I found that if it were stale the Experiment would not always succeed,)
and having put to it a convenient proportion of the Solution of Minium to turn
it into a deep and almost opacous Purple, I then dropped in as much Spirit of
Sal Armoniack, as I guessed would Precipitate about half or more (but not all)
of the Lead, and immediately stirring the mixture well together, I mingled the
Precipitated parts with the others, so that they fell to the bottom, partly in
the form of a Powder, and partly in the form of a Curdled Substance, that (by
reason of the Predominancy of the Tinged Corpuscles over the White) retained as
well as the Supernatant Liquor, a Bluish Purple color sufficiently Deep, and
then instantly (but yet Warily,) pouring on a pretty Quantity of Spirit of
Salt, the matter first Precipitated, was, by the above specified figure of the
bottom of the Glass preserved from being reached by the Spirituous Salt; which
hastily Precipitated upon it a new Bed (if I may so call it) of White Powder,
being the remaining Corpuscles of the Lead, that the Urinous Spirit had not
struck down: So that there appeared in the Glass three distinct and very
differingly colored Substances; a Purple or Violet-colour'd Precipitate at the
bottom, a White and Carnation (sometimes a Variously colored) Precipitate over
That, and at the Top of all a Transparent Liquor of a lovely Yellow, or Red.

Thus you see, Pyrophilus, that though to some I may have seemed to have
lighted on this (50th.) Experiment by chance, and though others may imagine,
that to have excogitated it, must have proceeded from some extraordinary
insight into the nature of Colors, yet indeed, the devising of it need not be
looked upon as any great matter, especially to one that is a little versed in
the notions, I have in these, and other Papers hinted concerning the
differences of Salts. And perhaps I might add upon more than conjecture, that
these very notions and some particulars scatteringly delivered in this
Treatise, being skilfully put together, may suggest diverse matters (at least)
about Colors, that will not be altogether Despicable. But those hinted,
Pyrophilus, I must now leave such as You to prosecute, having already spent
far more time than I intended to allow my self in acquainting You with
particular Experiments and Observations concerning the changes of Color, to
which I might have added many more, but that I hope I may have presented You
with a competent number to make out in some measure what I have at the
beginning of this Essay either proposed as my Design in this Tract, or
delivered as my Conjectures concerning these matters. And it not being my
present Design, as I have more than once Declared, to deliver any Positive
Hypothesis or solemn Theory of Colors, but only to furnish You with some
Experiments toward the framing of such a Theory; I shall add nothing to what I
have said already, but a request that you would not be forward to think I have
been mistaken in any thing I have delivered as matter of Fact concerning the
changes of Colors, in case you should not every time you try it, find it
exactly to succeed. For besides the Contingencies to which we have elsewhere
shown some other Experiments to be obnoxious, the omission or variation of a
seemingly unconsiderable circumstance, may hinder the success of an Experiment,
wherein no other fault has been committed. Of which truth I shall only give you
that single and almost obvious, but yet illustrious instance of the Art of
Dying Scarlets, for though you should see every Ingredient that is used about
it, though I should particularly inform You of the weight of each, and though
you should be present at the kindling of the fire, and at the increasing and
remitting of it, when ever the degree of Heat is to be altered, and though (in
a word) you should see every thing done so particularly that you would scarce
harbor the least doubt of your comprehending the whole Art: Yet if I should
not disclose to You, that the Vessels, that immediately contain the Tinging
Ingredients, are to be made of or to be lined with Tin, You would never be able
by all that I could tell you else (at least, if the Famousest and Candidest
Artificers do not strangely delude themselves) to bring your Tincture of
Chochinele to Dye a perfect Scarlet. So much depends upon the very Vessel,
wherein the Tinging matters are boiled, and so great an Influence may an
unheeded Circumstance have on the Success of Experiments concerning Colors.

FINIS.
A SHORT ACCOUNT OF SOME OBSERVATIONS Made by Mr. BOIL About a Diamond that
Shines in the Dark.

First enclosed in a Letter written to a Friend, And now together with it
annexed to the Foregoing Treatise, upon the score of the Affinity betwixt
Light and Colors.



LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman. 1664.

A COPY OF THE LETTER That Mr. Boil wrote to Sir Robert Morray, to accompany
the Observations touching the Shining Diamond.
SIR,
THough Sir Robert Morray, and Monsieur Zulichem be Persons that have deserved
so well of the Commonwealth of Learning, that I should think my self unworthy
to be looked upon as a Member of it, if I declined to Obey them, or to Serve
them; yet I should not without Reluctance send you the Notes, you desire for
him, if I did not hope that you will transmit together with them, some Account
why they are not less unworthy of his perusal: which, that you may do, I must
inform you, how the writing of them was Occasioned, which in short was thus. As
I was just going out of Town, hearing that an Ingenious Gentleman of my
Acquaintance, lately returned from Italy, had a Diamond, that being rubbed,
would shine in the Dark, and that he was not far off, I snatched time from my
Occasions to make him a Visit, but finding him ready to go abroad, and having
in vain tried to make the Stone yield any Light in the Day time, I borrowed it
of him for that Night, upon condition to restore it him within a Day or two at
furthest, at Gresham College, where we appointed to attend the meeting of the
Society, that was then to be at that place. And hereupon I hasted that Evening
out of Town, and finding after Supper that the Stone which in the Day time
would afford no discernable Light, was really Conspicuous in the Dark, I was so
taken with the Novelty, and so desirous to make some use of an opportunity that
was like to last so little a while, that though at that time I had no body to
assist me but a Footboy, yet sitting up late, I made a shift that Night to try
a pretty number of such of the things that then came into my thoughts, as were
not in that place and time unpracticable. And the next Day being otherwise
employed, I was fain to make use of a drowsy part of the Night to set down
hastily in Writing what I had observed, and without having the time in the
Morning, to stay the transcribing of it, I ordered the Observations to be
brought after me to Gresham College, where you may remember, that they were
together with the Stone it self shown to the Royal Society, by which they had
the good Fortune not to be disliked, though several things were through have
omitted, some of which you will find in the Margin of the enclosed Paper. The
substance of this short Narrative I hope you will let Monsieur Zulichem know,
that he may be kept from expecting any thing of finished in the Observations,
and be disposed to excuse the want of it. But such as they are, I hope they
will prove (without a Clinch) Luciferous Experiments, by setting the
Speculations of the Curious on work, in a diligent Inquiry after the Nature of
Light, toward the discovery of which, perhaps they have not yet met with so
considerable an Experiment, since here we see Light produced in a dead and
opacous Body, and that not as in rotten Wood, or in Fishes, or as in the
Bolonian Stone, by a Natural Corruption, or by a Violent Destruction of the
Texture of the Body, but by so slight a Mechanical operation upon its Texture,
as we seem to know what it is, and as is immediately performed, and that
several ways without at all prejudicing the Body, or making any sensible
alterations in its Manifest Qualities. And I am the more willing to expose my
hasty Trials to Monsieur Zulichem, and to You, because, he being upon the
Consideration of Dioptricks, so odd a Phoenomenon relateing to the Subject, as
probably he treats of, Light will, I hope, excite a person to consider it, that
is wont to consider things he treats of very well. And for you Sir, I hope you
will both recrute and perfect the Observations you receive, For you know that I
cannot add to them, having a good while since restored to Mr. Clayton the
Stone, which though it be now in the hands of a Prince that so highly deserves,
by understanding them, the greatest Curiosities; yet he vouchsafes you that
access to him as keeps me from doubting, you may easily obtain leave to make
further Trials with it, of such a Monarch as ours, that is not more inquisitive
himself, than a favourer of them that are so. I doubt not but these Notes will
put you in mind of the Motion you made to the Society, to impose upon me the
Task of bringing in, what I had on other occasions observed concerning shining
Bodies. But though I deny not, that I sometimes made observations about the
Bolonian Stone, and tried some Experiments about some other shining Bodies; Yet
the same Reasons that reduced me then to be unwilling to receive even their
commands, must now be my Apology for not answering your Expectations, Namely
the abstruse nature of Light, and my being already overburden'd, and but too
much kept employed by the Urgency of the Press, as well as by more concerning
and distracting Occasions. But yet I will tell you some part of what I have met
with in reference to the Stone, of which I send you an account. Because I find
on the one side, that a great many think it no Rarity upon a mistaken
persuasion, that not only there are store of Carbuncles, of which this is one;
but that all Diamonds and other Glistering Jewels shine in the Dark. Whereas on
the other side there are very Learned Men, who (plausibly enough) deny that
there are any Carbuncles or shining Stones at all.

And certainly, those Judicious men have much more to say for themselves, than
the others commonly Plead, and therefore did deservedly look upon Mr. Clayton's
Diamond as a great Rarity. For not only Boethius de Boot, who is judged the best
Author on this Subject; ascribes no such Virtue to Diamonds, but begins what he
delivers of Carbuncles, with this passage. Magna fama est Carbunculi. Is vulgo
putatur in tenebris Carbonis instar Boethius de Boot. Gem. and Lapid. Histor.
Lib. 2. Cap. 8.
lucere; fortassis quia Pyropus seu Anthrax appellatus a veteribus fuit. Verum
hactenus nemo unqnam vere asserere ausus fuit, se gemmam noctu lucentem
vidisse. Garcias ab Horto proregis Indiae Medicus, refert se allocutum fuisse,
qui se vidisse affirmarent. Sed it is fidem non habuit. And a later Author, the
Diligent and Judicious Johannes de Laet in his Chapter of Carbuncles and of
Rubies, has this passage. Quia autem Carbunculi, Pyropi and Anthraces a
veteribus nominantur, vulgo creditum fuit, Carbonis instar in tenebris lucere,
quod tamen nulla gemma hastenus deprehensum, licet a quibusdam temere jactetur.
And the recentest Writer I have met with on this Subject, Olaus Wormius, in his
Account of his well furnished Musaeum, does, where he treats of Rubies, concur
with the former Writers by these Words. Sunt qui Rubinum veterum Carbunculum
esse existimant, Musaei Wormiani, Cap. 17.
sed deest una illa nota, quod in tenebris instar Anthracis non luceat: Ast
talem Carbunculum in rerum natura non inveniri major pars Authorum existimant.
Licet unum aut alterum in India apud Magnates quosdam reperiri scribant, cum
tamen ex aliorum relatione id habeant saltem, sed ipsi non viderint. In
confirmation of which I shall only add, that hearing of a Rubie, so very Vivid,
that the Jewellers themselves have several times begged leave of the fair Lady
to whom it belonged, that they might try their choicest Rubies by comparing
them with That, I had the Opportunity by the Favor of this Lady and her
Husband, (both which I have the Honor to be acquainted with) to make a Trial
of this famous Rubie in the Night, and in a Room well Darkn'd, but not only
could not discern any thing of Light, by looking on the Stone before any thing
had been done to it, but could not by all my Rubbing bring it to afford the
least Glimmering of Light.

But, Sir, though I be very backward to admit strange things for truths, yet I
am not very forward to reject them as impossibilities, and therefore I would
not discourage any from making further Inquiry, whether or no there be Really
in Rerum natura, any such thing as a true Carbuncle or Stone that without
Rubbing will shine in the Dark. For if such a thing can be found, it may afford
no small Assistance to the Curious in the Investigation of Light, besides the
Nobleness and Rarity of the thing it self. And though Vartomannus was not an
Eye witness of what he relates, that the King of Pegu, one of the Chief Kings
of the East Indies, had a true Carbuncle of that Bigness and Splendor, that it
shined very Gloriously in the Dark, and though Garcias ab Horto, the Indian
Viceroys Physician, speaks of another Carbuncle, only upon the Report of one,
that he Discoursed with, who affirmed himself to have seen it; yet as we are
not sure that these Men that gave themselves out to be Eyewitnesses speak
true, yet they may have done so for ought we know to the contrary. And I could
present you with a much considerabler Testimony to the same purpose, if I had
the permission of a Person concerned, without whose leave I must not do it. I
might tell you that Marcus Paulus Venetus (whose supposed Fables, diverse of our
later Travellours Purchas's Pilgrim. lib. 1. cap. 4. page 104.
and Navigatours have since found to be truths) speaking of the King of Zeilan
that then was, tells us, that he was said to have the best Rubie in the World,
a Palm long and as big as a man's Arm, without spot, shining like a Fire, and he
subjoyns, that the Great Cham, under whom Paulus was a considerable Officer,
sent and offered the value of a City for it; But the King answered, he would
not give it for the Treasure of the World, nor part with it, having been his
Ancestors. And I could add, that in the Relation made by two Russian Conssacks
of their Journey into Caray, In the year 1619.
written to their Emperor, they mentioned their having been told by the people
of those parts, that their King had a Stone, which Lights as the Sun both Day
and Night, called in their Language Surra, which those Cossacks interpret a
Ruby. But these Relations are too uncertain for me to build any thing upon, and
therefore I shall proceed to tell you, that there came hither about two years
since out of America, the Governor of one of the Principal Colonies there, an
Ancient Virtuoso, and one that has the Honor to be a member of the Royal
Society; this Gentleman finding some of the chief Affairs of his Country
committed to another and me, made me diverse Visits, and in one of them when I
inquired what Rate Stones they had in those parts of the Indies he belonged to,
he told me, that the Indians had a Tradition that in a certain hardly
accessible Hill, a pretty way up in the Country, there was a Stone which in the
Night time shined very vividly, and to a great distance, and he assured me,
that though he thought it not fit to venture himself so far among those
Savages, yet he purposely sent thither a bold Englishman, with some Natives to
be his guides, and that this Messenger brought him back word, that at a
distance from the Hillock he had plainly perceived such a shining Substance as
the Indians Tradition mentioned, and being stimulated by Curiosity, had
slighted those Superstitious Fears of the Inhabitants, and with much ado by
reason of the Difficulty of the way, had made a shift to clamber up to that
part of the Hill, where, by a very heedful Observation, he supposed himself to
have seen the Light: but whether 'twere that he had mistaken the place, or for
some other Reason, he could not find it there, though when he was returned to
his former Station, he did again see the Light shining in the same place where
it shone before. A further Account of this Light I expect from the Gentleman
that gave me this, who lately sent me the news of his being landed in that
Country. And though I reserve to my self a full Liberty of Believing no more
than I see cause; yet I do the less scruple to relate this, because a good part
of it agrees well enough with another Story that I shall in the next place have
occasion to subjoyn, in order whereunto I shall tell you, that though the
Learned Authors I formerly mentioned, tell us, that no Writer has affirmed his
having himself seen a real Carbuncle, yet, considering the Light of Mr.
Claytons Diamond, it recalled into my mind, that some years before, when I was
Inquisitive about Stones, I had met with an old Italian Book highly extolled to
me by very competent Judges, and that though the Book were very scarce, I had
purchased it at a dear Rate, for the sake of a few considerable passages I met
with in it, and particularly one, which being very remarkable in it self, and
pertinent to our present Argument, I shall put it for you, though not word for
word, which I fear I have forgot to do, yet as to the Sense, into English.

Having promised (says our Author) to say something of that most precious sort
of Jewels, Carbuncles, because they are very rarely to be met with, we shall
briefly deliver what we know of them. In Clement Behvonu^o Cellini nell Aree
del Gioiellar's Lib. 1. page 10.
the seventh's time, I happened to see one of them at a certain Ragusian
Merchants, named Beigoio di Bona, This was a Carbuncle white, of that kind of
Whiteness which we said was to be found in those Rubies of which we made
mention a little above, (where he had said that those Rubies had a kind of
Livid Whiteness or Paleness like that of a Calcidonian) but it had in it a
Luster so pleasing and so marveilous, that it shined in the Dark, but not as
much as colored Carbuncles, though it he true, that in an exceeding Dark place
I saw it shine in the manner of fire almost gone out. But as for colored
Carbuncles, it has not been my Fortune to have seen any, wherefore I will only
set down what I Learned about them Discoursing in my Youth with a Roman
Gentleman of ancient Experience in matters of Jewels, who told me, That one
Jacopo Cola being by Night in a Vineyard of his, and espying something in the
midst of it, that shined like a little glowing Coal, at the foot of a Vine,
went near toward the place where he thought himself to have seen that fire,
but not finding it, he said, that being returned to the same place, whence he
had first descried it, and perceiving there the same splendour as before, he
marked it so heedfully, that he came at length to it, where he took up a very
little Stone, which he carried away with Transports and Joy. And the next day
carrying it about to show it diverse of his Friends, whilst he was relating
after what manner he found it, there casually intervened a Venetian
Ambassador, exceedingly expert in Jewels, who presently knowing it to be a
Carbuncle, did craftily before he and the said Jacopo parted (so that there was
no Body present that understood the Worth of so Precious a Gemm) purchase it
for the Value of 10. Crowns, and the next day left Rome to shun the being
necessitated to restore it, and (as he affirmed) it was known within some while
after that the said Venetian Gentleman did in Constantinople sell that
Carbuncle to the then Grand Seignior, newly come to the Empire, for a hundred
thousand Crowns. And this is what I can say concerning Carbuncles, and this is
not a little at least as to the first part of this account, where our Cellini
affirms himself to have seen a Real Carbuncle with his own Eyes, especially
since this Author appears wary in what he delivers, and is inclined rather to
lessen, than increase the wonder of it. And his Testimony is the more
considerable, because though he were born a Subject neither to the Pope nor the
then King of France (that Royal Virtuoso Francis the first) yet both the one
and the other of those Princes employed him much about making of their Noblest
Jewels. What is now reported concerning a Shining Substance to be seen in one
of the Islands about Scotland, were very improper for me to mention to Sr.
Robert Morray, to whom the first. Information was Originally brought, and from
whom I expect a farther (for I scarce dare expect a convincing) account of it.
But I must not omit that some Virtuoso questioning me the other day at
White Hall about Mr. Claytons Diamond, and meeting amongst them an Ingenious
Dutch Gentleman, whose Father was long Ambassador for the Netherlands in
England, I Learned of him, that, he is acquainted with a person, whose Name he
told (but I do not well remember it) who was Admiral of the Dutch in the
East Indies, and who assured this Gentleman Monsieur Boreel, that at his return
from thence he brought back with him into Holland a Stone, which though it
looked but like a Pale Dull Diamond, such as he saw Mr. Claytons to be, yet was
it a Real Carbuncle, and did without rubbing shine so much, that when the
Admiral had occasion to open a Chest which he kept under Deck in a Dark place,
where 'twas forbidden to bring Candles for fear of Mischances, as soon as he
opened the Trunck, the Stone would by its Native Light, shine so as to
Illustrate a great part of it, and this Gentleman having very civilly and
readily granted me the request I made him, to Write to the Admiral, who is yet
alive in Holland, (and probably may still have the Jewel by him,) for a
particular account of this Stone, I hope ere long to receive it, which will be
the more welcome to me, not only because so unlikely a thing needs a clear
evidence, but because I have had some suspicion of that (supposing the truth of
the thing) what may be a shining Stone in a very hot Country as the
East Indies, may perhaps cease to be so (at least in certain seasons,) in one
as cold as Holland. For I observed in the Diamond I send you an account of,
that not only rubbing but a very moderate degree of warmth, though excited by
other ways, would make it shine a little. And it is not impossible that there
may be Stones as much more susceptible than that, of the Alterations requisite
to make a Diamond shine, as that appears to be more susceptible of them, than
ordinary Diamonds. And I confess to you, that this is not the only odd
suspicion (for they are not so much as conjectures) that what I tried upon this
Diamond suggested to me. For not here to entertain you with the changes I think
may be effected even in harder sorts of Stones, by ways not vulgar, nor very
promising, because I may elsewhere have occasion to speak of them, and this
Letter is but too Prolix already, that which I shall now acknowledge to you is,
That I began to doubt whether there may not in some Cases be some Truth in what
is said of the right Turquois, that it often changes Color as the wearer is
Sick or Well, and manifestly loses its splendour at his Death. For when I found
that even the warmth of an Affriction that lasted not above a quarter of a
minute, Nay, that of my Body, (whose Constitution you know is none of the
hottest) would make a manifest change in the solidest of Stones a Diamond, it
seemed not impossible, that certain warm and Saline steams issuing from the
Pody of a living man, may by their plenty or paucity, or by their peculiar
Nature, or by the total absence of them, diversifie the Color, and the
splendour of so soft a Stone as the Turquois. And though I admired to see, that
I know not how many Men otherwise Learned, should confidently ascribe to Jewels
such Virtues as seem no way competible to Inanimate Agents, if to any Corporeal
ones at all, yet as to what is affirmed concerning the Turquois' s changing
Color, I know not well how to reject the Affirmation of so Learned (and which
in this case is much more considerable) so Judicious a Lapidary as Boethius de
Boot The Narrative in the Authors own words, is this, Ego (says he) sancte
affirmare possum me unam aureo Annulo inclusam perpetuo gestare, cujus
facultatem (si gemmae est) nunquam satis admirari potui. Gestaverat enim ante
Triginta annos Hispanus quidam non procula puternis aedibus habitans. Is cum
vita-functus esset, and ipsius suspellex (ut moris apud nos est) venum exposita
esset, inter caetera etiam Turcois exponebatur. Verum nemo (licet complures co
concurrissent, ut eam propter Coloris Elegantiam, quam vivo Domino habuerat
emerent) sibi emptam voluit, pristinum enim nitorem and Colorem prorsus
amiserat, ut potius Malachites, quam Turcois videretur. Aderat tum temporis
gemmae habendae desiderio etiam parens and frater meus, qui antea saepius
gratiam and elegantiam ipsius viderant, mirabundi came nunc tam esse deformem,
Emit came nihilominus pater, satis^^ vili pretio, qua omnibus contemptui crat,
ac presents non eam esse quam Hispanus gestaral, arbitrarentur. Domum reversus
Pater, qui tam turpem Gemmam gestare sibi indecorum putabat, eam mihi dono dat,
inquiens; Quandoquidem, fili mi, vulgi fama est, Turcoidem, ut facultates suas
exercere possit, dono dari debere tibi eam devoveo, ego acceptam Gemmam
Sculptori trado, at gentilitia mea insignia illi, quamadmodam fieri solet, in
Jaspide Chalcedonio, aliisque Ignobilioribus Gemmis, insculper l. Turpe enim
existimabam, hujusmodi Gemma ornatus gratia, dum gratiam nullam haberet, uti.
Paret Sculptor redditque Gemmam, quam gesto pro annulo Signatorio. Vix per
mensem gestaram, redit illi pristinus color, sed non it a nitens propter
Sculpturam, ac inaequalem superficiem. Miramur omnes gemmam, atque id praecipue
quod color indies pulchrior fieret. Id quia observabam, nunquam fere ^am a manu
deposui, ita ut uunc adhuc candem gestem.
, who upon his own particular and repeated Experience delivers so memorable a
Narrative of the Turquois's changing Color, that I cannot but think it worth
your Perusal, especially since a much later and very Experienced Author, Olaus
Wormius, where he treats of that Stone, Confirms it with this Olaus Wormius in
Musae. 18o. page 186.
Testimony. Imprimis memorandum exemplum quod Anshelmus Boethius de seipso
refert, tam mutati Coloris, quam a casu preservationis. Cui and ipse haud
dissimile adferre possum, nisi ex Anshelmo petitum quis putaret. I remember
that I saw two or three years since a Turcois (worn in a Ring) wherein there
were some small spots, which the Virtuoso whose it was asur'd me he had
observed to grow sometimes greater sometimes less, and to be sometimes in one
part of the Stone, sometimes in another. And I having encouraged to make
Pictures from time to time of the Stone, and of the Situation of the cloudy
parts, that so their Motion may be more indisputable, and better observed, he
came to me about the middle of this very week, and assured me that he had, as I
wished, made from time to time Schemes or Pictures of the differing parts of
the Stone, whereby the several Removes and motions of the above mentioned
Clouds are very manifest, though the cause seemed to him very occult: these
Pictures he has promised to show me, and is very ready to put the Stone it self
into my hands. But the ring having been the other day casually broken upon his
finger, unless it can be taken out, and set again without any considerable
heat, he is loath to have it meddled with, for fear its peculiarity should be
thereby destroyed. And possibly his apprehension would have been strengthened,
if I had had opportunity to tell him what is reladed by Musae. Worm, page 99.
the Learned Wormius of an acquaintance of his, that had a Nephritick stone, of
whose eminent Virtues he had often Experience even in himself, and for that
cause wore it still about his Wrist; and yet going upon a time into a Bath of
fair Water only, wherein certain Herbs had been boiled, the Stone by being
wetted with this decoction, was deprived of all his Virtue, whence Wormius
takes Occasion to advertise the sick, to lay by such stones whenever they
make use of a Bath. And we might expect to find Turcos likewise, easily to be
wrought upon in point of Color, if that were true, which the curious Antonio
Neri, in his ingenious Art Vetraria teaches of it, namely, That Art Vetratia,
lib. 7. cap. 102.
Turcois's discolourd and grown white, will regain and acquire an excellent
Color, if you but keep them two or three days at most covered with Oil of
sweet Almonds kept in a temperate heat by warm ashes, I say if it were true,
because I doubt whether it be so, and have not as yet had opportunity to
satisfy my self by Trials, because I find by the confession of the most
Skillful Persons among whom I have laid out for Turcoises, that the, true ones
are great rarities, though others be not at all so. And therefore I shall now
only mind you of one thing that you know as well as I, namely, that the rare
Stone which is called Oculus Mundi, if it be good in its Kind, will have so
great a change made in its Texture by being barely left a while in the
Languidest of Liquors, common Waters, that from Opacous it will become
Transparent, and acquire a Luster of which it will again be deprived, without
using any other Art or Violence, by leaving it a while in the Air. And before
experience had satisfied us of the truth of this, it seemed as unlikely that
common Water or Air, should work such great changes in that Gemm, as it now
seems that the Effluviums of a human Body should effect lesser changes in a
Turcois, especially if more susceptible of them, than other Stones of the same
kind. But both my Watch and my Eyes tell me that it is now high time to think of
going to sleep, matters of this Nature, will be better, as well as more easily,
cleared by Conference, than Writing. And therefore since I think you know me
too well to make it needful for me to disclame Credulity, notwithstanding my
having entertained you with all these Extravagancies; for you know well, how
wide a difference I am wont to put betwixt things that barely may be, and
things that are, and between those Relations that are but not unworthy to be
inquired into, and those that are not worthy to be actually believed; without
making Apologies for my Ravings, I shall readily comply with the drowsiness
that calls upon me to release You, and the rather, because Monsieur Zulichem
being concerned in your desire to know the few things I have observed about the
shining Stone. To entertain those with Suspicions that are accustomed not to
acquiesce but in Demonstrations, were a thing that cannot be looked upon as
other than very improper by,

SIR, Your most Affectionate and most Faithful Servant, TO. BOIL.

OBSERVATIONS Made this These were brought in and Read before the Royal
Society, (the Day following) Oct. 28. 1663.
27th. of The Stone it self being to be shown to the Royal Society, when the
Observations were delivered, I was willing (being in haste) to omit the
Description of it, which is in short, That it was a Flat or Table Diamond, of
about a third part of an Inch in length, and somewhat less in breadth, that it
was a Dull Stone, and of a very bad Water, having in the Day time very little
of the Vividness of even ordinary Diamonds, and being Blemished with a whitish
Cloud about the middle of it, which covered near a third part of the Stone.
October 1663. about Mr. Clayton's Diamond.
BEing looked on in the Day time, Have made me forget to take notice that I
went abroad the same Morning, the Sun shining forth clear enough, to look upon
the Diamond through a Microscope, that I might try whether by that Magnifying
Glass any thing of peculiar could be discerned in the Texture of the Stone, and
especially of the whitish Cloud that possessed a good part of it. But for all my
attention I could not discover any peculiarity worth mentioning.
though in a Bed, whose Curtains were carefulsy drawn, I could not discern it
to Shine at all, though well Rubbed, but about a little after Sunset, whilst
the Twilight yet lasted, Nay, this Morning a pretty while after Sunrising,
(but before I had been abroad in the more freely enlightened Air of the Chamber)
I could upon a light Affriction easily perceive the Stone to Shine.

Secondly, The Candles being removed, I could not in a Dark place discern the
Stone to have any Light, when I looked on it, without having Rubbed or
otherwise prepared it.

Thirdly, By two white Pibbles though hard Rubbed one against another, nor by
the long and vehement Affriction of Rock Crystal against a piece of Red cloth,
nor yet by Rubbing two Diamonds set in Ring, as I had Rubbed this Stone, I
could produce any sensible degree of Light.

Fourthly, I found this Diamond hard enough, not only to enable me to write
readily with it upon Glass, but to Grave on Rock Crystal it self.

Fifthly, I found this to have like other Diamonds, an Electrical faculty. V.
For it drew light Bodies like Amber, Jet, and other Concretes that are noted to
do so; But its attractive power seemed inferior to theirs.


Sixthly, Being rubbed upon my Clothes, as is usual for the exciting of Amber,
Wax, and other Electrical Bodies, it did in the Dark manifestly shine like
Rotten Wood, or the Scales of Whitings, or other putrified Fish.

Seventhly, But this Conspicuousness was Fainter than that of the Scales, and
Slabber (if I may so call it) of Whitings, and much Fainter than the Light of a
Glowworm, by which I have been sometimes able to Read a short Word, whereas
after an ordinary Affriction of this Diamond I was not able to discern
distinctly by the Light of it any of the nearest Bodies: And this Glimmering
also did very manifestly and considerably Decay presently upon the ceasing of
the Affriction, though the Stone continued Visible some while after.

Eighthly, But if it were Rubbed upon a convenient Body for a pretty while, and
Briskly enough, I found the Light would be for some moments much more
considerable, almost like the Light of a Glowworm, insomuch after I ceased
Rubbing, I could with the Chafed stone exhibit a little Luminous Circle, like
that, but not so bright as that which Children make by moving a stick Fired at
the end, and in this case it would continue Visible about seven or eight times
as long as I had been in Rubbing it.

Ninthly, I found that holding IX. We durst not hold it in the Flame of a
Candle, no more than put it into a naked Fire; For fear too Violent a Heat
(which has been observed to spoil many other precious Stones) should vitiate
and impair a Jewel, that was but borrowed, and was supposed to be the only one
of its Kind.
it a while near the Flame of a Candle, (from which yet I was careful to avert
my Eyes) and being immediately removed into the Dark, it disclosed some faint
Glimmering, but inferior to that, it was wont to acquire by Rubbing. And
afterward holding it near a Fire that had but little Flame, I found the Stone
to be rather less than more excited, than it had been by the Candle.

Tenthly, I likewise endeavored to make it Shine, by holding it a pretty while
in a very Dark place, over a thick piece of Iron, that was well Heated, but not
to that Degree as to be Visibly so. And though at length I found, that by this
way also, the Stone acquired some Glimmering, yet it was less than by either of
the other ways above mentioned.

Eleventhly, I also brought it to some kind of Glimmering Light, by taking it
into Bed with me, and holding it a good while upon a warm part of my Naked Body.

Twelfthly, To satisfy my self, whether the Motion introduced into the Stone
did generate the Light upon the account of its producing Heat there, I held it
near the Flame of a Candle, till it was qualified to shine pretty well in the
Dark, and then immediately I applied a slender Hair to try whether it would
attract it, but found not that it did so; though if it were made to shine by
Rubbing, it was as I formerly noted Electrical. And for further Confirmation,
though I once purposedly kept it so near the hot Iron I just now mentioned, as
to make it sensibly Warm, yet it shined more Dimly than it had done by
Affriction or the Flame of a Candle, though by both those ways it had not
acquired any warmth that was sensible.

Thirteenthly, Having purposely rubbed it upon several Bodies differing as to
Color, and as to Texture, there seemed to be some little Disparity in the
excitation (if I may so call it) of Light. Upon White and Red Cloths it seemed
to succeed best, especially in comparison of Black ones.

Fourteenthly, But to try what it would do rubbed upon Bodies more hard, and
less apt to yield Heat upon a light Affriction, than Cloth, I first rubbed it
upon a white wooden Box, by which it was excited, and afterward upon a piece
of purely Glazed Earth, which seemed during the Attrition to make it Shine
better than any of the other Bodies had done, without excepting the White ones,
which I add, lest the Effect should be wholly ascribed to the disposition White
Bodies are wont to have to Reflect much Light.

Fifteenthly, Having well excited the Stone, I nimbly plunged XV. We likewise
Plunged it as soon as we had excited it, under Liquors of several sorts, as
Spirit of Wine, Oil both Chemical and expressed, an Acid Spirit, and as I
remember an Alcalizate Solution, and found not any of those various Liquors to
destroy its Shining property.
it under Water, that I had provided for that purpose, and perceived it to
Shine whilst it was beneath the Surface of that Liquor, and this I did diverse
times. But when I endeavored to produce a Light by rubbing it upon the lately
mentioned Cover of the Box, the Stone and it being both held beneath the
Surface of the Water, I did not well satisfy my self in the Event of the
Trial; But this I found, if I took the Stone out, and Rubbed it upon a piece of
Cloth, it would not as else it was wont to do, presently acquire a
Luminousness, but needed to be rubbed manifestly much longer before the desired
Effect was found.

Sixteenthly, I also tried several XVI. Having found by this Observation, that
a warm Liquor would not extinguish Light in the Diamond, I thought fit to try,
whether by reason of its warmth it would not excite it, and diverse times I
found, that if it were kept therein, till the Water had leisure to communicate
some of its Heat to it, it would often shine as soon as it was taken out, and
probably we should have seen it Shine more, whilst it was in the Water, if some
degree of Opacity which heated Water is wont to acquire, upon the score of the
Numerous little Bubbles generated in it, had not kept us from discerning the
Luster of the Stone.
times, that by covering it with my warm Spittle (having no warm Water at hand)
it did not lose his Light.

Seventeenthly, Finding that by Rubbing the Stone with the Flat side downwards,
I did by reason of the Opacity of the Ring, and the sudden Decay of Light upon
the ceasing of the Attrition, probably lose the sight of the Stones greatest
Vividness; and supposing that the Commotion made in one part of the Stone will
be easily propagated all over, I sometimes held the piece of Cloth upon which
I rubbed it, so, that one side of the Stone was exposed to my Eye, whilst I was
rubbing the other, whereby it appeared more Vivid than formerly, and to make
Luminous Tracts by its Motions too and fro. And sometimes holding the Stone
upwards, I rubbed its Broad side with a fine smooth piece of Transparent Horn,
by which means the Light through that Diaphauous Substance, did whilst I was
actually rubbing the Stone, appear so Brisk, that sometimes and in some places
it seemed to have little Sparks of Fire.

Eighteenthly, I took also a piece of flat Blew Glass, and having rubbed the
Diamond well upon a Cloth, and nimbly clapped the Glass upon it, to try whether
in case the Light could pierce it, it would by appearing Green, or of some
other Color than Blew, assist me to guess whether it self were sincere or no.
But finding the Glass impervious to so faint a Light, I then thought it fit to
try whether that hard Bodies would not by Attrition increase the Diamonds Light
so as to become penetrable thereby, and accordingly when I rubbed the Glass
briskly upon the Stone, I found the Light to be Conspicuous enough, and
somewhat Died in its passage, but found it not easy to give a Name to the
Color it exhibited.

Lastly, To comply with the Suspicion I had upon the whole Matter, that the
chief manifest Change wrought in the Stone, was by Compression of its parts,
rather than Incalescence, I took a piece of white Tile well Glazed, and if I
pressed the Stone hard against it, it seemed though I did not rub it to and
fro, to shine at the Sides: And however it did both very manifestly and
vigorously Shine, if whilst I so pressed it, I moved it any way upon the
Surface of the Tile, though I did not make it draw a Line of above a quarter of
an Inch long, or thereabouts. And though I made it not move to and 'fro, but
only from one end of the short Line to the other, without any return or Lateral
motion. Nay, after it had been often rubbed, and suffered to lose its Light
again, not only it seemed more easy to be excited than at the beginning of the
Night; but if I did press hard upon it with my Finger, at the very instant that
I drew it briskly off, it would disclose a very Vivid but exceeding short Lived
Splendor, not to call it a little Coruscation. I after bethought my self of
employing a way, which produced the desired Effect both sooner and better. For
holding betwixt my Fingers a Steel Bodkin, near the Lower part of it, I pressed
the point hard against the Surface of the Diamond, and much more if I struck
the point against it, the Coruscation would be extremely sudden, and very
Vivid, though very Vanishing too, and this way which commonly much surprised
and pleased the Spectators, seemed far more proper than the other, to show that
pressure alone, if forcible enough, though it were so sudden, and short, that
it could not well be supposed to give the Stone any thing near a sensible
degree of Warmth, as may be suspected of Rubbing, yet it is sufficient to
generate a very Vivid Light.
So that a Cartesian would scarce scruple to think he had found in this Stone
no slight Confirmation of his Ingenious Masters Hypothesis, touching the
Generation of Light in Sublunary Bodies, not sensibly Hot.

A Postscript. Annexed some Hours after the Observations were Written.
SO many particulars taken notice of in one Night, may We afterward, tried
precious Stones, as Diamonds, Rubies, Saphires, and Emeralls, etc. but found
not any of them to Shine except some Diamonds, and of these we were not upon so
little practice, able to foretell before hand, which would be brought to
Shine, and which would not; For several very good Diamonds, either would not
Shine at all, or much less than others that were far inferior to them. And
yet those Ingenious Men are mistaken, that think a Diamond must be foul and
cloudy, as Mr. Claytons was, to be fit for Shining; for as we could bring some
such to afford a Glimmering Light, so with some clear and excellent Diamonds,
we could do the like. But none of those many that we tried of all Kinds, were
equal to the Diamond on which the Observations were made, not only considering
the degree of Light it affotded, but the easiness wherewith it was excited, and
the Comparatively great duration of its Shining.
make this Stone appear a kind of Prodigy, and the rather, because having
tried as I formerly noted, not only a fine Artificial Crystal, and some also
that is Natural, but a Ruby and two Diamonds, I did not find that any of these
disclosed the like Glimmering of Light; yet after all, perceiving by the
Hardness, and the Testimony of a Skillful Goldsmiths, that this was rather a
Natural than Artificial Stone; for fear lest there might be some difference in
the way of Setting, or in the shape of the Diamonds I made use of, neither of
which was like this, a flat Table-stone, I thought fit to make a farther Trial
of my own Diamonds, by such a brisk and assiduous Affriction as might make
amends for the Disadvantages abovementioned, in case they were the cause of
the unsuccessfulness of the former Attempts: And accordingly I found, that by
this way I could easily bring a Diamond I wore on my Finger to disclose a
Light, that was sensible enough, and continued so though I covered it with
Spittle, and used some other Trials about it. And this will much lessen the
wonder of all the formerly mentioned Observations, by showing that the
properties that are so strange are not peculiar to one Diamond, but may be
found in others also, and perhaps in diverse other hard and Diaphanous Stones.
Yet I hope that what this Discovery takes away from the Wonder of these
Observations, it will add to the Instructiveness of them, by affording
pregnants Hints, toward the Investigation of the Nature of Light.

FINIS.

