EXPERIMENTS AND Considerations ABOUT THE Porosity of Bodies, IN TWO ESSAYS.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Smith at the Prince's Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1684.

TO THE READER.
THe Reader is to be advertised, not to expect in the following Essay a
Regular, or so much as a Coherent, Discourse. For it was intended only as a
collection of loose Experiments and Observations about the Porosity of the
parts of Bodies belonging as Chemists speak) to the Animal Kingdom, and laid
(not to say thrown (together, in order to what I had thoughts of offering,
toward an Intelligible account of Occult Qualities. I am not ignorant, that
even one of the most ancient and famous of Physicians has said, that a man's
body is (almost) every where perspirable. But I judged that a Doctrine of such
moment, and which diverse things in the Theory and Practice of after Physicians
may make one think they either disbelieved or disregarded, did not deserve to
be slightly delivered, and in general terms, but to be more narrowly
considered, and likewise made out by Particular Instances, whose applyableness
and usefulness to explain diverse obscure Phenomenon, may hereafter appear much
greater, then perchance at the first sight they will be thought.

And the foregoing advertisement, with a light change, which it is presumed the
Reader may easily make of himself, is to be extended to the Essay tacked to
this about the Pores of Solid Bodies, and so may excuse the absence of a
distinct Preface to it.

An Essay of the POROUSNESS OF ANIMAL BODIES.
AS the most numerous part of the Pores of Bodies is too minute to be seen, so
the Contemplation of them has been thought too inconsiderable to be regarded.
But when I consider, how much most of the Qualities of Bodies, and consequently
their operations depend upon the structure of their minute, and singly
invisible, particles, and that to this latent contexture, the^ bigness the
figure and the collocation of the Intervals and Pores do necessarily concur
with the Size, Shape and Disposition or contrivance of the substantial parts I
cannot but think the Doctrine of the small Pores of Bodies, of no small
importance to Natural Philosophy. And I scarce doubt, but if such little things
had not escaped the sight of our Illustrious Verulam, he would have afforded a
good Porology (if I may so call it) a place, (and perhaps not the lowest
neither,) among his Desiderata.

And, though other employments and avocations hinder me from attempting to
treat of this subject as amply and particularly as it deserves, or even as I
had designed in a Scheme drawn diverse years since, and seen by some Virtuosi;
Yet, not to leave apart of Physics, that seems to me so curious and important,
altogether as uncultivated as I found it; I shall present you as many of the
Notes I had drawn together about this subject, as I can conveniently (for I do
not pretend to do it methodically) reduced to three heads: Whereof the first,
which will challenge to it self this present essay, is the porosity of Animal
Bodies, about which I shall not be solicitous to marshal my observations, since
they all conspire to show but this one thing; That the parts of Animals,
especially whilst these are alive, are furnished with numerous Pores.

Those parts of the Bodies of Animals, wherein their porosity may be best shown
seem to be their Membranes or Skins, the Bones, the Flesh, and Coagmentations
of Membranes, Flesh and Juices. And therefore it would be proper enough to
treat of these Heads distinctly, and give Instances of each of them in
particular. But yet I think it will be more convenient, to set down in order
the principal Fountains, whence the Porousness of the substances belonging to
the Animal Kingdom (as the Chemists speak) may be derived, and to annex to each
of these the Experiments and observations, upon which I argue from it, and
which it will be easy to refer, if that be thought fit, to this or that of the
parts above mentioned (namely the Membranes, Bones, etc.) whereto they shall
(respectively) appear the most properly to belong.

CHAP. I.
THe first thing from which I will deduce the Porosity we have been speaking
of, is, the Frame or Constitution of the stable Parts of the Bodies of Animals.
For the Body of an Animal being not a rude and indigested lump of matter, but a
curious engine, admirably framed and contrived for the exercise of several
Functions as Nutrition, Generation, Sensation, and many differing local
Motions, it was necessary that it should be furnished with variety of
Dissimilar and Organical parts not only very Skilfully, but very differingly,
contrived congruous to the several uses for which they were designed, or if you
please, to the several Functions they were to perform. And, because 'twill be
easily granted, that the Corpuscles, that are skilfully brought together for
such purposes, must be so contexed as not to touch one another exactly every
where, it will readily follow that they must leave little Intervals or Pores
between them, and that, considering the multitude of particles that must go to
the making up the Body of the Animal, and the great difference and variety in
point of bigness and figure of the Corpuscles that are requisite to contex such
differing parts, as Membranes, Fibers Bones, Grizles, Ligaments, Veins,
Arterys, Nerves, etc. Both the number and the variety of the Pores cannot but
be very great. This argument will be much confirmed, by what there will be
occasion to say further to the same purpose, in the Essay touching the Porosity
of even Solid Bodies. Wherefore I shall now proceed to the Second thing, whence
we may derive that of Animal Substances.

CHAP. II.
THis is afforded us by considering the Nutrition of Animals. For there being
continually a great waste made of their substance, partly by the exclusion of
visible excrements, and partly by the avolation of invisibles steam, this great
loss must necessarily from time to time be repairpaired by the supplies
afforded by Nutrition of which the best, if not the only Intelligible, way of
giving an account, is, to conceive that the alimental Juice, prepared chiefly
in the Stomach is impelled or attracted (for to our present purpose it matters
not which) to the parts of the Body that are to be nourished by it, and the
Corpuscles of the juice insinuate themselves at those Pores they find
commensurate to their Bigness, and Shape; and those that are must congruous,
being assimilated, add to the substance of the part wherein they settle, and so
make amends for the Consumption of those that were lost by that part before.
This may be illustrated by what happens in Plants, and especially Trees, in
which, of the various Corpuscles that are to be found in the liquors, that
moisten the Earth, and are agitated by the heat of the Sun and the Air, those
that happen to be commensurate to the Pores of the Root, are by their
Intervention impelled into it, or imbibed by it, and thence conveyed to the
other parts of the Tree in the form of Sap which passing through new strainers,
(whereby its Corpuscles are separated, and prepared or fitted to be detained in
several parts) receives the alterations requisite to the being turned into
Wood, Bark, Leaves, Blossoms, Fruit, etc. But to return to Animals, our
argument from their Nutrition will be much confirmed, by considering, that in
Children and in other young Animals, that have not yet attained their due
Stature and Bulk, the Nutrition is so copious as to amount to a continued
Augmentation. For, as it is evident that Animals grow in all their parts, and
each part according to all its Dimensions, in so much that even the cavities of
Bones increase; so we cannot well conceive how this can be done, unless the
Nutritive liquor be distributed through the whole Body of the part that is to
be nourished and augmented. And to this distribution it is requisite that the
Body abound with Pores into which the congruous particles of the Juice may be
intimatly admitted, and penetrating even into the innermost recesses, may place
or lodge themselves in the manner that is most convenient for the Natural
Increase of the part. But the more particular Declaration of this Process I
leave to Anatomists and Physicians.

CHAP. III.
HAving premised once for all, that in this Essay, I often use the word Skin in
the lax and popular sense of it, without nicely distinguishing the Epidermis or
Cuticula, called in English the Scarf-skin, from the Cutis it invests and
sticks closely to; I shall proceed to another Topic, whence the Porousness of
Animals may be argued, namely, the great plenty of matter that is daily carried
off by Sweat, and insensible Transpiration. For, it is confessed that Sweat is
discharged at the Pores of the skin; and since there is no penetration of
Dimensions, we may safely conclude, that the matter that is not wasted by
Sweat, or by any other sensible way of evacuation, must have small Pores or
out-lets in the Skin, at which it may issue in the form of steams; though
nothing hinders but that invisible Effluvia also may evaporate at the same
Pores with the Sweat, though for want of plenty or grossness, or a fit
disposition in the ambient, those Effluvia be not at the Orifices of those
Pores brought into little Drops, such as those of sweat.

That therefore the Skins of a multitude of Animals, though they seem close to
the eye, may be porous, may (as we have been saying) be argued in many of them
from their sweating. But because all of them have not been observed to sweat,
as is wont to be particularly affirmed of Dogs, we shall add some other
Instances to make it probable.

We may sometimes, in the smooth skin of a living man, discern Pores with good
Microscopes, and, with one that is none of the best, we may easily on the
inside of gloves, which are made but of skins dressed, discern good store of
these little out-lets: Sometimes orderly enough ranged to make the sight not
unpleasant. And though some of them may, I think, be suspected to have been
made by the Hairs that grew on the skin before 'twas dressed, yet that greater
numbers of them, than can be supposed to come from thence, are perforations
that pass quite through the Leather, may, not improbably, be shown by the usual
Practice of Chemists, to purify Quicksilver by tying it up strictly in a piece
of kids or sheeps Leather, and then wringing it hard to force it out; by which
means the lower surface of the Leather will be covered with a Mercurial Dew or
Sweat which will fall down and fly out, as the Pores happen to open this or
that way, in a thick shower of globules, leaving the dross behind in the
Leather. And tho when a man's skin is tanned it is of a greater thickness then
one would expect, and that which I employed seemed almost as thick as a
Buck-skin Glove yet having had the curiosity to try the same Experiment with
the skin of a man's Arm, I found the Quicksilver would be squeezed out at the
Pores of that also. It Is not necessary that I should here inquire, whether the
little holes, unperceived by the naked Eye, at which the Sweat is discharged,
and perhaps the matter that the Body looses by insensible transpiration gets
out, be not, at least most of them, the Orifices of small excretory vessels,
belonging to those very numerous glandules which the excellent Anatomists Steno
and Malpighi are said to have discovered beneath the Cuticula, and which for
their smalness and shape have been called Glandulae miliares. I need not, I
say, engage in this inquiry, since according to this ingenious opinion also,
the Skin must be allowed a multitude of small Perforations or Pores, and that
is sufficient for my purpose, from whencesoever this Porosity proceeds in a
man's Skin. For the next observation will show that some membranes of Animals
may give passage to transpir'd matter without being perforated by the excretou^
Vessels of Glandules.

The Membranes or Skins under the shells of Hens Eggs, though they be very
thin, are of a Contexture very fine and close as may be confirmed by their
resisting the sharp Corpuscles of Vinegar; and yet, that not only these Skins,
but the shells that cover them, are porous, may be inferred from the
Experiments I made, of keeping them suspended for a good while, and carefully
counterpoised in good scales; for by these it appeared, that the Eggs did from
time to time manifestly lose in weight; which could not reasonably be imputed
but to an invisible Transpiration, the rather, because usually in eggs that
have been kept long, there will be at one end a cavity which is wont to
increase with their age, and is made by the shrinking of the Membrane from the
Shell, to accommodate it self to the diminished quantity of matter, that
remains to be involved by it.

When I consider the plenty of matter, that is wont to be discharged daily by
insensible Perspiration, especially in Healthful men that exercise themselves
moderately, I cannot but think it probable, that the minute Pores, that suffice
for the carrying off so much matter, are very numerous, and are much more so
than even by the multitude of drops of sweat, that serve to wet the skin, men
are wont to imagine. For Sanctorius in his excellent little Tract de Medicina
statica affirms, that what is barely carried off by insensible transpiration
does ordinarily amount to more, that is, diminishes more the weight of a man's
Body, than all the visible excrements (whether gross or liquid) put together.
Aph. vi. He adds, If the meat and Drink, taken in one day, amount to the weight
of eight pound, the insensible Transpiration ordinarily amounts to five pounds
or thereabouts. And elsewhere says, that sometimes in the space of 24 hours, in
the Winter time, a healthy Body may exhale fifty ounces or more. And some
Trials, that I have carefully made upon my self, added to some others of a very
curious as well as great Prince, that made use of a like instrument, and did me
the honor to acquaint me with the events, gave me no cause to reject
Sanctorius observations, considering the difference in point of heat, between
the climate of Italy, where he writ, and that of England, where ours were made;
only I fear, there has been committed an oversight by those many that ascribe
all the decrement of weight, that is not referrable to the grosser Excrements,
to what transpires at the Pores of the visible parts of the skin, without
taking notice of that great plenty of steams that is in expirations discharged
through the Windpipe by the Lungs, and appear manifest to the Eye it self in
frosty weather; though they may be presumed to be then less copious than those
Invisible ones that are emitted in Summer, when the ambient Air is much warmer.
But though I look upon the Windpipe as the great Chimney of the Body in
comparison of those little Chimneys (if I may so call them) in the Skin, at
which the matter that is wasted by perspiration is emitted, yet the number of
these little vents is so very great, that the fuliginous Exhalations that steal
out at them, cannot but be very considerable. Besides that, those that are
discharged at the Aspera Arteria, do probably, at least for the most part,
issue out at the latent Pores of the Membranes that invest the Lungs; which
membranes may be looked upon as external parts of the Body, in reference to the
air, tho not in reference to our sight. But, to return to our Eggs, we may
safely allow a very great evacuation to be made at the Pores of the skin in
man, who is a sanguineous and hot Animal, since we see that even Eggs, that are
still actually cold, transpire. And I elsewhere mention the copious
transpiration even of Frogs, that are always cold to the touch; and the
Decrement in weight of some Animals, soon after they are strangled or
suffocated, when, their vital Heat being extinct, no more fumes are emitted by
expirations at the Windpipe: To which signs may be added the trivial
experiment of holding in warm weather the palp of ones Finger, as near as one
can without contact, to some cold and solid smooth body, as to a piece of
polished Steel or Silver; for you will often times see this Body presently
sullyed or overcast, with the invisible steams that issue out of the Pores of
the Finger, and are by the cold and smooth surface of the Body condensed into
visible steams, that do as 'twere cloud that surface, but upon the Removal of
the Finger, quickly fly off, and leave it bright again.

The Perviousness of the skin outward may not improbably be argued from the
quickness wherewith some Medicines take away some black and blew Discolorations
of the skin, that happen upon some lighter stroke, or other contusions. For,
since these preternatural and unsightly colors are wont by Physicians to be
imputed to some small portions of blood, that upon the contusion is forced out
of the capillary vessels that lie beneath the surface of it, and being
extravasated are obliged to stagnate there; it seems very likely, that if a
powerful Medicine do quickly remove the discoloration, that work is performed
by attenuating, and dissolving, and agitating the matter, and disposing it to
transpire through the cutaneous Pores, though perhaps, when it is thus changed,
some part of it may be imbibed again by the Capillary Vessels, and so by the
circulation carried into the mass of Blood. Now, that there are Medicines that
will speedily work upon such black and blew marks, the Books and Practice of
Physicians and Surgeons will oblige us to admit. Helmont talks much of the
great virtue of white Briony root in such cases. And a notable Experiment made
a while ago by a Learned acquaintance of mine in an odd case, did not give
Helmont the Lie. And I know an eminent Person, who having some while since
received a stroke, by a kick of an Horse, on his Leg, a very threatening
contusion, which made the part look black and frightful, he was in a few hours
cured of the pain of the hurt, and freed from the black part of the
Discoloration by the bare application of the chopped leaves of Hissop mixed with
fresh Butter into the form of a Pultess.

Nor is it only the Skin that covers the visible parts of the Body that we judge
to be thus porous, but in the Membranes that invest the internal parts, we may
reasonably suppose both numerous and very various Pores, according to the
exigency of their peculiar and different Functions or Offices. For, the two
first causes of Porosity mentioned in this Essay, are as well applicable to the
Membranes that cover the internal parts, as the Liver, the Spleen, etc. as to
the external Skin, or Membrane that covers the Limbs; and in some respects the
transpiration through such Pores seems more advantaged, than that through the
Pores of the surface of the Body; since the parts that environ the Spleen,
Liver, Kidneys, etc. in man, are hot in comparison of the ambient Air, and
being also wet, which the Air is not, the laxity of the Pores of the internal
parts is doubly befriended. And perhaps it may be allowable to conceive, both
the Skin that covers the Limbs, and the Membranes that invest the internal
parts of the Body, to be like worsted stockings, Wast-Coats, etc. Which in
their ordinary state have a kind of continuity, but upon occasion can have
their Pores every way enlarged and stretched, in this or that manner, as the
Agents that work on them determine them to be. This may be confirmed, by what
we manifestly see in the finer sort of leather, as that of Kid or Lamb, and by
the latent Pores that may be opened in Sheeps-Leather, and man's Leather, by the
pressure of included Quicksilver.

This Porosity of a living man's Skin and other Membranes, though internal ones,
will the more easily be assented to if it appear that such thick and gross
Membranes, as the urinary bladders of dead Animals, are Porous and Penetrable
even by Water. This we tried, by putting some salt of Tartar in a clean well
dried bladder (which ought to be afterward tied up close in the neck, lest the
effect should be ascribed to the moist Air) and leaving the lower part of the
bladder, as far as the Salt, reached immersed in common Water, whose particles
by degrees insinuated themselves into the Pores of the bladder, in plenty
enough to resolve the Salt of Tartar into a liquor. And, that it may not be
said that the Acrimony of the Salt, by fretting the bladder, made way for the
Corpuscles of the Water, I shall add that the Experiment succeeded, but much
more slowly, when we tried it with Sugar instead of Salt of Tartar. And there
are some, who pretend that certain Syrups made this slovenly way, which they
would have pass for a secret, are very much preferable to those made of common
Water.

That the films that line the shells of Eggs are of a very close Contexture
seems probable, as by other things, so by their resisting some liquors, sharp
enough to corrode the shell, and yet that such Membranes are pervious to
Liquors that are none of the most subtle of all, we found by the ensuing
Experiment. This was made by taking an ordinary Hens Egg, and keeping it for
two or three days in distilled Vinegar, or in strong crude Vinegar. For then
taking it out of the Liquor and wiping it well, it was visibly, and not
inconsiderably, swelled, which I concluded to be from the ingress of some
particles of the liquors, at the Pores of the Skins that invest the White of
the Egg. For we found nothing broken, though we made the Trial more than once.
And to be satisfied that the manifest expansion proceeded from some other
cause, than the mere dilatation of the White, or Yolk, or both, we compared the
weight of the Egg, after it was taken out and well wiped, with that which had
been taken before 'twas put into the Menstruum, and found the Egg,
notwithstanding the loss of the Shell, to be considerably heavier than 'twas
before its immersion.

I shall add on this occasion that by a more unlikely way than that newly
recited, both the Egg, Shell and Lining of an Egg, may be penetrated. For,
notwithstanding the fine and close contexture of the Membranes that invest the
Eggs, the Chinese have a way of Salting them in the shell, as I have been
assured both by English and Dutch Merchants trading to the East Indies. And in
one of the Dutch Journals sent by the Council of Batavia to their Principals in
Holland, and intercepted by an English man of War, I met with diverse accounts
of great numbers of salted Eggs, that were such or such a day of such a Month
brought in by Sea to Batavia or other Ports. Long after which time, meeting
with an ingenious Physician, that lived in Batavia, I learned by enquiry from
him, that it is very true that such Eggs are frequently met with in those parts;
he having diverse times eaten of them there: some that he judged to have been
either boiled or roasted, before they were salted; and others that were raw,
when they came to be dressed for him, but yet retained a Briny taste. And,
though the Merchants I enquired of could not tell me what way the Chinese
employed to Salt their Eggs, without making them unfit for common use, yet by a
trial made with clay and Brine, in which I kept the Eggs for a competent time,
I was persuaded that 'twas possible the Chinese should have the Art ascribed
to them. For upon the breaking of an Egg coated with clay, after it had lain
for a competent time in Brine, I found its Taste considerably Salt, but was, by
I know not what accident, hindered from prosecuting the Experiment, and
endeavoring to make it more practicable and useful.

I knew a Physician of more learning than virtue, who, being tormented with a
violent and obstinate Colic of a peculiar kind, was wont to relieve himself by
Clisters of Sack; tho he usually found that not long after he had taken any of
them, they would make him giddy, and fuddle him, as he himself confessed to me.
But upon this Instance I lay not much weight, and less upon what was answered
me by a great Surgeon, who having practiced his Art in the West Indies, and
being asked by me whether he had not dressed Wounds and Ulcers with the recent
juice of Tobacco (a plant I use to keep growing in my Garden for its excellent
virtues in cuts, burns, and tumors;) and whether, if he employed it, he did not
find it emetick, he told me among other things, that having Diverse times
dressed with this Juice a small Ulcer in a Woman's leg, the patient soon after
the application would grow sick, and have her stomach turned, or actually
vomit. But, as I was saying, on this instance I lay no stress, because the
Corpuscles of the Tobacco might probably enough get in at the small Orifices of
some corroded Vessels, and so be conveyed inwards, rather by the help of the
Circulation of the blood, than on the account of the Porousness of the Parts.
And therefore I shall rather mention what has been related to me, by an eminent
Physician of the famous College of London, namely, that he had diverse times
given himself a vomit, by a certain application of decocted Tobacco to his
wrists, and some other external parts; which brings into my mind, what is
affirmed to have been observed in some Children that have scabb'd Heads, who
have been made Drunk, by the application of Clothes or spunges wetted in
Infusion of Tobacco, or of strong Liquors, and applied to the part affected.
Though in this case the inebriating Particles may be suspected to have got in,
not at the mere Pores, but rather at the Orifices of the Capillary Vessels,
that were made accessible by such little solutions of Continuity, as are seldom
wanting in scabbed Heads.

That Children may be purged by outward applications is asserted by some
Physicians; and an experienced Person of that number has affirmed to me, that
he can almost constantly do it by a Plaster. But it is more considerable what
was related to me by an eminent Virtuoso, who being indisposed to believe such
things a while before he told me the story, was desired by a curious Person to
show him his Hand which the Relator having done the other took it in his hand,
which was moistened (as was afterward confessed) with a kind of subtle
Chemical Oil, but so slightly, that the Relator scarce minded it, till some
time after when he found himself pressed with a motion, like that which a purge
would have given him; for the other thereupon smiling, my acquaintance began to
suspect what the matter might be, and was in a short time purged four times,
without griping, or other pain or discomposure. But to return to the Porousness
of Membranes, it may serve to make way for your admitting it, to observe, that
though Lute-strings be but Ropes of Fibers (which are at least the chief parts
that Membranes consist of) dead, cold and stiff, yet when the lute is in tune
they will sometimes in wet weather swell so forcibly as with noise and violence
to break, which proceeds from the copious ingress of moist vapors into their
Pores, whereby they are not only shortened, but as I have tried in nice scales,
made manifestly heavier.

The Porosity of the internal parts of Animals by both the forementioned ways (
viz. of emission and reception of Corpuscles,) may be confirmed by the things
that happen in some of the Metastases or Translations (as the Physicians call
them) of the morbifick matter in diseased Bodies. It Is known to them that are
any thing conversant with Hospitals, or the observations of Physicians, that
there do not seldom occur in Diseases sudden Removes of the matter that caused
them, from one part to another according to the nature and functions of which,
there may emerge a new Disease, more or less dangerous than the former, as the
invaded part is more or less noble. Thus oftentimes the matter, which in the
sanguiferous Vessels produced a Fever, being discharged upon some internal
parts of the Head, produces a Delirium or Phrenitis; in the latter of which I
have somewhat wondered, to see the Patients Water so like that of a Person
without a Fever; the same Febrile matter either by a deviation of Nature, or
medicines improper or unskillfully given, is discharged sometimes upon the
Pleura, or Membrane that lines the sides of the Chest; sometimes upon the
throat; sometimes upon the Guts; and causes in the first case a Pleurisy, in
the 2d a Squinancy, and in the third a Flux, for the most part dysenterical.
But, because I suppose, that many, if not most, of these translations of
peccant humors, are made by the help of the circulation of the Blood, I forbore
at the beginning of this Section to speak in general terms, when I mentioned
them in reference to the Porousness of the internal parts of the Body, and
contented my self to intimate, that some of them may serve to confirm that
Porosity.

This will not perhaps seem improbable, if we consider that it is in effect
already proved, by the same arguments by which we have shown, that both the
Skin and the internal Membranes are furnished with Pores, Permeable by
Particles whose Shape and Size are correspondent to them. For we may thence
probably deduce, that when a morbifick matter, whether in the form of Liquor,
or of exhalations, chances to have Corpuscles suited to the Pores of this or
that part of the Body, it may, by a concourse of Circumstances, be determined
to invade it, and so dislodge from its former receptacle, and excite Disorders
in the part it removes to.

CHAP. IV.
ANother thing whence the Porosity of Animals may be argued* is, their taking
in of Effluvia from without. For these cannot get into the internal parts of
the Body, to perform their operations there, without penetrating the Skin, and
consequently entering the Pores of it.

Now, That things, outwardly applied to the Body, may without wounding the
Skin, be conveyed to the internal parts, there are many things that argue.

And first, it has been observed in some Persons, (for all are not equally
disposed to admit the action of particular Poisons) that Cantharides, being
externally applied by Chyrurgions or Physicians, may soon, and before they
break the Skin, produce great disorders in the Urinary Passages, and sometimes
cause bloody Water. And I remember, that having once had a blistering Plaster,
applied by a skilful Chyrurgion between my shoulders, though I knew not that
there were any Cantharides at all mixed with the other Ingredients, yet it gave
me about the neck of my Bladder one of the sensiblest pains I had ever felt,
and forced me to send for help at a very unseasonable time of night.

The Porousness of the Skin may be also argued from diverse of the effects even
of Milder Plasters. For, though some Plasters may operate as they closely
stick to the Skin, and hinder Perspiration from within, and fence the part from
the external cold; yet, twill scarce be denied, that many of them have notable
effects upon other accounts, whereof none is so likely and considerable as the
copious ingress of the Corpuscles of the Plaster, that enter at the Pores of
the Skin, and being once got in, act according to their respective Natures and
Virtues. The like may be said of Ointments, whose operations, especially on
Children (whose Skin is ordinarily more soft and lax) are sometimes very
notable. And I have known considerable things performed by them, in an internal
Disease of grown men, where I should scarce have expected a Vegetable Ointment
should perform so much: I say, a Vegetable Ointment, for it is vulgarly known
that by Mercurial Ointments Salivation may be excited; and sometimes, against
the Physicians will, the Corpuscles of the Quick Silver get so far into the
Body, that he is not able to get them out again.

What we lately said of Plasters, may be applied to those that Physicians call
Pericarpia, or Wrist-bands: The better sort of which, though sometimes
ineffectual, are oftentimes successful in stopping Fits of Agues, as I have
frequently found in a mixture, elsewhere mentioned, of Currants, Hops, Baysalt
well beaten together, by which, by Gods blessing, many, and I among others,
have been freed from simple Tertians, and either double Tertians or Quotidians.

The Argument of the Porosity of Animals, drawn from those things that get in
through their skins, without breaking or wounding them, may be much
strengthened, if it can be made appear, that those Physicians do not deceive us,
who ascribe sensible Operations and Virtues, to things externally applied, in
so loose a way, that they do not so much as stick to the Skin, or perhaps
immediately touch it; such as some call Periapta and Appensa; diverse of which
are best known among us, by the name of Amulets; such as are the Quills
containing Quicksilver or Arsenick, that some hang about their necks, and wear
under their Shirts, against the Plague and other Contagious Diseases; and the
Bloodstones that others wear against Haemorrhages; and the stone which the
Women use in the East Indies, for a quite contrary effect, in Obstructione
Mensium. That many of these external Medicines, answer not the promises of
those that extol them, having some of them no sensible operation at all, and
others no considerable one, experience has assured judicious observers; but
that some of them, especially on some Patients, may have considerable, not to
say admirable, operations, I confess my self by other motives, as well as
Authority, to be persuaded. Having been one summer frequently subject to bleed
at the Nose, and reduced to employ several remedies to check that distemper;
that which I found the most effectual to stanch the blood, was some moss of a
dead man's Scull (sent for a present out of Ireland where it is far less rare
than in most other Countries) though it did but touch my skin till the herb was
a little warmed by it. And though I remember not that I have known any great
matter done to stop Haemorrhagies by the bare outward application of other
Blood-stones; yet of one that looked almost like an Agate, I admired the
effects, especially upon a young and extraordinarily Sanguin person. To which I
shall add a memorable thing, If one would see this passage at large he may find
it at the end of the Essay.
communicated to the experienced Zwelfer by the chief Physician of the States
of Moravia. For this learned man whom he extols for a great Physician and
Philosopher; assures him, that having prepared some Trochischs of Toads
according to Helmonts way, (which I remember I also was solicitous to prepare,
but had not occasion to make trial of their virtue,) he not only found, that
being worn as Amulets they preserved him and all his Domestics, and Friends,
from the Plague (though he daily visited the infected) but that having caused
these Trochischs to be put upon the Plague sores of several persons, none of
them died, but the venom of the pestilential Carbuncles was thereby so weakened
that the ulcers were afterward easily cured by vulgar remedies.

And now, as to the difficulty, which I acknowledge not to be small, to
conceive how Bodies actually cold can emit Effluvia, capable of penetrating
(without moistening it) a Membrane of so close a Contexture as a man's Skin; I
suppose it will be much lessened in the objectors opinion, by what he will meet
with hereafter about the Pores of Bodies, and the Figures of Corpuscles. For
supposing these to be congruous, it will not seem incredible, that the Effluvia
of Amulets should in tract of time get passage through the Pores of the Skin of
a Living Body. And to make this the more probable, I will give an Instance in
the Skin of a dead Animal. And, because this requires a Liquor I much employ in
these trials about Porology, though I have many years since in another Tract
taught how to make it for another purpose; yet I shall here repeat, that it is
made by exactly mingling Flower of Brimstone, powdered Sal Ammoniac and good
Quicklime in equal quantities, save that, if the Quicklime be not very dry and
good, a fourth or fifth part must be superadded, for these being nimbly mixed,
and distilled by degrees of Fire in a Retort, till the Sand be at length
brought to be almost red hot, there will come over a smoking Spirit, which
must be kept very carefully stopped, and which for distinctions sake, I also use
to call, The Permeating Menstruum or Liquor, and its expirations the Penetrant,
or Permeating Fumes.

And now you will easily understand the experiment I was about to mention,
which was this; We took a very clean piece of polished Copper, in want of which
one of silver will serve the turn, and having lapt it up in a piece of either
Lambs or sheeps Leather, so that it was every way enclosed, we then held it
over the Orifice of the Vial that contained the Spirit, at a pretty distance
from the Liquor, whose fumes nevertheless did quickly, (perhaps in a minute of
an hour or less) pervade the Pores of the Leather, and operate upon the
included metal as appeared by the deep and lasting tincture it had given to the
lower surface of it, though the interposed Leather it self was not deprived of
its whiteness, nor at all sensibly discolored; however it smelt of the
Sulplureous steams that had invaded it. And, if I misremember not, the same
Experiment succeeded, though somewhat more slowly, when a double Leather was
interposed between the fumes and a new piece of Copper coin. This will be
thought the less strange, when I shall come to some other Instances of the
Penetrancy of these Spirits. In the mean while I leave it to be considered,
whether this may not suggest some conjecture at that strange Phoenomenon, which
is recorded by Authors of good repute, That sometimes in great Thunders the
Lightening, among other operations, has been found to have manifestly
discolored men's money, without burning the Purses or Pockets wherein it lay.
For in our experiment, the steams that in a trice pervaded the Leather, the
most usual matter whereof Purses are made, were sulphurous, as the smell
argues, that those which accompany the Fulmen are wont to be; and whereas
these, when they invade Bodies, are usually very hot, ours operated when the
Liquor that emitted them was actually cold. And if it be said, that sometimes
their money has been found discolored in their Pockets, who were not struck, by
the Fulmen, but had it only pass near them, it may be objected, that tho the
entire Body, whether fluid or solid, if there be any of this latter kind that
is in Latin called Fulmen (for our English word, Thunderbolt seems not so
applicable to a fluid) did not touch them, yet it might scatter steams enough
round about it, to cause the Phoenomenon. For confirmation of which I shall
take notice, that a considerable Person of my acquaintance, having had the
Curiosity to ascend a burning mountain in America, till the sulphurous steams
grew too offensive to him, he told me that, among other operations he observed
them to have upon him, one was, that he found the money he had about him turned
of a black and dirty color, such as I have observed our sulphurous steams
often give both to Copper, and to Silver Coins. But whether or no our Spirits
will justify the conjecture, they invited me to mention, at least their so
easily pervading the Skin of a dead Animal may make it probable, that the Skin
of a Living man may be easily penetrated by external steams whose approach the
Eye does not perceive, and whose operations, though not inconsiderable, may
therefore be unsuspected. I leave to Physicians to consider, what use may be
made of this observation, in reference to the propagation of contagious
Diseases, by the contact of infected Air, distinct from the Respiration of it,
and by the penetration of the steams, that issuing from diverse Bodies invade
the Skin, and may perhaps be capable of operations, either hurtful or friendly,
that are not usually suspected to proceed from such causes, and are therefore
misascribed to others. And on this occasion it will not be impertinent to add,
that by hanging up sheeps Leather or Lambs Leather in the free Air, the vapors
of it would so insinuate themselves into the Pores in wet weather, that a
moderate degree of moisture in the Air would add to it a not inconsiderable
weight, of which dry weather, whether hot or cold, would deprive it.

CHAP. V.
I Must not in this place omit some Instances, very proper to manifest the
Penetrableness of Membranes to Fumes themselves, if they be subtle enough for
their Pores, or correspondent enough to them.

Among the observations published by Physicians I have met with some by which
it appears that Cantharides may have great Effects upon the internal Parts of
the Body, though they do not so much as touch the Skin, but are placed at some
distance from it, Schenkii Observationum Lib. 7. Obs. 37.
so that their Effluvia must be transmitted through other Bodies before they
can penetrate that. The learned Michael Paschalius mentions a Chyrurgion, who
was twice brought to void much Blood with his Urine, by some Spanish Flies that
he carried about in a Purse or Bag. And another Doctor of note relates of
another person that came to complain to him, that he pissed Blood, having
carried about with him Cantharides, though in his Pocket, and adds, that a like
Case was recounted to him by Helidaeus, whom he calls an eminent Bolognian
Physician.

We see, that in Linen Cloth, the finer and more slender the threads are the
closer and less Porous, coeteris paribus, the Linen is: By analogy to which
one may esteem the thin film that lines the shell of an Egg, to be of an
exceeding close Contexture; and yet that even this film is not impervious to
some Fumes, I have found by the following Trial.

To make this, we slowly and warily picked off a sufficient part of the Shell
of a Hens Egg, from the Skin that lay just beneath it, and is wont to stick so
close to it, that their separation, without injuring the Membrane, is not easy.
In this Skin, being wiped, we wrapped up a flat piece of Copper, whose surface
was made bright, that the change of Color might be the better seen; and having
kept this covered bit of Plate, over the Fumes of our smoking Liquor lately
mentioned for a minute or two by our ghess we unfolded the Skin, and found, as
we expected, that the lower surface of the Copper which was it that had been
held over the Fumes, was turned of a very dark color, which manifested that
even so fine and closely contexed a Membrane was not only, as we have formerly
shown, penetrable by Liquors, but readily pervious to our sulphurous
exhalations, tho these were probably but faintly emitted, since the Liquor they
came from was then actually cold. But in making the Trial it is fit to hold (as
we did in that newly recited) the Membrane against the light, to see if it be
entire, and have escaped all those little lacerations that are hardly avoidable
in severing it from the Shell it sticks so close to. If this caution be
neglected, it is easy to be imposed on, by overlooking some little holes, that
are not easily discerned when one looks down upon the Skin, and yet may be
sufficient to make the Experiment deceitful. But, tho when it is well made, it
is a notable confirmation of the Doctrine endeavored to be established in this
Paper, yet I shall now subjoyn a more considerable Instance to the same purpose.

The Porousness of the Internal Membranes of the Body, will be more easily
granted, if it be considered that either the Liquors, or the moist Exhalations,
whose Action is promoted by the Natural Heat of the Parts, keeps them
constantly wet or moist, and thereby renders them more lax, and more penetrable
by subtle Spirits or other Corpuscles. In favor of this Reflection I made the
following Experiment. We took a piece of a dried Urinary Bladder, which was
judged to have been a Calves; and having lapt it about a new piece of Silver
Coin, so that the Bladder was single where it covered the lower side of the
Piece, we kept it for diverse Minutes, by guess, over the Spirituous Fumes of
our often mentioned Permeating Liquor, but could not perceive that the Coin was
thereby at all affected or ternished. Whence we concluded that the Pores of the
dry Bladder were too close and narrow* to give passage to the Expirations of
the Menstruum. But presuming that moisture would some what relax them with
another piece of the same Bladder, made limber by being a little wetted in
common Water, we lapt up another like peace of new Coin, as we had done the
former, and kept it at the same distance as before, from the Liquor, but not
for so long a time. For after about two Minutes, by guess, we removed and took
out the Piece, and, as we expected, found much of its lower surface (that
regarded the Liquor) deeply discolored. Which Experiment will not only justify
what I lately said, of the greater Laxity of moist than of dry Membranes, but
will be thought no mean confirmation of what is in this Essay delivered about
the Porosity of Membranes, since the Urinary Bladder does, as Anatomists well
know, consist of more than one Membrane, though they stick so close together,
as to appear but one to the Eye. And this Bladder was speedily penetrated by
the Fumes that our Liquor emitted in exceeding Cold and Frosty weather, though
the Bladder it self was not in the warm Body of the live Animal, but had been
so long kept dried and cold, that probably the Moisture it introduced in scarce
one minute of an Hour, could not restore it to the Laxity it had, whilst it was
a part of the living Calf.

One of the notablest Instances I ever met with, of the Porosity of the
Internal Membranes of the Humane Body, was afforded me by that British
Nobleman, of whom our famous Harvey tells a memorable, not to say matchless,
story. This Gentleman, having in his youth, by an accident which that Doctor
relates, had a great and lasting Perforation made in his Thorax, at which the
motion of his Heart could be directly perceived did not only out live the
accident, but grew a strong, and somewhat corpulent man; and so robust, as well
as Gallant, that he afterward was a Soldier, and had the honor to command a
Body of an Army for the King. This Earl of Mount-Alexander (for that was his
last Title having married one of my nearest kinswomen, and having been told
that I was very desirous to see, what I had heard such strange things of, very
obligingly came, at a fit time, to give me that satisfaction. In order to which
he removed that which covered the wide Orifice of his Hurt, and gave me the
opportunity of looking into his Thorax, and of discerning there the motions of
the Cone, as they call it, or Mucro of the Heart. But these things I mention
but upon the by, and because of the strangeness of the fact; the thing I
principally intended relates to my present argument. Having then made several
inquiries fit for my purpose, his Lordship told me, that when he did, as he was
wont to do from time to time, (though not every day) inject with a Syringe some
actually warm medicated Liquor into his Thorax, to cleanse and cherish the
Parts, he should quickly and plainly find in his Mouth the taste and smell of
the Drugs, wherewith the Liquor had been impregnated. And I further learned,
that, whereas he constantly wore upon the unclosed part of his Chest, a Silken
Quilt, stuffed with Aromatic and odoriferous Powders, to defend the
neighboring Parts and keep them warm; when he came, as he used to do after
some weeks, to employ a new Quilt, the fragrant Effluvia of it would mingle
with his breath in exspiration, and very sensibly perfume it, not, as I
declared I suspected, upon the score of the pleasing Exhalations that might get
up between his Clothes and his Body, but that got into the Organs of
Respiration, and came out with his Breath at his Mouth, as was confirmed to me
by a grave and judicious Statesman, that happened to be then present, and knew
this General very well. Other circumstances I might add, but that I dare not
trust my memory for them, and unhappily lost the Paper, wherein the oddness of
the things invited me to set them down, for fear of forgetting them.

That part of this Narrative which relates to Injections may be much confirmed
by what is delivered by Galen himself, who says that Mulsum or Honeyed Water,
being injected at the Orifice of Wounds penetrating into the cavity of the
Thorax, has been observed to be in part received into the Lungs, and discharged
out of the Aspera Arteria by coughing. And this he mentions as a known thing,
employing it as a Medium whereby to prove another.

The mention that has been made of the Porosity of Membranes, brings into my
mind what I once observed at the Dissection, made by some Physicians, and
Anatomists, of a lusty Soldier, that was hanged for I know not what crime.
This man, though otherwise young and sound, was observed to have been long
molested with what they call a short, dry Cough, which made us expect to find
something much amiss in his Lungs. But meeting with nothing there, we were at a
loss for the cause of this Cough, till coming to consider the internal part of
the Chest, we perceived something on one of the sides, by tracing of which we
discovered, that between the Pleura and the substance of the intercostal
muscles, there was lodged a certain matter, of the breadth of a Silver Crown
piece, or thereabouts, of a roundish figure, and of the consistence and almost
color of new, soft Cheese, which odd stuff was concluded to have been the
remains of some ill cured Pleurisy, and to have transmitted through the Pores
of the Pleura, though that be a very close Membrane, some noxious Effluvia,
which ever and anon irritated the Lungs into an irregular and troublesome
motion, and so produced the Cough the Malefactor had been molested with.

CHAP. VI.
I Am well aware that it is far less difficult, to prove the permeableness of
single Membranes, than that of such a Part of the Body, as seems to be an
aggregate of several parts, which in regard of their close adhesion, are looked
upon but as one part, to which, on that account, men commonly give a distinct
name. But yet there are some Phenomenon that seem to argue, that even such
compounded or resulting parts if I may so call them, are not destitute of
Pores, which whether they be not some of them the Orifices of exceeding slender
and therefore unobserved Capillary Vessels, I must not now stay to enquire.

When the cavity of the Abdomen in those Hydropical Persons that are troubled
with an Ascites, is filled with Water, or rather with a Liquor that I have
found to be much more viscous, it justly appears strange, that by an
Hydragogue, or some appropriated purging medicine, great quantities of this
gross Liquor should in a short time be carried off by Siege, and perhaps also
by Urine, though to get into the cavity of the Guts, or that of either of the
Kidneys, it seems necessary that it Permeate the Tunicles, and other component
parts, of the Viscera it gets into.

I know not whether I may on this occasion take notice of what Physicians
observe to occur now and then in Empyema's that follow ill conditioned
Pleurisies. For it has several times been observed, that upon the bursting of
such imposthumes into the cavity of the Chest, the Purulent matter has been
voided by Siege and Urine. I hesitate, as I was saying, whether I should
allege this Phenomenon, as a proof of what I now contend for, till it be
determined whether this Metastasis be made by transudation properly so called,
or by the ingress of the Pus into the imperfectly closed Orifices of the
Vessels of the Lungs; where being once admitted and mingled with the Blood they
may with this circulating Liquor arrive at the Kidneys, or any other Parts
fitted to make a secretion of this Heterogeneous matter.

But whatever be the Reason or manner of it, we find that the Lungs do
sometimes odly convey things to distant parts of the Body. And if I may here
mention a thing, cui honos praefationis est, I shall add that I have several
times observed in my self, that when I had been an actor or an assistant in the
Dissection of a living Dog, especially if his Blood or Body were rankly
Scented, I should diverse hours after plainly find that odor in the excrements
I voided by Siege.

A famous Surgeon and Anatomist relates, that one who was very ill of a
dropsy, judged to arise from a Scirrhus of the Spleen, coming to ask his
counsel and assistance, though he judged the patients case desperate, yet to
content him, he ordered him to dip a very large Sponge in good Quicklime-Water,
and having squeezed out the superfluous Liquor, to bind it upon the region of
the Spleen, only shifting it from time to time. He adds, that after some months
he was much surprised to receive a visit from this Patient, with solemn thanks
for his recovery; the outward Medicine having, it seems, resolved the Scirrhus
and concurred with nature to evacuate the hydropical humor. For the resolution
of which hard tumor it seems necessary, that the sanative Corpuscles of the
external remedy should at length penetrate, not only the Epidermis, and the
true Cutis, but the Muscles themselves of the Abdomen, and some other
interposed parts.

These instances may be strengthened by an eminent observation of Galen, who
takes notice that Bones being sometimes broken, without piercing the Skin that
covers the part they belong to, when the Callus is making, and the broken parts
of the Bone begin to be conglutinated together, a Portion of that Blood which
had flowed to the part affected is carried to the Skin and permeats that, so as
to wet and foul the Dressings or Bandages that are kept upon the limb affected
by the Fracture.

CHAP. VII.
BOnes, Horns, and parts of the like Substance, being those that are granted to
be the most solid of the Bodies of Animals, I come in the last place to show by
particular Experiments that these also have their Pores. I say, by particular
Experiments, because in a general way, their Porosity has been already proved,
by the same Arguments, from their original Texture, Nutrition, Augmentation,
etc. That have been employed to manifest the Porousness of Animal substances in
general.

That the Nails of men, as well as their Skins, are Porous, may be gathered
from their being easily and permanently tinged with diverse metalline solutions,
and particularly with those of silver in Aquafortis, and Gold in Aqua Regia;
the former of which solutions though cold, will but too easily tinge the Skin
and Nails it chances to touch, and makes some little stay upon, with a dark and
blackish color; which I found not that I could wash out with water, or, even
with a far more penetrating and abstersive liquor. The like durableness I found
in the Purple spots, that I sometimes purposely made on my Nails, by letting
some little drops of the solution of Gold in Aqua Regia dry upon them, which I
now and then did, to observe the way of the Nails growth. For if the stain were
made near the root of the nail, it would be still, though very slowly, thrust
on by the new matter, till after some weeks it arrived to the further end of
the Nail, and was fit to be pared off with it. But this only upon the by. It Is
more to our purpose to take notice, that, though the Menstruums employed in the
recited Experiments be of themselves very acid and corrosive, yet they are so
changed by the metals they have dissolved, that they are Acid no more, the
solution of Silver being rather extremely bitter, and that of Gold of a kind of
Stiptic taste, almost like that which sloes, growing in the hedges, are wont to
be of.

Ivory is a thing too well known to need to be described. And, since it is
generally looked upon (for I have had no opportunity to compare it with the
Bones) as the solidest part of the vastest of Terestrial Animals, Experiments
proving its porosity, will be strong presumptions for that of the hardest parts
of other Animals. And the Porousness of Ivory may be argued from the several
ways of dying it with permanent colors. For in these colorations the Tinctures
that make them, must penetrate into, and be lodged in the Substance of the
Ivory, especially when the Substance remains smooth and glassy, as I have
diverse times made it do, when I employed fit Menstruums and Metalline Pigments.
The solution I formerly mentioned of Silver in Aqua fortis, being laid upon
Ivory, will soon give it a dark and blackish stain, which is not, that I have
found, to be washed off. I remember also that I many years since taught some
ingenious artificers, to adorn Ivory with a fine purple color, by moistening
it with, and suffering leisurely to dry on it, a solution of Gold made in Aqua
Regia. And if occasion required, allayed with water, nor needs either of these
solutions be applied hot, any more than the Ivory needs to be heated. Both
which circumstances favor the Porousness of the solid Body.

Copper dissolved in Aqua fortis stains Ivory with a bluish color, as I have
sometimes seen in the hafts of knifes, about whose coloration nevertheless
another way is also employed. But I remember that without making use of any
Acid or Corrosive Menstruum, I have even in the cold stained Ivory, with a fine
and permanent blew, like a Turquois, by suffering to dry upon it as deep a
solution as I could make of Crude Copper, in an urinous Spirit, as that of Sal
Armoniack.

But now to return to Bones, their growth in all their dimensions, does, as I
lately noted, argue their Porosity and the marrow that is found in the great
hollow Bones, whether it nourish them or no, must it self be supplied by some
alimental juice, that soaks or otherways penetrates, into the cavities that
contain it.

Nor does it seem at all improbable, that Blood it self may through small
Vessels be conveyed into the very substance of the Bone, so as that the Vessels
reach at least a little way in it, though perhaps the Liquor they carry may
afterward by Imbibition be brought to the more internal parts of the Bone. For
not to urge that we manifestly see, that on each side of the lower Jaw, Nature
has been careful to perforate the Bones and make a Channel in the substance of
it; which Channel receives not only a larger Nerve but a Vein, and Artery to
bring in and carry back Blood for the nourishment of the Teeth, by distinct
Sprigs sent from the great branch to the particular Teeth. Not to urge this, I
say, (which I mention but to show that the opinion lately proposed is agreeable
to a known practice of Nature) I have been assured by eminent Anatomists, whom
I purposely consulted, that they have observed Blood Vessels to enter a great
way into the substance of the larger Bones. And one of them affirmed, that he
had traced a Vessel even to the great Cavity of the Bone. Which I the less
scrupled to admit, because it has been observed, that in younger Animals the
Cavity is in great part furnished with Blood* as well as Marrow, and in those
larger Pores, whereof many are found in the more Spongy Substance of diverse
Bones, Blood has been observed to have been lodged, as also in the spongy part
of the Skull, that lies between the two Tables, as I have been assured by
Skilful Eyewitnesses.

The blackness also, that Bones acquire when put into a competent heat, and a
peculiar kind of fatness which they may by heat be made to afford, show that
they harbor, even in their internal parts, store of Unctuous Particles,
separable from the solid substance, (which still retains its shape and
continues solid) in whose Pores they may thereby be argued to have been lodged.
The Lightness of Bones, even when their Cavity is accessible to (Air and)
Water, is also a great sign of their Porosity. And so is their being corroded
by tinging liquors, if they be penetrative and well applied. I know not whether
I should add on this occasion, that having taken calcined and pulverized Bones,
such as we use to make our Cupels of, and, after having given them a good heat,
kept them for some time in the Air, but in a well covered place; I found the
imbibed moisture of the Air to have manifestly increased their weight; and that
I also observed in a curious Skeleton, where the Bones were kept together by
wires, instead of other Ligaments, that though I kept it in a well covered
place, not far from a Kitchen Fire, yet in very moist weather the Bones seemed
to swell, since those joints that were easy to be bent, in dry weather, and
that after several manners, would grow stiff and refractory, and indisposed to
be put into such motions, when the weather was considerably wet. These
particulars (as I was saying) I am somewhat doubtful whether I should here
insert, because one may suspect the Phenomenon may proceed rather from somewhat
else, than the imbibed moisture of the Air; and yet I would not omit to
mention these observations, because I do not yet see any cause to which they
may more probably (or indeed so probably) be assigned.

And on this occasion I shall subjoyn some observations made on large and solid
Ox Bones, which in one of my Note Books I find thus registered. Nov. 15. We
weighed two [entire or unbroken] Marrow Bones, and found the one to weigh xxix
+ ss, and the other xxiv + iv + 30 gr. Nov. 24. The former weighed xxix + vi,
and the latter xxv + i + 30 gr. December. 28. the former weighed xxix + iij. 55
gr. and the latter xxiv + vii. + 39 gr. June 7th of the following year, the
former weighed xxix + ii. And the latter xxiv + vii. By which observations
purposely made at differing times of the year, and in very good scales, it
seems that Bones do plentifully enough imbibe the Exhalations of the Air, and
emit them again, together with some of their own, according as the ambient
happens to be disposed. And these alterations argue the Bones to abound with
Pores, since the external steams must have Pores to receive them, and the
Effluvia must upon their recess leave Pores behind them.

I confess that to think (as with some Anatomists I lately seemed to do) that
Bones themselves admit into their substance, Vessels capable of conveying a
nutritive Liquor, we must suppose those Vessels extremely slender. But that
it is not only possible but somewhat credible, there may be such, I am induced
to think, by what is known to happen in that disease, which from the Country it
most infests is called the Plica Polonica. For, tho one would think that the
hairs of men are much too slender, to have cavities in them capable of visible
Liquors; and though I have found it very difficult, even with a good
Microscope, to perceive any cavities in the hair of a man transversly cut; yet
not only some other writers of good note, but the Judicious Sennertus himself
deliver, that in this disease (of which he particularly treats) it has been
observed, that if the Patients cause their entangled hair to be cut, as they
sometimes do, by reason of its nastiness or unsightliness, they are not only
thereby endangered, but sometimes the single hairs will actually bleed, where
the ends have been cut off; so that so thick a Liquor as Blood may be conveyed
through Vessels, that can at most be but in a proper sense Capillary and must
be far less than hairs, if their Perforations be like those by which many
Plants have their nourishment conveyed to them, or such as are obvious in
diverse Canes, which being cut quite through transversly, discover a multitude
of distinct Pores, that by some Experiments one may be induced to guess, reach
all along, and make the Cane like a Cylindrical Bundle of Minute Pipes; or
rather a multitude of small cavities, that perforate from end to end the
Parenchyma, or Substance analogous to it, that gives them stability. And for
the present this sort of Vessels seem to me, the more likely to be those that
convey the Blood to the extreme Parts of the Hair, because even in Horse hairs,
which yet are nourished and grow, I am not yet sure, that I have discovered
with my Microscopes any cavity, and therefore suspect there may be diverse
imperceptible ones, for the Hair is nourished and grows, which it is not like
it should do if the Body were solid; and if there were but a single cavity in
it, as in the lower part of a Quill, it is like the Microscope I used would have
discovered it, since with one much inferior I could easily see, that several
little short Hairs, that grow upon the Animal that yields Musk, had each of
them a cavity in it like that of the lower part of a Quill.

To the things that have already been said about the Porosity of Bones, I shall
now add an observation of a very learned Physician, that is very remarkable to
our present purpose, because it argues, that even Bodies not saline, nor
actually moist, may from without get into the Pores and Cavities of Humane
Bones. Diverse Physicians have complained of the mischiefs done to the Bones by
Mercury, employed to salivate in Venereal Diseases. Whereof I remember I have
read a very notable Instance, in a learned Book (which I have not now by me) of
an eminent Roman Professor of Physic, who had the opportunity of making
several curious observations in the famous Hospital of the Incurabili at Rome;
and is therefore the more to be credited; where he relates, that in the Cavity
of at least one Pocky-mans Bones, there was found real Quicksilver that had
penetrated thither. And this brings into my mind a memorable observation of an
ancient and experienced Physician, who being famous for the cure of Venereal
Diseases, was asked by me, what Instances he had found of the Penetration of
Quicksilver, either outwardly or inwardly administered, into the Bones of men?
To this he answered, that he could not say he had himself taken notice of any
Quicksilver, in the Cavities of greater Bones, but that some other
Practitioners had told him, that they had met with such Instances, as I
enquired after. But for himself, he only remembered that a Patient, who had been
terribly fluxed with mercurial Inunctions, coming afterward to have one of the
Grinders of his lower Jaw pulled out, because of the raging pain it had long
put him to; my Relater had the curiosity to view narrowly this great Tooth, and
found, to his wonder, a little drop of true Mercury in that slender Cavity of
the Root, that admits the small Vessels which convey nourishment and sense to
the Tooth, in more than one of whose three Roots he affirmed to me that he
found true, though but exceeding little, Quicksilver. But a full Testimony to
my present purpose is afforded me by the experienced Physician Eustachius
Rudius, who relates, Eustach. Rudius (apud Sennertum) lib. 5. de morbis acutis
cap. 15.
that he saw himself, and that others also observed, some Bodies dissected, of
those that had been anointed for the Venereal Pox, in the Cavities of whose
Bones no small quantity of Quick Silver was got together, (which yet (to add
that upon the by) he says, did not hinder some of them from living many years,
surviving those Inunctions.)

CHAP. VIII.
I Am not ignorant that, among the Particulars laid together in the foregoing
Essay, there are some that are not absolutely necessary, to prove the
Porousness of the Bodies of Animals. But I thought it not impertinent to
mention them, because I hoped that they, in conjunction with the rest, may be
of some use to Naturalists, in giving an account of several things that pass in
a Humane Body, whether sound or sick, especially if it be of a Topical disease,
and may remove, or much lessen that great Prejudice, that makes many (and some
of them otherwise learned) Physicians despise the use of all Amulets,
Pericarpia, and other external Medicines in Distempers of the Inward parts,
upon a confident, but not well grounded supposition, that these Remedies
immediately touching but the outside of the Skin, cannot exercise any
considerable operations upon the internal parts of the Body.

But though I have thus acknowledged some Passages of the foregoing Essay to be
supernumerary, yet I must not dismiss it without intimating that I might from
one Topic more have fetched a probable, though not a demonstrative argument,
in favor of the Porousness of Animals. For this may be very probably argued
from hence, that even Inanimate, Solid and Ponderous Bodies, that in all
likelihood must be of a far closer Texture than the living Bodies of Animals
(whose various Functions require a greater number and diversity of Pores in
their differing Organs) are not devoid of Pores, and have some of them very
numerous ones, as will be sufficiently made out in the following Essay, to
which I shall therefore hasten.

N. B. The following Paper is that which is referred to in the 35th Page of this
Essay.
Pharmacopoeiae Regiae classis xiii. pa. 614.615.
Hujus rei veritatem comprobat Doctissimus ac celeberrimus Medicus and
Philosophus D. Johannes Chrysostomus Irmbler, Statuum Moraviae Marchionatus
Protomedicus, his verbis ad me scribens: Et revera paravi ego, Anno M. DCLV,
quo tempore inter Infectos versabar quotidie, Trochiscos Bufonios, eosque ut
caetera Helmontii, indefessi veritatis indagandae, and ex puteo Opinionum
veterum nostram credulitatem excaecantium eruendae, nati Philosophi,
experimenta suas lauds sustinere comperi: Inter, viginti autem Bufones vix
unum quidem, jucundo sane spectaculo, vidi vermiculos, per nares and oculos
egressuros, manu repellere quamdiu poterat, doxec elanguerit Bufo: sed
Trochiscos ex vermiculis una cum pulvere emo^tui bufonis, and materia per anum
(nondum vidi per vomitum;) scilicet alis, pedibus, capitibus, ventribus
Scarabaeorum viridibus, auratisve and nigris, quos bufo cum terra in escam
venatur, ejecta, cerea patina exceptis, cum Tragacantho rosato formatos,
pluribus personis super anthraces opponi feci, atque nullum eorum mortuum esse
dicere possum, sed and meorum domesticorum, ut and aliorum, quibus dedi,
amicorum nullus, quod scio, infectus est. Sic comperi non tantum hisce
Trochiscis enervari virus pestilens in Carbunculo jam admissum, ut dein
vulgaribus chirurgicis remediis ulcus facili negotio fuerit curatum, sed etiam
ad sinistram mammam ligatos, mihi meisque accursui and occursui infectorum
expositis, animositatem quandam indicibilem confer, atque ita miasmata and
effluvia pestilentialia abarcere. Hucusque Excel. Medicus Moraviae.


An Essay of the POROUSNESS OF SOLID BODIES.
CHAP. I
AS 'twill with far less difficulty be allowed, that Animals and Vegetables,
and such Bodies, as have belonged to either, abound with Pores, than that
Inanimate, Solid, and even Ponderous Bodies are not destitute of them: So it is
far less difficult to make out the former than the latter of these
Propositions. And therefore, Pyrophilus, I hope you will not expect that I
should give you as many proofs of the one, as I have of the other; however I
despair not, that those I shall present you, will appear sufficient for my
purpose, though they be not numerous enough to make me careful to marshal them
in any exact order.

Of the reasons that induce me to think that even Solid Bodies are not
destitute of Pores, there are some that have a greater Affinity with those
arguments that the Schools are wont to call a priori, because they require more
unobvious Ratiocinations upon Physical Principles, and others which resemble,
and indeed are, such proofs as are usually named a posteriori, being suggested
by the Phenomenon afforded us by experience, without the help of any difficult
Ratiocinations.

Of the First sort of Reasons I shall propose to you three; and begin with
that, which may be drawn from the Origin and Formation of diverse hard Bodies.
See the Tract of the Origin and Virtues of Gems, and the Notes about the
Mechanical production of Hardness.
For I have elsewhere endeavour^^ and I hope not unsu^cessfully, to show, both
that diverse stones, and even Gems themselves, and that several Metalline and
other Mineral Bodies, were once either visible Liquors or at least very soft
substances. And I have elsewhere proved, that both these kinds of Bodies do
consist of, (which is the case of Liquors) or abound in (which is the case of
soft and moist Bodies) minute particles of determinate Sizes and Shapes; from
whence I think one may very probably conclude, that such Gems and other Mineral
Bodies, notwithstanding any hardness they afterward come to acquire, are not
destitute of Pores, since it is no way likely, that Corpuscles of various and
very irregular Figures, such as those of most Liquors of the terrestrial Globe
are wont to be, can be so brought together, especially by chance, cold, or any
other such agents, as not to intercept little Intervals or Pores between them.

CHAP. II.
ANother thing which makes me think the Porosity of the most part even of Solid
Bodies to be great, is the consideration of the great disparity, that may be
found in the specific Gravities of such Bodies, as the Eye does not perceive
to be Porous. For, though Water be a Body of that kind, and though its parts be
so close packt together, that the attempts of Ingenious men, to make a manifest
compression of that Liquor by outward violence, have not hitherto proved
successful, yet we find, that stones, Clays, metals, and even some Woods and a
multitude of other kinds of Solids, will readily sink in Water, and by
consequence are specifically heavyer than it; which greater gravity seems not
any way explicable, without supposing, or at least so well as by supposing,
that the Corpuscles whereof such sinking Bodies consist, do either lie closer
together, or are separately more solid, than those of Water; which Liquor must
consequently be Porous, though neither the Eye, nor the great force that has
been several ways employed to compress it, can discover any Pores in it. Upon
the same ground I further conclude, that solid Stones themselves, as Marble,
Flints, etc. Are not free from Porosity. For whereas, as far as several Trials
purposely made can inform me, I have found, that such of these as have nothing
metalline in them do seldom or never reach to treble the weight of an equal
bulk of Water, they will, upon the former grounds, appear to be considerably
Porous; since the lightest metals, which are Tin and Iron, are above twice
heavier in specie, that is, the bulks being equal, than Marble, Flints,
Crystal, etc. And by the same reason I also infer the great Porosity, even of
the Solid Body of Iron, which is as well heavier, as very much harder, than
Tinn. For though Copper be a good deal more ponderous than Iron, or Steel, yet
I have diverse times found fine Gold, to be more than twice as heavy in specie
as Copper, since, whereas this Metal, whether it be European, or brought from
Japan (for of that also I made Trial) is about nine times as heavy as so much
Water; I found refined Gold to be about nineteen times as heavy as Water equal
to it in bulk. By which it seems highly probable, that so solid and heavy a
Body, as Iron or Steel it self, may be so porous, that Metalline matter equal
to it in weight may naturally be contained in much less than half the
Dimensions that Metal possesses. And that Gold it self, which is the most
comPact and solid Body we know of, is not destitute of Pores, may appear by the
Dissolution of it in Quicksilver, of which I shall speak a little below. And
if any should pretend, that hardness may be a greater argument of the
Compactness of a Body, and its immunity from Pores, than its specific weight
can be; I shall add, that though I have found that Emery, which is the Body
employed to cut steel and Load-stones and Crystal, and the most of Gems, being
indeed much harder than Marble or Flints, be far heavier than thrice its bulk
of Water; yet that ponderousness proceeds, as I else where intimate, from the
mixture of a metalline Substance, which I have separatted from it. And
Diamonds, though much harder Bodies than Emery, and indeed the hardest we know
of in nature, are so far from being, as some of late have written, the most
ponderous of Bodies, that having examined them hydrostatically, by a way
elsewhere mentioned, I found them not much heavier than either Crystal, or fine
Glass, and not half so heavy as the lightest Metals.

CHAP. III.
THe next thing, from which the Porousness of Solid Bodies, and even those that
belong to the Mineral Kingdom (as the Chemists speak) may be deduced, is the
same with the first of those from which we formerly argued the Porosity of
Substances belonging to the Animal Kingdom, namely, the very frame and
constitution of such Bodies. For the solidest Bodies themselves, resulting from
the Convention or Coalition of a great number of Particles of several bignesses
and shapes, we cannot reasonably suppose, (especially in those concretes
wherein they are not ranged by a seminal Principle) that they should be
contexed so, as to touch one another exactly every where and therefore they
must of necessity leave some little Intervals and Pores between them.

This reason will, I hope, appear clear enough of it self, to him that shall
attentively consider it, especially if he know, that it has been Geometrically
demonstrated, that there are but very few figures that will, (as they speak)
implere spatium, that is, which being adjusted to one another will so exactly
touch, that there is not the least unfilled space within the circumference or
circuit, if the figures be plain, or within the ambient Superficies, if they be
solid; so that, considering the vast variety of other Figures, which made
Epicurus and other Atomists pronounce it incomprehensible, it is very obvious to
conceive, that Corpuscles of such differing shapes being put together, will
leave multitudes of little Pores intercepted, between those parts that do not
every where touch one another. And even the Mathematical Figures lately spoken
of, may be said to fill space rather in a Geometrical than a Physical sense.
For, if such Portions of matter as are required to constitute, for instance, a
Cube, were actually put together, they would not exactly fill the space
comprehended within the ambient surface of the Body they compose, because the
component Bodies, being Physical, consist of Corpuscles of their own particular
shapes, which we never find Mathematically exquisite. As if, for example, the
Cube were of Marble, no Art could polish the sides of a component Body so, as
that they should be perfectly smoothed since (as, if I mistake not, the learned
Gassendus well observes) Emery, Pumice-stone, and even Puttee, or other Powders
that are employed to polish them, do themselves consist of little hard angular
Corpuscles, that leave small scratches, like so many little furrows, on their
surfaces, which must needs hinder the perfect contact of the whole surfaces of
two contiguous Bodies, and consequently leave here and there Intervals or
Pores, between those surfaces; to which I shall add that Marble it self as it is
Marble, abounds with internal Pores, as will ere long appear by Experience, and
as may be rationally conjectured from the Specific Levity of it, in comparison
of Gold and Lead.

CHAP. IV.
HAving dispatched the Arguments a priori, that may be employed to show the
Porousness of Solid Bodies, 'twill be now seasonable to propose some
Experiments and observations, that may (as 'twere) a posteriori either evince
or confirm the same Doctrine.

Of these Instances some relate to Solid Bodies that are of less specific
gravity some to Fossiles presumed to be devoid of Metalline parts, some to
Minerals that are thought to participate of a Metalline nature, some to Metals
themselves, and some to Glass.

To begin with the first sort of these Instances; That Wood is Porous, there
are many things that argue; some of which are elsewhere mentioned. But few
would suspect, that Quicksilver which is so unapt to enter the Pores of Bodies
much less compact, should permeate pieces of Wood of a considerable thickness;
and yet, that we have made it do by the following Experiment. We took a wooden
Trunk, such as is employed to shoot pellets at Birds, with strength enough to
kill them, and having closely stopped one end of it, we poured in Quick Silver at
the other, till it reached to a good height in the cylindrical Cavity of the
Instrument, and then the lower parts of the Metalline Liquor, being assisted by
the weight of the Incumbent ones, (not to mention that of the Air) to press
into the Pores of the Wood, they issued out at them on all sides, in great
numbers of minute drops, much after the manner of Quicksilver strained through
Leather, out of amalgams; which was a Phenomenon not unpleasant to behold. But
till I have opportunity to repeat this Experiment with differing circumstances,
I shall not think it fit to lay much stress upon it, for want of knowing, what
interest the great weight of the Quick Silver may have had in the event.

And this caution may perchance be applicable to the following Experiment,
namely, that having, by the help of my Pneumatical Engine, withdrawn the Air
from one side of a round piece of board, the Air on the opposite side, not
having its pressure any longer resisted by that which it used to meet with from
the withdrawn Air, pressed so strongly against the surface of the Wood exposed
to it, as to make it self way through the Pores of it, and get copiously enough
into the Cavity whence the other Air had been pumpt out; (the weight of the
incumbent Atmosphere doing on this occasion, what the weight of the
Quicksilver did on that last recited:) Which was a surprising spectacle to the
bystanders because the board that was thus permeated, was of strong Wood, and
of considerable thickness.

I should here subjoin several other Arguments of the Porousness of Wood, if I
could display them without more words, than I am willing to allow them; and I
presume it may here suffice, if I let you see by some surprising Effects that
when Wood is reduced to that thinness, that its closeness or Porosity may
conveniently be examined, it will easily enough give passage, even unto
visible, odorable, and tinging Corpuscles though they invade it not in the form
of a Liquor, but of dry Exhalations, so they be not incommensurate to its
Pores. This I suppose, you will not scruple to infer from the following Trials,
as they were long since set down in one of my Note-Books.

1. The Fumes of our smoking Liquor [described in the foregoing Essay] tinged
a Copper half penny, through a broad thin shaving of Dale, that did not, when
held against the window, discover any perforation; tinged it, I say, very
deeply in about a quarter of a minute and somewhat less.

2. The same Fumes tinged manifestly, but not so notably, the same half penny
first cleansed through two such shavings of Dale, laid one upon another in
somewhat less than one minute.

3. And in about one minute the same Fumes tinged the cleansed half penny,
through three such shavings of Dale very visibly, but not so conspicuously, as
through the two forementioned. These Trials were made without the help of heat
to promote the operation of the Fumes.

CHAP. V.
FRom the consideration of Woods let us now proceed to give some Instances of
the Porousness of Bodies made of close and compacted, and perhaps well baked
Clays or other Earths.

That Earthen Vessels, tho strong and well baked, are many of them porous
enough may be argued not only from what has been lately recited, but from
hence, that some of them will suffer themselves to be soakt through by Oil.
Others by solutions of Nitre, and some other Salts. And there are very few of
them, without excepting Hassian Crucibles themselves, that will long keep Salt
of Tartar, and such like fixed Alcalies, in fusion without being penetrated by
them. I have heard Distillers complain, that when they have distilled corrosive
materials, as Vitriol and Saltpeter, with strong fires, in those Earthen
Vessels that are commonly made use of in London (especially by refiners)
instead of Retorts though their necks be strait and long (upon which account
they are called long-necks) a considerable quantity of the finest Spirits make
their escape quite through the Vessel; so that in the Retort and Receiver many
ounces are found wanting, of the first weight of the matter to be distilled.
And this sometimes, when the Vitriol has been previously calcined, and a
reasonable allowance has been made, for what may have escaped through the Lute,
that joined together the long Neck and Receiver. And though I have observed of
our Bottles, made of the same Earth with Juggs, that they are hard enough to
strike Fire with a good Steel, yet a good Experimenter upon such Vessels of
whom I made enquiry, has assured me that these, as compact as they are, may,
even without external heat, have their Pores pervaded by the finer parts of
Spirituous Liquors.

To this purpose I remember that meeting once with a Virtuoso, that was curious
about the ways of making Sider as brisk and spirituous a Liquor as he could; I
enquired of him, whether he was able to keep in the subtle Spirit of this
Skilfully fermented Liquor, in those earthen Bottles, that, by reason of the
solidity they acquire by the vehement coction of the Fire, are commonly called
stone Bottles; to which he replied. that he often found to his trouble, that
the Liquor would permeate the compact Substance of the Bottles: And when I
objected that the Spirits might either escape out at the Cork, which I have
made several Spirits of diverse kinds that would readily permeate; he replied,
that what he had said appeared by the outside of the Bottles: To which when I
further objected, that the sight of dew on the surface of the Bottles, would
not convince me, without tasting whether it were vinous, because I had diverse
times observed, that brisk Liquors would produce a dew, on the outside of the
Vessels that contained them, not by any transudation (for I have made Trial of
it in Glasses) but by condensing the aqueous vapors, dispersed through the
neighboring part of the Ambient Air: He replied that, besides what his taste
had informed him of the quality of this dew, he found that the included Liquor,
though exactly stopped, wasted in not very many Months so considerably, as
sometimes to lose a sixth, or even a fifth part; and this escape or percolation
of the Liquor through the Substance of the Vessels, he affirmed himself to have
observed, not only in one or two Bottles, but in very many and the like
observation for the main was confirmed to me, upon his own experience, by an
eminent Physician, who, being a great Lover of brisk Sider, used to bottle it
up early and carefully.

Though good Hassian Crucibles be very closely compacted, as well as thoroughly
baked Bodies, and upon that account are able to keep Silver and diverse other
Metals long in fusion, without letting them at all run out; yet having
dissolved Silver in Aqua fortis, I observed that, though the Salts were by this
operation so changed that this horn-like Silver did dissolve neither in the
Aqua fortis, nor in the Aqua Regia that I put it into; yet when I kept it a
while in fusion, (which it is easily brought to be) among quick Coals, it would
without cracking or perforating the Crucible, soak into it, and permeate the
Pores of it, in I know not how many places, as I convinced some curious
persons, by showing them on the outside of the Vessel, a multitude of minute
globules of pure Silver, like so many little drops, that were got thither, as
it were, by transudation.

CHAP. VI.
FRom baked Earths, that are designed in point of hardness to emulate stones,
we will proceed to give some instances of the Porousness of Natural Stones
themselves.

There goes a tradition, that in some part of the West Indies they have a
Stone, of which they make large Vessels, wherein they put Water to percolate,
as it were, through a strainer. Of these Vessels I had one sent me for a
present, whereof being hereafter to give some account in a more opportune
place, I shall now only take notice that I found that Water would (tho slowly)
soak through the Vessel, tho it were considerably thick.

If, as many of the Ancients, and most of the modern Corpuscular Philosophers
have conceived, the Transparency and Opacity of Bodies proceeds from a
Rectitude or Crookedness of Pores, which makes them fit or unfit to transmit
the Light, that tends to pervade them in Physically straight Lines: If this
Hypothesis, I say, be allowed, we may draw a very probable argument, that
Stones may be Porous, from the Phenomenon of that odd Gem, that is best known
by the name of Oculus Mundi. For this small stone (at least that which I made
my Observations of) when it is dry, and is kept in the Air, is opacous, almost
like a polished piece of white Amber, and so it continues, as long as it is kept
dry. But if you put it into fair water, it will in no long time, become by
degrees quite Transparent, and that which I made Trial of looked then not
unlike a piece of clear yellow Amber which by degrees does in the free Air lose
its Transparency and turn to be opacous as before. Now according to the above
mentioned Corpuscular Hypothesis, the Pellucidness which the Stone acquires in
Water, may be accounted for, by saying, that the Liquor getting in at the
crooked Pores of the Stone, does for the time rectify them, and make them
pervious to the straight Beams of Light; as we see that White Paper, being
wetted with Water, or, which does far better, being made so imbide Oil, has its
Pores so changed and rectified, that the Water much lessens its Opacity, and
makes it almost Semidiaphanous and the Oil, if it be fine and well soaked up,
makes it Transparent. But upon the recess or evaporation of the imbibed
Particles of Water, the Pores of the little Stone becoming crooked again
reflect the Rays of light they should transmit. Which explication will be the
better allowed of, if my memory do not misinform me, when it tells me, that a
learned Member of the Royal Society found the Oculus Mundi to weigh more in a
nice balance, when it was taken out of the Water and well wiped, than before
it was put in. This Stone, which very few of the writers about Gems take notice
of, is so rare and difficult to be got, that I had not opportunity to make upon
it all the Trials I desired; and therefore, though the Subject be curious, I
may, I hope, be excused, if I hasten from it to another.

There is so much difference in many Qualities betwixt Stones and Metals, that
it is very probable, that when the Corpuscles of both come to be brought
together into one Mass, they will not touch one another so close, as not to
leave store of little Intervals or Pores between them. And upon this ground I
have been apt to think that diverse very hard Stones, Diaphanous and Opacous,
are not devoid of Porosity. For I have elsewhere delivered a way by which I
have obtained good store of Metalline parts, both from American Granats, and
from Emery; though this last be so exceeding hard a Stone, that it is usually
employed by artificers to work upon Iron and Steel, and to cut not only Rock
Crystal, but diverse Gems that are harder than either that or Steel.

Upon the same ground one may probably infer the Porosity of many Artificial
Gems made by Fusion; for to give these the color of Sapphirs, Topazes,
Amethysts, etc. we are wont to add to the vitrifiable matter, either some
prepared metal, as calcined Copper, calx of Gold, etc. or else some Mineral as
Zaffora and Manganeze (as the Glass-men call Magnesia) that abounds in
Metalline parts. Nay I remember, I have sometimes given the color to the
vitrified substance, by employing natural Gems, as Granats; though to show that
the coloration which the mass received from these, proceeded from the Metalline
Corpuscles, that lay hid in the tinging matter, the Color produced was not
that which was conspicuous in the Gem it self, but one very different from it,
and such as the metal, which upon other accounts I supposed the Gem to partake
of, ought, according to the Grounds I proceeded upon, to produce in the
vitrifiable matter. And this very Experiment makes it also highly probable,
that even natural transparent Gems, (diverse of which are much harder than
Marble, Iron and even Steel) are themselves Porous; since, notwithstanding
their Transparency and seeming Homogeneity. They are made up of Ingredients of
such differing natures as are Stony and Metalline Corpuscles.

From the same Ground we may likewise deduce the Porosity of Marcasites; many
of which I have observed to be, not only hard enough, plentifully to strike
fire by collision with Steel, but more ponderous than even diverse Oars, that
were rich enough in Metal, to be wrought with good profit. And yet these hard
and heavy (Mineral) Stones are very far from being homogeneous; since I have
met with few Inanimate Bodies, produced by Nature her self, so compounded as
several Marcasites that I have seen. For these are wont to contain more or less
Copper, and Iron too: and they abound in Combustible Sulphur, a Corrosive Salt,
and a certain Fixed Substance, which I found to differ from true Earth, but of
whose Nature the Trials I have hitherto made on it, have but little satisfied
me.

I might here deduce the Porosity of the Lodestone, as hard and solid a Body
as it is, partly from the Effluvia it emits and admits, and partly from the
Heterogeneity I have by Chemical Trials found to be in it. But these things
belong more properly to a Paper about Magnetical Bodies, for which I the more
willingly reserve them, because other Experiments will keep them from being
needful to be here insisted on.

The Porosity of Marble, and diverse other Stones of like Contexture, may with
probability be deduced from this, that they are liable to be dissolved by
diverse of the corrosive Menstruums of the Chemists, such as Aqua fortis sp. of
Salt, etc. And some of them even by Vegetable Liquors, of Natures own
preparing, as the juice of Limons, and that of Barberries. But a more noble and
satisfactory instance may be afforded, by the invention of staining or
coloring white Marble, without employing any fretting Liquor, or spoiling the
Texture of it. This way being casually lighted on by an ingenious Stone-cutter
in Oxford, who gained by it both credit and money, he long since thought fit to
acquaint me with it, upon condition of secresy (which I have to this day
inviolably kept) and of my assisting him to improve his Invention by making it
practicable with other Colors than Red. These circumstances I mention, to
signify that I write not by guess, of this matter, having both seen the
Experiment tried, and made it my self. But though I found it far less
improvable to other uses, then one would expect, yet, as to our present
purpose, it is very apposite. For by this way an excellent red Color, may be
made to soak into a piece of White Marble, almost as Oil will do into Leather,
without impairing, that I observed, the solidity of the stone, which, after
being dyed, will be capable of a fine gloss as before. Some other Colors (yet
but few fair ones) would by this way be brought to soak into Marble, on which
one may with them so define, and limit the Colorations, that I remember the
Artificer, when I brought him to kiss the Kings hand, presented His Majesty
with an Andromeda, whose Colors were so vivid, that this skilful Judge of
curious things, was pleased to honor it with a place among his Rarities. And,
to satisfy his Majesty that the fine Red was not, as some suspected, a mere
varnish, I purposely broke a plate of Marble, in whose fragments he saw, that
the Pigment had sunk to a considerable depth, into the very Substance of the
Stone. And I doubt not but it might have been made easily enough to sink much
deeper, if it had been thought necessary. A fine Plate of such White Marble,
with the penetrating Pictures of Colored Flowers drawn upon it I yet keep by
me to satisfy the curious. And some Utensils, as Hafts of Knives, Salt-Sellers,
etc. I have known to have lasted several years.

There is an Experiment that seems much stronger for the Porousness of Solid
Bodies, than that it self (which was lately recited) of staining Marble. For in
Italy some Goldsmiths have a way of imbuing Fragments of Rock-Crystal, which is
a Body much harder than Marble, with diverse Colors; which do sometimes so
imbellish them, that having ground off those parts that would not receive the
same Tincture, they set some of them in Gold Rings, and sell them with profit.
When I was informed of this, I thought of a Composition, that I hoped might
perform the same thing, and perhaps better than that which was employed by
them, who either knew not, or for ought I could perceive, used not, some
Minerals that I thought fit for the purpose. Upon this Presumption we carefully
cemented some clear Fragments of Native Crystal with a Composition of some
Volatile Minerals, together with a Salt or two, and having suffered the
Crucibles to cool leisurely, we had diverse of the Fragments stained here and
there, some with one Color and some with another, as differing Fumes happened
to invade them. And of these Colors some were dark or dull, and some vivid
enough. But having considered the stained pieces, and the progress of the
Operation, more attentively, I began to doubt, whether these Adventitious
Colors were really produced by the bare penetrating of the Mineral Fumes into
the Pores of the Crystal it self. For I thought it possible, and not very
unprobable, that the great Heat of the Fire, and the Ambient Mixture, might
cleave or flaw in many places some of the Crystalline Fragments; and that the
finer parts of the Minerals being vehemently agitated, might insinuate
themselves into these thin Flaws, which upon the slow refrigeration of the
Stones, shutting themselves close again, might lock up the tinging Particles,
without appearing discontinued, especially to the Eyes of Persons that were not
made use of with a more than ordinary attention, excited by distrust. This
suspicion was not removed by the apparent entireness of each little piece of
Crystal. For having taken more than once a Lump of that stone, and slowly
brought it to be red hot in the Fire, I found that if I warily quenched it in
Water, though it would thereby acquire a multitude of little cracks or Flaws,
which destroyed its former transparency, and made it look whitish, yet it
continued still an entire Body, notwithstanding the disadvantageous haste,
wherewith the operation had been performed. And having after this suspicion,
inquired of an ingenious Lapidary, that belonged to a great Prince whether in
polishing of Gems upon the Wheel, he had taken notice that the Heat would flaw
them, he answered me, that now and then he had observed that some Stones,
especially* if I misremember not, Rubies, when they were very much heated by
the swift motion of the Engine he employed to polish them, did cleave as it
seemed to him, and gape, so as at first to make him fear the Stones were
spoiled; and yet afterward they closed so perfectly, that no Flaw at all could
be perceived in them. I have mentioned the foregoing Experiment of tinging
Crystal, to comply with the dictates of Philosophical candor, which forbids me
to lay much stress upon a Proof, whose validity I my self distrust. But perhaps
my suspicion may by further Trial, which I have not now convenience to make,
appear not to have been well grounded, and in that case the tinging of Crystal,
as well inwardly as outwardly, by Fumes will be a noble Argument for the
Porosity of Solid Bodies, Rock-Crystal being harder, and probably closer, not
only than Marble, but even than Glass.

CHAP. VII.
THat Metals, though the heaviest of Bodies, are not destitute of Pores, may be
with probability proved in a general way by this; That they are all dissoluble
in their appropriate Menstruums, as Gold in Aqua Regia, and all the rest in
Aqua Fortis, except Tin, which yet it self will be corroded by that Menstruum,
though not well kept up in a fluid form, as it may be by another Menstruum,
which I elsewhere teach; and sometimes the same Metal may be dissolved by very
differing Menstruums, as Lead by Aqua fortis, and Spirit of Vinegar; and Copper
by Aqua fortis, Aqua Regia, Spirit of Vinegar, Spirit of Salt, and some other
Solvents, that upon Trial I have found sufficient for that purpose.

But 'twill, I presume, be thought more considerable to my present argument, if
it be shown, that Bodies that appear Gross, and which in their Natural state
are not fluid, and are confessed to be of a compounded nature, will penetrate
Metals quite through, even without melting them.

This we have diverse times effected by a Cementation of Copper Plates, With
common {sulphur} (much a kin to a way prescribed by some Alchymists to make
Vitriolum Veneris) which we warily performed much after this manner. We took
good Copper laminated to the thickness of a Shilling or thereabouts, and having
cut it into small pieces, that they might the more easily be put into a
Crucible or Cementing Pot, we strewed at the bottom of the Vessel some beaten
{sulphur}, and then covered it pretty well with some of these Plates, which
were laid on flat-wise. Upon these we strewed another Bed of powdered
Brimstone, and covered that also with Plates, upon which we put more Sulphur,
and so continued making one lair of Brimstone, and another of Metal, till we
had employed all our Plates, or filled the Crucible, being careful that the
uppermost Bed, as well as the lowest, should be of Sulphur. This done, we luted
on an earthen Cover to the Vessel, to keep the {sulphur} from taking Fire, and
afterward having placed the Pot amongst Coals kindled at a good distance from
it, that it might be heated by degrees, we kept it for some few hours (perhaps
Two or Three) in such a degree of Fire as was sufficient to keep the Sulphur
melted (which is easily enough done) without bringing the Metal to fusion; the
Pot being cold, we took off the cover, and found the Plates quite altered in
Color and Texture, some of them having a dark and dirty Color, whilst others
looked of a fine Violet or Blew; they were generally so brittle, that 'twas
very easy to break them with ones finger, and reduce them to Powder. And (now
to add such Circumstances as a Chemist would not take notice of) many of the
Plates, when they were broken, appeared to have been (by the contiguous Beds of
Sulphur above and below) horizontally divided each of them into two Plates,
diverse of which in some places had a manifest distance or Cavity between them.
And 'twas observable, that when I considered one or other of these Plates
attentively in the parts that had been contiguous before I broke it, I could
plainly discern a multitude as 'twere of Fibers, reaching from one of the flat
sides of the Plate to the other, and running many of them, as to sense,
parallel to one another. These Circumstances may sufficiently argue, that the
Plates were pierced quite through by the Brimstone; but for confirmation of
this, and to show too that the Sulphur does as it were soak into the Body of
the Metal, and in a Gross manner lodge it self there; I shall add, that not
only to the Eye the Plates appeared much swelled, or thicker then when they
were put in, but having weighed them before the operation was begun, and after
it was quite ended, the Copper, though it needed not to be freed from
externally adhering Sulphur, was found to have a considerable increase of
weight by the accession of the Sulphur, which (to add that circumstance) though
it appeared not to the Eye, yet if a Plate were laid upon quick Coals, and
blown, would oftentimes discover it self by a Blew flame.

By making the like Experiment for the main, we found that refined Silver,
though a more heavy and compact Body, than Copper, and not dissoluble by most
of the Menstruums, that work on this Metal, is penetrable by the Body of
Sulphur, which will also calcine Tin and Lead and (especially) Iron.

Nor is Sulphur the only consistent Body that has this ingress into Metals; for
we have found them penetrable by prepared Arsenick. But because these
operations are not so easy, and the Subject is not easily handled without
danger, I forbear the mention of them in this place, where, after what has been
recited, it is not necessary.

Another Experiment there is, which does more advantageously than that made
with Brimstone, discover the Porosity of Copper. For there is a way by which,
without the help of Salts, Sulphur or Arsenick, one may make a solid and heavy
Body soak into the Pores of that Metal, and give it a durable Color. I shall
not mention the way, because of the bad use that may be made of it. But having
had the curiosity more than once to try it upon a new Copper Farthing, the
event was, that one part of it, which I purposely forbore to tinge, remained
common Copper still, but the other part acquired a yellow, that differed very
little, if at all, from a Golden Color, the former stamp that was impressed
upon the coin continuing visible. And to convince the scrupulous, that the
Pigment did really sink, and as it were soak into the Body of the Metal, and
did not merely color the Superficies, I made them take notice, that the
Farthing was not melted, and yet by filing off a wide gap from the Edge of the
Coin, inwards, it plainly appeared, that the Yellow or Golden Color had
penetrated a pretty way beneath the surface of the Farthing; so that it looked
there as if two thin Plates, the one Yellow, and the other Reddish, did,
without any Interval between them, lie upon one another.

If Bodies be not to be pervaded, or deeply pierced into, by Corpuscles, but
only to have their more superficial Pores, if I may so call them, penetrated
thereby, it is possible that Bodies, which are either much harder, or much
closer, than Marble, Alabaster or the like Bodies, may have their Pores
possessed even by odorous Corpuscles; I say, even by such, because they are
most of them gross enough to be kept from exhaling, by Bodies much less compact
then Earthen Bottles; and are far from being of the finest particles that
Nature affords. But that such odorous Corpuscles may lodge themselves in the
exterior Pores of very close Bodies, I have been inclined to think, not only,
by the obstinately adhering Odor, which I found by Trial, that some subtle and
Spirituous parts, such as the Chemists would perhaps call in their Aggregates,
the Essence of Musk, Amber, Ambergris, etc. notwithstanding the washing of
the Glasses, that had long contained such Liquors; but by what has been assured
me by a Physician of great Experience, who traveled and lived much in the
East. For having told him, that I had been informed, that in some places less
famous then Damascus, for curiosity in making fine Sword blades, there was a
way found and practiced of making them richly scented, without injury to their
Gloss; I desired to know of him, if at Damascus, or elsewhere, he had seen any
of them; to which he replied, that he did not remember he had, but yet made no
doubt the Information might be true. For he himself had in Europe, and kept for
diverse years, a Watch, whose Metalline Case, was richly perfumed; and when I
asked him, whether there were not some thin varnish, or some outward Case of
perfumed Leather, or Chagran, or somewhat else, from whence the odor
proceeded, he assured me, that his observations had prevented and removed that
and diverse other Scruples, and that the case being clean and Glossy, he could
not perceive that the Odor proceeded from any thing else, than some
odoriferous thing, or other that was invisibly lodged in the Pores, or Porous
Substance of the metal it self. And indeed, since both Arsenick, and even
common Sulphur, may by Art be as it were incorporated with some Metalls, and
even with Silver, I see not why it should be impossible, that some pleasingly
scented Substances should be admitted into the Pores of Metalline Bodies, and
be volatile enough to have their subtiler parts fly off in odorous Exhalations,
especially if they be a little excited, as the Watch Case lately mentioned was,
by a gentle heat, such as was that of the wearers pocket. And on this occasion
I remember to have made a certain Metalline composition, which looked like
Gold, and of which I caused a Ring to be cast, and yet this Metal retained so
many unperceived Mercurial Corpuscles in it, that an Ingenious Person to whom I
discovered the composition of it, found after Trial, as he assured me, that
being worn as a Ring, it had in some distempers, particularly of the Eyes,
manifest operations, that evidently enough seemed to flow, at least in great
part, from its participation of the Mercury we employed in preparing the
Factitious Metal.

Since the writing of the former part of this Essay, having met with an
inquisitive Nobleman, who had lived in several parts of Africa, and was
Governor of the best Town the Europeans have on that Continent, I discoursed
with him, among other things, about the Skill that some ascribe to the African
Moors, of making excellent weapons, whereof I knew his excellency was very
curious. Upon which occasion he told me, that some of the Offspring of the
Granadine Moors were indeed the best at making Arms that ever he met with; and
that he had seen some weapons of their forging and tempering, that he preferred
even to those of Damasco. And when I asked him whether any of them had the art
of perfuming their Weapons, he answered me, that some of them did it admirably
well, and instanced in a Blade which he kept for some years, and found it still
to retain the perfumed scent, which he supposed to be as it were incorporated
with the Steel whereof the Blade was made. When I told him, I suspected that
the scabbard might have been well perfumed, and communicate its odor to the
contained Blade, he allowed the objection to be plausible, but replied* that it
was not concluding, since misliking the Scabbard, as not handsome and
fashionable enough, he caused a new one to be made, wherein he afterward kept
it. And the same Lord further told me, that he had also a Fowling Piece, whose
Barrel was perfumed. And when I objected that perhaps the odoriferous scent
proceeded from the stock, and not from the Metal, he answered that the Gun not
being, when it came into his possession, skilfully and handsomely mounted, he
caused the Barrel to be fitted with a new stock, notwithstanding which, it
continued to smell fragrantly. And when I further asked, whether he ever caused
the Gun to be washed or scoured after it was grown foul by having been often
shot in, he answered me, that he had, and, as far as I can remember, subjoyned,
that after it was made clean it did (notwithstanding the ill scent that the
soot of the Powder had given it) retain a pleasing smell, but fainter than
before.

CHAP. VIII.
SInce the Subject of this Essay is the Porousness of Solid Bodies, and since
there is no Body that is generally reputed so close and compact as Glass, it
will be pertinent to this discourse, and probably will be expected, that I
should here say something about the Question, whether Glass be, or be not,
devoid of Pores.

But before I acquaint you with my Trials, or my thoughts, about this Problem,
I think it requisite to clear the sense, in which I mean to handle it, that I
may not, as some others have done, for want of distinctly stating the Question,
speak confusedly and erroneously of it.

I shall then here observe, to prevent mistakes, that the Porosity of Glass may
admit of two Acceptions. For it may be said to be quite pervious to Fluids, as
a Boot is to Water, or only to be capable of having its superficial parts
further and further dissolved or corroded thereby, as a Silver Cup is Porous in
reference to Aqua fortis, which cannot sweat through it, as Water does through
a Boot, but eat its way through it, by dissolving the Texture of the Vessel.

Another thing requisite to be premised, to prevent Ambiguity, is, that Glass
it self is not all of one sort, as men unacquainted with Chemistry are wont to
presume, for Glass of Antimony, for instance, and that of Lead, both of them
made per se, do manifestly differ, usually in color, and constantly in weight,
and also in their operations upon Humane Bodies; and both these sorts of Glass
do in several points differ from common Glass, under which name, for brevities
sake, I comprehend both White or Crystalline Glass, as it is called in the
Shops, and that courser sort, which they usually call Green Glass; both which
sorts I here consider under one Notion, because both are made of fixed Alcalies,
and other fit Ingredients, as Sand, Earth, Ashes, Pebbles, or Flints,
Colliquated by a strong and lasting operation of the Fire: and it is of this
common Glass, in the sense now declared, that I shall consider the Porosity in
the remaining part of this Essay. In which to proceed with some Method, I shall
digest what I have to say into the ensuing Propositions, and the observations
annexed to them.

Prop 1. It Is very probable, that Glass may be pierced into to some distance,
even by visible and tangible Bodies. I know that this will seem a Paradox to
many, and repugnant to common Experience, which shows that Glass Vessels will
contain very subtle and even highly corrosive Liquors, as the Spirit of
Hartshorn, of Urine, and that of Nitre; as also those potent Menstruums, as
Aqua fortis, Aqua Regis, and Oil of Vitriol, which not only are not observed to
pierce into it, but are unable to make any sensible alteration, so much as on
the superficial parts, even in those Vials wherein they have been long kept.

But, notwithstanding all this, I presume you will not condemn the lately
proposed Paradox, when you have considered what may be said to justify it.
For, besides that it may be made probable a Priori, by the Arguments whence we
have formerly proved the Porousness of Solid Bodies in general; there are two
sorts of Experiments, from whence one may argue, that Glass in particular is
not devoid of Pores in the sense wherein we are now speaking of them.

And first, I remember, that, having kept for a good while in a vial, a
quantity of a certain Spirit of Salt, that I had reserved in a cool place; I
found, when I came to use it, that the Glass was cracked, and most of the Liquor
was run out; but, before this happened, it had so far corroded the inside of
the Glass, that in some places it was eaten almost as thin as a piece of Paper;
and this part which yet continued Glass, was lined with a much thicker white
substance, that stuck to the sides of it, and looked and tasted like a kind of
odd Salt; so that it invited me to conjecture, that it proceeded from the
substance of the Glass, which you know consists of an Alcali as well as of Sand
corroded by the Saline Spirits of the Menstruum, and coagulated with them into
this odd kind of Concrete; and 'twas remarkable in our vessel, that the upper
part of the vial, to which the Menstruum did not reach, was not corroded, nor
altered, tho the operation of the Liquor reached as high as the Liquor it self.
And I remember, that when I related all this to some experienced Chemists, one
of them that was a more heedful observer, assured me, the like had once or
twice, happened to him, as since that time it has likewise done to me.

I had also, if I misremember not, another Vial, corroded by a distilled Liquor
of Vitriol, that had in it more of the Phlegm than of the Oil; which you will
somewhat the less wonder at, if you consider, that some Corrosive Menstruums
will scarce work on some Bodies, if they be too well dephlegmed, or at least
will not corrode them so readily and powerfully, if they are very strong, as
when they are diluted with a convenient quantity of Water. And, as to Oil of
Vitriol it self, which is the Menstruum I am speaking of, when we employ it to
make Vitriolum Martis, we are wont to weaken it with Water, that it may the
better dissolve that Metal. And perhaps you will suspect, that Vitriol has some
peculiar faculty of penetrating and fretting Glass, when to the Experiment
newly recited I shall add that which follows, as I find it registered among my
Notes.

[A pound of Dantzick Vitriol and a pound of Sea Salt, after the former had
been very lightly calcined, and the latter decrepitated, that they might not
boil in, or crack the Vessel; we caused to be distilled in a well coated Retort
by degrees of Fire, giving at length a very strong one, then taking off the
Vessel, we were not much surprised to find, that the heat had here and there
melted it, and that the fluxed Caput Mortuum had corroded the Glass, fetching
off as 'twere films from it, and those parts which did not appear to the Eye
thus manifestly wasted, seemed yet by their great brittleness, to have been
penetrated, so that their Texture was spoiled by the saline and vitriolate
Corpuscles.]

Prop II. Common Glass is not ordinarily permeable by Chemical Liquors, though
strong and subtle, nor by the directly visible or odorable Expirations of
Bodies tho absolutely speaking it be pervious to some Corporeal Substances.
This Proposition consisting of two parts, we shall allow each of them its
distinct Proofs.

And as for the first part, it is manifestly agreeable to the Common Experience
of Chemists; who daily find, that in well stopped Vials, or at least in
Hermetically sealed Glasses, they can preserve their subtilest and most
piercing Menstruums, as Spirit of Nitre, Aqua Fortis, Spirit of Salt, Spirit of
Vinegar, and Oil of Vitriol. And this they find to be true, not only as to Acid
and Corrosive Liquors, like those I have newly named, but also in those Spirits
that abound with Fugitive Salts, as the Spirit of Urine, of Blood, and of
Sal-Armoniack; and in the most subtle and highly rectified Spirit of Wine; as
also in the Ethereal Oil, or, as many call it, Spirit, of Turpentine: as
likewise in the Liquors of Salt of Tartar, and other fixed Alcalies resolved by
Deliquium.

The Result of these Observations may be much confirmed by considering, how
often it happens in the Destillation of more Wild and Fugitive Spirits, as of
Nitre, Tartar, and Sugar; that, though they are much agitated, and perhaps
subtilized, by Heat, yet, if the Lute, that joins the Receiver to the Retort be
very firm and close, the Receivers, though large, are often broken in pieces;
which probably would not happen, if the Spirits could insinuate and crowd
themselves, through the pores of Glass.

But, whereas it may be pretended, that such Vessels are strong and thick, I
shall add, that I have had the Curiosity to cause very fine bubbles to be blown
at the flame of a Lamp, purposly that they may be made extremely thin, and of
but a small part of the thickness we meet with in the Vessels made at the Glass
house; and some of these I caused to be exactly stopped, and others to be
Hermetically sealed; but could not find, that either dry Salt of Tartar would
relent in one, that was kept a good while under water, or that strong Spirit of
Sal Armoniack, which is one of the subtilest Spirits that we know, would
penetrate one of these thin films of Glass, which we kept a great while
immersed in it, though to discover whether it would at all penetrate the
thinnest Glasses, we employed some which were of that fine sort that is called
Essence Vials.

These and some other Trials have, I confess, made me very diffident of the
Experiments, that have been delivered by some men of Note, and built upon by
others, of the Permeableness of ordinary Glass Vessels to Chemical Liquors, as,
that Mercury and Aqua fortis being digested together in a Bolt-head may, by
rubbing the outside of the Glass, be made visibly and palpably to transudate.
Which Experiment (if my Memory do not much deceive me,) I purposely tried with
care, but without success.

But after all this I must desire, that it may be remembered, that in wording
the Proposition of the Imperviousness of Glass, I intimated that I would have
it understood of what Ordinarily happens. For in some Extraordinary cases,
which I take to be exceeding rare, I do not absolutely deny, but that the
General rule may admit of Exceptions. And, if it be lawful to conjecture, these
exceptions are likeliest to take place, when the peculiar Texture of this or
that Glass, is more slight or lax than ordinary; or when the Bodies that are to
pervade it, are vehemently agitated by heat; or when, besides a great subtlety,
and perhaps degree of heat too, their particles chance to have a special
congruity, to the relaxed Pores of that particular Glass they are to pass
through. I remember I have seen, not without some wonder, a sort of Glass of so
soft and resoluble a Texture, that Vessels of it of a competent thickness,
would be manifestly prejudiced and wrought upon by Liquors, that were not
considerably Sharp or Corrosive, if they were put in very hot. I have also
heard of another sort of Glasses, made in a certain Forest, complained of by a
Destiller, as subject to be sometimes injured by Corrosive Liquors. I once knew
a Doctor of Physic, that by diverse credulous Alchymists was suspected to have,
what they call the Philosophers Stone, because of a certain Book, Ingenious
enough, that he was supposed to have written on that subject. But when after
some acquaintance I happened to debate his Principles freely with him, he
confessed to me, that he had been mistaken, and to invite me to give him my
thoughts upon such like works, he frankly made me an ingenuous relation of his
Proceedings, wherein the main thing that dazzled him, and kept him from seeing
his Error, was, that he had reduced the matter he wrought on, which was real
Gold, to that degree of Fusibleness and subtlety, that when he gave too strong
a Fire, as mistake or curiosity made him several times do, the finer part of
the Metal would sweat through his Glasses, and stick sometimes to the outside
of them, and sometimes to the Neighboring Bodies. And, when I objected, that
he might be mistaken in this, and that what he thought had come forth by
transudation, rather issued out at some small unheeded crack, he replied that
he had made the observation so often, and with such care, that he was fully
satisfied it was a real penetration of the Glass, by the attenuated Metal,
which he was to have convinced me of by Trial. But, before he could come to
make it, by an Error of his own he unhappily died.

But, whatever be judged of this penetrating Gold, I elsewhere relate, that I
having upon a time destilled Spirit of Hartshorn with a very strong Fire, into
a Receiver that was large and thick enough, but of a course kind of Glass, it
did appear, upon my best examination, that the Glass itself was penetrated by
some vehemently agitated Fumes, or some subtle Liquor, that settled in strongly
scented drops on the outside of the Receiver. But such Instances being very
rare, and happening but in some cases or conjunctures of circumstances, that
are not like to be at all frequent, they cannot hinder the first part of our
Proposition to be true, in the sense wherein it is laid down.

And, as to the second part of the Proposition, which asserts Glass to be
pervious to some Corporeal substances, it may be proved ad hominem against any
Epicurean that should deny it, and the Cartesians must not) by the free ingress
and egress, which our sealed Thermoscopes show, that the Atoms or Corpuscles of
Cold and Heat are allowed, through the Pores of the Glass, that contains the
rising or fallng Tincture, or other Liquor. And without proceeding upon the
peculiar Principles of the Epicureans, we may give more certain proofs of the
Permeableness of Glass by certain Bodies. For I have elsewhere manifestly
evinced that the Effluvia of a Loadstone will attract and invigorate Steel,
though enclosed in Hermetically sealed Glasses; nay, I have also shown by
Experiment, that the Effluvia of so gross and dull a Body as the Earth, are
readily transmitted through Glass, and will operate on Iron, in Vessels
hermetically sealed. If Light be, as probably it is, either a subtle and
rapidly moving Body, or at least require such an one for its Vehicle, it must
not be denied, that it is possible for a Body without difficulty to pass through
the Pores of Glass; since it is by its help that we can clearly see the
Dimensions, Shapes, and Colors of Bodies included in Glasses. To this I shall
add, that far less subtle Bodies than those that constitute or convey Light,
may be made to permeate Glass, if their Figures being congruous enough to the
Pores of it, their penetration be assisted by an impetuous motion, or a brisk
impulse; as I have found by the increase of weight in some Metals, exposed for
diverse hours in Hermetically sealed Glasses, to the action of a Flame. On which
occasion I remember that having some years ago tried the same Experiment with
some Filings of Copper, they had indeed their color much altered, being
beautified with exceeding vivid Dies, which they yet retain, but did not
evidently appear to be increased in weight, as if, because they were not of a
Texture loose enough to be melted, the Igneous particles could not pierce them
enough to stick fast in them, at least in numbers great enough, to amount to a
sensible weight.

But without the help of Fire, or any sensible Heat, I think it not impossible
that Glass should be freely penetrated by some kind of Corpuscles, (though I do
not yet know of what sort they are) that sometimes happen to roave about in the
Air. This you will probably be surprised to read; but perhaps not more than I
was at the Phenomenon that induce me to write it. But because these are very
unusual, and can scarce be discoursed of without some odd reflections hinted by
them, I thought fit to set down a Circumstantial account of them in another
Paper, to which it more directly belongs than to this Essay; and therefore
shall now only tell you, what may be sufficient for my present purpose, namely,
that having in two or three Vials closely stopped, kept a certain limpid and
colorless Liquor, it would by fits acquire and lose a high Color, though I
could not reasonably impute the Changes to any manifest ones in the Air, nor to
any other cause so probable, as the Ingress and Recess of some very subtle and
uncommon particles, which at that time happened to swim to and fro in the Air,
and now and then to invade, and sometimes to desert, the Liquor.

There is another sort of Experiments relating to the Porosity of Glass, to
show that it may be pierced into by Bodies that are not corrosive in taste, and
are not Liquors, but only have a forced and temporary Fluidity, if they have so
much as that.

These Experiments may be drawn from some of the ways of coloring Panes of
Glass, for the Windows of Churches and other buildings; I say, some of the
ways, because, to deal heartily with you, I think, and so I presume will you
ere long, that in diverse of those Glasses, the Color does not pierce at all
deep into the Glass, but is produced by the close adhesion of a deep Red, but
thin and transparent, Pigment, to the surface of a Glassy Plate, through both
which the Beams of Light passing to the Eye, receive in their Passage the
color of the Pigment.

But, as by some operations the Glass is rather Painted, or externally
enamelled, than tinged, so in some others the Pigment or dying stuff appears to
pierce a little beneath the very superficies of the Glass, and the Yellow
Color will not only go further or deeper, but sometimes seems (for I do not
yet positively affirm it) to penetrate the whole Glass from side to side.

The Methods of Painting and staining Glass, having been hitherto the Practices
of a particular Trade that is gainful enough, and known but to few, the
Artificers are wont to be shy of communicating their secrets, tho we know in
general that Glass is stained, by having the Plates covered with Mineral
Pigments, laid on Beds of beaten Lime, or some other convenient Powder, and
kept for diverse Hours in a strong fire, but yet not strong enough to make the
Plates melt down, by which means the Pores of the Glass being much opened by
the Heat, and the Pigments being likewise agitated, and some of them as it were
vitrified with it, they are made either to pierce into the Plate, or at least
to stick very closely and firmly to it. But because the Practices of Glass
Painters require, besides skill and experience, a particular Furnace, and
diverse Implements, I shall add, that to try, whether Glass may not, without so
much ado, be so stained, as to show it to be Porous, we took prepared Silver,
(that Metal having, of all the Minerals I have tried, the best Ingress into
Glass) and having laid it upon a piece of Glass, not thick, nor yet so thin as
to Melt very easily, we laid this Glass (with the Pigment uppermost) warily
upon a few Quick-coals, and having suffered it to neal a while we gave it about
such a degree of heat, as might make and keep it red hot, without bringing it
to complete fusion, and then, suffering it to cool by degrees, we found, as we
expected, that the Glass had acquired a Yellow, and almost Golden, Color,
which was not to be washed off, or to be taken away, without such scraping as
would injure or spoil the Glass it self. The way of preparing Silver for this
operation, is not always the same, the Glass Painters commonly add to the
calcined Silver some Mineral Bodies, as Antimony, Yellow Oker, or the like. But
I, who take the penetration of the color to proceed from the Silver it self,
do sometimes employ only some thin piece of Silver, such as an old Groat, upon
which a little Sulphur being put, and kindled in the open Air, the Metal is
presently calcined, and the Powder made use of. And this it self I do not so
much out of necessity, as because the Calcination reduces the Metal into small
parts, and gives it a form, that makes it more easy be laid on, as one thinks
fit. For otherwise, going upon this my supposition, that the Silver was the
true Pigment of the Glass, I have more than once made Glass Yellow by
Leaf-Silver laid flat on the surface of it, and a little moistened, to keep so
light a Body from being blown off. And (to note that upon the by) it is pretty,
that if the Fire be made too strong, which it is hard to avoid doing, when we
will make it strong enough, without the help of a Furnace, it has several times
happened to me that the dyed Glass, though when held against the Light it
appeared of a Golden or Yellow Color, yet when held from the Light it appeared
Blew, so that here we have in a Mineral, somewhat that is very like that we
admire in the tincture of Lignum Nephriticum, which shows almost the like
difference of Color, as it is held against or from the Light, which may serve
for a confirmation of what I have elsewhere said to show that colors may be
derived from Mechanical Principles: But that only upon the by. Whether the Gold
color produced by Silver, do favor the hopes of those Alchymists that work on
that Metal, upon presumption that it is but unripe Gold, it is improper here to
examine. But since Yellow is not the Color of Silver, it seems the Yellowness,
acquired by our Glass Plates, argues, that there has been some ingress of the
substance of the particles of the Silver into the Glass, there appearing no way
so ready, to give an account of the change of Colors, as by supposing the
Particles of the Silver to be wrought on by the fixed Salts, and other fine
parts, of the Glass; since we know, that Metals may afford differing colors,
according to the Saline and other Bodies that work upon them, as Copper with
Spirit of Urine, which abounds in Volatile Salt, gives a deep Blew; with Spirit
of Salt, a fair Green; and with Aqua fortis, a Color that participates of
both. And in the making of Glass of Lead with Minium and White-Sand, or
Crystal, the Glass, it self if well made, is usually of an Amethystine Color.
But if you put a due Proportion, (which is a very small one,) of calcined
Copper to it, this Metal will not communicate to the Glass its own reddishness,
but be so changed by it, as to give it a good green, and sometimes so good an
one, that pieces of this Glass, such as we have caused to be cut and set in
Rings, might, among those that Judge of Stones but by the Eye, pass for no bad
Emeraulds.

On this occasion, it is likely 'twill be asked, whether there be any way of
tinging Glasses quite through, with a true and beautiful red, and whether the
Art of dying Plates of Glass, which the windows of many old Churches show to
have formerly been practiced, be now (as it is commonly supposed) altogether
lost?

This Question, consisting of 2 Parts, I shall quickly dispatch; the former, by
answering it without hesitancy in the affirmative. Yet adding withal, that the
red tincture being communicated to Glass, not properly by mere penetration of
the Pigment, but by the incorporation of it with Glass or its Materials, by the
help of fusion, I think the Experiment of no such great use in our present
Inquiry, as to hinder me from reserving what I have observed about it to a more
opportune place. And as to the second Part of the inquiry, it being rather a
Historical than a Philosophical question, I shall not here meddle with it; only
I shall wish the question may be cautiously stated. For, upon the burning the
famous Cathedral of St. Paul's Church in London, many pieces of the red Glass
that adorned the windows, were found broken and scattered about, some of which
I procured from a Chemist, that had carefully preserved them, designing to
retrieve the lost Invention of making the like. But when I came to examine them
narrowly, I was confirmed in the suspicion I had, that the redness did not
penetrate the whole Glass, but proceeded from a diaphanous Pigment very
artificially laid on, for though in other Postures no such thing could be
discerned, yet when I so held it, according to my Custom in examining painted
Glasses, that the surfaces of the Plate lay in the same level with my Eye,
between it and the window, so that a broken edge was next my Eye, I could
plainly see, and made the Chemist himself see, the lower part of the Plate to
be of ordinary uncoloured Glass, upon which there lay a very thin Plate or Bed
of a Diaphanous red Pigment, which, though it were not easily, was not
impossible to be here and there scraped off.

But, to return to those colorations that seem to pierce into the Pores of
Glass, I remember that I had once occasion to destil in a small Retort some
Gold, amalgamed with such a fine and subtle Mercury, that being (without the
addition of any Salt) put to the Gold in the cold, they presently grew hot
together. And in the destillation of this uncommon mixture, I found the matter
had, before it flew a way, permanently died or stained, about an Inch in
Diameter of the bottom of the Glass, with a color that, looked on from the
Light, was like that of the better sort of Turquoises; but beheld when 'twas
interposed between the Window and the Eye, appeared of a somewhat Golden
color. And this Glass, with some others oddly colored, I have yet by me to
satisfy the Curious, though I cannot but give Advertisement, that the
colorations of Glass may be much better performed with such Plates, and in such
Furnaces, as the Glass Painters use, than without them.

Since the Writing of the foregoing Paragraph, I was visited by an industrious
person, much addicted to some Chemical Operations, who had formerly advised
with me about a Process, of which I had had some Experience, that he conceived
might be useful to him. I then acquainted him with some of my thoughts about
it, and he having afterward united Gold with Quicksilver, (which by its
Effects will be easily concluded not to have been common,) he kept them in
Digestion for some Months, and afterward coming to me with a Melancholy look,
told me that the Fire having been once immoderately increased in his absence,
the sealed-Glass burst with an affrighting noise, and the included Amalgam was
so strangely dissipated, that scarce the lest fragment of it could be
retrieved. But the Decoction having continued so long a time, it seems the
matter was subtiliated enough to have a notable operation upon the Glass. For,
though the upper part of the Bolt-glass were blown of, and shattered into many
pieces, yet the lower part escaped well enough, and when he brought it me, to
observe what change had been made in it, I took notice with much delight, that
the Glass seemed to be tinged throughout, with so fine and glorious a Red
color, that I have seen several Rubies themselves, in that point, inferior to
it.

FINIS.

