ESSAYS Of the STRANGE SUBTILTY GREAT EFFICACY DETERMINATE NATURE OF EFFLUVIUMS.

To which are annexed NEW EXPERIMENTS To make FIRE and FLAME Ponderable:
Together with A Discovery of the Perviousness of GLASS.

BY The Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

-- Consilium est, universum opus Instaurationis (Philosophiae) potius
promovere in multis, quam perficere in paucis. Verulamius. LONDON: Printed by
W. G. for M. Pit, near the little North Door of St Paul's Church. 1673.

An Advertisement to the READER.
IT IS hoped, the Reader will not think it strange, not to meet with in the
following Papers a more close and uniform contexture of the passages that make
them up, if he be seasonably informed of the rise and occasion of penning them,
which was this. The Author having many years ago written an Essay about an
Experiment he made of Nitre, by whose Phenomenon he endeavored to exemplify
some parts of the Corpuscular Philosophy, especially the Production of
Qualities; he afterward threw together diverse occurring thoughts and
experiments, which he supposed might be employed by way of Notes, to prove or
illustrate those Doctrines, and especially those that concerned the Qualities
of Bodies; and among these observing those that are called Occult, to be
Subjects uncultivated enough, (at least in the way that seemed to him proper,)
he proposed to handle them more largely than most of the rest; and in order to
that Design he judged it almost necessary, to premise some Considerations and
experimental Collections about the Nature and power of Effluviums, about the
Pores of Bodies and Figures of Corpuscles, and about the efficacy of such
Local-motions as are wont either to be judged very faint, or to be passed by
unheeded. For he had often looked upon these three Doctrines, of Effluvia, of
Pores and Figures, and of Unheeded Motions, as the three principal Keys to the
Philosophy of Occult Qualities. But having hereupon made such Collections, as
upon review appeared too large to pass for Notes on so short a Text, he was
induced to draw them And some that were published An. 1669. under the Title of
The Atmospheres of consistent Bodies.
into the form (they now appear in) of Essays; but he would not put himself to
the trouble of doing it, with care to keep them from retaiaing much of their
first want of exact Method and Connection. Nor was the Author solicitous to
finish them up, in regard that his other Studies and occasions made him
perceive, that in what he had designed about Occult Qualities, he had cut
himself out more work than probably he should during many years have
opportunity to set upon in earnest, and complete. And in this Condition these
Papers lay for diverse years, (as is well known to several that saw them, or
even transcribed some of them,) and might have continued to do so, if the
Author had not been induced to let them come abroad, partly by considering,
that though the Subjects, (however he handled them) were as well important as
curious, yet he did not find himself prevented by others in what he had to
publish about them; and partly by the References he had made to them in some
other Papers, that he had promised his Friends, wherein several things here
delivered are vouched, and others supposed. And because the Notes concerning
the Porosity of greater Bodies and the Figurations of minute Particles,
together with the Paper about unregarded Motions, having been long laid aside
among other neglected papers, were some of them missing, and others so
mis-us'd, that they could not easily be made ready to accompany those that now
come abroad; the Author, that he might keep this Book from having its
dimensions too disproportionate, was content to add to the thickness of it, by
subjoyning one of those little Tracts, that lay by him, concerning Flame,
because of the Affinity betwixt the preceding Doctrine about Effluviums in
general, and Experiments that show in particular the Subtilty and the Efficacy
of those of Fire and Flame. And though, to that Tract it self, there belong
another, designed to examine, Whether the matter of what we call the Sunbeams,
may be brought to be ponderable; yet supposing this, hitherto cold and wet
Summer, to be like to be as unfriendly to the Trials to be made with
Burning-glasses as of late years some other Summers have proved, he was easily
prevailed with, not to make those Experiments that were ready, wait any longer
for those, that probably will not in a short time be so; especially since those
that now come abroad have no dependency upon the others.

OF THE Strange SUBTILTY OF EFFLUVIUMS.

BY The Honorable ROBERT BOIL.

LONDON: Printed by W. G. for M. Pit at the sign of the White Heart,
over against the little North Door of St Paul's Church. 1673.

OF The strange SUBTILTY OF EFFLVVIVMS.
CHAP. I.
WHether we suppose with the Ancient and Modern Atomists, that all sensible
Bodies are made up of Corpuscles, not only insensible, but indivisible; or
whether we think with the Cartesians, and (as many of that Party teach us) with
Aristotle, that Matter, like Quantity, is indefinitely, if not infinitely
divisible: It will be consonant enough to either Doctrine, that the Effluvia of
Bodies may consist of Particles extremely small. For if we embrace the Opinion
of Aristotle or Descartes, there is no stop to be put to the sub-division of
Matter, into Fragments, still lesser and lesser. And though the Epicurean
Hypothesis admit not of such an interminate division of Matter, but will have
it stop at certain solid Corpuscles, which for their not being further
divisible are called Atoms ((...),) yet the Assertors of these do justly think
themselves injured, when they are charged with taking the Motes or small Dust,
that fly up and down in the Sunbeams, for their Atoms; since, according to
these Philosophers, one of those little grains of Dust, that is visible only
when it plays in the Sunbeams, may be composed of a multitude of Atoms, and
exceed many thousands of them in Bulk. This the Learned Gassendus in his Notes
on Diogenes Laertius makes probable by the instance of a small Mite, which,
though scarce distinctly discernable by the naked Eye, unless when it is in
motion, does yet in a good Microscope appear to be a complete Animal, furnished
with all necessary Parts; which I can easily allow, having often in
Cheese-Mites very distinctly seen the Hair growing upon their Legs. And to the
former Instance I might add, what I have elsewhere told you of a sort of
Animals far lesser than Cheese-Mites themselves, namely those that may be
oftentimes seen in Vinegar. But what has been already said may suffice for my
present purpose, which is only to show, that the wonderful minuteness I shall
hereafter ascribe to Effluvia, is not inconsistent with the most received
Theories of Naturalists. For otherwise in this Essay the Proofs I mean to
employ, must be taken, not a Priori, but a Posteriori. And the Experiments and
Observations I shall employ on this occasion will be chiefly those, that are
referrible to one of the following Heads.

I. The strange Extensibility of some Bodies whilst their Parts yet remain
tangible. II. The multitude of Visible Corpuscles, that may be afforded by a
small portion of Matter. III. The smallness of the Pores at which the Effluvia
of some Bodies will get in. IV. The small decrement of Bulk or Weight, that a
Body may suffer by parting with great store of Effluvia. V. The great quantity
of Space that may be filled, as to sense, by a small quantity of Matter when
rarefied or dispersed.
But though to these distinct Heads I shall design distinct Chapters, yet you
must not expect to find the Instances solicitously marshalled, This Essay was
designed to be but a part of the Author's Notes upon his Essay about Saltpeter.
but set down in the order they occurred to me; such a liberty being allowable
in a Paper, where I pretend not to write Treatises, but Notes

CHAP. II.
AMong many things that are gross enough to be the Objects of our Touch, and to
be managed with our Hands, there are some that may help us to conceive a
wonderful minuteness in the small Parts they consist of.

I do not remember what Cardan, and since him another Writer have delivered
about the Thinness and Slenderness to which Gold may be brought. And therefore
without positively assenting to, or absolutely rejecting what may have been
said about it by others, I shall only borrow on this occasion, In a Paper about
Improbable Truths.
what I have mentioned on another upon my own Observation; namely, That Silver,
whose Ductility and Tractility are very much inferior to those of Gold, was,
by my procuring, drawn out to so slender a Wire, that, when we measured it,
which was somewhat troublesome to do, with a long and accurate measure, we
found, that eight Yards of it did not yet fully counterpoise one Grain: So that
we might add a Grain more without making the Scale, wherein 'twas put,
manifestly preponderate, notwithstanding the Tenderness of the Balance. Whence
we concluded, that a single Grain of this Wire amounted to 27 Foot, that is,
324 Inches. And since Experience informs us, that half an English Inch can by
Diagonal Lines be divided into 100 parts great enough to be easily
distinguished, even for Mechanical uses, it follows, that a Grain of this
wiredrawn Silver may be divided into 64800 parts, and yet each of these will be
a true metalline, though but slender and short, Cylinder, which we may very
well conceive to consist yet of a multitude of minuter parts. For though I
could procure no Gilt Wire near so slender as our newly mentioned Silver-wire;
yet I tried that some which I had by me was small enough to make one Grain of
it fourteen foot long: At which rate an Ounce did amount to a full Mile,
consisting of 1000 Geometrical Paces, (of 5 foot a-piece,) and 720 foot over
and above. And if now it be permitted to suppose the Wire to have been, as in
probability it might have been, further drawn out to the same slenderness with
the abovementioned Silver-wire, the Instance will still be far more
considerable; for in this case, each of those little Cylinders, of which 64800
go to the making of one Grain, will have a superficial Area, which, except at
the Basis, will be covered with a Case of Gold; which is not only separable
from it by a mental Operation, but perhaps also by a Chemical one. For I
remember, that from very slender gilt Wire, though I could get none so slender
as this of mere Silver, I did more than once, for Curiosities sake, so get out
the Silver, that the golden Films, whilst they were in a Liquor that plumpt
them up, seemed to be solid wires of Gold: But when the Liquor was withdrawn,
they appeared, (as indeed they were) to be oblong and extremely thin and double
Membranes of that Metal, which, with an Instrument that had been delicate
enough, might have been ripp'd open, and displayed, and been made capable of
further. Divisions and Subdivisions. To this I shall add, that each of the
little silver Cylinders I lately spoke of, must not only have its little Area,
but its Solidity; and yet I saw no reason to doubt, but that it might be very
possible, if the Artificer had been so skilful and willing as I wished, to have
drawn the same quantity of Metal to a much greater length, since even an Animal
substance is capable of being brought to a slenderness much surpassing that of
our Wire, supposing the Truth of an Observation of very credible Persons
critical enough in making Experiments, which, for a Confirmation and an
Improvement of our present Argument, I shall now subjoyn. An Ingenious
Gentlewoman of my Acquaintance, Wife to a Learned Physician, taking much
pleasure to keep Silkworms, had once the Curiosity to draw out one of the Oval
Cases, (which the Silkworm spins, not, as it is commonly thought, out of its
Belly, but out of the Mouth, whence I have taken pleasure to draw it out with
my Fingers,) into all the Silken-wire it was made up of, which, to the great
wonder as well of her Husband, as her self, who both informed me of it,
appeared to be by measure a great deal above 300 Yards, and yet weighed but two
Grains and a half: so that each Cylindrically shaped Grain of Silk may well be
reckoned to be at least 120 Yards long.

Another way, I remember, I also employed to help men by the extensibility of
Gold the better to conceive the Minuteness of the Parts of Solid Bodies.

We took six beaten Leaves of Gold, which we measured one by one with a Ruler
purposely made for nice Experiments, and found them to have a greater equality
in Dimensions, and to be nearer true Squares, than could be well expected: The
side of the Square was in each of them exactly enough three Inches and 2/8, (or
1/4,) which number being reduced to a Decimal Fraction, viz. 3125/100, and
multiplied by it self, affords 105625/10000 for the Area, or superficial
Content of each square Leaf: And this multiplied by 6, the number of the
Leaves, amounts to 633750/10000 square Inches, for the Area of the six Leaves.
These being carefully weighed in a pair of tender Scales, amounted all of them
to one Grain and a quarter: And so one Grain of this foliated Gold was extended
to somewhat above fifty Inches; which differed but about a fifth part from an
Experiment of the like nature, that I remember I made many years ago in a pair
of exact Scales; and so small a difference may very well be imputed to that of
the pains and diligence of the Gold-Beaters, who do not always work with equal
strength and skill, nor upon equally fine and ductile Gold.

Now if we recall to mind what I was lately saying of the actual divisibility of
an Inch into an hundred sensible parts, and suppose an Inch so divided to be
applied to each side of a square Inch of the Leaf-Gold newly mentioned, it is
manifest that by subtle parallel Lines, drawn between all the opposite Points,
a Grain of Gold must be divisible into five hundred thousand little Squares,
very minute indeed, but yet discernible by a sufficiently sharp-sighted Eye.
And if we suppose an Inch to be divided into two hundred parts, as I lately
told you it was in a Ruler I employ, then, according to the newly recited way,
the number of the Squares, into which a single Grain is capable of being
divided, will amount to no less than two Millions.

There is yet another way that I took to show, that the extensibility, and
consequently the divisibleness of Gold is probably far more wonderful, than by
the lately mentioned Trial it appears.

For this purpose I went to a great Refiner, whom I used to deal with for
purified Gold and Silver, and inquired of him, how many Grains of Leaf-Gold he
was wont to allow to an Ounce of Silver, when it was to be drawn into gilt Wire
as slender as an Hair? To this he answered me, that eight Grains was the
proportion he allowed to an Ounce when the Wire was to be well gilt; but if it
were to be more slightly gilt, six Grains would serve the turn. And to the same
purpose I was answered by a skilful Wire-drawer. And I remember, that desiring
the Refiner to show me an Ingot of Silver, as he did at first gild it; he
showed me a good fair Cylindrical Bar, whereon the Leaf-Gold, that overlaid the
surface, did not appear to be by odds so thick as fine Venetian Paper; and yet
comparing this with gilt Wire, which I also desired to see, the Wire appeared
to be the better gilt of the two; possibly because the Gold in passing through
the various Holes, was by the sides of them not only extended but polished,
which made it look more vividly than the unpolished Leaves that gilded the
Ingot.

So that, if we suppose an Ounce of the gilt Wire formerly mentioned to have
been gilt with six Grains of Leaf-Gold, it will appear by an easy calculation,
that at this rate one Ounce of Gold, employed on gilding Wire of that
slenderness, would reach between ninety and an hundred Miles. But if now we
further suppose, as we lately did, that the slender Silver-wire, mentioned at
the beginning of this Chapter, were gilt; though we should allow it to have
(because of its exceeding slenderness,) not, (as the former) 6 Grains, but 8
Grains of Leaf-Gold to an Ounce of Siver, it must be acknowledged, that an
hollow Cylinder or sheath of Gold weighing but eight Grains, may be so
stretched, that 'twill reach to no less than 60 times as much (in weight) of
Silver-wire as it covers: [I said 60 times, for so often is 8 contained in 480,
the number of Grains in an Ounce;] and consequently (a Grain of that Wire
having been found to be 27 foot long,) the Ounce of Gold would reach to seven
hundred seventy seven thousand six hundred foot, that is, an hundred fifty five
Miles and above a half. And if we yet further suppose this superficial or
hollow Cylinder of Gold to be slit all along, and cut into as slender lists or
thongs as may be, we must not deny that Gold may be made to reach to a
stupendous length. But we need not this last supposition to make what preceded
it an amazing thing: which yet though it be indeed Stupendous and seem
Incredible, ought not at all to be judged Impossible, being no more than what
upon the Suppositions and Observations above laid down, does evidently follow.

CHAP. III.
AFter what has been said of the minuteness of tangible Objects, 'twill be
proper to subjoyn some instances of the smallness of such as yet continue
visible. But in regard these Corpuscles are singly too little to have any
common measure applied to any of them, we must make an estimate of their
minuteness by the number of those into which a small portion or fragment of
matter may be actually divided, the multitude of these being afforded by so
inconsiderable a Quantity of matter, sufficiently declaring, that each of them,
in particular, must be marvelously little.

Among the instances, where the smallness of Bodies may be deduced from what is
immediately the Object of Sight, it may not be unfit to take notice of the
evaporation of Water, which though it be granted to consist of gross particles
in comparison of the spirituous and odoriferous ones of diverse other Liquors,
as of pure Spirit of Wine, Essential Oils of Spices, etc. yet to show that a
small Quantity of it may be dispersed into a multitude of manifestly visible
Corpuscles, I thought upon, and more than once tried, the rarefaction of it
into Vapors by help of an Aeolipile, wherein, when I made the Experiment the
last time, I took the pains to register the Event as follows.

We put an Ounce of common Water into an Aeolipile, and having put it upon a
Chasing-dish of coals, we observed the time when the streams of Vapors began to
be manifest. This stream was for a good while impetuous enough, as appeared by
the noise it made, which would be much increased, if we applied to it at a
convenient distance a kindled brand, in which it would blow up the fire very
vehemently. The stream continued about a quarter of an hour (sixteen minutes or
better,) but afterward the Wind had pauses and gusts for two or three minutes
before it quite ceased. And by reason of the shape of the Aeolipile, (which
being framed chiefly for other purposes, was not so convenient for this) a
great portion of the Vapors condensed in the upper part of it, and fell down in
drops; so that supposing that they also had come out in the form of Wind, and
the blast had not been intermitted toward the latter end, I guessed it might
have continued uninterruptedly 18 or 20 minutes. Note, That applying a measure
to the Smoke, that came out very visible in a form almost conical, where it
seemed to have an Inch or more in Diameter, 'twas distant from the hole of the
Aeolipile about twenty Inches; and five or six Inches beyond that, though it
were spread so much, as to have four or five Inches in Diameter, yet the not
uniform but still-cohering Clouds (which was the form wherein the Vapors
appeared) were manifest and conspicuous.

After the rarefaction of Water when it is turned into Vapors, we may consider
that of Fuel when it is turned into Flame; to which purpose I might here
propose several Trials as well of our own as others, about the prodigious
Expansion of some Inflammable Bodies upon their being actually turned into
Flame. But in this place to mention all these, would perhaps too much entrench
upon another Paper; and therefore I shall here propose to your consideration
but one instance, and that very easy to be tried; of which I find this account
among my Adversaria.

Having oftentimes burnt Spirit of Wine, and also Oil in Glass-lamps, that for
certain uses were so made, that the surface of the Liquor was still circular,
'twas obvious to observe, how little the Liquor would subside by the wast that
was made of it, in about half a quarter of an hour. And yet if we consider,
that the naked Eye after some Exercise, may, as I have often tried, discern the
motions of a Pendulum that swings fast enough to divide a single minute of an
hour into 240 parts, and consequently half a quarter of an hour into 1800
parts; if we also consider into how many parts of the time employed by a
Pendulum, the Vibrations, slow enough to be discernible by the Eye, may be
mentally subdivided; and if we further consider, that without intermission, the
Oil is preyed upon by an actual Flame, and the particles of it do continually
furnish a considerable stream of shining matter, that with a strange celerity
is always flying away; we may very well conceive, that those parts of Flame
into which the Oil is turned, are stupendiously minute, since, though the
wasting of the Oil is in its progress too slow to be perceived by the Eye, yet
it is undoubted that there is a continual decrement of the depth of the Oil, the
Physical surfaces whereof are continually and successively attenuated and
turned into flame; and the strange subtilty of the Corpuscles of flame would be
much the stronglier argued, if we should suppose, that instead of common Oil
the flame were nourished by a fuel so much more compact and durable, as is
that inflammable substance made of a Metalline Body, of whose lastingness I
have elsewhere made particular mention, In some Papers about Flame.
after having taught the way of preparing it.

Having in a pair of tender Scales carefully weighed out half a Grain of good
Gunpowder, we laid it on a piece of Tile, and whelmed over it a vessel of glass
(elsewhere described, and often mentioned) with a Brass-plate to cover the
upper orifice of it. Then having fired the Gunpowder, we observed that the
smoke of it did opacate, and as to sense so fill the whole cavity of the Glass,
though its Basis were eight inches, its perpendicular height above twenty
inches, and its figure far more capacious than if it were conical, and this
smoke, not containing it self within the vessel, issued out at two or three
little intervals, that were purposely left between the orifice of the vessel
and the plate that lay upon it. This cover we then removed, that we might
observe how long the smoke would continue to ascend; which we found it would do
for about half a quarter of an hour, and during near half that time, (viz. the
three first minutes) the continually ascending smoke seemed to be, at its going
out, of the same Diameter with the orifice at which it issued; and it would
ascend sometimes a foot, sometimes half a yard, sometimes two foot or more into
the Air, before it would disperse and vanish into it.

Now if we consider, that the cavity of this round Orifice was two inches in
Diameter, how many myriads of visible Corpuscles may we easily conceive
thronged out at so large an outlet in the time abovementioned, since they were
continually thrusting one another forwards? And into so many visible Particles
of smoke must we admit, that the half Grain of Powder was shattered, beside
those multitudes, which, having been turned into actual flame, may probably be
supposed to have suffered a comminution, that made them become invisible. And
though I shall not attempt so hopeless a work, as to compute the number of
these small Particles, yet to make an estimate whereby it would appear to be
exceeding great, I thought fit to consider, how great the Proportion was
between the spaces, that to the Eye appeared all full of smoke, and the
dimensions of the Powder that was resolved into that smoke. Causing then the
Glass to be filled with common Water, we found it to contain above two and
twenty Pints of that liquor, and causing one of those measures to be weighed,
it was found to weigh so near a pound (of sixteen ounces,) that the computation
of the whole Water amounted to at least 160000 grains, and consequently 320000
half grains. To which if we add, that this Gunpowder would readily sink to the
bottom of Water, as being (by reason of the Saltpeter and Brimstone, that make
up at least six parts of seven of it) in specie heavier than it, and in
likelihood twice as heavy, (for it is not easy to determine it exactly,) we may
probably guess the space to which the smoke reached to exceed 500000 times
that, which contained the unfir'd Powder; and this, though the smoke, being
confined in the vessel, was thereby kept from diffusing it self so far as by
its streaming out it seemed likely that it would have done.

To these Instances from Inanimate Bodies I shall subjoyn one more taken from
Animals. Whereas then men have with Reason wondered, that so small a Body as a
Cheese-mite, which by the naked Eye is oftentimes not to be taken notice of,
unless it move, (if even then it be so,) should by the Microscope appear to be
an Animal furnished with all necessary parts; whereas this, I say, has given
just occasion to conclude, that the Corpuscles that make up the parts of so
small an Animal, must themselves be extremely small; I think the Argument may
be much improved by the following Consideration. Those that have had the
Curiosity to open from time to time Eggs that are sat upon by a hatching Hen
cannot but have observed, how small a proportion in reference to the bulk of
the whole Egg the Chick bears; when that, which the Excellent Harvey calls
Punctum saliens, discloses the motion of the Heart, and the color of the
Blood; and that even about the seventh or eighth day the whole Chick now
visibly formed, bears no great proportion to the whole Egg, which is to supply
it with Aliment, not only for its nourishment, but speedy growth for many days
after.

To apply this now to the matter in hand, having several times observed and
shown to others, that Cheese-mites themselves are generated of Eggs, if we
conceive, that in these Eggs, as in ordinary one, the Animal at its first
formation bears but a small proportion to the bulk of the whole Egg, the
remaining part being to suffice for the food and growth of the Embryo probably
for a pretty while; since, if an Ingenious person, that I desired to watch
them, did not mis-inform me, they used to be about ten or twelve days in
hatching; this whole Egg it self will be allowed to be but little in reference
to the Mite it came from, how extremely and unimaginably minute may we suppose
those parts to be, that make up the Alimental Liquors, and even the Spirits,
that passing through the Nerves or Analogous parts, serve to move the Limbs and
Sensories of but, as it were, the Model of such an Animal, as, when it rests,
would not (perhaps) it self to the naked Eye be so much as visible; and in
which we may presume the nobler sort of stabler parts to be of an amazing
slenderness, if we consider, that, though in other hairy Animals, the Optic or
some other of the larger Nerves do, I know not how many times, in thickness and
circuit surpass a hair of the same Animal; yet in a Cheese-Mite, though none of
the largest of those Creatures, we have diverse times manifestly seen, as is
before intimated, single Hairs that grow upon the Legs.

Another way there is, that I employed to give men cause to think, that the
invisible Effluvia of Bodies that wander through the Air may be strangely
minute; and this was, by showing how small a fragment of matter may be resolved
into particles minute enough to associate themselves in such numbers with a
Fluid so much more dense than Air, as Water is, as to impart a determinate
Color to the whole liquor. What I did with Cocheneel in prosecution of this
design, my Experiments about Colors may inform you; but I shall now relate the
success of an attempt made another way, for which perhaps some of your friends
the Chemists will thank me; though I was not solicitous to carry on the
Experiment very far with Gold, not because I judged that less divisible into a
number of colored particles, but because I found, as I expected, that the
paleness of the native color of the Gold may make it in the end less
conspicuous, though, if I had then had by me a Menstruum, as I sometimes had,
that would dissolve Gold blood-red, perhaps the experiment with Gold would have
surpassed that, which it is now time I should begin to relate, as soon as I have
hinted to you by the way, that, for varieties sake, I made a trial with Copper
calcined per se, that I might not be accused of having omitted to employ a
Metal whose Body Chemists suppose to be much opened by Calcination. And though
the event were notable even in Comparison of that of the experiment made with
Cocheneel, yet my conjectures inclined me much to prefer the way described in
the following Account.

We carefully weighed out in a pair of tender Scales one grain of Copper
not-calcin'd, but barely filled; and because, as we made choice of this Metal
for its yielding in most Menstruums a Blew, which is a deep and conspicuous
color; we also chose to make a solution, not in Aqua fortis or Aqua regis, but
the Spirit of Sal Armoniack (as that is an urinous Spirit,) having found by
former trials, that this Menstruum would give a far deeper solution than either
of the others. This lovely Liquor, of which we used a good proportion, that all
the Copper might be thoroughly dissolved, we put into a tall cylindrical Glass
of about four inches in Diameter, and by degrees poured to it of distilled
Water, which is more proper in this case than common Water, which has
oftentimes an inconvenient Saltishness, 'till we had almost filled the Glass,
and saw the color grow somewhat pale, without being too dilute to be manifest;
and then we warily poured this liquor into a conical Glass, that it might be
the more easy to fill the vessel several times to the same height. This
conical Glass we filled to a certain mark four times consecutively, weighing
it, and the liquor too, as often in a pair of excellent Scales purposely made
for Statical experiments, and which, though strong enough to weigh some pounds
in each Scale, would, when not too much laden, turn with about one grain.
These several weights of the Glass, together with the contained liquor, we
added together, and then carefully weighing the empty Glass again, we deducted
four times its weight from the abovementioned sum, and thereby found the
weight of the liquor alone, to be that, which reduced to grains amounted to
28534; so that a grain of Copper, which is not full half so heavy in specie as
fine Gold, communicated a Tincture to 28534 times its weight.

But now if you please to take notice, that the scope of my Experiment was to
show, into what a number of parts one grain of Copper might be divided, you
will allow me to consider, as I did, that this multitude of parts must be
estimated by the Proportion, not so much in weight as in bulk, of the tinging
Metal to the tinged Liquor, and consequently, since that diverse Hydrostatical
trials have informed me, that the weight of Copper to the weight of Water of
the same bulk is proxime as 9 to 1, a grain-weight of Copper is in bigness but
the ninth part of as much Water as weighs a grain; and so the formerly
mentioned number of the grains of Water must be multiplied by 9, to give us the
Proportion between the tinging and tinged Bodies, that is, that a single grain
of Copper gave a blewness to above 256806 parts of limpid Water, each of them
as big as it. Which, though it may seem stupendous, and scarce credible; yet I
thought fit to prosecute the Experiment somewhat farther, by pouring all the
liquor out of the tall cylindrical Glass into another clean vessel, whence
filling the conical Glass twice, and emptying it as often into the same
cylindrical Glass, the third time I filled the conical Glass with colorless
distilled Water, and pouring that also into the cylindrical Glass, we found the
mixed liquor to have yet a manifest, though but a pale, blewness. And, lastly,
throwing away what was in the cylindrical Glass, we poured into it, out of the
same conical Glass, equal parts of distilled colorless Water, and of the
tincted Liquor we had formerly set apart in the clean Vessel, and found, that,
though the color were very faint and dilute, yet an attentive Eye could easily
discern it to be bluish; and so it was judged by an intelligent Stranger that
was brought in to look upon it, and was desired to discover of what color he
thought it to be. Whereby it appears, that one grain of Copper was able to
impart a color to above double the quantity of Water above mentioned.

This Experiment I have allowed my self to be the longer and more particular in
relating, both because I know not, that any such has been hitherto either made
or attempted, and because it will probably gratify your Chemists, that love to
have the Tinctures of Metals believed very diffusive; and because, if
Circumstances were not added, it would seem to you as well incredible, as
perhaps it does seem stupendous, that a portion of matter should be able to
impart a conspicuous color to above 256806 times its bulk of Water, and a
manifest tincture to above 385200, (for so it did, when the proportion of the
tinged part to the whole mixture, made of it and the unting'd part, was as 2 to
31,) and a faint, but yet discernible and distinguishable color to above five
hundred and thirteen thousand six hundred and twenty times its bulk of Water.

CHAP. IV.
IT were easy for me (Pyroph.) to give you several Instances, to show, that
the Effluvia of Liquors may get in at the Pores of Bodies that are reputed of a
close Texture, but I shall at present forbear to mention such Examples, not
only because they belong to another place A Discourse of Pores of Bodies, and
Figures of Corpuscles.
, where I take notice of them, but because many such would not seem so
remarkable, nor be so considerable to our present purpose, as a few taken from
Bodies that are not Fluid.

And first, it is delivered by Writers of good credit, that several Persons,
(for the Experiment does not hold in all) by barely holding for some time dried
Cantharides in their hands, have been put to much pain at the neck of the
Bladder, and have had some other parts ministering to the secretion of Urine
sensibly injured. That this is true, I am induced to believe, by what I have
elsewhere related to you of the unwelcome experiment I had of the effect of
Cantharides applied but outwardly to my neck, and that unknown to me, upon the
Urinary Passages; and that these Operations are due to material Effluxes,
which, to get into the Mass of Blood, must pass through the pores of the skin,
you will not, I presume, put me to prove.

Scaliger Exercit. 186. relates, that in Gascony, his Country, there are
Spiders of that virulency, that, if a man treads upon them to crush them, their
poison will pass through the very soles of his Shoes. Which story,
notwithstanding the Reputation of the Author, I should perhaps have left
unmention'd, because of a much stranger about Spiders, which he relates in the
same Section, but that I met with one that is analogous in the diligent Piso's
late History of Brasile; where, having spoken of another venomous Fish of that
Country, and the Antidotes he had successfully used to cure the hurts it
inflicts, he proceeds to that Fish the Natives call Amoreatim, of one kind
whereof, called by the Portugals Peize Sola, his words are these; Quae mira
sane efficacia non solum manum vel levissimo attactu, sed and pedem, licet
optime calceatum, Piscatoris incaute pisciculum conterentis, Paralysi and
Stupore afficit, instar Torpedinis Europaeae, sed minus durabili. Lib. 5. cap.
14.

What I shall ere long have occasion to tell you of the power of the Torpedo,
and some other Animals, to affect the Hand and Arm of him that strikes them,
seems applicable to the matter under consideration: For, though their affecting
the striker at a distance, may very well be ascribed to the stupefactive or
other venomous Exhalations that expire (and perhaps are as it were darted) from
the Animal irritated by the stroke, and are breathed in together with the air
they infect; yet their benumming, or otherwise affecting the Arm that struck
them, rather than any other part, seems to argue, that the poisonous steams get
in at the pores of the skin of the Limb, and so stupifie, or otherwise injure,
the nervous and musculous parts of it.

Other Examples belonging to this Section may be referred hither from diverse
other places in these Papers about Occult Qualities, and therefore I shall only
add here that most remarkable Proof, That some Emanations, even of solid
Bodies, may be subtle enough to get through the pores, even of the closest
Bodies; which is afforded us by the Effluvia of the Loadstone, which are by
Magnetical Writers said to penetrate without resistance all kind of Bodies. And
though I have not tried this in all sorts, yet having tried it in Metals
themselves, I am apt to think, the general Rule admits of very few Exceptions,
especially, if that can be fully made out, which is affirmed about the
perviousness of Glass to the Effluxions of the Loadstone. For, not only Glass
is generally reputed to be as close a Body as any is, but (which weighs more
with me) I have by Trials purposely made, had occasion to admire the closeness
of very thin pieces of Glass. But the reason why I just now expressed my self
with an If, was, because I was not entirely satisfied with the Proof wont to be
acquiesc'd in, of the perviousness of Glass; namely, that in Dials and
Sea-Compasses that are covered with plates of Glass, the Needle may be readily
moved to and fro by a Loadstone held over it. For these Plates being commonly
but fastened on with Wax, or at best with Cement, a Sceptick may pretend, that
the magnetical Effluvia pass not through the Glass, but through that much more
pervious matter, that is employed to secure the Commissures, only from the
access of the Air. To put then the matter past doubt, I caused some Needles to
be Hermetically sealed up in Glass-pipes, which being laid upon the surface of
water (whereon by reason of the bigness of the Cavities they would lightly
float,) the included Needles did not only readily feel the virtue of an
externally applied Loadstone, (though but a weak one) but complied with it so
well, that I could easily, by the help of the Needle, lead, without touching
it, the whole Pipe, this was shut up in, to what part of the surface of the
water I pleased. And I also found, that by applying a better Loadstone to the
upper part of a sealed Pipe, and a Needle in it, I could make the Needle leap
up from the lower part as near to the Loadstone as the interposed Glass would
give it leave.

But I thought it would be more considerable, to manifest that the Magnetical
Effluvia, even of such a dull Body, as the Globe of the Earth, would also
penetrate Glass. And though this seem difficult to be tried, because no
ordinary Loadstone, nor any Iron touched by it, was to be employed to work on
the included Iron; yet I thought fit to attempt it after this manner: I took a
cylindrical piece of Iron of about the bigness of ones little finger, and
between half a foot and foot long, (for I had formerly observed, that the
quantity of unexcited Iron furthers its Operation upon excited Needles,) and
having Hermetically sealed it up in a Glass-pipe but very little longer than
it; I supposed, that if I held it in a perpendicular posture; the Magnetical
Effluvia of the Earth, penetrating the Glass, would make the lower extreme of
the Iron answerable to the North Pole; and therefore having applied this to the
point of the Needle in a Dial, or Sea-Compass, that looked toward the North,
(for Authors mean not all the same thing by the Northern Pole of a Needle or
Loadstone,) I presumed it would, according to the Laws Magnetical (elsewhere
mentioned) drive it away, which accordingly it did. And having for farther
trial inverted the included Iron, (so that the end which was formerly the
lowermost, was now the uppermost) and held it in a perpendicular posture just
under the same point of the Needle, that extreme of the Iron-rod, which before
had driven away this point, being by this inversion become (in a manner) a
South-Pole, did (according to the same Laws) attract it: By which sudden change
of Poles, merely upon the change of situation, it also appeared, that the Iron
owed its Virtue only to the Magnetism of the Earth, not that of another
Loadstone, which would not have been thus easily alterable. And this Experiment
I the more particularly relate, because this is not the only place, where I
have occasion to make use of it.

CHAP. V.
ANother proof of the great Subtilty of Effluviums, may be taken from the small
Decrement of weight or bulk that a Body may suffer by parting with great store
of such Emanations.

That Bodies, which infused in Liquors impregnate them with new Qualities
suitable to those of the immersed Bodies, do so by imparting to them somewhat
of their own Substance, will, I presume, be readily granted by those that
conceive not, how one Body should communicate to another a solitary and naked
Quality, unaccompanied by any thing Corporeal to support and convey it. But I
would not have you think, Pyrophilus, that the only matter of fact I have to
countenance this notion, is that Experiment, which has convinced diverse
Chemists and Physicians, otherwise not friends to the Corpuscular Philosophy,
that Medicines may operate without any consumption of themselves. For, though
diverse of these, some of them Learned men, have confidently written, that Glass
of Antimony and Crocus Metallorum, being either of them infused in a great
proportion of Wine, will make it vomitive; and if that liquor be poured off,
and new be poured on, every new portion of such liquor will be impregnated with
the same virtue, and this though the liquor be changed a thousand times, and
yet the Antimonial Glass or Crocus will continue the same as well in weight as
virtue; and though thence some of them, especially Chemists, argue, that some
Metals without imparting any thing substantial, but only, as Helmont speaks of
some of his Arcana, by irradiation: Yet, I confess, I have some doubts, whether
the Experiment have been competently tried, and shall not fully acquiesce in
what has been said, till some skilful Experimenter deliver it upon his own
Trial, and acquaint us too, with what Instruments and what Circumspection he
made it. For, besides that the Ingeniousest Physicians I have questioned about
it, acknowledged the Taste, and sometimes the Color of the Wine to be altered
by the infused Mineral, I could not acquiesce in the affirmation of an ordinary
Chemist or Apothecary, or even Physician, if he should barely averr, that he
had weighed an Antimonial Medicine before 'twas put to infuse, and after the
infusion ended, and observed no decrement of weight. For I have had too much
experience (as I elsewhere mention) of the difficulty of making exact Statical
trials; not to know, that such Scales, as are wont to be employed by Chemists
and Apothecaries in weighing Drugs, are by no means fit to make trials with the
nicety which that I am speaking of requires: It being easy, even with the
better sort of such unaccurate Scales, especially if they be not suspended from
some fixed thing, but held with the hand, to mistake half a grain or a grain;
and perhaps a greater quantity, and at least more than by diverse of the
Experiments of this Essay appears necessary to be spent upon the impregnating
of a considerable proportion of Liquor with Corporeal Effluxions. Besides, that
if, when the beaten Crocus or Glass be taken out of the Wine to be weighed
again, the Experimenter be not cautious enough to make allowance for the Liquor
that will adhere to the Medicament, it is plain that he may take notice of no
decrement of weight, though there may be really Effluviums of the Mineral
amounting to several grains, imbibed by the Liquor. And though he be aware of
this, and dry the powder, yet it is not so easy, even for a skilful man, to be
sure that none of the more viscous particles of the Liquor stick to the
Mineral, and being sensible upon the Balance, though not to the Eye or Hand,
repair the recess of those emetick Corpuscles that diffused themselves into the
Menstruum. And the sense of these difficulties put me upon the attempting to
make so noble an Experiment with excellent Scales, and the care that it
deserves: But after a long trial, an unlucky accident frustrated at last my
endeavors. But though, till competent Relators give us an account of this
matter upon their own trial, and repeat the Infusion very much oftener, than,
for ought I find, any man has yet done, I must not acquiesce in all that is
said of the Impregnation of Wine or other Liquors by Antimonial Glass and
Crocus Metallorum; yet that after diverse repeated Infusions the Mineral
substance should not be sensibly diminished in bulk or virtue, may well suffice
to make this Instance, though not the only or chief that may be brought for our
purpose, yet a pertinent one to it. For that there is a powerful Emetick
Quality imparted to the Liquor, is manifest by experience; and that the Mineral
does not impart this virtue as 'twere by irradiation, but by substantial
effluxion, seems to me very probable; not only because I conceive not, how this
can be done otherwise, but because, as it is noted above, the Wine does
oftentimes change color by being kept a competent time upon the Mineral, as if
it drew thence a Tincture; and even when it is not discolored, I think it
unsafe to conclude, that the Menstruum has not wrought upon it. For I have kept
good Spirit of Vinegar for a considerable time upon finely powdered Glass of
Antimony made per se, without finding the Spirit to be at all tinged, though
it is known, that Antimonial Glass is soluble in Spirit of Vinegar, as mine
afterward appeared to be, by a longer digestion in the same Liquor. But there
may be a great number of minute particles dissolved in the Menstruum before
they be numerous enough to change the Color of it. And with this agrees very
well what is observed, That though too great a quantity of the prepared
Antimony be put into the liquor, yet it will not be thereby made too strongly
Emetick. For the Wine, being a Menstruum, will, like other Menstruums, be
impregnated but to a certain measure, without dissolving the overplus of the
matter that is put into it. And Mars, which is a harder and heavier body than
Glass of Antimony, is it self in part soluble in good Rhenish or other white
Wine, (and that in no long time,) and sometimes even in Water.

I do not therefore reject the Emetick Infusion, as unfit to have a place in
this Chapter, but till the experiment have been a little more accurately made,
I think it inferior, as to our purpose, to some of the Instances to be met
with in the next Chapter, and perhaps also to that mentioned by Helmont, and
tried by more than one of my Acquaintance, concerning the Virtue of killing
Worms, that Mercury imparts to the water or wine wherein it has been long
enough infused, or else for a while decocted. Though Quicksilver given in
substance is commended as an effectual Medicine against Worms, not only by many
professed As Quercetanus, Libavius, Zabata, Burggravius.
Spagyrists, but by diverse As Vidius, Paraeus, Caesalpinus, etc.
Methodists of good Note. And though, some other things, Chemical and
Philosophical, keep me from being of their opinion, who think that in this case
the Mercury impregnates the liquor as it were by Irradiation, rather than in a
Corporeal manner, yet the Eye does not perceive, that even limpid water takes
any thing from clean and well purged Mercury, which we know that diverse
corrosive liquors themselves will not work upon.

To this Instance I must add one that is yet freer from exceptions, which is,
that having for Curiosity sake suspended in a pair of exact Scales, that would
turn with a very small part of a grain, a piece of Ambergris bigger than a
Walnut, and weighing betwixt an hundred and six-score grains, I could not in
three days and a half that I had opportunity to make the trial, discover, even
upon that Balance, any decrement of weight in the Ambergris; though so rich
a perfume, lying in the open Air, was like in that time to have parted with
good store of odoriferous Steams. And a while after suspending a Lump of Assa
foetida five days and a half, I found it not to have sustained any discernible
loss of weight, though, in spite of the unfavourable cold weather, it had about
it a neighboring Atmosphere replenished with foetid exhalations. And when
twelve or fourteen hours after, perhaps upon some change of weather, I came to
look upon it, though I found that in that time the Aequilibrium was somewhat
altered, yet the whole Lump had not lost half a quarter of a grain; which
induced me to think, that there may perhaps be Steams discernible even by our
Nostrils, that are far more subtle than the odorous exhalations of Spices
themselves. For, having in very good Scales suspended in the Month of March an
ounce of Nutmegs, it lost in about six days five grains and a half. And an
ounce of Cloves in the same time lost seven grains and five eigths.

You will perhaps wonder, why I do not prefer to the Instances I make mention
of in this Chapter, that which may be afforded by the Loadstone, that is
acknowledged continually to emit multitudes of Magnetical Steams without
decrement of weight. But though I have not thought fit to pass this wholly
under silence; yet I forbear to lay so much stress on it, not only because my
Balances have not yet satisfied me about the Effluvia of Loadstones, (for I
take them not all to be equally diffusive of their Particles;) but because I
foresee it may be doubted, whether Loadstones, like odorous Bodies, do furnish
afresh of their own, all the Corpuscles* that from time to time issue from
them? Or, whether they be not continually repaired, partly by the return of the
Magnetical Particles to one Pole that sallied out of the other; and partly by
the continued passage of Magnetical matter (supplied by the Earth or other
Mundane Bodies) it make the Pores or Channels of the Loadstone their constant
Thorow-fares.

I doubt not but it will make it more probable, that a small Quantity of matter
being scattered into invisible Effluvia may be exceedingly rarefied and
expanded, if it can be made appear, that this little portion of matter shall,
for a considerable time, emit multitudes of visible parts, and that in so close
an order among themselves, as to seem in their Aggregate but one entire liquor,
endowed with a stream-like motion, and a distinct superficies, wherein no
interruption is to be seen, even by an Eye placed near it. To devise this
Experiment, I was induced, by considering, that hitherto all the (total)
dissolutions that have been made of Pigments, have been in liquors naturally
cold, and consisting probably of much less subtle, and certainly of much less
agitated parts, than that fluid aggregate of shining matter that we call Flame;
whereas I argued, that if one could totally dissolve a Body composed of parts
so minute as those of a Metal into actual Flame, and husband its Flame so, as
that it should not immoderatly waste, I should thereby dissolve the Metal in a
far more subtle Menstruum than our common water, or Aqua fortis, or Aqua Regis,
or any other known Menstruum I have yet employed. And consequently the
attenuation and expansion of the Metal in this truly Igneous Menstruum would
much surpass not only what happens in ordinary Metalline solutions, but
possibly also what I have noted in the third Chapter of this Essay, about the
strange diffusion of Copper dissolved in Spirit of Urine and Water. In
prosecution of this design, I so prepared one single grain of that Metal, by a
way that I elsewhere teach, that it was dissolved in about a spoonful of an
appropriated Menstruum. And then having caused a small Glass-lamp to be
purposely blown to contain this liquor, and fitted it with a socket and wieck,
we lighted the Lamp, which, without consuming the wieck, burnt with a flame
large enough and very hot, and seemed to be all the while of a greenish blew,
as if it were a but finer and shining solution of Copper. And yet this one
grain of prepared Metal tinged the flame that was from moment to moment
produced, during no less than half an hour and six minutes. And now if we
consider, that in this flame there was an uninterrupted Succession of
multitudes of colored Particles newly extricated, and flying off in every of
those many parts wherein a minute of time may either actually or mentally be
divided; and, if we consider Flame as a light and very agitated body, passing
with a stream upwards through the Air, and if we also consider the quantity of
liquor that would (as I shall by and by tell you) run through a Pipe of a much
lesser diameter than that Flame, within the compass of the forementioned time:
What a quantity of the streaming fluid we call Flame, if it could have been
preserved and collected into one Body, may we suppose would appear to have
issued out of one grain of Copper in the space of thirty-six minutes; and what
a multitude of metalline Corpuscles may we suppose to have been supplied for
the tinging of that Flame during so long a time? since a Cylindrical stream of
water falling but through a very short Pipe of glass, constantly supplied with
liquors, did pass at such a rate, that, though the aqueous Cylinder seemed more
slender by half, (or perhaps by two thirds or better) than the Flame, yet we
estimated, by the help of a Minute-watch and a good pair of Scales, that, if I
had had conveniences to let it run long enough, the water efflux'd in
thirty-six minutes (the time of the Flames duration) would have amounted to
above nine gallons, or, (reckoning a pint of water to contain a pound of
sixteen ounces) seventy-two pounds.

CHAP. VI.
THE last sort of Instances I shall propose to show the strange Subtilty of
Effluvia, is of such, as discover the great quantity of space that may by a
small quantity of matter, when rarefied or dispersed, be either filled as to
sense, or, at least, made (as they speak) the sphere of its activity.

To manifest this Truth, and thereby as well confirm the foregoing Chapter, as
make out what is designed in this, I shall endeavor to show, and help your
imagination to conceive, how great a space may be impregnated with the
Effluxions of a Body, oftentimes without any sensible, and oftener without any
considerable decrement in bulk or weight of the Body that affords them. And in
order to this, though I shall not pretend to determine precisely how little the
substances, I am to instance in, would waste upon the Balance, because you
will very easily see they are not that way to be examined; yet I presume, you
will as easily grant, that the decrement of weight would be but inconsiderable,
since of such light substances the loss even of bulk is so; which last clause I
shall now attempt to make good, by setting down some Observations, partly
borrowed from the writings of approved Physicians, and partly that my friends
and I have made about the durable Evaporation of such small particles of the
Effluxions of Animals, as are actually not to be discerned by the Eye to have
any of those things sticking to them, which are so very long in flying
successively away.

It Is wont to be somewhat surprising to men of Letters, when they first go a
hawking with good Spaniels, to observe, with how great sagacity those dogs will
take notice of, and distinguish by the scent, the places where Partridges,
Quails, etc. have lately been. But I have much more wondered at the quick scent
of an excellent Setting-dog, who by his way of ranging the fields, and his
other motions, especially of his Head, would not only intimate to us the kinds
of game, whose scent he chanced to light on, but would discover to us where
Partridges had been (though perhaps without staying in that place) several
hours before, and assist us to guess how long they had been gone before we came.

I have had strange answers given me in Ireland, by those who make a gain if
not an entire livelihood by killing of Wolves in that Country, (where they are
paid so much for every head they bring in) about the sagacity of that peculiar
race of dogs they employ in hunting them; but not trusting much to those
Relators, I shall add, that a very sober and discreet Gentleman of my
acquaintance, who has often occasion to employ Bloodhounds, assures me, that
if a man have but passed over a field, the scent will lie (as they speak) so as
to be perceptible enough to a good dog of that sort for several hours after.
And an ingenious Hunter assures me, that he has observed, that the scent of a
flying and heated Deer will sometimes continue upon the ground from one day to
the next following.

And now we may consider these three things; First, That the substance left
upon the grass or ground by the transient tread of a Partridge, Hare, or other
animal, that does but pass along his way, does probably communicate to the
grass or ground but some of those Effluxions, that transpire out of his feet,
which being small enough to escape the discernment of the Eye, may probably not
amount to one grain in weight, or perhaps not to the tenth part of it. Next,
That the parts of fluid Bodies, as such, are perpetually in motion, and so are
the invisible particles that swim in them, as may appear by the dissolution of
Salt or Sugar in water, and the wandering of aqueous Vapors through the Air,
even when the Eye perceives them not. And thirdly, That though the Atmosphere
of one of these small parcels of the exhaling matter we are speaking of, may
oftentimes be exceeding vast in comparison of the emittent Body, as may be
guessed by the distance, at which some Setters, or Bloodhounds, will find the
scent of a Partridge, or Deer; yet in places exposed to the free air or wind,
it is very likely that these steams are assiduously carried away from their
Fountain, to maintain the forementioned Atmosphere for six, eight, or more
hours, that is, as long as the scent has been observed to lie, there will be
requisite a continual recruit of steams succeeding one another And that so very
small a portion of matter as that which we were saying the fomes of these
steams may be judged to be, being sensibly to impregnate an Atmosphere
incomparably greater than it self, and supply it with almost continual
recruits, we cannot but think, that the steams it parts with, must be of an
extreme and scarce conceivable minuteness.

And we may further consider, that the substances, which emit these steams,
being such as newly belonged to Animals, and were, for the most part,
transpir'd through the pores of their feet, must be in likelihood a far more
evaporable and dissipable kind of Bodies than Minerals or adust Vegetables,
such as Gunpowder is made of; so that if the grains of Gunpowder emit
Effluviums capable of being by some Animals perceived at a distance by their
smell, one may probably suppose, that the small grains of this powder may hold
out very many times longer to supply an Atmosphere with odorable steams, than
the Corpuscles left on the ground by transient Animals.

Now though it be generally agreed on, that very few Birds have any thing near
so quick a sense of smelling as Setting-dogs or Bloodhounds, yet that the
odor of Gunpowder, especially when assisted by the steams of the Caput mortuum
of Powder formerly fired in the same Gun, may be Fowls be smelt at a notable
distance, particularly when the wind blew from me toward them, I often
persuaded my self I observed, especially as to Crows, when I went a shooting;
and was confirmed in that opinion, both by the common Tradition, and by sober
and ingenious persons much exercised in the killing of Wild-fowl, and of some
fourfooted Beasts.

I had forgotten to take notice of one Observation of the experienced Julius
Palmarius: Whence we may learn, that Beasts may leave upon the Vegetables, that
have touched their bodies for any time, such Corpuscles, as, though unheeded by
other Animals, may, when eaten by them, produce in them such diseases as the
infected Animals had. For this Author writes in his useful Tract de morbis
Contagiosis, that he observed Horses, Beeves, Sheep and other Animals, to run
mad upon the eating of some of the straw on which some mad Swine had layn.

And now to resume and prosecute our former discourse, you may take notice,
that the Effluvia, mentioned to have been smelt by Animals, are, though
invisible, yet big enough to be the objects of sense; so that it is not
improbable, that, among the steams that no sense can immediately perceive,
there should be some far more subtle than these, and consequently capable of
furnishing an Atmosphere much longer, without quite exhausting the effluviating
matter that afforded them.

Lib. 6. Observe. 22.
Forestus, an useful Author, recites an Example of Pestilential contagion long
preserved in a Cobweb.

Alexander Benedictus writes also, that at Venice a Flock-bed did for many
years harbor a pestiferous malignity to that degree, that when afterward it
came to be beaten, it presently infected the bystanders with the Plague.

And the Learned Lib. 4. de Eeb. cap. 3.
Sennertus himself relates, that in the year 1542. there did in the City of
Uratislavia (vulgarly Breslaw,) where he afterward practiced Physic, dye of
the Plague, in less than six Months, little less than six thousand men, and
that from that time the Pestilential Contagion was kept folded up in a linen
cloth about fourteen years, and at the end of that time being displayed in
another City, it began a Plague there, which infected also the neighboring
Towns and other places.

Libr. 3. Con. 17.
Trincavella makes mention of a yet lastinger Contagion, (which occasioned the
death of ten thousand persons) that lay lurking in certain Ropes, with which at
Justinopolis those that died of the Plague had been let down into their Graves.

But, though none of these Relations should to some Critics appear scarce
credible, it may be objected, that all these things, wherein this Contagion
resided, were kept close shut up, or at least were not exposed to the Air.
Wherefore having only intimated, that the exception, which I think is not
irrational, would, though never so true, but lessen the wonder of these strange
Relations, without rendering them unfit for our present purpose, I shall add,
that though it is the opinion of diverse Learned Physicians, that the matter
harboring Contagion cannot last above Twenty or a few more days, if the Body it
adheres to be exposed to the free air and the wind, and though I am not forward
to deny, that their judgment may hold in ordinary cases; yet I must not deny
neither, that a Contagion may sometimes happen to be much more tenacious and
obstinate: Of which I shall give but that one, almost recent instance observed
by the Learned Lib. 4. de Peste.
Dimmerbrook in his own Apothecary, who having but removed with his foot, from
one side to the other of a little Arbor (in his Garden) some straw, that had
layn under the Pallet, on which near eight Months before a Bed had layn,
wherein a Servant of the Apothecaries, that recovered, had been sick of the
Plague; the infectious steams presently invaded the lower part of his leg, and
produced a pungent pain and blister, which turned to a pestilential Carbuncle,
that could scarce be cured in a Fortnight after, though during that time the
Patient were neither feverish, nor, as to the rest of his Body, ill at ease.
This memorable instance, together with some others of the like kind, that our
Author observed in the same City (of Nimmegen) obtained, not to say, extorted,
even from him, this Confession; which I add, because it contains some
considerable, and not yet mentioned Circumstances of the recited case: Hoc
exemplo Medicorum Doctrina de Contagio in fomite latente satis confirmatur.
Mirum tamen est, hoc Contagium tanto tempore in praedicto stramine potuisse
subsistere, utpote quod tota hyeme ventis and pluviis, (he adds in another
place) nivibus and frigori, expositum fuisset.

And now I will shut up this Chapter with an instance, that some will think,
perhaps, no less strange than any of the rest, which is, that though they that
are skilful in the perfuming of Gloves, are wont to imbue them with but an
inconsiderable quantity of odoriferous matter, yet I have by me a pair of
Spanish Gloves, which I had by the favor of your fair and virtuous Sister (F.)
that were so skilfully perfumed, that partly by her, partly by those, that
presented them her as a Rarity, and partly by me, who have kept them several
Years, they have been kept about eight or nine and twenty years, if not thirty,
and they are so well scented, that they may, for ought I know, continue
fragrant diverse years longer. Which instance, if you please to reflect upon,
and consider, that such Gloves cannot have been carried from one place to
another, or so much as uncovered (as they must often have been) in the free
Air, without diffusing from themselves a fragrant Atmosphere, we cannot but
conclude those odorous Steams to be unimaginably subtle, that could for so
long a time issue out in such swarms, from a little perfumed matter lodged in
the pores of a Glove, and yet leave it richly stocked with particles of the
same nature; though, (especially by reason of some removes, in which I took not
the Gloves along with me,) I forgot ever since I had them, to keep them so much
as shut up in a Box.

Of the GREAT EFFICACY OF EFFLUVIUMS: BY The Honorable ROBERT BOIL.

OF THE GREAT EFFICACY OF EFFLVVIVMS.
CHAP. I.
THey that are wont in the Estimates they make of Natural Things, to trust too
much to the negative informations of their Senses, without sufficiently
consulting their Reason, have commonly but a very little and slight opinion of
the Power and Efficacy of Effluviums; and imagine that such minute Corpuscles
(if they grant that there are such,) as are not, for the most part of them,
capable to work upon the tenderest and quickest of Senses, the Sight, cannot
have any considerable Operation upon other Bodies. But I take this to be an
error, which, as it very little becomes Philosophers, so it has done no little
prejudice to Philosophy it self, and perhaps to Physic too. And therefore
though the nature of my design at present did not require it, yet the
importance of the subject would invite me to show, That this is as ill-gounded
as prejudicial a Supposition.

And indeed if we Consider the subject attentively, we may observe, That though
it be true, that, caeteris paribus, the greatness of Bodies does, in most
cases, contribute to that of their Operation upon others, yet Matter or Body
being in its own precise nature an unactive or moveless Subject, one part of
the Mass acts upon another but upon the account of its Local Motion, whose
Operations are facilitated and otherwise diversified by the Shape, Size,
Situation and Texture both of the Agent and of the Patient. And therefore if
Corpuseles, though very minute, be numerous enough, and have a competent degree
of motion, even these small Particles, especially if fitly shaped, when they
chance to meet with a Body, which the congruity of its texture disposes to
admit them at its Pores, and receive their either friendly or hostile
impressions, may perform such things in the patient, as visible and much
grosser Bodies, but less conveniently shaped and moved, would be utterly unable
(on the same Body) to effect.

And that you may with the less difficulty allow me to say, that the Effluviums
of Bodies, as minute as they are, may perform Considerable things, give me
leave to observe to you, that there are at least six ways, by which the
Effluviums of a Body may notably operate upon another; namely, 1. By the great
number of emitted Corpuscles. 2. By their penetrating and pervading nature. 3.
By their celerity, and other Modifications of their Motion. 4. By the congruity
and incongruity of their Bulk and Shape to the Pores of the Bodies they are to
act upon. 5. By the motions of one part upon another, that they excite or
occasion in the Body they work upon according to its Structure. And 6ly, By the
Fitness and Power they have to make themselves be assisted, in their Working,
by the more Catholic Agents of the Universe. And though it may perhaps be
sufficiently proved, that there are several cases wherein a Body that emits
Particles, may act notably upon another Body by this or that single way of
those I have been naming; yet usually the great matters are performed by the
association of two, three or more of them, concurring to produce the same
Effect. Upon which score when I shall in the following Paper referr an Instance
or a Phenomenon to any one of the forementioned Heads, I desire to be
understood as looking upon that but as the Head, to which it chiefly relates,
without excluding the rest.

CHAP. II.
TAking those things for granted, that have, I hope, been sufficiently proved
in the former Tract about the subtlety of Effluviums, I suppose it will readily
be allowed, That the Emanations of a Body may be extremely minute; whence it
may be rightly inferred, that a small portion of matter may emit great
multitudes of them.

Now that the great number of Agents may in many cases compensate their
littleness, especially where they Act or Resist per modum unius, (as they
speak,) men would perhaps the more easily grant, if they took notice to this
purpose of some familiar Instances.

We see that not only lesser Landfloods that overflow the neighboring Fields,
but those terrible Inundations that sometimes drown whole Countries, are made
by Bodies singly so so small and inconsiderable as Drops of Rain when they
continue to fall in those multitudes we call Showers.

So the aggregates of such minute Bodies as grains of Sand being heaped
together in sufficient Numbers, make Banks wherewith greatest Ships are
sometimes split, nay and serve in most places for Bounds to the Sea it self.

And though a single Corn of Gunpowder, or two or three together, are not of
Force to do much mischief, yet two or three Barrels of those Corns taking Fire
all together are able to blow up Ships and Houses, and perform prodigious
things.

But instead of multiplying such Instances, afforded by Bodies of small indeed
but yet visible Bulk, I shall (as soon as I have intimated, that the
abovementioned drops of Rain themselves consist of convening Multitudes of
Vapors most commonly Invisible in their Ascent,) endeavor to make out what was
proposed, by two or three Instances drawn from the Operations of Invisible
particles.

And first, we see, that though Aqueous Vapors be looked upon as the faintest
and least active Effluviums that we know of, yet when multitudes of them are in
Rainy weather dispersed through the Air, and are thereby qualified to work on
the Bodies exposed to it, their Operations are very considerable, not only in
the dissolution of Salts, as Sea Salt, Salt of Tartar, etc. and in the
putrefactive changes they produce in many Bodies, but in the intumescence they
cause in Oak and other solid Woods; as appears by the difficulty we often find
in and before Rainy weather, to shut and open Doors, Boxes, and other Wooden
pieces of work, that were before fit enough for the Cavities they had been
adjusted to.

I might here urge, that though the strings of Viols and other Musical
Instruments are sometimes strong enough to sustain considerable weights, yet if
they be left screwed to their full tension, (as it frequently happens) they are
oftentimes by the supervening of moist weather made to break, not without
impetuosity and noise. But it may suit better with my present aim, if I mention
on this occasion, (what I elsewhere more fully take notice of:) Being desirous
to try what a multitude even of Aqueous Steams may do, I caused a Rope that was
long, but not thick, and was in part sustained by a Pully, to have a Weight of
Lead so fastened to the end of it, as not to touch the ground, and after the
Weight had leisure allowed it to stretch the Cord as far as it could, I
observed that in the moist weather the waterish particles, that did invisibly
abound in the Air, did so much work upon and shorten the Rope, as to make it
lift up the hanging Weight, which was, if I mis-remember not, about an hundred
Pounds.

The invisible Steams, issuing out of the Walls of a newly plaster'd or whited
Room, are not sensibly prejudicial to those that do but transiently visit it,
or make but a very short stay in it, though there be a Charcoal-fire in the
Chimney; but we have many instances of persons, that by lying for a night in
such Rooms, have been the next morning or sooner found dead in their Beds,
being suffocated by the multitude of the noxious Vapors emitted during all
that time.

And here I think it proper to observe, That it may much assist us to take
notice of the multitude of Effluvia, and make us expect great matters from
them, to consider, that they are not emitted from the Body that affords them
all at once, as Hail-shot out of a Gun, but issue from it as the Vaporous Winds
do out of an Aeolipil well heated, or Waters out of a Springhead in continued
Streams, wherein fresh parts still succeed one another; so that though as many
Effluxions of a Body as can be sent out at one time were numerous enough to Act
but upon its Superficial parts, yet the Emanation of the next minute may get in
a little farther, and each smallest portion of time supplying fresh Recruits,
and perhaps urging on the Steams already entered, the Particles may at length
get into a multitude of the pores of the invaded Body, and penetrate it to the
very innermost parts.

CHAP. III.
I Come now to show in the second place, That the subtle and penetrating
nature of Effluviums, may in many cases cooperate with their multitude in
producing notable effects; and that there are Effluviums of a very piercing
nature, though we shall not now enquire upon what account they are so, we may
evince by several Examples. For not only the invisible Steams of good Aqua
Fortis and Spirit of Nitre do usually in a short time, and in the cold, so
penetrate the corks wherewith the Glasses that contained them were stopped, as
to reduce them into a yellow pap; but also the emanations of Mercury have been
sometimes found in the form of coagulated, or even of running Mercury in the
heads or very bones of those Gilders, or Venereal Patients, that have too long
or too unadvisedly been exposed to the fumes of it, though they never took
Quicksilver in its gross substance. Chemists too often find in their
Laboratories, that the steams of Sulphur, Antimony, Arsnick, and diverse other
Minerals, are able to make those stagger, or perhaps strike them down, that
without a competent wariness unlute the Vessels wherein they had been distilled
or sublimed; of which I have known diverse sad Examples. And of the Penetrancy
even of animal Steams we may easily be persuaded, if we consider, how soon in
many Plagues the contagious, though invisible, Exhalations are able to reach
the Heart, or infect other internal parts; though in diverse of these cases the
Blood helps to convey the infection, yet still the Morbifick particles must get
into the body before they can infect the mass of Blood. And in those
stupefactions that are caused at a distance by the Terpedo, the parts mainly
affected seem to be the Nervous ones of the Hand and Arm, which are of the most
retired and best fenced parts of those members. And there is a Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, that I make to smell to, whose invisible Steams, unexcited by heat,
are of so piercing a nature, that not only they will powerfully affect the Eyes
and Nostrils, and Throats, and sometimes the Stomachs too (yet without proving
Vomitive,) of the Patients they invade, but also when a great cold has so
clogged the organs of smelling, that neither sweet nor stinking odours would at
all affect them, these piercing Steams have not only in a few minutes both made
themselves a way, and which is more, so opened the passages, that soon after
the Patient has been able to smell other things also. And by the same
penetrating Spirit, a person of Quality was, some time since, restored to a
power of smelling, which he had lost for diverse Years, (if he ever had it
equally with other men.) I could easily subjoyn Examples of this kind, but they
belong to other places. And here I shall only add, that the steams of Water it
self assisted by warmth, are capable of dissolving the Texture of even hard and
solid bodies, that are not suspected to be Saline; as appears by the
Philosophical calcination (as Chemists call it) wherein solid pieces of
Hartshorn are brought to be easily friable into powder, by being hung over
waters, whilst their steams rise in distillation and without the help of
Furnaces. The Exhalations, that usually swim every night in the air, and almost
every night fall to the ground in the form of Dews (which makes them be judged
Aqueous,) are in many places of the Torrid Zone of so penetrating a nature,
that, as Eyewitnesses have informed me, they would in a very short time make
Knives rust in their sheaths, and Swords in their scabbards, nay and Watches in
their cases, if they did not constantly carry them in their pockets. And I have
known even in England diverse hard bodies, into which the Vapors swimming in
the air have insinuated themselves, so far as to make them friable throughout.
But of the penetration of Effluviums, I have given, in several places, so many
instances, that it is not necessary to add any here. And therefore to show,
that, as I intimated at the beginning of this Chapter, the Penetrancy and the
multitude of Effluviums may much assist each other, I shall now subjoyn; That
we must not for the most part look upon Effluviums as swarms of Corpuscles,
that only beat against the outsides of the Bodies they invade, but as
Corpuscles, which by reason of their great and frequently recruited numbers,
and by the Extreme smallness of their Parts, insinuate themselves in multitudes
into the minute pores of the bodies they invade, and often penetrate to the
innermost of them; so that, though each single Corpuscle, and its distinct
action, be inconsiderable, in respect of the multitude of parts that compose
the body to be wrought on; yet a vast multitude of these little Agents working
together upon a correspondent number of the small parts of the body they
pervade, they may well be able to have powerful effects upon the Body, that
those parts constitute; as, in the case mentioned in the former Chapter, the
Rope would not probably have been enabled to raise so great a weight, though a
vehement Wind had blown against it, to make it lose its perpendicular
straightness, but a vast multitude of Watery Particles, getting by degrees into
the pores of the Rope, might, like an innumerable company of little wedges, so
widen the pores as to make the thrids or splinters of Hemp, the Rope was made
up of, swell, and that so forcibly, that the depending weight could not hinder
the shortning of the Rope, and therefore must of necessity be raised thereby.
And I have more than once known solid and even heavy Mineral Bodies, burst in
pieces by the moisture of the Air, though we kept them within-doors carefully
sheltered from the Rain.

CHAP. IV.
THat the Celerity of the motion of very minute Bodies, especially conjoined to
their multitudes, may perform very notable things, may be argued from the
wonderful effects of fired Gunpowder, Aurum fulminans, of Flames that invisibly
touch the Bodies they work on, and also Whirlwinds, and those streams of
invisible Exhalations and other aerial Particles we call Winds. But because
instances of this sort suit not so well with the main scope of this Tract, I
shall not insist on them, but subjoyn some others, which, though less notable
in themselves, will be more congruous to my present Design. That the Corpuscles
whereof Odours consist, swim to and fro in the Air, as in a fluid Vehicle, will
by most, I presume, be granted, and may be easily proved. But I have elsewhere
shown, That the motion of the Effluviums of some sufficiently odorous Bodies,
has too little Celerity to make a sensible impression on the organs of
smelling, unless those Steams be assisted to beat more forcibly upon the
Nostrils by the Air, which hurries them along with it, when it enters the
Nostrils in the form of a stream, in the act of Inspiration. And I have by
familiar observation of Hunters, Fowlers, and partly of my own made manifest,
that Setting-dogs, Hounds, Crows and some other animals, will be much more
affected with sents, or the odorous Effluvia of Partridges, Hares, Gunpowder,
etc. when the Wind blows from the object toward the sensory, than when it sits
the contrary way, which way soever the Nostrils of the animal be obverted, so
the Air be imbued with the odorous Steams: And consequently the difference
seems to proceed from this, that when the Nostrils are obverted to the Wind,
the Current of the Air drives the Steams forcibly upon the Sensory, which
otherwise it does not.

That there is a briskness of motion requisite, and more than ordinarily
conducive to Electrical attractions, may be argued from the necessity that we
usually find by rubbing Amber, Jett, and other Electrical bodies, to make them
emit those Steams, by which it is highly probable their action is performed: And
though I have elsewhere shown, that this precedent rubbing is not always
necessary to excite all Electrical bodies; yet in those that I made to attract
without it, it would operate much more vigorously after attrition; which I
conconceive makes a reciprocal motion amongst the more stable parts, and does
thereby as 'twere discharge and shoot out the attracting Corpuscles; whose real
emission, though it may be probably argued from what has been already said,
seems more strongly proveable by an Observation that I made many years ago, and
which I have been lately informed to have been long since made by the very
Learned Fabri. The Observation was this; That if, when we took a vigorously
excited Electrick, we did at a certain nick of time (which circumstances may
much vary, but was usually almost as soon as the body was well rubbed) place it
at a just distance from a suspended Hair or other light body, or perhaps from
some light powder; the Hair, etc. would not be attracted to the Electrick, but
driven away from it, as it seemed, by the briskly moving steams that issue out
of the Amber or other light body.

This Argument I could confirm by another Phenomenon or two of affinity with
this, if I should not borrow too much of what I have elsewhere noted about the
History of Electricity.

I know a certain substance, which though made by distillation, does in the
cold emit but a very mild and inoffensive smell, but when the vessel that holds
it is heated, though no separation of constituent Principles appear to be
thereby made, (the Body being in all usual trials homogeneous,) the Effluviums
will be so altered, that I remember a Virtuoso, that, to satisfy his
curiosity* would needs be smelling to it, when 'twas heated, complained to me,
that he thought the Steams would have killed him, and that the Effluviums of
Spirit of Sal Armoniack it self were nothing near so strong and piercing as
those.

And even among solid Bodies, I know some, which, though abounding much in a
substance wherein some rank smells principally reside, yet (if they were not
chafed) were scarce at all sensibly odorous; but upon the rubbing of them a
little one against the other, the attrition making them, as it were, dart out
their Emissions, would in a minute or two make them stink egregiously.

And as the Celerity of motion may thus give a vigor to the Emanations of
Bodies, so there may be other modifications of motion, that may contribute to
the same thing, and are not to be wholly neglected in this place. For as we
see, that greater Bodies do operate differingly according to such and such
modifications; as there is a great difference between the effects of a Dart or
Javelin, so thrown as that its point be always forwards, and the same weapon
if it be so thrown, that during its progressive motion the extremes turn about
the Center of gravity or some inward parts, as it happens when Boys throw
sticks to beat down fruit from the tops of trees; so there is little doubt to
be made, but that in Corpuscles themselves it is not all one, as to their
effects, whether they move with or without rotation, and whether in such or
such a line, and whether with or without undulation, trembling or such a kind
of consecution; and in short, whether the motion have or have not this or that
particular modification; which how much it may diversifie the Effects of the
Bodies moved, may appear by the Motion, that the Aerial particles are put into
by Musical Instruments. For, though the effects of harmony, discord and
peculiar sounds be sometimes very great, not only in Human bodies, but, as we
shall show in the following Tract, in Organical ones too; the whole efficacy of
Music and of Sounds that are not extraordinarily loud and different, seems, as
far as it is ascribable to Sonorous bodies, to depend upon the different manners
of motion whereinto that Air is put, that makes the immediate impression on our
organs of hearing.

CHAP. V.
I Should now proceed to show, how the Celerity and other modes, that
diversifie the motion of Effluviums, may be assisted to make them operative by
their determinate sizes and figures, and the congruity or incongruity which
they may have upon that score with the Pores of the grosser Bodies they are to
work on: But I think it not fit to entrench upon the subject of another Of the
Pores of Bodies, and Figures of Corpuscles.
Tract, where the relation between the figures of Corpuscles and the Pores of
grosser bodies is amply enough treated of. And therefore I shall only in this
place take notice of those effects of Lightning, which seem referable, partly
to the Celerity and manner of Appulse, and partly to the distinct sizes and
shapes of the Corpuscles that compose the destructive matter, and to the
peculiar relation between the particles of that matter and the structure of the
bodies they invade. I know that many strange things that are delivered about
the Effects of what the Latins call Fulmen (which our English word Lightning
does not adaequately render) are but fabulous; but there are but too many that
are not so; some of which I have been an Eyewitness of, within less than a
quarter of an hour after that the things happened. And though it be very
difficult to explicate particularly many of these true Phenomena, yet it seems
warrantable enough to argue from them, that there may be Agents so qualified,
and so swiftly moved, that notwithstanding their being so exceedingly minute,
as they must be, to make up a flame, which is a fluid Body, they must in an
imperceptible time pervade solid Bodies, and traversing some of them without
violating their Texture, burn, break, melt, and produce other very great
changes in other Bodies that are fitted to be wrought on by them. And of this I
must not forget to mention this remarkable instance; That a person Curious
enough to collect many rarities, bringing me one day into the Study where he
kept the choicest of them, I saw there among other things a fine pair of
Drinking-glasses that were somewhat slender, but extraordinarily tall; they
seemed to have been designed to resemble one another, and made for some
drinking entertainment. But before I saw them, that resemblance was much
lessened by the Lightning, that fell between them in so strange a manner, that,
without breaking either of them, that I could perceive, it altered a little the
figure of one of them, near the lower part of the Cavity; but the other was so
bent near the same place as to make it stand quite awry, and give it a posture,
that I beheld not without some amazement. And I cannot yet but look upon it as
a very strange thing, and no less considerable to our present purpose, that
Nature should in the free Air make of Exhalations, and that such as probably
when they ascended were invisible, such an aggregate of Corpuscles, as should
without breaking such frail Bodies as Glasses, be able in its passage through
them, that is, in the twinkling of an Eye, to melt them; which to do is wont
even in our Reverberatory Furnaces to cost that active flames a pretty deal of
time.

And this calls into my memory, that upon a time, hearing not far off from me
such a clap of Thunder as made me judge and say, that questionless some of the
neighboring places were thunder-strook, I sent presently to make inquiry;
which having justified my conjecture, I forthwith repaired to the house, where
the mischief was done, by something, which those, that pretended to have seen
it coming thither, affirmed to be like a flame moved very obliquely. To omit
the hurt, that seemed to have been done by a Wind that accompanied it, or was
perhaps produced by it, to diverse persons and cattle; that which makes me here
mention it, was, that observing narrowly what had happened in an upper room,
where it first fell, I saw, that it had in more than one place melted the Lead
in its passage, (though that possibly outlasted not the twinkling of an Eye,)
without breaking to pieces the glass-casements, or burning (that I took notice
of) either the Bed or Hangings or any other combustible household stuff; though
near the window it had thrown down a good quantity of the solid substance of
the Wall, through which it seemed to have made its passage in or out. And that,
which made me the less scruple to mention this accident, is, that having
curiously pried into the Effects of the Fulmen, not only in that little upper
room, but in other parts of the House, beneath whose lowermost parts it seemed
to have ended its extravagant course, I could not but conclude, That if so be
it were the same Fulmen, it must have more than once gone in and out of the
House, and that the line of its motion was neither straight, nor yet reducible
to any curve or mixed line, that I had met with among Mathematicians; but that,
as I then told some of my Friends, it moved to and fro in an extravagant
manner, not unlike the irregular and wrigling motion of those fired Squibs that
Boys are wont to make by ramming Gunpowder into Quills. But about Thunder more
perhaps elsewhere. I shall here only add, That whereas it is a known Tradition,
which my own Observations heedfully made seem now and then to confirm, that
vehement Thunder, if Beer be not very strong, will usually (for I do not say
always) sour it in a day or two; if this degeneration be not one of the
consequences of the great and peculiar kinds of the concussions of the Air that
happens in loud Thunder (in which case the Phenomenon will belong to the next
Discourse,) the effect may probably be imputed to some subtle Exhalations
diffused through the Air, which, penetrating the pores of the Wooden vessels,
whose contexture is not very close, imbue the liquor with a kind of acetous
Ferment; which conjecture I should think much confirmed by a trial, it
suggested to me, if I had made it often enough to rely upon it. For considering
that the pores of Glass are straight enough to be impervious (for ought I have
yet observed) to the Steams or spirituous parts of Sulphur as well as to other
odorous Exhalations, I thought it worth trying, whether there be any
sulphurous Steams or other Corpuscles diffused through the Air in time of
Thunder, that would not be too gross to get in at such minute pores as those of
Glass. And accordingly having Hermetically sealed up both Beer and Ale apart, I
kept them in Summer time till there happened a great Thunder, a day or two,
after which the Beer which we drank, that was good before, being generally
complained of as sowred by the Thunder, I suffered my liquors to continue at
least a day or two longer, that the sowring Steams, if any such there were,
might have time enough to operate upon them, and then breaking the Glasses, I
found not that the liquors had been sowred, though we had purposely forborne to
fill the Glasses, to facilitate the degeneration of the liquors. Perhaps it
will be pardonable on this occasion to mention a practice, which is usual in
some places where I have been, and particularly employed by a great Lady, that
is a great housekeeper, and is very curious and expert in diverse Physical
Observations; for, talking with her about the remedies of the Sowring of Beer
and other drinks by Thunder, which is sometimes no small prejudice to her, she
affirmed to me, that she usually found the practice, I was mentioning, succeed:
And that before the then last great Thunder, of which I had observed the
Effects upon Beer, she preserved hers by putting, at a convenient distance,
under the Barrels, Chaffing-dishes of Coals, when she perceived that the
Thunder was like to begin, which practice, if it constantly succeed, may put
one a considering, whether the Fire do not by rarifying the Air and discussing
the sulphurous or other Steams, by altering them, or by uniting with them the
Exhalations of the Coals, or by some such kind of way, render ineffectual these
sowring Corpuscles, which perhaps require a determinate bulk and shape, besides
their being crowded very many of them together, to have their full Operation on
Barrell'd Liquors. But these things are but mere Conjectures, and therefore I
proceed.

CHAP. VI.
THE fifth way whereby Effluviums may perform notable things, is the Motion of
one part upon another, that they may excite or occasion in the Body they work
on according to its structure.

I shall in the following Tract have occasion to say something of the Motions
into which the Internal parts of Inanimate Bodies may put one another; but the
Examples now produced are designed to manifest the Efficacy, that Effluviums
may, on the newly mentioned accounts, have on Organical and living Bodies. To
which Instances it would yet be proper to premise, That even Inanimate and
Solid Bodies may be of such a structure as to be very much alterable by the
appropriated Effluviums of other Bodies, as may be instanced in the power, that
I have known some vigorous Loadstones to have, of taking away in a trice the
attractive virtue of an excited Needle, or giving a verticity directly contrary
to the former without so much as touching it.

And we may pertinently take notice of the attractive virtue of the Loadstone,
as that, which may afford us an eminent Example of the great power of a
multitude of invisible Effluviums, even from Bodies that are not great, upon
Bodies that are Inorganical or liveless: For taking it for granted, what both
the Epicureans, Cartesians, and almost all other Corpuscularian Philosophers
agree in, that Magnetism is performed by corporeal Emissions, we may consider,
that these passing unresistedly through the pores of all solid Bodies, and even
Glass it self, which neither the subtilest Odours nor Electrical Exhalations
are observed to do, seem to be almost incredibly minute, and much smaller than
any other Effluviums, though themselves too small to be visible; and yet these
so incomparably little Magnetical Effluxions proceeding from vigorous
Loadstones, will be able to take up considerable quantities of so ponderous a
Body as Iron; in so much that I have seen a Loadstone not very great, that
would keep suspended a weight of Iron, that I could hardly lift up to it with
one Arm; and I have seen a little one, with which I could take up above eighty
times its weight. And these Effluvia do not only for a moment fasten the Iron
to the Stone, but keep the Metal suspended as long as one pleases.

This being premised, I come now to observe, That the chief effects of Effluvia
belonging to the fifth Head are wrought upon Animals, which by virtue of their
curious and elaborate structure, have their parts so connected and otherwise
contrived, that the motions or changes that are produced in one, may have by
the consent of Parts a manifest operation upon others, although perhaps very
distant from it, and so framed as to declare their being affected by actions
that seem to have no affinity at all with the Agents that work upon the part
first affected.

I have shown at large in another The Usefulness of Experimental Philosophy.
Treatise, that a Humane Body ought not to be looked upon merely as an aggregate
of Bones, Flesh, and other consistent parts, but as a most curious and a living
Engine, some of whose parts, though so nicely framed as to be very easily
affected by external Agents, are yet capable of having great Operations upon
the other parts of the Body, they help to compose. Wherefore without now
repeating what is there already delivered, I shall proceed to deliver such
Effects as are wrought on Human Bodies by these Effluviums without any
immediate contact of the Bodies that emit them.

And first, not to mention Light, because its being or not being a Corporeal
thing is much disputed even among the Moderns; it is plain, that our organs of
Smelling are sensibly affected by such minute Particles of matter as the finest
odours consist of. Nor do they always affect us precisely as odours, since we
see, that many persons, both men and women, are by Smells, either sweet or
stinking, put into troublesome Headaches.

If it were not almost ordinary, it would be more than almost incredible, that
the smell of a pleasing Perfume should presently produce in a Human Body, that
immediately before was well and strong, such faintnesses, swoons, loss of
sensible respiration, intumescence of the Abdomen, seeming Epilepsies, and
really convulsive motions of the Limbs, and I know not how many other
frightfull Symptoms, that by the unskilful are often taken for the effects of
Witchcraft, and would impose upon Physicians themselves, if their own or their
Predecessors Experience did not furnish them with Examples of the like
Phenomenon produced by Natural means. Those Symptoms manifest, what the consent
of Parts may do in a Humane Body; since even Morbifick Odours, if I may so call
them, by immediately affecting the organs of Smelling, affect so many other
parts of the genus Nervosum, as oftentimes to produce Convulsive motions, even
in the extreme parts of the Hands and Feet.

Nor is the efficacy of Effluviums confined to produce Hysterical fits, since
these invisible Particles may be able (and sometimes as suddenly as Perfumes
are wont to excite them) to appease them, as I have very frequently, though not
with neverfailing success, tried, by holding a Spirit, I usually make of Sal
Armoniack, under the Nostrils of Hysterical persons. My remedy did not only
often recover, in a trice, those whose Fits were but ordinary, but did more
than once, somewhat to the wonder of the Bystanders, relieve, within a Minute
or two, persons of differing Ages and Constitutions, that were suddenly fallen
down by Fits, that the Bystanders judged Epileptical, (but I, Hysterical.)

I attribute the good and evil Operations of the forementioned Steams, rather
in general to the consent of the parts that make up the genus Nervosum, than to
any hidden Sympathy or Antipathy betwixt them and the Womb, not only for other
reasons, not proper to be insisted on here, but because I have known Odours
have notable Effects even upon Men. I know a very eminent person, a Traveller,
and a man of a strong constitution, but considerably Sanguine, who is put into
violent Headaches by the Smell of Musk. And I remember, that one day being
with him and a great many other men of note about a Public Affair, a man that
had a parcel of Musk about him, having an occasion to make an application to
us, this person was so disordered by the smell, which to most of us was
delightful, that in spite of his Civility he was reduced to make us an
Apology, and send the perfumed man out of the room, notwithstanding whose
recess this person complained to me, a good while after, of a violent pain in
his Head, which I perceived had somewhat unfitted him for the Transaction of
the Affair whereof he was to be the chief manager. I know another person, whose
happy Muse has justly made him many Admirers, that is subject to the Headache
upon so mild a smell as that of Damask-Roses, and sometimes even of Red-Roses,
in so much that walking one day with him in a Garden, whose Alleys were very
large, so that he might easily keep himself at a distance from the Bushes,
which bore many of them Red-Roses; he abruptly broke off the discourse we were
engaged in, to complain of the harm the Perfume did his Head, and desired me to
pass into a Walk, that had no Roses growing near it.

If it were not for the Sex of this person, I could relate an Instance that
would be much more considerable of the Operation of Roses. For I know a
discreet Lady to whom their smell is not unpleasing, (for she answered me that
'twas not so at all,) but so hurtful, that it presently makes her sick, and
would make her swoon if not seasonably prevented: And she told me that being
once at a Court in which she was a Maid of Honor, though she her-self did not
know whence it came, she found her self extremely ill on a sudden, and ready to
sink down for faintness; but being then in discourse with a person, whose High
Quality she paid her profound respect to, her Civility, that kept her from
complaining or withdrawing, might have been dangerous if not fatal to her, had
not the Princess who was speaking with her, and who knew her Antipathy to
Roses, taken notice that her Face grew strangely pale, and was covered with a
cold sweat. For thereby presently guessing what might be the cause, which the
sick Lady her self did not, she asked aloud whether some body had not brought
Roses (which were then in season) into the Bedchamber, which question
occasioned a speedy withdrawing of a Lady, that stood at a distance off, and
had about her Roses, which were not seen by the Patient, who was by this means
preserved from falling into a swoon, though not from being for a while very
much discomposed.

But this you may tell me was the case of a Woman, who complained her malady
affected her Heart, not her Head. Wherefore returning to what I was speaking of
before I mentioned Her, I shall proceed to tell you, that as Odours may thus
give Men the Headache, so I have often found the smell of rectified-Spirit of
Sal Armoniack to free Men as well as Women from the Fits of that distemper; and
that sometimes in so few Minutes, that the person relieved could scarcely
imagine, they could so quickly be so.

To which I shall not add the Trials that I have successfully made upon my
self, because being, thanks be to God, very seldom troubled with that
distemper, the occasions I have had of making them have not been many. And
though I have not always found so slight a Remedy to work the desired Cure,
yet that it does it often, even in Men, is sufficient to show the Efficacy of
Sanative Effluviums.

Now, to manifest, that Steams do not Operate only upon Hysterical Women, or
persons subject to the Headache, I will add some Instances of the Effects they
may produce upon other persons, and parts.

It Is but too well known an Observation, that Women with Child have been often
made to miscarry by the stink of an ill-extinguisht Candle, though perhaps the
smoke ascending from the Snuff were dissipated into the invisible Corpuscles, a
good while before it arrived at the Nostrils of the unhappy Woman; and what
violent and straining motions Abortions are frequently accompanied with, is
sufficiently known already.

I think I have elsewhere mentioned, that a Gentleman of my acquaintance, a
proper and lusty man, will be put into the fits of Vomiting by the smell of
Coffee, boiled in Water; I shall therefore rather mention, that I know a
Physician, who having been, for a long time when he was young, frequently
compelled to take Electuarium lenitivum, one of the gentlest and least
unpleasant Laxatives of the Shops, conceived such a dislike of it, that still,
as himself has complained to me, if he smell to it, as he sometimes happens to
do in Apothecaries Shops, it will work (now and then for several times) upwards
and downwards with him.

I know another very ingenious persons of the same faculty, that has been a
Traveller by Sea and Land, who has complained to me, that the smell of the
Grease of the Wheels of a Hackney-coach, though it do but pass by him, is wont
to make him sick and ready to Vomit.

Every body knows, that Smoke is apt to make men's Eyes water, and excite in the
organs of Respiration that troublesome and vehement commotion we call Coughing.
But we need not have recourse at all to visible Fumes, for the production of
the like Effects; since we have often observed them, and repeated Sneezings to
boot, to proceed from the invisible Steams of Spirit of Sal Armoniack, when
Vials containing that liquor, though they were perhaps but very small, were
approached too hastily, or perhaps too near to the Nostrils.

And because in most of the foregoing Instances, the chief Effects seem to be
wrought, by the consent of parts, on the genus Nervosum and the action of one
of them upon the other, and thereby upon several other parts of the Body, I
will subjoyn a remarkable instance of the Operation of a mild and grateful
Odor upon the Humors themselves, and that in a Man.

A famous Apothecary, who is a very tall and big man, several times told me,
that though he was once a great lover of Roses, yet having had occasion to
employ great quantities of them at a time, he was so altered by their Steams,
that now, if he come among the Rose-bushes, the smell does much discompose him.
And the odor of Roses, (I mean Incarnate-Roses, which we commonly call
Damask-Roses, though they be not the true ones,) makes such a colliquation of
Humors in his Head, that it sets him a coughing, and makes him run at the Nose,
and gives him a sore throat; and by an affluence of Humors makes his Eyes sore,
in so much that during the season of Roses, when quantities of them are brought
into his House, he is obliged for the most part to absent himself from home.

CHAP. VII.
ONE may show on this occasion, that as there might be considerable things
performed by Effluviums, as they make one part of a living Engine work upon
another by virtue of its structure, so the action of such invisible Agents may
in diverse cases be much promoted by the fabric and laws of the Universe it
self, upon this account, that, by the Operation of Effluvia upon particular
Bodies, they may dispose and qualify those Bodies to be wrought upon, which
before they were not fit to be, by Light, Magnetisms, the Atmosphere, Gravity
or some other of the more Catholic Agents of Nature, as the World is now
constituted. But not to injure another Tract, I shall conclude this, when I
shall have taken notice, that in the Instances hitherto produced, there has
been a visible Local distance between the Body that emits Steams, and that on
which they work. But if I thought it necessary, it were not difficult to show,
that one might woll enough referr to the title of this Tract diverse Effects of
Bodies that are applied immediately to ours; such as are Blood-stones,
Cornelions, Nephritick-stones, Lapis Malacensis, and some Amulets, and other
solid substances applied by Physicians outwardly to our Bodies. For in these
applications the gross Body touches but the Skin, and the great Effects, which
I elsewhere relate my self to have sometimes (though not often, much less
always) observed to have followed upon this External contact or near
application, may reasonably be derived from the subtle Emanations, that pass
through the Pores of the Skin to the inward parts of the Body: As is evident in
those, who by holding Cantharides in their Hands, or having them applied to
some remote External part, have grievous pains produced in their Urinary parts,
as it has happened to Me as well as to many others. And to the insinuation of
these minute Corpuscles, that get in at the Pores of the Skin, seems to be due
the Efficacy of some Medicines, that purge, vomit, resolve the Humors, or
otherwise notably alter the Body being but externally applied; of which I could
here give several Instances, but that they belong more properly to another
place, and are not necessary in this, where it may suffice to name the
notorious Power, that Mercurial Ointments or Fumes, either together or apart,
have of producing Copious Salvations, to show in general, that both the Steams
and the Emanations of outwardly applied Medicinal Bodies may have some great
Effects on Human ones.

OF THE Determinate Nature OF EFFLUVIUMS.

OF THE DETERMINATE NATURE OF EFFLVVIVMS.
CHAP. I.
THE Effluviums of Bodies, Pyrophilus, being for the most part invisible, have
been wont to be so little considered by vulgar Philosophers, that scarce
vouchsafing to take notice of their Existence, it is no wonder that men have not
been solicitous to discover their distinct Natures and Differences. Only Lib.
1. Meteor. cap. 3, and 4.
Aristotle, and (upon his account) the Schools, have been pleased to think,
that the two grand parts of our Globe do sometimes emit two kinds of
Exhalations or Steams; the Earthy part affording those that are hot and dry,
which they name Fumes, and very often, simply, Exhalations; and the Aqueous
part, others that are (not as many of his Disciples mistake him to have taught,
Cold and Moist, but) Hot and Moist Cap. 3. (...).
, which they usually call Vapors, to discriminate them from the Fumes (or
Exhalations,) though otherwise, in common acceptance, those Appellations are
very frequently confounded.

But, though the Aristotelians have thus perfunctorily handled this Subject, it
would not become Corpuscularian Philosophers, who attribute so much as they do
to the Insensible Particles of Matter, to acquiesce in so slight and jejune an
account of the Emanations of Bodies. And since we have already shown, that
besides the greater and more simple Masses of Terrestrial and Aqueous matter
newly mentioned, there are very many mixed Bodies, that emit Effluviums, which
make, as it were, little Atmospheres about diverse of them, it will be congruous
to our Doctrine and Design, to add in this place, That besides the slight and
obvious differences, taken notice of by Aristotle, the Steams of Bodies may be
almost as various as the Bodies themselves that emit them; and that therefore
we ought not to look upon them barely under the general and confused notion of
Smoke or Vapors, but may probably conceive them to have their distinct and
determinate Natures, oftentimes (though not always) suitable to that of the
Bodies from whence they proceed.

And indeed the newly mentioned Division of the Schools gives us so slight an
account of the Emanations of Bodies, that, methinks, it looks like such
another, as if one should divide Animals into those that are Horned, and those
that have Two Feet: For, besides that the Distinction is taken from a
Difference that is not the considerablest, there are diverse Animals (as many
four-footed Beasts and Fishes) that are not comprised in it; and each member of
the Division comprehends I know not how many distinct sorts of Animals, whose
differences from one another are many times more considerable, than those that
constitute the two supreme Genus's, the one having Bulls and Goats, and
Rhinoceros's, and Deer, and Elks, and certain Sea Monsters whose Horns I have
seen; and the other Genus comprising also a greater Variety, namely, a great
part of Four-footed Beasts, and, besides Men, all the Birds (for ought we know)
whether of Land or Water. And as it would give us but a very slender
Information of the Nature of an Elk or an Unicorn, to know that it is an Horned
Beast; or of the Nature of a Man, an Eagle, or a Nightingale, to be told, that
it is an Horn-less Beast; so it will but very little instruct a man in the
Nature of the Steams of Quicksilver or of Opium, to be told, that they are
Vapors Hot (or rather Cold) and Moist; or of the Steams of Amber or
Cantharides, or Cinnamon, or Tobacco, to be told, that they are Hot and Dry.
For, besides that there may be Effluviums, which, even by their Elementary
Qualities, are not of either of these two supreme Genus's, (for they may be
Cold and Dry, or Cold and Moist,) these Qualities are often far from being the
Noblest, and consequently those that deserve to be most considered in the
Effluviums of this, or that, Body; as we shall by and by have occasion to
manifest.

CHAP. II.
ANd here it may not be improper to mention an Experiment, that, I remember, I
diverse years since employed to illustrate the Subject of our present Discourse.

I considered then, that Fluid Bodies may be of very unequal density and
gravity, as is evident in Quicksilver, Water and pure Spirit of Wine; which,
notwithstanding their great difference in specific gravity, may yet agree in
the conditions requisite to Fluid Bodies. Therefore presuming, that by what I
could make appear visible in one, what happens analogically in the other, may
be ocularly illustrated, I took some Ounces of Roch-allom, and as much of fine
Saltpeter. I took some Ounces of each, because, if the quantity of the
ingredients be too small, the concoagulated grains will be so too, and the
success will not be so conspicuous. These being dissolved together in fair
Water, the filtrated solution was set to evaporate in an open-mouthed Glass,
and being then left to shoot in a cool place, there were fastened to the sides
and other parts of the Glass several small Crystals, some Octoedrical, which is
the figure proper to Rochallom, and others of the Prismatical shape of pure
Saltpeter; besides some other Saline concretions, whose being distinctly of
neither of these two shapes, argued them to be concoagulations of both the
Salts. And this we did by using such a degree of Celerity in Evaporating the
liquor, as was proper for such an effect. For, by another degree, which is to
be employed when one would recover the Salts more distinctly and manifestly,
the matter may (as I found by trial) be so ordered, that the aluminous Salt
may, for the most part, be first coagulated by it self, and then from the
remaining liquor curiously shaped Crystals of Nitre may be copiously obtained.

Trials like this we also made with other Salts, and particularly with
Sea Salt, and with Allom and Vitriol; the Phenomenon of which you may meet with
in their due places. For the recited Experiment may, I hope, alone serve to
assist the imagination to conceive, how the Particles of Bodies may swim to and
fro in a Fluid, (which the Air is,) and though they be little enough to be
invisible, may many of them retain their distinct and determinate natures, and
their aptness to cohere upon occasion; and others may, by their various
occursions and coalitions, unite into lesser Corpuscles or greater Bodies
differing from the more simple Particles, that composed them, and yet not of
indeterminate though compounded Figures.

CHAP. III.
THese things being premised, we may now proceed to the particular Instances of
the Determinate Nature of Effluviums; and these we may not inconveniently
reduce to the three following Heads, to each of which we shall assign a
distinct Chapter; the first of these I shall briefly treat of in this third
Chapter, and treat somewhat more largely of the others in the two following.

In the first place then, That the Effluviums of many Bodies retain a
determinate Nature oftentimes in an invisible smallness, and oftener in such a
size as makes them little enough to fly or swim in the Air; may appear by this,
that these Effluvia being by Condensation or otherwise reunited, they appear to
be of the same nature with the Body that emitted them. Thus in moist weather,
the Vapors of Water, that wander invisibly through the Air, meeting with
Marble-Walls or Pavements, or other Bodies, by their Coldness and other
Qualifications, fit to condense and retain them, appear again in the form of
Drops of Water; and the same Vapors return to the visible form of Water, when
they fall out of the Air in Dews, or Rains.

Quicksilver it self, if it be made to ascend in distillation with a convenient
degree of Fire, will almost all be found again in the Receiver in the form of
running Mercury. Which strange and piercing Fluid, is in some cases so disposed
to be stripped of its Disguises, and re-appear in its own form, that diverse
Artificers, and especially Gilders, have found, to their cost, that the fumes
of it need not be, as in Distillation, included in close Vessels to return to
their pristine nature, Mercury having been several times found in the Heads and
other parts of such People, who have in tract of time been killed by it, and
sometimes made to discover it self during the Lives of those that dealt so much
in it; of which I elsewhere give some Instances. Wherefore I shall only observe
at present, that it is a common Practice, both among Gilders, and some Chemists,
that, when they have occasion to make an Amalgam, or force away the Mercury
from one by the fire, they keep Gold in their Mouths, which by the Mercurial
fumes, that wander through the Air, will now and then, by that time it is taken
out of their Mouths, be turned white almost, as if it had been silvered over.

A mass of purified Brimstone being sublimed, the ascending fumes will condense
into what the Chemists call Flores Sulphuris, which is true Sulphur of the same
nature with that, formerly exposed to sublimation; and may readily by melting
be reduced into such another mass.

And to give you another like Example of dry Bodies; I tried, that by subliming
good Camphire in close vessels, it would all, as to sense, be raised into the
upper vessel, or part of the Subliming-glass in the form of dry Camphire as it
was before.

Nay though a Body be not by Nature, but Art compounded of such differing
Bodies as a Metal and another Mineral, and two or three Salts; yet, if upon
Purification of the mixture from its grosser parts, the remaining and finer
parts be minute enough and fitly shaped, the whole liquor will ascend, and yet
in the Receiver altogether recover its pristine form of a transparent Fluid,
composed of differing Saline and Mineral parts. This is evident in the
Distillation of what Chemists call Butter, or Oil of Antimony, very well
rectified. For, this Liquor will pass into the Receiver diaphanous and fluid,
though, besides the Particles of the Sublimate, (which is it self a factitious
compounded Body) it abounds with Antimonial Corpuscles, carried over and kept
invisible by the corroding Salts; whatever Angelus Sala, and those Chemists
that follow him, have affirmed to the contrary; as might be easily here proved,
if this were a fit place to do it in.

I found by inquiring of an Ingenious person, that had an interest in a
Tin-Mine, that I was not deceived in guessing, that Tin it self, though a Metal
whose Ore is of a very difficult fusion, and which I have by it self kept long
upon the Cupel without finding it to fly away, would yet retain its Metalline
nature in the form of fumes or flowers. For this experienced Gentleman answered
me, that diverse times they would take great store of a whitish Sublimate from
the upper part of the Furnaces or Chimnies, where they brought their Ore to
fusion, or wrought further upon it; and that this Sublimate, though perhaps
elevated to the height of an ordinary Man, would, when melted down, afford at
once many Pounds of very good Tin. On which occasion I shall add, that I have
my self more than once raised this Metal in the form of white Corpuscles by the
help of an Additament, that did scarce weigh half so much as it.

CHAP. IV.
THe second way, by which we may discover the Determinate Nature of Effluviums,
is, by the difference that may sometimes be observed in their Sensible
Qualities. For, these Effluviums that are endowed with them, proceed from the
same sort of Bodies, and yet those afforded by one kind of Bodies being in many
cases manifestly differing from those that fly off from another, this evident
disparity in their Exhalations argues their retaining distinct natures,
according to those of the respective Bodies whence they proceed.

I will not now stay to examine, whether in the Steams, that are made visibly
to ascend from the Terrestrial Globe by those grand Agents and usual raisers of
them, the Sun, and the agitation of the Air, the Eye can manifestly distinguish
the diversity of colors: But in some productions of Art such different colors
may be discovered in the Exhalations, even without the application of any
external heat to raise them. For, when Spirit of Nitre, for example, has been
well rectified, I have often observed, that even in the cold the fumes would
play in the unfill'd part of the stopped Vials it was kept in, and appear in it
of a reddish color, and, if those vessels were opened, the same fumes would
copiously ascend into the Air, in the form of a reddish or orange-tawny Smoke.
Spirit or Oil of Salt also, if it be very well dephlegm'd, though it will
scarce in the cold visibly ascend in the empty part of a Vial, whilst it is
kept well stopped; yet, if the free Air be allowed access to it, it will, in
case it be sufficiently rectified, fly up in the form of a whitish fume. But
this is inconsiderable in comparison of what happens in a volatile Tincture of
Sulphur, I have elsewhere taught you to make with Quicklime. For, not only
upon a slight occasion the vacant part of the Vial will be filled with white
fumes, though the Glass be well stopped; but upon the opening the Vial these
fumes will copiously pass out at the neck, and ascend into the Air in the form
of a Smoke, more white than perhaps you ever saw any. And both this and that of
the Spirit of Saltpeter do by their operation, as well as smell, disclose what
they are; the latter being of a Nitrous nature, (as is confessed) and the
former, of a Sulphurous: In so much that having for curiosities sake in a
fitly shaped Glass caught a competent quantity of the ascending white fumes, I
found them to have convened into Bodies transparent and Geometrically figured,
wherein 'twas easy to discover by their sensible qualities, that there were
store of Sulphurous particles mixed with the Saline ones. That the liquors of
Vegetables, distilled in Balneo or in Water, are not wont to retain any thing
of the color of the Bodies that afforded them, is a thing easy to be observed
in Distillations made without Retorts or the violence of the Fire. But it may
be worth while to make trial, whether the Essential Oil of Wormwood ascend
colored like the Plant, whence it is first drawn over with Water in the Limbec,
or rectified in Balneo. For, I forgot to take notice of it, when upon some
particularities, I observed in that Plant, my curiosity led me to find, that
not only in the first distillation in a Copper Limbec, tinned on the inside,
the Oil came over green, but by a rectification purposely made in a
Glass-vessel, the purified liquor was not deprived of that color.

The mention of these Essential Oils, as Chemists call those that are drawn in
Limbecs, leads me to tell you, that, though these liquors be but Effluvia of
the Vegetables they are distilled from, condensed again in the Receiver into
liquors; yet, as subtle as they are, many of them retain the genuine taste of
the Bodies, whence the heat elevated them; as you will easily find, if you will
taste a few drops of the Essential Oil of Cinnamon, for example, or of Wormwood
dissolved by the intervention of Sugar or Spirit of Wine in a convenient
quantity of Water, Wine, or Beer. For, by this means you have the natural taste
of this Spice or Herb. And Wormwood is a Plant, whose Effluvia do so retain the
nature of the Body that parts with them, that I must not forbear to allege
here an Observation of mine, that may show you, that it is possible, though not
usual, that even without the help of the Fire the expirations of a Body may
communicate its taste. For, among other things, that I had occasion to observe
about some quantity of Wormwood laid up together, I remember, I took notice,
and made others do the like, that coming into a room, where 'twas kept, not
only the organs of smelling were powerfully wrought upon by the Corpuscles that
swarmed in the Air, but also the Mouth was sensibly affected with a bitter
taste. Perhaps you will scarce think it worth while, that after this instance I
should add, that I found the expirations of Amber, kept a while in pure Spirit
of Wine, taste upon the tongue like Amber it self, when I chewed it between my
teeth. But I choose to mention this instance, because it will connect those
lately mentioned with another sort, very pertinent to our present purpose. For,
the expirations that I have obtained from Amber, both with pure Spirit of Wine,
and a more piercing Menstruum, did manifestly retain in both those liquors a
peculiar smell, with which I found it to affect the Nostrils, when, for trials
sake, I excited the Electrical faculty of Amber by rubbing. And as for Odours,
it is plain, that the Essential Oils of Chemists, well drawn, do many of them
retain the peculiar and genuine sent of the Spices or Herbs that afforded them.
And that these Odours do really consist of, or reside in certain invisible
Corpuscles that fly off from the visible Bodies, that are said to be endowed
with such Smells, I have elsewhere proved at large; and it may sufficiently
appear from their sticking to diverse of the Bodies they meet with, and their
lasting adhesion to them.

Other Examples may be given of the settled difference of Effluviums directly
perceivable by Humane Organs of Sense, as dull as they are; which last
expression I add, because I scarce doubt, but that, if our Sensories were
sufficiently subtle and tender, they might immediately perceive in the size,
shape, motion, and perhaps color too of some now invisible Effluviums, as
distinguishable differences, as our naked Eyes in their present constitution
see, between the differing sorts of Birds, by their appearances, and their
manner of flying in the Air, as Hawks, and Partridges, and Sparrows, and
Swallows. To make this probable I will not urge, that in fine white Sand, whose
grains by the unassisted Eye are not wont to be distinguished by any sensible
Quality, I have often observed in an excellent Microscope, a notable disparity
as to bulk, figure, and sometimes as to color: And that in small Cheese-mites,
which the naked Eye can very scarcely discern, so far is it from discovering
any difference between them, one may (as was noted in the last essay) plainly
see, besides an obvious difference in point of bigness, many particular parts,
on whose accounts the structure of those moving points may difference them from
each other. And I have sometimes seen a very evident disparity even in point of
shape between the very Eggs of these living Atoms, (as a Poet would perhaps
style them.) But these kinds of proofs (as I was saying) I shall forbear to
insist on, that I may proceed to countenance my conjecture by the effects of
the Effluviums, that are properly so called, upon Animals.

And first, though the Touch be reckoned one of the most dull of the five
Senses, and be reputed to be far less quick in Men than in diverse other
Animals; yet the gross Organs of that, may, in Men themselves, even by
accident, be so disposed, as to be susceptible of impressions from Effluvia: Of
this in another Paper I give some Instances. And I know not whether diverse of
the Presages of Weather to be observed in some Animals, and the Aches and other
pains, that, in many crazy and wounded men, are wont to fore-run great changes
of Weather, do not often (for I do not say always) proceed (at least in part)
from invisible and yet incongruous Effluxions, which, either from the
subterraneal parts, or from some Bodies above ground, do copiously impregnate
the Air. And on this occasion it will not be impertinent to mention here what
an experienced Physician being (if I much misremember not) the Learned
Dimmerbrook, relates concerning himself, who having been infected with the
Plague by a Patient that lay very ill of it, though by Gods blessing, which he
particularly acknowledges, upon a slight but seasonable Remedy, he was very
quickly cured, and that without the breaking of any Tumor; yet it left such a
change in some parts of his Body, that he subjoyns this memorable passage; Ab
illo periculo ad contagiosos mihi appropinquanti in emunctoriis successit
dolor, vix fallax Pestis indicium.

Two or three other Observations of the like nature you meet with in another of
my Papers About Cosmical Suspicions.
. And I shall now add, that I know an ingenious Gentlewoman (Wife to a famous
Physician) who was of a very curious and delicate complexion, that has several
times assured me, that she can very readily discover, whether a person, that
comes to visit her in Winter, came from some place where there is any
considerable quantity of Snow; and this she does, (as she tells me) not by
feeling any unusual cold (for if the ground be frozen but not covered with
Snow, the Effect succeeds not,) but from some peculiar impression, which she
thinks, she receives by the organs of Smelling. I might add, that I know also
(as I may have formerly told you) a very ingenious Physician, who falling into
an odd kind of Fever, had his sense of Hearing thereby made so very nice and
tender, that he very plainly heard soft whispers, that were made at a
considerable distance off, and which were not in the least perceived by the
healthy bystanders, nor would have been by him before his sickness. Which
(sickness) I mention as the thing, that gave his organs of Hearing this
preternatural quickness, because when the Fever had quite left him, he was
able to hear but at the rate of other men. And I might tell you too, that I
know a Gentleman of eminent parts and note, who, during a distemper he had in
his Eyes, had his organs of Sight brought to be so tender, that both his
friends and himself also have assured me, that when he waked in the Night he
could for a while plainly see and distinguish Colors, as well as other
objects, discernable by the Eye, as was more than once tried, by pinning
Ribbands or the like Bodies of several colors, to the inside of his Curtains
in the dark. For if he were awakened in the Night, he would be able to tell his
bedfellow, where those Bodies were placed, and what color each of them was of.

I have mentioned these Instances only to show you, that if our Sensories were
more delicate and quick, they would be sufficiently affected by Objects, that,
as they are generally constituted, make no impressions at all upon them. For
otherwise I know, that the Species (as they call them) both of Sounds and
Colors, are not held by many of the Moderns, (from whom in that I dissent
not,) to be so much corporeal Effluxions, trajected through the medium, as
peculiar kinds of Local Motion conveyed by it. Therefore I shall now confirm
the conjecture I would countenance by the discrimination made by the organs of
other Animals of such Effluvia as to us men are not only invisible but
insensible. And therefore partly to strengthen what I delivered, and partly to
confirm what I am now discoursing of, it will not be impertinent to subjoyn two
or three Relations, that I had from persons of very good credit, whom I thought
likely to make me no unsatisfactory returns to my Questions about things they
were very well versed in.

A person of Quality, to whom I am near allied, related to me, that to make a
trial, whether a young Blood-hound was well instructed, (or as the Huntsmen
call it, made) he caused one of his Servants, who had not killed, or so much as
touched any of his Deer, to walk to a Countrey-town, four Mile off, and then to
a Market Town three Miles distant from thence; which done, this Nobleman did, a
competent while after, put the Blood-hound upon the scent of the man, and
caused him to be followed by a Servant or two, the Master himself thinking it
also fit to go after them to see the event; which was, that the Dog, without
ever seeing the Man he was to pursue, followed him by the scent to the
abovementioned places, notwithstanding the multitude of Market-people that
went along in the same way, and of Travelers that had occasion to cross it.
And when the Blood-hound came to the chief Market Town, he passed through the
streets, without taking notice of any of the people there, and left not till he
had gone to the House, where the Man, he sought, rested himself, and found him
in an upper Room to the wonder of those that followed him. The particulars of
this Narrative the Nobleman's Wife, a person of great veracity, that happened
to be with him when the trial was made, confirmed to me.

Enquiring of a studious person, that was Keeper of a Red-dear-park and versed
in making Bloodhounds, in how long time, after a Man or Deer had passed by a
grassy place, one of those Dogs would be able to follow him by the scent? He
told me, that it would be six or seven Hours: Whereupon an ingenious Gentleman,
that chanced to be present, and lived near that Park, assured us both, that he
had old Dogs of so good a scent, that if a Buck had the day before passed in a
Wood, they will, when they come where the scent lies, though at such a distance
of time after, presently find the scent and run directly to that part of the
Wood where the Buck is. He also told me, that though an old Blood-hound will
not so easily fix on the scent of a single Deer, that presently hides himself
in a whole herd; yet if the Deer be chased a little till he be heated, the Dog
will go nigh to single him out, though the whole herd also be chased. The
above-named Gentleman also affirmed, that he could easily distinguish whether
his Hounds were in chase of a Hare or a Fox by their way of running, and their
holding up their Nose higher than ordinary when they pursue a Fox, whose scent
is more strong. These Relations will not be judged incredible by him that
reflects on some of the Instances that have already (in the foregoing Essay)
been given of the strange subtilty of Effluvia: To which I shall now add, that
I remember, that to try whether I could in some measure make Art imitate
Nature, I prepared a Body of a vegetable substance, which, though it were
actually cold, and both to the Eye and Touch dry, did for a while emit such
determinate and piercing, though invisible, Exhalations, that having for Trials
sake applied to it a clear Metalline Plate (and that of none of the very
softest kind neither) for about one Minute of an Hour, I found, that, though
there had* been no immediate contact between them, I having pursposely
interposed a piece of Paper to hinder it; yet there was imprinted on the
surface of the Plate a conspicuous stain of that peculiar color, that the
Body, with whose Steams I had imbued the vegetable substance, was fitted to
give a Plate of that mixed Metal. And though it be true, that in some
circumstances, the lately mentioned Instances about Bloodhounds have a
considerable advantage of this I have now recited; yet that advantage is much
lessened, not to say countervail'd, by some circumstances of our Experiment.
For, not to repeat, that the emittent Body was firm and cold, the Effect
produced by the Effluvium that guided the Settingdog, was wrought upon the
Sensory of a living and warm Animal; and such an one, whose organs of Smelling
are of an extraordinary tender Constitution above those of Men and other
Animals, and probably the Impression was but transient; whereas in our case the
invisible Steams of the vegetable substance wrought upon a Body which was of so
strong and inorganical a Texture as a (compounded) Metal, though it were fenced
by being lapt up in Paper, notwithstanding which these Steams invaded it in
such numbers, and so notably, as to make their Operation on it manifest to the
Eye, and considerably permanent too; since coming to look upon the Plate after
the third day, I found the induced Color yet conspicuous, and not like
suddenly to vanish.

Hitherto in this Chapter I have argued from the constant and settled difference
of the sensible Qualities of Effluviums, that they do not always lose their
distinct natures, when they seem to have lost themselves by vanishing into Air.
But before I dismiss this Subject, I must consider an Objection, which I know
may be made against the Opinion we have been countenancing. For it may be
alleged, that there may be many cases, wherein the Effluviums of Bodies are,
in their passage through the Air, sensibly altered, or do affect the Organs of
sense otherwise than each kind of them apart would do: Nor is this difficulty
altogether irrational. For it seems consonant enough to Experience, that some
such cases should be admitted, and therefore in the foregoing Discourse I have,
where I thought it necessary, forborne to express my self in such general and
absolute terms, as otherwise I might have done. But, as for such cases as I
have insisted upon, and many more, I shall now represent, that the objected
alterations need not hinder, but that Effluviums at their first parting from
the Bodies, whence they take wing (if I may so speak,) may retain as much of
the nature of those Bodies, as we have ascribed to them, since the subsequent
change may very probably be deduced from the combinations or coalitions of
diverse Steams associating themselves in the Air, and acting upon the Sensory,
either altogether and conjointly, or at least so near it, that the Sense cannot
perceive their Operations as distinct. This I shall elucidate, but not pretend
to prove, by what happens in Sounds and Tastes. For if, by way of instance, in a
Musical instrument, two strings tuned to an eight, be touched together, they
will strike the Ear with a sound, that will be judged one, as well as pleasing,
though each of the trembling strings make a distinct noise, and the one
vibrates as fast again as the other. And if, into Oil of Tartar per Deliquium,
you drop a due proportion of Spirit of Nitre, and exhale the superfluous
moisture, the Acid and Alcalizate Corpuscles, that were so small as to swim
invisibly in those liquors, will convene into Nitrous Concretions, whose taste
will be compounded of, but very differing from, both the tastes of the Acid and
Tartareous Particles; which Particles may yet, for the most part, by a skilful
Distillation, be divorced again. And so, if to a strong solution of Potashes
or Salt of Tartar you put as much in weight of Sal Armoniack, as there is of
either of those fixed Salts contained in the liquor; you may, besides a subtle
Urinous Spirit that will easily come over in the distillation, obtain a dry
Caput mortuum, which is almost totally a compounded Salt, differing enough from
either of the ingredients, especially the Alcalizate, as well in Taste as in
some other Qualities: This Salt (freed from its faeces) being that Diuretic
Salt, I several years ago gave quantities of, to some Chemists and Physicians,
from the most of whom I received great thanks, accompanied with the (more
acceptable) accounts of the very happy success they had employed it with,
though usually but in a small Dose, as from six, eight or ten Grains to a
Scruple. But this being mentioned only upon the by, I shall proceed to tell
you, that, since I intimated to you already, that I would mention Examples of
Sounds and Tastes only to illustrate what I had been delivering; I shall now add
some Instances by way of Proof, of the Coalition and resulting change of Steams
in the Air. It Is easily observable in some Nose-gays, where the differing
Flowers happen to be conveniently mixed, that in the smell afforded by it, at a
due distance, the Odours of the particular Flowers are not perceived, but the
Organ is affected by their joynt-action, which makes on it a confused but
delightful impression. And so, when in a Ball of Pomander, or a perfumed Skin,
Musk, and Amber, and Civet, and other sweets are skilfully mixed, the coalition
of the distinct Effluvia of the ingredients, that associate themselves in their
passage through the Air, produce in the Sensory one grateful perfume, resulting
from all those Odours. But if you take Spirit of fermented Urine and Spirit of
Wine, both of them Phelgmatick, and mix them together, they will incorporate
like Wine and Water, or any other such liquors, without affording any dry
concretions. But if you expose them in a convenient Vessel but to the mild heat
of a Bath or Lamp, the ascending Particles will associate themselves, and
adhere to the upper part of the Glass in the form of a white but tender
Sublimate, consisting both of Urinous and Vinous Spirits, associated into a
mixture, which differs from either of the liquors, not only in Consistence,
Taste and Smell, but in some considerable Operations performable by this odd
mixture; which, this is not the place, to take further notice of. And if Spirit
of Salt and Spirit of Nitre be, by Distillation, elevated in the form of Fumes,
so ordered as to convene into one liquor in the Receiver, this liquor will
readily dissolve crude Gold, though neither the Spirit of Nitre alone, nor that
of Salt would do so.

And that you may have an ocular proof of the Possibility of the distinctness
and subsequent Commixture of Steams in the Air; I shall now add an Experiment,
which I long since devised for that purpose, and which I soon after showed to
many curious persons, most of whom appeared somewhat surpised at it. The
Experiment was; that I took two small Vials, the one filled with Spirit of
Salt, but not very strong, the other with Spirit of fermented Urine or of Sal
Armoniack very well rectified: These Vials being placed at some distance, and
not being stopped, each liquor afforded its own smell, at a pretty distance, by
the Steams it emitted into the Air, but yet these Steams were invisible. But
when these Vials, (which should be of the same size) came to be approached very
near to each other, though not so, as to touch; as when the two liquors are put
together in the form of liquors, they will notably act upon one another; so
their respective Effluviums meeting in the Air, would, answerably to the
littleness of their bulk, do the like, and, by their mutual occursions, become
manifestly visible, and appear moving in the Air like a little portion of Smoke
or of a Mist, which would quickly cease, if either of the Vials were removed
half a Foot or a Foot from the other. And I remember, that, to add to the
oddness of the Phenomenon, I sometimes made a drop of the Spirit of Salt hang
at the bottom of a little stick of Glass or some other convenient Body, and
held this drop thus suspended in the Orifice of a Vial that had Spirit of Sal
Armoniack in it, and was furnished with a somewhat long neck; for by this means
it happened, as I expected, that the ascending Urinous Particles, though
invisible before, invading plentifully the Acid ones of the drop, produced a
notable Smoke, which, if the drop were held a little above the neck of the
Glass, would most commonly fly upwards to the height of a Foot or half a Yard:
But if the drop were held somewhat deep within the Cavity of the neck, a good
part of the produced Smoke would oftentimes fall into the Cavity of the Vial,
which was left in great part empty, sometimes in the form of drops, but usually
in the form of a slender and somewhat winding stream of a white color, that
seemed to flow down just like a Liquor from the depending drop, till it had
reached the Spirit of Sal Armoniack; upon whose surface it would spread it self
like a Mist. But this only upon the by. As for the main Experiment it self, it
may be, as I have found, successfully tried with other Liquors than these; but
it is not necessary in this place to give an account of such Trials; though
perhaps, if I had leisure, it might be worth while to consider, whether these
Coalitions of differing sorts of Steams in the Air, and the Changes resulting
thence of their particular precedent Quantities, may not assist us to
investigate the causes of diverse sudden Clouds and Mists, and some other
Meteorological Phenomenon, and also of diverse changes that happen in the Air in
reference to the coming in and ceasing of several either Epidemical or
contagious Diseases, and particularly the Plague, that seem to depend upon some
occult temperature and alterations of the Air, which may be copiously
impregnated by the differing subterraneal (not to add here, Sidereal)
Effluviums, that not unfrequently ascend into it (or otherwise invade it,) with
Pestiferous or other Morbifick Corpuscles, and sometimes with others of a
contrary Nature, and sometimes too perhaps, neither the one sort of Steams,
which may be supposed to have imbued the Air, is in it self deleterious; nor
the other salutary, but becomes so upon their casual coalition in the Air. You
will perhaps think this Conjecture of the resultancy of pestilential Steams,
the less improbable, if I here add that odd Observation, which was frequently
made in the formerly mentioned Plague at Nimmegen by a Physician so Judicious
as Tract. de Peste, lib. 2. cap. 3.
Dimmerbrook, whose words are these; Illud notatu dignum saepissime
observavimus, nempa in illis aedibus in quibus nulla adhuc pestis erat, si
linteamina sordida aqua and sapone nostrate (ut in Belgio moris est) illio
lavarentur, eo ipso die, vel interdum postridie, duos tres-ve simul peste
correptos fuisse, ipsique aegri test abantur faetorem aquae saponatae illis
primam and maximam alterationem intulisse. Hoc ipsum quoque in meo ipsius
hospitio infelix experientia docuit, in quo post lota linteamina statim gravem
alterationem perceperunt plaerique domestici, and proxime sequenti nocte tres
peste correptae, ac brevi post mortuae fuere. I omit the Instances he further
sets down to confirm this odd Phenomenon, of which, though perhaps some other
Cause may be devised, yet that I lately assigned seems at least a probable one,
if not the most probable; since, as it is manifest by daily experience, that the
smell occasioned by the washing of foul Linen with the Soap commonly used in
the Netherlands, produces not the Plague; so by our Learned Author's
Observation it appears, either that there were not yet any Pestilential
Effluxions in the Air of those places, which on the occasions of those washings
became infected, or at least that by the addition of the fetid Effluvia of the
soapy Water, those Morbifick Particles, that were dispersed through the Air
before, had not the power to introduce a malignant constitution into the Air,
and to act as truly Pestilential, till they were enabled to do so by being
associated with the ill-scented Effluvia of the Soap.

Whether also Salutary, and, if I may so call them, Alexipharmacal Corpuscles
may not be produced in the Air by Coalition, might be very well worth our
Enquiry: Especially if we had a competent Historical Account of the yearly
ceasing of the Plague at Grand Cayro. For, as I have elsewhere noted out of the
Learned Prosper Alpinus, who practiced Physic there; and as I have also been
informed by some of my Acquaintance who visited that vast City, that almost in
the midst of Summer as soon as the River begins to rise The Plague which here
miserably rages upon the first of the Flood does instantly cease; in so much
as when five Hundred dye at Cayro the day before, which is nothing rare, (for
the sound keep company with the sick, holding Death fatal, and, to avoid them,
Irreligion,) not one does dye the day following; says Mr. Sandys in his
Travels, Lib. 2.
, the Plague has its malignity suddenly checked, even as to those that are
already infected, and soon after ceases; so if other Circumstances contradict
not, one might guess, that this strange Phenomenon may be chiefly occasioned
by some Nitrous or other Corpuscles that accompany the overflowing Nile, and by
associating themselves with what Hippocrates somewhere calls (...), disable
them to produce their wonted pernicious Effects. To which Hypothesis suits well
what is delivered by more than one Traveller into Egypt, and more particularly
by our Ingenious Countreyman Mr. George Sandys, who not only takes notice, that
about the time of the overflowing of Nilus, whose abounding with Nitre has been
observed even by the Ancients, there is a certain moistening Emanation diffused
through the Air. To prove, says he Mr. Sandys in the Book abovecited.
, speaking of the overflowing of Nilus, that it proceeds from a natural
Cause, this one, though strange, yet true Experiment will suffice. Take of the
Earth of Egypt adjoining to the River, and preserve it carefully, that it
neither come to be wet nor wasted, weight it daily, and you shall find it
neither more nor less heavy until the seventeenth of June, at which day it
begins to grow more ponderous, and augmenteth with the augmentation of the
River, whereby they have an infallible knowledge of the state of the Deluge,
proceeding without doubt from the Humidity of the Air, which having a recourse
through all passible places, and mixing therewith increases the same, as it
increases in moisture.

That these Sanative Steams perform their Effects merely because they are
moist, I presume Naturalists will scarce pretend; but that they may be of such
a nature as by their Coalition with the Morbifick Corpuscles to increase their
Bulk and alter their Figure, or precipitate them out of the Air, or clog their
Agility, or pervert their Motions, and in a word destroy all or some Tat least
of those Mechanical* Affections which made those Corpuscles Pestilential: That,
I say, these Antidotal Vapors (if I may so call them) may have these Effects
upon those that formerly were Morbifick, and that so there may result from the
Association of two sorts of Particles, whereof one was of a highly noxious
nature, a harmless mixture, might here be made probable by several things; but
that I hope what I have lately recited about the Coalitions of the Effluvia of
Spirit of Salt and of Urine (Liquors known to be highly contrary to each other)
is not already forgotten by you.

And the Experiment with which I am to conclude this Essay will perhaps make
you think it possible, that the Pestiferous Steams that have already passed out
of the Air, and invaded, but not too much vitiated, the Bodies of Men, may have
their malignity much debilitated by the supervening of these Antidotal
Particles. For in that Experiment you will find, that the Steams emitted into
the Air from the Liquor there described, though that were actually cold, were
able to reach, and manifestly to Operate, (and that probably by way of
Praecipitation,) upon Corpuscles that were fenced from them by the
Interposition of other Bodies; not more porous than those of living Men.
Whether the fume of Sulphur, which by many is extolled to prevent the Infection
of the Air, do by its acid or other Particles disarm, if I may so speak, the
Pestilential ones, I have not now time to inquire: No more than whether in
Ireland and some few other Countries, that breed or brook no poisonous Animals,
that hostility may proceed, at least in great part, from the peculiar Nature of
the Soil, which both from its superficial and deeper parts, constantly supplies
the Air with Corpuscles destructive to venomous Animals. And some other
Particulars, that may be pertinently enough considered here, you may find
treated on in other Papers. And therefore at present I shall only intimate in a
word, that having purposely made a visible and lasting Stain on a solid Body
barely by cold Effluvia, I did by the invisible and cold Steams of another Body
make in two or three Minutes a visible change in the color of that Stain.

And as for the other part of the Conjecture, (viz.) That Meteors may sometimes
be produced by the Occursions of Subterraneal Effluvia, some of them of one
determinate Nature, and some of another, I think I could, to countenance it,
give you diverse Instances of the plentiful Impregnation) of the Air at some
times, and in some places, with Steams of very differing Natures, and such as
are not so likely to be attracted by the Heat of the Sun, as to be sent up from
the Subterraneal Regions, and sometimes from Minerals themselves. But for
Instances of this kind, I shall, for brevities sake, refer you to another Paper
An Essay of Subterraneal Exhalations.
, where I have purposely treated of this Subject, and particularly shown, That
though usually the Effluxions that come from under ground are ill-scented, yet
they are not always so; and also that Sulphurous Exhalations even from cold,
and, for the most part, Aqueous Liquors may retain their determinate nature in
the Air, and act accordingly upon solid Bodies themselves, to whose
Constitution those Effluvia chance to be proportionate.

But one memorable Story not mentioned (...) that Discourse is too much to our
present purpose to be here omitted, especially having met with it in so
approved an Author as the experienced Agricola, who having mentioned out of
ancient Historians the Raining of White and Red liquors, which they took
(erroneously I doubt not) for Milk and Blood, subjoyns, Agric. de Not. eorum
quae effluunt e Terra, Lib. 12. page 236.
Ut autem majorem fidem habe amus Annalium monumentis facit res illa decantata,
quae Patrum memoria (in another place he specifies the Year of our Lord) in
Suevia accidit; Aer enim ille stillavit guttas, quae lineas vestes crucibus
rubris quasi sanguineis imbuebant. Which I the rather mention, because it does
not only prove what I allege it for; but may keep, what is lately and very
credibly reported to have happened in diverse places of the Kingdom of Naples
soon after the Fiery Eruption of Vesuvius, from being judged a Phenomenon
either altogether fabulous, (as doubtless many have thought it,) or a Prodigy
without all example, as is presumed even by those that think it not miraculous.
And to this I add, that 'twill be the less improbable, that the more agile
Corpuscles of Subterraneal Salts, Sulphurs and Bitumens, may be raised into the
Air, and keep distinct natures there, if so fixed a Body as common Earth it self
can be brought to swim in the Air. And yet of this the worthy Writer newly
quoted gives us, besides what Annals relate, this Testimony upon his own
knowledge: Agric. de Not. eorum quae e Terra effluunt, Lib. 12. page 263.
Certe hic Kempnicii undecimum abhinc annum mense Septembri effluxerunt imbres,
sic cum terra lutea commisti, ut ea passim plateas scilicet stratas viderem
conspersas.

And to show you that in some cases the Particles even of Vegetable Bodies may
not so soon perish in the Air as they vanish there, but may retain distinct
natures at a greater distance, than one would think, from the Bodies that
copiously emit them; I shall add, that having desired an ingenious Gentleman,
that went on a considerable Employment to the East Indies, to make some
Observations for me in his Voyage; he sent me among other things this Remarque:
That having sailed along the Coast of Ceylon, (famous for Cinnamon-trees and
well-scented Gums,) though they Coasted it almost a whole day, the Wind, that
then chanced to blow from the shore, brought them a manifestly odoriferous Air
from the Island, though they kept off many miles (perhaps twenty or twentyfive)
from the shore. Nor should this be thought incredible, because the diffusion
seems so disproportionate to that of other Bodies dissolved by Fluids; as, for
instance, though Salt be an active Body and resoluble into abundance of minute
Particles, yet one part of Salt will scarce be tastable in an hundred parts of
Water. For sensibly to affect so gross an Organ as that of our Taste, there is
usually required in sapid Particles a bigness far exceeding that which is
necessary to the making Bodies fit Objects for the sense of Smelling, and,
which is here mainly to be considered, there is a great difference between the
power a Body has to impregnate so thin and fine a Fluid as Air, whose parts are
so rare and lax, and that which it has to impregnate Liquors, such as Water or
Wine, whose parts are so constipated as to make it not only visible and
tangible, but ponderous. On which occasion I remember that having had a
Curiosity to try how far a sapid Body could be diluted without ceasing to be
so, I found by Trial, that one drop of good Chemical, and, as Artists call it,
Essential Oil of Cinnamon being duly mixed by the help of Sugar with Wine,
retained the determinate taste of Cinnamon, though it were diffused into near a
quart of Wine. So that making a moderate estimate, I concluded, that upon the
common supposition, according to which a drop is reckoned for a Grain, one part
of Oil had given the specific Taste of the Spice, it was drawn from, to near
fourteen thousand parts of Wine. By comparing which Experiment with what I
noted about the proportion of Salt requisite to make Water taste of it, you will
easily perceive; that there may be a very great difference in point of
diffusiveness between the little Particles that make Bodies sapid: Which may
serve to confirm both some part of the first Chapter of the foregoing Essay of
the Subtilty of Effluvia* and what I was lately saying to show it possible,
that Antimonial Glass might impart store of Steams to the Emetick Wine, without
appearing upon common Scales to have lost of its weight; since we see, that one
Drop of so light a Body as Oil may communicate not insensible Effluvia, but
tastable Corpuscles to near a Quart of Liquor. But this is not all for which I
mention our Experiment: for I must now add, that besides the almost innumerable
Sapid parts of a spicy Drop communicated to the Wine, it thence diffused a vast
number of odorous Particles into the Air, which both I, and others perceived to
be imbued with the distinct scent of Cinnamon, and which perhaps the Liquor
would have been found able to have Aromatized for I know not how long a time,
if I had had leisure to prosecute the Observation.

CHAP. V.
THE third and last way I shall mention of showing the Determinate Nature of
Effluviums, is to be taken from the Consideration of their Effects upon other
Bodies than the Organs of our Senses; (for of their Operations upon these we
have already spoken in the foregoing Chapter*) For the Effects, that certain
Bodies produce on others by their Effluviums, being constant and determinate,
and oftentimes very different from those, which other Agents by their Emissions
work upon the same and other subjects, the distinct nature of the Corpuscles
emitted may be thence sufficiently gathered.

We may from the foregoing Tract of the Subtilty of Effluvia, borrow some
Instances very pertinent to this place. For the temporary benumbedness or
stupefaction, for example, produced in the Fisherman's Foot by the Effluvia See
the Essay of the Subtilty of Effluviums, Chap. 4.
of the Fish (Amoreatim) mentioned by the Ingenious Piso, manifests, that those
stupifying Emanations retained a peculiar and venomous nature during their
whole passage through the Shoe, Stocking and Skin, interposed betwixt the Fish
and the nervous part of the Foot benumbed by it. And though there are very few
other Bodies in the World, that are minute enough to pass through the pores of
Glass, it is apparent, by the Experiment there recited of the oblong Iron
Hermetically sealed up in a Glass-pipe, that the Magnetical Effluvia of the
Earth may retain their peculiar and wonderful nature in a smallness that
qualifies them to pass freely through the pores of Glass it self.

But that I may neither repeat what you have already met with in the foregoing
Tract, nor anticipate what I have to say in the next; I will employ in this
Chapter some Instances that may be spared from both.

That diverse Bodies of a Venomous nature may exercise some such Operations upon
others by their Effluviums transmitted through the Air, as they are wont to do
in their gross substance, is a Truth, whereof though I have not met with many,
yet I have met with some Examples among Physicians.

The Learned Lib. 6. part 7. cap. 1.
Sennertus observes as a known thing, that the Apprentices of Apothecaries have
been cast into profound Sleeps, when in distilling Opiat and Hypnotick Liquors
they have received in at their Nostrils the Vapors exhaling from those Bodies.

It Is recorded by the In Explicatione Herbarum Biblicarum, cap. 2.
Writers about Poisons, that the root and juice of Mandragora casts those, that
take it, into a deep Sopor not unlike a Lethargy. And though the Apples of the
same Plant be thought to be much less malignant; yet Levinus Lemnius relates
that it happened to him more than once, that having laid some Mandrake-Apples
in his Study, he was by their Steams made so sleepy, that he could hardly
recover himself; but the Apples being taken away he regained alacrity, and
threw off all drowsiness.

Among all Poisons there is scarce any whose Phenomenon are in my opinion more
strange than those that proceed from a mad Dog; and yet even this Poison, which
seems to require Corpuscles of so odd and determinate a nature, is recorded by
Physicians to have been conveyed by Exhalations. Aretaeus writes (as a Learned
modern quotes him,) Quod a rabido cane, qui in faciem, dum spiritus adducitur,
tantummodo inspiraverit, and nullo modo momorderit, in rabiem homo agatur. And
as there are relations, among Physicians, of Animals, that have become Rabiosi
by having eaten of the parts or excrements of rabid Animals; so Libro 3.
Acutor. Morbor.
Caelius Aurelianus, who writes, that some have been made to run mad, not by
being bitten, but wounded only with the Claws of a mad Dog, tells us also of a
man, that fell into a Hydrophobia (which is wont to be a high degree of the
Rabies, and by some of the antienter Writers was employed to signify that
Disease) without being bitten by a mad Dog, but infected solo odore ex rabido
cane attracto. By which Odours in this and other Narratives of Poisons I
understand not a bare Scholastic species, but a swarm of Effluvia, which most
commonly are all or at least some of them odorous. And though it may justly
seem strange to many, that the Venom of a mad Dog should be communicated
otherwise than by biting, which is supposed to be the only way he can infect
by, it may appear less improbable, because Matthaeus de Gradibus names a
person, who, he says, proved infected after many days, by only having put his
Hand into the Mouth of a mad Dog, who did not bite him. And the formerly
mentioned Matthiolus relates, that he saw two, that were made rabid without any
would by the slabber of a mad Dog, with which they had the misfortune to be
besmeared.

Sennert. Libr. 6. part. 6. cap. 2.
Sennertus himself affirms of a Painter of his acquainance, that, when he had
opened a Box, in which he had long kept included Realgar, a noxious Mineral,
sometimes used by Painters and not unknown to Chemists, and had unfortunately
snuff'd in the Steams of it, he was seized with a giddiness in his Head and
fainting fits, his whole Face also swelling, though by taking of Antidotes he
escaped the danger.

Diverse other Examples we have met with in the writings of Physicians, which I
forbear to add to these, because, I confess, I very much doubt the Truth of
them, though the deliverers of some of them be men of Note. But the probability
of most of the things already cited out of credible Authors may be strengthened
by what I shall now subjoyn, as a further proof of the distinct Nature of
Effluvia; of which it will be a very considerable Proof, if Medicines, which
are of a milder and more familiar nature and operation than Poisons, shall yet
be able in some cases to retain, in their invisible Particles swimming in the
Air, the same, (though not so great) power of Purging, which is known to belong
to them when their gross Body is taken in at the Mouth. Of this I have
elsewhere, on another occasion, given some Examples. To which I shall now add,
that I know a Doctor of Physic, that is usually Purged by the Odours or
Exhalations of a certain Electuary, whose Cathartick Operation, when it is
taken in substance, is wont to be but languid. And another Doctor of my
acquaintance, causing good store of the root of black Hellebore to be long
pounded in a mortar, most of those, that were in the room, and especially the
party that pounded it, were thereby purged, and some of them strongly enough.
And the Learned Sennertus somewhere affirms, that some will be purged by the
very Odor of Colocynthis. And it is not to be passed by unregarded; that in the
cases I have alleged, Exhalations, that are endowed with Occult Qualities,
(for those of Cathartick Medicines are reckoned among such) ascend into the Air
without being forced from the Bodies they belonged to by an External heat.

And if I would in this place allege Examples of the Operations of such
Effluvia, as do not pass into the Air, but yet operate only by the contact of
the External parts of the Body, I could give Instances, not only of the
Purgative, but the Emetick Qualities of some Medicines exerted without their
being taken in at the Mouth, or injected with Instruments.

There are also other sorts of Examples than those hitherto mentioned, that
argue a Determinate Nature in the Effluxions of some Bodies emitted into the
Air. Approved Writers tell us, that the Shadow of a Walnut-tree with the Leaves
on it is very hurtful to the Head; and some Instances they give us of great
mischief it has sometimes done. And though the Shadow, as such, is not likely
to be guilty of such bad Effects; yet the Effluvia of the neighboring Plant
may be noxious enough to the Head. For I, that was not at all prepossessed with
an opinion that it was so, and therefore without scruple resorted to the Shade
of Walnut trees in a hot Country, was by experience forced to think it might
give others the Headache, since it did to me, who, thanks be to God, both was,
and am still very little subject to that distemper. And this brings into my
mind an Observation that I have met with among some ingenious Travelers into
the West Indies, who observe in general, and of late a Countryman of our own
affirms it in particular, of the poisonous Manchinello-tree, that Birds will
not only forbear to eat of the Fruit of venomous Plants, but, as to some of
them, will not so much as light on the Trees: Which I therefore mention,
because probably Nature instructs them to avoid such Trees by some noxious
Smell, or other Emanation, that offends the approaching Birds. And I remember,
that some of our Navigators give it for a Rule to those that happen to land in
unknown Islands or Coasts, that they may venture to eat of those parts of
Fruits which they can perceive, the Birds, like kind Tasters, to have been
pecking at before.

Nicolaus Florentinus (cited by Sennertus) tells us of a certain Lombard, that
having in a House, that he named, at Florence, burned a great black Spider at
the flame of a Candle, so unwarily, that he drew in the Steams of it at his
Nostrils, presently began to be much disordered and fell into a fainting fit,
and for the whole night had his Heart much disaffected, his Pulse being so
weak, that one could scarce perceive he had any; though afterward he was cured
by Treacle, Diamose, and the powder of Zedoary mixed together.

And I remember, that being some years ago in Ireland, I gathered a certain
Plant (peculiar to some parts of that Country) which the Natives call
Maccu-buy, because of strange Traditions that go about it; the chief of which I
found by trial not to be true: But yet being satisfied, that its Operations
were odd and violent enough, I was willing to gratify the chief Physician of
the Country, who was desirous I should propose to him some ways of correcting
it; and whilst I was speaking of one that required the pounding of it, he told
me on that occasion, that intending to make an extract of it with Vinegar, he
caused his man to beat it well in a Mortar, which the man soon repented he had
begun to do: And the Doctor himself, though at a pretty distance off, was so
wrought upon by the Corpuscles that issued out into the Air, that his Head, and
particularly his Face, swelled to an enormous and disfiguring bulk, and
continued tumid for no inconsiderable time after.

I have not leisure to subjoyn many more Instances to show the Determinate
Nature of Effluviums, small enough to wander through the Air; nor perhaps will
it be necessary, if you please but to consider these two things. The first,
that many odoriferous Bodies, as Amber, Musk, Civet, etc. as they will, by the
adhesion of their whole substance, perfume Skins, Linen, etc. so they will in
time perfume some Bodies disposed to admit their action, though kept at a
distance from them. And the other is, that in Pestilential Fevers and diverse
other Contagious sicknesses, as the Plague, Smallpox, or Measels, the same
determinate Disease is communicable to found persons, not only by the immediate
contact of the infected party; but without it, by the Contagious Steams that
exhale from his Body into the Air. And having said this and desired you to
reflect upon it, I shall conclude this Chapter with an Experiment, that
possibly will not a little confirm a great part of it.

Considering then with my self, how I might best devise a way of showing to the
very Eye, That Effluvia elevated without the help of Heat, and wandering in the
Air, may both retain their own Nature, and upon determinate Bodies produce
Effects, that a Vulgar Philosopher would ascribe to Occult Qualities: I
remembered, that I had found by trials (made to other purposes) that Volatile
and Sulphurous Salts would so work upon some Acid ones sublimed with Mercury,
as to produce an odd diversity of Colors, but chiefly an Inky one; on which
account I judged it likely that my aim would by answered by the following
Experiment.

I took an Ounce, or better, of such a Volatile Tincture of Sulphur, as I have
elsewhere The Liquor here mentioned is, for the main, the same with that
described by the Author in his Book of Colors, Experiment the (...)
taught you to make of Quicklime, Sulphur and Sal Armoniack, and stopped it up
in a Vial capable of containing at least twice as much; then taking a Paper
whereon something had been written with invisible Ink, I laid it down six
Inches off of the Vial, which, being unstop'd, began, upon the access of the
Fire, to emit white Fumes into it; and by these, what was written upon the
Paper, notwithstanding its distance from the Liquor, quickly became very
legible, though not quite so suddenly, as if a Paper, written with the same
clear Liquor, were held at the like distance directly over the orifice of the
Vial. And having caused several pieces of clean Paper to be written on, with a
new Pen dipped in the clear Solution of Sublimate made in Water, 'twas pleasant
to see, how diverse of the Letters of several of these Papers, being placed
within some convenient distance of the Vial, would be made plainly legible, and
some of them more, some less blackish, according to their distances from the
smoking Liquor, and other Circumstances. But 'twas more surprising to see,
that when I held or laid some of these Papers, though with the written side
upwards, just upon or over the orifice of the Vial, though the contained Liquor
did not by some Inches reach so high, yet the latent Letters would become not
only legible but conspicuous in about a quarter of a Minute of an Hour
(measured by a good Watch fit for the purpose, as more than one trial assured
me.) And as it may be observed, that in some Circumstances the smoking Liquor
and the Solution of Sublimate will make an odd Precipitate almost of a
silverish color, so in one or two of our Trials we found a like color
produced, by the Steams of that Liquor, in some of the colorless Ink. Nor is
it so necessary to employ a visibly smoking Liquor for the denigrating of
invisible Ink at a distance. For I have, to that purpose, with good success,
though not equal to that I have recited, employed a couple of Liquors, wherein
there was neither Sulphur, nor Sal Armoniack, nor Sublimate. What other Trials
I made with our Volatile Tincture of Sulphur, it is not necessary here to
relate, only one Experiment, which you will possibly think odd enough, I shall
not omit; because it will not only confirm the precedent Trials, but also much
of the foregoing Essay, by showing the great Subtilty and penetrating power of
Effluviums that seem rather to issue out very faintly, than to be darted out
with any briskness.

Causing then something to be written with dissolved Sublimate upon a piece of
Paper, we folded the Paper with the written side inwards, and then enclosed
this in the midst of six sheets of Paper, laid one upon another, not placed one
within another, and folded up in the form of an ordinary Letter or packet to be
sealed, that, the edges of the enclosing Paper being inserted one within the
other, the Fumes might not get into this written Paper but by penetrating
through the Leaves themselves: This done, that side of the Packet, on which
there was no commissure, and on which, were it to be sent away, the
Superscription should be written, was laid upon the orifice of the Vial, which
(as was before intimated) was some Inches higher than the surface of the
Liquor, and left there about ten Minutes; after which taking off the folded
Papers, and opening them, we found, that the Steams had pervaded all the
Leaves, in which the written Paper had been enclosed. For, though the Leaves
did not appear stained or altered, yet the formerly latent Characters appeared
conspicuous. I have not time to discourse, whether and how far this Experiment
may assist us to explain some odd Effects of Thunder, or of that strange
Phenomenon, (glanced at in the foregoing Chapter,) which is said to have
happened lately in the Kingdom of Naples after the great Eruption of Vesuvitus,
which is said to have been followed by the appearing of the Crosses formerly
mentioned, some of which have been found on the innermost parts of Linen, that
had been carefully folded up. But of these and the like things, I say, I have
now no time to discourse, whether any thing derivable from our Experiment may
be pertinently applied to their Explication. For which reason I shall add no
more than that afterward for further trial we took a printed Book, that
chanced to be at hand, and which we judged the fittest for our purpose, because
the leaves being broad they might the better preserve a small Paper to be
placed in the midst of them from being accessible to the Exhalations sidewise,
and having put the designed Paper into this Book, and held it to the orifice of
the Vial, though there were no less than twelve leaves between them; yet those
Letters, that happened to be the most rightly placed, were made inky in the
short space of three Minutes at the utmost; though this Liquor had been so long
kept and so often unstop'd to try Conclusions with it, that it had probably
lost a good part of the most spirituous and piercing Particles.

NEW EXPERIMENTS, To make the PARTS OF FIRE and FLAME Stable and Ponderable.

BY The Honorable Robert Boil.

LONDON: Printed by WILLIAM GODBID, for Moses Pit, at the Sign of the White
Heart in Little Britain. 1673.

A PREFACE; SHOWING The Motive, Design, and Parts of the ensuing Tract.
THE Inducements which put me upon the Attempt, expressed in the Title of this
Essay, were chiefly these:

First, I considered, that the Interstellar part of the Universe, consisting of
Air and Ether, or Fluids analogous to one of them, is diaphanous; and that the
Ether is, as it were, a vast Ocean, wherein the Luminous globes, that here and
there like Fishes swim by their own motion, or like Bodies in Whirlpools are
carried about by the Ambient, are but very thinly dispersed, and consequently
that the proportion, that the Fixed Stars and Planetary Bodies bear to the
diaphanous part of the World, is exceeding small and scarce considerable;
though we should admit the Sun and Fixed Stars to be Opacous Bodies upon the
account of their terminating our sight: Which diffident Expression I employ,
because I have elsewhere shown by two or three Experiments, purposely devised,
that a Body may appear opacous to our Eyes, and yet allow free passage to the
beams of Light.

I further considered, that there being so vast a disproportion between the
diaphanous part of the World and the Globes, about which it is every way
diffused, and with which it is sometimes in great portions mingled, as in the
water, which together with the Earth makes up the Globe we inhabit; and the
nature of Diaphanous Bodies being such, that, when the Sun or any other
Luminous Body illustrates them, that which we call Light does so penetrate and
mix it self per minima with them, that there is no sensible part of the
transparent Body uninlightned; I thought it worth the enquiry, whether a thing,
so vastly diffused as Light is were some thing Corporeal or not? And whether,
in case it be, it may be subjected to some other of our Senses besides our
Sight, whereby we may examine; whether it has any affinity with other
Corporeal beings, that we are acquainted with here below?

I did not all this while forget, that the Peripateticks make Light a mere
Quality, and that Cartesius ingeniously endeavors to explicate it by a
modification of Motion in an Aetherial matter: But I remembered too, that the
Atomists of old, and of late the Learned Gaffendus, and many other Philosophers
assert Light to be Corporeal; and that some Tears since, though I declined to
pass my Judgment about the Question, yet I had employed Arguments, that
appeared plausible enough to show, That 'twas not absurd to suppose, that the
Sun, which is the Fixed Star most known to us, might be a Fiery Body. And
therefore doubting, whether the Corporeity of Light would be in haste
Determined by mere Ratiocinations, I thought it very well worth the
endeavoring to try whether I could do any thing toward clearing the dispute
of it by Experiments; especially being persuaded, that, though such an attempt
should be ineffectual, it would but leave the controversy in its former state,
without prejudicing either of the contending Hypotheses; and yet, if it should
prove successful, the consequences of it would be very great and useful toward
the explicating of diverse Phenomenon in diverse parts of Natural Philosophy, as
in Chemistry, Botanicks, and (if there be any such) the allowable part of
Astrology. (Nor perhaps would it be impossible by the help of slight Theorical
alterations; to reconcile the Experiments, I designed, to either of the
abovementioned Hypotheses, and so as to the Explication of Light, to one
another.)

To compass then, what I aimed at, I thought, 'twas fit in the first place to
try, what I could do by the Union of the Sunbeams, they being on all hands
confessed to be Portions (as I may so speak) of true and Celestial Light: And
then, I thought fit to try, what could be obtained from Flame; not only because
that is acknowledged to be a Luminary but because I hoped, the difficulties, I
foresaw in the other Trials, might be in some measure avoided in those made
with Flame; and if both sorts of them should succeed, the later and former
would serve to confirm each other. According to the Method I proposed of
handling these two Subjects, I should begin with some account of what I
attempted to perform in the Sunbeams: But the truth is, that when I chanced to
fall upon the Enquiry that occasioned this Paper, besides that the time of the
Year it self was not over-favourable, the weather proved so extraordinary dark
and unseasonable that it was wondered at; so that, though I was furnished with
good Burning-glasses, and did several times begin to make trials upon diverse
Bodies, as Lead, Quicksilver, Antimony, etc. yet the frequent interposition of
Clouds and Mists did so disfavour my Attempts, that, however they were not all
alike defeated, yet I could not prosecute the greatest part of them to my own
satisfaction. And therefore being unwilling to build on them as yet; I shall
reserve an account of them for another opportunity; and now proceed to the
mention of that sort of Experiments which depending less on Casualities, 'twas
more in my power to bring to an Issue.

I know I might have saved both you and my self some time and pains by omitting
several of these Trials, and by a more compendious way of delivering the rest.
But I rather chose the course I have taken; partly because the Novelty and
Improbabilities of the Truth I deliver seems to require, that it be made out by
a good number of Trials; partly because I thought it might not be altogether
useless to you and your Friends, to see upon what Inducements the several steps
were made in this Inquiry; partly because I was willing to contribute something
toward the History that now perhaps will be thought fit to be made of the
Increment or Decrement that particular Bodies may receive by being exposed to
the Fire; and partly (in fine) because the Incongruity of the Doctrine here
asserted to the Opinions of the Schools, and the general Prepossessions of
Mankind, made me think it fit by a considerable Variety, as well as number, of
Experiments to obviate, as far as may be, the differing Objections and Evasions
wherewith a Truth so paradoxical may expect to be encountered.

New EXPERIMENTS, To make FIRE and FLAME PONDERABLE.
THough there be among the following Trials a Diversity that invites me, as to
rank them into four or five differing sorts, so to assign them as many distinct
Sections; yet for the convenience of making the References, there will be
occasion to make betwixt them, I shall wave the Distinction, and set them down
in one continued Series.

And because I am willing to comply with my have, as well as to deal frankly
and without Ceremony with you, I shall venture to subjoyn the naked Transcripts
of my Experiments, as I had in an artless manner set them down with many others
for my own remembrance among my Adversaria, without so much as retrenching some
Circumstances that relate less to my present Argument, than to some other
purposes.

I shall then begin with the mention of a couple of Experiments, which though
they might conveniently enough be referred to another Paper; yet I shall here
set them down, because it seems very proper to endeavor to show in the first
place, that Flame itself may be as 'twere incorporated with close and solid
Bodies so as to increase their bulk and weight.

Trials of the First sort.
EXPERIMENT I.
[A Piece of Copper-plate not near so thick as a Half-crown, and weighing two
Drachmes and twenty-five Grains, was so placed with its broad part Horizontal,
in a Crucible, whose bottom had a little hole in it, for Fumes to get out at,
that it could not be removed from its Position, nor be easily made to drop down
or lose its Level to the Horizon, though the Crucible were turned upside down:
Then about an Ounce and half of common Sulphur being put into a taller and
broader Crucible, that, wherein the Copper stuck, was inverted into the orifice
of it, that the Sulphur being kindled, the flame, but not the melted Brimstone
in substance, might reach the Plate, and have some vent beyond it at the
abovementioned hole. This Brimstone burned about two Hours, in which time it
seemed all to have been resolved into Flame, no flowers of Sulphur appearing to
have sublimed into the inside of the upper Crucible; and though the Copperplate
were at a considerable distance from the ignited Sulphur, yet the Flame seemed
to have really penetrated it, and to have made it visibly swell or grow
thicker; which appeared to be done by a real accession of substance: since,
after we had wiped off some little adhering sordes, and with them diverse
particles of Copper that stuck close to them, the Plate was found to weigh near
two and thirty Grains more than at first, and consequently to have increased
its former weight by above a fifth part.]

EXPER. II.
[Having, by refining one Ounce of sterling Silver with Saltpeter, according
to our way reduced it to seven Drachms or somewhat less; we took a piece of the
thus purified Silver, that weighed one Dram wanting two Grains, and having
ordered it as the Copper-plate had been in the former Experiment, after the
flame of above one Ounce and a quarter of Sulphur, (that Quantity chancing to
be suitable to the Capacity of the Crucible) had for about an Hour and a half
beat upon it, the Silver-plate seemed to the Eye somewhat swelled, and the
lower surface of it, that was next the flame, was brought to a great
smoothness, the weight being increased to one Dram five Grains and three
quarters; which increase of weight falling so short of that which was gained by
the Copper, I leave it to you to consider, whether the difference may be
attributed to the closeness and compactness of the Silver, argued by its being
heavier in specie than Copper; or to the greater congruity of the pores of
Copper to be wrought on by the fiery Menstruum; or to some other cause.]

If you should here ask me, by what Rational inducements I could be led to
entertain so extravagant an expectation, as that such a light and subtle Body
as Flame should be able to give an augmentation of weight to such ponderous
Bodies as Minerals and Metals; I shall now, to avoid making anticipations here,
or needless repetitions hereafter, return you only this Answer: That the
expectation you wonder at may justly be entertained upon the same or such like
inducements, as you may easily discover in another Paper, entitled Corollarium
Paradoxum. For, supposing upon the grounds there laid, that Flame may act upon
some Bodies as a Menstruum, it seems no way incredible, that, as almost all
other Menstruums, so Flame should have some of its own Particles united with
those of the Bodies exposed to its action: And the generality of those
Particles being, (as it is shown in the Paradox about the Fuel of Flames,)
either Saline, or of some such piercing and Terrestrial nature, it is no wonder,
that being wedged into the Pores, or being brought to adhere very fast to the
little Parts of the Bodies exposed to their action, the accession of so many
little Bodies, that want not gravity, should, because of their multitude, be
considerable upon a Balance, whereon one or two, or but few of these
Corpuscles would have no visible Effect.

I could here, if it were expedient, mention some odd scruples about the
preceding Experiments, and some also of the subsequent; but, lest you should,
with some other of my Friends, upbraid me with being too jealous and Skeptical,
I will not trouble you with them; but proceed to the next sort of Trials,
wherein, though the matter were not always manifestly beaten on by a shining
Flame; yet it was wrought on by that, which would be called Flame by those who
take not that word strictly, but in a latitude, and which this Igneous
substance may more properly be styled, than it can be called common Fire, this
being visibly harbored in burning Coals or other gross materials, from which
our Metals were fenced. And I have elsewhere shown by experiment, that
Visibility is not in all cases necessary to Actual Flame, particularly when the
Eye receives a predominant impression from another Light.

Trials of the Second sort.
EXPER. III.
INto a Crucible, whose sides had been purposely taken down to make it very
shallow, was put one Ounce of Copper Plates; and this being put into our
Cupelling-furnace, and kept there two Hours, and then being taken out we
weighed the Copper (which had not been melted) having first blown off all the
ashes, and we found it to weigh one Ounce and thirty Grains.

EXPER. IV.
[Supposing that Copper, being reduced to filings, and thereby gaining more of
Superficies in proportion to its bulk, would be more exposed to the Action of
the Fire, than when it is in places as it was formerly; we took one Ounce of
that Metal in filings, and putting them upon a very shallow Crucible, and under
a Muffler, we kept them there about three Hours, (whilst other things that
required so long a time were Cupelling;) and afterward taking them off, we
found them of a very dark color, not melted but caked together in one Lump,
and increased in weight (the ashes and dust being blown off) no less than about
fortynine Grains. Part of which increment, above that obtained by the
Copper Plates in the former Experiment, may not improbably be due to the longer
time that in this Experiment the filled Copper was kept in the Fire.]

EXPER. V.
[Being willing to see, whether calcined Hartshorn, that I did not find easy
to be wrought on by corrosive Menstruums, would retain any thing of the Flame
or Fire to which it should be exposed; we weighed out one Ounce of small Lumps
of Hartshorn, that had been burnt till they appeared white, and having put them
into a Crucible, and kept them in a Cupelling-furnace for two Hours, whilst
some Metals were driving off there by the violence of the Fire; we found, that
when they were taken out, they had lost six or seven Grains of their former
weight; perhaps either because, notwithstanding the external whiteness of the
Lumps, the internal Parts of some of them might not be so exquisitely calcined,
but retain some Oleaginous or other Volatile Substance* or, because, having
omitted to ignite them well before they were weighed, they may have since their
first Calcination imbibed some moist Particles of the Air. Which conjecture
seemed the likelier, because, having kept them a while in the Scales they were
weighed in, they did within two or three Hours make it somewhat preponderate.
On which occasion I shall add, that, at the same time, with the Hartshorn we
put in one Ounce of well-heated Brick, and kept that likewise in the Furnace
for above two Hours; at the end of which weighing it whilst it continued hot,
we did not find it to have either sensibly got or lost; but, some time after,
it seemed upon the Balance to have imbibed some, though but very little,
moisture from the Air.]

EXPER. VI.
[Upon a good Cupel we put one Ounce of English Tin of the better sort, and
having placed it in the Furnace under a Muffler, though it presently melted,
yet it did not forsake its place, but remained upon the concave surface of the
Cupel, till at the end of about two Hours it appeared to have been well
calcined; and then being taken out and weighed by it self, the Ounce of Metal
was found to have gained no less than a Dram.]

EXPER. VII.
[An Ounce of Lead was put upon the Cupel, made of calcined Hartshorn, and
placed under the Muffler after that the Cupel was first made hot and then
weighed. This Lead did not enter into the Cupel, but was turned into a pretty
kind of Litharge on the top of it, and broke the Cupel, whereby some part of
the Cupel was lost in the Furnace, and yet the rest, together with the
Litharge, weighed seven Grains more than the Ounce of Lead and the heated Cupel
did when they were put in.]

But because, though this trial showed that some weight was gained either by
the Metal or Cupel, or both; yet it did not by this appear, what either of them
acquired; it seemed fit to subjoyn a further trial.

EXPER. VIII.
[We took a Cupel about two Ounces in weight, made of about ten parts of
Bone-ashes, and one of Charcoal-ashes, made up together with Ale. This was by
it self put in a Cupelling-furnace, under a Muffler; and the Laborant, well
versed in weighing, was ordered to take it out, when 'twas thoroughly and highly
heated, and to weigh it whilst 'twas in that condition (I being then present:)
This being done, 'twas forthwith placed again under the Muffler, where some
Metalline Bodies were Cupelling, and kept there for about two Hours; at the end
of which time 'twas taken out red-hot, and presently put into the same
Balance, as before, which was already fastened to a Gibbet; where having caused
the adhering ashes to be blown off, I found, that whereas, when 'twas first
taken from under the Muffler, we had but two Ounces and two Grains, now the
same weight being put into the opposite Scale, it had gained very near one and
twenty Grains. And here note, that 'twas not without some cause, that I was
careful to have the Cupel weighed red-hot. For I had a suspicion, that,
notwithstanding the dryness of the Bone, it might receive some little
alteration of weight by imbibing some little Particles wandering in the Air;
which suspicion the event justified. For leaving the Cupel counterpois'd to
cool in the Balance, in a short time it began sensibly to preponderate; and
suffering it to continue there nine or ten hours, till we had occasion to use
the Balance, I found it at the end of that time to be about three Grains
heavier than before.]

This was not the only trial we made about the augmenting the weight of Cupels;
but this being the fairest, and exempt from those mischances, from which the
other were not altogether free; I shall content my self to have set down this:
In the mention of which I thought fit to take notice of the increase of the
weight of the Cupel after it had layn in the Scales, and also that we weighed
it at first whilst it was thoroughly hot, because those Circumstnces, as not
being suspected, may easily be left unthought on, even by skilful
Experimenters; and yet the weighing of the Cupel, when it had been well neal'd,
and the not weighing it soon enough after it is taken from the Fire, may keep
those, that shall reiterate this Experiment, from making it cautiously and
accurately enough. For if the former Circumstance be omitted, that which the
Cupel may seem to have lost of its substance, was nothing but the adventitious
moisture of the Air; and if the later Circumstance be neglected, the weight, it
may seem to have gained from the Fire, was indeed due to the waterish Particles
of the Air. I could wish also, that trial were made, whether the success would
be the same in Cupels made in differing sorts of Bone-ashes, and other
materials, wont to be employed for that purpose. For That I had not opportunity
to do.

EXPER. IX.
Iron being a Metal, that experience had informed me will more easily be
wrought on by Fluids that have Particles of a Saline nature in them, than is
commonly believed; 'twas not unreasonable to expect, that Flame would have a
greater Operation on it, (especially if it were beforehand reduced to small
Parts) than on any of the Bodies hitherto described. Which supposition will be
confirmed by the short ensuing Note.

[Four Drachms of filings of Steel being kept two Hours on a Cupel under a
Muffler, acquired one Dram six Grains and a quarter increase of weight.]

EXPER. X.
[A piece of Silver, refined in our own Laboratory, being put upon a Cupel
under a Muffler, and kept there for an hour and half, whilst other things were
refining, was taken out and weighed again, and, whereas before it weighed three
Drachms, thirty-two Grains and a quarter, it now weighed in the same Scales
three Drachms, thirty-four Grains and a half, or but little less.]

Finding this Memorial among diverse others about the Weight of Bodies, exposed
to the Fire, I thought it not amiss to annex it in this place; though finding
it to be but single, I would not have it to be relied on till further trial
have been made to discover, whether it was more than a casual and anomalous
Experiment; and if the Silver had not been refined, I should have suspected,
that the Copper, that was blended with it, as it is usually blended with common
Silver, might have occasioned the increased of weight.

(Postcript.)
Since the foregoing Experiment was first set down, meeting with an opportunity
to reiterate the trial once more, we did it with half an Ounce of filings of
Silver, well refined with Lead in our own Laboratory, and kept it about three
hours upon the Cupel; after the end of which time taking it out, we found it to
be of a less pleasant color than it was of before, and melted (though not so
perfectly) into a Lump, which weighed four Drachms and six Grains; and yet, the
success being so odd, and, if it prove constant, of such moment, I could wish
the trial were further repeated in differing quantities of the Metal.

EXPER. XI.
[We took a Dram of filings of Zink or Spelter, and having put it upon a
Cupel under a Muffler, we kept it there in a Cupelling-fire about three Hours,
(having occasion to continue the Cupellation so long for other trials;) then
taking it off the Cupel, we found it to be caked into a brittle and
dark-colour'd Lump, which looked as if the filings had been calcined. This
being weighed in the same Scales gained full six Grains, and so a tenth part of
its first weight.]

EXPER. XII.
Among our various trials upon common Metals, we thought fit to make one or two
upon a Metal brought us from the East Indies, and there called Tutenag, which
name being unknown to our European Chemists, I have elsewhere endeavored to
give some account of the Metal it self; whence I shall borrow the ensuing Note,
as directly belonging to our present purpose.

[Two Drachms of filings of Tutenag being put upon a Cupel, and kept under the
Muffler for about two hours, the filings were not melted into a Lump of Metal,
but looked as if Ceruss and Minium being powdered had been mingled together;
some of the parts appearing distinctly white; and others red: The Calx being
put into the Balance appeared to have gained twenty-eight Grains and a
quarter. Another time the Experiment being reiterated with the like
Circumstances, we found, that two Drachms of the filed Tutenag gained the like
increase of weight, abating less than one Grain.]

So that this Indian Metal seems to have gained more in the fire, in proportion
to its weight, than any we have hitherto made trial of.

EXPER. XIII.
[Being desirous to confirm by a clear Experiment, what I elsewhere deliver
contrary to the vulgar Opinion of those that believe, that in all Cupellations
almost all the Lead that is employed about them, does, together with the baser
Metals that are to be purged off from the Silver or Gold, fly away in Smoke, as
indeed in some sort of Cupellations a good proportion may be blown off that
way: We took two Ounces of good Lead and one Dram of filings of Copper, and
having caused a Cupel to be ignited, and nimbly taken out of the Furnace, and
weighed, whilst 'twas very hot, 'twas presently put back, together with the two
Metals laid on it, into the Cupelling-furnace, where having been kept for about
two hours, it was taken out again, and 'twas found, according to what (as I
elsewhere Essay the sixth of the Useful. of Not. Philos.
note) uses to happen in such Circumstances, to have nothing on the surface of
it worth weighing distinctly in the Scales, in which the Cupel with what was
sunk into it amounted to four Ounces three Drachms and eleven Grains, which
wanted but nine Grains of the whole weight of the Cupel and the two Metals,
when they were all three together committed to the Fire.] So that, though we
make a liberal allowance for the increment of weight that may with any
probability be supposed to have been attained by the Cupel and what was put
upon it, yet it will easily be granted, that very much the greater part of the
Metals was not driven off in Fumes, but entered into the Substance of the Cupel.

Trials of the Third sort.
AFter having shown that either Flame or the Analogous Effluxions of the Fire
will be, what Chemists would call, Corporified with Metals and Minerals exposed
naked to its action; I thought it would be a desirable thing to discover,
whether this Flame or igneous Fluid were subtle enough to exercise any such
Operation upon the Light Bodies sheltered from its immediate contact by being
included in close Vessels; but it being very difficult to expose Bodies in
Glasses to such vehement Fires without breaking or melting the Glass, and
thereby losing the Experiment; I thought fit, first to employ Crucibles
carefully luted together, that nothing might visibly get in or out, and of that
attempt I find among my Notes the following Account.

EXPER. XIV.
[We took an Ounce of Steel freshly filed from a Lump of that Metal, that the
filings might not be rusty, and having included them betwixt two Crucibles, as
formerly, kept them for two hours in a strong Fire, and suffered them to
continue there till the Fire went out; the Crucibles being unluted, the filings
appeared hard caked together, and had acquired a dark color somewhat between
black and blew, and were increased five Grains in weight.]

The foregoing Experiment being the first I mention of this kind, 'twill not be
amiss to confirm it by annexing the following Memorial.

[An Ounce of filings of Steel being put between the Crucibles luted together,
after they had been kept about an hour and half in the fire, were taken out,
and being weighed, were found to have gained six Grains.]

EXPER. XV.
[Two Ounces of Copper-plate were put into a new Crucible, over which a lesser
was whelmed, and the commissures were closed with lute, that nothing might fall
in. After the same manner two Ounces of Tin were included betwixt Crucibles,
and also two Ounces of Lead; these being put into the Cupellingfurnace were
kept in a strong Fire about an hour and a half, while something else was trying
there. And then being taken out, the event was, that the Copper Plates, though
they stuck together, were not quite melted, and seemed some of them to have
acquired scales like Copper put into a naked Fire, and the two Ounces had
gained eight Grains in weight. The Lead had broke through the bottom of the
Crucible, and thereby hindered the designed Observation. The Tin acquired six
Grains in weight, and was in part brought to a pure white Calx, but much more
of it was melted into a Lump of a fine yellow color, almost like Gold, but
deeper.] The prosecution of this trial as to the Copper Plates you will meet
with in Experim. XXI. to which I therefore referr you.

N. B. Because Lead in Cupellation enters the Cupel, we were willing to try, if
we could so far hinder it from doing so, as to make some estimate what change
of Weight the Operation of the Fire would make in it: And therefore being able
already to make a near guess, how much a quantity of Tin may gain by being
calcined on a Cupel, and remembering also from some of my former trials the
indisposition which Tin gives Lead to Cupellation, we mixed a Dram of Tin
with two Ounces of Lead, and exposing the mixture (in a Cupel) to the Fire
under a Muffler, we first brought it to fusion, and then it seemed at the top
dry and swelled and discolored; notwithstanding which, having continued the
Operation a good while, because of other things that were to be done with the
same Fire, we were not lucky enough to bring the Experiment to an issue worth
the relating here, in reference to the scope above-propos'd, though in relation
to another the success was welcome enough.]

EXPER. XVI.
[Supposing that if Copper were beaten into thinner plates than those we lately
used, and kept longer in the fire, this would have a more considerable
Operation upon them, we took one Ounce of very thinly hammered pieces of
Copper, and putting them betwixt two Crucibles (one whelmed over another) as in
Experim. XV. with some lute at the corners of the juncture, to keep the fire
from coming immediately at the Metal, we kept them in the Cupelling-furnace
about three hours, and then disjoyning the Vessels, we found the Metal covered
with a dark and brittle substance, like that described in the above recited
Experiment. Which substance, when scaled off, disclosed a finely colored
Metal, which, together with these burnt scales, amounted to one and twenty
Grains above the weight that was first put in.]

If, when these things were doing, I had been furnished with a very good Lute,
which is no such easy thing to procure, as Chemists, that have not frequently
employed vulgar Lutes, are wont to think; I would have made a trial of the
ensuing Experiment for a good while in the naked Fire, notwithstanding that
diverse Metalline Minerals will scarce be brought to fusion in Glasses,
especially without such a Fire, whose violence makes them break the Vessels.
For I thought, that by making a fit choice of the Metals to be employed, I
could prevent that inconvenience: But wanting the Accommodations I desired, and
yet presuming, that in a Sand-furnace I might by degrees administer heat enough
to melt so fusible a Metal as fine Tin, and keep it in fusion; I resolved to
make some trials, first upon that, and then upon another Metal. For though I
was not sure of being then able to prosecute the Experiment far enough; yet I
hoped, I might at least see some Effects of my first trial, which would enable
me to guess, what I was to expect from a complete one.

EXPER. XVII.
[We took then a piece of fine Block-Tin, and in a pair of good Scales weighed
out carefully half a Pound of it; this we put into a choice Glass-retort, and
kept it for two days or thereabouts in a Sandfurnace, which gave heat enough to
keep the Metal in fusion without cracking the Glass. Then taking out the
mixture, we carefully weighed it in the same Scales, and found the superficies
a little altered (as if it were disposed to calcination) and the weight to be
increased about two Grains or somewhat better.]

EXPER. XVIII.
[The other Experiment, I tried in Glasses, was with Mercury, hoping, that, if
I could make a Precipitate per se in a Hermetically sealed Glass, I should by
comparing the weight of the Precipitate, and the Quicksilver that afforded it,
have a clear Experiment to my purpose; and I should have no bad one, if I could
but make it succeed with a Glass, though not sealed, yet well stopped; instead
of those Infernal-glasses (as they call them) which are commonly used and wont
to be left open (though some slightly stop them with a little Paper or Cotton:)
But though, partly that I might a little diversifie the Experiment, and make it
the more likely to succeed in one or other of the Glasses, I divided the
Mercury and distributed it amongst several of them, and but a little to each,
the success did not answer expectation, the Hermetically sealed Glasses being
unluckily broken; and the Precipitation in the others proceeding so slowly,
that I was by a remove obliged to leave the trial imperfect; only I was
encouraged, (in case of a future opportunity) to renew it another time, by
finding that most of the Glasses, though tall, and stopped with fit Corks,
afforded some very fair Precipitate, but not enough to answer my Design.]

Trials of the Fourth sort.
MOst of the Experiments hitherto recited, having been made as it were upon the
by with others, whose exigencies 'twas fit these should comply with; very few
of the exposed Bodies were kept in the Cupelling-fire above two hours or
thereabouts. Upon which account I thought fit to try, how much some Bodies,
that had been already exposed to the Fire, would gain in weight by being again
exposed to it; especially considering, that most calcinable Bodies, (for I
affirm it not of all) which yield rather calces than ashes by being without
additament reduced in the Fire to fine powder, seemed to be by that Operation
opened, or (as a Chemist would speak) unlocked, and therefore probably capable
of being further wrought upon and increased in weight by such a Menstruum as I
supposed Flame and igneous Exhalations to be. And about this Conjecture I shall
subjoyn the ensuing Trials.

EXPER. XIX.
[One Ounce of Calx of Tin, that had been made per se for an Experiment in our
own Laboratory, being put in a new Cupel and kept under the Muffler for about
two hours, was taken out hot and put into the Scales, where the powder appeared
to have gained in weight one Dram and thirty-five Grains by the operation of
the Fire, which made it also look much whiter than it did before, as appeared
by comparing it with some of the Calx that had not been exposed to the second
Fire: No part of the Puttie was, as we could perceive, melted by the vehemence
of the Fire, much less reduced into Metal.]

EXPER. XX.
[Out of a parcel of filings of Steel, that had been before exposed to the fire
and had its weight thereby increased some Grains, not Scruples; we took an
Ounce, and having exposed it at the same time with the Calx of Tin, and, for
the same time, kept it in the Fire, we took it out at the two hours end; and
found the weight to be increased two Drachms and two and twenty Grains. The
filings were very hard baked together, and, the Lump being broken, looked
almost like Iron.]

EXPER. XXI.
The following Experiment, though it may seem in one regard but a Continuation
of the XV th; yet it has in this something peculiar from all the foregoing,
that not only it affords an instance of the increase of Weight obtained by a
Metal at the second time of its being exposed to the fire, but shows also, that
such an increment may be had, though this second ignition be made in close
Vessels.]

[Some of the Copper mentioned in Experim. XV. being accidentally lost, one
Ounce and four Drachms of what remained was included betwixt two Crucibles and
exposed to a strong fire for two hours, and suffered to continue there till the
fire went out: When it was taken out, it appeared to have gained ten Grains in
weight, and to have upon the superficial parts of the Plates (as we observed)
diverse dark colored flakes, some of which stuck to the Metal, but more, upon
handling it, fell off.]

And here I shall conclude One of the Two Parts of our designed Treatise: For,
though I remember, that these were not all the Trials that were made and set
down upon the Subject hitherto treated of; yet these are the chief, that having
escaped the mischances, which befell some others, I can meet with among my
promiscuous Memorials; whose number, when I drew them together, I could scarce
increase, having by all these and other Trials of differing kinds wasted my
Cupels and commodious Glasses, where I could not well repair my loss. Whether I
should have been able by Reduction, specific Gravity, or any other of the
ways, which I had in my thoughts, to make any discovery of the Nature of the
Substance that made the Increment of Weight in our Ignited Bodies; the want as
well of leisure, as of accommodations requisite to go through with so difficult
a task, keeps me from pretending to know. But these three things, I hope, I may
have gained by what has been delivered. The First, That we shall henceforth see
cause to proceed more warily in the Experiments we make with Metals in the
Fire, especially by Cupellation. The next, That it will justify and perhaps
procure an easier assent to some passages in my other Writings, that have
Relation to the Substance, whatever it be, that we are speaking of. And the
third, (which is the principal,) That it will probably excite you, and your
inquisitive Friends, to exercise their sagacious Curiosity, in discovering what
kind of Substance that is, which, though hitherto overseen by Philosophers
themselves, and, being a Fluid, far more subtle than visible Liquors, and able
to pierce into the Compact and Solid Bodies of Metals, can yet add something to
them, that has no despicable Weight upon the Balance, and is able for a
considerable time to continue fixed in the Fire.

Additional Experiments, ABOUT ARRESTING and WEIGHING OF Igneous Corpuscles.
EXperiments to discover the Increase in Weight of Bodies, though enclosed in
Glasses, being those that I considered as likeliest to answer what I designed
in the hitherto prosecuted Attempt, and finding the seventeenth Experiment as
well as the next (tried upon Mercury) to be very slow, and its performance not
to be very great, I began to call to mind, what, many years ago, Experience had
shown me possible to be performed, as to the managing Glass-vessels, even
without coating them, in a naked Fire, provided a wary person were constantly
employed to watch them. And supposing hereupon, that, in no longer time than a
Laborant might, without being tired, hold out to attend a Glass, a Metal
exposed in it to a naked fire might afford us a much more prosperous trial than
that lately referred to, I afterward resolved, when I should be able to
procure some Glasses conveniently shaped, to prosecute my Design; in pursuance
of which though I had not any Furnaces fitted for my purpose, I directed a
Laborant to make the following Trials.

EXPER. I.
[We took eight Ounces (Troy weight) of Block-Tin, which being cut into bits
was put into a good round Vial with a long neck, and then warily held over
quick Coals without touching them till it was melted; after which it was kept
almost continually shaken, to promote the Calcination, near an hour, the Metal
being all the while in fusion, and the Glass kept at some distance from the
thoroughly kindled Coals. The most part of this time the orifice of the Vial was
covered with a Cap of Paper (which sometimes fell off by moving the Glass) to
keep the Air and Steams of the Coals from getting into the neck. And at the end
of this time, he that held the Glass being tired, and having his Hand almost
scorched, the Vial being removed from the fire was broken, that we might take
out the Metalline Lump, which had a little darkish Calx here and there upon the
upper surface, but much more beneath, where it had been contiguous to the
bottom of the Glass; then putting all this carefully freed from little
fragments of broken Glass into the same Balance with the self-same
counterpoise I had used before, I found, according to my Expectation, an
increase of weight, which amounted to eighteen Grains, that the Tin had
acquired by this Operation.]

EXPER. II.
[This done we separated the Calx for fear of losing it, and having melted the
Metal in a Crucible, that by pouring it out it might be reduced to thin Plates
capable of being cut in pieces, and put into such another Vial as the last; we
weighed it again together with the ^^tely reserved Calx, but found, that,
notwithstanding all our oar, we had lost three Grains of the eighteen we had
gained. This done we put the Metal into another Vial. But in regard the neck
was shorter than that of the former, and could not like it be long held in ones
Hand; and because also I was willing to see what Interest the shaking of melted
Tin has in the quickness of the Calcination, the Glass, which had a stopple of
Paper put to it to keep out Smoke and Air, was held at some distance from the
Coals, only whilst the Tin was melting; and then was warily laid upon them and
kept there for two hours, at the end of which 'twas again taken off, and the
Metal weighed with the same Counterpoise and Balance as formerly; and then it
appeared to amount to eight Ounces twenty-four Grains, and to have much more
separable Calx than at the first time. Nor did I much wonder, that the weight
should be increased in this last Operation but nine Grains in two hours, and in
the former twice so many in half the time; since, during the two hours, the
Glass was kept in one posture, whereas in the first Operation, it was almost
perpetually shaken all the while 'twas kept in fusion. And it is observed, that
the agitation of melted Minerals will much promote the Effect of the Fire upon
them, and conduce to their Calcination.]

EXPER. III.
Though these Trials might well satisfy a person not very scrupulous, yet to
convince even those that are so, I undertook, in spite of the difficulties of
the Attempt, to make the Experiment in Glasses Hermetically sealed, to prevent
all suspicion of any accession of Weight accruing to the Metal from any Smoke
or Saline Particles getting in at the mouth of the Vessel. And in prosecution
of this design I thought upon a way of so Hermetically sealing a Retort, that
it might be exposed to a naked fire without being either cracked or burst; an
Account of which Trial was thus set down.

[Eight Ounces of good Tin carefully weighed out was Hermetically sealed up in
a new small Retort with a long neck, by which 'twas held in ones Hand, and
warily approached to a kindled Charcoal-fire, near which the Metal was kept in
fusion, being also ever now and then shaken for almost half an hour, in which
time it seemed to have acquired on the surface such a dark color as argued a
beginning of Calcination, and it both emitted Fumes that played up and down,
and also afforded two or three drops of Liquor in the neck of the Retort. The
Laborant being not able to hold the Glass any longer, 'twas laid on quick
Coals, where the Metal continued above a quarter of an hour longer in fusion;
but before the time was come that I intended to suffer it to cool in order to
the removing it, it suddenly broke in a great multitude of pieces, and with a
noise like the Report of a Gun; but (thanks be to God) it did no harm neither
to me nor others that were very near it. In the neck we found some drops of a
yellowish Liquor, which a Virtuoso that tasted it affirmed to be of an odious
but peculiar Sapor; and as for the Smell, I found it to be very stinking, and
not unlike that of the distilled Oil of Fish.]

But, though our first Attempt of this kind had thus miscarried, we were not
thereby discouraged, but in prosecution of the same design made the ensuing
Trial.

EXPER. IV.
[The Tin which had been before (in the first or some such Experiment) partly
calcined in a Glass, being melted again in a Crucible, that it might be reduced
to pieces small enough to be put into another Glass, was put again into the
Scales, and the surplusage being laid aside, that there might remain just eight
Ounces; these were put into a Bolt-head of white Glass with a neck of about
twenty Inches long, which being Hermetically sealed (after the Glass had been a
while kept over the fire, lest that should break by the rarefaction of the
Air,) the Metal was kept in fusion for an hour and a quarter, as (being
hindered by a Company of strangers from being there my self) the Laborant
affirmed. Being unwilling to venture the Glass any longer, it was taken from
the fire, and when 'twas grown cold, the sealed end was broken off; but before
I would have the bottom cut out, I observed, that the upper surface of the
Metal was very darkly colored, and not at all smooth, but much and very odly
asperated; and the lower part had between the bottom and the lower part of the
Lump a pretty deal of loose dark-colour'd Calx, though the neighboring surface
and some places of the Lump it self looked by Candlelight (it being then
Night) of a golden Color. The Lump and Calx together were weighed in the same
Scales carefully, and we found the weight to have increased twenty-three Grains
and better, though all the Calx, we could easily separate, being weighed by it
self amounted not to four Scruples or eighty Grains.]

For Confirmation of this Experiment I shall subjoyn another, wherein but a
quarter of so much Metal was employed with such success as the annexed Memorial
declares.

EXPER. V.
[Two Ounces of filings of Tin were carefully weighed and put into a little
Retort, whose neck was afterward drawn slenderly out into a very small Apex;
then the Glass was placed on kindled Coals, which drove out fumes at the small
orifice of the neck for a pretty while. Afterward the Glass; being sealed up
at the Apex, was kept in the fire above two hours; and then being taken off was
broken at the same Apex; whereupon I heard the outward Fire rush in, because
when the Retort was sealed the Air within it was highly rarefied. Then the body
of the Glass being broken, the Tin was taken out, consisting of a Lump, about
which there appeared some gray Calx and some very small globuls, which seemed
to have been filings melted into that form. The whole weighed two Ounces twelve
Grains, the later part of which weight appeared to have been gained by the
Operation of the Fire on the Metal. In the neck of the Retort, where it was
joined to the body, there appeared a yellowish and clammy substance thinly
spread, which smelt almost like the foetid Oil of Tartar.]

EXPER. VI.
To vary the foregoing Experiments by making Trials on a Mineral that is held
to be of a very Metalline nature, but is not a true Metal, nor will be brought
to fusion by so moderate a Heat as will suffice to melt Tin, and yet has parts
less fixed than Tin, as being far more easily sublimable, we thought fit to make
the following Experiment.

[We took an Ounce of filings of Zinke carefully weighed, and having as
carefully put them into a round Bolt-glass, we caused the neck to be drawn out
very slender, and then ordered the Laborant to keep it upon quick Coals for the
appointed time. Afterward returning home, I called for the Glass, which he
said he had kept four hours upon the Coals; answering me also, that there did
for a great part of the time Smoke appear to ascend from the Zink and get out
at the unstopt Apex. And in effect I observed, that the upper part of the Glass
was lined with Flores or Sublimate of a darkish gray. The Glass being
dexterously cut asunder, we took out not only the filings of Zinke, some of
which were melted into little globuls, but the Flores too, and yet weighing all
these in the same Scales, we had used before, we found five Grains and somewhat
better wanting of an Ounce. Which we the less wondered at, because of the
continuance of the lately mentioned Exhalations emitted by the filed Mineral.]

EXPER. VII.
For more ample confirmation of the truth discovered by what I have been
reciting about Tin, I thought fit to try the like Experiment upon another
Metal, which though of somewhat more difficult fusion than Tin, I had reason to
think might, if employed in a moderate quantity, and warily managed, be kept
melted in Glass without breaking it. And accordingly having carefully weighed
out four Ounces of good Lead cut beforehand into pieces little enough for the
orifice of the Glass, I caused them to be put into a small Retort with a long
neck, wherein was afterward left but an orifice not much bigger than a pins
head: Then leaving directions with the Laborant what to do, because I was my
self called abroad, at my return he brought me together with the Glass, this
Account: That he had kept it over and upon the Coals two hours, or better, and
then supposing the danger of breaking the Glass was over, he had sealed it up
at the little Orifice newly mentioned, and kept it on the Coals two hours
longer. Before the Glass (which I found to be well sealed) was broken, I
perceived the pieces of Lead to have been melted into a Lump, whose surface was
dark and rugged, and part of the Metal to have been turned into a dark-colour'd
Powder or Calx: All this being taken out of the Retort, was weighed in the same
Balance, whereon the Lead appeared to have gained by the Operation somewhat
above thirteen Grains.

EXPER. VIII.
To show that Metals are not the only Bodies that are capable of receiving an
increase of Weight from the Fire, I thought fit to make upon Coral a trial,
whereof my Memorial gives me this Account.

[Little bits of good red Coral being Hermetically sealed up in a thin bubble
of Glass, after two Drachms of them had been weighed out in a pair of nice
Scales, were warily kept at several times over and upon kindled Coals, and at
length being taken out for good and all, were found of a very dark Color, and
to have gained in weight three Grains and about a half.]

EXPER. IX.
One Experiment there is, which, though it might have come in more properly at
another place, is not to be omitted in this because it may invite us to
consider, whether in the foregoing Experiments, excepting those made on Lead
and Tin in sealed Vessels, there may not be more of the Fire adherent to or
incorporated with the Body exposed to it, than one would conclude barely from
the recited Increments of their Weight. For having taken very strong fresh
Quicklime provided on purpose for choice Experiments, and exposed it, before
the Air had time to slake it, upon the Cupel, to a strong fire where it was
kept for two hours; I found that it had increased in weight even somewhat
beyond my expectation: For being seasonably put into the Balance, the Lumps
that weighed, when exposed, but two Drachms, amounted to two Drachms and
twenty-nine Grains; which makes this Experiment a pregnant one to our purpose.
For by this it appears, that notwithstanding a Body may for many hours, or even
for some days, be exposed to a very violent Fire, yet it may be still capable
of admitting and retaining fresh Corpuscles; so that, though well made Lime be
usually observed to be much lighter than the Stones whereof it is made; yet this
lightness does not necessarily prove, that, because a burnt Limestone has lost
much of its matter by the Fire, it has therefore acquired no matter from the
Fire; but only inferrs, that it has lost far more than it has got. And this may
give ground to suspect, that in most of the foregoing trials the accession of
the fiery Particles was greater (though in some more, in others less so,) than
the Balance discovered; since, for ought we know, diverse of the less fixed
Particles of the exposed Body might be driven away by the vehemence of the
Heat; and consequently the Igneous Corpuscles that fastened themselves to the
remaining matter might be numerous enough, not only to bring the accession of
Weight that was found by the Scales, but to make amends for all the fugitive
Particles, that had been expelled by the violence of the Fire. And since so
fixed a Body as Quicklime is capable of being wrought upon by the Igneous
Effluvia, so as that they come to be as 'twere incorporated with it, it may
perchance be worth considering, whether in other calcined or incinerated Bodies
the remaining Calces or Ashes may not retain more than the bare Impression
(unless that be stretched to mean some participation of a substance,) of the
Fire. Whether these Particles that adhere to or are mingled with the stony ones
of the Lime may have any thing to do in the Heat and tumult that is produced
upon the slaking of Lime, this is not a fit place to examine. And though by
this Experiment and those made in sealed Retorts, which show that what is
afforded by Fire may in a Corporeal way invade, adhere and add Weight to even
fixed and ponderous Bodies, there is a large Field opened for the Speculative to
apply this Discovery to diverse Phenomenon of Nature and Chemistry; yet I shall
leave this Subject unmedled with in this place.

A DISCOVERY Of the PERVIOUSNESS OF GLASS TO PONDERABLE PARTS OF FLAME.

With some Reflections on it by way of COROLLARY.

Subjoyned as an Appendix to his Experiments about Arresting and Weighing of
IGNEOUS CORPUSCLES, BY. The Honorable ROBERT BOIL.

LONDON: Printed by W. G. for M. Pit at the sign of the White Heart,
over against the little North Door of St Paul's Church. 1673.

A DISCOVERY OF The Perviousness of GLASS TO Ponderable Parts of FLAME.
THAT I might obviate some needless scruples that may be entertained by
suspicious Wits upon this Circumstance of our Additional Experiments, That the
Glasses employed about them were not exposed to the Action of mere Flame, but
were held upon Charcoals, (which to some may seem to contain but a Grosser kind
of Fire:) And that also I might, by diversifying the way of trial, render such
Experiments both more fit to afford Corollaries, and more serviceable to my
other purposes, I attempted to make it succeed with a Body so thin and
disingaged from gross matter as mere Flame is allowed to be, knowing, that by
going cautiously with it to work, one might handle a Retort without breaking
it, in spite of a violent agitation of kindled matter.

EXPER. I.
Supposing then that good common Sulphur by reason of its great Inflammability
and the vehemence and penetrancy of its Flame, would be a very fit fuel for my
purpose, I provided a small double Vessel so contrived, that the one should
contain as many Coals as was necessary to keep the Sulphur melted, and that the
other, which was much smaller, and shaped like a Pan, should contain the
Brimstone requisite for our Trial; and (lastly,) that these two should be with
a convenient Lute so joined to one another, that all being closed at the top,
save the orifice of the little Pan, (the fire and smoke of the Coals having
their vent another way,) no fire should come at the Retort to be employed, but
the flame of the burning Brimstone. Then two ounces of filings of Tin being
heedfully weighed out, and put into a Glass-Retort provided for such Trials,
and made fit to be easily sealed up at the neck, when the time should be
convenient, the Sulphur (which ought to be of the purer sort) was kindled, and
the Glass by degrees exposed to it; where it continued, as the Laborant
informed me, (the smell of Brimstone, peculiarly offensive to me, forbidding me
to be present,) near two hours before the Metal melted; after which he kept the
Retort near an hour and half more with the Metal melted in it. Then bringing it
me to look upon, I perceived a pretty deal of darkish Calx at the bottom, and
partly too upon the surface of the far greater part of the Metal, which now lay
in one Lump. The part of the Retort that had been sealed being broken off, we
first took out the Calx, and then the Lump, and putting them into the Scales,
they had been formerly weighed in, found them to have made a very manifest
acquist of weight, which, if both the Laborant and I be not mistaken, (for the
paper, which should inform us, is now missing) amounted to four grains and a
half, gained by the recited Operation. Afterward, we being grown more expert
in making such Trials, the experiment was repeated with the same quantity of
filings of the same Metal: At the end of the Operation, (which in all lasted
somewhat above three hours) having broken off the sealed neck of the Retort, we
found, that a good proportion of darkcolour'd Calx had been produced. This
being weighed with the uncalcin'd part of the Metal, the two ounces we first
put in appeared to have acquired no less than eleven grains and a half (and
somewhat better.)

Such Superstructures, both for number and weight, may possibly in time be
built on this and the like Experiments, that I shall venture to obviate even
such a scruple as is like to be judged too Skeptical. But I remember, that,
considering upon occasion of some of the Experiments formerly recited, that
though it were very improbable, yet it did not appear impossible, that the
increment of Weight, acquired by Bodies exposed in Glass-vessels to the Fire,
might proceed, not from the Corpuscles of Fire, but from the Particles of the
Glass it self, loosened by the power of so intense a Heat, and forcibly driven
into the enclosed Body; I was content to take a couple of Glasses, whereof one
was shaped into a little Retort, and having weighed them, and then having kept
them for a considerable time upon kindled Coals, and then weighed them again, I
could gather little of certainty from the Experiment, (the Retort at one time
seeming to have acquired above half a grain in the fire,) save that there was
no likelihood at all, that so considerable an increase of weight, as we diverse
times obtained in close vessels, should proceed from the Glass it self, and not
from the Fire.

EXPER. II.
Because it seems evident enough, that, whatever Chemists tell us of their
Hypostatical Sulphur, common Brimstone is a body Heterogeneous enough, having
in it some parts of an oily or inflammable nature, and others acid; and very
near of kin to the Spirits of Vitriol; I thought fit to vary our Experiment, by
making it with a liquor that is generally reputed to be as Homogeneous as
Chemists themselves are wont to render any, I mean with a Spirit of Wine, or
some such liquor as will totally flame away without affording Soot, or leaving
any drop of Phlegm behind it. In prosecution of this design, we carefully
weighed out an ounce of filings of Block-Tin, and put them into a Glass-Retort,
fit for the purpose, whose neck was afterward drawn out to a great
slenderness; and we also provided a conveniently shaped metalline Lamp, such as
that the flame of this ardent Spirit might commodiously burn in it, and yet not
melt nor crack it; which Lamp, though furnished with a Cotton wick, afforded no
Soot, because as long as it was supplied with liquor enough, it remained
unburnt. These things being in readiness, the Retort was warily approached to
the flame, and the Metal was thereby in a short time melted. After which the
Glass being kept exposed to the same flame for near two hours in all, the
sealed apex of the Retort was broken off, and there appeared to have been
produced a not inconsiderable Quantity of Calx, that lay loose about the
remaining part of the Tin, which, upon its growing cold, was hardened into a
Lump. This, and the Calx, being taken out of the Retort with care, that no
little fragment of Glass should at all impose upon us, was weighed in the same
Scales as formerly, and found to have gained four grains and a half, besides
the Dust that stuck in the inside of the Retort, of which we reckoned enough to
make about half a grain more; so that of so fine and pure a flame as of this
totally ardent Spirit, enough to amount to five grains was arrested, and in
good measure fixed by its operation on the Tin it had wrought upon.

EXPER. III.
For confirmation of the former trial, wherein we had employed the Spiritus
ardens of Sugar, we made the like experiment with highly Rectified Spirit of
Wine, only substituting an ounce of Lead instead of one of Tin. The event, in
short, was this; that after the Metal had been for two hours or better kept in
the flame, the sealed neck of the Retort being broken off, the external Air
rushed in with a noise, (which showed the Vessel to have been very tight,) and
we found pretty store of the Lead; for 'twas above seven scruples, turned into
a grayish Calx, which together with the rest of the Metal being weighed again,
there was very near, if not full, six grains of increase of weight acquired by
the Operation.

1. N. B. The Lump of Lead, that remained after the newly recited Operation,
being separated from the Calx, was weighed and cut in pieces, that it might be
put into a fresh Retort, wherein it was again exposed to the flame of Spirit of
Wine, that I might satisfy my self, whether probably the whole Body of the
Lead might not, by repeated Operations, or (perhaps by one continued long
enough) be reduced to Calx. And though, after the Retort (whose neck had been
drawn out) had been kept in the flame for about two hours, it was, by the
negligence of a Footboy, unluckily broken, and some of the Calx lost; yet we
made a shift to save about five grains of it, (whose color was yellowish;)
which was enough to make it likely, that, if we had had convenience to pursue
the Operation to the utmost, the whole Metal might have been calcined by the
action of the flaming Spirit.

2. N. B. And lest you should be induced by some Chemical conceits to imagine,
that the particles that once belonged to flame, did make more than a Coalition
with those of the Lead, and by a perfect Union were Really transmuted into the
Metal whose weight they increased; I shall add, that (according to a Method
elsewhere delivered) I examined the seven scruples of Calx, mentioned to have
been made in the third Experiment, by weighing them in Air and Water, and
thereby found, as I expected, that though the absolute Gravity of the Metal had
been increased by the particles of Flame that stuck fast to it, yet this
Aggregate of Lead and extinguished Flame had lost much of its specific
Gravity. For, whereas Lead is wont to be to Water of the same bulk, as about
eleven and a half to one, this subtle Calx of Lead was to Water of the same
bulk little, if at all, more than as nine to one.

These are not the only Experiments I made of the Operation of mere Flame upon
Bodies enclosed in Glasses; but these, I suppose, are sufficient to allow me to
comply with my present haste, and yet make good the Title prefixed to this
Paper. For, whence can this increase of absolute weight (for I speak not of
specific Gravity,) observed by us in the Metals exposed to the mere flame, be
deduced, but from some ponderable parts of that Flame? And how could those
parts invade those of the Metal enclosed in a Glass, otherwise than by passing
through the pores of that Glass? But, because I judge it unphilosophical,
either to more careful that what one writes should appear strange, than be
true; or to be forward to advance the repute of Strangeness, to the prejudice
of the Interest of Truth, though it be perhaps but a remote one, or a
collateral one; I shall deal so impartially, as to subjoyn on this occasion two
or three short Intimations, that may prove both seasonable for Caution, in
reference to the Porousness of Glass, and give a hint or two in relation to
other Things.

I do not then by the foregoing Experiments pretend to make out the Porosity of
Glass any farther, than is expressed in the Title of this Paper; namely, in
reference to some of the Ponderable parts of Flame. For otherwise I am not at
all of their mind, that think Glass is easily penetrable, either, as many do,
by Chemical Liquors; or, as some, by Quicksilver; or, as others, at least by
our Air: Those opinions not agreeing with the Experiments I made purposely to
examine them, as you may find in another Paper.

Again, if we compare the Increase we observe to be made in the Weight of the
Bodies that we expose to the naked Fire, and those of the same or the like
kinds that we included in Glasses, or so much as in Crucibles; it may be worth
considering, Whether this difference in acquired weight may not give cause to
suspect, that the Corpuscles, whereof Fire and Flame consists, are not all of
the same size, and equally agitated, but that the interposed Vessel keeps out
the grosser Particles like a kind of Strainer, though it gives passage to the
minutest and most active?

I offer it also to Consideration, Whether this perviousness of Glass, even to
the minute particles that pervade it, and their adhesion to the Metal they work
on, does necessarily imply Pores constantly great enough to transmit such
Corpuscles? or, Whether it may not be said, that Glass is generally of a closer
Texture, than when in our Experiments the pores are opened by the vehement Heat
of the flame that beats upon it, and in that state may let pass Corpuscles too
big to permeate Glass in its ordinary state; and that this penetration is much
assisted by the vehement agitation of the Igneous parts, which by the rapidness
of their motion both force themselves a passage through the narrow pores of the
Glass, and pierce deep enough into those of the included Body to stick fast
there; (as hail-shot thrown with ones hand against a board, will pass off from
it, but being shot out of a Gun will pierce it, and lodge themselves in it?)
And I know a Menstruum that does not work upon a certain Metal whilst the
liquor is cold, or but faintly heated, and yet by intending the Heat would be
made to turn it into a powder or Calx, (for it does not properly dissolve it.)

Perhaps it may not be amiss to add on this occasion, that though Glass be
generally acknowledged to have far smaller pores, than any other matter wont to
be employed to make vessels, that are to be exposed to the fire; yet till I be
farther satisfied, I shall forbear both to determine, whether the rectitude,
that some Philosophers suppose in the pores of Glass, as it is a transparent
body, or rather in their ranks or rows, may facilitate the Perviousness we
above observed in Glass, and to conclude from the foregoing Experiments, that
ponderable parts of Flame will be able as well to pass through the pores of
Metalline vessels as those of Glass. For though, with a silver vessel, made
merely of plate without Soder, I made two or three Trials (of which you may
command an account) in order to the resolving of these doubts; yet by an
accident, which, though it were not a surprising one, was unlucky enough to
defeat my endeavors, I was kept, for want of fit Accommodations, from bringing
my intended trials to an issue.

And now having endeavored by the foregoing Advertisements to prevent the
having unsafe Consequences drawn from our Experiments; it remains that I
briefly point at three our four Corollaries that may more warily be deduced
from them. To which, if I get time, I may subjoyn a hint or two about further
Inquiries.

COROLLARY I.
Confirming this PARADOX, That Flame may act as a Menstruum, and make
Coalitions with the Bodies it works on.
THE Experiments, we have made and recited of the premeating of Flame (as to
some of its parts) through Glass-vessels, and of its working on included
Metals, may much confirm the Paradox I have elsewhere proposed, That Flame may
be a Menstruum, and work on some Bodies at the rate of being so; I mean not
only by making a notable Comminution and Dissipation of the parts, but by a
Coalition of its own particles with those of the fretted Body, and thereby
permanently adding Substance and Weight to them. Nor is it repugnant to Flames,
being a Menstruum, that in our experiment the Lead and Tin, exposed to it, were
but reduced to powder, and not dissolved in the form of a Liquor, and kept in
that state. For, besides that the interposed Glass hindered the Igneous
particles from getting through in plenty enough; I consider, that it is not
necessary, that all Menstruums should be such Solvents, as the objection
supposes. For whether it be (as I have sometimes suspected,) that Menstruums,
that we think simple, may be compounded of very differing parts, whereof one
may precipitate what is dissolved by the other; or for some other Cause, I have
not now time to discuss. Certain it is, that some Menstruums corrode Metals and
other Bodies without keeping dissolved all, or perhaps any considerable part;
as may be seen, if you put Tin in a certain quantity of Aqua fortis, which will
in a very short time reduce it almost totally to a very white substance, which,
when dry, is a kind of Calx. And so by a due proportion of Oil of Vitriol,
abstracted from Quicksilver by a strong fire, we have diverse times reduced the
main body of the Mercury into a white powder, whereof but an inconsiderable
part would be dissoluble in water. And such a white Calx I have had by the
action of another fretting Liquor on a Body not Metalline.

And having thus cleared our Paradox of the opposed Difficulty, my haste would
immediately carry me on to the next Corollary, were it not, that there is one
Phenomenon belonging to this place that deserves to be taken notice of. For,
whether it be, as seems probable, from the vehement agitation of the permeating
particles of Flame, that violently tear asunder the Metalline Corpuscles, or
from the nature of the Igneous Menstruum, (which being as 'twere percolated
through Glass it self, must be strangely minute,) it is worth observing, how
small a proportion, in point of weight, of the additional adhering Body may
serve to corrode a Metal, in comparison of the Quantity of vulgar Menstruums
that is requisite for that purpose. For, whereas we are obliged to employ, to
the making the solution of crude Lead, several times its weight of Spirit of
Vinegar, and (though not so many times) even of Aqua fortis, 'twas observed in
our Experiment, that, though the Lead was increased but six grains in weight,
yet above six score of it were fretted into powder, so that the Corrosive Body
appeared to be but about the twentieth part of the corroded.

COROLL. II.
Proposing a PARADOX about Calcination and Calces.
Another Consequence, deducible from our discovery of the perviousness of Glass
to Flame, may be this; That there is cause to question the Truth of what is
generally taken for granted about Calcination, and particularly of the notion,
that not only others, but Chemists themselves, have entertained about the
Calces of Metals and Minerals. For, whereas it is commonly supposed, that in
Calcination the greater part of the Body is driven away, and only the Earth, to
which Chemists add the Fixed Salt, remains behind; and whereas even Mechanical
Philosophers, (for two or three of Them have taken notice of Calcination,) are
of opinion, that much is driven away by the violence of the fire; and the
remaining parts by being deprived of their more radical and fixed moisture are
turned into dry and brittle particles: Whereas these Notions, I say, are
entertained about Calcination, it seems, that they are not well framed, and do
not universally hold; since, at least they are not applicable to the Metals,
our Experiments were made on. For, it does not appear by our Trials, that any
proportion, worth regarding, of moist and fugitive parts was expelled in the
Calcination; but it does appear very plainly, that by this Operation the Metals
gained more weight than they lost; so that the main body of the Metal remained
entire, and was far from being, either as a Peripatetick would think,
Elementary Earth, or a compound of Earth and Fixed Salt, as Chemists commonly
suppose the Calx of Lead to be. From which very erroneous Hypothesis they are
wont to infer the sweet Vitriol of Lead, which they call Saccharum Saturni, to
be but the sweet Salt of it extracted only by the Spirit of Vinegar, which does
indeed plentifully enough concur to compose it. Whence I conclude, that the
Calx of a Metal even made (as they speak) per se, that is, by fire without
additament, may be, at least in some cases, not the Caput mortuum, or Terra
damnata, but a Magistery of it. For, in the sense of the most intelligible of
the Chemical Writers, that is properly a Magistery wherein the Principles are
not separated, but the bulk of the Body being preserved, it acquires a new and
convenient form by the addition of the Menstruum or Solvent employed about the
preparation. And, not here to borrow any Argument from my Notes about
particular Qualities, you may guess, how true it is, that the greatest part of
the Body, or all the radical moisture is expelled in Calcination, which
therefore turns the Metal into an arid unfusible powder; by this, That I have
several times from Calx of Lead reduced corporal Lead. And I remember, that
having taken what I guessed to be but about a third or fourth part of the Calx
of Lead, produced by the third Experiment; I found by a trial purposely
devised, that without any Flux-powder or any additament, but merely by the
application of the Flame of highly Rectified Spirit of Wine, there could in a
short time be obtained a considerable proportion of malleable Lead; whereof the
part I had the Curiosity to examine, was true malleable Lead; so little was the
arid powder, whence this was reduced, deprived by the foregoing Calcination of
the suppo'sd radical moisture requisite to a Metal. The Consideration of what
may be drawn from this Reduction in reference to the Doctrine of Qualities
belongs not to this place.

COROLL. III.
One use, among the rest, we may make, by way of Corollary, of the foregoing
Discovery, which is in reference to a Controversy warmly agitated among the
Corpuscular Philosophers themselves. For, some of them, that follow the
Epicurean or Atomical Hypothesis, think, that when Bodies are exposed in close
vessels to the fire, though the Igneous Corpuscles do not stay with the Bodies
they invade, yet they really get through the Pores of the interposed Vessels,
and permeate the included Bodies in their passage upwards; whereas others,
especially favorers of the Cartesian Doctrine, will not allow the Atomists
Igneous Corpuscles, which they take to be but vehemently agitated particles of
Terrestrial matter, to penetrate such minute pores as those of Glass; but do
suppose the operation of the fire to be performed by the vehement agitation
made of the small parts of the Glass, and by them propagated to the included
Bodies, whose particles by this violent Commotion are notably altered, and
receive new Textures, or other modifications.

But our Experiments inform us, that, though neither of the two Opinions seems
fit to be despised, yet neither seems to have hit the very mark; though the
Epicurean Hypothesis comprize somewhat more of the Truth than the other. For,
though it be not improbable, that the brisk agitation communicated by the small
parts of the Glass to those of the Body contained in it, may contribute much to
the effect of the fire; and though, by the small increment of weight, we found
in our exposed Metal, it is very likely, that far the greater part of the Flame
was excluded by the close Texture of the Glass; yet on the other side it is
plain, that Igneous particles were trajected through the Glass, which agrees
with the Epicureans; and they, on the other side, mistook, in thinking that
they did but pass through, and divide and agitate the included Bodies; to which
nevertheless our Experiments show, that enough of them, to be manifestly
ponderable, did permanently adhere.

Whether these Igneous Corpuscles do stick after the like manner to the parts
of meat, dressed by the help of the fire, and especially roast-meat, which is
more immediately exposed to the action of the fire, may be a question, which I
shall now leave undiscuss'd, because I think it difficult to be determined,
though otherwise it seems worthy to be considered, in regard it may concern
men's Health, to know, whether the Coction of meat be made by the fire, only as
it is a very hot body, or whether it permanently communicates any thing of its
substance to the meat exposed to it: In which (last) case it may be suspected,
that not only the degree and manner of application of a fire, but the nature of
its fuel may be fit to be considered.

COROLL. IV.
The Experiments above recited give us this further Information, That Bodies
very spirituous, fugitive, and minute, may, by being associated with congruous
particles, though of quite another nature, so change their former Qualities, as
to be arrested, by a solid and ponderous Body, to that degree, as not to be
driven away from it by a fire intense enough to melt and calcine Metals.

For, the foregoing Trials (taking in what I Exp. III. N. B. 2.
lately delivered of the lessened specific Gravity of calcined Lead) seems
plainly enough to discover, that even the agitated parts of flame, minute
enough to pass through the pores of Glass it self, were as 'twere entangled
among the metalline particles of Tin and Lead, and thereby brought to be fixed
enough to endure the Heat that kept those Metals in fusion, and little by
little reduced them into calces: Which is a Phenomenon that one would not
easily look for, especially considering how simple a Texture that of Lead or
Tin may be supposed to be in comparison of the more elaborate structures of
very many other Bodies. And this Phenomenon, which shows us, what light and
fugitive particles of matter may permanently concur to the Composition of
Bodies ponderous and fixed enough, may perchance afford useful hints to the
Speculative; especially if this strict Combination of spirituous and fugitive
substance with such, as being gross or unwieldy, are less fit than organized
matter to entangle or detain them, be applied, (as it may be with advantage) to
those aggregates of spirituous Corpuscles, and organical Parts, that make up
the Bodies of Plants and Animals. And this hint may suggest a main Inference to
be drawn from the Operations of the Sunbeams on appropriated subjects,
supposing it to prove like that of flame on Tin and Lead.

And now having dispatched our COROLLARIES, we might here inquire, Whether all
the particles of Fire and Flame, that are subtle and agitated enough to
penetrate Glass, and fasten themselves to included Bodies, be reduced by
Ignition to the same nature, or else retain somewhat of their proper Qualities?
Which Inquiry I have some cause not to think so undeterminable, as at first
blush it may appear. For, one of the ways, that may be proposed for this
Examen, is already intimated at the close of the third Experiment, which shows,
that we may compare the specific Gravity of the Calces of the same Metal, made
in Glasses by the operation of Flames; whose fuels are of very differing
Natures. And I said, one of the ways, because it is not the only way I could
name, and have partly tried. But though I might say more concerning Expedients
of this kind, and could perhaps propound other Inquiries that may reasonably
enough be grounded upon the hitherto recited Phenomenon (and those of some
other like trials,) yet I must not unseasonably forget, that the pursuit of
such Disquisitions would lead me much farther than I have now the leisure to
follow it.

ERRATA.
Page 44. l. 19. r. some Metals work; page 1. in the Discourse about the
Determinate Nature of Effluviums, add the name of the Author, viz. By the
Honorable ROBERT BOIL.

FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
IT has been thought, it might be the Interest of the Reader, especially
Foreiners, to be advertised, That these Essays are already Translating into
Latin, and beginning also to be printed in that Language; which that it may
duly be done, both as to this and the Author's other Writings, to be published
for the future, the greater care will be taken here, because it has been
several times found both at home and elsewhere, that the Versions made of them
abroad, and not in the place, where in case of any difficulty the Author may be
consulted with by the Latin Interpreters, are often very defective, and not
seldom injurious to the sense he has delivered them in. Which being considered
by those that desire to know the genuine sense of the Author, it is presumed,
they will rather choose those Versions, which are made by persons that have
that advantage of comsulting him in any case of doubt, than such as shall
mis-inform them; notwithstanding the pretense of a cheaper rate of the Book.

Which being thus advertised, the Printer takes this opportunity of farther
acquainting the Reader from the Latin Interpreter, that these Essays, to his
knowledge, were ready and in the Press several Months before Dr. Thomas
Bartholin's Acta Philosophica and Medica appeared in England, in which there
are two or three passages that may seem of affinity with some to be met with in
the latter part of the Papers about Experiments of Arresting the parts of
Flame, and of making them Ponderable.

A Catalogue of the Writings Published by The Honorable ROBERT BOIL.
1. SEraphick Love. London, for Henry Herringman, 1660. in 8o. 2. New
Experiments Physico-Mechanical, touching the Spring of the Air, and its
Effects. Oxford, for Thomas Robinson, 1660. in 8o. In Latin: Oxford; for the
same, 1661. in 8o. 3. Certain Physiological Essays; to which is added, The
Physico-Chymical Essay about the Differing parts, and Redintegration of
Saltpeter; as also, the History of Fluidity and Firmness. London, for Henry
Herringman, 1661. in 4o. In Latin; London, by the same, 1661. in 4o. 4. Some
Considerations touching the Style of the H. Scriptures. London, for H.
Herringman, 1661. in 8o. 5. The Skeptical Chemist. London, for John Crook,
1661. in 8o. In Latin; London, for the same, in 8o. 1662. 6. A Defense of the
Doctrine touching the Spring and Weight of the Air, against the Objections of
Franciscus Linus. London, for Tho. Robinson, 1662. in 4o. 7. An Examen of Mr.
Hobbes his Dialologus Physicus de Natura Aeris; with an Appendix touching Mr.
Hobbes his Doctrine of Fluidity and Firmness. London, for Tho. Robinson, 1662.
in 4o. 8. Usefulness of Experimental Philosophy. Oxford, for Rich. Davies,
1663. in 4o. 9. Experimental History of Colors. London, for H. Herringman,
1664. in 8o. In Latin: London, for the same, 1665. in 12o. 10. History of Cold.
To which is added, an Examen of Antiperistasis, and of Mr. Hobbes his Doctrine
of Cold. London, for John Crook, 1665. in 8o. 11. Hydrostatical Paradoxes.
Oxford, for Rich. Davies, 1666. in 8o. In Latin; Oxford, for the same, 1669. in
12o. 12. Origin of Forms and Qualities. Oxford, for Rich. Davies, 1667. in 8o.
In Latin; Oxford, for the same, 1669. in 12o. 13. Free Considerations about
Subordinate Forms. Oxford, for Rich. Davies, 1667. in 8o. In Latin; Oxford,
1669. 14. Continuation of New Experiments Physico-Mechanical touching the
Spring and Weight of the Air, and the Atmosphere of Consistent Bodies. Oxford,
for Rich. Davies, 1669. in 4o. 15. Of the Absolute Rest of Solid Bodies.
London, for H. Herringman, 1669. in 4o. In Latin; London, for the same, 1672.
in 12o. 16. Several Tracts; viz. An Introduction to the History of Particular
Qualities: Of Cosmical Qualities and Suspicions: Of the Temperature of the
Subterraneal and Submarine Regions: Of the bottom of the Sea. Oxford, for Rich.
Davies, 1671. in 8o. In Latin; London, for the same, 1672. in 12o. 17. Small
Tracts; viz. Of a Discovery of the admirable Rarefaction of the Air, even
without Heat: New Observations about the Duration of the Spring of the Air: New
Experiments touching the Condensation of the Air by mere Cold, and its
Compression without Mechanical Engines: The admirably Differing Extension of the
same Quantity of Air rarefied and compressed. London, for H. Herringman, 1670.
in 4o. In Latin; London, for the same, 1670. in 12o. 18. Of the Usefulness of
Natural Philosophy, Tom. 2. Oxford, for Rich. Davies, 1671. in 4o. 19. An Essay
about the Origin and Virtue of Gems. London, for Moses Pit, 1672. in 8o. In
Latin; London, for the same, 1673. in 12o. 20. Several Tracts, containing New
Experiments touching the Relation betwixt Flame and Air, and about Explosions:
An Hydrostatical Discourse answering some Objections of Dr. Henry More: An
Hydrostatical Letter, dilucidating an Experiment about a way of weighing Water
in Water: New Experiments of the Positive or Relative Levity of Bodies under
Water: Of the Air's Spring on Bodies under Water: About the differing Pressure
of Heavy Solids and Fluids. London, for Rich. Davies, 1672. in 8o. 21. Essays,
of the strange Subtilty, the great Efficacy, and the Determinate Nature of
Effluviums. To which are annexed, New Experiments to make Fire and Flame
Ponderable; together with a Discovery of the Perviousness of Glass. London, for
Moses Pit, 1673. in 8o. 22. A Dialogue concerning the Positive or Privative
nature of Cold; by a Member of the R. Society: And a Discourse about the
Saltness of the Sea; and another of a Statical Hygroscope; together with some
Phenomenon of the force of the Air's Moisture. To which is added a Paradox
about the Natural and Praeternatural State of Bodies, especially the Air.
London, for Rich. Davies, 1673. in 8o.

