ERRATA.
PAge 6. for omitted, r. emitted, p. 14. l. 9. of left out.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Books Published by the Honorable Robert Boil, and Printed for John Tailor at
the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1. A Free Inquiry into the Vulgarly received Notion of Nature, made in an
Essay adress'd to a Friend: In English and Latin.

2. The Martyrdom of Theodora and Dydimus.

3. A Disquisition about the final Causes of Natural things; wherein it is
inquired, Whether, and (if at all) with what Cautions a Naturalist should admit
them? To which are subjoined, by way of Appendix, some uncommon Observations
about Vitiated Sight.

4. The Christian Virtuoso: Showing that by being addicted to Experimental
Philosophy, a Man is rather assisted, than Indisposed to be a good Christian;
to which are subjoined: 1st. A Discourse about the Distinction that represents
some things as above Reason, but not contrary to Reason. 2. The first Chapters
of a Discourse, Entitled Greatness of Mind Promoted by Christianity. Printed
for J. Tailor at the Ship; and J. Wyat at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Experimenta and Observationes PHYSICAE: Wherein are briefly Treated of SEVERAL
SUBJECTS Relating to Natural Philosophy IN AN EXPERIMENTAL WAY.

To which is added, A small Collection of STRANGE REPORTS.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for John Tailor at the Ship, and John Wyat at the Rose in S.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCI.

A Letter that may serve for a Preamble.
To my Learned Friend Mr. H. Oldenburg (Secretary to the Royal Society.)
SIR,
BEing at length come to a Resolution, I have already done something more than
barely entered upon that way of Writing, that you and I have more than once
Discoursed of together; and wherein you particularly (tho not you only) among
my Learned Friends, have wished to see me Engaged.

It Is not, that I am insensible of the Prejudice which the things I deliver are
like to sustain, by the disadvantageous Dress wherein they must appear, in the
way of Writing I have pitched upon; which being for the most part plainly
Historical, and set down in the order wherein, they chanced to come to hand,
denies most of them, not only the usual Ornaments of other Books, but the
allowable Advantages, that Method, elaborate Discourses, neat Hypotheses, and
subtle Disputes, are permitted to bring even to Philosophical Writings.

But these Considerations were over-sway'd by a sad one, founded upon the (yet
continuing) condition I was in, when I was Debating this matter in my Thoughts.
For it having pleased God (to whose always most just Dispensations Men ought
entirely to submit) to Afflict me with the Stone and the Palsy; as on one side,
these, added to a sufficient number of Avocations, scarce permit me any great
expectation, of finishing in a short time the Tracts I had made a lesser or
greater Progress in, according to my first design; so on the other side, my
Friends judging it unfit, that the Materials provided for these more than begun
Treatises, should be quite lost, or kept too long useless, it seemed expedient,
that as Opportunity should from time to time serve, I should look over my
Memorials, and other scattered Papers, to take notice what Experiments and
Observations were to be found in them.

Upon these, and the like inducements, having picked up several of my dispersed
Papers, some of them Written many Years ago, and some of a less ancient date; I
began to refer the most part of what I found Historical in them, together with
some few things that did seem necessary not to be severed from them, to certain
Heads or Titles which I called Chapters; and made them the more numerous, that
they might singly be the less Prolix: And about these I must desire your leave
to represent some things, by way of Preface.

And first, several of the ensuing Particulars that I met with among my Papers,
being parts of Essays of other Discourses, and being for have Transcribed for
the most part Verbatim, as they were couched there; I dare hope for your
excuse, if among such Transcripts you now and then meet with things, which, how
pertinent soever to the Tracts they first belonged to, might have been spared
as needless, if not sometimes Foreign; also, in the new Form the Discourses are
now put into; since I could not leave out such unnecessary Clauses (whereof yet
I hope you will not find many) without too much mutilating the coherence, or
obscuring the sense of what is delivered; and I could not alter them, and adapt
others to supply their places without spending more time, and taking more
Pains, than in the condition I am now in, I suppose you would be willing to
condemn me to.

Next, I despair not but you will allow me the Liberty I have taken, to vary
the Bulk and Method of particular Chapters, as my occasions would permit, or
the plenty or paucity of Materials suggested; or the Nature of the thing I
treated of, and the Scope I proposed to my self in Writing of it, seemed to
require. But sometimes my want of Health and Leisure, and my desire to hasten
to other subjects, that either pleased me better, or seemed more considerable,
made some of the following Chapters, compared with others, but short;
especially, if I were supplied but with a number of things pertinent to that
Subject, by the Papers I had then in hand, how much soever I may have Written
of it in other Papers, which I hope hereafter to be Master of.

And this Advertisement may render you a Reason why to the Title of some of the
Chapters I have subjoyned the first Section, tho it be not at present followed
with a second.

And, as for my having employed very differing Methods in some of the ensuing.
Tracts, I did it with design, as judging such a variety of Method more
conducive to my purpose, than Uniformity in it would have been. For, besides
that some of the Treatises, vhence these Chapters were taken, did, by the ways
wherein they were already Written, oblige me, to accommodate my self to their
Method; I thought, that if you should show these Papers to any, that are very
unacquainted (which I have heard you complain, that too many are) with the way
of accommodating in some tolerable manner, his Enquiries and his Writings to
the several Subjects he applies himself to, he may be somewhat helped, by the
differing Examples he may here meet with, to make variations somewhat suitable
to the differing Natures of the Subjects he deals with.

But here I must beg you to take notice, That, tho in compliance with this
design, as well as for some other reasons, I have in several of the following
Chapters given intimations and hints of things, which I do not there prosecute;
and now and then propose some Conjectures and Opinions, whose proof I do not
insist on; yet I am not willing you should think, that, however some of those
passages may be but occasional things, mentioned principally to excite, and
give hints to the inquisitive and sagacious; yet all, or most of them, are of
the same kind; and that I thought not on them, but as slightly and transiently
as I mentioned them; and have no better and other Reasons to alledg for my
suspicions or intimations, or even for my conjectures or my opinions, than
those you will meet with in Papers hastily drawn up; especially since, I think,
I can show you diverse of the things delivered in those passages, enlarged and
rendered at least probable or practicable in other Discourses, that for certain
Reasons do not accompany these I now send you.

I expect, that you should think it somewhat strange, to find many of the
following Experiments set down much less circumstantially than those that are
mentioned in the Physico-Mechanical Experiments touching the Air; in the
Continuation of them; in the History of Cold, and in some other Books of Mine
that you have been pleased to peruse. But on this occasion give me leave to
represent to you, that the nature of diverse of the former Experiments,
especially Chemical ones, and my aims in mentioning them, being considered, it
seemed not requisite they should be more fully Treated of: And as for others,
tho the brevity and dispatch; which diverse reasons made me propose to my self,
had not forbidden me to amplify; yet I daily feel my leisure, not to say my
Life too; so torn piece^^^^ from me, by Sickness, Visits, Business, and
inevitable Avocations, that I am frequently admonished to hasten the securing
of as much as conveniently I can, by dispatching particular Subjects, and am
quite hundred from dwelling so long upon them, as, if I had more Health and
Leisure, I should willingly do. To these things perhaps, so favorable a Person
as Mr. Oldenburg will add, that the Characters which Learned Writers, English
and Foreign, tho diverse of them personally unknown to me, have been pleased to
give of the diligence and sincerity employed in setting down the
Physico-Mechanical Experiments, and those of some other Writings of Mine, may
permit me to hope, that it will be thought, that, after having been diverse
years versed in making Trials and Experiments, I have made them with some care
and wariness, and mentioned them faithfully, where I have not done it amply;
upon hopes it may be taken in good part from a Person in my present condition,
that was never a Professor of Philosophy, nor so much as a Gown-man; to have
made shift to make the Experiments and Observations he communicates, and set
them down truly and heartily, without fraudulently concealing any part of them,
for fear they should make against him. And tho perhaps you will easily believe,
that in diverse of the Experiments which I have but briefly mentioned, I have
been as diligent an Observer of Circumstances, as I was wont to be when I made
those, which have had the luck to be taken notice of for being fully related;
and tho it may be also, that some Scruples or Objections, which my brevity may
in part occasion, were not unforeseen by me, and might have been avoided by a
more copious and diffused way of Writing; yet I purposely decline such a way of
delivering things, not only for the reasons above mentioned; and because I
suppose them that may peruse these Papers, to be acquainted with my formerly
Published Writings, and to have either from them, or otherwise, understood the
way of making such Experiments as mine; but also, because, tho I wanted Time
and Health, much less than I do, I should not think it fit too much to prevent
the Industry of others about the Trials I mention; and reap the Field so clean,
as not to leave them, not only store of Ears to Glean, but some corners of
standing Corn. I have therefore here and there purposely omitted, both, some
not absolutely necessary Practical Directions about making of Trials, that
might prevent such Scruples or Objections, as have the Grounds of answering
them clearly delivered in my Printed Books; and several, not only lesser
Circumstances, but considerable Phenomenon, and obvious Applications, that may
probably occur to others, as they did to me in making the Trials and Reflecting
on them.

Advertisements about the Disposition of the following Treatise.
YOU will quickly discern that the following Chapters could not be intended for
complete Tracts, about the Subjects handled in them. And indeed they were
intended but for such Memoirs about the Various particular Subjects they Treat
of, as may be serviceable to the Solid Natural History that has been nobly
designed and is still prosecuted, by the Royal Society. Wherefore since (at
least in our Age) no Writer that I know of, has so early and so well, both
urged the necessity of Natural History, and promoted diverse Parts of it by
Precepts and Specimens, as the illustrious Lord Verulam; I shall not scruple in
the way or manner of Writing these short Collections of mine, to make use
somewhat frequently of his Authority and Examples; but without Confining my
self to either.

I. Agreeably to this Advertisement you will find, that some of the Particulars
that the following Treatise consists of, are single and as it were, Independent
ones; upon which account they resemble those which in the Verulamian Sylva, or
Natural History, are called Experiments Solitary: And have for that reason
induced me to give that Title to each of the several Chapters that are made up
of them.

II. Another sort of Chapters there is, wherein diverse Experiments and
Observations, all of them relating to the same Subject or Purpose, are set down
together. These if they were ranged and sorted in order to distinct Theories, I
should call, in imitation of the mentioned Author, Experiments in Consort. But
my backwardness to frame Theories has made me choose to forbear as yet to
methodize them, and therefore has made me think fit to call them only various
Experiments and Observations about this or that Subject (which they belong to.)

III. My have, tho not that only, induced me to make one sort of Chapters more,
that partly agrees with, and partly differs from each of the two that I come
from mentioning: For in every one of these Chapters, there are two or three, if
not more, single or Solitary Experiments; and there are also others that have
some kind of Connection among themselves, as being referable to the same Subject
or Purpose. On that score the Title that is given to each of the Chapters of
this Third sort, is that of Miscellaneous Experiments; and sometimes (but
seldomer) of Promiscuous Ones. And all the Particulars that I refer to the
three forementioned Heads, are cast into Chapters, wherein the several kinds
are distinguished only by their Titles, or not.

IV. There is one Advertisement that regards all the sorts of Particulars that
are referred to the forementioned Chapters, which is, that I have usually
comprehended Observations, as well as Trials, nuder the Title of Experiments;
which I have done, not only upon the Authority, and in following the Example of
our Judicious Chancellor (as is every where obvious in his Sylva Sylvarum) but
for other reasons too. For both the sorts of Particulars may pass for matters
of Fact, and so are Historical, taking the word in a lax sense, and the
employing it in that sense, makes the Articles or Passages, whereof the
Chapters and other parts of our Collection consists, much more commodious for
References and Citations.

V. Besides the three forementioned kinds of Chapters, you will meet in the
ensuing Treatise with another sort of Writings, whereof some are almost entire,
and others Fragments of larger Discourses. In neither of these, I did confine
my self so much to matters of Fact, as in those Chapters that consist of
Experiments and Observations; but took the liberty, as occasion required, to
enlarge in Discourses, and sometimes to Cite such passages out of other Men's
Writings, as I judged I could make some pertinent Application or use of,
perhaps unthought of by the Author. And these Papers being most, if not all of
them Written in a more free and discursive way, I thought fit to separate them
from the Sets of Collections that are almost merely Historical; and accordingly
I have not styled them Chapters, but Titles; and have forborne to assign them,
as I did the others, Ordinal Numbers; which I desire likewise you would not
prefix to any of them, because I am not yet resolved how I shall dispose of
them, either by supplying what is wanting to finish any one, or more of them,
or by taking to pieces, and employing those pieces as Materials for other
Tracts.

VI. Perhaps I shall not be thought to need Pardon, if to comply with their
Curiosity, who affect most those Experiments, that are either uncommon, or
teach them to do or perform something useful or pretty; I sometimes prefix a
Title declaring what it treats of, to a particular Experiment (or Observation,)
which for its Importance, Novelty, or Usefulness (Theorical or Practical) may
deserve to bedistinguish't; since by this means such Particulars may be the
better impressed on the memory, to gratify those, whose nicety or want of
leisure, may make them well pleased by a transient view of the Titles we speak
of, to find such Passages as they chiefly looked for, with less trouble than
that of perusing an Index.

VII. Among the Experiments our Collection consists of, there is here and there
one, to which it was thought fit to add something, either by way of
Explication, or of Illustration, or of Confirmation, or of Answer to
Objections, or of Theorical Reflection, or of Practical Application, etc. And
these Supplements or Additions it was thought fit to call sometimes
Annotations, but oftener Scholiums, because that Term is freely used in a very
comprehensive Sense by Mathematical Writers. But tho I readily acknowledge that
this Term has been chiefly employed by Mathematicians, yet the use of it has
not been so confined to them, but that good Authors in other parts of Learning
have not scrupled to employ it, as may appear by the Scholiums that some
Learned Physicians have Written upon Hollerius, an eminent Person of their
Profession; as also by the Example of the famous and Experienced Forestus, who
has not seldom subjoined Scholiums, even to his own Medicinal Observations.

VIII. The mention of these Scholia prompts me to tell you, I had almost
forgotten, but yet must not leave unmention'd, that I thought fit now and then
to premise to Sets of Experiments, and sometimes (tho more seldom) to a single
Observation a short Preamble by way of Introduction, which may often excuse the
need of subjoyning a Scholium; and may be warranted by the Example of the Lord
Verulam in his Centuries, wherein he often inserts such short Preambles, as
things fitted to give light to the Experiments they belong to, and to give some
Advertisement both of the Nature and Importance of the Subject, and of the
Scope of the Writer, or of other useful circumstances.

IX. If among my own Experiments, namely, those that I have made or seen, I
have sometimes inserted Experiments or Observations that are not so: I have not
done it without reason, and am authorized in that Practice, by frequent
Examples afforded me by the first, if not only Author that I know of, that gave
us a Set of Precepts of well writing Natural History, our often cited Verulam,
whose Centuries do in great part consist of borrowed Experiments and
Observations; without which, he was sensible that his Sylva must be of too
narrow a compass, or too thinly stock't with Plants, especially with Trees. And
indeed it is not to be expected, that, as the Silkworm draws her whole Mansion
altogether out of her own Bowels, so a single man should be able to write a
Natural History out of his own Experiments and Thoughts. And he that will
strictly confine himself to those, will be often reduced to omit things very
pertinent, if not necessary, to his Subject, which is of practice studiously
declined by me, who prefer the Readers Vtility, to the ambition'd Glory of
being thought to borrow nothing from any Body. And I can add in my Defense, at
least my Excuse, that I have made use but of a small part of the Liberty
allowed me by the Example of so great a Guide in the way of Writing Natural
History. For I have very much seldomer than he, employed the Trials of others;
and have yet seldomer mentioned unverifi'd Reports or vulgar Traditions, being
careful that the Bulk of the Matters of Fact I deliver, should consist of
things, whereof I was my self an Actor, or an Eye witness; and that the
comparatively few borrowed Experiments that I added, (that I might not deprive
my Reader of some things very pertinent and useful to my Subject) were received
from Persons of very good credit; besides that I do not only frequently give
sufficient Intimation in the Experiment or Observation its self, but oftentimes
by placing the Letter C in the Margent, do give notice; nay, and sometimes to a
whole Set, prefix the Title of Communicated Experiments or Observations.

X. I have nothing more to give you notice of here, save that, whereas you will
find that I Write but on one side of the Leaves, whereof this Book This refers
to the Manuscript that was sent to Mr. O. and is left to show the Intention of
the Author.
consists: I did so for two Reasons. The First, That in case I should have
occasion to employ any of these Experiments in other Treatises, for which I am
more concerned than for this Rhapsody, I might have room to Substitute, if it
should be thought fit, one or more of my later Experiments in its place. And
Secondly, That I might have room, if I can get leisure, to Write Annotations,
or make Reflections, or Illustrations, or Corrections, or in a word, such
Addititions and Alterations of particular Experiments and Passages, as they
shall be thought to deserve or need.

I am sensible that this Preamble, increased by the Advertisements that 'twas
thought necessary to annex to it, is of a length that may seem disproportionate
to the Book or Tract it is prefixed to. But I may in excuse of this represent to
you, that the Bundle of Writings you now receive, is but a part of the Book; to
which, if God vouchsafe me Health and Leisure, this Preface enlarged by its
Appendix, is designed for an Introduction. And in that case it is hoped that
these Preliminaries, as many as they are, will not be thought Impertinent, or
needlessly prolix.

Experimenta and Observationes PHYSICAE. TOME I.
CHAP. I.
CONTAINING Chymico-Magnetical Experiments and Observations.

THE Loadstone, Pyrophilus, is so admirable a Body, and its Usefulness to
Mankind is already so great, without denying us hopes of farther Improvments;
that I think we must want Curiosity or Gratitude, if we neglect either to take
notice of any Experienced Phoenomena that directly relate to so abstruse a
Subject, or, by consigning them to Paper, to preserve them from Oblivion. It Is
chiefly by this Consideration, Pyrophilus, that I am induced to mention to you
the following Experiments and Observations, made most of them by the help of
the Fire. For, tho some of them may seem but slight; yet they may not prove
unuseful, toward discovering the Nature of a Body so strange and singular,
that, for ought is yet manifest, any true Magnetical Phoenomena may somewhat
conduce to the knowledge of it, And I was the rather induced to make Trials and
Observations of this Kind, because most of them are such as I have not met with
in Authors. And the few that remain, I have not found sufficiently taken notice
of there; Philosophers and Mathematicians aiming chiefly, in their Magnetical
Writings, to prosecute and apply the Attractive and Directive, and perhaps the
Inclinatory, faculty of the Loadstone. Whereas, throwing into another Paper,
what I Observed, of that kind, I did in the present Inquiry mainly intend to
make the Loadstone rather the Object than the Instrument of my Trials: and
handling chiefly the very Substance of the Stone, endeavor not so much to
Advance or Apply its Faculties, as to Weaken and Destroy them, tho in order to
the better knowing of them. Having therefore procured a considerable number of,
for the most part naked (or uncapt) Loadstones, most of them Course, but of
differing Sizes, Shapes, Colors, and Countries; I made upon them several
Trials, some of which I should immediately proceed to give you a brief Account
of, but that 'twill be proper to premise this short Advertisement: That, I
would not have the Title of these Experiments make you expect, that the Fire
should be a main Agent in every one of them, since to preserve some few of
them, I refer them hither, tho an actual Fire was not Employed to make them:
Since the common Rule that a potiori part fit denominatio, will suffice to
Warrant, or at least excuse, my giving to this small Collection the Title of
ChymicoMagnetical Experiments; because the greatest part were performed by the
help of the Fire, or Bodies Chymically prepared by the Application of it. And
because it is usual with the best Writers about Magnetism, to reckon Steel and
Iron among Magnetical Bodies; I shall not scruple to deliver in this Paper some
Experiments, made by the help of the Fire upon those Subjects; with reference
neverthe less to Magnetism.

EXPERIMENT I.
Having Ignited several Loadstones, and removed them from the Fire till they
grew Cold again, I found a great disparity in the visible substance whereof
they consisted, and the manifest structure of the gross parts that made them
up. For some Stones upon Refrigeration, either fell asunder of themselves, or
grew very Brittle; when as others still continued in their entireness: Some of
them being broken looked not unlike Iron-Ore, or Stones which I have gathered
near Iron-Mynes in Kent; others being broken, after Refrigeration appeared to
consist of Plates or Flakes of several Colors, and lying Parallel to one
another: And others again, which as I remember were English ones, did neither
appear to be composed of any such Flakes, nor had their dark Colors much, if
at all changed by the operation of the Fire, nor did cease to be Solid Bodies.

EXPERIMENT II.
We could not upon the Burning of several small Loadstones one after another,
discern any such blew sulphurous Flame as Porta in his Lib. 7. Cap. 7.
Natural Magic relates himself to have seen, and judges to have been as it
were the Soul of the Loadstone, upon whose recess he says, it lost its
Magnetic Faculty, which is most commonly true as to any considerable degree of
the Coitive or Attractive Power, but not of the Directive Faculty or Virtue.
But it may be that Porta mistook the small Flame, which is often omitted even
by well-kindled and glowing Charcoales, (on which sort his Loadstone was
placed) especially when a little blown upon, for the exhaling Soul of the
Loadstone; or else, to be civil to him, we may suppose, that, His Stone was
more rich in Unctuous Moisture than Others are wont to be; and if we had had by
us a very exact pair of Scales, we should have endeavored to have by them
discovered, See Exper. 10.
whether the Fire do deprive Loadstones of any ponderable parts.

EXPERIMENT III.
The Solidity of some English Loadstones, made me think it fit, tho I looked
upon them as a kind of Iron-Ore, to try whether they could not be brought to
strike Fire. And accordingly, having made diverse Collisions betwixt a rough
piece, and the steel of a Tinder Box; I found that with much ado it was
possible to obtain some Sparks, (tho they seemed but small ones:) But having
taken a large piece of smooth Loadstone, I found that, by striking it somewhat
briskly, with the edge of a steeled Hammer, we were able to produce good store
of Sparks, and some of them of a surprising bigness; for they were judged to
exceed the size of those that are usually afforded by common Flints.

EXPERIMENT IV.
For certain Reasons I thought fit to make a further Trial, being desirous to
satisfy my self, whether it were not possible, to make Loadstones afford Fire
without the help of Iron or Steel. And being willing to comply with this
Curiosity, I made choice of two solid pieces of Loadstone, that were cut almost
into the form of Cubes; and found that many Collisions being made between them,
especially at the edges; there were produced from Time to Time, (tho not
frequently,) some Sparks of Fire, tho neither so numerous, nor so great or
vivid, as those of the foregoing Experiment wherein the Steel was employed.

EXPERIMENT V.
I have (elsewhere) formerly related, that if an Oblong Loadstone made glowing
hot, be refrigerated Perpendicularly, the lower extreme will thereby become its
Northern Pole. And I shall now add, that yet if such a Loadstone be
refrigerated Perpendicularly, not upon an ordinary Terrestrial Body, but upon
the Northern extreme of a much stronger Loadstone; in such case, this
debilitated Stone will receive its Impressions, as if it were an Iron, and its
lower extreme will not be, as before, by the Magnetic Effluvia of the Earth,
made its Northern Pole; but it will be contrariwise animated by the Pole of the
Loadstone, on which it is cooled; and according to the Laws Magnetical, the
lower extreme of it, will not be its Northern, but its Southern Pole, nimbly
attracting the North end of an excited and Aequilibrated Needle.

EXPERIMENT VI.
By the forementioned way of Refrigeration I also found, that a Disanimated
Loadstone (if I may so speak) may be restored, to some degree of its Attractive
Virtue; for I tried that a small Loadstone, which after its being made red hot
in the Fire, and cooled Perpendicularly upon the Ground, was not able to take
up a fragment of a Needle; being again heated, and not only cooled upon the
Pole of a strong Loadstone, but suffered to rest on it a while after, was soon
grown vigorous enough, to take up what formerly it could not move.

EXPERIMENT VII.
I further observed, that tho a Loadstone that had passed the Fire, had not, by
being immediately before made red hot, had its Body opened and fitted to take
in plentifully the Magnetical Streams; yet it would, like a wire of Iron,
acquire a new Verticity from the vigorous Loadstone; but not be in many Hours
so vigorously impregnated with Magnetic virtue, if it were applied cold to the
Pole of the Animating Loadstone; as it would in a very short time, if being
glowing hot it were refrigerated thereupon.

N. B. It has been observed, that if a Loadstone be made red hot in the Fire,
it will scarce retain any sensible Attractive virtue, save that it will be
able, by being endowed with a Magnetism from the Earth, to drive away that Pole
of a Needle well poys'd, which agrees in Denomination with that Pole of the
Loadstone, which is applied to it. But I desire that it may be remembered, that
I intimated that this is not strictly and universally true; for in some of our
English Loadstones, it has been observed, that Ignition does not only leave
them capable of a Directive Virtue, but leaves them also a considerable
Attractive power, so that they will sustain a good weight of Steel (as will
appear hereafter.)

EXPERIMENT VIII.
We took three English Loadstones that appeared to be of a very compact
Substance; two of them very small, as not being of near half an Inch in length;
the other much greater, being about an Inch long, and of a considerable
breadth, but yet of small thickness: These we made red hot in a Fire of well
kindled Charcoal, and being thoroughly Ignited, removed them one after another,
and hastily set each of them upon a Plate of Silver (for neither Wood nor Iron
would have been convenient) and applying the Loadstone (Capp'd) to each of
them, whilst it was yet red hot; it seemed manifest enough, not only, that
whilst it was in that state, the Stone had not so strong an Operation on it, as
if it were not red hot: But, which is remarkable, when it ceased to appear
Ignited, but yet was intensly hot, (so that it was readily able to burn his
Fingers that should offer to take it up between them) the armed Loadstone had a
more powerful Operation on it, by way of what they call Attraction and
Sustentation (not only, as I said, than it had, whilst the Ignited Stone
conspicuously retained the color Fire, but) than it had, after the same Stone
was grown cold.

EXPERIMENT IX.
This Experiment was reiterated with the two smaller Magnets and the greater,
with the like success: And when the Magnets were grown cold, they did
notwithstanding their having been twice ignited, discover some little
Magnetism, if applied to the end of a well-excited Magnetic Needle, nicely
poys'd upon the point of an ordinary Needle [or brass Pin] (on which its Center
of Gravity leaned.) And I found that the bigger of the three forementioned
Loadstones, after the first, if not also after the second Ignition; did not
only move the Magnetic Needle more briskly than one would have expected, but,
(which may seem strange) being thrust into filings of Mars, and then taken out,
it carried up with it and sustained a considerable Number of them. Whence we
may conclude, that in some Loadstones of a very solid Constitution, such as
this was; the Magnetical virtue is more Radicated (if I may so speak) or
Permanent, than in the generality of other Magneticks: This Stone being the
first wherein I observed, after I had thoroughly Ignited it, any Attractive
virtue able to take up Filings of Iron.

EXPERIMENT X.
On occasion of these Trials I made another, which tho to some it may seem but
slight, I thought the more worthy to be made, because I remember not to have
read or heard of it before; we took then, the same Loadstone that we employed
about the last Experiment, and having again made it red hot, in the Fire,
suffered it not to cool leisurely in the Air, as before, but quenched it, in a
Basin of cold Water; intending thereby to make a double variation of the
Experiment, first, by cooling it Hastily, and as it were Abruptly; and next by
cooling it not in the Air, but in a Fluid some hundreds of times more Dense or
Ponderous than the Air. The Event of the Trial was, that, upon the Immersion of
the red hot Stone, there fell off some flaky matter, as if it had been Scales
of Mars; and the Stone, when cold, would not take up any filings of Iron, as
before it did many; so that it appeared to have lost much of the Virtue it so
lately had, tho it retained the Power to move a wellpoys'd Needle, if it were
held near to either side of the point of it.

EXPERIMENT XI.
A black Oblong Loadstone, of a Homogeneous Substance, and weighing near three
Drams, having been in a Fire of well-kindled Charcoals, Ignited, and continued
so for some Minutes, of an Hour; being weighed again as soon as it was cooled,
was found to have lost about of a Grain of its first Weight, and much of the
blackness of its Color.

Tho the Affinity between the Loadstone and Iron, might make one expect that
the Fire might have a like Operation upon this Stone, and that out of which
Iron is commonly melted, both being indeed Iron-Oars; yet for some Reasons that
I cannot now stay to mention, I was induced to think, that the Effect of
Ignition upon those two Bodies might be very differing, as I conceive their
Internal and unseen Texture to be. And therefore I made the following
Experiment.

A Lump of Iron Oar, which looked almost like a white Stone, rather than a
common Oar, and was about the bigness of two Eggs; being applied, in several of
its parts, to an excited Needle, did not appear to move it manifestly. But
being afterward made glowing Hot, and kept so for a while, and then
Refrigerated; it did in those parts, which seemed by their newly acquired
Color to abound with Metalline Corpuscles; it did, I say, manifestly Attract
the North end of the Needle. And this was tried, both with a Needle of our own
touching, and by the Mariners Needle of a Sun-Dyal; whose Flower-de-Luce, the
burnt Oar did manifestly draw.

EXPERIMENT XII.
To confirm the former Observation, and also what I elsewhere gave notice of,
That diverse Bodies are of a Magnetical Nature or have in them some parts that
are so, which yet are not vulgarly believed to be referable to that sort of
Bodies; I shall subjoyn the following Experiment.

A Brick that had not been used, was sawed long ways into two equal pieces, and
each of these (one at one time, and another at another) was heated red hot in
the Fire for a pretty while, and afterward suffered to cool North and South:
And, as I expected, it thereby acquired a Magnetical Verticity; and with that
end that in cooling respected the South, did a little, tho but faintly, draw
the Flower de Luce (which pointed out the North) of the Mariner's Needle; and
with the other end, did somewhat more vigorously drive the Flower de Luce away,
and a little attract the other Extreme of the Needle.

EXPERIMENT XIII.
We took a [black] Loadstone, and having by degrees beaten it small, without
suffering it to touch any Iron or Steel Vesiel or Instrument, [which because of
the hardness of the Stone, was very troublesome to do;] we set aside the
grosser Grains for other uses, and upon some of the finer Powder we poured the
Spirit of common Salt, which had at first a sensible Operation upon it, by
producing foetid Fumes, and making a kind of Ebullition, as that Menstruun is
wont to do upon filings of Iron or Steel. But nevertheless, being kept a Night
or two in Digestion, it drew a high Tincture; and tho this was not at all, like
the Solutions of Mars in Spirit of Salt, Green, but of a Yellowish Brown, not
very remote from Redness: Yet a little of it being dropped into a fresh and
sufficiently colored Infusion of Galls, turned it presently into an Inky
Substance, which in some Positions appeared bluish, as a Tincture or light
Solution of Mars would have done.. I shall only add, about the Solution of
Loadstone, that having carefully made it with a good Aqua regia, obtained a
Solution, some of which you may yet command a sight of, that by some Virtuosi
to whom I showed it, was thought either a fine Solution of Gold, or little, if
at all, inferior to it in kind or Richness of Color. I chose to employ the
Spirit of Salt, rather than that of Nitre or Aqua Fortis, in this Experiment;
because I found the first named Liquor to dissolve Iron very well, if not
better, tho less furiously, than Aqua Fortis it self; and also, because I could
by this means better judge of the Tincture of its Color; having formerly found
by Trial, that Spirit of Salt makes a Green Solution of Mars; but Aqua Fortis
or Spirit of Nitre, a Reddish one. And it was to judge of the Tincture of the
Loadstone, as well as for another purpose, that I was so careful to keep the
Stone from touching Iron, when it was pulverising; least by the Hardness of it,
and the Sharpness of its Angles, it should grate off some parts of the Metal,
and so alter the Solution; for want of which Caution, I have known some
Experiments about Artificial Gems to miscarry; the Brass Mortar wherein the
hard Ingredients were beaten, having communicated some Particles to them, that
altered the Color which the Mass after Vitrification would otherwise have
been of.

EXPERIMENT XIV.
Some Parts of the foregoing Experiment may be confirmed by that which follows.

I caused a weak Loadstone to be heated red hot, to make it the more easy to
be powdered, and having caused it to be beaten very fine, I digested good
Spirit of Salt upon it. (I afterward found that ordinary Spirit would serve
the turn) This in a few Hours acquired a Tincture not greenish, but almost like
that of a troubled Solution of Gold. It strongly relished of Iron, and a little
of it being dropped into Infusion of Galls, it turned it immediately into an
Inky Liquor; part of this Solution being gently Evaporate^, grew thick like an
Extract, but did not seem disposed to shoot into Chrystals; yet another part of
it did precipitate with Salt of Tartar, much like a Solution of Vitriol; and
another with Spirit of fermented Urine gave a plentiful, but yellowish red,
Praecipitate.

EXPERIMENT XV.
Meeting among my loose Notes, with one that may serve both for a Variation and
Confirmation of what has been above delivered in the Experiments; it seemed not
improper to annex a Transcript of it.

A red Mineral, whose Consistence was between Stony and Earthy, was by me
judged to be a kind of Iron Oar, tho having powdered some of it, I could not
find that a good Loadstone would attract any part of it: Therefore, to satisfy
my self, and to confirm D. B's Observation; about the Virtue of Linseed Oil, I
caused this red Powder, wetted with that Liquor, to be kept about two Hours
Ignited in a Crucible; by which means it was turned blackish. This dark
colored Powder was taken out, and suffered to cool, and then would readily
adhere to the same Loadstone, almost as if they had been a heap of filings of
Iron. But the Operation of the Fire perhaps contributed, as much (or more) as
the Linseed Oil, to this Change. For a parcel of the red Powder being kept
Ignited in a Crucible, tho without the Liquor, did afterward appear Magnetical.

After having said thus much of the most useful of uncommon Stones, the Magnet:
It will not, I presume, be thought incongruous to subjoin some Remarks about
the most precious of them that are known among us, viz. Diamonds; which will be
done in the next Chapter.

CHAP. II.
CONTAINING Various Observations about DIAMONDS.

DIamonds being generally esteemed the most Noble and Precious of Gems, and
even of Inanimate Bodies here below, (for of Carbuncles, the very Existence is
disputed;) the Opportunity I had of being one of the Committee or Directors of
the English East India Company, (whereto the desire of Knowledge, not Profit,
drew me) allowed me in some measure to gratify my Curiosity about them, by
adding to some Observations of my own, the Answers I had to the questions, I
propounded to some East India Merchants and Jewellers, that had Opportunity to
deal much with those Gems. Part of what I had learned about them, I committed
from time to time to some Papers, which were the main things that supplied me
with the following Particulars.

These Gems, (to add that upon the by,) may the rather deserve our Curiosity,
because the Commerce they help to maintain between the Western and Eastern
parts of the World, is very considerable. For as small as their Bulk is, their
Properties and Men's Opinion, do so much recommend them, that I remember one of
the most famous and intelligent Merchants of this Nation, (who has been
Governor of more than one Trading Company in it,) being inquired of by me about
the value of the Diamond Trade; he answered me, That according to his
well-grounded Estimate, there came from the East Indies into Europe, one year
with another, to the value of about 350000 Sterling. of which about 100000 l. came
into England; which at present, because of the prudent Indulgence of the
Government, and of the East India Company, is become the Mart of Diamonds.

I. To prove the great hardness of Diamonds, even in comparison of other
Bodies, that are thought wonderfully hard, a famous Artist for cutting of
Diamonds, in return to some questions I put him, affirmed to me, that he could
not either Cut or Polish Diamonds with any thing but with Diamonds. And he
further answered me, that if he should employ so rough a way, and such forcible
Engines to cut Rubies or any other Stones, as he does to cut Diamonds, it would
presently break them in pieces; which the Inspection of his Engine made very
probable to me.

II. A very skilful Cutter and Polisher of Diamonds (Mr. L.) being demanded by
me, whether he found that all sorts of Diamonds were of equal Hardness, told
me, that having dealt in Diamonds near twenty years in Amsterdam, and diverse
years in England, he perceived that there are of later years, brought over
worse and worse sorts of Diamonds; so that he judges those of the old Rock (as
he calls them) either to be quite spent in the Indies themselves, or at least
to be seldom or never brought over to us. And he finds several of recent
Diamonds, so soft and brittle in comparison of those of the old Rock, that he
is oftentimes afraid, or unwilling to meddle with them, least he should spoil
them in the Cutting or Polishing.

III. Notwithstanding the (lately mentioned) wonderful Hardness of Diamonds,
there is no Truth in the Tradition, as generally as it is received, that
represents Diamonds as incapable of being broken by any External force, unless
they be softened by being steeped in the Blood of a Goat. For this odd
Assertion, I find to be contradicted by frequent practice of Diamond Cutters:
And particularly having inquired of one of them, to whom abundance of those
Gems are brought to be fitted for the Jeweller and Goldsmith, he assured me,
That he makes much of his Powder to Polish Diamonds with, only, by beating
board Diamonds (as they call them) in a Steel or Iron Mortar, and that he has
that way made with ease, some hundreds of Carrats of Diamond Dust.

IV. It Is an Opinion received among many that deal in Gems, that as Diamonds
are the hardest of Bodies, so the same Compactness, and their great Solidity,
gives them also a proportionable Gravity, and makes them extremely weighty, in
reference to their Bulk: And I saw in the Hands of a Virtuoso, a Book (that I
could not procure) not long since put out by a French Jeweller, who as he
affirms, has dealt very much in Diamonds; wherein the Author asserts, the great
Ponderosity of these Stones, in comparison of other Bodies. But this Opinion
agrees very little with the following Experiment, that I find among others,
that I tried about Gems, Registered to this purpose.

A rough Diamond somewhat dark within, did in a pair of Scales that would turn
either way with the 32th part of a Grain, weigh 8 Grains, and eight Sixteenths.
This Stone being with care weighed in Water, according to the Rules of the
Hydrostaticks; its weight appeared to be to that of an equal Bulk of that
Liquor, as 2 11/23 to 1. So that, as far as can be judged by this Trial, even a
Diamond weighs not full thrice as much as Water.

V. A famous and experienced Cutter of Diamonds, being asked by me, whether he
did not find some rough Diamonds heavier than others of the same bigness, told
me, that he did, especially if some of them were Cloudy or foul: Insomuch that
showing me a Diamond that seemed to be about the bigness of two ordinary Pease
or less, he affirmed, That he sometimes found in Diamonds of that bigness,
compared together about a Carrat (or four Grains) difference in point of weight.

VI. The shape or figure of Diamonds is not so easy to be securely determined.
For those that are seen in Rings and other Jewels, having been by way of
Preparation cut and polished, have changed their natural Figures for that which
the Artificer thought fit to give them. And rough Diamonds themselves (which
are not obviously met with) do oftentimes come to our Hands broken, tho
unwillingly, by the Diggers. And thereby unfit to acquaint us with their
genuine Shape, which we may also miss of being able to discover, on account of
the Accidents that the matter they consisted of was subject to, at their
formation in the Mine. For to omit other Proofs, having had a Parcel of between
100 and 150 (if I misremember not the Number,) put into my Hands at one time in
the East India House to gratify my Curiosity, I found very few of them
completely shaped; but most of them broken, and of very irregular Figures, like
those of so much Gravel taken up at adventures upon the Seashore. But some few
I saw that were pretty regularly figured, which probably were not much hindered
from shooting freely in the Wombs or Cavities, wherein they were Coagulated or
Concreted. And these seemed to consist, in my opinion, of several Triangular
Surfaces that were terminated in, or composed, diverse solid Angles. And one
rough Diamond I had of my own, wherein this Shape was more conspicuous than I
remember to have seen in any other. Besides having inquired of a very
experienced Artificer, who dealt much in fitting these Gems for the Goldsmiths
use, whether he found rough Diamonds to be of any constant Figure, and if he
did, what that Figure was? He answered me, That he always found those that had
any constant, (or as he meant, regular) Figure, to be in his own Expression six
cornered.

VII. Diamonds have in them a Grain (or a determinate tendency of their Fibers,
or rather of the thin Plates they are made up. of,) as well as Wood, and may
with case enough be split along the Grain, tho not against it; as I have seen a
very large Diamond that was cut according to the Grain into three pieces,
whereof the middlemost, tho large and about the thickness of a Shilling, was of
an even thickness, and exactly flat on both sides. I have my self a
Diamond-Ring, whose Stone I would not have polished, but caused it to be set
rough as Nature produced it, because in that state the Grain is manifest to the
naked Eye, and much more to a Glass moderately magnifying the several Plates it
consists of, having their Edges distinguishable like those of a Book a little
opened. A Cutter of these Gems that has had store of them to practice his skill
on, answered me, That one good blow may split even great Diamonds, if it be
given, as they speak, with the Grain; but against the Grain, he affirmed to me,
as dexterous and expert an Artificer as he is, that he is not able so much as
to Cut or Polish them.

VIII. The common Color of Diamond being generally enough known by sight, it is
not needful, as it would not be to describe it by Words; but the most usual
Color of these Gems is not the only, of which they may sometimes be found. A
great Traveller into the Eastern parts of the World assured me, That he had
seen some of them that were of a pale bluish Color: That famous French
Jeweller as well as Traveller, Monsieur Tavernier, gives an account of a fair
Diamond that he had of a very red color; and that great. Ornament of our
English Court the D. of R. told me, that she was Mistress of a fair one, which
tho not of a Ruby, was of a red Color, but not having it at Hand, she could
not then show it me: A Relation of mine, in the same Court, used to wear a
Diamond Ring; which tho the Stone was not great, he valued at a hundred Pound,
because its Color was of so fine a Golden yellow, that I I should have taken
it for an excellent Topaz, but that he had satisfied me 'twas a Diamond to
which agreed its great hardness, which gave an uncommon Luster. And I remember,
that Surveying attentively a parcel of rough Diamonds newly brought from the
East Indies, I perceived among them, besides several lighter variations of
Color. One Stone that was all Green, and that to such a degree, that I doubted
not that if it were polished land set, it might pass for an excellent Emerald;
and I should have suspected this Gem to have been really of that kind, but that
I found it among Diamonds that belonged to Merchants too Skilful in those Gems
to be imposed upon; and which was more, the Stone being yet rough and uncut, I
found it plainly to have the proper shape of a Diamond.

IX. At the late return of the Ships from India, being present at the delivery
of the Diamonds to the Owners, I observed one belonging to a Dutch Merchant
whose Father was a Cutter of Diamonds, and bred him to the same Trade. The
Diamond came from the King of Cholconda, it was shaped (like mine) with fix
Triangular sides, which yet were neither regularly figured nor truly flat, some
of them being a little Unequal, and one of them having a manifest and
odly-figured Cavity in it. But the Diamond being fair and flawless, and so
thick, that the Merchant told me it would be too deep for one Ring, and that
therefore he meant to split it into two. I had it weighed, and found it to
amount to ten Charats (or 40 Grains). I could easily perceive the Grain of this
Diamond, which the Merchant also acknowledged; who answered me, that he had
never seen in Diamonds any Heterogeneous mixture enclosed. He further informed
me, that there was brought him a large Diamond from Borneo, that was much
darker than one I showed him; insomuch that he compared it to Soot; but when he
had cut and polished it, he and others were much surprised to find it a fair
and clear Stone, of very great value.

X. The conjecture I have elsewhere proposed, that diverse of the real Virtues
of Gems may be probably derived from the metalline, or mineral tinctures, or
other Corpuseles that were imbody'd with the matter of the Gem, whilst it was
yet fluid, or soft, and afterward concoagulated therewith: This conjecture, I
say, may be much countenanced by the following Relation, which deserves a place
in this Chapter, by reason of its pertinency to the Subject of it.

I have long suspected that the matter whereof Diamonds mainly consist was,
whilst it was yet in Solutis Principiis, impregnated with metalline, and more
particularly with martial ones: But by reason of the dearness of those Gems,
and some other impediments, tho I have been Master of several Diamonds of
differing sizes, cut, and uncut, yet I could never make a Trial capable of
satisfying my curiosity, till having lately met with among other little
curiosities that lay long neglected by me, some number of small Diamonds, that
I had bought for Experiments; I considered that their being yet rough, and so
in their Natural State might make them more fit for my purpose, and so it might
that they were not so clear as those that we value in Rings, which probably
argued their having more of Martial Tincture in them than I should expect in
the more Diaphanous: Upon this account, I say, I took a moderately vigorous
Loadstone (for 'twas none of the strongest I have had) and applied it
successively to five or six of these small Stones, without perceiving it had
any Operation on them: But when I came to apply it to one more, which looked
somewhat duller than almost any of the rest, I found that it had in it
Particles enough of an Iron nature to make it a Magnetical Body; and observed
without surprise, that not only it would suffer it self to be taken up by the
strongest Pole of the Loadstone, but when that Pole was offered within a
convenient distance, it would readily leap through the Air to fasten it self to
it.

I have elsewhere mentioned some other Qualities of Diamonds, as besides their
Electrical Virtue, this, That it is possible that some of them may without Fire
or Intense Heat be brought to shine; tho among all that I have Tried, I found
but two that I could so make Luminous. One of these belongs to the King, and is
Described at the latter end of our History of Colors; and the other is a very
small one of my own; which either was quickly lost among other Stones of the
same size, or quickly lost its Faculty of Shining. But, to avoid Repetitions, I
shall here only add, that some few other Observations of a more peculiar sort
than those delivered in the two foregoing Pentades, may be found in other
Writings of ours, to which they seem more properly to belong.

CHAP. III.
Many Changes of Color produced by one simple Ingredient.

I Know not any way more likely to Convince the generality of Men (who are wont
to be much more impressed on by sensible Phenomena than Theories, tho solidly
Founded) how great an Interest the variable Texture of Bodies may have in
making them appear of differing Colors, than by showing how the addition of a
single Ingredient that either is Color ess, or at least is not of any of the
Colors to be produced, is capable (and that for the most part in a trice) by
introducing a secret change of the Texture to make the Body, it is put to,
appear sometimes of one Color, sometimes of another, according as the parts of
the Body wrought upon are disposed to receive such a change as Modify's the
incident Beams of Light after the manner requisite to make them exhibit a Blew,
a Green, a Red, or some other particular Color.

Upon this Consideration I thought of several Liquors, such as Aqua fortis, Oil
(as they call it) of Vitriol, or instead of it of Sulphur. Aqua Rezia, besides
other Saline Liquors that I shall not now stay to name, because it may here
suffice to tell you, that amongst them all I made choice of the Spirit (not
that which Chemists call the Oil) of Salt, as that which is very simple, and
which if it be not too much dephlegm'd, may be had clear and Colorless enough.
With this Spirit, I proceeded to make the following Experiments upon several
Bodies, whose differing Textures made me suppose they would be fit for my
purpose. And tho I could not, without much disadvantaging my Design, forbear to
mention some Trials that may be found elsewhere scatterd among my Writings on
other occasions; yet the greatest part by odds of those laid together in this
Chapter, will, I presume, be found New.

I. Some drops of well Colored Syrup of Violets being let fall together upon a
piece of white Paper, if a third or fourth part so much Spirit of Salt be with
the tip of one's Finger mixed with them, the Syrup will presently become of a
Red Color, usually somewhat inclining to Purple.

II. But if the Liquor to be Acted on, be otherwise disposed, it is possible
with Spirit of Salt to turn it from a Blew Color, not to a Red, but to a
Green, as I have sometimes done by letting fall into a deep Solution of Filings
of Copper made with an Urinous Spirit, as that of Sal armonia^, just as many
drops of Spirit of Salt as were requisite and sufficient to produce the change
intended. I say just so many Drops, because a very small error either in excess
or defect, may leave the mixture still Blew, or bring it to be all Colorless.

III. Upon a quantity, not exceeding many Drops of good Syrup of Violets, let
fall two or three drops of good Spirit of Urine, Hartshorn, or the like, or of
Oil of Tartar per deliquium; and when by mixing them well, the Syrup has
acquired a fine Green Color, then by putting to it a little of the Spirit of
Salt, and stirring it with the tip of your Finger, you may turn the Green Syrup
(as in the first Experiment you did the Blew) into a Red.

IV. If you put a quantity of Red Rose Leaves well dried into a Glass Vial
almost full of fair Water, and soon after put to them as much Spirit of Salt as
will make the Water pretty Sharp, you will quickly see both that Liquor and the
contained Leaves brought to a fine and lovely Red, which Scarlet Color it will
retain for a great while; the like effect Spirit of Salt will have on some
other Vegetables of a Stiptick or of an Astringent Nature.

V. But if by infusing Brazil in fair Water, you make a Tincture of it, which
you may much deepen by droping into it a little Spirit of Hartshorn, or of
Urine; if you then put to it a little Spirit of Salt, it will presently change
it from a deeply reddish Color, oftentimes like that of Muskadine, to a Color
far more pale, or rather yellow, like that of the more dilute Sack; so that the
same Spirit acting upon two Vegetable Tinctures differingly disposed, draws out
and heightens redness in one, and destroys it in the other.

VI. If you make an Infusion of true Lignum Nephriticum in Spring Water, it
will appear of a deep Color, like that of Oranges, when you place the Vial
between the Window and your Eye, and of a fine deep Blew when you look on it
with your Eye placed between it and the Window. But if you shake into this
Liquor a few drops of Spirit of Salt, the Caeruleous Color will presently
vanish and appear no more, in what light soever you look upon the Vial, tho the
Liquor will still retain the Orange Color.

VII. We took common Writing Ink, and having let fall several Drops of it upon
a piece of white Paper, so that when it grew dry in the Air, some parts of the
Ink lay thick and some thinner upon the Paper whereon it did spread it self, we
put a few Drops of strong Spirit of Salt, some on one part of the black'd
Paper, and some (or perhaps a small Drop) on another, and observed, as we
expected, that in these places, where the Spirit had been put, or to which it
reached, the blackness was quite destroyed, and succeeded by an unpleasant kind
of Color that seemed for the most part to participate of Yellow and Blew,
neither of them good in its kind.

VIII. If in Spirit of Salt, you dissolve Filings of Steel, and slowly
evaporate the filtrated Solution, it will shoot into a kind of Vitriolum Martis
that will be Green as well as that which Chemists vulgarly make with Oil of
Vitriol. And to add, That on this occasion, if you take these Chrystals made
with Spirit of Salt, and when they are dry, keep them in a Crucible, you will
find that even a moderate Fire if duly applied, will make them in a short time
exchange their Green Color for a Red, like that of the finer sort of Crocus
Martis, as indeed this Operation makes them referable to that sort of Medicines.

IX. We took some Mercury precipitated, per se (that is, by the sole Action of
the Fire, without any saline additaments) and tho crude Mercury is not as far
as I have tried, soluble in our English Spirit of Salt; yet this Red
Precipitate (which is supposed to be mere Mercury) with its own Sulphur
extraverted, did readily enough dissolve in that Liquor, and if I very much
misremember not, did not at all impart its own Color to it: And I also found
that Red-Lead or Minium being boiled a while in good Spirit of Salt, the
Redness did totally disappear. So that the same Agent that produces Redness in
diverse Bodies, did in those two, I have been mentioning, more than change it,
since it quite abolished it. Of which also, I can give you an easier instance,
by observing that the Reddest Coral being dissolved in our Menstruum, the
Redness vanishes, and the Solutition appears Colorless.

X. Take Filings of Copper, (the smallest are the fittest for this Experiment),
and having poured on them good Spirit of Salt till it swim, about two fingers
breadth over them; keep the Vial in a pretty strong Heat (in a Sand Furnace)
till you perceive the Menstruum has dissolved a competent part of the Metal:
Then warily take out the Vial, and holding it between your Eye and the Light,
you will perceive the Solution of Copper to be not like that of Steel formerly
mentioned, of a Green Color, but of a dark and troubled one, oftentimes
inclining to a deep, but muddy Red.

XI. But if you pour this Solution into a wide-mouth Glass, and let it stand
for a competent time, (which sometimes amounts but to a few hours, and
sometimes to very many) the exposed Liquor will appear of a Green, much finer
than that of the Chrystals of Mars.

XII. Take filtrated and limpid Solution of Silver, or of Mercury made in Aqua
fortis, and drop upon it some Spirit of Salt, by which you shall find the clear
Liquor turned white as Milk, which after a while will let fall a precipitate of
the same Color.

XIII. And if instead of a Solution of Silver or Quicksilver, you take a Red
Solution or Tincture of Benjamin, or of the Resinous part of Jallap Root, or
you will also have upon the Affusion of Spirit of Salt, a white Liquor and a
Precipitate of the same Color.

XIV. Being desirous to produce two differingColours at once by the same
Affusion of Spirit of Salt, I infused some dried red Rose leaves in fair Water,
till it had acquired a deep Color from them. To this Infusion, poured off
warily, that it might be clear, I added a considerable proportion of the sweet
Liquor, made by digesting Spirit of Vinegar upon red Lead, by which I knew
'twould be turned of a Bluish Green. Upon this almost opacous Liquor, I poured
Spirit of Salt, which as I expected, precipitated the Lead that had been
dissolved in the sweet Liquor, into a very white Powder, and gave the remaining
Liquor, well impregnated with particles of the Rose Leaves, a very fine and
durable Scarlet Color. To which Experiment I shall add on this occasion, that
if it had been well made, you may barely by shaking very well together and
confounding the White Powder with the Red Liquor, make a Carnation Color,
which (when it is made as it should be) appeared very fine and lovely whilst it
lasted, for in no long time the two Substances that composed it, would by
degrees separate, and re-appear each of them in its former place and Color.

XV. We took some Spirit of Salt, that having lain long upon Fylings of Copper,
had lost the muddy Tincture it had first acquired by being almost boiled upon
them. This Liquor, I say, that looked like common Water, we poured into a
small, but wide-mouthed Christal-Glass, about half an hour after 8 in the
Morning, and leaving it in a Window, it appeared after 40 Minutes to have there
acquired a Color, much like that of a German Amethist, and seemed to have no
tendency to Greenness. But being detained by the visit of a Virtuoso till
eleven a Clock, I could not see what happened in the mean time: But then as he
was going away, I invited him to see the Liquor, which he (not knowing what it
was) told me it looked of a Grassgreen Color, wherein tho I were not
altogether of his mind, yet in a short time after, it did to me also appear of
a lovely Green; in its passage to which it had in all been exposed about 3
hours and a half

XVI. Precipitate a strong Solution of Sublimate, (made in fair Water) with a
s. q. (and no more) of Oil of Tartar per deliquium. Put the Liquor and Powder
into a Filter of Cap-paper, and when the Water is run through, there will remain
in the Filter the Precipitate, which is to be slowly and well dried. Then take
it out of the Filter, in the form of a gross Powder, and having put it into a
clear Glass, let fall on it warily some Drops of pretty strong Spirit of Salt,
and (if the Experiment succeeds with you as it did with me) during the Conflict
that will be made, the little Lumps of the Precipitate will lose all their
former Brick-dust Color, and turn White, tho afterward they will appear
dissolved into a transparent Liquor, wherein the Orange Color is quite
abolished.

XVII. Having calcined Copper without any Additament, save Fire and Water (by
the way we elsewhere mention) we took an Arbitrary quantity of it, and having
poured on it about 3 or 4 times the quantity of good Spirit of Salt, we
obtained (what we looked for) both a Muddy, but manifestly Reddish Liquor, and
(somewhat to the surprise of the Persons I had a mind to satisfy) a white
Powder, whose quantity bore a considerable proportion to the Part that was
dissolved, (but whose Qualities belong not to this place) In which part its
self, (to add that upon the by) by the affusion of common Water, and the action
of the Air, we afterward produced more than one change of Color.

XVIII. We sometimes for Curiosity sake took a quantity, not exceeding a
spoonful, of the dark brown or somewhat reddish Solution of, mentioned in the
foregoing Experiment, and having put it into a cylindrical Vial, that the
change of Color may appear the better, we poured on it 2 or 3 Spoonfuls of
totally ardent vinous Spirit, and giving the Glass a shake to mingle them, we
presently had (as soon as the mixture became clear) a lovely green Liquor,
which when 'twas well settled, was very fair, and looked almost as if it were a
liquid Emerald.

XIX. We took some green Taffatee Ribband, and having moistened one part of it,
that was not great, twice or thrice with good Spirit of Salt, we suffered it to
dry of its self; which it did in a short time, and then we found as we
expected, that the wetted part was no longer of a Green, but changed to a Blew
Color. But the same Spirit, (to add that upon the by) presently turned that
part of a piece of black Ribband, upon which we put 2 or 3 Drops of it to a
Color not unlike that which they call Fueille Morte, or, a fading Leaf.

XX. It Is usual in Paper-shops, and in diverse other places, to meet with
Pamphlets and other thin Books that are covered with Papers that look sometimes
of a Greenish Blew Color, bordering upon Purple, and sometimes upon that of
Violets. Some of the deeper colored Papers of this sort, I have several times
to gratify some curious Persons, especially of the Sex, held in my left hand,
and with the other lightly and nimbly touched them here and there with the end
of a feather (cut off from the rest of the Quill) dipped in Spirit of Salt, which
almost in the twinkling of an Eye, died the touched parts of the Paper with a
Lovely Red, that would sometimes continue very Vivid for a good while, and be
manifest at the end of diverse Weeks, if not Months. And if instead of the
forementioned Quil, I took into my right hand (a Brush, or) somewhat that was
fit to sprinkle with, and having dipped it in the Saline Spirit, made many drops
at once fall upon the Paper, 'twas pleasant enough to behold how suddenly and
prettily it would be Speckled.

XXI. We took Antimony well powdered, and poured on it 3 or 4 times its weight
of good Spirit of Salt; we caused it to be boiled in this Liquor, (and that in
a Glass Vessel) wherein a part of it was dissolved, and taken up into the
Menstruum; where the Antimony quite lost its blackness. And this thus
impregnated Spirit of Salt, being dropped into fair Water, the black Mineral
subsided immediately, in the form of a very white Powder or Precipitate.

To these I might add other changes of Colors, that I have made, by the help
of Spirit of Salt. But these being not of so quick and easy Trial, (especially
because some of them require skill in Chemistry) I thought it not fit to annex
them; supposing that those already delivered, amounting to above four Pentades,
may suffice for the purpose declared at the beginning of this Paper. And also to
afford us this Reflection, That it may not be amiss, if Physicians, Chemists,
and others that are wont to compound Drugs, or other Ingredients; would be less
forward than they usually are, to mingle, not to say to jumble, several of them
together, either unnecessary, or without due regard to the friendly and
incongruous Qualities (in reference to one another) that the separate
Ingredients may have. For most of us are but too liable to be mistaken, when we
presume beforehand, what changes the Coalition, or other Associations of
differing Bodies may produce; especially if they be either Saline, or
plentifully partakers of a Saline Nature; Since Experience frequently shows,
that by the Action and Reaction that are consequent upon untried ways of
Composition, there Emerge in the mixture new Consistences and other Qualities
or Accidents, that were not looked for, when the Ingredients it is compounded
of, were put together. And tho it may sometimes happen luckily enough, that
these Emergent Qualities, whether of Drugs, or other Comparatively simple
Bodies, may prove advantageous; yet this may well be looked upon but as a lucky
chance; and hinders not, but that one may justly fear that ordinarily the newly
produced quality of a Medicine, may prove to be either worse than was expected,
or at least other than was designed, and consequently less fit for the
Physicians or the Artists determinate purpose.

CHAP. IV.
An Advertisement touching those Passages that in this Book relate to the Art
of Medicine.

THE favorable Reception the Public was pleased to give two Editions set
forth in one Year of The Usefulness of Experimental Philosophy, having
Encouraged the Stationer to Solicit me for a new Impression, I was on the same
ground invited to think of making additions to diverse parts of that Treatise;
but afterward observing that notwithstanding the Thanks and Acknowledgments I
had the good fortune to receive from several Physicians (some of them of great
Reputation, and perhaps by that only known to me) yet others were not well
pleased that a Person not of their Profession should offer to meddle with it,
tho with a design of advancing it: I, whose condition exempted me from taking
upon me their Calling, and who consequently must want many opportunities that
others enjoyed of making Observations about the Phenomenon of Diseases and of
Medicines, suffered my self without much violence to be diverted to other
Studies more suitable to my Inclinations, as well as to my Condition, and
accordingly I laid aside the Papers I had Written in reference to the
Physicians Art, nor were it easy, or perhaps possible for me to retrieve them,
after they have lain so many Years dispersed and neglected, by which means
perchance diverse of them have been lost.

But all this could not hinder me from being pressed to retrieve and
communicate these scattered and dusty Papers by the Secretary of the Royal
Society Mr. H. Oldenburgh: For as this Gentleman has been almost every where
wonderfully solicitous to preserve every thing from being lost, that may any
way contribute to increase the stock of useful knowledge. So having got notice
of these Papers, and a sight of some of them, his partiality for me made him
much overvalue them, and persuaded him that a Collection of them as incoherent
and unfinisht as they were, might be of some use to the Physicians Art. And
this seemed the more hopeful, because Natural Philosophy being a Science of far
greater Extent than Physic, and supplying it, with many of its Principles and
Theories; it is very Possible that Naturalists, tho not Professed Physicians, may
propose some such comprehensive Notions and Methods, as may awaken and enlarge
the minds of them that are so, and at least afford some useful hints to
considering and ingenious Men. And in effect diverse Physicians, as well as many
Patients, have been pleased to declare (some in Print, and some other ways)
that sometimes they found not useless assistances from some of those Papers,
wherein I occasionally touched on Medicinal things. Such Motives as these made
Mr. Oldenburg so earnest to procure the scattered Fragments, that I might have
yet remaining, about Medicinal Affairs, that tho for the Reasons mentioned
above, I could not think it fit to make a Collection of Papers so unlike in
their Subjects, so disproportionate in their Bulk, and so unfinished and
imperfect on diverse scores; Yet thus far I was content to comply with his
desires, that when these Trifles came to hand, I would now and then insert them
among my Experimenta and Observationes Physicoe. (Medicine being a Part, or an
Application of Natural Philosophy) especially if there were any great affinity
between the Paper I lighted on, and the Subject I was then treating of: Knowing
well that Mr. Oldenburg, and perhaps some others too, had rather I should
impart them at all adventures, than suppress what they judged might be useful;
and that 'twas better to run the hazard of having them slighted, than lost.

This Advertisement I thought fit to give in this place, once for all, that
when hereafter there shall occur any thing among these Experimenta and
Observationes Physicae, that directly relates to the Physician's Art, you may
not think it strange, remembering upon what account I ventured to meddle with
things of that Nature, and also that you may readily understand what I mean,
when you meet with any Particulars delivered, as Thoughts or Desiderata or
Wishes, tending to, or aiming at the Improvement of Medicine; which how slight
or superfluous soever they may be to Experienced Masters, to whom I did not
presume to recommend them, I thought might probably be serviceable to a very
Ingenious, but yet Young Cultivator of that noble Art, (whose Name, I concealed
after the way of the Curious of Germany under that of Trallianus,) for whose
use they were intended.

The I. PENTADE.
EXPERIMENT I.
A very Tall and well Set Gentleman, Aged about 24 years, by a Fall from his
Horse, had his Skull broken in several places, and being a Person of good
Estate, had several Surgeons to attend him in the course of his Sickness;
during which he was diverse times Trepan'd, and had several pieces of his Skull
taken off, which left great Chasms (that I have seen and felt) between the
remaining Parts. Within about three days after his Fall, this Knight (for so he
now is) was taken with a Dead Palsy on his Right Side, which did not equally
affect his Arm and his Leg: The use of the latter being sometimes suddenly
Restored to him in some measure, and (tho seldom) after a while almost as
suddenly Lost: But his Arm and Head were constantly Paralytical, being wholly
deprived of Motion; and having so little Sense, that it would sometimes lie
under his Body without his Feeling it. But if his Hand were pricked with a Pin,
he could take notice of it. This Palsy continued during almost the whole time
of the Cure, which lasted 23 or 24 Weeks. And when the Surgeons were going
to close up his Head, as having no more to do; one of them who was an Ingenious
Man, and Tenant to this Gentleman, opposed all the rest, alleging, that, if
they did no more, the Gentleman would lead an Useless and very Melancholy Life;
and that he was confident, the Palsy was some way or other occasioned by the
Fall, which had left something in the Head that they had not yet discovered. And
the Knight himself agreeing to this Man's motion, his Head was further laid
open; and at length, under a piece of proud Flesh, they found, with much ado, a
Splinter, or rather Flake, of a Bone, that bore hard upon the dura matter, and
was not pulled out without a great Hemorrhage, and such a stretch of the Parts,
as made the Patient think his Brain it self was tearing out. But this Mischief
was soon Remedied, and his Hurts securely Healed up; and he is now a Strong
Healthy Man, and finds no Inconvenience by having so broad and various a Callus
instead of the Skull; save that he is a little obnoxious to take Cold in his
Head. But the memorable Circumstances, for whose sake I mention this Narrative,
were these: When I asked him how big the Bone was, that was last taken out? He
told me, that it was less than half the Nail of one of his Fingers (not his
Thumb) and that it was almost as thin, being in size and shape like the Scale
of a Fish: But that it did not in his Head lie flat, but bore hard upon the
dura matter. When I asked him how long after it was taken out, he began to feel
some Relief, as to his Paralytic Distemper? He replied, That in less than five
hours he found himself, to his great joy, able to move his little Finger; and
(tho this happened in the Evening) he was the next morning able to move all his
Fingers, and within 2 or 3 days after to lift up his Arm: By which it seemed
manifest, that so little a Body as the Splinter lately mentioned, produced in
so robust a Person, a Palsy of the whole side it lay on. For when I
particularly ask't him, Whether, after the taking away of the proud Flesh that
encompassed the little Bone, he did not find, if he found none before, some
Relief as to his Palsy? He answered, that he found none at all, till the Bone
had been pulled out, which was not till a good while after the Surgeon had
been by degrees eating off the proud Flesh that, grew about it. But there was
in this case another Phoenomenon that I thought little less considerable than
the former. For, remembering the important controversy, that is agitated among
modern Physicians and Anatomists, about Nutrition by the Nerves, and having
thereupon asked this Knight, whether he did not find an Atrophy in the Limbs of
his Body that were affected? He told me, that when he began to be Paralytic on
that side, it by degrees much wasted, and the Paralytic Leg was very much
Extenuated: But the Arm and Hand much more, seeming nothing but a System of
Bones, with the Skin pasted on them. And when I further asked, if upon the
removal of the Bony Splinter abovementioned, the Atrophy of the Parts did not
also begin to lessen; he answered affirmatively, and told me, that in no very
long time his Leg and Arm recovered their wonted Dimensions; and in effect I
(some days since) saw the restored Arm well plump'd up with musculous Flesh,
tho the Weather were exceeding Cold. And he further told me, that he found no
difference between the Limbs that had been Paralytic, and the others, except
that they would grow sooner and more sensibly cold in Sharp or Frosty Weather.

This Gentleman answered me, to add that upon the by, that, during the course
of his Cure, he was very frequently (almost every second day) let Blood; that
he wanted not Appetite to his Meat; that for the most part he slept indifferent
well; and, which was more remarkable, upon so great a Hurt of the Head he did
not Vomit, not had afterward any Convulsions.

II. Among other Instances I have met with, that show the great Power which
sudden Passions of the mind may have upon the Body, I remember that a Woman of
middle Age, complained sadly to me of the mischief, a Fright had done her; for
she related to me, that having taken along with her to a Meadow by a
Riverside, a little Boy that she was dotingly fond of, whilst she was busy
about the work she came thither for, the Child stole away from her, and went
along the Bank, to delight himself with the View of the Stream; but being
heedless, it seems by Circumstances, that he set his Foot upon some piece of
Ground that the Water had made hollow; upon which account, the Earth failing
under the weight of the Boy's body pressing it, that, and he fell together into
the River: In the mean time the poor Mother casually missing her Child, hastily
cast her Eyes toward the brink of the River, and not being able to see him
there, she presently concluded him to be Drowned, and was struck with so much
horror upon the sudden accident that tore from her a favorite Son, that among
other mischiefs, she fell into a Dead Palsy of her right Arm and Hand, which
continued with her in spite of what she had done to remove it, till the time
she complained of it to me, who had not opportunity to know what became of her
afterward.

III. On the other side, to show that Violent Passions, and even Frights may
sometimes, tho very seldom, do good, as well as harm; I shall here add a
Relation that was circumstantially made me by the learned Person himself, to
whom the Accident happened. I familiarly knew a Gentleman that lived to be an
Eminent Virtuoso, and to oblige many by his useful Writings, who when he was a
Youth, fell into a violent and obstinate Sciatica, which continued with him so
long, that it left him little hope of Recovery; but the Devotion of this Young
man's Friends invited them to make him be carried, since he could not go, to
Church upon Sundays; and there it happened, that the Town being a Frontier
Garrison, the Guards were so negligent, that there was occasion given to a very
hot Alarm, that the Enemy was got into the Town, and was advancing toward the
Church to Massacre all that were in it. This so amazed and terrified the
People, that in very great and disorderly have, they all ran out of the Church,
and left my Relator in his Pew upon a Seat that they placed him, and whence he
could not remove without help: But he being no less frighted than the rest, as
they forgot him, he forgot his Disease, and made a shift to hamper off the Pew,
and follow those that fled; but it quickly appearing, that the Alarm had been
a false one, his Friends began to think in what a condition they had left him,
and hastened back to help him out of the Pew, which whilst they were going to
do, they, to their great surprise found him in the way upon his feet, and
walking as freely as other Men. And when he told me this Story, he was above
forty years Elder than when he was thus strangely rescued, and in all that
time, never had one Fit of the Sciatica.

ADVERTISEMENT.
It Is easy to be observed, that of the two kinds into which Chemists may be
conveniently enough sorted; the Number is greater of those that are not Professed
Physicians, than of those that are: And yet several of the former sort are led
by their more free Curiosity, or their particular Designs, to allow a large
scope to their Trials; and so in their Experiments upon various Bodies, to
operate upon some of those that may be reduced (either directly, or by sit
applications) to the Materia Medica, and afford uncommon Preparations: Which
tho designed for other purposes, may by a skilful Physician, with a light
Variation, and perhaps without any, be made to afford good Medicines: And
therefore I think it may be no inconsiderable service to the Public, if by the
leave and assistance of the Authors, diverse Chemical Experiments that are not
directly useful to their immediate purpose, were not, (as is usual) thrown
away, but put into the hands of some Sagacious Physician.

Upon these grounds, I thought my self little less than obliged, to set apart
now and then an Experiment that contained some uncommon Preparation, which
seemed applicable to Medicine; and to try whether, tho, being in the Country or
in some other inconvenient Circumstances, I had not opportunity to prove it my
self, the notice given of it, might not happen to be of use to a skilful
Physician.

I shall therefore partly in this Chapter, and partly (if God permit) in some
following Chapters and other Writings, tender to such a one, some few of the
Experiments of this sort, that I lately lighted on among my Adversaria, and
that seemed not incapable to be made of some service to the Physician's Art.

Of the good and bad effects of these, I shall be glad to be informed, that
they may be either used more freely and improved, or corrected and quite laid
aside; and I desire that this short Preamble may serve for a general one to all
the other designed Chemical Medicines that I shall venture to propose hereafter.

A Designed Chemical Medicine.
IV. I know how much Men are prejudiced in some whole Countries, against
Vomitive Medicines: and I remember we have had here in London a Physician of
great Fame and Practice, that would turn over a Patient to another Doctor, if
the Case were such that the Patient would needs make use of Emeticks. And I
readily acknowledge that they are edged Tools, that require a Skilful Hand, to
employ them without danger of doing more harm than good: But since Experience
shows that where the Patient can bear them, and the Disease requires them, they
act more speedily and effectually than other evacuating Medicines: And since
the generality of our Physicians, not excepting some that are justly reputed
very Cautious, do not scruple frequently to make use of the Infusion of Crocus
Metallorum, tho it do not seldom prove a Remedy harsh enough; I shall venture
in compliance with some ingenious Physicians, and others that have often made
use of a Medicine, that goes under the name of my Emetick Drops, to communicate
the Preparation of them; without pressing the use any otherwise than by
confessing that diverse Practitioners of Physic of differing Sentiments, agree
in assuring me, that they have not yet found any Emetick to work so
effectually, nor with more ease and safety, than this Liquor; which some of
them prefer by much to other Antimonial Vomits; and especially to the Infusion
of Crocus Metallorum.

In preparing my Vomitive Liquor, I have not always employed the same
proportion of the Ingredients it is made of, nor did I find it necessary to be
nice in that matter. But the proportion I somewhat prefer, is to take two Parts
of well chosen and finely powdered Antimony, and on these to pour three Parts
of the Menstruum, viz. Sp.; which ought to be rather moderately strong, than
too much rectified. These are to be distilled together in a Glass Retort fitted
with a Receiver not very small, till there come over a great part of the
Menstruum, which will usually toward the close be accompanied with Red Flores,
(some times copious enough) which being separated by filtration through
Cap-paper, the clear transmitted Liquor is to be put into a Glass, not newly
washed, but dry on the inside, and to be kept close stopped from all Intercourse
with the Air.

The Dose is usually to a Man or Woman, especially at the first time, from 4 or
5, to 7 or 8 Drops: But I know an Ingenious Physician that gives to 10 or 12,
or a few more Drops, if the Case be urgent; and by that means he told me, that
with a small Button-Bottle, that I chanced to give him a little before, he did
in 2 or 3 hours rescue three Gentlemen, that by a bad Surfeit with very bad
Circumstances, were suddenly brought into great danger of speedy Death, and
carried to a neighboring Tavern, as being too ill to be carried home.

The Vehicle may be a Spoonful or two of Wine, or Black-Cherry Water, or (which
diverse Persons choose rather) of Spring Water, Drinking up the Liquor
immediately after, because there will some Precipitation be made; and then
taking 2 or 3 Spoonfuls of the same Vehicle to wash it down. It usually begins
to work early, and does it without causing near so much straining as vulgar
Emeticks, and yet makes Copious Evacuations; and sometimes so Eradicative of
the Morbifick matter, that the Physician lately mentioned, who Cured the three
Gentlemen, having a poor Patient who had Conflicted for above three Years with
an Ague in several Types, but most commonly Quartanary, perfectly Cured him
with two Doses of these Drops, and a Julap made chiefly of the Distilled Water
of a common Vitriolick Mineral. And this Cure seemed therefore to me, when the
Physician gave me an account of the Drops he had from me, the more
considerable, because the Patient had made use of great Variety of Remedies;
and particularly he devoured great store of the Jesuits Bark, or Cortex
Peruvianus, (perhaps because it was not well Conditioned, or skilfulfully
Administered) which sometimes altered the Type of his Ague, turning it to a
single or a double Tertian, and sometimes kept off the Fits for a while, when
'twas a Quartane, but never Cured him quite; and left him in a deplorable
estate, wherein the Emetick Drops found him.

Tho I sent this Medicine to several Patients, in whom, thanks be to God, it
succeeded more than ordinarily well, yet I durst not venture to give it to
Children, or to very young Persons; but having gratified an Ingenious Surgeon
of good Practice, with a stock of it, the Trials he made upon diverse Persons,
with great Success on other Patients, imbolden'd him to give it to Boys and
Girls, and afterward even to several Children, whereof he gave me a good
Account, only he discreetly took care to proportion his Doses to the Age and
Strength of his Patients, and not to give the whole Dose at once, but divide it
into 2 or 3 parts, that if the first should work within half an hour or less,
the second should not be given, or lessened in quantity. And if neither the
second did work within about an hour, he added the third. And by this Cautious
Method, he assured me that he had suddenly relieved several Children in bad
Cases, and found not any mischief or danger ensue upon the administration of
it. But Children being tender Creatures, this is to be further and cautiously
tried.

POSTSCRIPT.
Having had occasion to keep by me some Vials furnished with the Emetick Drops,
longer than I thought I should need to do so: I observed that in tract of time,
there, began to subside a white Powder, wherein a good part of the Emetick
faculty of the Medicine may be supposed to reside; therefore 'twill be best
either to employ the Liquor in no long time after it is made, or if one has not
leisure or convenience to do so, to shake the Vial well (that the Powder may be
raised and we will dispersed through it) just before it be administered.

A Designed Chemical Medicine.
There are many that having a high Esteem for Chalybeate Waters, such as those
of the Spaw and Tunbridg, which yet in many places are not to be had at all,
and in few to be had well conditioned, are very Solicitous to find Succedaneums
to them. To gratify some Ingenious Persons of this sort (and improve a casual
hint taken from a Book of a somewhat like Preparation propo^^ded for another
purpose) I remember, I Employed a way of Aemulating such Waters that answered
the outward Phenomenon of Color and Taste, and seem by the paucity and
harmlesness of their Ingredients like to be innocent Medicines; I had no
opportunity to make trial of them in Physic, but finding that some Inquisitive
Cultivaters of that Art, valued them more than I did, I committed the
Experiment to Paper, and now suffer it to come abroad, that it may be tried by
Physicians, and either rejected or made use of, as success shall direct. The
Experiment as I made it, was this.

We took one part of very good Fylings of; and ten parts of good Distilled
Vinegar. These we put into a Bolt-head, and shop'd it well, and then in a mild
heat of Sand we digested them for about two days, and afterward augmented the
Heat till the Liquor appeared of a deep Orange Color, but yet transparent.
Part of this Tincture we poured off, and kept well stopped by its self, because
tho by a longer digestion and a greater heat, we obtained a very red Tincture,
yet we did not so much value it, because when the Menstruum is over
Impregnated, the Metal usually precipitates, and the fine Color is destroyed.
Of the first reserved Tincture, we let fall 4 Drops into VIIIss, (8 ss) of
clear common Water, whose Color was not thereby sensibly altered; and the Vial
containing this Mixture being well shaken, that the Tincture might diffuse it
self the more thoroughly, we kept it carefully stopped for use, as being our
Factitious or Counterfeit Spaw. A Spoonful or somewhat more of this, with about
a quarter of a Grain, or less, of good fresh Powder of Gauls, would presently
afford a Purplish Tincture, like that of Natural Springs impregnated with Mars,
such as the Water of the German Spaw, or of Tunbridg in Kent; if ones Mouth
were Washed with it, 'twas found to have like those Natural Chalybeat Waters, a
manifestly faeruginous taste. N. B. These Artificial Acidulae are to be
Administered in no long time after they are made; for Experience has informed
me, that (at least sometimes) when I kept them too long, within not many days
after they were made, they would lose much, if not most of their Briskness and
Force. And I sometimes perceive that there would subside to the bottom a
certain red or reddish Substance, as it were Oker, which was a token of the
Degeneracy of the Liquor; and some such thing I have observed in some Natural
Chalybeat Waters too long or negligently kept. But our Acidulae may be so soon
and so cheaply made freshly, that the above mentioned Inconveniency will scarce
to the Skilful seem considerable.

The II. PENTADE.
EXPERIMENT II.
Because it may be on some occasions of use to a Physician, to have ways of
Discovering the Adulterateness of Bezoar Stone, which for its dearness is often
Counterfeited, and not easily discerned to be so by the common ways of
Exploring, which use to be uncertain enough; it may not be amiss to Communicate
a new way of Trial, which it is unlike that Impostors have dreamed of, or if
they should know it, can easily elude. And this I am the rather willing to do,
because the proposed way may afford an useful hint to the Sagacious Inquirers
into the Nature, and some of the Preparations that may be made, of the Bezoar
Stone; which tho it be a Drug too much Magnified by some Physicians, especially
those that depend on it, against the true Plague; yet a Physician of great
Experience, and rather a severe, than any ways a partial Judge of it, allows it
to be an excellent Remedy even in Malignant and ill-condition'd Fevers, at
least if they be not truly Pestilential. One of the ways I employed, in
treating the Bezoar Stone, may be easily gathered from the ensuing Transcript
of one of my registered Experiments.

We took 40 or 50 Grains of choice Oriental Bezoar Stone reduced to Powder, and
in a Boltglass poured on it. VI of good Spirit of Niter, as well to try whether
this Liquor would prove a fit Menstruum for: this Stone, as we found it to be
for the Calculus Humanus, as for other purposes. And tho this Affusion being
purposely made in the Cold, the Liquor did not seem at first to work on the
Stone; yet soon after it fell violently upon it, and dissolved the greater part
of it, not without noise and a Notable Effervescence. The Solution was almost
Red, and the Glass being put in a digestive Furnace, the whole Powder was not
only dissolved, but being left a night or two in a North Window, it afforded
diverse Saline Concretions, much larger than could well have been expected from
so small a quantity of matter; and these Crystals, whilst they were yet in the
Glass, might easily be taken for Crystals of Saltpeter, so great was their
resemblance.

To manifest how much the faculties of loosening and binding, are relative
things, and depend upon the Disposition of the Body to be wrought upon, and so
upon the Congruity betwixt the Agent, and the Patient, I know an Ingenious
Gentlewoman, on whom Cinnamon, which generally is a considerable Astringent and
Stomachick Medicine, has a quite contrary Operation, and that in a strange
degree, insomuch that having found by 2 or 3 accidental Trials, that a very
little Cinnamon seemed to disorder her Stomach and prove Laxative, she resolved
once to satisfy her self, whether those Discomposures came by Chance, or no;
and having strewn some powdered Cinnamon upon a Tossed, she was going to put
into her Ale, upon eating the Tossed she was copiously Purged for two days
together, and that with such violence, that it put her into Convulsion Fits,
and a kind of Spasmus Cynicus, which she could never be perfectly freed from,
being troubled with from time to time for. 3 Years, as was the other day
averred to me, and diverse others that know her, by her Husband who is himself a
Learned Man and a professed Physician.

A prosperous Physician, to whom I had recommended some things relating to his
Profession whilst he practiced it with Success in the Capital City of Ireland,
where at that time there raged a new and violent Fever, whereof Multitudes
Died, very few Patients Recovering of it, happily lighted on a Method that
proved, through God's Blessing, very Prosperous. This Doctor returning into
Ireland sometimes before, having been desired by me to send me an account of
some things relating to Natural Philosophy and Physic that I named to him,
wrought to me in answer to some of my Enquiries a Letter, out of which I
thought fit to make this Extract, because I know not but that it may give good
hints toward the Cure of some other ill-condition'd Fevers.

Dublin, Feb. 27. 1682.
I Have employed Ens Veneris for the removal of a Subsultus Tendinum, in a
Person dangerously Sick of a Febris Petechialis (a Discase fatal to very many
here for these 12 or 14 Months) and found that it answered my hopes in 3 or 4
Hours after I gave it in Conserve of Borrage Flowers.

I have, since I came from England, thought of a Method of Curing the aforesaid
Fever, which has not once failed me, tho I made of it for 16 or 18 several
Persons, many of which would certainly Dye, if treated after the usual manner
in this case. If I should tell you from what Observations and Reasonings I came
to alter the Method of Cure, I should be very tedious. I shall therefore at
present wave that, and proceed to tell you, That when first I come to any Sick
of this Disease, if I find Costive (as generally they are) I prescribe a
Glister, and after that an Episplastick Plaster 6 or 7 Inches broad, and 8 or
9 Inches Long, to be applied between the Shoulders; the Blister being well
raised, I order to be Dressed carefully, stripping off the Cuticula. This
continues running till the Fever is gone off; which is most commonly in 10 or
12 days, if they have not kept up too long with it, and then we cannot
certainly foretell the time of the Fever's declination; for the whole time till
the going off of the Fever, I Prescribe Emulsions of Aq. Aronis, Card. Bened.
Citrij totius and Sir. Granatorum cum Aceto; I allow of Orange and Butter-milk
Possets, of roasted Apples, Flummery, or any other light and cooling thing they
call for.

By this Method I keep the Genus Nervosum and Brain from being Affected, and
consequently secure my Patients; for as many as I have ever known of them Dye,
that were troubled with this Disease, Died of a disorder of those Parts. I do
not defer the Blistering Plasters, as others do, till I find my Patients
Delirous, Lethargick, Convulsive, or otherwise affected in their Heads and
Nerves, finding by the Experience of others that then they most commonly prove
ineffectual, because of some Morbifick Matters being too deeply lodged in these
parts. I do not prescribe, except upon some extraordinary occasions, any
Volatile Salts or Spirits, or any thing too apt to quicken the already
over-brisk Circulation of the Blood, having Experimentally Learned that by
these often used, the Brain and Nerves become sooner than ordinary affected,
for as much as they deeply insinuate themselves, and drive with them some
Morbifick Matter into the Brain and Nerves. I find Bleeding bad, being
generally Fatal. If I doubt of the Recovery of any of my Patients Sick of this
Disease, it is only when I find that they have been let Blood, or lain for 8 or
9 days before I come to them; tho I have brought through it, even Persons in
those Circumstances.

A Designed Chemical Medicine.
I shall not, because I need not, Discourse of the Medicinal Virtues of Steel
in a City where many Learned Physicians do so much esteem and employ Chalybeate
Medicines as they do in London, and therefore I shall content my self at this
time to offer you a couple of Preparations of Steel that possibly you have not
met with or thought of.

1. Considering that most of the ways made use of by Chemists to prepare Steel,
tend by dividing it into very Minute parts, to make it more liable to be
wrought on by the Liquors of the Stomach, and some other parts of the Body, and
that the generality of these Chalybeate Preparations are wont to be made only
with Acids, whether manifest, as Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of Vinegar, etc. or
Occult, as Brimstone, which tho insipid in its Natural State, when it comes to
be Melted, discloses its hidden Salt, and works on by a sharp Acidity;
considering this, I say, and that Men have confined themselves to Acids in
working on Steel, because they supposed Instruments of that kind were necessary
to dissolve that Metal, I thought it might do you, and some Ingenious Men of
your Profession, some little Service, if I proposed to you a way of Opening the
Body of Steel, that tho I gave a hint of it diverse Years ago, is, for ought I
know, yet unpracticed.

We took then several Ounces of highly rectified Spirit of fermented (or
putrified) Urine made per se, and consequently without Quicklime, and poured it
upon as much Filings of Steel freshly made, to be sure, not to have any Rusty
ones, as we guest, would at least suffice to satiate it fully. These we put in
a moderately warm place, where the Menstruum wrought on the Metal for diverse
hour together, and Dissolved a considerable part of it. This Solution we set to
filter, and found it of a Taste considerably strong, but very different from
any of the Chalybeat Preparations, we remembered, that were seen made with
Acids. The Liquor being kept in a stopped Viol for some days near a Window, did
in the Cold let fall by degrees a considerable quantity of Powder of a deep
Green Color, which surpised some Virtuosi, to whom I showed it, especially
because the Liquor it self was not of that Color; tho at least the superficial
part of what remained (in plenty) in the Filter, did also in the Air acquire a
Green Color. But tho our Solution poured off from the subsided Powder, was
warily and slowly evaporated, yet we did not find it would well Crystallize
What use may be made in Physic, of Preparations of this kind, I leave to you,
whose Profession as well as Curiosity will engage you to consider. I do not
presume to tell you, but in general it seems that Steel Prepared with Volatile
Spirits of the Animal Kingdom that are wont to be friendly to Nature, and are
very contrary to Acids, may have new qualities very differing from those of
Steel Prepared with Acids, and may be more safe in some Cases and to some
Patients. With what other Volatile Menstruums I have dissolved Mars, and what
Phenomenon some Trials I made with that Metal opened by such Salts, you may
command an Account of, if you think it worth desiring.

A Designed Chemical Medicine.
Another Experiment that I made on Steel, was designed to make as much of it
Volatile, as I could with a Menstruum, not so Corrosive or Dangerous to the
Body as Oil of Vitriol, or Spirit of Niter, which, especially the former, are
employed by diverse Chemists to make Chalybeat Preparations that yet are not
Volatile. The Medicinal Scope I had in my Eye, for I had also a Chemical one
(that belongs not to this place) was to try if I could by it obtain any Sulphur
of Mars, which the Commendations that some, even of those Chemists, whether
Adepti or not, whose Authority I most regard, represent as an excellent
Medicine, especially in Cases that require Anodynes, and which the others, or
the same speak of as a graduatory Substance (as to some Metals) or both: If you
should ask me, why I did not make use of the common Vitriolum Martis, which is
easy to be had in the Shops of Chemists? I answer, That my design being to try
whether or no I could obtain a Sulphur, that might properly enough (tho not in
the utmost rigor) we call Sulphur of Mars, that which is made the common way,
would not answer my end, since tho I should be able from this Vitriol to obtain
a real Sulphur; yet I should not think it safe thence to conclude, that it came
from the Metal, and not from the Menstruum; because I have several times from
Oil of Vitriol it self, obtained no contemptible proportion of Yellow and
Combustible Sulphur. To which I add, that the acquisition of a Metalline
Sulphur, tho it was not the only thing that I aimed at in this Preparation, for
I presumed, that at least I should make a very great Comminution of the parts
of Steel, which is one of the main things aimed at by the more Rational
Physicians in the Preparations of that Metal.

Upon these and the like grounds, I pitched upon good Spirit of Sea Salt as a
Menstruum, much fitter for my purpose than either Oil of Vitriol or the Acid
part of Sulphur; and accordingly in a good many Ounces of this Menstruum, we
dissolved as much as we easily could of choice Filings of fine Steel, and
having filtered the Green Solution, we very slowly Evaporated it in a Glass
Vessel, and took such care not to spoil the matter, that we had store of fine
Green Crystals that were not very small, and looked prettily; most of these we
put into a strong, but small Retort, and by degrees of Fire, and a strong one,
for the last hours; we obtained diverse Ounces of a Liquor that came over in
white Fumes, like Mists driven by the Wind, and afforded a Sulphurous Smell:
This Liquor we rectified, and had a Yellow Ponderous Spirit, that seemed to be
much more of Kin to the Spirit of Sea Salt, than to the common Oil of Vitriol;
especially since being mixed with Aquafortis, it would, like Spirit of Salt,
make it a Menstruum, that would even in the Cold Dissolve Gold in thin Leaves.
Which last words I add, because having put into a little of it already made
Yellow, by having dissolved Leaf-Gold a very thin Plate, but a pretty deal
thicker than a Leaf of Hammered Gold, the Menstruum made it look all over
white, almost like Silver, which seemed to argue, that this Vitriolate
Menstruum differed from common Spirit of Salt. And however, it may be worth
taking notice of by the By, that not only Vitriols Blue, as is well known to
Chemists, but that Vitriols of one of those Colors, and whereof the same
Metal is the basest, may differ much from one another on the score of the
various, and to us perhaps, unknown Menstruum that dissolves the Metal, since
our Green Vitriol yields Liquors very different from common English Vitriol of
Mars made with Oil of Vitriol, tho all the three be green. Which may give us
some Reason of the uncertainty, whereof Vitriol is mainly employed; and it is
perhaps worth remarking, that tho we did not find the Vitriol of Mars made the
common way, nor even Roman Vitriol to dissolve in a Vinous Spirit totally
Inflammable, yet it would easily enough Dissolve our Saline Vitriol, (if I may
so call it) which Solution to hint that in Transitu, you may perhaps see cause
to employ as a Medicine in several Cases, and particularly as a Styptic in
Wounds, since its Taste is very Astringent, its Parts very Subti, and made fit
by the Vinous Spirit, to prevent Corruption; especially in those Clymates where
Surgeons complain. That they can scarce prevent the Breeding of Worms in
Wounds, unless they do betimes Dress them with Spir. of Wine or Brandy.

But that which we chiefly aimed at in this Operation, was the dry part, of
what was Elevated by the force of the Fire. This we found to be
distinguishable, partly by its Situation, and partly by more durable Accidents,
into three kinds of Substance, whereof one was almost like a Powder, which
after the Contact of Air, did in a while come over to be of a Yellow Color,
almost like Sulphur, but it was not indeed truly Combustible Sulphur. The other
Substance consisted of larger parts, and was of a deep Color, between Read and
Brown. But the third, which seemed the most Copious of all, was made up of fine
parts, larger than the former, of a deep Reddish Color, and adorned with a
fine Gloss, like that of Scales of Fishes, that looked very prettily.

The Caput Mortuum was found to be of a Texture that would have surpised most
Men; for a great part of it appeared to be turned into a Talky Substance,
consisting of pretty broad and very thin Plates, smooth and glossy, that lay
upon, and against one another, like those that make up Muscovia-Glass, when the
pieces are more thick than large.

CHAP. V.
CONTAINING Experiments and Observations Solitary; in two Pentades.

The I. PENTADE.
EXPERIMENT I. A notable Comminution of Gold into Powder that will sink in
Water.
TO manifest into how great a multitude of Corpuscles, gross and heavy enough
to sink to the bottom even of a Saline Liquor in the form of Precipitate or
Powder; I thought of this Expedient. We took a Grain of Refined Gold, and
having dissolved it without heat in a competent quantity of good Aqua Regia, we
put to it by guess about two Spoonfuls of Water, and then by a Thread we hung
in the mixture a little bit of clean metaline Body, and kept it suspended in
the Liquor for many hours (or some few days.) By this means we obtained, as we
expected, a Precipitate of a fine and deep Color, so copious and so light,
that it was a long time before it would all settle at the bottom. Then looking
upon the remaining part of the Suspended Metaline Body, we found it so very
little less than when the whole was first put in, that the diminution of it was
not judged to amount to near a Grain. By which Experiment it appeared, that one
Grain of Gold, not swiming in parts separately invisible, as it is in Solutions,
but reduced to a Manifest Powder, seemed to make a considerable quantity of
Precipitate at the bottom of the Cylindrical Vial, whose Diameter was about an
Inch, that we kept it in. And this Glass being a little shaken, the Precipitate
would rise like a Mud, and be so thoroughly dispersed in the form of a Powder,
through the whole Body of the Liquor, and a greater quantity of Water added to
it, that at first it would seem Opacous, and after some time, it would appear
like a high and lovely Purple Solution. So that one Grain of Gold (for the
Color argued that there was some of that Metal, in every Corpuscle of the
Precipitate) was reduced into as many Grains of Powder, as sufficed to lodge
themselves in all the Particles of space great enough to be visible, that were
contained in a Mass of sixteen Drachms (is Two Ounces) of Water.

EXPERIMENT II. A Proof of the Metalline Nature of Granates.
I have else where endeavored to show that diverse, if not most, of the real
Virtues of some Gems, (for there are too many Fabulous ones ascribed to them)
may in probability proceed from the Particles of Mineral Juices, that were
admitted whilst the matter was yet in Solutis Principiis, or at least soft, and
afterward Coagulated with the Lapidescent part of the Stone. In confirmation
of this Conjecture, I shall now observe, that having, upon some grounds not
necessary to be here mentioned, suspected that Granates contain (some of them)
besides some other Metalline Substances, diverse Corpuscles of a Martial Nature;
I made choice of some small ones, which by their deep and almost dark Color,
(to name no other Signs) I guessed to contain somewhat of Iron or Steel; and
applied to them a pretty vigorous Loadstone, which as I expected, readily took
them up and to which they constantly stuck afterward, till I forcibly separated
them from it. But tho I tried this upon more parcels of Garnets than one or
two, yet I found that there was not many in one heap, that would easily adhere
to the Magnet.

EXPERIMENT III.
A Gentleman Eminent for his Travels into Eastern Parts, and for his Skill in
Jewels, told me, in Confirmation of my Opinion about the Origin of Gems from
Fluid Materials; that he had seen a white Saphir that was a Table-Stone, as
they speak, i. e. flat and not cut in Facets, about the middle of which there
was a Cavity about the bigness of a large Pins head, or small Fitch, that
contained in it a drop of Liquor that it seems could not be Coagulated into
Stone with the rest of the Matter: Which Liquor, he said, was very easily
discernible by its shifting places in the Cavity, when the Stone was put into
differing Postures. And when I ask't, whether there was no Flaw or Commissure
in the Stone, at which the Liquor may be suspected to have got in; he assured
me that there was none, but that the Cavity was every way encompast by the
solid Stone, and was about the thickness of three Barley Corns beneath the upper
Superficies of it.

SCHOLIUM.
It may be here fit to give notice once for all, about the Experiments that are
in the following Collections, styled Solitary, that tho most of them are
delivered nakedly as matters of Fact, without any such Introduction or
subsequent Reflection, as may be met with sometimes expressly, and oftener by
Intimation in diverse others; yet that it should not be thence inferred, either
those that are simply recited, were lighted on by chance, or made at all
adventures, or that they are of no use, because for the most part there is not
any expressly ascribed to them: For as they were not written without a
particular occasion and scope too, so that many of them may be applied to good
purposes, will, perchance, be found here and there in our other Writings. And
to make it probable in general, that most of them may not be useless, it may
perhaps suffice that we refer to what we have elsewhere purposely Discoursed,
about the uses of Experiments (even) to Speculative Philosophy.

This may pass for a general Scholium applicable to most of those Experiments
that are not attended with any particular Scholium, nor any thing in the
Experiment or Observation its self, that may easily by an attentive Reader, be
made to supply the place of a Scholium. Which last clause I add, to intimate,
that besides my have, another reason why so many Scholium's, as may be expected
in the following Collection, will not be found in it, was, because the proemial
part did, on several occasions, make it needless to subjoyn Annotations.

EXPERIMENT IV.
An Ingenious and Credible Person (Mr. W.) assured me, that in one of the fine
Gardens near Genoa, that he delighted to Visit, there was Pond, which being
made on the side of a Hill, the Wall next the bottom of the Hill was so high,
that Men could not look over it into the Pond, nor be at all seen over it by
the Fishes in the Pond; and yet he has several times observed these Fishes to
be called together by the Gardener, as he pleased, with a certain noise that
the Gardener made to assemble them, tho neither he nor any man else could be
discovered by the Fishes that readily obeyed their Summons.

This Relation may be of use in the Controversy, Whether Fishes hear under
Water.

EXPERIMENT V.
Upon occasion of what is elsewhere said of the Production of vivid apparent
Colors by the breaking of the beams of Light, on Corpuscles extraordinary
Minute, tho solid; I took a Globe of rock Crystal, which being for a certain
use saw'n in two by a Cutter of Gems, and having looked upon the flat Surfaces,
observed to the Sun Beams, the little Particles that (notwithstanding their
seeming smoothness in the Shade) asperated their Surfaces, did so retract and
reflect the Light, as to make them exceed the vivid Colors of the Rainbow,
(but in a somewhat interrupted manner) sometimes on one part of the Surface,
sometimes on another, as the Surface happened to be Situated in reference to
the Sun.

And having caused a choice and fine Grained Touchstone to be likewise saw'n
asunder by the same Artificer, to make two of it; I observed upon the new
Surfaces made by this Action, that to the Touch smooth and polished, such vivid
Colors as I lately mentioned to be these Surface, were put in to various
Position in reference to the Sun and the Eye; so that notwithstanding the great
transparency of the Crystal and great Opacity of the Touchstone, their
superficial Corpuscles were found fit to exhibit (in due positions) the vivid
Colors we admire in the Rainbow.

The II PENTADE.
EXPERIMENT I.
Having for less than two hours borrowed an Oculus Munai, whose Color 10 Cent.
12.
was White, whose Figure was Round and plain Unequal, and whose Diameter, I
judged, to be about a third part of an Inch (rather less than more) I put it
into a very shallow Glass Vessel almost filled with fair Water, and observed
within one Minute, or thereabout, with the Minute-Watch, that one part of the
Edg began to appear somewhat Diaphanous, and the whole Stone did by degrees
lose its Whiteness, appearing of a dark Brownish Color: When this Change had
reached the whole Surface, I looked upon my Watch, and found that the Stone had
lain nine Minutes in the Water; out of which having taken it, I perceived the
Body was grown Semi-Diaphanous, and the parts near the Edg being less thick,
appeared to have lost much more of their former Opacity than the innermost part
had. Then putting the Stone presently into the Water again, I let it lie there
so long till the Time efflux'd, since the beginning of the Experiment amounted
just to half an Hour. Then taking it out, and wiping it, I found it was grown
much more clear, since being held against the light, it looked almost like
Yellow Amber, but not quito so Diaphanous. Then I exposed it to the Contact of
the Air, in the Scales of a very good Balance (where it weighed four Grains
and about a quarter) and left it for a quarter, or near half an Hour, in that
Balance to try if by the recess of any imbibed aqueous Moisture it would
become lighter; but want of Time hindered me from completing the Experiment,
but did not deter me from making another Observation, which was, that within
about a single Minute of an Hour, a portion of the Stone near one part of the
Edg, was manifestly grown Opacous and Whitish, and within not many Minutes
after, the whole Stone began to appear in a changing condition, but did not
change in every part at once, nor did the alteration make an uniform
Progression; but here one might successively discover diverse white Arches, or
as 'twere Zones, that were parallel enough to one another, and being quite
Opacous, intercepted between them other little Zones, which being yet
Semi-opacous, appeared of a Brown Color, and concurred to make the Stone look
like a very pretty Agate, wherein the Whiteness made a continued Progress as
long as the Time permitted me to observe it: And the Possessor assured me, that
within an Hour or or two it would be all of a Cream White (as he expressed
himself) which I thought the more Credible, because I saw one part of it, that
was pretty broad, to have obtained already a Whiteness, little, if at all
inferior to that of Ivory.

EXPERIMENT II. Remarkable Observations about Hurricanes.
The late Governor of the Bermudas Islands, (very much subject to Hurricanes)
in Answer to my Questions, about the Presages of those hideous Tempests,
informed me, that these were of the principal Forerunners. First, That the Sea
would manifestly swell at some distance from the Shores, insomuch, that the
Fishermen would diverse times make to Land, and warn the Inhabitants, upon the
confidence of that Presage, to provide against that dismal Storm, tho the Sea
were then smooth enough. Secondly, That the Sea would beat with great Noise
against the Shore, especially the Rocks, tho there appeared no manifest Cause,
as upon the account of the Wind or Tide, why it should do so. And this Sign
would sometimes not appear till many Hours, or perhaps a full Day after that
forementioned. And sometimes 'twas observed, that the Sea would now and then
suddenly Invade the Shore, and gain further upon it than could be accounted for
by the Wind or Tide, and then quickly Ebb away beyond the usual Low water-Mark,
and after return again with more fury, and fall back further than before.
Thirdly, That sometimes there would be perceived an ungrateful Smell in the
Air, before the Hurricane began to Blow. And Fourthly and Lastly, My Relator
affirmed to me, both he and others had seen many Bundles, as it were of long
Streaks of differing Colors, some Whitish, some Reddish, and some Bluish, or
Greenish, which by reason of their Figure are usually called in those parts
Horse-Tails: And these were seen in parts of the Sky, where the Air was
Troubled indeed, but yet no formed Clouds did appear to the Eye.

EXPERIMENT. III. A Monstrous Pearl.
Yesterday a curious Person came to show me a Monstrous Pearl, if I may December.
23.
so call it, because it was very irregularly shaped, and of an Enormous
bigness. For tho it were so artificially set in Gold, that by the help of a
little of that Metal fitly placed here and there, the whole Jewel represented a
Lion; yet I made shift to Measure it exactly enough with a Pair of Calapar
Compasses, (as they call those whose Legs are made Arch-wise) and found the
Length to be just an Inch and an Half, and the greatest Breadth (where yet it
was of a proportionate Thickness) to be 2/10 or 4/5 of an Inch. The Color was
Orient enough, all but one dark Spot, which by its size, figure, and situation,
I guessed to be the remains of that Part (whether like an Umbilical Cord or no)
whereby it was fastened to the Naker or Shell of the Fish that produced it.

EXPERIMENT IV. An odd Observation about the Influence of the Moon.
I know an Intelligent Person, that having by a very dangerous Fall, so broken
his Head, that diverse large Pieces of his Skull were taken out, as I could
easily perceive by the wide Scars that still remain; Answered me, that for
diverse Months that he lay under the Surgeons Hands, he constantly observed,
that about Full Moon, there would be extraordinary Prickings and Shootings in
the wounded Parts of his Head, as if the Meninges were stretched or pressed
against the rugged Parts of the broken Skull, and this with so much pain, as
would for 2 or 3 Nights hinder his Sleep, of which at all other times of the
Moon he used to enjoy a competency. And this Gentleman added, that the
Surgeons, (for he had 3 or 4 at once) observed from Month to Month, as well
as he, the Operation of the Full Moon upon his Head, informing him, that they
then manifestly perceived an Expansion or Intumescence of his Brain; which
appeared not at all at the New Moon; (for that I particularly asked) nor was he
then obnoxious to the forementioned Pricking pains.

EXPERIMENT. V. An uncommon Experiment about Heat and Cold.
To confirm what we have elsewhere delivered about the Mechanical Nov. 9. 89.
Origin of Heat and Cold, we devised the following Experiment: We took a small
and hermetically sealed Thermoscope, whose Stem was divided into parts, equal
enough as to Sense, by little Specks of Amel, that sharp Liquors might not eat
off or spoil the Marks. The Ball of this Instrument we put into a slender
Cylindrical Vessel, (called in the Shops a Mustard Glass) and more than covered
it with strong Oil of vitriol, and left it there awhile to be reduced to the
temper of the surrounding* Liquor. Then we cast upon it by degrees, grossly
Powdered, * which presently was wrought on furiously by the Menstruum; and by
this Conflict, was produced a seeming Effervescence, with great noise and store
of Froth, which more than once was ready to run out of the Vessel. But for all
this seeming Ebullition, the mixture instead of growing Hot, did really grow
Colder and Colder, as appeared not only when the Vessel was touched by the
Fingers on the outside, but by a surer mark, which was the descent of the
colored Spirit of Wine. How much farther it would have descended, (for the
Liquor was not near satiated with the {salt}) we were hindered from Discovering
by an unlucky Accident, that broke the Thermometer, and put an end to that
First part of our Experiment. But this was no hindrance to the Second part,
which for its Novelty we mainly designed. For when we poured this actually and
considerably Cold Mixture into three or four times its weight (by guess) of as
much common Water, that was likewise actually Cold; this Second Mixture did, as
I expected, immediately grow so Hot, that I did not like to keep my Finger for
a Minute or two upon the outside of the Glass.

An Advertisement about the Nature and Scope of the Chemical Experiments
contained in the following Pentades.
CHAP. V.
Containing two Pentades of Chemical Experiments.

BEfore you enter upon the perusal of the following Pentades, I think my self
obliged to give you notice, that you will be deceived if you expect to find
them consist, either Solely or Mainly, of Spagirical Secrets, or difficult and
elaborate Processes. I do not indeed deny, that I am not altogether unfurnished
with such as in probability, most Readers would refer to Experiments of that
Nature, and you may find diverse of them scattered upon fit occasions, in
several of my Writings: But in the present Tract, tho I have not forborne to
mention here and there as many Particulars of that sort, as I thought necessary
to excite and maintain the Curiosity, and sustain the Attention of a Reader
that Relishes nothing that is not Seasoned with somewhat that is not common;
yet in this Treatise, wherein I aimed not to appear a Chemist, so much as to
make my Reader a Naturalist; it was more suitable to my design, tho not more
conducive to my Credit, that the following Pentades (which God permitting, may
in tract of time, much increase in Number) should mainly consist of
Experiments, rather useful than Specious; my design being to contribute some
sound Materials toward the Erection of a solid and useful Natural Philosophy.
In making choice of which Materials, I usually prefer those Experiments that
afford the more Light to those that appear with the most Luster, and those that
are proper to increase the Readers skill, to those that make an Ostentation of
the Writers. On which ground it is, that, whatever I may do, where I purposely
Recommend Chemistry, I make this small Collection, consist mainly of simple and
not Intricate or elaborate Experiments. Those that are Simple being not only
more easy to be Tried, and if need be, Reiterated without much trouble, or
danger of erring; but (which I more regard) more easy to be judged of, as to
their Causes, Phenomena and effects, and consequently more fit to ground
Notions and Reasonings upon: Diverse of which may probably in the applications
that sagacious Persons may make of them, prove to be of Practical as well as
Theorical use. Thus tho a Wedg of Gold and a Diamond be, one more Rich and
finely Colored, and the other more precious and sparkling than a piece of
Steel and a Hint; yet on many occasions the two latter are far more serviceable
to Mankind than the former: Since not those that are more prized for
themselves, but those that in comparison seem despicable, afford Sparks, which
do not only give Light, but are fit to kindle Fires, which both afford
incomparably more Light, and in the application are of excellent and necessary
use in the Kitchins of Families, the Forges of Smiths of all sorts, the
Furnaces of Myne-men, and the Laboratories of Chemists.

The I. PENTADE.
EXPERIMENT I. To Dissolve Crude Gold with dry Bodies.
Because the generality of Chemists make so great a matter of Aurum Potabile,
tho they cannot deny, but that by their Preparations it is not made
irreducible; and because also I am willing to grant, that even some
Preparations, that leave the Metal reducible, may yet be of considerable use in
Physic (the grounds of which Opinion I elsewhere declare, and shall not here
repeat) I will in this place set down a Process, which tho I do not overmuch
value, served me well enough on some occasions, to Vye with those that much
vaunted their particular ways (as they thought them) of making Aurum Potabile,
I told them, I could make one in an hour or two's time without a Furnace; and
that without any other Distilled Liquor whatsoever than common Spirit of of
Wine well Dephlegm'd.

This I did several times, after the following manner. I prepared a Saline
Mixture consisting of one part of Sal Almonia^, two parts of Roch Alum, and
four parts of pure Nitre. This being well pulverized and mingled, I rubbed
diligently in a Glass or Marble Mortar, with 15 or 16 parts in weight of the
whole Mixture of Leaves of Gold, such as Apothecaries and Book-binders use.
Then I put this into a small new Crucible, and putting a few, and but a few,
kindled Coals round about it, and at a little distance from it, to neal the
Vessel; I soon after approacht them, till the heat made the Matter melt, and so
with that gentle Fire, I kept it in fusion, till it visibly emitted no more
Fumes but grew dry again.

This sign appearing, I presently took it off from the Fire, and whiles it was
yet warm, dug it out, as clean as I could, and having seasonably pulverized it,
that it might not attract the Moisture of the Air; I put upon it some highly
rectified Spirit of Wine, which within an hour or less time, was enobled with a
rich Golden Color. And accordingly I found it to be a real Solution of Gold,
by diverse Trials that I purposely made, to evince it to be so.

Of this and some other less common Preparations of more may be met with
hereafter.

EXPERIMENT. II. Luna Cornea by Distillation.
There was taken III of well refined Silver, thinly Laminated, and six of
common Sublimate. This was put first into a Retort, and the Silver cut into
small pieces, was put in after, that the matter lying uppermost might be
Penetrated by the ascending Fumes: But the Fire having not been made strong
enough, the Sublimate was Elevated to the uppermost part of the Retort, and
left the Silver scarce at all changed in the bottom of the Glass. Wherefore we
put the same Sublimate and Metal into another Retort, and administering a
stronger Fire, that the Sublimate might be thoroughly melted before it could flee
away, we obtained no running Mercury at all, but the greatest part of the
Sublimate was Elevated in its usual form, leaving behind it the Silver in a
Lump, which stuck hard to the bottom of the Glass, and appeared much altered.
For besides that there was acquired I. in weight, many of the pieces of Metal
stuck together, and seemed at least half Melted, and were of a kind of Horny
and Semi-Diaphanous Substance, which would readily enough Melt almost like
Sealing-Wax, when I held it to the Flame of a Candle, at which yet I could not
perceive it manifestly to take Fire.

SCHOLIUM.
It Is here to be noted once for all, that in this and diverse other Chemical
Experiments, there is sometimes much more delivered than is necessary to make
good the Title, or the thing mainly intended. But 'twas thought fit, not to
Dismember or Mutilate the entire Memoir as 'twas registered, because that of
the other Particulars some may be, tho indirectly, referred to the principal
part, and others may be looked on as Phenomenon, which may be of use at least
to me, by keeping me from forgetting them, and probably tend to the main design
of all these Experiments, viz. to contribute to a Natural History, which may
respect Practice, as well as Theory.

EXPERIMENT. III. Mercury growing warm with Silver.
We took II of animated (or antimonial) Quicksilver, and put it into the palm
of ones Hand; we put to it by degrees a Dram and an Half of Powder of fine
Silver, made by Precipitation with Copper the ordinary way (but with more than
ordinary care). Whilst this Mixture was making with ones Finger, he that held
it in his hand, confessed he found it grow sensibly Warm; and I, whose Finger
was considerably Warm, could not with it perceive any coldness in the Amalgame.
This in a very short time became of a soft, and (as to sense) uniform
consistence, and so soft that it was like almost melted Butter, insomuch that
we added half a Dram more of the Calx of Silver, without rendering the Amalgame
at all too stif; and perhaps we might have added the other half Dram, without
overcharging that penetrant Mercury: in which case it had swallowed up full its
own weight of Silver; so different it was from common Mercury; and when we left
off, it had reduced into a very yiedling form, three quarters of its own weight
of solid Metal. This aaa we put into a small Vyal, and stopped the Glass with a
Cork, to observe whether the Amalgame would harden without intercourse with the
free Air. Next morning it appeared to be concreted in the Glass; and the next
morning after that, we broke the Glass to take out the Matter, which we found
considerably hard, but brittle enough.

EXPERIMENT. IV. The Durableness of the Faculty of a certain prepared Mercury
to grow Hot with Gold.
To convince those that Treat the Incalescense of Prepared Mercury and of Gold,
as a Chemical Chymera; I sent in a Concealed way to the Royal Society, some
Mercury laboriously Prepared in my Furnaces, whereof I. being put upon a due
proportion of a Calx of Gold made by the common way, (Quartation) they grew
presently and very sensibly hot in the Palm of ones Hand. I shall now add, that
to try whether this surprising Faculty of growing hot immediately upon Gold,
will continue any long time in the Mercury; I lately took some that I had (for
a certain purpose) kept Hermetically sealed in a Glass Egg for diverse Years,
(if I mistake not, Ten or Twelve at least) and having Reiterated the
forementioned Trial with it; first alone, and then in the presence of a
Cultivator of Chemistry; it presently grew hot with the in the palm of the
Hand. And having Distilled off the Mercury, and tried it again as well as some
that was Undistill'd, if I much misremember not, it did again heat with the
Gold.

EXPERIMENT. V. An uncommon way of operating upon.
When Chemists expose Antimony, for instance, and diverse other Consistent, but
not fixed Bodies, to the action of the Fire, they are wont to do it in Vessels,
either open, as when they make Calx, or Glass of Antimony, or at least in
Vessels that are not so close: But that there is Air included with the matter,
as when they Sublime it in Glasses, or in Earthen subliming Pots; and tho they
regard not this included Air, because usually there is not much of it in the
Vessel, yet it may have a not inconsiderable influence on the effects of the
Fires Operation, not only as it contributes to the ascension and sustentation
of dissipated parts of the Mineral, but as it affords these Corpuscles room to
fly to and fro in it, and thereby make Associations or Coalitions and
Concretions that otherwise would not be produced. Upon this account I guest
that it may be, on diverse occasions, a thing of use for Discoveries, and
perhaps too, for Practice, to employ a Method, that the Body exposed to the
action of the Fire, may be kept from the Contact of the Air, at least as to any
sensible portions of it, and being as it were included in Bodies almost
equivalent to Solids; and one may suppress the free emission and ascent of
Exhalations, and so to make an Operation, not only in Clauso, but as it were in
Solido, and reduce the parts of the Body Exposed, and perhaps the Igneous
Corpuscles to act reciprocally upon one another, without any notable
Dissipation, or Avolation of Parts.

To apply now what has been said, to Antimony; I shall briefly set down an
uncommon way that came into my mind of Operating upon it. We took well
powdered, and well dried (white) Chalk reduced likewise to Powder; with these
in a large Earthen Pot or Crucible, we made SSS. having a care to make the
lowermost and uppermost bed of Chalk, and the last thicker than any of the
rest, as also that none of the Antimo-nial Layers, were but of a moderate
thickness, that the Heat might penetrate them the better; then the Vessel,
being covered, was put among the kindled Coals of a good digestive Furnace,
(not because such a one was necessary, but because 'twas at hand) where 'twas
kept for a competent time, which according to the bigness of the Pot, and the
strength of the Fire, may be sometimes 20 or 24 Hours, sometimes a Day and a
Half, and sometimes two Days or better.

The II. PENTADE.
EXPERIMENT I. A very uncommon way of making a Cale of Gold.
It Is known that most Chemists, and many Physicians, have a Superlative Esteem
for the Medicinal Virtues of Gold, and the Preparations of it. And upon this
ground, diverse of them have long been, and still are Solicitous to make Calces
of Gold by differing ways; most of them laborious, and some of them scarce to
be safely wrought and used in Physic: Wherefore I shall, I presume, be easily
Pardoned, if I here set down a way that came into my mind, and that I have
sometimes used to make a preparation wherein Gold is reduced to very minute
Parts, without the help of Mercury, or of any Precipitation made by sharp
Salts, whether Acid or Lixivial.

We took then refined Gold, and dissolved it in clean and Spirituous Aqua
Regia, and instead of Precipitating the clear Solution with Oil of Tartar per
deliquium, as is usually done, or with Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, or other
Volatile Urinous Spirits, we first with a very modest Heat drew off the
Superfluous Liquor; whereby the Gold with the remaining part of the Menstruum,
was left in the appearance of a thick and Oleous Liquor. This done, we poured
upon it a treble weight of Vinous Spirit totally inflammable and in a short
time, we had, as we expected, a very subtle Powder, or high colored Calx of
Gold, that subsided at the bottom; the Menstruum being strangely dulcifi'd as
to Taste, and become fragrant in point of Smell When a very few days were past,
we decanted the Liquor, and put on it fresh ardent Spirit, and leaving them a
while together, there subsided the like well colored Calx more plentifully
than the first time.

I know not, to add that upon the by, whether it may, or may not be worth while
to try to Discover whether this Dulcifi'd A. R. Spirituosa being drawn off from
the subsiding Gold, may have acquired any Virtue from the opened Metal. Some
Trials seeming to argue that the openness of this Calx made it fit to be easily
wrought upon by a Menstruum that would not touch Water-Gold, as they call the
common Calx made by quartation, nor yet Leaf-Gold, such as the Apothecaries
Employ; but however the Menstruum has acquired such qualities as make it seem
likely to prove an useful Medicine, which yet I refer to Trial.

By the way we pitched upon to make this Powder of Gold, it seemed probable,
that it would not (at least) be less subtle, and yet would be more mild, than
common Preparations; and nevertheless we thought it might, perhaps, make it yet
more secure, if we should, as we did, put upon it a totally Ardent Vinous
Spirit, and burn it off once, twice, or thrice, to carry off with it any little
Corosive or Saline Particles* that may have still adhered to the Metalline ones.

N. B. The Spirituous Aqua Regia, mentioned in the Process, is so called by me,
partly to distinguish it from the common Aqua Regia, and partly because it is
indeed of a more Spirituous Nature than the common, being composed without any
gross Salt; Such as * but only of Spirits. This Menstruum I made for some
particular uses: And tho it works more slowly than the common Chrysulca, yet I
often prefer it to this, as that which I can employ to some uncommon purposes,
and as it may probably be a more innocent Menstruum in making Preparations of
Sol, designed for Medicinal uses. I make it very easily, by mixing one part of
good Spirit of Salt, with two parts of strong Spirit of Niter, or (when it is
not to be used for Medicines) of common, but clean Aqua Fortis.

SCHOLIUM.
The above recited Trial was made as it is delivered; but some Circumstances
that I took notice of, and particularly some Grains of Powder that, tho mingled
with the rest, were shining, as if they had been extremely Minute, and bright
Filings of Gold. These Circumstances, I say, made me Suspect that the Success
might much depend upon particular and nice Circumstances that may need more
exact Trial, than I had then occasion to make; and therefore it may be fit that
the Experiment be heedfully repeated. It may also be tried whether the
employing common A. R. instead of the Spirituous, will much vary the Experiment.

EXPERIMENT II.
To try how much Volatile Salt an assigned quantity of Water would Dissolve, we
took III of Distilled Water, and put into it by degrees, some dry Salt of Salt
Ammoniac (that was very White, and compact enough) keeping the Liquor in
digestion for a pretty while, that it might have time to Dissolve as much as it
could. When we found it would Dissolve no more in a moderate Heat, we took it
off, and found that after standing some Hours in the Cold there fell to the
lower part of the Glass, and settled there, a pretty quantity of Salt, which we
guessed to be about II, which being deducted from II, that had been in all put
in, there remained I and VI in the Liquor, which by this account had Dissolved
at least half its weight of Salt.

SCHOLIUM.
I desire it may not be thought strange, if among our Chemical Experiments,
some few shall be here and there met with, that are much less Elaborate or
Promising than others that I could easily have inserted in their Rooms; for I
did it on set purpose, partly because oftentimes (as was intimated at the
beginning of the Chapter) some more simple or seemingly less valuable
Experiments may be fitter materials, than more curious ones, for the Natural
History we would promote; and partly to give an Example, if mine can signify
any thing, of not disdaining to Register some things that seem mean; if by the
light they afford, or the uses they may be applied to, they compensate the want
of Luster, and of immediate Utility. And the substance of this Scholium I
desire may be mentally transferred, as occasion shall require, to those
following Chapters that Treat of Chemical Experiments.

EXPERIMENT. III.
Perhaps some Chemists will think that the following Memoir may give hints that
may be of use on several occasions, both for other purposes, and for theirs,
that would draw Tinctures from several Bodies, that will not afford them in
simple Spirit of Wine, tho well rectified.

The simple Spirit of good French Verdigreas, being once or twice abstracted
from as much Salt of Tartar as it would dissolve in the Cold; left the Salt
easily susible, and dissoluble in highly rectified Spirit of Wine.

EXPERIMENT IV.
I have not been unacquainted with some Curious and Elaborate Preparations of
that noble Flower the Rose; and experience has convinced me that it is possible,
whatever most Chemists think of it, to obtain from Roses a true essential Oil,
that mixes not with Water, and is exceeding fragrant: But there are several
that are so far from believing that an Essential Oil may be obtained from
Roses, without being in the form of a Butter, but in a liquid one like Oil of
Cloves, or Wormwood, that they doubt whether a true Spiritus Ardens can be
obtained from them, without addition of Wine, or some such inflamable Liquor. I
shall here transcribe the following Note, as containing a more simple and easy
Preparation (than any of those before mentioned) of the Ardent Spirit of those
Flowers, and therefore more suitable to the design of the whole Chapter.

To make an inflammable Spirit of Roses.
Two Bushels of Damask Roses (together with a good number of red Rose-buds)
being beaten, and put into a Vessel with Water amounting to about 4 Gallons,
were mingled with about a quart of Ale-Yest, and kept in Fermentation for about
5 or 6 days (the weather being cold for the Season) and then being Distilled
per vesicam, afforded us a Spiritus Ardens.

EXPERIMENT. V. An Experiment about the Chemical Analysis of Pearls.
We took II of Seed Pearl, that were carefully bought for Oriental, and without
breaking them, put them into a Retort, and Distilled them in a Sand-Furnace by
degrees of Fire, giving a strong one at the last. By this means we had a little
Black Oil Swimming upon the Spirit, which was also dark and muddy, as if
incorporated with some more Oil. The weight of both these Liquors was 23
Grains, besides which there stuck to almost all the upper part of the Retort, a
thin film of Oil, which together with a streak of the like reaching to the
bottom of the Receiver, we estimated at 3 Grains more, and so reckoned 26
Grains for the weight of the whole ascended matter. The Caput Mortuum amounted
to full the remainng weight of two Ounces. The Empyreumatical Liquors that came
over, smelled much like those of Hartshorn, and the Spirit was found to
belong, as we expected, to the Tribe of Urinous ones, or, as many now call them
Volatile Alcaly's For it readily hissed and produced Bubbles, with good Spirit
of Salt turned Syrup of Violets Green, and being dropped into Solution of
Sublimate, turned that White; to omit another way or two, by which I examined
it. The Oil that stuck to the Retort, and which was faetid, like that of
Hartshorn, did easily dissolve in dephlegm'd Spirit of Wine, and afforded a
reddish Brown Solution. The Caput Mortuum was very black, and some Grains of it
were found readily enough dissoluble in Spirit of Vinegar. Being calcined in a
well covered Crucible, with a strong Fire (for a moderate one will not do it,
unless it be long) we reduced them to be purely White, and to a weight less by
some Grains than an Ounce, and III and we found, as we expected, that being
Pulverized, this Calx tasted hot and bitterish upon the Tongue, like good Calx
Vive, and was not only of an Alcalisate, but a Lixival Nature: For besides that
it presently turned Syrup of Violets Green, it quickly afforded an Orange
Colored Precipitate, with Solution of Sublimate.

Strange Reports, In II. PARTS.

Addressed to a Vertuoso, Friend to the Author.

Advertisement.
I Presume, Sir, you may yet remember, what I Wrote about the Nature and Scope
of my Collection of Strange Reports, in an Essay which take's its Title from
them; and which I was encouraged to make by the Example and Authority of
Aristotle. And therefore This Famous Philosopher in his little Tract, whose
Title some render de Mirandis Auditionibus, scrupled not to comprise without
Method, diverse Reports, uncertain or fabulous, nor to insert several that were
not so cautiously admitted as those recited in the following. Collection.
I shall desire, that to save your Trouble and my own, That Paper may serve for
a Preface to that which follows. About which, supposing this Request to be
Granted, I shall need to give you at present but this short Advertisement; That
for distinction's sake, I thought fit to divide the ensuing Particulars into
two Parts, because they are indeed of two sorts: One relating to things purely
Natural, and the other consisting of Phenomenon, that are, of seem to be, of a
Supernatural Kind or Order.

The first Set of Particulars belonging to each of the two forementioned Parts,
has prefixed to it the Title of the First Section, tho it be not at this time
attended by a Second; because it is designed, that God permitting, it shall be
so hereafter, when I shall get time to pick up out of my Adversaria, and other
Memoirs, Particulars fit to have placed in the List of Strange Reports.

I must likewise give you notice, That you are not to expect the II. Part at
this time: Discretion forbidding me to let that appear, till I see what
Entertainment will be given to the I. Part, that consists but of Relations far
less strange than those that make up the other Part.

Strange Reports. PART. I.
SECTION. I.
RElating to a judicious Virtuoso, that a Physician of Bruxels a while since
affirmed to me, That he himself had prepared 3 or 4 resuscitable Plants, one of
which he had presented to the Marquess of Castle Rodrigo, now Governor of the
Spanish Netherlands, where this Virtuoso had not long since been. Relating
this, I say, to this Gentleman, and Enquiring of him, whether he had seen this
resuscitable Plant; he answered me, That he had never seen nor heard of it; but
told me on this occasion, That coming to Deal with an Apothecary of Namier, if
I misremember not the Name, much esteemed for his extraordinary Skill in
Chemistry about some choice Preparations, wherewith this Man's Shop was
furnished the Apothecary told the Virtuoso, that he had really prepared
resufcitable Plants, a different way from that which others pretended to, and
that he could prepare a great variety of them. And when having inquired of the
Virtuoso, whether he himself had seen any of these prepared Plants, he assured
me, that he had seen not only some, but many; I then upon farther enquiry how
they appeared, learned that the Chemist had diverse of them in distinct
Glass-Bottles; that the Apparitions that were exhibited, showed not the
peculiar Colors, but only the shape of the Plant; but this so genuinely that
he could perfectly distinguish and easily know it to be such or such a Plant
instancing particularly in Carduus Benedictus, and Camomile.

And the difference betwixt this way of Exhibiting Plants, and that which is
mentioned by Quercetan, and pretended to by others; I found by this Gentleman's
Answers, to consist chiefly in these two things: The first, that the
Apothecary's Plants did not as the others seem to grow up into the Air included
in a Sealed Vial, but were seen as growing in a clear Liquor, wherewith the
Bottle that contained it was almost filled; and the next, That whereas to make
the Apparition, mentioned by Quercetan, and others, the Application of an
actual Heat (as that of a Lamp, or the Sunbeams, or the like) is affirmed to
be requisite, upon the absence of which the Fantastical Plant relapses into
its Ashes. In the formation of the Apothecaries Vegetables, he does not employ
any actual Heat, but (which may seem more strange) only the shaking, of the
Bottle, for upon that Agitation the prepared Ashes or Powder being this'd from
the bottom, and dispersed quite through the Liquor, when the Glass is set by in
a quiet place, the scattered Particles by degrees so convene, as to compose a
Model of the Plant they once belonged to. And Heat not being requisite to their
formation, these Plants do not quickly, as the Pelonian Physician's Fantastic
Vegetable, Recorded by Quercetan, fall back into a Powder; but if let alone,
continued a great while, until the Preparer think fit by a gentle Agitation of
the Bottle, to dissolve the loose Contexture of it.

RELATION II.
I met the other day with a very intelligent Person, well versed in Chemistry,
not credulous, and in a word very well worthy of Credit, who assured me, that
he had himself seen a few years ago at Mentz, in the Hands of one Monsieur P --
r, a Gentleman of Switzer-land, and a Virtuoso, a piece of Glass about the
bigness of a Shilling, or somewhat bigger; which was Red and pretty transparent
like Glass of Antimony made per se, and which this Monsieur P. affirmed to the
Relator, that he Hammered before the present Elector of Heidelberg (to whom I
told him, I had the Honor to be known, and) by whom the Relator was about that
time employed. And this Monsieur P. being his intimate Acquaintance, and
perceiving that he was, (as he well might be) indisposed to believe so strange
a thing, after he had confessed the Glass to have been given him by an excellent
Chemist in his Country (Switzerland); this Gentleman, I say, at the Relators
earnest Request, gave him leave for his satisfaction, to lay the piece of Glass
upon an Anvil, and to strike seven or eight strokes with a Hammer upon it; by
which means he found, that tho it was nor malleable (at least in the state it
then was) like neal'd Silver, since it began to crack at the edges like Silver
that is over-hammer'd; yet it did really stretch under the Hammer, growing more
thin on the beaten part, and having visible Marks or Impressions made on it by
the edg of the Hammer.

RELATION III.
A Pious and Learned Schoolmaster, that ventured to stay in London in the
great Plague 1665, and was much Employed, as some Friends of mine that knew
him, and commended him, assured me, to Visit the Sick, and distribute Alms and
Relief to them, went indiscriminately to all sorts of Infected, and even Dying
Persons, to the number, as he told me, of nine Hundred, or a Thousand; and
being asked by me about the Infection of other things than Walls, he told me,
That being once called to Administer some Ghostly comfort to a poor Woman that
had Buried some Children of the Plague, he found the Room so little, that it
scarce held any more than the Bed whereon she lay Sick, and an open Coffin
wherein he saw her Husband lie Dead of the same Disease, whom the Wife soon
after followed. In this little close Room they affirmed to him, that the
Contagious Steams had produced Spots on the very Wall; and when I asked,
whether he himself had seen them, he answered, That he had not; but yet was
inclined to believe the thing to be true, not only upon the score of the
Relators, but because he had observed the like in his own Study, which being
divided only by a Wall from some Rooms of a House, which the Owner had turned
into a kind of a Pesthouse, and in which, Numbers had Dyed in a short time; he
took notice that the white Wall of his Study was (since the Sickness raged,
without any other cause that he could imagine) Blemished in diverse places with
Spots, like those of Infected Persons; when (to add that upon the by) I
inquired what Antidote he used; he replied, That next the Protection of God,
which so many sad Objects made him the more fervently Implore, and a constant
fearlesness, the only Preservative he used, besides good Diet, were half a
Spoonful, or a Spoonful of Brandy five or Six times a day, especially when he
went into Infected places, and the bigness of a small Nut or less, of a Root of
Spanish Angelica, of which he held in his Mouth the quantity of a Pepper-corn,
or somewhat less, as often as he thought there was need.

RELATION IV.
An ingenious Person, January, 25.
and very worthy of Credit, informed me the other day, in answer to some
questions that I proposed to him, That he was Employed some years ago by a
German Physician (whose Name he told me) to Distill a certain Mineral not
unknown to me, which he performed in a naked Fire, with so good success, that
he had from about half a Pound of the Mineral, near III of the Liquor; this he
included in a Glass with a Bubble, and a slender neck like one of my
Weather-Glasses; but tho the Liquor at first reached not above the Bubble, but
only filled it to the bottom of the Pipe; yet as the Moon increased, this
Liquor, as the Doctor expected, by degrees expanded it self in the Glass, so
that about the Full- Moon, it reached about an Inch into the Pipe, and upon the
Decrease of the Moon, it subsided by degrees to the bottom of the Pipe. And
when I asked, whether the Vessel were carefully stopped, he answered, That it was
not only so, but Hermetically Sealed like one of my Thermometers with Spirit of
Wine, which he had seen. This the Relator averred to me upon his own
Observation, and being desired, he readily gave me a description of the
Mineral, and a direction where to procure it, (which I am now endeavoring to
do) adding that the same Doctor made the like Trial with another Mineral, akin
to this, with which my having heard that such an Experiment had been done, gave
me occasion to propose him the question.

RELATION V.
An inquisitive Traveller that not long since waited on a German Prince
addicted to Chemistry, and was employed by him in his private Laboratory; being
asked by me some questions about Ore of Bismute or Tin-glass, whereof there is
said to be a Mine in that Prince's Territories, and in particular, whether he
had observed any thing of the varying bulk of a strange Liquor obtainable from
it: He answered me to this effect, That he had had occasion to make many Trials
upon this Mineral, and that particularly by his Prince's command, he had
Distilled a considerable quantity of a certain sort of it (because it yields
but very little Spirit) and that he thereby obtained a Liquor, which being by
Rectification freed from its superfluous Phlegm, amounted to about half a Pint.
This Liquor was put into a Vial, which it almost half filled. This Vial being
exactly stopped, was set aside in a quiet place, where, (as the Prince expected)
as the Light of the Moon increased, from the New- Moon toward the Full; so
this Liquor gradually swelled, and that not in a hardly perceptible degree, but
very manifestly and confiderably; so that when the Moon was Full, the Liquor
reached almost to the top of the Glass, and during her Wane, as the Light
decreased, so did the bulk of the Liquor, which was always least at the New-
Moon. I asked him if any Trial had been made, whether the Weight of this Spirit
varied with the Bulk, and he frankly confessed to me, That it had not come into
his Mind; but for what is above Related of the Increment and Decrement as to
quantity affirmed to me, that he himself, as well as his Prince had several
times Observed it; and he also readily told me the way he used in making the
Distillation, which he said, exacted an intense degree of Fire.

RELATION VI.
An inquisitive Person, that having gone through his Studies in the University,
Traveled through diverse Countries to make himself the more fit for the
Profession of Physic, answered me, That having Resided for some time in
Prussia, he had more than once or twice (and that in differing places)
observed, as others in his Company also did, That the Fishermen in breaking
the Ice of long Frozen places, and taking out thence confiderable Masses of
Ice, did several times find in them Swallows, sometimes numerous enough, that
were so enclosed in the Ice, that unless by breaking or thawing it, they could
not be gotten out of it. And he further answered me, That when these Lumps or
Masses of Ice came to be thawed in their German Stoves, the Swallows, that lay
as Dead before, would Revive, and perhaps fly about the Room; but did not long
survive their Recovery out of their Insensible state; some Dying again in few
hours, others the next day, or perhaps the third; but sew or none, that he
observed, Living beyond the fourth or the fifth; which immature Death, my
Relator judged to be caused by their having no Appetite to Eat, which
Inappetency made them Dye Starved. But as the conjecture may be true as to
those that Lived for some days, so it seems not like that those that Perished
in few Hours, Dyed merely of Hunger; and as for them that were Starved to
Death, I should suspect that they were Starved, not so much for want of
Appetite, as for want of such Animals as they used to Feed on, especially
Flies, which they could not get in Winter.

RELATION VII.
An Inquisitive Gentleman lately Returned from Jamaica, where he was Employed
by the Governor to make Discoveries of Natural Things, answered me (this
Morning) that he had seen in that Island great number of Trees that bear the
Silken Cotton, that he found many of them to surpass in bigness and height the
larger sort of our English Oaks; and that on a Mountain that many went to Visit
out of Curiosity, to view a stupendous Silk-Cotton Tree, he saw its Bulk, and
many affirmed to him, and it was the general Tradition of the Country, which he
saw no cause to disbelieve, that this prodigious Tree was in the Body no less
than 21 yards about, that is, more than 60 Foot in Compass.

The same curious Traveller told me he saw a Cannow made of the hollowed Trunk
of one of these Silk-Cotton Trees, which after all that had been taken off to
give it the shape of a Vessel fit for Service, was 30 Foot about, and of at
least a proportionable length.

RELATION VIII.
A Merchant Rich and Judicious, and more addicted to Letters than is usual to
Men of his Calling, being returned into England, from some of the remoter Parts
of the East Indies, to satisfy my Curiosity about a strange Tradition of
several Navigators about a more than one way extraordinary In-draught of the
Sea on the Coast of a great Island of the Southern Ocean, sent me the ensuing
Relation, which tho it contains something manifestly Fabulous, but easily
distinguishable from the rest, I give you in the Relators own Words, being
unwilling to alter any thing till I can see him again, and propose my Scruples
to him.

At Campar and Rakan, on the East Coast of Sumatra, is in the Rivers Mouth (to
a certain distance) at each New and Full-Moon, a Violent In-draught of the Sea,
(called Bunna) which approaches with an hideous noise, and Mountain-high, so
that whatsoever opposes it, Perishes. Its approach is in three Parts, the
first high, but not so terrible; the second is high, black and horrid; the
third is low, and of gentle motion; before its approach, it gives so fair
warning, that the People may Eat, and bath themselves, before they weigh
Anchor; but when they weigh, they must Row hard against it, and when its fury
is past, follow with it, till they return to their Anchor place. The true
reason whereof the Inhabitants cannot discover: But (as if Greece only were not
the Mother of Fabulous Traditions) these poor Natives Fabulize, That at Campar
(where is the greatest Bunna) in former Ages, there was a Princess, who, to
shun the Rape of an insolent Casfree Slave, ran into the Seas mouth; but the
Slave still pursuing her, and after him the Princess's little-Dog; all perished
and thus (by a new Metamorphosis) these three Waves perpetuate their
Commemoration. That afterward a bold Fellow hoping to divert this Bunna from
Campar (by advice of some Wizards) Rowed up against that first part of the
Torrent, and filling a Bottle of its Water, which he immediately stopped up
close, he betook himself to Rakan (not far distant) and poured it out into that
Rivers Mouth, which brought the Bunna thither also, tho it left not Campar; but
that Fellow suddenly after Dying, none durst since attempt the like, else the
Natives fancy it may still be done.

My humble Opinion is, (adds my Relator) that the Mouths of those Rivers being
choakt up with their Sand-Banks, and so rendered very Shallow; when the great
Spring-Tydes come roaring over those Shoals (at the New and Full-Moons) out of
the Malacca Streights, the first Influx is Irresistible, by such small Vessels
as use that Port, (especially if attended with dark Weather or Stormy Gusts) so
that they are forced to Weigh and Bear up against it for fear of being
Strandded and Split. In which Sentiment I rest, till I can attain a more
prevalent Reason.

RELATION IX.
A Gentleman that had Traveled far and Observed much, related to me, That
being off the Coast of Mosambique, between the 20th and last Days of September,
the Captain of the great Portugal Ship they were in, walking to and fro upon
the Deck, Spied a great way off, a very little dark Cloud or blackish Spot in
the Sky: Whereupon, tho the Weather were fair, he made all the have he possibly
could to provide for a great Storm, by taking in the Sails, etc. And tho for a
while the Sky continued clear, and they had no signs of an imminent Change; but
that when the Cloud approacht, the Wind that had till then filled, their Sails
ceased, and the Sea became Calmer than before: But presently after they had a
furious Hurricane, which turned their Ship quite round many times one after
another, as if it were an Aerial Whirl-pool, which lasted for above two Hours,
and then left them, seeming to have a progressive Motion, as Whirl-pools in
Rivers often have.

RELATION X.
An Ingenious Practitioner of Physic, accompanied by one of the same
Profession, assured me with great Asseveration, That some while since, being at
a place in the Country near Amsterdam, where there Lived a kind of a Farmer,
who (tho Illiterate enough) was reputed very Curious; this Person showed him,
among other things, a considerable quantity of Quicksilver that was altogether
of the Color of Gold. And, to answer my scruple, this Relator added, that the
Color did not belong only to the Surface of the whole Mass; but having
purposely (with Water) divided it into many Globules, each of them retained the
same rich Color. And he further told me, That the possessor of this yellow
Mercury, having put some of it over a Fire in a convenient Vessel, it quickly
lost its fludity, and was precipitated into a red Powder; about which he hoped
to learn some notable things at his next Visit to the Author: But that having
been too long delayed; when he came to the place again, he found to his great
Grief that the Master was Dead, and his Relations were, or pretended to be,
ignorant of his Secrets.

A very Learned and Experienced Physician, made me a Visit to give me notice,
that a few Days before he had received one in the Night from a couple of
Strangers, one of whom by some things that he saw him do, he judged to be (what
they call) an Adeptus, who besides a thing far more rare and valuable, showed
him as a Curiosity, a running Mercury of a lovely Green. And when I asked my
judicious Relator, whether he had broken the fluid Mass into Drops, to observe
whether the Color were that only of the Surface, or of the whole Mass? He
answered, that he purposely laid it upon a rough Body, as a Carpet, and found
the Globules, whereinto 'twas by this Means divided, to be of the same fine
Green that had beautified the whole Mass.

These Relations, tho they had come to me from less Credible Persons than those
I received them from, I should not hastily have rejected, because of some odd
and fine Colorations of running Mercury, that I have my self Observed, but here
forbear to mention, because they belong to another Paper.

FINIS.

