THE General History OF THE AIR, Designed and Begun BY THE Honble ROBERT BOIL
Esquire.

IMPRIMATUR.

June 29. 1692.

Robert Southwell, P. R. S.

LONDON, Printed for Awnsham and John Churchill, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row, near Amen-Corner.

MDCXCII.

Advertisement of the Publisher to the READER.
THE Design of the following Papers the Author's own Preface will acquaint thee
with. And though, as thou will there see, his Expectation of Assistance (in a
Work too great for one single Man's Undertaking) from others failed him; yet I
doubt not but his own Experiments and Collections would have made this Treatise
much larger before it had been published, had his Health allowed him
Opportunity: But that permitting him not so much as to review these Papers, or
range them into that order, which would be most advantageous, thou art not to
wonder, if thou find some Defects, some Dislocations, and other Faults in
this Publication, which the Author's last Hand would have prevented. The
Negligence of Transcribers has let slip the Characters of Relators, and Names
and Places of Author's from whom several of the Particulars in the following
Papers were taken: Nor could it be hoped that the Authors own Memory (were he
in a State of Health fit to be troubled with it) should after so long a time as
this Collection has been making, and in that Variety of Men and Books he has
had to do with, be able to retrieve them. But this will be no great Loss to the
learned World, which is sufficiently acquainted with his great Cantion, and
will make no Difficulty confidently to rely upon his unaffected Candor and
Sincerity. I know not how much some other Parts of his noble, and always busy
Designs for the Advancement of Knowledge, and the Benefit of Mankind, may suffer
by that Tenderness of his Constitution, which the Importunity of his Friends
can hardly prevail upon him to withdraw from Philosophical Cares. But this he
has ordered so, that imperfect as it is, one cannot call it deficient; since
the Foundation being here laid, and the Draught made, every one may, if he
please, add toward the completing of the building, I will not say with
Materials equal to what his Sagacity and Laboratory used to afford: For we must
not expect to find in every Age a Man able and ready to lay out so much Cost,
Pains and Skill, frankly, for the Improvement of Natural Philosophy, and the
Information of the World, as he has done. The Scheme of Titles under which
these Materials for a History of the Air are ranged, is somewhat different from
that printed by him several Years since, and distributed amongst his Friends.
But this is without any Prejudice to the main Design, since whatsoever any one
has collected under those Heads, will be easily reducible to these, which in a
more natural Order are more comprehensive. In that first Draught he followed my
Lord Bacon's Advice, not to be overcurious or nice in making the first Set of
Heads, but to take them as they occur. But now that thus much comes to be
published, which perhaps may serve to some Men as a common Place for the
History of the Air, the Titles have been a little more increased or methodized,
to which any one may add as he finds Occasion: Only in these the Reader is
desired to observe,

I. That under the Title of Mineral Substances, are comprehended Earth, and all
other Fossiles to avoid multiplying of Articles.

II. That when any mixed Body is ranked under Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral
Substances, it is put under that of the three which either it partakes most of,
or to which most is owing in the present Experiment, or which in its own Nature
it most resembles.

III. That it is not by an Oversight that Lightning is put under two different
Titles; for in one it is considered only in reference to the Sight; in the
other it is considered as the Product of sulphurous or inflamable Effluviums
taking fire, with the strange Effects it produces; which may be an Example of
putting the same thing with different Views, under different Heads.

What is abovesaid was written whilst the Author was living, to which it is
necessary now to add, That the Titles, as here printed, and the Orders of the
Papers, as now ranged under them, were shown to the Author, and approved by him
as fitter for the General History of the Air, than those he had formerly
printed. So that, Reader, thou have these Papers as they were prepared and
ordered to be published in his Lifetime; and they had then gone to the Press
to be printed, just as thou now receivest them, had not the Publisher the last
Winter been hastily called out of Town.

The CONTENTS of the several TITLES of the History of the AIR.
Title 1. WHAT we understand by the Air, Page 1 Title 2. Of the constant and
permanent Ingredients of the Air, 2 Title 3. Of the Ether in the Atmosphere, 9
Title 4. Of the Springy Particles of the Air, and the Spring of the Air, 11
Title 5. Of the Magnetical Particles in the Air, 15 Title 6. Of the
Destruction, Generation, Absorption and Extrication of the Air, 17 Title 7. Of
the Accidental or less constant Ingredients of the Air, 27 Title 8. Of Aqueous
Particles in the Air, and of the Moisture and Dryness of the Air, 29 Title 9.
Of Clouds, Mists and Fogs, 36 Title 10. Of Terrestrial Steams in the Air, 37
Title 11. Of Salts in the Air, 39 Title 12. Of Sulphur and inflamable Particles
in the Air, and of Lightning, and its Effects, 60 Title 13. Of Celestial
Influences or Effluviums in the Air, 67 Title 14. Of the Height of the
Atmosphere, 83 Title 15. Of the Motion of the Air, and of Winds, 84 Title 16.
Of the Air as the Medium of Sounds, and of Sounds and Noises in the Air, and
particularly Thunder; and of the Air's Operation on the Sounds of Bodies, 89
Title 17. Of the Weight of the Air, 90 Title 18. Of the Consistency of the Air,
its Rarity, Density, Fluidity, Subtilty, 148 Title 19. Of the Heat and Coldness
of the Air, 150 Title 20. Of the Air in reference to Light, its Perspituity,
Opacity, Reflections, Refractions, Colors, Light and Lightning, 189 Title 21.
Of the Operation of the Air on the Consistency of Animal Substances, 201 Title
22. Of the Operation of the Air on the Consistency of Vegetable Substances, 204
Title 23. Of the Operation of the Air on the Consistency of Mineral Substances,
206 Title 24. Of the Air in reference to Fire and Flame, 208 Title 25. Of the
Air in reference to Fermentation, 210 Title 26. Of the Air as the Receptacle of
Odours, 211 Title 27. Of the Operation of the Air on the Odours of Animal
Substances, 212 Title 28. Of the Operation of the Air on the Odours of
Vegetable Substances, 214 Title 29. Of the Operation of the Air on the Odours
of Mineral Substances, 215 Title 30. Of the Operation of the Air on the Tastes
of Animal Substances, 216 Title 31. Of the Operations of the Air on the Tastes
of Vegetable Substances, 217 Title 32. Of the Operations of the Air on the
Tastes of Mineral Substances, 218 Title 33. Of the Operations of the Air on the
Colors of Animal Substances, 219 Title 34. Of the Operations of the Air on the
Colors of Vegetable Substances, 220 Title 35. Of the Operations of the Air on
the Colors of Mineral Substances, 222 Title 36. Of the Air destroying or
introducing other less obvious Qualities into Animal Substances, 229 Title 37.
Of the Air destroying or introducing other less obvious Qualities into
Vegetable Substances, 230 Title 38. Of the Air destroying or introducing other
less obvious Qualities into Mineral Substances, 232 Title 39. Of the Air in
reference to the Propagation and Vegetation of Plants, 234 Title 40. Of the Air
in reference to the Generation, Life and Health of Animals, 235 Title 41. Of
heavy Bodies sustained in, or taken up into the Air, 251 Title 42. Of Dew, 252
Title 43. Of Rain, 253 Title 44. Of Hail, 255 Title 45. Of Snow, 256 Title 46.
Of other things falling out of the Air, 257 Title 47. Promiscuous Experiments
and Observations of the Air, 258 Title 48. Desiderata in the History of the
Air, and Proposals toward supplying them, 259
THE PREFACE.
THE continual Use of the Air is so absolutely necessary to our Life; the good
or bad Temperature of it is so important to our Health; and the scarce evitable
Presence and powerful Pressure of it, has so great an Interest in many of the
Phenomenon we meet with here below, and even in diverse where its Agency is not
suspected; that among mere Bodies there are perhaps few Subjects that more
deserve our Curiosity, whether as we are Animals, or as we are Naturalists.
Upon which Account I can scarce think that any thing that conduces to the
fuller Knowledge of a Body so diffused, so necessary, and so powerful, is fit to
be despised, or is unworthy to be preserved in Writing.

And therefore, though I have formerly had occasion to treat, in distinct
Tracts, of some of the Qualities or Affections of the Air, as its Gravity,
Springiness, etc. yet I found my self inclined to contribute further to the
Knowledge of that vast and useful Subject, by setting down some Memorials,
partly out of my own Observations and Trials, and partly out of those I had
from Persons of good Credit, concerning some Causes and Effects of the Changes
of the Air, and consequently concerning several of its Qualities that were
requisite to be taken into Consideration in a work of that Nature. And not
content with this, though my own Studies and Affairs would not permit me to
prosecute my self the Design I am going to mention, yet thinking it might be a
very useful thing, in reference both to Philosophy and Physic, that a Natural
History of the Air (though at first it should prove but a very imperfect one)
were faithfully compiled, I propounded the Design to some Virtuosi that seemed
to relish it, and undertook to be Assistant in it.

And to facilitate their Work, I drew up a Set of Heads and Inquiries of that
sort, which in another Paper I call Titles of the first Classis or Order;
which, tho purposely set down without any anxious Method, were comprehensive
enough to have a good Number and Variety of Particulars conveniently referred
to them. But afterward finding the Persons to whom I had committed these
Schemes, to have been for many Years very unmindful of their Promises; I did on
this Discouragement lay aside, not only the Hopes of a General History of the
Air, but what I had already written about the Changes of that Body.

And upon the same Accounts, those scattered Notes lay many Years in loose
neglected Papers, till at length the Curiosity and Desires of some Virtuosi,
that knew I had gathered some Remarks, though few and incoherent, touching some
Qualities of the Air, obliged me to draw together those that without a
troublesome Search I could retrieve, offering themselves to promote the Design
that others had abandoned. The Desire to gratify these Inquisitive Men, and the
Conviction I am brought under, by such Reasons as are mentioned at the
Beginning of this Paper, that scarce any Truth, whether Historical or
Doctrinal, that relates to so important a Subject as the Air, is unfit to be
preserved, prevailed with me, rather to choose a very disadvantageous way of
setting down what I have to deliver about it, than suffer the loose
Observations I had occasion to make about some Phanomena and Qualities, and
especially the Changes of the Air, to be lost. And therefore, though I have not
the leisure to methodize my incoherent Notes, and much less to weave them into
continued Discourses; yet rather than let them perish, and disappoint those
that will have them such as they are, I am content to refer to some of the
Titles prefixed to this Treatise, as to a kind of Common Places, what my
Memory, or some old Notes about diverse things relating to the Air, and
especially to the Causes and Effects of its Changes, supply me with in
reference to that Body.

And upon the like Account, I have not strictly confined my self to the mention
of my loose Observations, and those that I have been furnished with by Answers
to the Questions I put to diverse Travelers and Navigators: but I have also
cast in several pertinent Passages that chanced to occur to me in the reading
of some Voyages, and other Books, especially such as either are out of Print,
or are but in few Hands, or else are not extant in those that are called the
Learned Languages. And that those Virtuosi that are willing to contribute their
Industry to carry on the Design that was at first proposed, might have some
Heads whereunto to refer what shall occur to them; I thought fit to premise to
my Papers the abovementioned Scheme, or rough Draught, of the General History
(which after many Years I chanced to recover.) I have also thought fit, that
under three or four Titles, my Collections of Particulars should be somewhat
large and Methodical, to afford the same Persons some Specimens of what I
should have thought requisite to do upon particular Subjects, if I would have
ventured upon such a Task, as to write a Natural History of the Air.

I am not ignorant that I expose my self to Censure, for suffering to pass out
of my Hands, Memoirs so maimed and imperfect, that several of the Subjects
mentioned in the Scheme of Titles are left altogether untouched; and those that
are particularly mentioned, are for the most part touched upon but lightly. But
the chief, though not perhaps the only Reasons that kept me from being silenced
by these Considerations, though I confess them to be weighty, were these.
First, That not pretending to write the History of the Air, but only some
Memoirs for it; I might without Incongruity or Indecency contribute what had
occurred to me in reference to some of the Titles, though I left the others to
those that had made Experiments or Observations about them. Next, That having
through the Fraud or Negligence of some Persons, lost sundry loose Papers that
I had provided for the History of the Air, my Unwillingness that the rest
should undergo the same Fate, invited me to impart them to many, as the best
Expedient to secure them. To which I, Thirdly, add an Inducement, which though
last named, was the first in Efficacy, as that which made the other two
significant; namely, that I had more than once observed, that when a Work of
this Nature has been once begun and taken notice of, in such an inquisitive and
active Age as this of ours, it seldom fails to excite the Curiosity and
Industry of others, whom, if the Design be any thing well laid, the Utility
that it promises will invite to carry it on.

TITLE I.
What we understand by the AIR.

BY the Air I commonly understand that thin, fluid, diaphanous, compressible
and dilatable Body in which we breath, and wherein we move, which envelops the
Earth on all sides to a great height above the highest Mountains; but yet is so
different from the Ether [or Vacuum] in the intermundane or interplanetary
Spaces, that it refracts the Rays of the Moon and other remoter Luminaries.

TITLE II.
Of the constant and permanent Ingredients of the Air.

A short Answer to a Question about the Nature of the Air, given by Mr. Boil
to Mr. H. Oldenburg.
AS to your Question, What I think the Air to be? I shall in the first place
take it for granted, that by the Air you mean not, either the pure Element of
Air, which some, nor that Etherial or Celestial Substance, that others (upon
what Grounds I must not here examine) assert; but that, which I am wont to call
the Atmospherical Air, which is that common Air we breath and move in.

But though I know you too well, to suspect that you design any Ambiguity in
your Question; yet I shall not adventure to answer it, till I have premised a
Distinction that is not usual: For, according to my Thoughts, the Air may be
taken either for that which is Temporary, (if I may so call it;) or in a
Transient State; or that which is Lasting, and in a Permanent State. This
Distinction, which perhaps you looked not for, I shall illustrate by this
Example; That if you sufficiently heat an Eolipile furnished with Water, and
stay a pretty while to afford time for the expulsion of the Aerial Particles by
the Aqueous Vapors, you may afterward observe, that these last named will be
driven out in multitudes, and with a noise, and will emulate a Wind or Stream
of Air, by blowing Coals, held at a convenient distance, like a pair of
Bellows, and by producing a sharp and whistling Sound against the edg of a
Knife, held in a convenient Posture almost upon the Orifice of the Pipe, whence
they issue out. But this vapid Stream, though in these, and some other things
it imitates true Air, whilst the vehement Agitation lasts, which the Vapors it
consists of, received from the Fire; yet in a very short time, especially if
the Weather, or the Vessels it enters into, be cold, loses the temporary Form
it seemed to have of Air, and returns to Water, as it was at first.

This premised, I come to speak directly, but dare not do it confidently, to
your Question: For though possibly I may have made as many Trials as another
about the Nature of the Air; yet I freely confess to you, that I much suspect
there lies yet something concealed in it, that needs a further Discovery, which
may perhaps be made by further Trials. But in the mean time, (not wholly to
baffle your Curiosity, since it is so modest, as to desire to know of me, not
what the true Nature of the Air is, but what I guess concerning its chiefest
Property or Attribute) I will acquaint you with some of the Thoughts I long ago
had, and which I yet took upon my self, and desire to have them looked upon by
you but as Conjectures, entertained only till farther Discoveries confirm them,
or suggest better in their room.

It seems then not improbable to me, that our Atmospherical Air may consist of
three differing Kinds of Corpuscles. The first is made of that numberless
Multitude and great Variety of Particles, which, under the form of Vapors or
dry Exhalations, ascend from the Earth, Water, Minerals, Vegetables and
Animals, etc. and in a word, of whatever Substances are elevated by the
Celestial or Subterraneal Heats, and made to diffuse themselves into the
Atmosphere. The second sort of Particles that make the Air, may be yet more
subtle than the former, and consist of such exceeding minute Parts, as make up
the Magnetical Steams of our Terrestrial Globe, and the innumerable Particles,
that the Sun and other Stars, that seem to shine of themselves, do either emit
out of their own Bodies, or by their Pressure thrust against our Eyes, and
thereby produce what we call Light; which, whether we explicate it by the
Epicurean or Cartesian Hypothesis, argues a great Plenty of a Celestial, or
some other very subtle Matter, to be dispersed through, or harbored in the
Intervals of the stabler or grosser Corpuscles of the Atmosphere.

But because you expect from me a distinguishing, and as it were,
Characteristick Quality, which may put a difference between the Parts already
named of the Atmosphere, and those to which most of the Phenomena of our
Engine, and many other Pneumatical Experiments, seem to be due; I shall add a
third sort of Atmospherical Particles, compared with which, I have not yet
found any, whereto the Name of Air does so deservedly belong. And this sort of
Particles are those, which are not only for a while, by manifest outward
Agents, made Elastical, but are permanently so, and on that account may be
styled Perennial Air.

Of the Structure of the Elastical Particles of the Air, diverse Conceptions may
be framed, according to the several Contrivances Men may devise to answer the
Phenomena: For one may think them to be like the Springs of Watches, coil'd up,
and still endeavoring to fly abroad. One may also fancy a Portion of Air to be
like a Lock or Parcel of curled Hairs of Wool; which being compressed by an
external Force, or their own Weight, may have a continual endeavor to stretch
themselves out, and thrust away the neighboring Particles, and whatever other
Bodies would hinder them to recover their former State, or attain their full
Liberty. One may also fancy them like extremely slender Wires, such as those of
Gold and Silver, that Tradesmen unwind from some Cylindrical Bodies of
differing Sizes, on which they were rolled; which Pieces of Spiral or curled
Wire may be, as of differing Substances and Consistences, so of very differing
Lengths and Thicknesses, and have their Curls greater or lesser, nearer each
other, or more distant, and be otherwise diversified; and yet all have
Springiness in them, and (notwithstanding) be, by reason of their Shape,
readily expansible on the score of their native Structure, as also by Heat,
Girations, and other Motions; and compressible by an external Force into a very
little room. I remember too, that I have among other Comparisons of this kind,
represented the springy Particles of the Air, like the very thin Shavings of
Wood, (that Carpenters and Joiners are wont to take off with their Plainers;)
for, besides that these may be made of differing Woods, as Oak, Ash, Firr, etc.
and thereby be diversified as to their Substance, they are usually of very
various Breadths, and Lengths, and Thicknesses. And perhaps you may the rather
prefer this Comparison, because it may seem somewhat to illustrate the
Production of the springy Particles of the Air: for to make these Shavings,
there is no Art nor curious Instruments required; and their Curls are no ways
uniform, but many ways differing, and seemingly casual; and, which is chiefly
considerable, these Shavings are producible out of Bodies, that did not appear,
nor were suspected to be Elastical in their Bulk, as Beams and Blocks; almost
any of which may afford springy Shavings, barely by having some of its Parts so
taken off, as to be thin and flexible enough, and commodiously shaped: Which
may perhaps illustrate what I tried, that diverse solid, and even mineral
Bodies, not suspected of Elasticity, being put into corrosive Menstruums,
devoid of that Quality, there will, upon the convenient Comminution of Parts,
ensuing the Action and Re-action, that passes between them in the Dissolution,
result or emerge a pretty Quantity of permanently Elastical Fire. But possibly
you will think that these are but extravagant Conjectures; and therefore
without adding any thing in favor of them, I shall proceed, and willingly
grant, that one may fancy several other Shapes (and perhaps fitter than these
we have mentioned) for these springy Corpuscles; about whose Structure I shall
not now particularly discourse, because of the variety of probable Conjectures
that, I think, may be proposed concerning it. Only I shall here intimate, that
though the Elastical Air seem to continue such, rather upon the score of its
Structure, than any external Agitation; yet Heat, that is a kind of Motion, may
make the agitated Particles strive to recede further and further from the
Centers of their Motions, and to beat off those, that would hinder the freedom
of their Gyrations, and so very much add to the endeavor of such Air to expand
it self. And I will allow you to suspect, that there may be sometimes mingled
with the Particles that are springy, upon the newly mentioned Account, some
others, that owe their Elasticity, not so much to their Structure, as their
Motion, which, variously brandishing them and whirling them about, may make
them beat off the neighboring Particles, and thereby promote an expansive
Endeavor in the Air, whereof they are Parts. And though some of these may, in
very cold Climates and Seasons, prove to be of those, which I not long since
referred to temporary Air; yet others of them may be so minute and agile, and
so advantageously shaped, that at least in our Climate, the Air will scarce be
so cold, but that the Causes, which entertain the Agitation, and keep it fluid,
may also give a competent Motion to Particles so well disposed to be kept in it.

And now, Sir, 'twill be time to endeavor to proceed to some Particulars, that
may countenance the Conjectures I have hitherto been proposing.

Having not now the leisure to prosecute this Discourse uninterruptedly, till
it be completely finished, I thought it not unfit, not only to set down, in
this Paper, some of those occurring Thoughts and Observations of my own, upon
this Subject, that were the likeliest, unless this way preserved, to vanish out
of my Memory, and which may serve to recall diverse others into it; but also to
annex some Passages referable to the same Purposes, borrowed from such Books,
as probably I may not have at hand, when I shall resume this Treatise. These
two sorts of Passages make up the following Notes, and are therefore to be
looked upon but as materially here laid together to be preserved, not so much
for themselves (though some of them perhaps deserve not to perish) as in Order
to the finishing of the designed Structure. And though, for that Reason, they
may often appear very confusedly placed, yet they may seem more incoherent than
they are, there being certain Transitions, and other things, by which some of
them may be so connected, as to be fit to make discoursive Parts and Paragraphs
of the Treatise they belong to; upon which Account it is that they are put at
diverse Distances one from another, that if hereafter I have leisure, there may
be room for the Transitions, etc. by which they are designed to be connected
into coherent Discourses.

What is above said in reference to this Tract in general, is applicable to
those particular Parts of it, whether Chapters or Sections, or other Divisions
that follow a Line of Astericks, such as the ensuing * * * * * * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * * employed to separate the unfinished Part of the Division it
belongs to, from the foregoing.

TITLE III.
Of the Ether in the Atmosphere.



TITLE IV.
Of the Springy Particles of the Air, and the Spring of the Air.

Aerem valide comprimere, aut dilatare.
FOllibus lusoriis aerem pyulco ingerentes majorem Casati Mechanicorum, lib. 8.
cap. 5. p. 792, 793, etc.
subinde atque majorem difficultatem percipiunt; quo enim magis aer conclusus a
naturali raritate recedere cogitur, etiam major nisu resistit, neque solum
magis densari renuit, sed and se latius explicare molitur. Hinc didicimus and
pneumaticos fontes construere, qui spiritu interno urgente aquam in altum
evibrant, and plumbeas glandes fistulis ejaculari, non pulvere nitrato ignem
concipiente, sed aere per vim densato ad antiquas dimensiones recuperandas
erumpente. Quoniam vero ingesta jam in conceptaculum non exigua aeris copia
difficilius comprimitur nova aeris accessione, quam ut manus valeat trusillum
recta impellere; idcirco trusilli hastulam deformatam in helicem, and suae
matrici insertam, adhibere operae pretium erit: dum enim manubrio agitante
contorquetur cochlea, sensim deprimitur embolus, aeremque ingerit. Ne autem
mora longiore opus sit perpetua versatione manubrii, ita cochleae matrix
externam vasis faciem contingat, ut illi adnecti, atque ab eo disjungi valeat:
initio enim, quando adhuc levis est aeris modice compressi resistentia, lamella
illa suo foramine interius claviculatim striato cohaerens hastulae emboli, si a
vase disjuncta fuerit, una cum hastula movebitur: deinde vero, quando jam
trusillis aegre impellitur, lamella illa cum vase connectatur, and non nisi
versato manubrio adduci atque reduci embolus poterit, id quod satis lent
perficietur. Rem claritatis gratia in font pneumatico explicemus.

Sit vas A. B. ex materia metallica, in cujus superiore part labrum, ex quo
per foramen A. immittatur in vas aqua, ita tamen, ut non impleatur; aqua enim
in vas modice inclinatum descendens, aerem expellet per tubulum C. D. ubi satis
aquae immissum fuerit, occludatur foramen A. diligentissime cochleola
congruente, and convoluto epistomio E. tubus D. C. sit aeri impervius ad vasis
latus statuatur modiolus cum embolo congruente H. I. and emboli hastula sit
connexa cum mobili vasi ansa H. O.

Porro hastula H. K. perforata sit, and continuo ductu usque ad emboli K. S.
fundum pateat aeri ingredienti via H. S. sed foramini S. adjecta sit valvula,
quae aeri regressum obstruat. Similiter modioli fundo in I. valvula exterius
apposita aperiatur ingesto aeri transitum praebens; sed aeri intra vas
compresso cum nusquam exitus pateat, valvula ipsa modioli foramen I. occludit.
Hastulae vero H. K. exterior facies sit in helicem striata, and lamellae M. N.
tanquam matrici congruat, quae in M. and N. cochleolis adnecti queat exterius
vasi, quasi esset ansae fulcrum.

Ubi immissum fuerit quantum satis est aquae, cochleolis M. and N. revolutis
disjungatur matrix a vase: tum attracta ansa H. O. una cum lamella M. N.
attrahitur embolus K. S. and per apertum ductum H. S. ingreditur aer, modiolum
implens. Impulso deinde embolo, valvula ad S. clauditur, and aer ex modiolo per
patentem valvulam I. ingeritur in vas; ex quo nequit exire, neque aquam
propellere, clauso scilicet epistomio E. and foramine A. qua propter
comprimitur, and densatur; ideoque attracto denuo embolo K. S. inclusus vasi
aer se latius explicare connitens valvulam I. valide applicat foramini modioli,
sibique exitum obstruit. Toties adducitur atque reducitur embolus, and aer
ingeritur, quoad magna premendi difficultas percipiatur; ubi eo ventum fuerit,
tunc lamella M. N. iterum vasi adnectatur suis cochleolis; nec jam embolus
recta adduci potest; sed areptum in O. manubrium versatur, and embolus intra,
modiolum circumactus sensim attollitur, qui deinde revoluto in contrarium
manubrio deprimitur, and multa vi aer in vase comprimitur. Laxato demum
Epistomio E. compressus in vase aer, aquam exprimit per tubum C. D. primum
quidem vehementius, subinde remissius, prout aeris vis elastica sensim
longuescit.

Hoc idem quod de aere intra vas comprimendo ad aquam evibrandam comminisci
placuit, servata analogia, dicendum est de aere, tum conatu manus recta
trusillum impellentis, tum open cochleae similiter conformatae, intra
conceptaculum comprimendo, ut ex fistula deinde multa vi emittatur plumbea
glans, ubi reseratus aeri exitus illum subito dilatari permiserit. Quin and
pneumatica hujusmodi tormenta citra conceptaculum aeris compressi construere
non inutile accidat, si, quemadmodum nostrates pueri surculos sambuceos fungosa
medulla exhauriunt, and utraque tubuli extremitate papyraceis globulis
obstructa, alterum globulum congruo cylindro propellunt, atque inclufum aerem
densant, quoad aeris vim elasticam, and impellentis manus conatum non ferens
extremus alter globulus edito seloppo expellatur; ita ferream fistulam
longiorem paraveris, cujus alteri extremitati immittatur plumbea glans obducta
papyro, aut simili materia, ut exquisite tubi osculum implens demum universam
aeris. vim excipiar, alteram extremitatem aliquot spiris ambiat cava cochlea,
quam impleat cylindrus ferreus in congruentem cochleam deformatus; si enim
hujusmodi cylindrus vix brevior fuerit, quam fistula, and apto manubrio
convolutus in fistulam sensim immittatur, totum aerem, quo fistula replebatur,
ad exiguas spatii angustias adiget, ex quibus magna vi demum, qua data: porta,
erumpens ejaculabitur plumbeum globulum.

TITLE V.
Of the Magnetical Particles in the Air.



TITLE VI.
Of the Destruction, Generation, Absorption and Extrication of the Air.

New Experiments about producing of Air. And examining the Bodies produced.
THAT the Air has a great Interest in the Production of many Phenomena of
Nature, either not formerly known, or not formerly ascribed unto it, as the
chief Agent, if as any at all, has been, I suppose sufficiently manifested by
our own Experiments, as well as by those published by abler Writers.

That also the Air is necessary not only to the wellbeing, but to the verry
Being and Motions of the Generality of Animals, will be easily deduced from
those Trials whereby we have made it appear, that Animals whose Blood is hot,
may be killed in our Engine by the withdrawing of the Air in about one Minute
of an Hour, and that even those minute Creatures, whose Blood or Analogous
Juice is cold, will for the most part, without excepting Cheese-Mites
themselves, presently lose all their visible Motions, upon the Recess of the
Air, may appear from our Experiments about Respiration.

Wherefore the Air, being a Body so important in our Speculations of Nature,
and so necessary to the Continuance of our Lives, I could not but think it
deserved, that we should solicitously inquire, whether it may or may not be
produced by Art; for if it can be so by any, not very uneasily practicable
ways, the Discovery may not only help us to explicate some difficult Phenomena
of Nature, but may afford us, among several other Uses, that of enabling us to
supply diverse, if not also submarine Navigators with fresh Air produced under
Water, and thereby lengthen their staying in Places, where the Continuance of
it may be of great Use both speculative and practical.

Upon these and the like Motives, I resolved, notwithstanding the Difficulties
I foresaw my Curiosity would meet with in so new an Attempt, to try what I
could do. But before I relate the Success of this Attempt, I must premise a
couple of necessary Advertisements.

And first, when I here speak of Production of Air, I desire to be understood
in a familiar Sense, meaning by that Expression the obtaining a sensible
Quantity of Air, from Bodies wherein it did not appear before they were handled
after our way, that so much Air, if any at all, was pre-existent. This I say,
because I would not in this Place needlessly engage in the Controversy about the
Ingenerability (as they speak) or the mutual Transmutation of the Bodies that
are called Elementary: for though I am not sure, but that some of our
Experiments may argue a new and real Production of Air, or a Generation of it
in the stricter Sense, yet I shall now employ the words Generation and
Production, in the large and popular Acception, and would signify by them, as I
lately intimated, the obtaining of a sensible Quantity of Aerial Substances
from Bodies, that did not appear to have it, whether this obtained Substance
were due to an Extrication and Union of Aerial Particles latent in the Pores of
the Bodies that afforded it, or to a real Production or Generation of Air, no
where existent antecedently to our Experiments. And this is the first of my two
Advertisements.

The second is this, That among the Difficulties, I foresaw, in making
Experiments suited to my Design, I looked upon it as one of the greatest,
though the least obvious, that to satisfy such a Disposition as mine, that is
naturally prone enough to question things, it would be requisite for me to
consider, and, if I could, to determine by appropriated Trials, whether the
fluid Substances my Experiments might afford me, deserved the Name of Air or
not. Wherefore I saw my self obliged to increase my Task, and so direct my
Inquiries, that in the first Place they may afford me sensible Portions of such
a Substance, as in a popular Sense may be styled Air, whether these obtained
Substances ought to be looked upon as true Air or no. So that my intended
Disquisition would naturally consist of two Parts, whereof the former was to
contain the ways of producing, that which seems Air; and the other to propound
those of examining, how far the produced Substance is endowed with the
Qualities, that are judged to belong to Air as such.

But in regard that I thought it most convenient so to contrive my Experiments,
as to make such of them as I could to serve me, both to produce Air, and to
examine it, I shall be more than once obliged to mingle the two Parts of my
Disquisition, and reserve for the latter of them, only those few Trials, that
concern purely the Examen of the produced Air.

And upon this Score it will be seasonable to take notice in this Place, that
forasmuch as there are diverse Qualities ascribed to Air, which to me seem but
accidental, and not universally to belong to Air as such, I have not observed
any one Attribute that I think to be so much the Property of Air, and so fit to
distinguish its true Particles from aqueous Vapors, earthy Exhalations, and
the Effluvia of other Bodies, as a durable Elasticity or Springiness. And
therefore I shall henceforth employ that, as the chief Criterion, whereby to
constitute a Portion of Matter Aerial, and discriminate it from other flying
and fluid Substances, and consequently to allow or deny it the Title of Air.

Now among the several Ways I thought of, whereby to produce Air, those I
judged fittest to put in practice were these. 1. By Fermentation. 2. By
Corrosions and Dissolutions of Bodies. 3. By boiling of Water and other
Liquors. 4. By the mutual Actions of some, especially saline Bodies, upon one
another. 5. By the Analyzes and Resolutions of certain Substances.

On January 17, we conveyed into a long and large Experiment I.
Tube some Filings of Steel, and as much Water as was thought convenient to
dilute the Oil of Vitriol, which we also conveyed in a peculiarly shaped Glass,
sealed at both Ends, but with a Hole opened near one of them; the external
Tube, and the Water in them being exhausted, and the Mercury in the Gage, which
we had also included, being so far impelled up into the open Leg, that there
was scarce any at all left in the sealed one; this, I say, being done, the
external Tube was by our way exactly closed: and then the Oil of Vitriol being
by little and little, and at good Intervals of Time, poured out of the internal
Tube, to actuate the Water, there were produced exceeding large Bubbles by the
Action of the Solvent upon the Metal, which also produced a sensible Heat,
though not a great one. When this Conflict had lasted a while, we observed, in
compliance with the chief Scope of this Experiment, whether there would be any
springy Air produced by all those Bubbles; and we perceived that there seemed
to be so much of it generated, that at length the Mercury in the Gage was
impelled to the very bottom of the open Leg, and the Air included in the other
seemed to be more compressed than it had been when it was put in by the Weight
of the Atmosphere. But to try whether this Spring (wherein the Warmth, formerly
mentioned, might be suspected to have for that time some Interest) would
continue, I removed the Tube into another Room where was no Chimny; and coming
to look on it the next Day, did not take notice of any sensible Alteration in
the Gage; and with the like Success I visited it for three or four Days: But
then coming one Day to look upon it, I found the Mercury in the Gage to have
ascended about one Inch and an half, and about that quantity of Water to have
got into the sealed Leg; which inclined me so much the more to suspect, that
this Change in the Gage might have been accidental, a Boy having unknown to me
removed the Tube from its wonted Station, to place somewhat else there, without
doing it heedfully enough. And this Conjecture seems the more likely, because I
have not seen any notable Change to have happened in the Gage from that time to
this, (which is the 25th of January at Night) the Mercury in the open Leg being
about one Inch and an half.

March 8. A Glass Vial holding about a Pint (by guess) Experiment: II.
was filled with Wheat Flower, and as much Water as was sufficient to drench it
well. Afterward the Orifice was exactly and strongly closed with a Cork, and
an excellent Cement: the Glass was set in a warm Place of the Laboratory,
because of the Coldness of the Season; and having stood there a Fortnight
bating one Day, it this Morning broke by the mere Dilatation of the included
Matter, whose visible Part was last Night observed to leave a considerable Part
unfill'd beneath the Cork. Notice was taken by the Laborant of the Event of
this Trial, by a Noise which yet was no louder than one made upon the bursting
of the Glass into several Pieces: To my Taste the included Matter was but a
little sourish, but another afterward judged it to be manifestly acid.

March 9. Having on the 23d of February put into a Experiment III.
pretty large Bolt-head a convenient Quantity of bruised Raisons, with as much
Water as I thought necessary to make them ferment; and having caused the Air to
be carefully pumped out, and taken sufficient Order to keep any from forcing or
stealing into the Glass, I set it in the Laboratory, that the Warmth of the Air
might facilitate the Fermentation. At the end of four or five Days, it did not
appear by a Mercurial Gage, (which had been purposely enclosed together with
the Raisons) that there was generated any springy Substance. But being hindered
by several Occasions from looking after this Glass from time to time, it seems
the contained Liquor fermented more violently than the time of the Year would
have made one expect: for about four of the Clock in the Afternoon, no body
being in the Laboratory, the Glass flew in pieces with a loud Noise like the
Report of a Pistol; which alarming a Domestic of mine, that was in a Chamber
not far off, made him hasten to the Laboratory, where he found the Raisons
thrown all about, and the middle part of the Bolt-head (for the Bottom and the
Pipe were entire enough) scattered into such little Pieces, that they seemed
almost to be vanished.

On the 22d of February, I filled a Glass that had a Experiment IV.
somewhat wide Mouth, and might hold by Estimation three Pints (or Pounds) of
Water; to which that Liquor, and a convenient Quantity of bruised Raisons upon
the Orifice of the Glass, were tied the Neck of a pretty large Bladder, out of
which the Air having been diligently expressed, it was strongly fastened to our
Glass with one of our close Cements; so that by squeezing the Bladder, we could
not perceive that any Air could get in or out. Then, this done, we left the
Glass in a convenient Place in the Laboratory, till the 8th or 9th of March;
and then finding the Bladder to be pumped up, we would have tied up the
contained Air, but could not do it by reason of an imperceiv'd Hole, perchance
made with the Point of a Pin, by some one of them that handled it. Wherefore
taking off this Bladder, we caused another that was very limber, to be put on
after the manner newly described; and yesterday Morning we found it, though by
Estimation it might hold about two Pounds of Water, to be so full of Air, that
we could not without difficulty, and losing a pretty deal of the contained Air,
tie the Bladder very close near the Neck of it.

And to try whether this same Mixture would continue to produce Air, (whether
fermented or not, I must not here dispute) I caused another Bladder to be
fastened to the same Glass as before, and found it this Morning March 11. as
full as if it were distended with a Pair of Bellows.

April 28. Into the bottom of a wide-mouthed Vial we Experiment V.
put some good Spirit of Salt, and Filings of Steel, and whelmed over it a Rr.
fitted with an Eel-skin and a Wire; to the latter of which was tied a thin
Glass-Vessel, hermetically sealed at the bottom, tho 'twas but slender, and
furnished with a competent Quantity of Filings of Copper, then we exhausted the
Rr. well with our Engine, and afterward by thrusting the Glass that held the
Filings against the bottom of the Vial, we broke it off, upon which the Filings
fell into the Menstruum, which acting upon them, there ensued good store of
Bubbles that made a Froth much deeper than was the Liquor, and the successive
Generation of these Bubbles continued a good while, and appeared some of them
large enough, though in the free Air they would scarce have been visible, or at
least would not have been taken notice of, the Vial having been kept in our
Vacuum for a Quarter of an Hour longer, and no Greenness to be seen in the
Liquor, the Rr. was taken off, and the Vial left open to the Air.

A Bubble of Air, whose Diameter was near in length Experiment VI.
to that of a middle sized Pea, was left at the top of a round Vial with a long
narrow Neck, whose Cavity was filled with fine Oil of Turpentine, and then
being inverted into a Vial filled with the same Liquor, was set aside in a
quiet Place, and left there for a competent time. Another Vial shaped like the
former, but a pretty deal less, was filled Neck and all with Alcohol of Wine,
save a Bubble of Air about the same Bigness with the former: This Vial being
inverted into another furnished with the same Liquor, was set aside in the same
Window with it, and at the same time: The Event was, that about the End of the
6th Day, the Bubble disappeared in the Glass that contained the Oil of
Turpentine. And the like Absorption, if I may so call it, I observed to have
been made of the Air by the contiguous Spirit of Wine, the next Day after.

May the 23d. We opened another exhausted Receiver, Experiment VII.
wherein was an unstop'd Vial more than half full of an opacous and blackish
Liquor, which we guessed (for we found no Inscription belonging to it) to have
been Frogs Spawn, and were sure to have been included at least three Years: By
the Mercurial Gage that was put up with it, it appeared to have afforded some
Air, but not very much. Its Smell was stinking, much like that of the Pump of a
Ship, but yet it had produced no Insects, nor had any Appearance of Mouldiness.

A Gentleman of my Acquaintance, an industrious Experiment VIII.
Digger for Mines, and Owner of a good one, informs me, that when the Miners
meet with running Water under Ground, they are thereby supplied with Air enough
for free Respiration: And when I asked whether he thought that Air was produced
or extricated by the Motion of the Water, or else were only concomitant to the
Stream? He answered, that it seemed to him more like to proceed from the Water
it self: and further answered me, that standing Waters did not afford Air to
the Diggers; and that running Waters did it even at considerable Depths,
amounting to many Fathoms.

Experiments about the Production of Air, and the examining thereof proposed.
Sect 1. TO produce Air by Fermentation in exactly closed Receivers.

To produce Air by Fermentation in sealed Glasses.

To separate Air from Liquors by boiling.

To separate Air from Liquors by the Engine.

To produce Air by Corrosion, especially with Sp. Anti.

To separate Air by Animal and sulphurous Solvents.

To obtain Air in the exhausted Receiver by burning Glasses, and red hot Irons.

To produce Air out of Gunpowder, and other nitrous Bodies.

Sect. 2. Examine the produced Aerial Substance by its preserving or reviving.
1st. Animals. 2dly. Flame. 3dly. Fire. 4thly. The Light of rotten Wood, Fish.

To examine it by its Elasticity, and the Duration thereof.

As also by its Weight.

And by its lifting up the Smoke of Liquors.

TITLE VII.
Of the Accidental or less constant Ingredients of the Air.



TITLE VIII.
Of Aqueous Particles in the Air, and of the Moisture and Dryness of the Air.

I Shall not here determine whether in all the Instances that are referred to
this Title, the Phenomena be produced by the mere Moisture of the Air as such,
or by some other Agents, whose Corpuscles are accompanied and assisted by the
moist Air as a Vehicle and a concurrent Cause. But without nicely
distinguishing the Grounds of particular Operations, we shall refer the
Phenomena in general to the Moisture of the Air, (or moist Air) that Quality
being the most obvious to be observed in these Phenomena; in the Production of
some of which it seems either the only, or the main Cause, in others an
assistant Cause, and in all a not useless Concomitant.

The Account upon which a Body is dry, being usually but this, that the Pores
intercepted between its more stable Parts, are not filled with any visible
Liquor, it is not to be expected that a Quality so near of kin to a Privation,
should furnish much to our present historical Notes: But yet Dryness may
sometimes have a notinconsiderable Interest in the Changes of a Body, and that
upon differing Scores, whereof I take these two to be the chief. 1st. As the
Body by Exsiccation is deprived of those liquid and exhalable Parts that were
before harbored in its Pores, and were perhaps the Principle of diverse
Operations ascribed to it. And, 2dly. As these Evaporable Parts by their Recess
may occasion a Change of Texture in the Body, especially in regard of the
Pores, whose Bigness, Figure, and perhaps Position, being altered, the Body by
this Change of Texture acquires a Disposition to act, and be acted on, in
several Cases, otherwise than formerly.

Sometimes when the Weather began to be overcast, A Transcript of an
Observation made at Stanton.
the Hygroscope did not sensibly appear to grow heavier, and sometimes it would
preponderate when I took notice of no Vapors to make it do so: and though
these things happened but seldom, in respect of the ordinary Changes of the
Hygroscope according to those of the Weather; yet they made me suspect that
sometimes the Clouds may consist of other Steams than Aqueous, or that there
may be some Exhalations that may have a peculiar Congruity with the Pores of
the Hygroscope, and whose Nature may be such as to the Power of drying the
Hygroscope, that upon these or some other, yet unheeded Accounts, the Steams
that are sometimes diffused in the Air, may control the usual and regular
Causes of increasing or lessening the Gravity of the Hygroscope. And this
Suspicion was the stronger, because having made Hygroscopes with Powder and
Salt, and also with the Saw-dust of Wainscot, hung at nice Scales in very thin
open Glasses, purposely blown for Lightness sake at the Flame of a Lamp, though
they usually acquired and lost Weight, as the Weather grew moister or drier,
yet sometimes they did not.

At half of an Hour after nine a Clock at Night, I Experiment I.
looked upon the Half Hundred Weight that hung at the bottom of the Rope, the
Weather being then fair, and a Mark being put at that part of the erected Board
where the bottom of the Weight touched, I perceived the Sky a while after to
grow cloudy and overcast, but without Rain; wherefore going to visit the Weight
again, I found it to be risen of an Inch or more; and looking on my Watch,
perceived there had passed an Hour and a Quarter since the Mark was made.

This Morning I came again to look upon the Weight between eight and nine of
the Clock, and found it raised above the newly mentioned Mark, made last Night
about one Inch, (for 'twas about 9/10 of an Inch.) This Day the Weather being
fair and windy, the Weight was fallen by ten at Night about six Inches beneath
its Station, at which I found it when I looked on it in the Morning.

Being not well yester-night, the Weight was observed at Bedtime, by two of my
Servants, and it then rested at the 11th of the erected Bound. This Morning
about eight of the Clock, I visited it my self, and found it to be risen about
of an Inch above the eighth Inch, the Morning being cloudy, though the Morning
very dry and dusty. The Weather growing more overcast, within somewhat less
than an Hour after, I visited the Weight again, some scattered Drops of Rain
then beginning to fall, and found it to be risen about half an Inch above the
newly mentioned eighth Mark.

I looked when I was ready to go to Bed upon the suspended Weight of 56 Pound,
and marked how low it reached upon the divided Board; and a great part of the
Night having been rainy, I looked again when I was dressed in the Morning,
which was about half an Hour after eight a Clock, and I found the Cord so
shrunk, that the Weight was raised above five Inches higher than I left it the
Night before; but the Day recovering dry and windy, and sometimes warm, the
Rope was so stretched, that at Night the Weight sunk a good way beneath all the
Marks. N. B. The Rope near the Weight was in Diameter ^ of an Inch, and four
decimal Parts of a tenth.

We took a Rope of near three Foot and an half in length from the Point of
Appension, and somewhat Experiment II.
less than ^ (Inch) in Diameter; this we suffered to be stretched for some Days
by a Weight of Lead with an Iron Ring or Ansula, weighing a Quarter of an
Hundred, according to the great Hundred, which is five score and twelve: and
then placing a flat Board under it so, that the Weight just rested upon it, we
had the Rope well wetted over them with a Sponge dipped in Water, and so often
applied to it, that the Liquor might be thoroughly soaked into the Pores of the
Rope, which at first seemed thereby a little stretched, rather than shortened;
but after an Hour or two it began to shrink, so that we could make the Weight
swinge like a Pendulum over the Piece of Board it leaned upon before. But
afterward the same Day the Weight stretched out the Rope again as much as
formerly.

It Is observable, that though Morocco be an Inland-Town, and the Soil of those
Parts be usually dry, if not parched; yet Doctor D. who was lately there,
informed me, that about Morocco, notwithstanding the violent Heats he felt in
the Daytime, he observed the Nocturnal Air to be very damp, so as to make the
Clothes he put off at Night exceeding moist, and unfit to be worn without
airing the next Morning. He added, That though the Air was very piercing, and
manifested it self to be so by many other Signs, yet it would not make his
Knife rust in his Pocket, or his Sword in the Scabbard, though it would quickly
produce a Rust in Instruments of that Metal exposed naked to it.

Air too moist cannot be wholesome. The Air in our Parts, viz. about Oakly in
Buckingham-shire, though a high Country, is, as I said before, between
Michaelmas and Alhallontide very moist, especially in rainy Weather, and upon a
Thaw, insomuch that Wainscots, Stair-cases and Pictures will stand all of a
Water, and after run down in great Drops; and at Brill, upon that high Hill,
it is in diverse Houses worse than in the Valley, insomuch that the Stair-cases,
especially if laid in Oil, will run down with Water: the North and North-East
side of our Houses are observed to be moister, insomuch that the Furniture will
rot, if Fires be not made sometimes in the Rooms, and the things aired: This is
observed to be the most aguish Season of the Year. Mr. J. T.

As in another Experiment wetried, whether or no the Removal of the Air out of
the Receiver would much alter the Temperature of the included Medium or Space,
as to Heat and Cold: so we endeavored to discover, whether the Alteration
would be notable, as to Dryness and Moisture. To this purpose we did indeed
wish for such a Hygroscope (or Instrument wherewith to measure the Moisture and
Dryness of the Air) as we used many Years ago, and since found well described
by the industrious Kircher, in a Place of his Ars magnetica, to which I
therefore refer your Lordship. But in regard that to this Instrument there is
requisite the Beard of a wild Oat seasonably gathered, which we could not then
procure; we recalled to Mind another Hygroscope, which, though it discover not
such small Mutations as the former, we thought might be usefully enough
substicuted instead of it.

Of this Hygroscrope, having particularly described it in another Paper, we
shall now only say in a word, that it is made by fastening to the upper End of a
Piece of Gut-string, or great Lutestring, a very light Index, and strongly
fastening the lower end of the same String to the bottom of a Box, or other
convenient Frame, the Circumference of whose upper Part may be at pleasure
divided into Degrees or other Partitions, upon which the Index may move to and
fro. For the Instrument being thus made, when the Air grows moister, the
Vapors insinuating themselves into the Pores of the Filaments that compose the
String, do somewhat shorten it; and thereby those Filaments being altered in
point of Contortion, the Index that is fastened to them turns one way: and upon
the recess of those Vapors, or of others of like nature, the String comes to
be wreathed, and consequently the Index to be moved another way. So that in a
String of about three Inches long, the Point of the Index will be oftentimes
made to change its Place very notably, by such a mutation of the Air, as to
Dryness and Moisture, as was to be met with in the Morning and at Noon of the
same Day, tho such a Change did not always need either Rain, Clouds or Mists,
or the absence of them, to make it notable.

We took then one of these Hygroscopes, and conveyed it into a small Receiver,
that the removal of the Experiment III.
Air being sudden, the Change of Temperature (if any should happen) in the
exhausted Cavity, might be the more sudden and conspicuous. But we found not
that the emptying of the Receiver made the Index sensibly change place. And
though this Experiment were carefully made, yet for the greater Security we
repeated it once more; and neither then perceiving the Index to remove, we kept
the Receiver exhausted for a pretty while, lest there should be some more time
requisite to the Operation of the Medium upon the Instrument. But neither did
this Trial produce any sensible Alteration of the Index; but after the Key was
turned, and Access was thereby given to the excluded Air, tho the Cover were
still kept on, we found that then within some Hours, the Index was considerably
removed. So that as far as these Experiments informed us, the Either or subtle
Matter that succeeds in the place deserted by the Air, if that Place be not
left void; and consequently the thinner and more fluid part of the Atmosphere
(in which the Corpuscles, that may be more properly called Aerial, swim) seems
in its own nature to be very sensibly, neither cold, or hot, or dry, or moist.
I said, as far as these Experiments, I mean those we made in this Engine with
the Thermoscope and Hygroscope, inform us: because this Conjecture (for I dare
yet call it no more) may be examined diverse other ways, whose Events may either
confirm, or oppose, or limit it. In the mean time I could wish, that if your
Lordship had one of Kircher's Hygroscopes at hand, you would frequently and
carefully try the last-recited Experiment with it; because I have found, that
if such a Hygroscope be very well made, it is admirable, as well as pleasant, to
see how small a Mutation of the neighboring Air it will take notice of. But I
thought fit to desire to have it frequently tried, because Care must be taken
that such Motions of the Index be not mistaken for the Effects of the altered
Temper of the Medium in the Receiver, which may in some Cases proceed from
those Steams of the Oil and Water, which we elsewhere mention, that we now and
then, tho but seldom, observed to get out of the Cylinder into the Receiver,
and play up and down there.

TITLE IX.
Of Clouds, Mists and Fogs.

HEaring that an excellent Astronomer of my Acquaintance, had often measured
the Height of Clouds, I enquired of him what Height he observed them to have?
and was answered, That though he had measured eighteen or twenty even of white
Clouds in fair Weather, yet he observed scarce any one to be higher than three
quarters of a Mile, and few of them he found to exceed half a Mile.

A Mist coming, driving upon the Sea toward the Shore, though without any
sensible Wind, will raise a greater Swell of a Sea, than a brisk Wind will do.
N.

I have observed in a Ground near my House, which is somewhat moist in Winter,
as also in other Places, especially after a warm Day, and against fair Weather
in Autumn, a moist bluish Mist to ascend about twenty or thirty Foot high, and
then to subside again in Dew. Mr. J. T.

TITLE X.
Of Terrestrial Steams in the Air.

INquiring of an ingenious Acquaintance of mine, who, in an enclosed Scope of
Ground, has several Veins of differing Metals and Minerals, whether he did not
see, and sometimes smell Steams ascending out of this or that Spot of his
Ground, in Circumstances where their Ascension could not be imputed to the
Action of the Sun? He and his Son, who was also a Virtuoso, told me, that they
had diverse times seen as 'twere Pillars of Fumes ascending like Smoke, whereof
some would be inodorous, some ill-scented, and some, though but seldom,
well-scented. And you may have observed, as well as I, that Fogs, some of which
I have known to be very lasting, and to have a large Spread, did require no
tender Nostrils to perceive them to stink.

I have frequently observed the smoking Steams that arose out of the Shafts of
Mines not wrought in: And it is certain, the Charcoal made in Cornwall
(especially of that Wood that grows in the Mineral Part thereof) does afford a
manifest Arsenical and Sulphurous Smell beyond other Charcoal. N.

Tell est par exemple ce nuage horrible d'une fumee Journal des Scavans III.
1685.
epaisse qui s'eleva de la mer de Crete au Commencement de l'Este de l'an 721.
et qui s'etant repandu dans l'air le fit paroistre tout en feu. La mer n'en fut
pas mesme exempte; car les grosses masses de pierres enflammees qu'on en vit
sortier, et qui se joignirent a l'Isle qu' on nomme Hiera, echauferent si fort
les eaux qu'elles en bruloient les mains.

TITLE XI.
Of Salts in the Air.

IT IS sufficiently known that the Peripatetick Schools teach the Air to be an
Element warm and moist; and if it be an Element, it ought, according to their
Principles, and those of the greatest part of other Naturalists, to be a simple
and Homogeneous Body. But because such an elementary or uniform Purity is much
easier to be found in the Writings of Schoolmen, than amongst the Works of
Nature, many of the modern Philosophers have justly forsaken this Doctrine of
the elementary Simplicity of the Air in some measure; but perhaps very few of
them, if any, have asserted the Air to be so exceedingly compounded a Body, as
in my Opinion it really is. For diverse of them grant indeed, that the
Atmosphere is not absolutely pure, but yet think, that it differs but gradually
from true and simple Air, as Water a little moved and troubled does from clear
and settled Water. But for my part, I confess I acquiesce not in either of
those Notions of the Air. For, as I have elsewhere more fully declared in a
short Discourse, purposely treating of the Substance of the Air, although I
will not deny that there is an Ethereal Matter more subtle than the common
Air, which Either I take to be diffused through all the Interstellar Part of the
Universe known to us, reaching to and surrounding all its great Globles; yet
speaking of the Air which we Men live and breath in, I take our Atmosphere to
consist not only of the purer Either, but in great part of a vast multitude of
Effluvia emitted by the Terraqueous Globe, and the various Bodies it is made up
of, and perhaps in some part also of substantial Emanations from the Celestial
Bodies; and that that whereby the Atmosphere differs from such pure Air, as the
Schools tell us of, is not a bare and indeterminate Feculency, but a confused
Aggregate of several distinct and perhaps disagreeing kinds of Effluvia. And
amongst those, one of the principal sorts I take to be the Saline ones, which
rove up and down amongst others in that vast Ocean of Effluxions, we call the
Atmosphere: wherein yet I do not think there are to be met with, either all
sorts of them every where, or perhaps any sort in like Plenty, in all Places,
and at all Seasons.

To show that the Air is not unfurnished with Parts of a saline Nature, I might
alledg some Considerations that seem to make it probable a priori, as they
speak, that there are always some such Corpuscles emitted into the Air. But
instead of insisting on such Particulars, because they may seem too little of
an Historical Nature, to be fit for this Paper, I shall content my self to take
notice in the general, that almost (if not more than almost) all the Arguments
I have employed, to prove the copious Ascension of subterraneal Steams into the
Air, may be applied to our present Purpose, since amongst the effluviating
Substances of the Terraqueous Globe, there are, as I have declared in another
Paper, huge quantities of common or Marine Salt, besides Nitrous, Aluminous,
Vitriolate, and perhaps other kinds of Salts. To which I shall add, that the
emission of Subterraneal Aporrheas or Effluxes, is not the only Means whereby
the Air may be impregnated with saline Particles; since the Exhalations and
Vapors produced by the Action of the Sunbeams upon the more superficial Parts
of the Earth and Sea, may supply the Air with Swarms of Corpuscles, as well of
saline, as of any other Nature. Not to mention that the Number of these may, in
diverse Places, be much increased, by those Vulcans, that have open Vents to
discharge their Fumes into the Air; by those numerous Fires which burning in
our Chimnies, produce much saline Smoke; and by other ways, which I shall here
forbear to discourse of, for the Reason lately given for my declining Arguments
drawn a priori: though some things applicable to this purpose, will in
likelihood occur amongst the Instances I am about to add, to make it seem
probable a posteriori, or by some Effects and Phenomena, that the Air is
impregnated with saline Corpuscles, that are none of its least active Parts,
and may have great Interest in diverse of its Operations.

From what has been hitherto delivered, to make it probable that there is a
saline Substance in the Air, I thought fit to proceed to other Inquiries. The
first; Whether the Aerial Salts be of differing kind? and if so, which they
are? And the second; How it comes by its saline Substance? But about such
differing Points I durst promise my self but little Satisfaction, and therefore
shall not pretend to give you much.

And yet, to say something to the first of the two Inquiries, I am prone to
think, that the saline Particles of the Atmosphere are not all of one sort, but
that there may be three or four differing kinds of Aerial Salts.

I know that diverse learned Men, some Physicians, some Chemists, and some also
Philosophers, speak much of a Volatile Nitre, that abounds in the Air, as if
that were the only Salt wherewith it is impregnated. But though I agree with
them, in thinking that the Air is in many Places impregnated with Corpuscles of
a Nitrous Nature; yet I confess I have not been hitherto convinced of all that
is wont to be delivered about the Plenty and Quality of the Nitre in the Air:
For I have not found, that those that build so much upon this volatile Nitre,
have made out by any competent Experiment, that there is such a volatile Nitre
abounding in the Air. For having often dealt with Saltpeter in the Fire, I do
not find it easy to be raised by a gentle Heat; and when by a stronger Fire, we
distill it in close Vessels, it is plain that what the Chemists call Spirit of
Nitre, has quite differing Properties from crude Nitre, and from those that are
ascribed to the volatile Nitre of the Air; these Spirits being so far from
being refreshing to the Nature of Animals, that they are exceeding corrosive:
And even when I caused Earth to be dug up in an old Pigeon-House, because that
is accounted the most nitrous sort of Earth, and distilled it with moderate
Fires, I did not find the volatile saline Parts, that came over, to be like
that, which these learned Men conceive the Air to be stored with. Nor have I
met with among them any positive Proof, to evince the Truth of their Opinion;
which yet, as I was saying, I am content to admit as an ingenious Supposition,
'till something be offered that shall prove it to be more; which I think not
impossible to happen, at least as to some Times and Places. But I am not yet
sure, that the Exhalations, that ascend from the subterraneal Parts, and
perhaps also the Sunbeams themselves, may volatilize many of the nitrous
Corpuscles they chance to act upon, and elevate them into the Air, without
analyzing them, or destroying their Texture, as our Fires are wont to do. But
however, I do not take the hitherto mentioned Nitre to be the only Salt, that
impregnates the Air: For when I consider how vast a Portion of the Terraqueous
Globe is covered with the salt Sea, and how vast Quantities of fossile Salt, as
well fine and clear, as course, are dug up in Poland, especially near Cracovia;
in Hungary, Transylvania, and in diverse other Parts of the Earth: When I
consider too, that we seldom find Saltpeter in the Earth, but that there is
Sea Salt mixed with it, which puts the Salt-peter-men to a great deal of
Trouble to separate it; and that even from Saltpeter, that passes for good, I
had Trouble enough, when I had the Curiosity purposely to refine it, to free
the purely Nitrous from the other saline Particles: I am prone to suspect, that
in very many Places, especially maritime ones, the Effluvia of common Salt do,
at least as plentifully as those of Saltpeter, abound in, or impregnate the
Air: which Conjecture might be favored by diverse things, if I had leisure to
insist on them.

That in some Places, that abound with Marchasites, there is a kind of fretting
Vitriolate Salt, copiously dispersed through the Air, I have been inclined to
think, partly by other Inducements, and partly by the Answers made me by a very
observing Man, who lived in a Place, that I remember I visited; where being
forced to reside a good while, he found the Hangings of his Chamber, and the
Curtains of his Bed, rotted by the Vitriolate Steams expired by the Soil, whose
Effluvia had also very manifest and unwelcome Effects, on diverse other things,
that were kept near that Place; tho on the opposite Side of the River, in a
Town that is not half a Mile distant from this Place, neither I, at my being
there, heard any such thing complained of, nor the Relator, who had often
occasion to repair thither, observed any such mischievous Effects; the Soil of
this latter Place being chalky; whereas the other above mentioned is
vitriolate, insomuch that he observed, that when the moist and blackish Mould
had been beaten upon by the Sun, that here and there the superficial Parts
would be as 'twere besprinkled with a somewhat whitish saline Efflorescence.

Besides the hitherto-mention'd kinds of Salts, it seems not improbable to me,
that the Air (especially about great Towns, and some other particular Places)
may be impregnated with volatile Salts, that are of a Nature contrary to Acids.
For that there may be Places in the Earth, even at a good Depth under Ground,
that lodge such Salts, I have been induced to think by the Experience of an
Acquaintance of mine: who, hoping to find in the Salt of what he supposed to be
Virgin-Earth, the true Receptacle of an universal Spirit, from which he
promised himself great and profitable Matters, caused to be dug up a great deal
of a certain Clay, in a Place abounding with Minerals, and obtained thence by
mere Distillation, no inconsiderable Quantities of Spirit and Salt, which in
diverse Qualities, as Smell, Taste, etc. I judged to be near of kin to the
Spirit of Urine or Hartshorn. And yet this Earth was dug up at the Depth of
many Feet, not to say Yards, beneath the Surface of the Ground, (as an
ingenious Potter, from whom the Chemist had the Clay, assured me upon the Place
it self) which I once visited, to see some other choice Minerals, that innobled
that Soil; whence I would have got a Quantity of the abovementioned Clay, but
that it being then the midst of Winter, the Rain had (as the Workmen speak)
drowned (...) Pit.

In great Cities, and also Towns, where much Wood is burnt, it is probable that
numerous Particles of volatile Salt may be dispersed through the neighboring
Air. For, as I have elsewhere shown, the Soot of burned Wood, which is but that
small part of the Smoke which chances in its passage upwards to stick to the
Chimny, does very much abound in a volatile saline Spirit, which by many Trials
are found to have so much Affinity to that of Urine and of Hartshorn, as not to
be easily, but by the Smell distinguished from it.

Besides, in several Places the Putrefaction of Substances, that once were
Parts of animal Bodies, may furnish the Air with volatile Salts, as I have
elsewhere mentioned, that I found, that Urine, without Distillation, will by
bare Putrefaction afford saline and spirituous Parts, that, whilst they yet
swim in the copious Phlegm, that makes up the Body of the Liquor, will
manifestly discover themselves to be volatile, not only by their Smell, but by
their hissing with acid Spirits, and by their dissolving some Bodies, and
precipitating others, according to the manner of volatile sulphurous Salts, as
those that abound in Spirit of Hartshorn, Blood, etc. And I am apt to think,
that it is not only in the parts of Animals, but also in those of many
Vegetables, that Putrefaction may either extricate or produce volatile Salts.
And I remember, I have observed in some succulent Vegetables, that chancing to
lie in a Heap together, in a convenient Season of the Year, to make them rot; I
observed, I say, when the Putrefaction was come to a certain Point, that the
Stink did so resemble that of Carrion, that 'twas not easy for me to believe it
came from Cadaverous Plants, not Animals. And that it is not impossible for a
Vegetable to afford, without the Help of an Additament, a volatile Salt, even
in forma sicca, may be gathered from what I elsewhere relate, of my having
distilled such a Salt from a certain spirituous Seed, though I freely confess,
I never obtained any (without previous Incineration) from above two or three
Vegetables. But of this enough in this Place.

I shall now add, that besides the more simple Salts hitherto enumerated, it is
not unlikely, that in some Places the Air may sometimes contain compounded
Salts. For I have elsewhere shown, that some sorts of saline Spirits, meeting
one another in the Air, may there convene. And I elsewhere teach how to order a
couple of Liquors so, that one will never of it self afford any thing in a dry
form; and yet the spirituous Effluvia of this Liquor, meeting with those of the
other, will exhibit a volatile and saline Body in a dry form; though the
Liquors themselves being mingled, will not afford any such Substance. What I
have elsewhere delivered concerning subterraneal Steams, may make it probable,
that at least now and then, and in some Places, there may be sent up from under
Ground into the Air, among other Effluvia, store of saline ones, which needs
not be supposed all of them to be of an uncompounded Nature. With which that
agrees very well, that was related to me by a very intelligent Acquaintance of
mine, that lived long in Parts of America, where there was a Vulcan, which he
and some others having the Curiosity to visit, told me, that before they came
any thing near the Fire, or were offended by the Heat, not only the Skin of his
Face was almost corroded by the Sharpness of the Exhalations, but the Color of
his Hair was altered by it; which kept him from prosecuting his intended
Discovery. It Is a known thing, and I have received Information of it from more
than one Eyewitness, that about Mount Vesuvius, the ascending Exhalations,
that issue out at some of the Holes, are of so saline and sulphurous a Nature,
that part of them stick about the Orifices of those Vents, in the form of
Flower of Brimstone; of which a learned Acquaintance of mine brought away some
Quantity. And I have had brought me from some of those Vulcans, a Stone, whose
Caveties abounded with a white Salt, which, by fit Trials purposely made, was
found near akin to Sal-Armoniac, and easily resoluble into a Salt, whereof one
part was somewhat fixed, and the other very volatile, which made it highly
probable, that the Salt was compounded in the Bowels of the Vulcan: whence I
have been credibly informed, that great Quantities of it have been cast up in
the fiery Eruptions, and therefore Store of it might in Likelihood be dispersed
through the Air, since I found the Salt it self to be sublimable.

But, besides the saline Substances hitherto mentioned, which may be referred
to determinate Species, I think it not impossible, that the Air may, at least
in some Times and Places, be impregnated with Corpuscles of a saline Nature,
whether simple, or compounded, or of both kinds, not easily reducible to any of
the sorts, we have been speaking of, or are acquainted with. For which Reason I
shall not presume to give them any other Denomination, than that indefinite one
of Anonymous. And I have been inclined to think, there may be such Bodies in
the Air, by these two Inducements. The first; That the particular aerial Salts,
that have been hitherto recited, are but few, as it seems probable, by what I
have said in other Papers of subterraneal Steams and Menstruments; and that
therefore there may ascend out of the Earth into the Air, saline Fumes
differing enough from those, whose kinds we have hitherto described. But
besides this Consideration a priori, (as they speak) Experience has presented
us with some Phenomena, that seems a posteriori to confirm this Conjecture. For
there happen such Changes to some Bodies, by being exposed to the Air, as,
though I am not sure, and therefore shall not be confident, that they are
mainly produced by some nameless Substance of a saline Nature, may yet make it
allowable to suspect them to proceed thence. And amongst these I shall take
leave to insert some, which I deny not to be probably referrable, either to one
or other of the formerly enumerated kinds of aerial Saltness. For laying these
Instances before you together, they may, by appearing thus associated, give the
stronger Probability to our Opinion, that there are saline Substances in the
Air. And those Instances, that are not so proper to persuade you, that there
are anonymous Salts, may serve to confirm that there are, at least in diverse
Places, differing sorts of aerial Salts. I remember I have more than once
visited old Glass-windows, in high and ancient Buildings, and found some of the
Panes of Glass here and there corroded, as if they had been worm-eaten; which
probably enough argued the sharp and fretting Corpuscles, to have been carried
along with the Winds to which they were exposed, as will not easily be reduced
to any formerly named Salts, whose being unable to corrode Glass, especially no
finer than that was I speak of, is sufficiently known to Chemists.

Besides the abovementioned Phenomena, others have occurred to me, which
possibly 'twould not be thought impertinent to subjoin on this occasion; but I
choose rather to reserve them for another Discourse; and now should put an End
to this, but that I dare not conceal from you, that I sometimes had Thoughts of
trying, whether a Discovery may not be made, what kind of Saltness there is to
be found in the Air, and whether the aerial Saltness does or does not abound
there, at least at this or that time. But this I freely confess to be so
difficult an Attempt, that all that I can offer pretends but to dissuade you
from rejecting it, as too desperate and extravagant a thing to be fit to be
tried.

And I speak the less promisingly of what I am to say in the remaining part of
this Paper, because I have not by me any Notes to assist my Memory, (which I
dare not trust alone) concerning the Issues of the not numerous Trials, I had
Opportunity to attempt in pursuance of those Thoughts. This I well remember,
that among other ways of making the intended aerial Discoveries, I looked upon
this as the least unpromising, that such Subjects should be carefully chosen
out, as being disposed to be differingly wrought upon, according to the
differing sorts of Saltness, that may be found predominant in the Air.

This more general way of investigating the Salts of the Air, may contain
diverse particular Methods, of which I shall now touch upon the following three.

First, It may be worth while, to expose to the Air such Bodies, as we judge
fittest to be wrought upon by the Salt, that we think likeliest to be met with
in it. So where we guess the Air to be impregnated with Nitre, we may expose
Lime to it, or some other Body that we think disposed to imbibe or retain such
a Saltness. We may also hang up in such an Air, Clothes or Silks died with such
Colors, that Nitrous (for Instance) or Salino-Sulphureous Spirits (as some
Chemists call them) have been found peculiarly apt to make to fade, or to
discolor them. In the Places where we suspect vitriolate Steams to abound,
some appropriated Preparations of Sulphur, either common or metalline, may be
exposed to try whether they will acquire a Blackness, as I have several times
found some of those Sulphurs, though otherwise of no dark Color, to do, upon
the least Contact of vitriolate Corpuscles. In some Places also, which are
judged likely to afford subterraneal Steams, guesses may be made, whether this
or that kind of Salt ascends into the Air, by spreading upon the Ground, in
Places free from Dirt and Dusts, large Pieces of clean and white Linen Cloth,
that has no Relish of Soap or Lees; and observing, after they have lain a
competent while, whether, and how they are discolored, and what kind of
Saltness, if any, is to be found in the Moisture imbibed by them, from the
ascending Steams and falling Dew.

The next of the abovementioned ways of inquirng after the Saltness of the
Air, may be, to find, if it be possible, some one Body, that is both capable to
be wrought on by several aerial Salts, and will be so differingly wrought on by
them, as to discover which kind of Salt it is, that has produced the Change.
That it is very difficult to find such a Body, I will readily grant, but that it
may be possible I will not be forward to deny. For having pitched upon Copper
to make this Trial with, though the Attempt did not succeed according to my
Wish, yet perhaps it was chiefly for want of Time and Accommodations that it
miscarried. For having taken Plates of Copper beaten thin, (without Experiment
I.
regarding their Bigness, or Figure, or Smoothness, as things not necessary to
my purpose) I caused the Surfaces to be made very clean, that the Colors might
be the more easily produced, and the better discerned; then, keeping these over
Glasses wherein were placed diverse Spirits, as of common Salt, and of Nitre,
partly sincere, and partly diluted with Water, I observed, as I expected, that
though I put the Glasses in no Heat, yet there ascended fretting Particles out
of the Liquors, and that within less than a Day, the Steams of the two
abovementioned Liquors had much darkened the Surfaces of the Copper Plates,
they met with in their way, the keeping them a while in the Air was not hard to
know by the differing Discolorations that appeared, which Plate had been
invaded by the saline Corpuscles, and which by the nitrous: Which I did not at
all wonder at, because I have formerly found, as I have elsewhere noted, that
whereas Spirit of Nitre will make of Copper a greenish blew Solution, Spirit of
Salt will, if duly employed, dissolve that Metal into a grass-green Liquor; as
the Spirit of Soot and that of Urine will into a deep Blew, almost like
Ultramarine. But, as I said, the want of Time, of which good store may be
requisite for such Trials, kept me from prosecuting my Attempt to an Issue.
Notwithstanding which I look not upon the Design as desperate, not only because
of the Encouragement I have already mentioned to resume it: But because I have
observed Pieces of malleable Copper, brought me, to examine, out of an English
Mine, (which is yet concealed) to be overcast here and there with a fair
Verdigrease, which by Circumstances I judged to have been produced, not by
gross Liquors, but by the Air impregnated with Steams fit to work on that
Metal. And possibly there may be other subterraneal Bodies, and even metalline
ones, that by their Degree of Color, or peculiar kind of Rust or Stain, that
they will acquire in the Air, may help us to guess, what Substances, and among
others what Salts the Air of that Place is impregnated with. I have been in a
great and stately House, which being oddly seated, had this peculiar
Inconvenience, upon the Score of the Steams that infested the Air, that those
that dwelt in it, as one of the chief of themselves complained to me, could not
keep their Silver Plate, of which they had great Store, from being blemished by
odd Discolorations, or as they seemed to think it, Rust; though when it was not
used, they carefully kept it in a Place judged convenient for such a Purpose.
And I have been informed by an observing Man who lived there some time, that
there is nothing more generally known in Amsterdam, than that their Silver
Plate there, exposed a little while to the common Air, tarnishes immediately,
contracting a dirty Color, partaking of yellow and black. Another Instance or
two, though not afforded by Plate, I could mention to the same Purpose; but I
reserve them for another Place; my Haste obliging me to pass on to the last of
the three ways I proposed, of investigating the Differences of aerial Salts.

The third way may be looked upon, if you please, as a Variation of the second;
but there is this Difference betwixt them, that here we make use of metalline
Bodies, not crude, but already prepared by some Chemical Operations; so that
being beforehand reduced to very small Parts, by the Intervention of saline
Substances, the Operation of the Air upon them is wont to be much the sooner
performed. In this third way then we employ such factititious Minerals or other
Bodies, as having for the most Part an adventitious Color already, will change
that Color by being exposed to the Air. For it seems not impossible, but that
by diligently observing what Difference may be found in the Discolorations,
produced in these Substances by the differing kinds of Salts, as Nitrous,
Salino-Sulphureous, etc. that we have shown may be met with in the Air, some
guesses may be made in a short time of this or that Salt, which has the chief
Stroke in the Production of the exhibited Color. And I shall on this occasion
mention two or three Bodies, without determining, till I be better satisfied,
whether their Changes proceed only or chiefly from the Salt of the Air; but I
am content not to pretermit them, because if they do not prove what I propose,
they will at least clear the meaning of it, and may however help us to guess at
the Resemblance or Difference of Airs in several Places, by the Likeness or
Unlikeness of the produced Changes of Color, whether these Changes proceed
from saline, or from any other Substance intermingled with the Air.

If we precipitate a strong Solution of good Silver Experiment II.
made in Aqua fortis, with a competent Quantity of Spirit of Sea Salt, we shall
have a Powder, which at first will be very white; but if the Liquor be not
poured off, this being exposed for a good while to the Air, it would acquire on
the Surface a dark Color, which perhaps an attentive Eye will discern somewhat
various, as this or that kind of Saltness happens to be predominant in the Air.

We took an equal Weight of good Filings of Copper, Experiment III.
and powdered Sal-Armoniac, which being well mixed, were put into a covered
Crucible, and kept in a moderate Fire over ignited Coals, till the Sal-Armoniac
had either quite or almost done smoking; then as much of the remaining Mass as
could be parted, was taken out, and looked of a dark Color; but this Mass
being grossly beaten, and exposed for some time to the Air, looked like a kind
of Verdigrease, which is a Substance, whose Color may be observed somewhat to
vary, according to the Nature of the particular Salts, which by working on, and
imbodying with the Copper, produce the Pigment. But a Parcel of the same Mass
being, before the Air had time to work much upon it, grossly powdered, and
hermetically sealed in a glass Egg, to fence it from the Air, and left in a
South Window, did not appear discolored, when the out side of the other Parcel
showed like Verdigrease: which seems to argue, the Change of Color to have
been made by the aerial Salt, if we suppose the Moisture of the Airto have had
no Interest in the Change, or to have concurred to it, but as a kind of Vehicle
assistent to the Salt.

I also took Spirit of the Soot of Wood, and having Experiment IV.
poured a little of it on the Filings of Copper, my Expectations were answered
by my finding, that the Liquor dissolved some Parts of the Metal into a deep
and lovely Azur like Ultramarine; and that this Solution being suffered to grow
dry in an open Glass, by the the mere Operation of the Air, the Ceruleous
Color very soon degenerated, even before the matter was quite dry, into a
Cyanious Color, such as may be seen in good Turquoises. And to manifest that
this Change proceeded not from any Peculiarity in the Spirit of Soot, and that
this Spirit acted as abounding with a Salino-sulphureous Salt; I shall add,
that I had the like Success in a Trial made with an urinous Spirit drawn from
animal Substances, and put upon crude Filings of Copper. And in those Trials I
sometimes observed the Differences of Colors, that did not discourage me from
hoping, that the Prosecution of them might not be insignificant to my Purpose.

I have not been solicitous to describe the forementioned Changes of Colors
more particularly, because it had been very difficult to do so, and therefore I
judged it more expedient not to attempt it. For there is so great a Variety of
Colors, that few but Painters can exactly enumerate, and distinguish them by
proper Names. And yet, besides those more noted ones, there are many others,
for which, though our Language, nor perhaps any other, is not copious enough to
furnish us with distinct Appellations, yet our Eyes, especially when they have
been attentively conversant with such Objects, are sharp enough to discern
them: and by the Help of these nameless, as well as the stated Colors, I am
apt to think a heedful Observer may perceive diverse Variations in the Colors
of the Bodies, we have been speaking of, that may assist him to guess, what
Substance it is in the Air whereto these Diversities may be ascribed. And as
Nature is much more rich in Things, than our Dictionaries are in Words, so has
she furnished Men with Sensories capable of distinctly perceiving a far greater
Variety of Objects, than they are able verbally to express. And this might be
shown by Instances, in the Organs and Objects of Senses less acute than Sight,
whose Subtilty in distinguishing things I could exemplify, not only by what is
related, but by what has been performed by some Persons, not unknown to me,
particularly our famous Doctor Harvey. But Examples of this kind I have not
leisure to stay on; and therefore without spending more Words upon this third
way of discovering aerial Salts, I shall barely recommend the Care of such
Observations to their Curiosity, who shall think it worth while to make them.

With how little Confidence of Success, Trials that have the Aims of those I
have been speaking of, are to be attempted, not only Consideration, but
Experience has made me sensible. But yet I would not discourage humane
Curiosity from adventuring even upon slight Probabilities, where the Nobleness
of the Subjects and Scope may make even small Seize very desirable. Those
adventurous Navigators that have made Voyages for Discovery in unknown Seas,
when they first discerned something of obscure near the Horizon, at a great
Distance off, have often doubted, whether, what they had so imperfect a Sight
of, were a Cloud, or an Island, or a Mountain: But though usually it were more
likely to be the former, (as that which more frequently occurred than the
latter) yet they judged it advisable to stere toward it, till they had
attained a clearer Prospect of it: For if it were a deluding Meteor, they would
not however sustain such a Loss in that of no great Labor, as in case it were
a Country, they would in the Loss of what might prove a noble and rich
Discovery. And if they desisted too soon from their Curiosity, they could not
rationally satisy themselves, whether they slighted a Cloud, or neglected a
Country.

I do not perceive that the Air of our Inland Parts is considerably impregnated
with Esurine Salt; since I do not find the Bars and Casements of our Windows
much impaired by Rust after near eighty Years standing; or that they are more
rusty toward one Quarter than another; though the Air hereabout (viz. Oakly in
Buckingham-shire) is very damp about the End of Autumn, and Beginning of
Winter. So that I conceive this Salt either proceeds from the Sea-Vapours near
the Seacoasts, or else from the Dissolution of this Esurine Salt in the Air,
upon the burning of Sea or other mineral Coals. Mr. J. T.

Mox ollam ex igni removent; postea ex refrigerata Agricola de Re Metallica,
Lib. duodec.
eximunt halinitrum purissimum: quod candidi marmoris speciem gerit; atque tunc
etiam id quod terrenum est, in fundo residet. At terra, ex qua dilutum fuit
factum, and rami quernei vel consimilis arboris alternis sub dio ponantur, and
aqua quae combibit halinitrum conspergantur: quo modo quinque vel sex annis
rursus apta fit and conficiendum dilutum. Halinitrum quodammodo purum, quod dum
terra tot annos quievit interea, ortum fuit, and quod lapidei parietes in
cellis vinariis and locis opacis exudant, cum primo diluto permistum decoquatur.

Si vero locus aliquis talium venarum copiam suppeditaverit, ipsae statim non
conjiciantur in castella; sed primo convehantur in areas, atque cumulentur:
quanto enim diutius aeri and pluviis expositae fuerint tanto meliores fiunt.
Nam in ejusmodi cumulis, aliquot post mensibus, quam venae in areas fuerunt
congestae, nascuntur fibrae long venis bonitate praestantes: deinde vehantur
in sex, plurave castella, longa and lata ad novem pedes, ad quinque alta.

Si vero dum dilutum recoquitur, separata non fuerint, mox ex minoribus vasis
infundatur in majora, eaque concludantur: in quibus item atramentum sutorium
separatum ab alumine concrescit: utrumque excisum, and in hypocausto siccatum
divendatur dilutum, quod in vasis and cupis non concrevit in cortinam refusum
recoquatur: sed terra, quae in fundo cujusque cortinae resedit, ablata in
castello una cum venis, denuo aqua and urina diluatur. At terra quae in
castellis diluto, postquam effluxit, superfuit egesta and coacervata quotidie,
rursus magis ac magis fit aluminosa, non aliter atque terra, ex qua halinitrum
fuit confectum, suo succo plenior fit: quare denuo in castella conjicitur, and
aquae affusae ea percolantur.

A learned Observer, who practiced Physic in one of the most Southern of the
English Colonies, being asked by me about the Effects of the Air there upon
Iron; affirmed to me, that the great Guns there are so subject to become rusty,
that after they have lain a very few Years in the Air, one may with a Hammer
knock off whole Scales, or rather Cakes of Crocus Murtis: and he observed, that
those Guns, that lay only exposed to the Air, did this much more than those
that by Accidents were drowned, and lay covered with the salt Water.

And since Dew is made of Steams of the Terrestrial Globe, which whilst they
retain that Form, and were not yet convened into Drops, did swim to and fro in
the Air, and made part of it; the Phenomena that show the Power of Dew in
working on solid Bodies, may help to manifest how copiously the Air may be
impregnated with subtle saline Parts. Wherefore I shall here add, that having
met with a Person that was bred as well a Scholar as a Traveller, and had
visited not only some of the maritine Places of Brasil, but some of the inward
Parts of that vast Country, I inquired of him about the Subtilty of Brasilian
Dew, and its Power to rust Metals, about which he told me, that it was
certainly very great, and would not only rust Knives and such Instruments, but
likewise Money, which he assured me he had particularly observed; adding, that
in several Places the Portugals kept their great Guns cased over, that the Dew
might not fall upon them, and by its Corrosiveness so rust them, as to be apt
after a while to break in the Discharge. And when I demanded whether he tasted
the Dew, to observe the Saltness of it? he replied, that he had not, but that
he had in diverse Places observed, that it left the Grass, etc. that it had
rested on, covered over with a pure white Salt, as if it had been a hoar Frost.

An ingenious Traveller, and Student of Physic, being discoursed with by me
about some Particularities of his Country (which is Sweedland) relating to
Minerals, and their Effects upon the Air, assured me, that in a City, or
notable Town called Fahlun, which is built on the lower Part of an Hill,
containing one of the best Copper Mines in Sweden, the Exhalations, that are
copiously emitted by the latent Minerals, do so affect the Air in and about the
Place, that their Silver Coins are oftentimes notably discolored by them, not
seldom made even black or blackish, though the Money be kept well tied up in
Bags or Purses, and these perhaps placed one within another, and the whole
Aggregate be kept locked up in Coffers or Presses made of Wood of perhaps an
Inch thick: He added, that these subterraneal Steams have manifest Effects upon
Brass, (wherewith that Country abounds) insomuch that there being kept in the
principal Church seven Crowns made of that Metal upon a particular Occasion,
the sulphurous Steams made those that looked to them, take the Pains to
cleanse and brighten them at a Months End, till finding that the Labor was
every Month to begin again, they at length grew weary of it, and suffered these
Crowns to grow, as they yet continue, as black (to use his own Phrase) as the
Tunnel of a Chimny: This he averred to be true, as having a good Opportunity to
be sure of it, in regard of his being a Native of this Town. And he further
assured me, that the corrosive Exhalations did so penetrate the Bars and
Vessels of Iron that lie exposed to the Air, that after a while, it is easy with
a Hammer to knock off Scales of Mars, which are friable into a Powder like
Crocus, save that the Color is more dark.

TITLE XII.
Of Sulphur, and inflamable Particles in the Air; and of Lightning, and its
Effect.

YEsterday a Neopolitan Lord, a Person of high Quality, and very curious, being
asked by me some Questions about some natural Phenomena relating to Vesuvius
and the adjacent Country? assured me, that having had occasion to stay for
diverse Months at a Country House, but little distant from Naples, he took much
Pleasure, taking the Air on Horseback upon a very sulphurous Soil, to take
notice of diverse Observables to be met with there; and that he often found,
that when his Horse trod something hard upon the Ground, there would be
produced a great, and as it were a crackling Noise, which would have frighted a
Stranger; and that oftentimes he could discern, that where his Horse had trod,
there would presently arise a Dust, and Fumes that were manifestly sulphurous
and ready to take Fire: adding, that sometimes he thought that they actually
did so. He further told me, that he sometimes for Curiosity sake, caused some
Clods, or as it were Turfs, to be cut out of that Soil, and laid in a kind of
Heap, and that then in the Night he could observe, that the Steams that
plentifully issued thence would sometimes be kindled by or in the Air, as they
ascended in it.

The same Nobleman told me, that when some Years ago there were Eruptions of
Fire in Mount Vesuvius, he and others observed, with Amazement and Horror, that
the Flame, which shot up into the Air from the Volcano, was of so prodigious a
Height, as invited them to measure it with a Quadrant, by which they found it
to be near two Miles high: And when I asked if he comprised in that Height the
Altitude of the Mountain it self? he answered, that he did not, for the Flame
that appeared above the top of the Mountain, appeared as high as the Mountain
it self; and 'twas from the top of the Hill, and not the bottom, that they
computed the Height of the Flame. He added, that sometimes the Earth would
tremble, and there would be Discharges of such vast Stones, and other heavy
things, that he saw some Massis of ignited Matter thrown up a great way into
the Air, that were bigger than the Chamber he did me the Honor to visit me in,
though that were a large Room for a Bedchamber.

Voila tout ce qu' on peut dire de cette Isle, qui semble Voyage de Levant, p.
203.
un enfer, car on voit la mer du port, and de la cost toute noire and Brulee
d' un petit escueil, qui paroist depuis enuiron soixante ans, and d' ou on vit
sortir en ce temps la une grande flamme, qui y a laisse une ouuerture si
profonde, que si on y jette une pierre, on ne l' entend point tomber. Mais ce
qui est arrive depuis en ce port, n' est pas moins estonnant, je le rapporteray
icy comme je l' ay appris de diuerses persons en plusieurs endroits. Il y a
enuiron 18. ans que durant la nuit Accident extraordinaire a Santorini.
d' un certain Dimanche, commenca dans le port de Santorini un tres grand bruit
lequel s' entendit jusques a Chio, qui en est eloigne de plus de deux cent
milles, mais de tell sort qu' on crut a Chio que c' estoit l' armee
Venitienne qui combattoit contre celle des Turcs, ce qui sit que des le matin
chacun monta aux lieux les plus eleuez pour en estre spectateur, and me
souuiens que le Reverend Pere Bernard Superieur des Capucins de Chio, homme
venerable, and tres digne de foy, me conta qu' il y avoit este trompe comme les
autres, car il crut aussi bien qu' eux entendre plusieurs coups de canon;
cependant ils ne virent rien, and en effet ce fut un feu qui se prit dans la
terre du fond du port de Santorini, and y fit un tell effet, que depuis le matin
jusqu' au soir il sortit du fond de la mer quantite de pierres de ponce, qui
montoient en haut auec tant de roideur and tant de bruit, qu' on eust dit que
ce fusset autant de coups decanon, and cela infecta tellement l' air, que dans
ladite Isle de Santorini, il mourut quantite de persons, and plusieurs de la
mesme Isle en perdirent la veue, qu' ils recouurerent pourtant quelques jours
apres. Cette insection s' estendit aussi loin que le bruit qui l' avoit
precede, car non seulement dans cette Isle, mais mesme a Chio, and a Smyrne,
tout l' argent deuint rouge, soit qu' il sut dans les Coffres, ou dans les
poclies; and nos Religieux demeurans en ces lieux la me dirent que tous leurs
calices en estoient deuenus rouges. Au bont de quelques jours cette infection
se dissipa, and l' Argent reprit sa premiere couleur. Ces pierres de ponce qui
sortirent de la couurirent tellement la mer de l' Archipel, que durant quelque
temps, quand il regnoit de certains Vents, il y avoit des ports qui en estoient
bouchez, en facon qu' il n' en pouuoit sortir aucune barque, pour petite qu'
elle fut, que ceux qui estoient dedans ne se fissent le chemin au travers de
ces pierres de ponce auec quelques pieux; and on en voit encor a present par
toute la mer Mediterranee, mais en petite quantite, cela s' estant disperse ca
and la. Seneque raconte en une de ses Epistres que Santorini est bastie sur des
mines de souphre, and cesont else qui fournissent asseurement la matiere pour
allumer ce feu. On dit qu' Alexandre le Grand mesura la mer en cet endroit, and
n' y trouua point de fond. Il y a pourtant une petite Isle appellee Firesia, a
la point de laquelle on peut donner fonds, and point en aucun autre endroit.

It has been often observed, that upon the Falling of Thunder there has been
produced in the Air, near the Places where it fell, a strong Odor of Burnt
Brimstone. And I remember, that being one Night at a Town built almost upon the
great Lake of Geneva, anciently called Lacus Lemanus: The Thunder was so
violent as much frighted the Inhabitants; though (by reason of the
Neighborhood of the high Mountains of Savoy and Switzerland) Thunders be very
frequent there: And the next Day I had a great Complaint made me, of the strong
Stink of Sulphur, produced by the Thunder that fell hard by, into the Lake, and
was ready to overcome by its Smell, even a Soldier that stood Centionel near
it.

On July 24. An. 1681. The Ship Albemarl, whereof Mr. Edward Lad was then
Master, being an hundred Leagues from Cape Cod in Latitude 48. about 3 P. M.
met with a Thunder Storm, the Lightning burnt the Main-top-sail, split the main
Cap in pieces, rent the Mast all along. There was in special one dreadful Clap
of Thunder, in Report bigger than of a great Gun, at which all the Ships
Company were amazed: then did there fall something from the Clouds upon the
Stern of the Boat, which it broke into many small Parts, split one of the
Pumps, the other Pump much hurt: it was a Bituminous Matter, smelling much like
fired Gunpowder: it continued burning in the Stern of the Boat. They did with
Sticks dissipate it, and poured much Water on it, and yet they were not able,
by all they could do, to extinguish it, until such time as all the Matter was
consumed. But the strangest thing of all is yet to be mentioned.

When Night came, observing the Stars, they perceived that their Compasses were
changed. As for the Compass in the Biddekel the North Point was turned clear
South. There were two other Compasses unhung in the Locker in the Cabin, in
one of which the North Point stood South like that in the Biddekel. As for the
other the North Point stood West, so that they sailed by Needle, whose Polarity
was quite changed. The Seamen were at first puzzled to work their Vessel right,
considering that the South Point of their Compass was now become North: But
after a little Use it was easy to them; thus did they sail a thousand Leagues.
As for the Compass, wherein the Lightning had made the Needle to point
Westward; since is was brought to New England the Glass being broken, it has,
by means of the Air coming to it, lost its Virtue. One of their Compasses which
had quite changed the Polarity, from North to South, is still extant in that
Country, in the Hands of Mr. Increase Mather; the North Point of the Needle
does remain fixed to this Day as it did immediately after the Lightning caused
the Alteration.

An industrious Gentleman that was long an eminent Planter of Trees, wherewith
he furnished many of his Neighbors, presented me with a Piece of a Branch that
seemed to have had a Slit, for it reached through the Bark almost to the very
Wood, from one End to the other, but had now the Lips of the Wound overgrown on
each side with new Bark: Of this kind of Gashes, he told me, he found in other
Branches of the same Tree, which made him think that some envious Knave had
done this in Spite: but considering the Circumstances more curiously, he found
that Conjecture much discountenanced by some of them, and suspected that these
Wounds must have been made by some designless Agent. For by his own
Observations, and those of his Friends, it appeared, that these Fissures are to
be met with, not only in diverse others of his own Trees, of differing kinds,
and in differing Plantations, but also in the Trees of several others, which
tho growing in the same Country, were remote enough from his: so that it having
been observed with some Wonder, that in the foregoing Season, Lightnings had
been very numerous and frequent, he and his Friends concluded, for Reasons that
need not be here repeated, that the abovementioned Gashes were some of the odd
Effects of those Lightnings, which kept me from wondering at his negative
Answer, to the Curiosity I had to know, whether all these Wounds of the Trees
looked the same way, as East or West, North or South. For I had formerly
observed, that the same Fulmen or Flash of Lightning reaching to the Earth in
the Form of Fire, appeared by the recent Effects as well of its impetuous
Motion as of its violent Heat, to have moved in an irregularly winding-Line:
which made me compare its Motion to that of a Squib, and helped me to solve
some odd Phenomena of Lightning, that this is not the fittest Place to
discourse of: the foregoing Mention of what happened to the Trees, being
designed, partly to preserve the Memory of an unusual Phenomenon, and partly to
show that whatever is wont to happen in Animals, Lightning is not always
destructive or corruptive of Vegetables, since the Wounds inflicted to Trees
were happily cicatrized, and did not kill or poison the Plants. And whether
this Phenomenon were produced, by some mineral Exhalations kindled in the Air,
or by the violent and irregular Motion of some such Substance, or by both
together, the Phenomenon will be pertinent to the Subject or Design of the
present Tract.

TITLE XIII.
Of Celestial Influences or Effluviums in the Air.

To Mr. HARTLIB.
Dear Sir,
I Shall not I hope altogether forget the Charge which you have been pleased to
lay upon me, in reference to the Consideration of all winy Liquors, their
Affections, and the several Distempers incident to them, with my Thoughts about
the preserving of them, so as may best retard the Quickness of their Motion,
and hinder their Dyscrasy and Corruption.

To which End an exact Scrutiny into the Air, its Quality, Temperament and
Motion, and an Inquiry of the Efficacy and Force that this has upon all such
Bodies, will be in some measure necessary.

And this puts me in mind to leave one Request with you, viz. to beg-your
Assistance and Countenance on all Occasions to Mr. Street, when he shall at
any time wait on you, who both as to his Undertaking, and to the Modesty and
Simplicity of his Spirit, does very much emulate our so much joint-esteemed
Friend Mr. Mercator, who, though he may differ from the former, in reference to
his Method, or to some of the profounder Parts of Learning: yet I think it very
possible to reconcile them in the main, and cannot but expect something
extraordinary, in the asserting and perfecting of the Theory of the Planets,
will be brought forth between them, which I should the more gladly see, by how
much most Scholars complain of it, as of a thing hitherto wanting, by how much
also I guess, that having the Examples of so many who have already attempted
the same thing in vain, they will find themselves the more constrained to lay
down some new choice, singular and undeniable Hypothesis, for the better
Invitation of the Admittance of their Opinion among Learned Men, although such
a Work be no less necessary also for other Reasons.

For if we assert not the Theory of the Planets rightly, and upon such Ground
as are indubitably demonstrable; we shall never be free from Errors and
Disagreements in Opinion about their Motions, and the right Calculation of them.

And if we mistake in either of these, we must mistake of the true Place in the
Heavens, in which each Planet is, or constantly ought to be: And if we at all
err in our Judgment of their due Places, it is impossible we should assert
their several Aspects, and the mutual Influences and Virtues they have (through
this) one upon another: And so the Physical Use of their Motions falls to the
Ground wholly, or at least becomes subject to very much Uncertainty.

And truly, if there be no such Use at all of the Motions of these Bodies, as
that which I may call Physical, viz for predicting, and for (in some measure)
determining the Affections, Dispositions and Alterations, that are introduced
into several things here, either immediately, or into the Air immediately, by
reason of the Course of these superior Bodies, it would very much lessen and
depretiate with me, that Toil, Cost, Pains, Watchings, and continual Exercises,
and Endeavors, that have been used for the gaining of exact Observations in
Astronomy. Seeing when we have done all, and obtained all beyond the mere bare
Knowledge of them, we can propound no End, Benefit, Use or Advantage, that may
recompense the Trouble and Pains bestowed upon them, (at least upon some of
them) nor so much as any real or particular Relation, between us and them; and
if so, we know them only to know them.

But we shall at present presume the contrary, and therefore shall crave leave
to say, that although several Objections are commonly brought against any such
Use or Application of these Bodies, or of their Power, Influence or Motions,
which are occasioned partly by the Superstition and Paganism incident to this
kind of Doctrine; partly by the Imposture, Ignorance, and want of Learning,
generally observed in the Persons professing this Knowledge; partly by the
manifest Mistakes and Uncertainty that there is in the Predictions of this
Nature; and partly by the Inexplicableness of the Way or Manner how they come
to affect one another, which admits not, as many conceive, of an easy visible
or familiar Demonstration. Yet all these Objections, if thoroughly examined, do
not, as we humbly conceive, really null or take away the Possibility of the
thing simply, but are raised rather against the Enormities and Imperfections
that are confessed to be in it: and it may, notwithstanding all those
Objections, still be certain, that these Celestial Bodies (according to the
Angles they make one upon another, but especially with the Sun or with the
Earth in our Meridian, or with such and such other Points in the Heavens) may
have a Power to cause such and such Motions, Changes and Alterations (stronger
or weaker, according to the Nature of the Angle) as the Extremities of which
shall at length be felt in every one of us: And this may be evidenced, 1st. by
undeniable Experiments, not only from things inanimate and vegitate, but from
the undoubted Observations of Physicians, as well in several Chronical as acute
Distempers, and more eminently in all Lunatic, Epileptick, Paralitick or
Lethargick Persons. 2dly. It may further admit of a Demonstration: for if the
extreme Motions of Physic be Generation and Corruption, and the mean Motions
Rarefaction and Condensation, allowing then these Bodies to have a share in
promoting the mean Motions, (viz) of Rarefaction and Condensation, we shall or
may soon be convinced, that their Effects then upon all other things here,
cannot but be exceeding considerable.

For the better understanding of which, I shall offer, a little more largely to
you my Conceptions, viz.

That to speak properly and simply, I take Generation and Corruption to be the
Extremes of Motion, rather than Motions themselves: for the Scope, Intentions
or Effects of all Physical Motions (strictly so taken) are only to one of these
Ends, viz. either for Generation or Corruption: and these two are they also
which limit and bound all Motion; for beyond these Meets there is no Physical
Progression, and therefore these two must be the true Termini, as well a quo,
as ad quem, of all such Motion, seeing all things are corrupted to be
generated, and all things generated are at length corrupted.

But if these be rather the Termini and Extremes of Motion, then Motion it
self. We must acknowledge, there are Motions, which Nature uses as Means,
between these two Extremes; which mean Motion must be as opposite also one to
another, as the two Extremes. Otherwise we should never be at a Certainty,
which way Nature intends by her Motion: otherwise also we must say one and the
same Course, or one and the same thing in Nature, may simply and of it self, be
the immediate Cause of Generation and Corruption, of Life and of Death, of
Hardness and Softness, which is absurd and impossible.

Now as these two Motions of Rarefaction and Condensation, are opposite one to
the other, as is required, so do they square to all other the Instruments and
Phenomena in Nature, (viz.) the one answering to Heat, the other to cold; the
one to Hardness, Compactness and Aridity, the other to Gentleness, Softness,
Sweetness, Maturity, etc.

For which Reasons therefore, as well as for many other, which might be urged,
(if insisted on) we do conclude, (submitting it nevertheless to be examined)
that Generation and Corruption, Rarefaction and Condensation, is the simplest,
plainest and truest Analysis, that can be found in Nature, for all Physical
Motions, as unto some of which all Motion, purely Physical, may (as we humbly
conceive) without straining, be immediately referred, and as by and through
which all may likewise, with as little Difficulty, be resolved.

And having laid this as a second Argument; we say 3dly. That it cannot be
denied, but all the Affections and Dispositions of Moisture, Heat, Cold,
Drought, the Course of all Winds, Showers, Thundering, or whatsoever else is
used by Nature, to produce these two general and universal Effects of
Rarefaction and Condensation, do in a great Measure, if not wholly, depend
upon, and are altogether regulated by the Course, Motion, Position, Situations
or Aspects of the Superior and Celestial Bodies or Planets. And therefore,
4thly. We say, that every Planet has its own proper Light: And as the Light of
the Sun is one thing, the Light of the Moon another; so every Planet has its
distinct Light, differing from all the other. Now we must either say, that this
Light is a bare Quality, and that the utmost Use and End of it is only to
illuminate; and there is no Light but is accompanied further with some Power,
Virtue or Tincture, that is proper to it: which if granted, it will inform us
then, that every Light has its own Property, its own Tincture and Color, its
own specifique Virtue and Power; and that according to the several Bodies of
Light, there are several Properties, Tinctures and Powers; and that as one Star
differs from another in Glory (according to the Apostle) so one Star and one
Planet differs from another in its Virtue, in its Color, in its Tincture, and
in its Property.

And consequently, that those eminent Stars and Planets that are in the
Heavens, are not to be considered by us as sluggish inergetical Bodies, or as
if they were set only to be as bare Candles to us, but as Bodies full of proper
Motion, of peculiar Operation, and of Life. The Sun not only shining upon the
rest of the Planets; but by his quickening Warmth, awakening, stirring and
raising the Motions, Properties and Powers, that are peculiar to them.
According therefore to the Angles, they make with the Sun, and according as
they are more or less enlightened by him; according also as they are at the same
time more directly or more obliquely, more remotely or more nearly situated
and placed, in respect to us; so must the Effects of the Powers, Virtues and
Tinctures, that are proper to them, be more or less felt by us. 5thly. For the
manner of the Planets, transmitting these their Properties and Powers, and of
their affecting other Bodies at so remote Distance, there is nothing begged or
required in it, that is insuperable to a Man's Apprehension or Belief: (seeing,)

1. We affirm not any Property, Operation, Virtue, or Power, to be transmitted
from any of the said Planets, but what does descend with its Light, and is the
real Property of its Light.

2. No Man judges, that the Light of any Planet, or of the Sun it self, is
refracted, or by any other means weakened, hindered or impaired by the Ether (or
that Substance which fills up the Space between one Planet and another) through
which it passes; but that it does descend whole directly and inrefracted unto,
or upon our Atmosphere.

3. But whatsoever is received by the Atmosphere, is also received by the thin
and subtle Air, that is contiguous to the Atmosphere: And this Air therefore
cannot but be capable of being moved, stirred, altered, and impressed by these
Properties, Virtues and Lights, as penetrating each Part of it.

4. Not only the Air, by reason of its Thinness and Subtilty, is capable of
being thus penetrated, moved and altered, by these Planetary, Virtues and
Lights: But forasmuch also as our Spirits, and the Spirits likewise of all
mixed Bodies, are really of an Aerious, Ethereal, Luminous Production and
Composition; these Spirits therefore of ours, and the Spirits of all other
Bodies, must necessarily no less suffer an Impression from the same Lights, and
cannot be less subject to an Alteration, Motion, Agitation and Infection,
through them and by them, than the other (viz.) the Air: But rather as our
Spirits are more near and more Analogous to the Nature of Light than the Air,
so they must be more prone and easy to be impressed than it. And if our
Spirits, and the Spirits of all mixed Bodies may be altered, changed, moved and
impressed by these superior Bodies, and their Properties; then these Spirits
being the only Principles of Energy, Power, Force and Life, in all Bodies
wherein they are, and the immediate Causes, through which all Alteration comes
to the Bodies themselves. It is impossible therefore Spirits should be altered
and changed, and yet no Alteration made in the Bodies themselves: and therefore
a less Limit or Extreme cannot be set to the Power or Operation, or Force of
the superior Bodies upon the Inferior, than what must terminate at length
into the very Bodies themselves.

5. As a further Confirmation or Proof of this, in reference at least to our
selves, I shall offer to your Consideration the Accidents that often happen to
Men, by the mere Air, as Convulsions, Cramps, Blastings, Lameness, Colds, many
of which endure a Man's Lifetime; and which (with many bitter Infirmities that
sometimes seize upon a Man, while standing, walking, or lying in the Air) are
rarely or never felt or discerned at the Instant of their Approach or Insults
upon a Man, nor yet accompanied with the Sense of any Excess in the Air for
Heat or Cold at that time, and therefore not well referrable to any Cause in
the Air, if not to the Power of those Properties and Operations of the
Celestial Bodies that we speak of: And this I submit to the Judgment of common
Experience.

6. Lastly; As the Sun-shining on the rest of the Planets does not, as we said,
only barely illuminate their Bodies; but besides this, through the Power,
Virtue and Activity it has, does also raise, excite, awaken and stir up the
several Properties and Dispositions that are in those several and respective
Bodies, whereby they are more lively and effectually brought forth upon us; so
we are to suppose it is in reference to this our Planet, which is the Earth,
which is not only enlightened, warmed, cherished and fructified by the Power,
Virtue and Influence of the Sun; but has its proper Magnetical, Planetary
Virtue, also fermented, stirred, agitated and awakened in it, which it remits
back with the reflected Light of the Sun: and together with this Magnetic
Planetary Property of the Earth, which is stirred and raised by the Sun, are
awakened also the seminal Dispositions, Odors and Ferments that are lodged in,
and proper unto particular Regions or Places, which do likewise emit and
diffuse through the Air, as their several and respective benign, grateful, so
their several malignant, congelative and fracedonous Natures and Qualities.

And hence therefore, though the Air, its Temperament, Disposition and Quality
in general, is to be looked at, according to the Motions, Influences and
Aspects of the several superior Bodies; yet the particular Healthfulness and
Unhealthfulness of Places, the evil Disposition of the Air, Evenings, Nights,
and early in the Mornings, in some Parts more than in others; the
super-abundant Moisture, excessive Winds, Droughts or other Seasons, proper to
one Country, and not to be observed in another neighboring to it; all these
are rather to be allowed and referred to those Odors, Vapors and Exhalations,
that are through the Power of the Sun, or other Planets, drawn forth from their
particular Seats into the Air, from the Planets themselves.

And thus I have hinted, as well as I may, at the Solutions of all the
Phenomena pertaining to this matter, that I can think of.

And if this be so, then wholly to neglect this Physical Use (and
Consideration) of the Motion of these Bodies, and either to reject it, because
of the Superstition that has been mixed with it, or to exclude it from all
manner of Care, and from all other further Scrutiny, as a thing not worth our
Inquiry or Search at all after, is as great an Extreme on the other hand, and a
Mistake, that must not pass untaxed among Learned Men.

You did not expect, I am sure, I should have adventured into so particular an
Apology for Astrology; nor did I intend it, when I begun my Letter; nor do I
now aim to justify any thing further, than what may properly, if not
necessarily, fall into the Consideration of Natural Philosophy, being indeed
much induced to think, that were the Theory of the Planets so exactly stated,
so perfectly, or so undeniably demonstrated, that we might be sure we rightly
understood the Place, Course and Position of each of their Bodies in the
Heavens; this other Doctrine of their Physical Use, with the Weight, Dignity,
Extent, Considerableness or Inconsiderableness of it, would soon confirm and
demonstrate it self by the Evidence and Proof of it self, especially if any
will please to take the Pains to calculate these Motions for his own private
Use, and according to the Meridian he is in, and so compare them with his own
Observations, of the Change and Alteration of the Air from Day to Day. Which
doubtless, as it was the way at first taken by the Ancients, to find out their
Efficacy, (I mean the making such a constant Observation, and keeping such a
Diary) so the doing of that again, and giving us first an History or Diary of
the Observations of the Weather, and its Changes in all Respects, and then an
Account of the several Places, Motions, or Aspects, each Day, of the several
Bodies of the Heavens, with the Agreements, Doubts, or Disagreements, that
these bear one to another, and that must necessarily rise thereupon, would be
that, that could not but prove both satisfactory and delightsom to us, in this
great Point, about their Physical Power and Use.

And the Commodity of this in our Oeconomical or Civil Concerns in Husbandry,
in Gardening, in Physic, and to the producing many other very stupendous
Effects, cannot possibly be so well credited or discerned as it would, if some
such plain Foundation and Demonstration of the Power of these Bodies, in
general, were laid. Which methinks we should be much the more encouraged to
undertake, having an Advantage given us in this Age, beyond what most Ages ever
had, by the Use of those rare Instruments, that they call the Thermometers, or
Weather-Glasses.

And truly when I consider, that things of the greatest Consequence do
oft-times depend upon the most common Observations; and that Matters of the
highest Improvement do receive their Beginning from mean, small, ordinary
Experiments: I would have no Man, who has Leisure, Opportunity and Time, to
think it a slight thing to busy himself in collecting Observations of this
Nature. It being much more commendable for a Man to preserve the History of his
own Time, though but in the Observation of the Motions of this kind, than to
say, upon every Occasion that offers it self, this is the hottest, or this is
the coldest; or this is the rainiest, or this is the most seasonable or
unseasonable Weather that ever he felt; whereas it may perhaps be nothing so.

And if there were no other Use, yet Observations of this Nature would much
conduce to complete the natural History of any Place, as we may observe by that
Learned Author who writ Historiam Naturalem Brasiliae; and who, to prove not
only the Habitableness, but Healthfulness of that Climate and Country,
exhibites the Account of every Day's Weather, observed by him for many Years
together, and so the Agreement of it to that Temper, which we account healthful.

But the instituting and perfecting of accurate Observations of this Nature, by
the help of several large and exact Thermometers, placed in several Rooms, or
exposed after some convenient Manner to the Air it self, would be a more noble
and useful Undertaking, than ordinary. I say, the doing this accurately, by
large and exact Glasses, by placing several of them, either together, or at
some fit Distance one from another. It being much to be lamented, and that
which I cannot but complain to my self of, that no Improvement considerable
has, as I can learn, been made by any Man, of these Glasses, either in our own
Country, or any where else, since their first Invention, (but only to hang them
in a Room for Ornament sake) there being many things yet wanting, that were
much to be desired for the perfecting of them. For;

1. None has hitherto given us the best Proportions between the Diameter of
the Head, and the Diameter of the Bodies or Cylinder, although this be indeed
the very first Consideration, and that which is most necessary in the Use of
these Instruments; for as by how much the bigger the Cylinder is, and by how
much the lesser the Head, by so much the more slow and imperceptible the Air's
Alteration and Motion will be; so by how much the bigger the Head, and smaller
the Cylinder is, by so much the more quick, subtle and discernable will every
small Difference of the Air appear, which therefore being on both sides capable
of an Extreme, ought to be regulated necessarily, according to some mean.

2. Admitting a mean or convenient Proportion between these two Diameters, to
be as one to 16, or one to 24. We in the next Place do no less want the fittest
Proportion for the Length of the Cylinder, which must doubtless also be varied
answerably, as we vary the Proportion of its Diameter, the smaller Cylinder in
Proportion to its Head, requiring the greater Length, the bigger Cylinder on
the contrary the shorter Length.

3. I have not hitherto seen any Cylinder that has been well graduated, 12 or
16 Degrees being the most that are set upon the common Weather-Glass: whereas
to the making of accurate Observations, it would require a Cylinder to be
divided into at least 360 Parts; though I think it neither unreasonable nor
unpracticable, to have one divided into 1000 Parts, allowing but 10 Degrees to
each Inch, which is no unusual Division, seeing such an one will much better
discover, not only the small, but the more sudden and remarkable Changes of
the Weather, (which are of chiefest Use) than any others that are common and
ordinary.

4. Although no Liquor ought to be used in these Glasses, that is subject to
Frost; yet we have little or no Account what those Liquors are, that might be
best or fittest for the accurate making of those Experiments; whether those
whose Property it is, somewhat to attract the Air, and so to preserve
themselves in at least their first Quantity, as Oleum Sulphuris per Campanam,
Ol. Vitrioli, Liquor Salis Tartari, etc. Or, 2dly. Whether those whose Parts
are finest, subtilest, and nearest of kin to the Air, such as is Spirit of
Wine, Spirit of Terebinth, well rectified, and according as there is occasion
still fresh supplied. Or, 3dly. Whether those that are of a middle Nature, as
strong Spirit of Vinegar. Or, 4thly. Whether instead of these, and beyond
these, it may not be best to use only well-refined Quicksilver.

All which several Particulars, as they are necessary, and ought to be first
ascertained, yet they are but preliminary to the Experiments themselves.

In the making of the Experiments themselves, therefore it would be convenient;
1st. That several Thermometers of one Proportion, Length and Graduation in
their Cylinders in all Respects, as near as may be, were set in one Frame
together, either with one and the same, or with Variety of Liquors. 2dly. That
several of these Frames were set in several Rooms, and that foam were exposed
immediately to the Air it self; yet so as it may be conveniently sheltred from
the actual Rays of the Sun, and from the Injury of Storms, Rain and Winds.

In the History it self, there cannot be too much Care and Exactness provided;
the Air of the Chimny, Cranny of a Wall or Door, Breath of People, or other
such Accidents, do not interpose to deceive a Man's Observation, which must be
circumspectly foreseen and considered.

The Proportion between the Warmth of the Day and Night, in constant Weather;
the Agreement or Disagreement of the Motion of the Air; with the Motions of the
superior Bodies, in all uncertain, changeable and inconstant Weather; the
Efficacy or Inefficacy through these, in foretelling of Winds and Rain; the Air
its particular Disposition, under Thunder, under times of Mildews or Blastings,
eminent Eclipses, Conjunctions; with many other the like Particulars, which
will of themselves be incident to an ingenious, diligent, apprehensive Person,
may be the Subject of this History.

I shall not digress so far, as to tell you, what other things may be done by
the Help of this excellent Instrument, this being not pertinent to our present
Purpose.

Yet it is certain, that Drebble, that great, singular, learned Mechanic, did
by the Help of this Instrument, make a Dial continually to move of it self;
regularly showing both the times of the Day, and other Motions of the Heavens;
did also make an Automatous Instrument of Music; and found out a Furnace which
he could govern to any Degree of Heat: but whether these have died with him, or
how far the Meditations of others have wrought upon them, I shall humbly refer
to a more leasurable Inquiry. And if you can inform me among any of your
Acquaintance or Correspondents, I should be glad to hear and to learn any thing
of this Nature, or relating to the further Use, Experiment or Improvement of
this rare little Instrument, or to the further clearing, ventilating or
discussing the Theory or Doctrine of the Planets, or the Physical Use and Power
of these Bodies that we have thus briefly made an Essay of. Thus far that
Letter.

They have a received Tradition in Java, and probably in diverse other Islands
of the South Sea, that the Beams of the Moon are wont to cause Contractures in
the Body of those Men that stay too long exposed to them: The Truth of which
Tradition was lately confirmed to me by an ingenious Doctor, that with Applause
practiced Physic in those Parts; who assured me, that he had observed, that
upon the Account before mentioned some were made lame, or else had some of
their Limbs contracted for diverse Weeks, and some for many Months, or even a
longer time. And when I asked him, whether he had at any time been subject to
that Mischief himself? He answered, that whilst he was a Novice in those Parts,
after a very hot Day, he laid himself down very slenderly covered, to sleep
(according to the Custom of the Place) near the Door of the House he lodged in;
but being unacquainted with the Tradition, he unskilfully chose a Place upon
which the Moon could fully beat for a good part of the Night, which being past
before he waked, when he went to rise, he found his Neck so stiff, that he was
scarce able at all to stir it; and his Mouth was so drawn awry, that 'twas
hideous to behold, and continued so unsightly, that Shame forced him to keep
within for some Days; during which he made Use of brisk Aromatic Medicines, by
whose Help he got off a Contracture that used to stay very much longer with
others. And when I asked him, if these Distempers were not occasioned rather by
the Coldness of the Night and Subtilty of the Air, than the Operation of the
Moon's Beams? He answered me, that 'twas generally observed, that the other
Causes, without the direct Beams of the Moon, were not wont to produce such bad
Effects; and that his Landlord, when he saw his Mouth awry, told him, that if
he had made him acquainted with his Design to pass the Night in the open Air,
he would have prevented this Mischief, by lodging him in a Place unexposed to
the Moon's Light.

TITLE XIV.
Of the Height of the Atmosphere.



TITLE XV.
Of the Motion of the Air, and of Winds.

Extract of a Letter from Fort St. George, dated January the 23d, 1668.
ALthough the Bar of Porta Nova proved more shallow and dangerous than we were
informed; yet she (our Ship) got safe in thither: and it was well she did so.
Had we kept her here, there had been no Possibility of her Escape from
perishing in a dreadful Storm, or rather Hurricane, which happened here the 22d
of November: The like has not been known here in any Man's Memory. The Tempest
of Wind and Rain was so exceeding violent, that nothing could stand before it;
Men and Beasts carried into the Sea by the Violence of the Winds and Floods:
the Generality of the Houses in this and the Neighbor Towns were ruined:
scarce any Trees left standing in Gardens or elsewhere: the Wall of this Town
laid flat in several Places; your Godownes and other Houses in and about the
Fort, uncovered and exceedingly shattered: no Place in the Fort where we could
keep our Persons, Books or Papers free from the Wind or Rain: nor scarcely any
Doors could stand against the Violence of it: and we hourly feared the falling
of the Fort down upon us, it was so exceedingly rocked: and yet abroad we could
have no Shelter, nor were able to stand against it. The repairing of the Damage
will necessarily require a great Charge, which at first we thought would have
amounted to 3000 Pagothes: but hope it will come short thereof.

Captain Brookehaven told me, that about the Island Mauricius, Hurricanes were
the most frequent of any Place he knows; and that near that Island he met with
one which lasted four Days in all: in one of which Days the Storm had seven
Paroxysms or Exacerbations, which the Seamen call Frights of Weather, each of
which he observed to differ two Points of the Compass from the preceding; by
which Means the Surface of the Sea, by the Collision of the Waves, became to be
all white, as if the Ship had been among Rocks. He added, that the Storm made
the Day exceeding dark: And that the Noise was rather like that of Thunder,
than of Wind, insomuch that those on the Shrouds could not hear those on the
Deck.

A Learned Physician that traveled into America, affirmed to me, that those
Countries only have constant Winds from the Land in the Night, which are
furnished with Hills; and therefore the Barbados wants such Winds, because it
has no Hills.

One of the East-Indian Committee (who had lived Years in the Island of
Teneriff) answered me, that he usually observed there the Briezes to come in
from the Sea about nine of the Clock in the Morning, and that about two Hours
after Sun set, there blew a sharp Land Wind, every way from the Island to the
Sea-ward, which continued all Night till the next Morning.

A Learned Traveller answered me, that though the Air were generally calm and
clear at the Top of the Mountains, yet sometimes he had met there with Winds
considerably strong.

In Lettere di Venetia.
MArtedi sui li 29. Agosto 1679. all hoar 19. incirca si leuolevo nelle Paludi
della Villa di Fauis del Dominio Casareo tree miglia lontana da Palma Noua
Dominio Veneto un uento chiamato Bissa boua, che allargandosi per circa
cinquanta passi scorse con tanto empito, e furore, che porto per aria diuersi
huomini, che tagliauano il fieno in quei Prati, e anco alcuni Carri carichi di
fieno con i Buoui precipitandoli assai lontano con la rouina delli animali, de
Carri, e degli huomini, e passando per i Campi sbarbicando ogni sort di Piante
le porto per aria gettandole molti passi lontano, rendendo la terra per oue
scorse cosi arsa, che pare non ui sii may stata piantata cosa alcuna. Arriuo
nella villa decta Bagnaria del Dominio Veneto dove getto a terra molte Case
sino a fondamenti, et altre discoperse, e rouino portando per aria tauole,
traui, et ogni altra cosa che era dentro esse Case restando mal trattate molte
Person senza pero la morte di alcuno. Fuori di dettata Villa ui e una Chiesa
chiamata S. Tomaso la quale resto scoperta, e rouinata una part del muro
portando uia il Campanile, e Campane che nel giorno seguente non si erano per
anco trouate; -- Di la si porto uerso Seuigliano Dominio Veneto e rouino tutta
la Campagna senza danno pero della Villa, mentre li passo poco lontano, de
girando poco lungi dalla Villa stessa spianto da fondamenti un Palazzo del D.
Co. Horatio Strasoldo, nel quale gli amazzo ogni sort di animali che ui erano,
portando per aria li mobili e sino le botti, esterminando parre della
possessione. Non restorono pero offese Person, perch erano alla Campagna a
lauorare, e nel camino getto pure a terra due altre Case che sono nel Taglio
per andare a Strasoldo spiantandole affacto con la morte diuna Donna, d'un
Fanciullo, e diuersi Animali.

Di la uolto uerso Palma, et arriuando sino all mura della Fortezza giro uerso
la Villa di Priuano mezo miglio distante quale rouino la meta, spiantando da
fondamenti belissimi Palazzi, portando per aeria travi, tavole, et ogni altra
cosa con la morte di molti, quantita di feriti, e diuersi strapazzati con far
alla Campagna di molto male. Di poi scorse nella Villa di Visco Dominio
Imperiale, e tra li altri danni fatti ronino tutto il Palazzo novo del D. Marco
Foscolini Gentilhuomo di Cinidal nel quale essendoni una gran rimessa da
Carozze, la di cui Porta hauena tree Cadenazzi, and entrando il Turbine per li
balconi getto la Carozza con tanto empito nella Porta stessa che la ruppe, e
porto fuori la Caroza tutta fracassata gettandola sopra un muro della Corte
assa alto, portando il Cielo della stessa mezzo miglio lontano, e verto nel
medemo Palazzo ferito, e mal trattato un seruitore di esso Foscolini, di cui
ronino pure una Braida, and un Brolo essendo in detta Villa restati due morti,
e diversi feriti; -- S' inoltro poi nella Villa di S. Vido di Crauglio stato
Imperiale, la quale rouino tutta affatto senza restarui nemeno una Casa,
portando per Aria coppi, travi, legne, sassi, e mobili con la morte di
moltissime Person, e moltissimi feriti e rouinati, et in detta Villa non si
puo anddare, ne con Carri, ne con Caualli per la grande moltitudine di
rouinazzo, arbori et altro che hanno attrauer-sato le strade, essendo rimassi
morti gran numero di animali --.

Da questo luoco si porto uerso Villes Villa Imperiale buona part della quale
getto a terra per andar al Territorio di Monfalcone con la morte di molte
person, et quantita di animali con lasciar le Campaign per dove e passata
senza piante, e come strada battuta --.

Ha danneggiato anco altre Ville ma leggiermenre; ne per anco si sa quello
hauera fatto piu avanti nel detto Territorio.

Questo successo ha lasciato un spauento grande in queste Parti, essendosi
uedute cose incredibili mentre pioveuano sassi, tauole, arbori, traui, coppi,
huomini, done, fanciulli, botti, sorghi, uva, galline, animali, et in
conclusione cio che incontraua portaua per aria con un rumore, e fracasso cosi
gradne, che faceua terrore essendo per debt Ville un concorso grande di Popolo
uicino per uedere cose che si rendono incredibili.

Doctor B. answered me, that though the Eastern Winds blow near* of a Year at
Tangier, yet they seem not to reach far into the Inland Country, where he
observed them to be very unfrequent.

An ingenious Gentleman who is Owner of a Mine or two near the Sea, being asked
by me, whether he could, by any peculiar Change appearing in the deeper Parts
of the Mines, foretell any Alterations of Weather? He answered me, that the only
Presage he had constantly observed, was of the Change of the Wind. For many
Hours before the Wind was to shift from some other Corner, and get into the
South, the Water at the bottom of the Mine would appear manifestly more
troubled, or less limped than before: and when the Wind was to blow from the
East, he was usually forewarned of it by an unusual Degree of Clearness in the
Waters, which would appear more diaphanous than ordinary, though the South Wind
had not immediately before operated on the Waters. The Depth of the Mine was
between fifteen and twenty Fathom.

He told me, that the Hurricans about Goa, are observed to come usually but at
two Seasons, about the Beginning of March, and the 4th of October.

TITLE XVI.
Of the Air as the Medium of Sounds, and of Sounds and Noises in the Air, and
particularly Thunder; and of the Air's Operation on the Sounds of Bodies.

THIS Variety of the Air is the Cause of most dreadful Thunders, which, when
Gregory described, he astonished his Hearers. For upon the rising of several
Tempests altogether, the Sky is of a sudden covered over with black and thick,
as it were Globes of smokey Clouds: By and by the Thunder breaks forth on every
Side, rattling continually with Lightning, as incessantly flashing, enough to
amaze the most resolute and most accustomed to the Noise. Ludolph's Hist. of
Ethiop. l. 1. c. 5.

The String of a Viol has been by Mr. F. observed to give a sharper Sound
against or in rainy Weather, by almost half a Note.

Mr. F. also assures me, that more than once or twice it has happened to him,
that having put up false Strings in his Pocket, to make Frets of, as judging
them useless for any other Purpose, the want of Strings having driven him to
make Use of those, he has found them not false any more, but good Strings. And
also that he observes some Strings apter to receive a Tension from the moist
Air, than others are.

TITLE XVII.
Of the Weight of the Air.

A short Account of the Statical Baroscope, imparted by Mr. Boil, March 24.
1665. In a Letter to Mr. H. Oldenburgh.
AS for the new kind of Baroscopes, which I lately intimated to you, that my
Haste would not permit me to give you an Account of, though the Necessity of
preparing for an approaching Journey, gives me the same Excuse, I then had; yet
since your Letters acquaint me, that you still design a communicating to the
Curious, as much Information as may be, in reference to Baroscopes, I shall
venture to send you some (though but an imperfect) Account of what I did but
name in my former Letter to you.

Though by a Passage you may meet with in the Page of my Thermometrical
Experiments; and though you may find, that I did some Years ago think upon this
new kind of Baroscope; yet the Changes of the Atmosphere's Weight not happening
then to be such as I wished, and being unwilling to deprive my self of all
other Use of the exactest Balance that I (or perhaps any Man) ever had: I
confess to you, that successive Avocations put this Attempt for two or three
Years out of my Thoughts, till afterward returning to a Place, where I chanced
to find two or three Pairs of Scales, I had left there, the Sight of them
brought it again into my Mind; and though I were then unable to procure
exacter, yet my Desire to make the Experiment some Amends for so long a
Neglect, put me upon considering, that if I provided a Glass Bubble more than
ordinarily large and light, even such Balances as those might, in some
measure, perform, that which I had tried with the strangely nice ones
abovementioned.

I caused then to be blown at the Flame of a Lamp some Glass Bubbles as large,
thin, and light, as I could then procure: and choosing among them one, that
seemed the least unfit for my turn, I counterpoized it in a pair of Scales,
that would lose their Equilibrium with about the 30th part of a Grain, and were
suspended at a Frame. I placed both the Balance and the Frame by a good
Baroscope, from whence I might learn the present Weight of the Atmosphere: then
leaving these Instruments together, though the Scales being no nicer, than I
have expressed, were not able to show me all the Variations of the Air's
Weight, that appear in the Mercurial Baroscope; yet they did what I expected,
by showing me Variations no greater than altered the Height of the Mercury half
a quarter of an Inch, and perhaps much smaller than those: nor did I doubt,
that if I had had either tender Scales, or the means of supplying the
Experiment with convenient Accommodations, I should have discerned far smaller
Alterations of the Weight of the Air, since I had the Pleasure to see the
Bubble sometimes in an Equilibrium, with the Counterpoize, sometimes when the
Atmosphere was lighter, preponderate so manifestly, that the Scales being
gently stirred, the Tongue would play altogether on that side, at which the
Bubble was hung: and at other times, when the Air was heavy (that which was at
the first but the Counterpoise) would preponderate, and upon the Motion of the
Balance, make the Tongue vibrate altogether on its side: and this would
continue sometimes many Days together, if the Air so long retained the same
measure of Gravity; and then again the Bubble would regain an Equilibrium, or a
Preponderance. So that I had oftentimes the Satisfaction by looking first upon
the Statical Baroscope (as for Distinction sake it may be called) to foretell,
whether in the Mercurial Baroscope the Liquor were high or low. Which
Observations, though they hold as well in Winter as the Spring, yet the
Frequency of their Vicissitudes (which perhaps was but accidental) made them
more pleasant in the latter of these Seasons.

So that the Matter of Fact having been made out by Variety of repeated
Observations, and by sometimes comparing several of those new Baroscopes
together, I shall add some of those Notes, about this Instrument, which readily
occur to my Memory, reserving the rest till another Opportunity.

And, 1. If the Ground on which I went in framing this Baroscope, be demanded,
the Answer in short may be; 1st. That though the glass Bubble, and its
Counterpoise, at the time of their first being weighed, be in the Air, wherein
they both are weighed, exactly of the same Weight; yet they are nothing near of
the same Bulk, the Bubble by reason of its capacious Cavity (which contains
nothing but Air, or something that weighs less than Air) being perhaps a
hundred, or two hundred times bigger, than the Metalline Counterpoise. 2dly.
That according to an Hydrostatical Law, (which you know I have lately had
occasion to make out) if two Bodies of equal Gravity, but unequal Bulk, were to
be weighed in another Medium, they will be no longer equiponderant: but if the
new Medium be heavier, the greater Body, as being lighter in specie, will lose
more of its Weight than the lesser and more compact: but if the new Medium be
lighter than the first, then the bigger Body will outweigh the lesser. And this
Disparity arising from the Change of Mediums, will be so much the greater, by
how much the greater Inequality of Bulk there is between the Bodies formerly
equiponderant. 3dly. That laying these two together, I considered, that 'twould
be all one, as to the Effect to be produced, wherein the Bodies were weighed in
Mediums of differing Gravity, or in the same Medium, in case its (specific)
Gravity were considerably altered; And consequently, that since it appeared by
the Baroscope, that the Weight of the Air was sometimes heavier, and sometimes
lighter, the Alteration of it in Point of Gravity, from the Weight it was of,
at first counterpoising of the Bubble in it, would unequally affect so large
and hollow a Body as the Bubble, and so small and dense an one, as a Metalline
Weight; and when the Air, by an Increase of Gravity, should become a heavier
Medium than before, it would buoy up the Glass more than the Counterpoize, and
if it grew lighter than it was at first, would suffer the former to
proponderate. (The Illustration and Proof can scarce be added in few Words, but
if it be desired, I may, God permitting, send you them at my next leisure.) And
though our English Air, being about a thousand times lighter than Water, the
Difference in Weight of so little Air, as is but equal in Bulk to a Bubble,
seemed to give small Hopes, that it would be sensible upon a Balance; yet by
making the Bubble very large and light, I supposed, and found the Event, I have
already related.

2. The hermetically sealed glass Bubble, I employed, was of the Bigness of a
somewhat large Orange, and weighed about one Dram and ten Grains. I thought
it very possible, if I had been better furnished with Conveniences (wherein I
afterward found, I was not mistaken) to make (among many that might be
expected to miscarry) some, that might be preferrable to this, either for
Capacity or Lightness, or both, especially if Care be taken, that they be not
sealed up whilst they are too hot. For though one would think, that it were
advantageous to ratify and drive out the Air, as much as is possible, because
in such sealed Bubbles the Air it self (as I have elsewhere shown) has a
Weight, yet the Advantage countervails not the Inconvenience of being obliged
to increase the Weight of the Glass, which when it includes highly ratified
Air, if it be not somewhat strong, will be broken by the Pressure of the
external Air, as I have sufficiently tried.

3. By reason of the Difficulties, and Casualties, that may happen, about the
procuring and preparing such large and light Bubbles, as I have been lately
mentioning, it may in some Cases prove a Convenience to be informed, that I
have sometimes, instead of one sufficiently large Bubble, made Use of two that
were smaller: And though a single Bubble of competent Bigness be much
preferrable, by reason, that a far less Quantity and Weight of Glass is
requisite to comprize an equal Capacity, when the Glass is blown into a single
Bubble, than when it is divided into two; yet I found, that the employing of
two instead of one, did not so ill answer my Expectation, but that they may for
a need serve the turn, instead of the other, than which they are much easier to
be procured.

This Instrument may be much improved by diverse Accommodations. As, 1st. there
may be fitted to the Ansa (or Checks of the Balance) an Arch of a Circle,
divided into 15 or 20 Degrees, (more or less according to the Goodness of the
Balance) that the Tongue resting over against any of these Divisions, may
readily, and without Calculation, show the Quantity of the Angle, by which when
the Scales propend either way, the Tongue declines from the Perpendicular, and
the Beam from its Horizontal Parallelism. 2dly. Those that will be so curious,
may instead of the ordinary Counterpoise (of Brass) employ one of Gold, or at
least of Lead, whereof the latter being of equal Weight with Brass, is much
less in Bulk, and the former amounts not to half its Bigness. 3dly. These Parts
of the Balance that may be made of Copper or Brass, without any Prejudice to
the Exactness, will by being made of one of those Metals, be less subject than
Steel to rust with long standing. 4thly. Instead of the Scales, the Bubble may
be hung at one End of the Beam, and only a Counterpoise to it at the other,
that the Beam may not be burdened with unnecessary Weight. 5thly. The whole
Instrument, if placed in a small Frame, like a square Lanthorn with Glass
Windows, and a Hole at the top for the Commerce of the internal and external
Air, will be more free from Dust and irregular Agitations, to the latter of
which it will otherwise be sometimes liable. 6thly. This Instrument being
accommodated with a light Wheel, and an Index, may be made to show much more
minute Variations than otherwise. 7thly. The Length of the Beam, and
Exquisitness of the Balance, may easily, without any of the foregoing Helps
(and much more with them) make the Instrument far exacter than those, I was
reduced to employ. And to these Accommodations, diverse other may be suggested
by a further Consideration of the Nature of the thing.

Though in some Respects the Statical Baroscope be inferior to the Mercurial,
yet in others it has its own Advantages and Convenience about it.

At first it confirms ad oculum, our former Doctrine, that the falling and
rising of the Mercury depended upon the varying Weight of the Atmosphere, since
in this Baroscope it cannot be pretended that a fuga vacui, or a Funiculus, is
the Cause of the Changes we observe. 2dly. It shows, that not only the Air has
Weight, but a more considerable one than some learned Men, who will allow me to
have proved, that it has some Weight, will admit. 3dly. This Statical Baroscope
will oftentimes be more parable than the other, for many will find it more easy
to procure a good pair of Gold Scales, and a Bubble or two, than a long Cane
sealed, a Quantity of Mercury, and all the other Requisites of the Mercurial
Baroscope, especially if we comprize the Trouble and Skill that is requisite to
free the deserted part of the Tube from Air. 4thly. And whereas the Difficulty
of removing the Mercurial Instrument has kept Men from so much as attempting to
do it even to Neighboring Places, the essential Parts of the Scale Baroscope
(for the Frame is none of them) may very easily in a little room be carried
wheresoever one will, without the Hazard of being spoiled, or injured. 5thly.
There is not in Statical Baroscopes, as in the other, a Danger of Uncertainty,
as to the Goodness of the Instrument, by reason, that in the Mercurial the Air
is in some more, and in some less, perfectly excluded; whereas in these that
Consideration has no Place. 6thly. It being, as I formerly intimated, very
possible to discover Hydrostatically, both the Bigness of the Bubble, and the
Contents of the Cavity, and the Weight and Dimensions of the glassy Substance
(which together with the included Air make up the Bubble) much may be
discovered by this Instrument, as to the Weight of the Air, absolute or
respective. For when the Mercury in the Mercurial Baroscope is either very
high, or very low, or at a middle Station between its greatest and least
Height, bringing the Scale-Baroscope to an exact Equilibrium (with very minute
Divisions of a Grain) you may by watchfully observing, when the Mercury is
risen or fallen just an Inch, or a 4th, or ^ of an Inch. etc. and putting in
the like minute Divisions of a Grain to the lighter Scale, till you have again
brought the Balance to an Equilibrium, you may, I say, determine what known
Weight in the Statical Baroscope, answers such determinate Altitudes of the
ascending and descending Mercury in the Mercurial: And if your Balance be
accommodated with a divided Arch, or a Whele and Index, these Observations will
assist you for the future, to determine, by seeing the Inclination of the
Tongue, or the Degree marked by the Index, to conclude readily, what Potency
the Bubble has, by the Change of the Atmosphere's Weight, acquired or lost.

Some Observations of this Nature I watchfully made, sometimes putting in a
64th, sometimes a 32d, sometimes a 16th, and sometimes heavier parts of a Grain
to the lighter Scale: But one that knew not for what Uses these little Papers
were, coming to a Window where my Baroscope stood, so unluckily shook them out
of the Scales, and confounded them, that he robbed me of the Opportunity of
making the nice Observations I intended, though I had the Satisfaction of
seeing, that they were to be made. 7thly. By this Statical Instrument we may be
assisted to compare the Mercurial Baroscopes of several Places (though never so
distant) and to make some Estimates of the Gravities of the Air therein. As if,
for instance, I have found by Observation, that the Bubble I employ (and one
may have made diverse Bubbles of several Sizes, that the one may repair any
Mischance that may happen to another) weighed just a Dram, when the Mercurial
Cylinder was at the Height of 29 Inches (which in some Places I have found a
moderate Altitude) and that the Addition of the 16th part of a Grain is
requisite to keep the Bubble in an Equilibrium, when the Mercury is risen an
8th, or any determinate part of an Inch, above the former Station: When I come
to another Place, where there is a Mercurial Barometer, as well freed from Air
as mine (for that must be supposed) if taking out my Scale-Instrument, it
appears to weigh precisely a Dram; and the Mercury, in the Baroscope there,
stand at 29 Inches, we may conclude, the Gravity of the Atmosphere not to be
sensibly unequal in both those two Places, though very distant. And though
there be no Baroscope there, yet if there be an additional Weight, as for
instance, the 16th part of a Grain, requisite to be added to the Bubble, to
bring the Scales to an Equilibrium, it will appear, that the Air, at this
second Place, is at that time so much heavier than the Air of the former Place
was, when the Mercury stood at 29 Inches. But in making such Comparisons, we
must not forget to consider the Situation of the several Places, if we mean to
make Estimates not only of the Weight of the Atmosphere, but of the Weight and
Density of the Air. For though the Scales will show, as has been said, whether
there be a Difference of Weight in the Atmosphere at the two Places; yet if one
of them be in a Vale or Bottom, and the other on the Top, or some elevated part
of a Hill, it is not to be expected, that the Atmosphere in this latter Place,
should gravitate as much as the Atmosphere in the former, on which a longer
Pillar of Air does lean or weigh; so that the Bubble in both these Places
should be precisely of the same Weight.

And the mention I have made of the differing Situation of Places, puts me in
mind of something, that may prove another Use of our Statical Baroscope, and
which I had Thoughts of making Trial of, but was accidentally hindered from the
Opportunity of doing it; namely, that by exactly poizing the Bubble, at the
Foot of a high Steeple or Hill, and carrying it in its close Frame to the top,
one may, by the Weight requisite to be added to the Counterpoize, there to
bring the Beam to its horizontal Position, observe the Difference of the Weight
of the Air at the bottom and at the top; and in case the Hill be high enough,
at some intermediate Stations. But how this may assist Men to estimate the
absolute or comparative Height of Mountains, and other elevated Places, and
what other Uses the Instrument may be put to, when it is duly improved, and the
Cautions, that may be requisite in the several Cases, which shall be proposed,
I must leave to more leisure, and further Consideration.

I caused to be made with great Care, by a skilful
Mathematical-Instrument-maker, Weight of a Cubick Inch of Water.
a hollow Cube of Brass, whose every Side was as exactly as could be procured,
an English Inch. This we carefully counterpoised in a very good pair of Scales,
and found it to weigh 11 Drachms, 1 Grain and, (Troy-Weight) Then placing it in
one of the Scales as horizontally as we were able, we warily filled it with
clear common Water, (of the best sort of that called Pump-water) till the
Surface of the Water seemed to lie as level, as we could make it, to the Brims
of the Vessel: then weighing it carefully, we found the Water alone (for the
Cube had been counterpoized before) to weigh 254 9/16 Grains: So that in regard
it is scarce possible to know, that such a Vessel is so filled, as to come
nearer Exactness, than within a Drop or two: I presume we may, without any
sensible Error, suppose an Inch of Water to weigh 256 Grains, which latter
Number I rather chufe, because its aliquot Parts make it more convenient, and
it agrees well enough with some Trials, that I made with solid Cubes, to
measure the true Weight of a Cubick Inch of Water.

This done, the Vessel was well dried within, and the same Scales being well
counterpoized, the Instrument was so too, and being placed on one of the Scales
as Horizontically as we could, Mercury (distilled to have it more pure) was
warily put into it, till by Degrees it had filled the Vessel as to Sight; but
we neither expected, nor found, that it would be brought to an exact Level, and
exquisitly fill all the Corners of the Vessel. But when it seemed to be so well
filled, that even a critical Eye could not readily find fault with it, though
the Mercury appeared capable of some Accession without overflowing, we weighed
the Quicksilver it self (for The Weight of a Cubick Inch of Quicksilver.
the Vessel had been counterpoized before) and found it to weigh 7 Ounces, 2
Drachms, (Troy) which falling somewhat short (though not very much) of what the
abovementioned Weight of the Water required, we tried to add a little more
Quicksilver, without making it run over, and found the Increase of 82 Grains;
so that now the Quicksilver weighed 7 Ounces, 3 Drachms, 22 Grains; but it
seemed when the Eye was placed in a Level with the Brims of the Vessel, that it
was rather a little of the highest, than any way depressed, and yet was not so
full, but that we could add 112 Grains to the former Weight, without making it
run over; and perhaps we might have added yet more, but I decline doing it,
because the last mentioned Accession seemed manifestly to make it so much swell
above the Brims of the Vessel. By all which it is evident that it is scarce
possible to determine precisely by such hollow Instruments, the true Weight of
a Cubick Inch of Quicksilver. And therefore, since by other ways of Trial, I
have found the Proportion of the Weight of Mercury to Water of the same Bulk,
to be somewhat less than that of 14 to 1, I think we may, without any
considerable Inconvenience, suppose the Weight of a Cubick Inch of Quicksilver
to be 3580 Grains, which is near 14 times the abovementioned Weight of a
Cubick Inch of Water, and comes near enough to the second or middlemost of the
three Estimates lately set down; and by the least Estimate of all it appears
that a Cubick Inch of Quicksilver weighs 7 Ounces Troy Weight, that is 8 Ounces
Averdupois Weight: And consequently when the Quicksilver of the Baroscope, kept
up by the Counterpoize of the Air 30 Inches, (as I have observed it several
times to be within a Month last past) the Weight of the Air that is incumbent
on an Inch The Weight of a Pillan of the Atmosphere.
Square here below, amounts to 18 l. Troy Weight; that is in Averdupois Weight
15 l. 1/17.

As 11 to 14, or rather as 355 to 452, so is the Area of a Square inscribed in
a Circle to the Area of the circumscribed Circle.

Hence 355: 452:: 1: 1, 2732394.

Hence if the side of an inscribed Square be an Inch, that multiplied by an
Inch, renders a Cubick Inch for the solid Content.

In like manner if the Height of a Cylinder erected on the circumscribing
Circle, be an Inch, the solid Content of that Cylinder is 1,2732394.

Wherefore 1, and 1, 2732394 multiplied, by the Weight of the Cubick Inch of
any kind of Metal, give the Weight of a Cubick Inch, and of a Cylindrick Inch
that circumscribes the same, whence an Inch Table for both is easily made, by
continual Addition, or for any Height propounded, multiplying both by the same.

Mr. Townly's Register, if I misremember not.
Nov. 23 2 28. 98 24 8 29. 54 9 p 28. 90 25 3 80 27 9 p 99 29 9 28. 97 9 p 29.
09 Dec. 6 9 p 28. 97 7 9 60 8 9 29. 05 11 9 28. 93 3 p 29. 01 13 8^ 28. 90 9 p
95 25 9 p 29. 04 26 9 p 28. 32 28 10 p 29. 13 Jan. 1 9 p 28. 99 2 9 82 3 9 29.
08 9 p 06 5 10 28. 70 6 10 29. 09 9 p 28. 62 7 8 28. 99 12 10 28. 88 4 p 98 16
1 29. 13 9 p 28. 65 17 10 14 21 9 29. 05 22 4 28. 99 9 p 94 23 9 99 24 11 p 29.
06 25 9 28. 50 9 p 29. 10 29 9 28. 90 9 p 71 30 8 80 31 9 p 30. 12 Febr. 1 12
22 2 8 29. 97 15 9 p 28. 99 16 9 p 95 17 8 29. 10 Mar. 2 9 p 28. 98 4 8 78 9 86
12 9 28. 80 9 p 66 13 8 29. 03 1671 Apr. 1 6 p 28. 99 2 9 p 78 3 8 29. 03 June
8 1 29. 18 8 p 28. 86 9 7 99 Aug. 12 6 28. 90 Sept. 6 8 29. 15 7 10 28. 65 8 7
29. 05 12 9 28. 98 29 8 28. 96 3 p 29. 08 30 9 p 29. 19 Octo. 1 10 28. 63 3 8
29. 10 In all those Papers the Mercury was still about 12 of one Inch higher
than is set down, for the Numbers signify only bottom of the Cap.


A Register kept by Mr. Lock in Oxford.
d h Th. Bar. Wind. Weather at Oxford. 1666 June 24 9 70 29 N E 2 Fair. 22 76
29 1 Fair. 25 4 73 29 1 N E 1 Fair. 10 74 29 1 E 1 Fair. 15 77 29 1 S E 2 Fair.
26 9 73 28 8 N 1 Fair. 12 75 28 7 N E 1 Thunder. 13 75 28 7 S W 4 Thunder,
Rain, Hail. 14 74 28 8 N 0 Thunder, Rain. 18 73 28 8 N 1 Clouds, dry. 22 72 28
8 Fair. 27 7 70 28 8 N W 1 Rain. 9 70 28 8 N W 1 Rain. 16 68 28 8 W 1 Fair. 28
9 63 29 1 W 0 Clouds. 17 67 29 1 N 1 Clouds. 29 9 63 29 2 N 1 Clouds. 19 69 29
1 N 1 Clouds. 30 9 64 29 2 N 0 Clouds. 20 64 29 2 N 1 Fair. July 1 9 57 29 4 W
2 Fair. 2 11 63 29 3 W 1 Clouds.

d h Th. Bar. Hy. Wind. Weather 21 67 29 2 Rain. 3 9 66 29 1 W 1 Clouds. 22 66
29 1 Clouds. 4 11 64 28 8 W 0 Clouds. 17 68 28 7 S E 2 Clouds. 5 9 65 28 7 S W
2 Clouds. 23 65 28 7 S W 2 Rain. 6 9 63 29 1 W 1 Fair. 16 67 29 1 S W 1 Clouds.
7 9 67 29 1 S 2 Fair. 23 72 28 7 Lightning. 8 9 70 28 8 S W 2 Clouds. 9 9 66^
29 2^ S W 2 Fair. 10 9 66 29 1 S 2 Clouds. 11 10 67 29 1^ S 2 Clouds. 12 10 66
29 2^ S 2 Fair. 13 10 66 29 3 W 1 Fair. 14 3 75 28 8^ S W 2 Clouds. 15 9 67 29
1 S W 1 Fair. 16 11 70 29 1 S W 2 Fair. 17 5 71 28 8^ E 0 Clouds after Rain. 19
71 28 8^ W 1 Rain. 18 7 62 29 2^ S W 2 Fair. 9 64 29 2 S W 2 Fair. 19 9 65 29 3
S W 2 Cloudy. 20 12 67 29 4 W 1 Fair. 21 8 64 29 4^ W 1 Fair. 22 9 67 29 3^ S W
1 Fair. 23 9 67 29 2 E 1 Thunder, Rain. 15 71 29 1 N E 1 Fair. 17 71 29 1 E 1
Rain. 21 69 29 2 1 Clouds, Lightning. 24 9 67 29 2 N 1 Clouds. 25 9 67 29 2^ N
1 Clouds. 26 6 64 29 3 N 1 Close. 30 23 69 29 3 15 Fair. 31 7 67 29 3 15 N W 0
Fair. August 15 10 60 29 2 20 Clouds. 16 9 59 29 2 19 N 1 Fair. 29 21 64 29 2
19 30 9 59 29 3^ 19 N 0 Fair. 31 7 61 29 3^ 20 N E 0 Fair. 9 61 29 3 20 N E 1
Fair. September 1 6 55 29 3 17 N E 1 Fair. 9 55^ 29 3 17 E 2 Clouds. 2 9 52 29
3 16 E 3 Clouds. 3 9 49 29 4 16 E 2 Fair. 4 9 47 29 3 15 E 1 Fair. 13 50 29 3
15 E 2 Dim reddish Sunshine 20 51 29 2 14 This unusual Color of the Air,
which without a Cloud appearing, made the Sunbeams of a strange red dim Light,
was very remarkable. We had then heard nothing of the Fire of London: But it
appeared afterward to be the Smoke of London then burning, which driven this
way by an Easterly Wind, caused this odd Phenomenon. 5 22 49 29 1 6 9 44^ 29 2
15 N E 1 Fair. 8 9 44 29 4 15 N E 1 Fair. 9 9 46 29 4 S W 1 Thick, Sun. 17 52
29 2 18 S 2 Rain. 22 53 29 -- 20 2 Rain. 10 9 52 28 8^ 20 S W 3 Fair. 16 56 28
8 20 W 2 Rain. 11 11 53 28 8^ 22 S W 2 Cloudy. 12 9 52 29 -- 23 S 3 Close. 13 9
50^ 29 2^ 23 W 2 Fair. 14 9 53 29 1 23 S E 2 Fair. 15 10 57 29 1 27 N E 1
Close. 11 57 29 1 28 N E 1 Rain. 23 61 29 1 35 Fair. 16 9 59 28 8 34 E -- Mist.
21 61 28 7 37 Rain. 17 9 54 28 8 35 N W 1 Close. 22 49^ 28 1^ 30 Rain. 18 9 42
28 8 37 N E 4 Close after Rain. 11 43 29 1 36 E N 3 Close. 13 44 29 2 35 E N 3
Close. 17 45^ 29 3 35 E 2 Fair. 23 45 29 4 35 0 Fair. 19 9 41 29 5 35 N 1 Fair.
20 9 46 29 4 37 N 1 Close. 21 8 47 29 3 36 0 Thick Mist. 22 52 29 4 38 0 Fog.
22 10 48 29 4 37 S W 1 Close. 23 9 46 29 5 37 W 0 Clouds. 24 8 49 29 4 38 S W 1
Fair. 21 55 29 2 39 2 Fair, h 19 few drops 25 6 53 29 1 38 S 1 Clouds. 10 54 28
8 39 S 3 Rain. 21 50 29 1^ 38 0 Fair. 26 8 49 28 7 39 W 3 Close. 27 9 48 29 2
37 W 3 Fair. 23 48 29 4 36 2 Fair. 28 7 45 29 5 36 W 2 Fair. 19 47 29 4 37 2
Rain. 29 7 51 29 4 40 W N 1 Rain. 12 53 29 5 38 W N 2 Fair. 18 53 29 5 35 N W 0
Fair. 30 9 48 29 6 37 W S 0 Clouds. 21 57 29 5 46 2 Fair. October 1 8 54 29 5
45 S 1 Clouds. 19 61^ 29 5^ 43 0 Fair. 2 9 56 29 5 44 S W 2 Close. 3 7 54 29 5
S W 0 Close. November 25 10 32 29 1^ 26 9 31 29 2 0 Thick Fog. 18 31 29 1^ 0
Fog. 27 11 33 29 1^ W 0 Fair. 18 34 29 2^ 0 Clouds. 22 34 29 2 2 Clouds. 28 10
39^ 28 7 63 S W 2 Rain. 21 36 28 7 62 2 Fair. 30 9 31 28 7 60 W S 2 Fair. 22 31
29 1 61 Fair. December 1 9 29^ 29 3 61 W 0 Fair. 22 29 29 4 61 0 Fair. 2 9 27
29 2 60 S E 2 Clouds, Thaw. 3 9 27 28 7 60 E 1 Clouds. 17 27 29 7 61 0 Rain. 4
9 26 28 8 60 S E 0 Thick Fog. 12 26 28 8^ 61 S 1 Snow. 5 9 30 28 6 63 S 1 Hard
Rain. 21 34 28 6 63 2 Fair. 6 9 34^ 29 1 64 W S 1 Fair. 18 36 29 1 64 0 Small
Rain. 7 9 32 29 3 63 W 0 Fair. 8 9 32 29 3 65 W S 3 Small Rain. 23 35 29 3 64 0
Rain hard. 9 9 31 29 1 63 N 2 Hard Snow. 17 29 29 1 63 0 Fair. 10 21 26 29 5 63
Fair. 11 9 24 29 5 63 W N 1 Hard Frost, fair. 21 21 29 5 60 2 Fair. 12 9 20 29
6 59 N 1 Fair, hard Frost. 13 10 21 29 6 61 N 1 Fair, hard Frost. 14 9 22 29 6
63 N W 1 Little Mist, and slow Thaw. 11 24 29 5 63 N W 2 Clouds, Thaw. 15 9 25
29 6 64 N 1 Fair, little Thaw. 16 9 24^ 29 6 63 N E 0 Fog, hoar Frost. 17 24 29
6 63 NE 0 Thaw, Clouds. 17 9 22 29 6 63 N 0 Clouds, hard Frost. 22 23 29 5 64
Thaw, Clouds. 18 10 24 29 5 65 N 2 Small misty Rain. 21 24 29 5 64 Small Rain.
19 9 23 29 5 64 N W Small Snow, Thaw. 20 9 23 29 5 64 N 2 Mist, Thaw. 22 22 29
5 64 0 Fair, freeze. 21 10 20 29 3 63 S W 2 Hard Frost, Clouds. 21 22 29 2 63 1
Snow. 22 9 22 29 2 63 N W Clouds, no Thaw. 22 21 29 2 63 Frost, fair. 23 8 21
29 1^ 64 N 0 Little Snow last Night, Frost, close. 21 20 29 3 63 0 Fair, hard
Frost. 24 10 17 29 4^ 62 N W 2 Fair, hard Frost. 17 18 29 3 63 W 1 Snow. 25 9
18 29 4 62 N W 1 Hard Frost, fair. 22 19 29 4^ 61 Fair, hard Frost. 26 9 18 29
3 62 W 1 Fair, hard Frost. 19 22 29 2 63 0 Clouds, Thaw. 27 8 22 29 2^ 64 N W 1
Fog. 16 22 29 2^ 63 N W 1 Close, Thaw. 21 22 29 2^ 63 N W 0 Close, Freeze. 28 9
20 29 3 63 N W 0 Close, Frost. 22 18 29 3 63 N W 0 Close, Frost. 29 10 16 29 4
63 N W 0 Fog, hard Frost. 22 15 29 5 62 0 Thick Fog, hard Frost. 30 9 15 29 4
62 N W 0 Very thick Fog, and hard Frost. 22 15 29 4^ 62 N W 0 Clear, hard
Frost. 31 8 14 29 4 62 N W 0 Fair, hard Frost. 15 15 29 5 63 N W 0 Fair, hard
Frost. January 1667 1 8 12 29 4 62 N W 0 Fog, hard Frost. 2 10 13 29 6^ 63 S E
0 Fair, hard Frost. 3 9 10 29 5 63 S E 0 Fair, hard Frost. 22 11 29 3 63 0
Close, hard Frost. 4 10 13 29 3 63 E S 1 Close, hard Frost. 5 11 12 29 2 62 E 0
Snow, Frost. 6 9 13 28 8^ 63 E S 0 Snow, Frost. 15 14 28 7 63 E 0 Close, Frost.
7 9 16 28 6^ 64 E 0 Close, hard Frost. 17 18 28 6 64 E 0 Little dewy Rain, and
Tendency to a Thaw. 8 8 20 28 6 65 E N 0 Close, Thaw, little Rain. 21 21 28 8
64 0 Close, Thaw. 9 8 21 29 2 65 E N 0 Little Snow, and little Thaw. 21 22 29 3
65 0 Close. 10 9 21 29 3 65 N E 0 Close, Frost. 22 21 29 2 65 2 Close. 11 8 20
29 2 65 N E 1 Close, Frost. 12 21 29 2 65 N E 0 Close, gentle Thaw. 12 9 21 29
2 64 NE 0 Close, Frost. 13 11 22 28 7 65 NE 0 Thick Fog, Thaw. 22 23^ 28 8 65 0
Close, great Thaw. 14 8 24 28 7^ 65 E 1 Fog, perfect Thaw. 21 24 28 6 65 2
Close. 15 10 22 28 6 64 EN 2 Close, Frost. 22 23 28 6 65 0 Small Rain. 16 8 23
28 7 65 ES 1 Close. 17 8 25 28 7 65 EN 0 Fog. 18 7 25 28 6 65 NE 2 Snow, Thaw.
21 23 28 8 64 2 Little Snow. 19 8 21 29 2 64 NE 0 Frost, little Snow. 22 20 29
4 64 Hard Frost. 20 9 18 29 5 63 N 0 Fair, hard Frost. 22 20 29 6 63 0 Fair,
Frost. 21 8 18 29 6 63 NW 0 Fair, hard Frost. 17 21 29 6 63 W 1 Fair, Frost. 22
9 25 29 5 66 SW 2 Rain. 23 28 29 3 66 3 Rain. 23 9 29 29 3 67 WS 1 Clouds. 17
32 29 4^ 67 W 1 Fair. 24 9 29 29 5 66 WS 1 Fair. 21 32^ 29 3 66 4 Close. 23 33
29 2 66 4 Close. 25 8 36 28 8 67 SW 3 Little misty Rain. 19 42 28 6 73 3 Little
misty Rain. 26 8 38 28 8 72 WS 2 Close. 12 37 28 8 73 WS 1 Rain. 27 10 33 29 2
70 WS 2 Fair. 28 22 30 29 2 69 1 Rain. 29 6 30 29 2 70 1 Mist. 16 31 29 3^ 70
NW 0 Clouds. 31 13 26 29 4^ 69 E 2 Close. February 1 9 26 29 5^ 69 E 2 Close. 2
9 28 29 5 70 E 1 Close. 3 9 31 29 4 72 SE 0 Thick Fog. 4 9 33 29 5^ 72 E 0 Fog.
22 34 29 6^ 73 0 Close. 5 8 32 29 7 72 E 1 Close. 22 31 29 7 71 2 Close. 6 18
26 29 7 68 NE 1 Clouds. 7 9 24 29 5 69 NE 1 Clouds, Snow in the Night. 23 23 29
5^ 67 1 Close. 8 10 22 29 5^ 67 EN 2 Frost, close. 9 8 21 29 4 67 ES 1 Close,
Frost. 22 22 29 4 68 Snow. 10 9 23 29 3 69 SE 1 Rain. 16 28^ 29 3 71 SW 2
Misty. 23 32 29 2 73 2 Close. 11 9 34 29 2 73 SW 2 Misty. 22 36 29 1 74 Close.
12 8 35 28 7 74 SE 2 Close. 22 37 28 4^ 73 2 Fair. 13 8 34 28 4 72 SW 3 Fair.
22 36 28 2 70 2 Close. 14 8 34 28 4 69 WS 3 Fair. 22 33 28 6 68 Fair. 15 8 32
28 5 69 S 2 Rain. 23 32 28 5 69 S 2 Fair. 16 23 31 28 7 69 N 1 Close. 17 9 30
28 8 69 W 1 Fog. 18 11 32 29 4 66 NW 2 Fair. 19 9 28 29 7 64 NW Hoar Frost,
fair. 15 33 29 6 56 S 2 Fair. 20 9 28 29 6 63 Fair. 21 9 28 29 5 63 ES 1 Fair.
22 8 29 29 5 62 NE 1 Close. 15 29 29 5 60 NE 1 Rain. 23 8 27 29 5^ 63 NE 2
Close. 24 9 26 29 6 62 NE 2 Close. 25 10 25 29 5 62 NE 1 Snow. 26 7 23 29 4 61
NE 1 Frost, little Snow. 27 8 23 29 2 61 NE 1 Close, Frost. 28 9 21 29 1 60 NE
1 Fair, Frost. March 1 11 22 29 2 59 E 1 Fair, hard Frost. 2 10 23 29 3 60 NE 1
Clouds, Frost. 17 26 29 3 59 NE 1 Hail. 3 9 24 29 4 60 NE 2 Close. 21 25 29 4
62 2 Misty, Rain. 4 9 25 29 4 60 NE 2 Close. 5 9 24 29 2^ 60 NW 2 Close, about
6 small Snow. 6 23 17 29 4^ 56 2 Fair, hard Frost. 7 9 15 29 4 55 NE 2 Fair,
very hard Frost. 13 16 29 4 54 NE 2 Snow. 8 8 14 29 2 54 NE 2 Very hard Frost,
Thames frozen, Carts went over. 9 8 18 28 8^ 58 NE 2 Snow hard, already deep,
hard Frost. 10 9 18 29 2 58 NE 2 Close, hard Frost. 11 8 19 29 3 57 NE 1 Hard
Frost, little Snow. 12 8 21 29 5 57 EN 1 Frost. 13 9 21 29 5 56 NE 1 Close,
Frost. 14 8 21 29 4 56 SE 2 Close, Frost. 16 23 29 3 55 SE Close, Thaw. 15 8 23
29 2 57 E 1 Mist, Thaw. 16 8 27 29 1^ 59 SE 2 Rain. 21 30 29 0 60 0 Fair. 17 11
31 29 2 60 NE 1 Close. 18 8 28 29 6^ 61 NE 1 Fair. 18 35^ 29 6 62 S 1 Fair. 19
8 33^ 29 6^ 61 SW 1 Close. 20 6 37 29 6 61 W 1 Fair. 21 10 35 29 4 55 SW 2
Small Rain. 12 36^ 29 4 56 SW 2 Small Rain. 23 38 29 1 59 3 Close. 22 9 37 29
1^ 58 W 2 Fair. 23 9 35 29 1^ 58 SE 1 Clouds. 11 36 29 1 58 SE 1 Rain. 24 9 35
29 2 58 NW 1 Clouds. 26 7^ 30 29 5 50 NW 1 Fair. 27 7 29 29 6^ 49 NE 1 Fair. 28
9 28 29 5^ 48 NE 2 Fair.

1669 December I began to keep a Register of Heat and Cold at London, by a
Thermometer of the Royal Society's Standard: This Thermometer I marked 2
d h T. 2 Bar. Hy. Wind. Weather 26 9 3 -- Extreme hard Frost 1670 January 13
10 4^ 23 4^^ Close. 14 10 4 Close. 22 4^ Mixed, i. e. Part Clouds, Part clear.
15 23 3^^^ 16 10 2^^^ Fair. 17 10 2^ Fair. 18 9 2^^^ Mist. 19 10 1^^^ Mist. 20
1 0^^ Clouds. 9 0 Close, Frost. 21 9 1 Close. 22 23 1^^^ Fair. 23 9 1^^ Fair.
24 9 1^ Fair. 25 9 1 Close. 26 8 0^ Snow. 27 10 0^ Snow. 28 10 0^^^ Snow. 29 23
0 Hard Frost. 30 11 0^ Hard Frost. 31 11 0^^^ Thaw. February 2 11 0 Frost. 3 10
0^^^ Frost. 6 23 0 7 9 0^ Snow. 8 9 0^^ Fair. 9 10 0^ Fair. 10 9 1 -- Close. 11
10 0^^ Fair. 12 10 1^ Thaw. 13 9 1^^^ Rain. 14 9 0^^^ Fair, Frost. 17 23 3
Mist. 20 11 2^^^ Fair. April 1 10 1^^^ Close.

1670 May I here divided the Degres of the Gresham-Colledg-Thermometer, each
into 4, so that 24 is now the same that 6 was before.
d h T. 2 Bar. Hy. Wind. Weather. 27 9 24 Fair. 29 11 31 Fair. 23 24 Fair. 30 7
22 Fair. 23 29 Fair. June 1 9 28 Cloudy. 1671 May 29 8 20 Rain. June 5 8 31
Cloudy. 1672 January 31 9 4. NE Fair. February 1 8 5. -- Fair. June 15 16 36^^
Cloudy. 16 9 33 Cloudy. 17 37 SW 2 Fair. 20 9 29 Cloudy. August 15 6 24 17 8 22
Close. 1672 October 13 9 20 December 23 22 20^ 27 17 18 1673 January 1 22 18 4
18 14^ April 3 17 5 Snow. May 10 21 16 E June 9 22 22 E Rain. 10 9 21 Cloudy.
12 9 23 Fair. 13 22 22 Rain. 14 9 24 Close. 17 9 26 18 9 26 Close. 20 9 22
Fair. 21 9 24 Fair. 2 6 23 Fair. 27 10 26 28 9 25 Rain.

1673 July Memorand. That from the Beginning of May, till the middle of July,
there was scarce one dry Day, but so great Rains, that produced greater Floods
than were known in the Memory of Man.
d h T. 2 Bar. Hy. Wind. Weather. 2 9 25 8 10 26 10 8 25 Fair. 14 17 31 Fair.
25 22 35 28 12 33 Close. 30 9 24 Fair. 1674 March 9 8 1 N E Frost and Snow. 19
6 5 Snow. 20 10 5^ N E Snow all Day. December 25 15 11 Fair. 27 16 11 W Fair.
28 15 14 W Close. 1675 January 3 16 14 W Fair. April 25 9 12 N E Fair. 26 10 12
N Fair. 27 12 12 E Fair. 28 9 12 E Close. 1675 May 2 9 16 Close. 23 15 27
Cloudy. June 8 22 21 Cloudy. 9 13 21 Close. 10 14 22 Close. 13 10 22 E Close.
14 9 17 Fair.

1681 March The Thermometer marked 3 is one, which I began now to use at my
Return to Oxford.
d h T. 3 Bar. Hy. Wind. Weather. 14 14 46 29 4 W A little Mist. 15 8 36 29 6 N
W Fair. 16 12 45 29 5 N W 2 Little Rain. 17 7 37 29 7 E Fog. 18 8 33 29 7 E
Fair. 23 11 34 28 8 N W Close. 24 12 32 29 2 N Cloudy. 25 18 33 28 7 N W
Cloudy. 26 15 32 8 N Cloudy. 27 13 28 29 2^ N Fair, Snow this Morning. 14 29
2middot; N Snow hard. 28 11 29 5 N Cloudy. 30 7 34 5 W Close: All the foregoing
Week it rained in Showers every Day. April 6 18 49 4 S Very fair. 7 9 45 5 S
Very fair. 17 55 4 S W Very fair. 9 8 50 3 S W Close. 14 50 2 S W Rain. 10 11
44 3 W 2 Clouds, and a little Shower this Morning. 11 17 46 5 S W 2 Fair ever
since Yesterday. 12 15 51 2^ S 3 Fair since. 13 14 49 3 W 2 Fair since. 14 13
45 3 S W 3 Fair since. 15 17 54 3 E N 3 Close all Day. 16 8 45 3^ E N 1 Misty.
17 52 2^ E N 1 A little Shower between 4 and 5 17 6 49 2^ N E 1 Thick Fog,
Showers between 6 and 7 last Night. 18 7 46 2^ S W 2 Fair, and Clouds since.
May 3 14 50 29 4 N E 2 Close, no Rain since 18 April, but very hot and fair
Weather till Yesterday, the Wind for the most part between N and E. 4 10 44 4^
N E 1 Close since. 5 8 37 4^ N E 1 Clouds. 6 8 37 2 E N 1 Fair, Clouds
Yesterday. 19 46 29 W 1 Cloudy. 7 7 41 28 8 W N 2 Clouds. 11 43 8^ W 1 Rain. 16
47 7 W 1 Close. 8 9 41 29 N E 1 Cloudy since. 9 9 42 2 E N 1 Fair. 10 4 47 3^ N
1 Fair since. 11 9 48 3^ S E 1 Fair since. 15 61 2^ S W 1 Fair since. 16 11 54
6 S W 1 Fair, a little Shower or two since. 18 65 5 W 1 Fair since. 17 8 55 6 W
N 1 Fair since. 19 17 70 2 N E 1 Fair since. 20 6 64 3^ N E 2 Cloudy, no Rain
from hence till June 20 the driest Spring that has been known, there having
been no Rain from the End of March to the End of June. August 2 6 65 3 7 N W 1
Fair. 3 11 60 3 8 N 1 Fair. 4 9 62 3^ 9 W 1 Fair. 5 9 62 3^ 8 E 1 Fair. 6 15 71
1^ S 1 Fair. 7 9 68 2 9 S 1 Fair. 15 72 28 8 8 S W 2 Cloudy. 8 8 68 7 9 S 2
Close. 11 69 7 9 S 2 Rain a little. 9 9 64 8 10 S W 1 Close. 17 66 7 10 S 1
Rain a hard Shower. 10 6 62 7 11 S W 2 Close. 11 9 62 29 1^ 11 S W 1 Close. 12
8 66 2 17 S W 1 Mist. 13 9 69 28 8 18 S 1 Rain. 14 72 7 17 SW 1 Fair, Clouds.
14 8 67 8 17 S 1 Fair. 16 72 6 16 SE 1 Thunder Shower. 16 9 69 29 2 17 SW 1
Rain for Hour, and then fair. 17 6 69 2 16 18 4 67 3 16 1682 February 10 12 25
29 5 EN 1 Close, Frost. 11 10 24 29 6 NE 1 Fair, Ice. 12 15 27 29 7 NE Very
fair. 13 11 24 29 7 61 NE 1 Thick Fog. 14 8 23 29 6 63 NE 1 Fair. 15 8 29 29 5
65 EN 1 Close. 17 8 31 29 0 72 S 2 Cloudy, and some Rain. 20 17 42 28 7 75 SE 2
Rain. 21 8 44 28 6 75 S 2 Rainy. 22 9 42 28 7 77 S 2 Close. 24 10 41 29 2 74 SE
1 Close. 25 15 39 28 7 75 NE 1 Rain ever since Yesterday in the Afternoon. 26
10 38 29 1 74 N 1 Close. 27 7 37 29 3 75 NW 1 Close. 28 10 39 29 4^ 73 W 1
Close. 1682 March d h T. 3 Bar. Hy. Wind. Weather. 1 9 42 29 3^ 74 Fog. 5 16 30
29 1 67 S 1 Very fair, hard Frost in the Morning. 6 10 28 29 2 67 NE 1 Fair. 7
11 25 29 2^ 65 N 2 Very fair. 22 13 29 29 2 57 N 3 Cloudy, and a little Snow.
23 8 25 29 4 56 N 2 Close, Frost. 24 7 29 29 4 57 W 1 Close. 25 9 36 29 2 59 N
2 Clouds. 26 8 31 29 4 56 N 1 Close. 27 8 34 29 4 57 W 2 Fair. 13 39 29 3 59 WN
1 A Shower. 28 7 35 29 4 56 NW 1 Fair. 29 7 30 29 5 50 N Clouds. 30 8 30 29 5^
48 NE 2 Fair. 11 31 29 5 47 NE 3 Snow. 31 8 30 29 6 48 NE 2 Fair. April 1 8 30
29 6 49 NE 2 Close. 2 9 33 29 6 50 NE 1 Close. 19 36 29 6 51 NE 1 Small Mist. 3
7 34 29 6 51 NE 1 Small Mist. 4 9 34 29 6 50 NE 1 Close. 5 7 34 29 5 50 NE 1
Fog, and Sunshine. 6 9 39 29 4 49 N 1 Fair. 7 9 39 29 5 48 N 1 Fair. 8 8 39 29
5 44 NE 1 Fog, and Sunshine. 11 43 29 5 44 SE 2 Fair. 9 7 40 29 3 40 SE 2
Thick Fog. 14 41 29 1^ 41 S 2 Rain. 20 43 28 7 44 S 2 Rain till past 6, now
fair. 10 7 43 28 6 47 SW 2 Close, Rain in Showers most part of the Day. 11 8 43
28 6 49 SW 2 Close Rain in Showers most part of the Day. 12 7 41 28 5 48 SW 1
Close, Shower about Noon. 16 44 28 6 47 WN 1 Fair. 13 6 37 28 8^ 47 SE 1 Fair.
17 44 28 5 47 2 Rain. 14 7 42 28 2 48 SE 2 Rain all the Morning, till past 12
14 45 28 5^ 50 W 3 Rain, more or less, almost all the Afternoon. 15 6 40 29 1^
50 SW 2 Fair. 16 7 43 29 1 48 Fair, hard Shower about 18 17 7 47 28 8^ 49 SE 1
Close, Showers several times in the Day. 18 7 43 28 7 50 SE 1 Rain the greatest
part of the Day. 19 6 44 28 7 52 S 2 Close, Rain a great part of the Day. 20 6
44 28 6 51 SE 1 Rain, and so in Showers several times of the Day. 21 4 45 28 6
51 S 1 Cloudy, Rain most part of the Morning. 22 8 47 28 7 51 S 1 Rain. 17 51
28 8 52 N 1 Rain most part of the Afternoon. 23 7 46 29 2 52 N 1 Close. 13 49
29 3^ 52 S 1 Close, Rain almost all the Afternoon. 22 49 29 3 52 N about 18
Hard Rain. 24 6 46 29 4 52 E 1 Close, hard Rain at Night. 25 7 47 29 1 52 ES 1
Close, some Rain. 14 42 28 8 53 SE 1 Dropping. 22 54 28 7 54 3 Hard Rain from
18 26 7 52 28 6 54 S 2 Cloudy, Rain often in the Day. 27 5 52 28 8 55 SW 1
Close, a good deal of Rain before Night. 28 18 51 28 55 SW 1 Close, Rain a good
part of the Morning, and some in the Afternoon. 29 8 47 29 1 55 SW 1 Cloudy, a
little Rain in the Afternoon. 30 5 47 28 8 55 SW 1 Fair. 18 46 28 6 55 NE 1
Hard Rain, which began about 11, and lasted till 21 or 22 1682 May d h T. 3
Bar. Hy. Wind. Weather. 1 4 42 28 8 55 NW 2 Cloudy. 21 47 29 2 54 NW 1 Fair. 2
8 43 29 2^ 54 SW 1 Cloudy, hard Rain from 19 or 20 all Night. 3 6 49 28 7 54 SW
2 Clouds, Wind W. all the Afternoon, but fair, bating a little Rain in the
Evening. 4 5 52 28 7 54 SE 1 Rain hard till 13 13 54 28 7 54 N 1 Rain hard till
Night. Memorand. That new fitting my Barometer, here the Mercury was raised by
Addition of more in the Receiver about 2/10 Inch, which is almost 2 of my
Degrees, which are Eights, though I suspect it is still by reason of included
Air, a Degree or two too low. 22 53 29 2 54 Small Rain. 5 8 48 29 3 54 E 1
Rain. 20 51 29 3^ 55 E 1 Close Rain most part of the Morning, and 2 or 3
Showers in the Afternoon. 6 7 48 29 3^ 55 NE 1 Mist. 7 8 46 29 4^ 55 E 2 Rain a
great part of the Day. 8 4 53 29 2 56 SW 2 Hard Rain till 7 or 8 9 10 54 29 1
55 E 1 Close. 14 55 29 1^ 55 SW 1 Rain. 10 9 50 29 2 54 S 1 Cloudy, a little
Rain about 17, and again about 22 11 6 49 29 2 54 SW 1 Close. 11 9 50 29 2 55
SW 1 Short Shower: several short Showers in the Afternoon. 12 6 49 29 3 54 SW 1
Close; a Shower in the Morning. 13 4 51 29 2^ 53 E 1 Close, several Showers in
the Day. 14 9 53 29 4^ 54 SW 2 Clouds. 15 7 51 29 4 51 S 1 Fair. 16 8 61 29 2
48 SE 1 Fair, hard Shower about 18 17 5 60 29 3^ 48 SW 2 Close. 18 7 57 29 5^
47 W 1 Fair. 19 8 58 29 5 45 WS 1 Fair. 20 5 63 29 3^ 43 SE 1 Fair. 16 69 29 3^
43 WS 1 Very fair. 21 8 59 29 3 44 S 1 Fair. 22 9 69 29 1 42 SE 1 Fair. 17 47
29 1 38 SW 2 Fair. 23 7 64 29 2 38 W 1 Fair, gentle Rain from 8 to 11 10 63 29
2 38 W 1 Rain. 24 7 62 29 2 39 N 1 Close. 25 6 59 29 3 42 NW 1 Fair. 27 9 53 29
5 42 W 1 Fair. 28 14 67 29 3 33 S 1 Fair. October 14 9 45 29 6 49 W 1 Close,
Rain last Night. 16 13 48 29 4 51 SW 2 Rain till Bedtime. 1682 October 17 9 47
29 2 51 W 1 Fair, little Rain. 18 10 41 29 1 51 SW 2 Cloudy, hard Rain from 5
to Bedtime. 19 9 39 28 7 51 W 1 Fair, Shower in the Afternoon. 20 9 34 28 7 51
0 Rain. 27 22 38 29 7 60 Close. 28 10 37 29 7 60 EN 2 Fair. November 8 18 29 8
Fair, hard Frost. 9 9 22 29 8 57 N 1 Fog, gone before Noon: hard Frost. 10 10
26 29 8^ 58 EN 1 Fair, hard Frost. 11 9 25 29 7 56 NE 1 Close, hard Frost. 12
Fair, hard Frost. 13 10 26 29 5 57 NE 1 Close, hard Frost. 14 13 23 29 7 57
Thick Fog, fair in the Afternoon. 15 10 36 29 4 56 SW 1 Close, Rain this
Morning, hard Rain 22 16 5 41 29 1 66 Hard Rain, Rain most part of the Day. 17
41 29 1^ 65 SW 1 Rain. 17 11 39 29 1 64 WS 2 Fair. 18 9 37 28 7 64 0 Fog, Rain
most part of the Day. 19 9 33 29 1 62 W 1 Fair, Rain in the Night 20 10 40 29 1
64 WN 1 Fair, Rain in the Afternoon. 22 42 29 2 63 2 Fair. 21 6 42 29 1^ 64
Hard Rain till 10 16 43 29 2 64 W 2 Fair. 22 11 33 29 5 63 W 1 Small Fog, Frost
this Morning. 23 9 28 29 5 62 NW Fog, thick Fog all Day. 24 9 25 29 5 62 NW
Thick Fog, little Rain in the Evening. 25 8 35 29 3 67 SW 1 Close, Rain in the
Evening. 26 9 35 29 4^ 65 WN 1 Fair. 27 10 31 29 7 64 WN 1 Fair. 28 4 32 29 8
65 Fair. 29 8 33 29 7 65 WS Small Fog. 30 9 35 29 7 65 SW 1 Fair. December 1 8
35 29 6 66 S 1 Mist. 2 9 34 29 6 66 S 1 Close. 3 9 34 29 6 66 SW 1 Foggy. 1683.
June 21 9 62 29 3 46 W 1 Close. 22 8 65 29 2 48 WS 2 Close, some Showers. 23 7
59 29 4 46 W 1 Cloudy. 25 19 67 29 4 44 WN 1 Fair, Mist in the Morning. 26 10
64 29 5 43 S 1 Very fair. 17 72 29 3 43 S W 2 Fair. 30 13 62 29 3 37 W N 3
Fair.

An Explication of the foregoing Register.
THE first Column with d at the Top, contains the Day of the Month.

The second Column with h at the Top, contains the Hour of the Day, which
beginning from Midnight, I count to 24, which is Midnight again; so that 13
stands for 1 Afternoon, and so on.

The third Column with Th. at the Top, marks the Degrees of my Thermoscope,
which having been blown at a Lamp, though the Spaces of the Degrees were
equally divided, yet because of the unequal Bigness of the small Tube, toward
the Extremities, where it grew bigger, it did not always in every Degree mark
equally proportionable Degrees of Heat and Cold. The Points to be observed in
that and the next Column, which is that for the Baroscope, show the just Place
where the Top of the tinged Spirit of Wine in the one, and the Mercury in the
other, stood between the Line of the Degree marked, and the following, when the
Observation was made. The Thermoscope I made use of till December, 1669, was a
sealed one, with all the Degrees increasing with the Heat in one continued
Series. The Thermoscope which I used from December. 1669. to June 1675. and is
marked 2. was one of Mr. Cotgraves adjusting, which beginning the reckoning
from the temper of freezing, has the Numbers increasing both upwards and
downwards; the Points show it to be in the Degrees; above 0, if set over; and
under 0, if set under: and or show it higher or lower in each Degree. The
Thermoscope used from March 1681, to the End, is marked 3, and is of the kind
of that used first.

The Column having Hy. at the Top, contains the Degrees of Moisture, as marked
by an Hygroscope made of the Beard of a wild Oat.

In the Column of the Wind, I not having the Convenience to observe the Points
exactly, have marked but 8, but yet with this Variety, that where I set two
Letters, the Wind was most from that Point whose Letter stands first, v. g. W N
signifies more West than North. When I set only one Letter, it was in or very
near that Cardinal Point.

The Strength is marked by 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. 0 signifies not so much Wind that
moved any Leaf that I could see in a Garden I looked into out of my Window, but
the Letter joined to it signifies which way the Weathercock then stood,
whether the former Wind left it so, or the present Breeze blew that way. 1
signifies a gentle Gale, just perceivable by the moving of the Leaves or
Plants. 4 signifies a very violent Storm: 2 and 3 the several Degrees between 1
and 4, as well as I could judge. These Degrees, though not so exactly measured
as I could have wished, I yet thought better than nothing.

LE Tuyau recourbe estoit ferme au bout ae et
Ouuert alautre extremite B. La recourbure depuis. G. Jusq' a C. estoit pleine
de Mercure and tout lereste estoit plein d' air. La longueur Ae. C. estoit 4
Pouces ou 32/8. J'echauffay cet air, et il feit baisser le Mercure Jusques en
f. qui estoit plus bas, and en mesme temps il monta jusq' en H. qui estoit 3/8
plus haut que G. ou C.

Pour scauoir quelle hauteur de Mercure auroit este necessaire pour empescher
la dilatation de lair, and retenir le mercure en C. Je nay qua trouuer ce qui
seroit necessaire pour repousser le mercure en C. Etainsy contenir lair dans
lespace Ae. C. non obstant la Chaleur. Je pose pour principe ceque lexperience
fait voir, Cest que quand une quantite dair occupe un certain espace que
Jappelle. Ae. et que la pression qui leretient dans cet espace soit B. si^on
vient a augmenter certe pression de tell quantite que lon voudra comme X. on
diminuera L'espace Ae. d'une certain quantite. D. Laquelle quantite est au
restant. M. comme X est a B. D. M.:: X. B. donc M. D.:: B. X.

Il est aise d appliquer cettereigle a lexperience cy dessus Car Ae. f. ou 35/8
de pouce sont lespace Ae. Lapression ordinaire de lair qui est de 30 Pouces
Jointe ae un pouce de haut que se trouue enter f. et H. est B X 31 Pouces de
mercure: et si nous y en adjoustons assez pour reduire lair a lespace. Ae. C.
Ledit. Ae. C. sera M. X 32/8 Et. f. C. Sera D. X Posant donc. M. D. B. 32. 3.
31.

La quatriesme proportionelle sera. X. X 2 29/32 pouces, qui estants joints a
B. X 31 Pouces feront 33 29/32 pouces don't lair sera press en C. Ae. qui sont
pres de 4 Pouces audessus de la pression ordinaire.

Experiment made at the Spire of the Cathedral-Church in Sarum, by Colonel John
Windham, assisted by Mr. Tho. Naish, Clerk of the Works, and John Warner, in
November, 1684.
HAving gotten together all the surveighing Chains the City afforded, and
carefully examined their Truth, and having prepared a proper Frame for the
Baroscope, we went into the Church, filled the Tube, and with all the Nicety we
could use, purged it of the airy Particles, and then immersing it, as in the
Forricellian Experiment, the Mercury was there suspended 30 Inches, and 50
Cents of an Inch, measuring it from the Surface of the Stagnum: Then drawing it
up to the first Floor above the Vaulting, which is 1033 Inches and high from
the Pavement, the Mercury subsided 9 Cents of an Inch: From thence drawing it
up to the middle Floor, which is 935 Inches higher, the Mercury subsided 8
Cents lower than before: And from thence drawing it up to the Weather-Door,
which is 2313 Inches higher than the last, the Mercury subsided 23 Cents below
its last Station. So the whole Height 'twas drawn up, is 4281 Inches and a
half; and the whole Difference of the Mercury's standing is 40 Cents of an
Inch. And letting it down again the same way, the Mercury reascended to its
first Stations.

At another time with an inverted Baroscope, like that Figure in the Margin,
having made a Mark where
the Liquor stood when 'twas below in the Church, and drawing it up to the
first Floor over the Inches. Inc. Cen. Vaulting Which is above the Pavement of
the Church 1033 and. The Liquor ascended 1 25 To the middle Floor 1968. 2 39 To
the 8 Doors Floor 2467. 3 22 To the Weather-Door 4281. 5 64 To the Top 4800, or
400 Feet. 6 40 If your Honor desires to have any other Experiments made at
that Spire, Mr. Naish whom I have mentioned above, is a Person well skilled in
the practical Parts of Mathematics, and a great Lover of Learning, but more
especially natural and experimental Philosophy, having all or most of your
Honor's Phylosophical Works. This Person I know would most gladly and heartily
embrace any Opportunity of serving your Honor, whenever you will be pleased to
let me impart any thing to him in a Letter.

This is humbly advertised by, Sir, Your Honor's most Obliged, and most
Obedient Servant, JOHN WARNER.
Decembris 17. Anno 1685.
At a Place in the great Continent in Europe, but not far from the Ocean, a
learned Acquaintance of mine keeping a Baroscope some Years, and being
discoursed with by me, about the Difference of the Phenomenon that may be
expected in Places situate upon the Continent, from what we find in this
Country, as it is an Island: He related to me, that a few Years since, casting
his Eyes upon the Baroscope, in ordinary Weather, and that was calm enough; he
was surprised to see the Mercury so strangely raised, as to exceed above two
Inches its wonted Station, which great Alteration he found within few Hours to
have been the Forerunner of so hideous a Storm as was generally wondered at,
and did a great deal of Mischief both in the Towns and Country of those Parts,
where it left sad Instances of its Fury. This Wind came all along the
Continent: but my Relator diverse times observed, that when very boisterous
Winds blew from the Sea, and the Storms came thence, (which lying to the
Southward) the Mercuty in the Baroscope would considerably subside, as has
likewise been often observed here in England by an ingenious Gentleman, living
within less than two Leagues of the Sea, to whom I presented a Baroscope to
make Observations with.

An industrious young Man, that whilst he was my Domestic, I bred up to
Chemistry, (of which he now teaches Courses) related to me the other Day, that
toward the latter End of the last Month (which was June) being at Oxford, where
his House is, he had occasion to cast his Eyes upon his Baroscope, and was not
a little surprised to find that the Quicksilver was in an extraordinary
Measure altered from the Height it stood at but a while before: Whereupon,
though the Weather were very hot and fair, as is usual in June, and had
continued so for some Days; yet he took upon him to foretell from this great and
quick Subsidence of the Mercury, that there would be e're long some notable
Change of Weather. And accordingly it happened within about four or five Hours;
that the Sky was all overcast; and there fell a hideous Storm of Rain,
Lightning and Thunder, accompanied with such a Whirlwind, as scarce any
remember to have seen in that City.

A Letter to the Author.
Honored Sir,
I Have been able to do so little in the Attempts I have made to serve you,
that I am ashamed to have been so well furnished to so small purpose. The
Barometer I had from you was conveyed safe into the Country, and as soon as it
came to my Hands, I rode to Minedeep, with an Intention to make use of it
there, in one of the deepest Gruffs (for so they call their Pits) I could find:
the deepest I could hear of was about 30 Fathom, but the Descent so far either
from easy, safe, or perpendicular, that I was discouraged from venturing on it.
They do not, as in Wells, sink their Pits strait down, but, as the Cranies of
the Rocks, give them the easiest Passage; neither are they let down by a Rope,
but taking the Rope under their Arm, by setting their Hands and Legs against
the sides of the narrow Passage, clamber up and down, which is not very easy
for one not used to it, and almost impossible to carry down the Barometer, both
the Hands being employed. This Information I should have suspected to come from
their Fear, had not an intelligent Gentleman, Neighbor to the Hill, assured me
'twas their usual way of getting up and down. For the Sight of the Engine, and
my Desire of going down into some of their Gruffs, gave them terrible
Apprehensions, and I could not persuade them but that I had some Design: So
that I and a Gentleman that bore me Company, had a pleasant Scene, whilst their
Fear to be undermined by us, made them disbelieve all we told them; and do what
we could, they would think us craftier Fellows than we were. But, Sir, I will
not trouble you with the Particulars of this Adventure: but certain it is the
Women too were alarmed, and think us still either Projectors or Conjurers.
Since I could not get down into their Gruffs, I made it my Business to inquire
what I could concerning them: The Workmen could give me very little Account of
any thing, but what Profit made them seek after; they could apprehend no other
Minerals but Lead Oar, and believed the Earth held nothing else worth seeking
for: besides, they were not forward to be too communicative to one, they
thought they had Reason to be afraid of. But at my Return, calling at a
Gentleman's House, who lives under Minedeep-Hills, and who had sent out his Son
to invite me in; amongst other things he told me this, that sometimes the Damps
catch them, and then if they cannot get out soon enough, they fall into a
Swound, and die in it, if they are not speedily got out; and as soon as they
have them above ground, they dig a Hole in the Earth, and there put in their
Faces, and cover them close up with Turfs; and this is the surest Remedy they
have yet found to recover them. In deep Pits they convey down Air by the side
of the Gruff, in a little Passage from the Top; and that the Air may circulate
the better, they set up some Turfs on the Lee side of the Hole, to catch, and
so force down the fresh Air: But if these Turfs be removed to the windy side,
or laid close over the Mouth of the Hole, those below find it immediately, by
want of Breath, Indisposition, and Fainting: and if they ehance to have any
sweet Flowers with them, they do not only lose their pleasant Smell
immediately, but stink as bad as Carrion. Notwithstanding this ill Success, I
had attempted some Trials once more, had not the spreading of the Contagion
made it less safe to venture abroad, and hastened me out of the Country sooner
than I intended. But I have some Hopes, the next Journey I make into those
Parts, to give you a better Account than this that follows. Near the House
where I sometimes abode, was a pretty steep and high Hill. April. 3. hora inter
8 and 9. Matutin. the Wind West, and pretty high, the Day warm, the Mercury was
at 29 Inches and 1/^^ being carried up to the Top of the Hill, it fell to 28
Inches: (or thereabouts, for I think it was a little above 28 Inches:) Both
going up and coming down, I observed that proportionably as I was higher or
lower on the Hill, the Mercury fell or rose. At my return to the bottom of the
Hill, the Mercury wanted of ascending to its former Height ^ of an Inch, which
I impute to the Sun's rarifying some Particles of Air that remained in the
upper Part of the Tube, rather than to any other Change in the Air; for I find
it harder to clear the Tube of Air perfectly, than at first I thought, or of
Water, if that have been put in with the Mercury, and I fear liable to the same
Inconvenience with Air enclosed. I know this is far short of what you might
have expected, and has, I fear, but little answered your Desires, since I guess
it was the perpendicular Height of the Place I made the Experiment in, that you
would have had, and perhaps other Considerations of Air, enclosed, and liable
to mineral Steams, would have made a Trial in one of the Gruffs more acceptable
to you. I do not think any thing in this Letter worthy of you, or fit for the
Public. But since I find by the two last Philosophical Transactions, that
Observations on the Torricellian Experiment are much looked after, and desired
to be compared; if for want of better, this should be thought fit to fill an
empty Space in the Philosophical News-Book, I shall desire to have my Name
concealed. But I fear that this very Caution of being in Print, where there is
no Danger of it, has too much of Vanity in it. I Am sure it is Boldness enough,
though allaid with Obedience, to venture such slight things to your Sight. I
visited the incrusting Spring I formerly mentioned to you, and could not find
any thing incrusted within at least 20 Yards of the Rise of it. The Place where
it works most, is about 40 or 50 Yards from the Springhead, and is at a Fall
higher than my Head: there it sheaths every thing with stony Cases, and makes
the sides of the Bank hard Rock, and from thence all along its Stream, it
covers Sticks, etc. with a Crust; and some so candied I found above this Fall,
but not so frequent; whether the mixing of Air with the Water in the Fall,
contributes any thing to the Effect, I cannot guess; but that the Fall does, I
suppose: for besides that at the abovementioned Fall, it seems to operate most
strongly, I observed, that though I could not find any thing incrusted within a
good Distance of the Spring, yet that the Moss above the Spring was a little
incrusted, (but not so firmly as at the other Place) for the Water in the
Winter, when the Springs are full, runs out also at a Hole two or three Yards
above the Place, where now only it rises, and from thence falls perpendicularly
into this lower Spring, from whence it runs by an easy Descent to the next
Fall. A Gentleman in whose Field it rises, and by whose House it runs, told me
upon Inquiry, that he uses it both in his Kitchen and Brew House, without any
sensible ill Effects, he being a pretty ancient, but healthy Man, and long
Inhabitant of that Place. It will bear Soap, freezes quickly; and waters his
Grounds upon Occasion, with Advantage. All the ill Effects of it, that he can
guess, are, that his Horses are usually shortbreathed, which he imputes to the
drinking of that Water. I brought with me from Minedeepe some Oar, and some
Stones; but I think them so inconsiderable, that I shall not judge them worth
sending, unless you please to command them. I am, SIR,

Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant, JOHN LOCK.
Chapter Chapter 5o May, 1666. POSTSCRIPT.
I had forgot to mention to you, that in their Gruffs, after burning, (when
they meet with hard Rocks in their way, they make a Fire upon them, that they
may dig through the easier) they find it very dangerous to go down into them,
as long as there remains any Fire or Heat in any Chinks of the Rocks.




Some Days ago the King doing me the Honor to discourse with me about the Use
of Baroscopes, was pleased to say, among other remarkable things, that at a
time his Majesty then named, he went from Whitehall about six in the Morning,
toward the Mouth of the River, attended by diverse of the Nobility, and
particularly by one of the Lords then present, whom his Majesty put in Mind of
the Adventure; and then he added, that though the Weather were exceeding fair,
and likely to continue so, insomuch that some of the Courtiers congratulated to
his Majesty so promising a Morning; yet when they were once gone too far to
return, he told them he thought they would be much mistaken, and that they were
to prepare for a Storm; which Conjecture his Majesty grounded upon his having,
unknown to the Company, consulted a good Baroscope before he went out, and
found the Mercury in it to have suddenly, and very notably subsided. And
accordingly within a very few Hours the Event verified his Majesty's
Prediction, a sudden Storm driving on the Yatch he was in, for diverse Leagues,
at a very unusual rate.

Nous apprenons de ces experiences, que puisque le poids de l' Air et le poids
de l' eau qui est dans les Pompes se tiennent mutuellement en Equilibre, ils
pesent precisement autant l' un que l' autre; and qu' ainsi en connoissant la
hauteur ou l' eau s' eleve en tous les lieux du monde, nous connoissons en
mesme temps combien chacun de ces lieux est press par le poids de l' Air qui
est au dessus d' eux; et partant.

Que les lieux, qui sont au board de la mer, sont pressez par le poids de l'
Air, qui est au dessus d' eux jusques au haut de sa Sphere, autant precisement,
que si au lieu de cet Air on substituoit une colomne d' eau de la hauteur de 31
Pieds deux poulces.

Ceux qui sont plus elevez de dix toises, autant que s' ils portoient de l' eau
de la hauteur de 31 Pieds un poulce.

Ceux qui sont elevez audessus de la mer de 500 Toises, autant que s' ils
portoient de l' eau a la hauteur de 26 Pieds onze poulces: and ainsi du rest.

Nous apprenons par ces experiences que l' Air qui est sur le niveau de la mer
pese autant que l' eau, a la hauteur de 31 Pieds deux poulces; mais parce que
l' Air pese moins sur les lieux plus elevez que sur le niveau de la mer; et qu'
ainsi il ne pese pas sur tous les Points de la terre egalement, and mesine qu'
il pese differemment par tout, on ne peut pas prendre un pied fix, qui marque
combien tous les lieux du monde sont Chargez par l' Air, le fort portant le
foible; mais on peut en prendre un par conjecture bien approchant du just;
comme par exemple, on peut fair estat, que tous les lieux de la terre en
general considerez comme s' ils estoient egalement chargez d' Air, le fort
portant le foible, en sont autant pressez, que s' ils partoient de l' eau a la
hauteur de 31 Pieds; et il est certain qu' il n' y a pas un demi pied d' eau d'
erreur en cette Supposition.

Or nous avons veu que l' Air qui est au dessus des montagnes hautes de 500.
toises sur le niveau de la mer, pese autant que l' eau a la hauteur de 26 Pieds
11 Poulces.

Et par consequent tout l' Air qui s' etend de puis le niveau de la mer jusqu'
au haut des montagnes, hautes de 500 Toises, pese autant que l' eau a la
hauteur de 4 Pieds un poulce, qui estant a peu pres la septieme party de la
hauteur entiere; il est visible que l' Air compris depuis la mer jusques a ces
montagnes est a peu pres la septieme party de la mass entiere de l' Air.

Nous apprenons de ces mesmes Experiences, que les vapeurs qui sont epaisses
dans l' Air, lors qu' il en est le plus Charge, pesent autant que l' eau a la
hauteur d' un pied huit Poulces; puisque pour les contrepeser, else font
housser l' eau dans les Pompes a cette hauteur, par deffus celle ou l' eau
contrepesoit deja la pesanteur de l' Air: de sort que si toutes les vapeurs
qui sont sur une contree estoient reduites en eau, comme il arrive quand else
se changent en pluye, else ne pourroient produire que cette hauteur d' un pied
huit poulces d' eau sur cette contree. Et s' il arrive par fois des orages ou
l' eau de la pluye qui tomb vienne a une plus grande hauteur; c' est parce que
le vent y port les vapeurs des contrees voisines.

Nous voyons aussi de la, que si toute la Sphere de l' Air estoit pressee and
comprimee contre la terre par une Force qui la poussant par le haut, la
reduisist en bas a la moindre place qu' elle puisse occuper, and qu' elle la
reduisist comme en l' eau, elle auroit alors la hauteur de 31 Pieds seulement.

Et par consequent qu' il faut considerer toute la mass de l' Air en l' estat
libre ou elle est, de la mesme sort que si elle eust este autrefois comme une
mass d' eau de 31 pieds de haut a l' entour de toute la terre, qui eust este
rarefiee et dilatee extremement, et convertie en cet estat ou nous l' appellons
Air, auquel elle occupe a la verite plus de place, mais auquel elle conserve
precisement le mesme poids que l' eau a 31 pieds de haut.

Et comme il n' y auroit rien de plus aise que de supputer combien l' eau qui
environneroit toute la terre a 31 Pieds de haut peseroit de livres; et qu' un
enfant qui scait l' Addition et la Soustraction le pourroit fair; on
trouveroit par le mesme moyen combien tout l' Air de la Nature pese de livers,
puisque c' est la mesme chose; et si on en fait l' epreuve, on trouvera qu' il
pese a peu pres huit Millions de Millions de Millions de Livers.

IN ay voulu avoir ce plaisir, et j' en ay fait le compte en cette sort.

IN ay suppose que le Diametre d' un cercle est a sa circonference, comme 7 a
22.

IN ay suppose que le Diametre d' une Sphere estant multiply par la
circonference de son grand cercle, le produit est le contenu de la superficie
Spherique.

Nous Scavons qu' on a divise le tour de la terre en 360 degrez cette division
a este voluntaire, car on l' eust divisee en plus ou moins si on eust voulu,
aussi bien que les cercles celestes.

On a trouve que chacun de ces degrez contient 50000 toises.

Les lieues autour de Paris sont de 2500 toises; et par consequent il y a 20
lieues au degree: D' autres en comptent 25 mais aussi ils ne mettent que 2000
toises a la lieue; ce qui revient a la mesme chose.

Chaque toise a 6 pieds.

Un pied Cube d' eau pese 72 libres.

Cela pose, il est bien aise de fair la supputation qu' on cherche.

Car puisque la terre a pour son grand cercle, ou pour sa circonference 360
degrez. Elle a par consequent de tour 7200 lieues. Et par la proportion de la
Circonference au Diametre aura 2291 lieues. Donc en multipliant le Diametre de
la terre par la Circonference de son grand cercle; on trouvera qu' elle a en
toute sa superficie Spherique 1649200 lieues quarrees. C' est a dire 103, 095,
000, 000, 000, toises quarr. C' est a dire 3711, 420, 000, 000, 000, pieds
quarr.

Et parce qu' un pied cube d' eau pese 72 livres.

Ils' ensuit qu' un prisme d' eau d' un pied quarre de base, et de 31 pieds de
haut, pese 2232 livres.

Donc si la terre estoit couverte d' eau jusques a la hauteur de 31 pieds; il y
auroit autant de prismes d' eau de 31 Pieds de haut, qu' elle a de pieds
quarrez en toute sa surface. (Ie scay bien que ce ne seroient pas des prismes,
mais des secteurs de Sphere; et je neglige expres cette Precision.)

Et partant elle porteroit autant de 2232 livres d' eau, qu' elle a de pieds
quarrez en toute sa surface.

Donc cette mass d' eau entiere peseroit.

8283, 889, 440, 000, 000, 000, livres.

Donc toute la mass entiere de la Sphere de l' Air qui est au monde, pese ce
mesme poids de

8283. 889, 440, 000, 000, 000, livres.

C' est a dire, Huit Millions de Millions de-Millions, deux cent quatre vingt
trois mill huit cent quatre vingt neuf Millions de Millions, quatre cent
quarente mill millions de livres.

Mr. Pascal in his small Tract, either De la Pesanteur de l' air; or in that
Del' Equilibre des liqueurs.
De caetero, feci haud ita pridem experimentum ponderandi aeris, quod pulchre
successit; nam sumpta vitrea lagena, valde levi et ad lampadem sufflata, ejus
figurae, qualem hic excusam vides, magnitudine parvae pilae quales habentur in
sphaeristeriis, non habente nisi minimam quandam aperturam per quam immittatur
pilus in extremitate orificii sui B. ponderavi eam in bilance
valde exacta, and frigida pondus habuit 78 granorum cum dimidio: Postea
calefeci eam carbonibus impositam, and reposui in bilaneem eo situ quo hic
descriptum vidos, nimirum orificio in imum verso, and deprehendi eam vix habere
pondus 78 granorum, tum immergendo orificium in aquam, refrigescere feci, and
dum aer se condensat pro modo quo refrigescit lagena, intravit tantundem aquae
quantum aeris calor antea expulerat; denique ponderans eam cum omniilla aqua
deprehendi eam habere pondus 72 granorum and dimidii plus quam antea: unde
concludo aerem qui per ignem expulsus erat, se habere ad aquam quae in locum
suum regressa erat uti se habet ad 72, aut uti se habet 1. ad 145. sed potui in
eo errasse difficile quippe est in ea re omnino exactum esse; Id saltem certo
scio, quod pondus aeris hoc modo fit sensibile, and prolixe hic deduxi
processum meum, ut si te eadem curiositas incessat, possis id eodem modo
perficere experimentum. Vale.

TITLE XVIII.
Of the Consistency of the Air; its Rarity, Density, Fluidity, Subtilty.

A Thin but large Bladder, wherein there was about the third part of the Air it
was capable of containing, being strongly tied at the Neck, and at the opposite
Part suspended and clogged at the bottom, with a Weight of 14 Pound; so that it
rested on the Floor, which sustained it; the Strings that tied the Bladder were
well stretched before, and could not shrink a quarter of an Inch without
drawing up the Weight. Then two Fire-shovels, with small Coals and Ashes were
applied at a convenient Distance, and kept moving to warm and rarify the
included Air, without cracking the Bladder, by which means after some of the
Wrinckles of the Bladder had been displayed, not without Noise, the Air being
expanded, and consequently the Bladder a little swelled, and the whole String
shortened, the Weight was raised and made to swing like a Pendulum. The same
Experiment being tried two or three times with a quarter of an Hundred,
succeeded not, though with larger Bladders, the Heat still either breaking the
Bladder with Noise, or occasioning some little Leak which hindered the desired
Success, though once we came so very near it, that it is scarce to be doubted,
that if we had had good Accommodations, it would have succeeded well, and that
perhaps if the Weight had been greater.

To try whether the Corpuscles of the Air would dive into a Liquor that was
exposed but to the ordinary Pressure of the free Air or Atmosphere. We covered
the bottom of a Cylindrical Vial with Filings of Copper, and then poured on it
an urinous Spirit, to the Height of about three Fingers breadth, and on this
Liquor we poured Oil of Almonds to the Thickness of a Crown Piece of Silver, or
that of about the fifth part of an Inch; then we stopped the Vial well, and
left it in a quiet Place for several Days. The Event was such as we expected,
namely, that the urinous Liquor did first acquire, and then lose a blew
Tincture, both were done but slowly. And when the Color was pretty well lost
(for the Liquor was not clear, but somewhat troubled) we took out the Cork, and
kept the Vial unstopp'd for one Minute of an Hour, and then stopped it again;
that in that short time the upper Part of the urinous Spirit began to be tinged
with Blew, and within an Hour, though the Vessel were all the while kept
stopped, the Sky-Colour reached to the lower part of the Liquor, which at this
time is wholly and deeply of that Color, the Oil that swims above it being
clear.

TITLE XIX.
Of the Heat and Coldness of the Air.

THough the Peripatetick Doctrine about the Limits and Temperaments of the
three Regions, into which they divide the Air, has been so plausibly proposed,
that it has been readily entertained, not only by the Aristotelian Schools, but
by the Generality of Philosophers, as well modern as ancient: yet since I think
it becomes a Naturalist to consider, not so much how easy a Doctrine is, by
reason of its Concinnity, to be remembered or supposed, as how strongly it is to
be proved. I must not dissemble, that as to this vulgar Theory, I think it
fitter we should wish it to be true, than that we should believe it is so: for
I confess, that upon the best Informations I have been able to procure from
Travelers by Land and Sea, or from Writers that relate rather what they have
observed, than what they have been taught, I have been much tempted to question
the received Doctrine of the Schools, about the Regions of the Air. And that
you may judge, whether or no my Thoughts be rational, the ensuing Discourse
shall acquaint you with several of the Particulars on which they are grounded.

What I have in other Papers written concerning Cold, does not only make it
less proper for me to treat of it indefinitely in this Place, but would make it
difficult for me to say much on this Subject without Repetition. And it were
perhaps fittest for me to say nothing on an occasion wherein I have left my
self little to say that is new and pertinent; but yet since this Title promises
not any thing about Cold in general, but only some less heeded Particulars,
relating to the Coldness of the Air: That I may not leave it wholly
unfurnished, I will refer to it a few Instances that ensue.

The Physician, elsewhere mentioned, that was lately at Morocco, answered me,
that notwithstanding the excessive Heat that reigned there in the Daytime, he
felt the Night very cold, and so he did the mountanous Air in those Parts.

An intelligent Gentleman that stayed a Year in Guinea, and spent part of that
time in the Land, answered me, that notwithstanding the excessive Heat of the
Climate, he was diverse times about four of the Clock in the Morning, reduced to
be ready to tremble for Cold, as he lay in his Hammock, for about an Hour
together.

A learned Man that lived at Jamaica, assured me, that when he laid in his
Hammock, about three or four Foot from the Ground, though he had much Clothes
under him, and little or none over him, he felt it cold beneath, and hot above.

It Is obvious to every Man's Sense or Observation; that the greater Heat that
is usually found in our Air, during the Summer, than in other Seasons of the
Year, has manifest Effects upon such easily agitable Bodies as Liquors, and
upon the Juices and Flesh of Animals, and the softer Parts of Vegetables. But
that even in Places sheltered from the Sunbeams, the Warmth of a temperate
Summer should be able sensibly to rarify and expand so cold and compact a Body,
as Glass it self, would not be easily suspected or believed. And yet that this
is one of the Effects of the Temperature of the Air in Summer, seems very
probable by this Experiment, that having two large factitious Crystal Viols,
caused some Stopples of the same Matter to be exquisitely ground, and fitted
this or that Vessel, exactly closed when the Stopple was in it, was very easy
to be opened in Winter, and in the colder Parts of the Neighboring Seasons;
but in Summer 'twas oftentimes so difficult to unstop the same Vessel, that a
Man's Force, though assisted with a String, was not able to pull out the
Stopple: To that I was often reduced to cause the Necks of the Vials to be held
under a Pump, or to be stirred to and fro in a Vessel full of Water, that the
Coldness of that Liquor might take off the Expansion that the Heat of the
Season had given the Glass, which being by this means made to shrink into its
former Dimensions, the Vial and Stopple would be easily enough disjoined. This
was tried in several Vessels, and in more than one Year. But to make this
Experiment successful, two Parts must at first have been exquisitly adjusted to
one another, which in those Glasses, with Stopples of the same Matter that are
commonly sold, they are not usually found to be.

We are wont to attribute the Effects we feel of the Summers Heat, to the bare
Warmth of the Air, and to the Agitations that such Warmth produces in the Parts
of our Bodies, especially in the Blood, Juices and Spirits, whereas it may very
well happen, that we may find odd Changes in our selves, upon very hot Weather,
which proceed not from the Heat of the Air, as such, but rather from this
Cause, that by such a Degree of Heat, diverse Bodies that we think not of, may
be solicited to send forth Effluvia that have emitted none by Force, or at
least no such Quantity as could make them sensibly operative. And these
Effluvia may be the true and immediate Causes of diverse Effects that are
unwarily ascribed to the mere Heat of the Air, and that which it produces in
our Bodies. To illustrate and confirm this Conjecture, I shall propose the
following Experiment.

Being in the Heat of Summer in the Country, I took a somewhat large Piece of
fine Amber, that I usually employed about Electrical Experiments; and when the
Sun had reached a considerable Height above the Horizon, I placed it in a
shaded Part of a Window, on which he shined freely, though I left the Amber
here for a competent time, yet I could not find that it would draw a Piece of
Straw, Feather, or other light Body, that at a convenient Distance was held to
it. But when I removed it a very little further into a Part of the Window, into
which the Sunbeams fell freely, they quickly put its Parts into such an
Agitation as made it emit Electrical Effluvia, and readily attract those light
Bodies that would not stir before, and which it would soon, though not
immediately, lose the Power of drawing, as before, if it were removed back into
the neighboring shaded part of the Window.

May 26. Mr. Nickson, who was four Years Governor of the English Colony in
Hudsons-Bay, answered me, that when they sailed within a certain Distance of
floating Islands of Ice, if the Wind blew from thence toward the Ship, or as
the Seamen speak, if they were to the Leeward of the Ice, they could by the new
and sensible Cold they felt, know that such Ice lay to Windward of them,
sometimes even before they were able to discover it by Sight. And when I
further asked, at what Distance that might be, he answered, that 'twas
sometimes twelve or fifteen Miles, if not twenty. He added, that usually when
the Wind blew from those great Masses of congealed Water, it brought along with
it a foggy Air, which he supposed to come (as well as the Cold) from the Ice.

The same Gentleman, answered me, that in that Part of Hudsons-Bay wherein he
wintered, the Rivers began to freeze about the latter end of October, or
beginning of November, and usually were not free from Ice till about the middle
or latter end of May, though he diverse times took the Latitude of Charleton
Island, the Place most frequented by the English, and seated at the bottom of
the Bay, and found it to be near the same with that of London, and at most but
about 52 Degrees.

When I inquired about the Depth of the Ice in the Rivers, he answered, that
they had often occasion to observe it; for in the Winter they made their Wells
there, (not in the Ground) and were obliged to dig about six Foot deep in the
Ice, before they could come at unfrozen Water.

He answered me, that when they sent their Men up into the Country, their
Bottles of Brandy would oftentimes so freeze, that about a fourth Part of it
would be turned into Ice. And when I asked, whether the unfrozen Part of the
Liquor was not exceeding strong, he answered me, that it was, and sometimes so
much so, as to be too fiery and unpleasant to the Taste.

He answered me, that he always found the Ice fresh that floated upon the
Seawater; and that when they wanted fresh Water, or had a Mind to spare what
they had aboard, they often supplied themselves out of the Cavities of great
floating Masses of Ice; in which hollow Places the Sunbeams thawing some Parts
of the Ice, they frequently found store of Liquor that was produced by the
Action of the Sunbeams upon the superior Parts of the Ice, whence the Water
ran into these Cavities. He added, that when the Seamen were in haste, they
used to relieve themselves by cutting or breaking off Pieces of the floating
Ice, and presently melting it in their Pots.

A learned Traveller, that made some considerable stay among the high Pyrenean
Mountains, answered me, amongst other notable things, about which I made
Inquiry, that he had several times observed at the Top of one or other of those
tall Hills, that the Air would be very hot, and that yet the same Day, and
perhaps within very few Hours, the Place would be covered with Snow, though it
were then Summertime.

Doctor N. answered me, that the Winds he felt at Morocco were so very hot,
that they were ready to stifle him, seeming to him like the Steams and Smoke
coming out of the Mouth of an Oven.

The Russian Emperor's Physician confirmed to me, that at Archangel (where he
was more than once) they averred to him, that in Wintertime a Northerly Wind
(which comes from the Sea) produces a kind of Thaw, so as to make the Eves
drop, though a North-East Wind rather confirms the Frost; but on the contrary,
a Southerly Wind blows over a thousand or a hundred Mile of frozen Land, does
rather increase the Frost than bring the Thaw.

A very inquisitive Person that visited the lofty Pyrenean Mountains, answered
me, that he and his Company had more than once observed, from the Top or higher
Part of one of those Hills, that though it were fair Weather there, yet a great
way beneath them, the Hill was surrounded with thick Clouds, which produced
Storms of Rain on the lower Grounds: and that (which was the chief Point, I
inquired after) they could manifestly see, that out of those Clouds, when it
thundered, Lightnings flashed upwards, as well as they are generally observed
to do it downward.

October 19. Doctor Stubbs assured me, that having at Jamaica taken a Bolt-head
about two Foot and a half in length, he usually found that betwixt 7 and 8 in
the Morning, which they there call the faint time (of the Day) because for want
of the daily Breezes, the excessive Heat makes them to faint away; the Water
was wont to rise in the Neck but a quarter of an Inch and a half, though at
that time by reason of the Winds, Men found the Heat very supportable: and
after Noon was past, the Water would subside by Degrees till toward the
abovementioned time the next Morning. This happened in a South Window, where
the fresh Winds come fully and freely in to beat upon the Bolt-head, without
any Glass to skreen the Vessel from the Wind.

He added, that though the Bolt-head were not stopped, yet the Water did not
even in that hot Country decrease sensibly in eight or ten Months.

A heedful Person that frequented the Coast of Sumatra in the South Sea,
answered me, that he never observed Ice or Frost, or Snow, in that great
Island, but that he had known Hail fall even in that torrid Climate.

Though the famous Island of Ceylon lies almost in the midst of the torrid
Zone, namely, between the 6th and 10th Degrees of Northern Latitude, yet an
observing Man that lived many Years upon it, told me, that in Hills not so
high, but that we might easily ascend to the Top in half an Hour, the
Inequality of the Air's Temperature, as to Heat and Cold, was very great: for
he had diverse times observed in himself and others, that though at the bottom
of the Hill the Heat was so great, as to oblige them to go almost stark naked,
yet when they ascended the Hill, they found the Air quite altered; and as they
went up higher and higher, the Cold increased upon them; so that
notwithstanding the Heat, so uneasy a Motion as Climbing, had given them, the
Coldness of the Air obliged them to put on unusually warm Clothes; and at the
Top of the Hill they would for all that be ready to quake for Cold.

Captain Knox answered me, that in 18 Years that he spent in the Inland of
Ceylon, he never observed any Ice or Snow, nor any more than a little kind of
Meteor that was between Dew and hoar Frost, which sometimes in Winter-Mornings
appeared very oddly, but quickly vanished. And when I asked if he had not seen
Hail it self; he answered, that he never saw it but once, but the Inhabitants
looked upon it as a wonderful thing, unseen by them before, that the Hail was
as large as a black Cherry, but not very round, and seemed to have the Corners
melted, which made him think it had been formed high in the Air; that for fear
of mistaking, he not only gathered some of it, but champ'd it between his
Teeth, and found it cold and hard, like our European Hail; and that he was fain
to be nimble in making his Trials, because when the Hail came to touch the
Ground, it would melt away much more suddenly than one would have expected.

Gregory being asked, upon a very sultry Day, whether it were not very hot in
Germany, made Answer, To Day has been something hot: Such is the Winter in
Suaquena. Ludolf. Hist of Ethiop. l. 1. c. 5.

The Heat of the Island Suaquena, Gregory used to call Ludolp. Hist. of Ethiop.
l. 1. c. 5.
Infernal: For, says he, it excoriates the Skin; melts hard Indian Wax in a
Cabinet, and sears your Shoes like a red hot Iron.

The higher you ascend the Mountains of Ethiopia Ludolp. Hist. of Ethiop. l. 1.
c. 5.
from the Coast of the red Sea, the more temperate you shall feel the Air,
insomuch, that as Tellezius witnesses, in many Regions of Ethiopia the Summer.
Heats are more mild than in Portugal, so many Degrees distant toward the North;
nay there are some Mountainous Countries, as in Samen, where the Cold is more
dreaded than the Heat. Nevertheless there falls none or very little Snow in
these Parts, only a certain small sort of Hail sometimes covers the Ground,
which at a Distance looks like Snow.

An intelligent Person, that was for many Years Consul of the English Nation at
Tripoli in Barbary; being asked some Questions about the Air, and the Winds in
those Parts, answered me, that when in Summertime the Wind blew over the great
Sandy Deserts that reach very far into the Country, the Wind, and the Sand it
brought along with it, oftentimes felt as hot as the Steams that come out of an
Oven when the Mouth is opened, insomuch that he could not, without great
Inconvenience, turn his Face toward the Quarter whence the Wind blew.

An ingenious Gentleman, that was employed in the French Colony, on the Coast
of Africa, and lived in those Parts about five Years, answered me, that in the
Island of St. Lovis, or near it, at a certain Season of the Year, when the hot
Winds blew from the Continent, the Sand on the Shores would be so scorching
hot, that he was not able to stand upon it, but it would, through the Soles of
his Shoes, scorch his Feet, unless he walked very fast. And then the Air
seemed to him to be thick, and as he expressed it, heavy and hot, as if it came
out of an Oven. And when the Wind blew from a Wood, where diverse Elephants and
other wild Beasts lay dead; the Steams of their Carcasses would make the Air so
stinking and offensive, that is was scarce supportable.

In summo ejus montis, Idae sc. fastigio sacellum est quod aedificiolo duntaxat
constat saxis sibi invicem impositis and sine calce cohaerentibus fornicis in
modum constructo, ad tectum prebendum. Sublimi adeo loco est, and a
vehementioribus ventis interdum ita perflato, ut lapilli inde transferantur.
Paulo infra id sacellum Petri Bellonii, lib. 1. cap. 16.
planities conspicitur montibus undique cincta, in qua multa sunt pascua, ubi
Arietes and Caprae Cretenses aestate pinguescunt. Si quis ex summo montis
vertice undique prospiciat parum aberit, quin totius Insulae ambitum videat cum
aliis vicinis Insulis, Miso, Cerigo, sive Cytherareliquisque Archipelagi. Aeris
intemperies in hoc monte adeo magna est quemadmodum ut in caeteris praecelsis
montibus, ut in ipsis Caniculae ardoribus meridie, nullo etiam spirante vento,
ingens sentiatur frigus: qua de causa nec hyeme, nec aestare quisquam eum
incolit. Nam licet pastores interdiu ovium greges ad pascua agunt noctu tamen
in valles se recipient.

In the next Chapter.
Late porro patet hic mons ejusque radices utrinque maris littora, ut ante
diximus attingunt; nam licet urbi Candiae sunt vicinae, meditullium tamen
insulae occupat ipse mons, adeo in sublime evectus, ut nives ejus verticem
perpetuo tegant; tamque frigida aura mediis etiam aestatis ardoribus isthic est
ut vix ferri queat: tametsi in convallibus magnus sit aestus.

Contigit id meae experientiae, quod etiam aliis contigisse Jacobi Zaharelli de
Regionibus Aeris, c. 8.
audivi, ut ascenderem ad summitatem usque montis Veneris, qui omuium in
Patavino agro altissimus est, ibi per totum diem habui aerem serenissimum, sed
infra circiter medium montis vidi nubes, quae me visione vallium prohibebant,
vesperi autem postquam de illo monte descendi, inveni factam eo die infera
part magnam pluviam cum in montis cacumine nihil pluisset; ex eo intellexi me
transiisse per mediam aeris regionem, in qua est facta pluvia, nec tamen eam
sensi frigidissimam, imo vix aliquam animadverti differentiam frigidioris and
calidioris aeris, nam aestivum tempus erat, pro aestivo tempore eram vestitus,
nec tamen tantum frigoris, quod me laederet, ex eo loco percepi, pars igitur
illa non est absolute frigida, sed solum comparatione inferi, aeris calidioris.

Idem de Alpibus proprio exemplo edoctus testatum reliquit Bartholinus Syst.
Phys. Instit. Succinct. de Terra, Aere and Igne, C. 4. Resp. 1.

Doctor B. answered me, that being at and near Morocco, he could see
Mount-Atlas covered with Snow, though it was then in the Heat of Summer, and
excessively hot where he was.

An intelligent Traveller that had visited some high Mountains, and
particularly the Alps, and the Pico of Teneriffe, answered me concerning this
prodigious Hill, that he found it very cold in ascending toward the Top; and
that as for the Mount Cenes, one of the famousest of the Alps, when he passed
over it into Italy, though it were in August, and the Weather very clear, yet
he felt at the Top a Wind so cold, that he could scarce possibly endure it, and
seemed to him the coldest that in all his various Travels he had ever felt; and
yet some of the Mountains seemed much higher, being then covered with Snow.

An intelligent Gentleman that had been a Traveller into the East Indies, told
me, that he never saw nor heard of any Snow or Ice in Guinea, but that in some
Parts of Barbary, where in the Plains and Valleys he found the Heat scorch
insupportable, he could see the Top of the Mountains covered with Snow, in
which State they continued all the Year.

A Man of Letters that lived in many Countries of the East Indies, being asked
by me diverse Questions, partly about other things, and partly about the
Temperature of the Air in several Regions, gave me among other Answers, this,
That on the high Mountain in the Island of Ceylon, notwithstanding the Heat of
the Country, there was Snow; and the like he saw on the tops of the Mountains
of Congo, though in the lower Parts of the Country they never have, that he
heard of, either Ice, Snow or Hail.

About Mid-summer, 1688, I placed in the Cave a Glass, with Spirits, which
stood above temperate, about of one of the small Divisions: Another Glass
placed without, in a common Room, stood at hot.

The Christmas following, I placed the same Glasses in the same Places, and
the Glass in the Cave stood as before, about temperate, that without stood at
Frost.

The Cave is cut into the bottom of a Clift that fronts to the Sea, the Earth
is about 80 Foot above it, and it is cut right in about 130 Foot.

The other Day two Gentlemen belonging to the Province of New Hampshire in
New England, (whence they came not long since) and employed by that Colony to
his Majesty here, answered me, that in the Winter the coldest Wind that blows
in their Country, is the North-West; and being asked again, what was their
hottest Wind in Summer, they told me, it was likewise the North-West. At which
Answer being surprised, I asked them, whether they could give any Reason of so
odd a Phenomenon. Whereto they answered, that they ascribed it to the large
Tract of the Continent, and the great Woods that lay to the North-West; which
Woods, they said, in the Winter had their Branches, through which the Wind
past, all laden with Snow: And in the Summer, they said, the close Air of the
Valleys, and the thick Steams that filled it, would conceive so intense an
Heat, that sometimes in the Heat of Summer, when a sudden Puff of Wind blew
upon their Faces from those sultry Vales, it seemed to them as if it came out
of the Mouth of a Furnace, and would be ready to overcome them with the
Faintness produced by the Heat and Vapors it brought along with it.

De montibus ad Bavariam stantibus mira est Alberti Balbini Hist. Bohem. l. 1.
c. 9. De montibus, and de valle Lauezka, p. 29. Chanowsky in vestigio Boh.
piae, C. ult. Montes part altera aestatem, altera hiemem referentes.
Chanow ^^ nostri narratio: post Bergreichensteinam (oppidum fodinis hodie quae
nobile) esse montes non tam situ (alii enim ad septentrionem, alii ad meridiem
latus obvertunt) quam Coelo and temporibus adversantes, callibus latissimis
montes illos dirimentibus; monstri instar est (quod se vidisse, and Anno 1639,
in rem praesentem venisse religiosissimus ille and Apostolicus vir asserit) in
altero monte saepius aestatem, in altero apposito hiemem dominari, ita ille
siccus aestivat, hic altissimis nivibus obsitus a viatore superari non potest;
ob eamque causam Messes ipsae variant, and dum in montibus ad nos obversis
demessa sunt omnia, altera Montium part seges virescit: Mirius illud quod in
Biessinensibus and Czachroviensibus Id. ibid.
Agris in tractu Plsnensi, contiguis, quos unus tantum sulcus dirimit ac
dividit, deprehenditur: Czachrovienses adhuc hibernant, cum in Biessinensi
Coelum ardeat, ibi caput attollit humo ^^^^mentum, cum Czachroviiadolescit in
culmum; elemento quoque dispari, illud riget, hoc tepet and fervet, eaque ex
causa, dum Czachrovienses been pelliti ingrediuntur, Biessinenses pellibus
onerari se sentiunt, villosque deponunt. Aliquid tale Anno 1652. mihi quoque
accidisse memini: nam cum Glacio Zambergam in Bohemia contenderem, and Glacio
ob nives altissimas certum vehiculi genus, quod trabas dicimus, sumpsissem,
superatis montibus, qui comitatum Glacensem a Bohemia dividunt, subito alia
rerum facies apparuit: altero enim montium latere viridia omnia reperimus, sic
ut Trahae nulli jam rei and usui essent, and currum petere cogeremur, nisi in
luto natare placuisset; at accolae montium illorum quotannis id sibi accidere
confirmabant, ut unum latus montium profundissimae nives contegerent, quando
alterum latus lectissimos flores proferret, and cum ibi omnia ventis verti
viderentur apud se e floribus suavissimos odores efflari.

I learned, by Inquiry, of an ingenious Gentleman, who several times went down
into the Hungarian Gold-Mine at Cremnitz, that when he was drawn up out of the
deep Pit, or perpendicular Groove, whose Depth exceeded 100 Feer; when he had
ascended above half the way, he found the Air sensibly warm, and so it
continued till he came by many Foot nearer the Day, as the Workmen call the
Orifice of the Pit. And when I asked whether this notable and sudden Heat did
not proceed from some Mineral through which he passed in that Region of the
Earth, or part of the Groove; He answered me, that he believed it did, in
regard he was there surrounded with a Vein or Bed of native Vitriol, some of
one Color, some of another, which he found to be soft under Ground, though it
soon after hardened in the Air: and of these differingly colored sorts of
Vitriol he brought up thence several Pieces, some of which he presented me. And
when I asked whether the new Heat he found in that Part of the Mine, did not
proceed from its being much nearer than the lower Part to the Air, which at
that time was hot; and whether he found the Heat to increase as he came nearer
the Day: He answered in the Negative, and told me, that after he had in his
Ascent left beneath him that warm Region, he found himself cold again in the
superior Part of the Groove, to which the Vitriolate Region did not reach.

I remember on this occasion, that asking an intelligent Person, who had more
than once crossed the Torrid Zone, what Expedient they used in his Ship, to
keep their Beer and other Liquors, cool enough to be drinkable in those sultry
Climates: He answered, that their way was to take the Bottle they mean to use,
and wrap it about with a course Linen Cloth dipped in the Seawater, and then
in some convenient Place of the Ship hang it in the Wind, which beating freely
and uncessantly upon it, would in no long time cool it to be potable enough.
And this Gentleman, who was an observing Person, added farther, that having
sometimes for Curiosity sake taken away a Bottle before it had been exposed
above half the usual time, he was able to find by the Taste, that part of the
Beer or Wine, that was next the sides of the Bottle to be refrigerated, whilst
the more inward Parts of the Liquor did yet continue hot.

The Czar's chief Physician confirmed to me, that in the Year 1664, or 63,
extraordinary dry and great Scopes of Land were set on Fire, and miserably
wasted by the great Heat of the Sun. And he added, that the very last Year he
found the like to have happened in Norway, particularly in a Place called by us
Bear-haven; where having seen the Ruin of diverse Wood-houses burnt, and
inquiring into the Cause, he was answered, that the Weather being very dry and
hot, not only the Grass and other Vegetables were scorched up, but those wooden
Houses among others, were set on Fire; which was confirmed to him by the
Governor of the Place, and countenanced by this Circumstance, that he saw the
Country covered with a fresh and verdent Livery of new Grass, brought up,
instead of that which was burnt, by some Rains that fell a while before.

A Traveller and Scholar being asked by me, whether at Mozambique, which is
thought the hottest Place in the known World, he had never observed the Houses
to be set on Fire with the mere Heat of the Sun? He answered me, that in the
three Months he stayed there, he saw no such thing, but the Inhabitants
affirmed it not to be very unfrequent; and as he passed to and fro, showed him
diverse Houses that had been so burnt: which was the less strange, because the
Houses are not built of ordinary Stone, whereof they have none there, but
fetched from another Place he named, where the Stone is mingled with a
Substance, much of the Nature of a Sulphur Vivum. And he added, that he himself
had diverse times seen the Stones so heated in hollow Places, that Musket
Bullets being exposed there to the direct Beams of the Sun, were in no very
long time melted. He said farther, that much of the excessive Heat of
Mozambique proceeded from the Soil, which is exceeding bare and dry, consisting
of white Sand; and that it is not covered with Grass, nor shaded with Trees.

An observing Traveller that had been at Mozambique, being for the most part
where it is not shaded with Trees, sandy, he found the Sun, which was almost in
the Zenith, to heat the Ground so much, that he was not able to stand still for
some time, but was fain to keep walking to avoid burning the Soles of his Feet.

Un Gentilhomme de mes a mis plein de merit et digne de creance me mande enter
plusieures chooses extraordinaires qu' il a observees proche de Barege aux
Pyrenees Qu'il y a des ponts de niege d' un rocher a lautre pardessous les
quells passent des torrents. Il en a vu un qui embrasse deux torrents, et qui a
vint neuf toises de long et autant de large par dessus. Il y a par dessous ce
pont Neuf toises et demi enter les Naissances de la voute les ponts sont
tellement forts qu' il estime que du Canon y passeroit, et il a fait rouler de
grosses pieces par dessus.

Le tremblement de Terre que souffrit la Syrie l'an 750. ne fut gueres moins
surprenant; puisque la Terre s'estant ouverte de toutes parts, plusieurs Villes
furent abimees, d'autres renversees, et quelques unes qui estoient elevees sur
des hauteures transportees dans des plains eloignees de six mill de leur
situation. On en peut dire autant du froid extreme qui l'an 753. glaca le
Pont-Euxin a la longueur de cent mill, et toute l'estendue de la mer voisine,
jusqu' a 30 condees de profondeur, quoy qu'on ne fut encore qu'au commencement
de l'automne. Journal de Seavans III. 1685.

Asking an intelligent Person that lived a good while in Guinea, how they did
to keep their Water cool in so hot a Place; he told me, that in some Corner of
their Hutts they were wont to make Holes in the Ground, in which they buried
over Night the long Earthen Jarrs, or other Vessels, so as that the Orifice of
the Vessels might be lower (though not very much so) than the Level of the
Ground. By this Means the Water would become drinkable, with some Coolness,
from the Beginning of the Morning to nine or ten of the Clock; after which
'twould grow distastefully hot. He added, that when they were abroad in the
Fields, he did as well cool his Water by putting it into Callibashes, and
hanging them all Night upon the Branches of Trees, especially where they were
exposed to the Wind.

February. Since now I have spoken so much of the Cold, I hope it will not be
too coldly taken, if in a few Words I make it some way to appear unto our
Readers.

We made three Differences of the Cold, all according to the Places: In our
House, in the Woods, and in the open Air, upon the Ice, in our going to the
Ship.

For the last, it would be sometimes so extreme, that it was not indurable; no
Clothes were Proof against it, no Motion could resist it. It would, moreover,
so freeze the Hair on our Eyelids, that we could not see; and I verily
believe, that it would have stifled a Man in a very few Hours: We did daily
find by Experience, that the Cold in the Woods would freeze our Faces, or any
part of our Flesh that was bare; but it was yet not so mortifying as the other.
Our House on the outside was covered two third Parts with Snow; and on the
inside frozen and hung with Ice-sickles. The Clothes on our Beds would be
covered with hoar Frost, which in this little Habitacle was not far from the
Fire. But let us come a little nearer to it. The Cook's Tubs wherein he did
water his Meat, standing about a Yard from the Fire, and which he did all Day
ply with melted Snow-water; yet in the Night-season, whilst he slept but one
Watch, would they be firm frozen to the very bottom: And therefore was he fain
to water his Meat in a brass Kettle close adjoining to the Fire; and I have
many times both seen and felt, by putting my Hand into it, that side which was
next the Fire, was very warm, and the other side an Inch frozen. I leave the
rest to our Cook, who will almost speak Miracles of the Cold. The Surgeon, who
had hung his Bottles of Syrups, and other liquid things, as conveniently as he
could, to preserve them, had them all frozen. Our Vinegar, Oil and Sack, which
we had in small Casks in the House, were all firm frozen. It may further in
general be conceived, that in the Beginning of June, the Sea was not broken up;
and the Ground was yet frozen; and thus much we found by Experience in the
burying of our Men; in setting up the King's Standard toward the latter End of
June; and by our Well, at our coming away in the Beginning of July; at which
time, upon the Land, for some other Reasons, it was very hot Weather. Capt.
James.

Monsieur L. J. confirmed to me what he had formerly Observations on the Top of
the Pyreneans.
told me, that upon the highest Mountain of the Pyreneans, called Pic De Midi,
he ascended at the End of August, or the Beginning of September (in the
Morning) to the very Top, where he and his Company spread a Tent, and staid
till the Evening: He says, he found the Air temperate where the Sun did not
beat; but on that side of their Bodies whereon the Sun shone, the Heat was
exceeding great, and was offensive, even to them that sat in the Tent of Oil'd
Cloth, if they sat too near the Sunny side of the Tent: they sometimes had Wind
at the Top of the Hill, which they found to blow cool enough, (and found it
very cold when they returned to the Bottom.) This Hill is so high, that it may
be seen from Montauban, which is 27 Leagues distant.

When I asked whether the Air in those Places, where the Sun did not beat, was
considerably cold? He told me, that the Exercise they had been put to in
ascending the Top of the Hill (for the most part of the way they rid up) kept
them from being very competent Judges of that; but they found the Wind
Northerly, though weak, yet very cooling; and the North Side of the Mountain
was even then covered with Snow, and scarce at all passable.

An ingenious Physician, Dr. B. that has been in diverse of the Inland Parts of
Africa, among other Answers that he returned to the Questions that I asked him,
about the Temperament of the Air in those Parts, gave me this memorable one,
That having had occasion at Morocco to use some good dried fine Jalap that he
had brought with him out of England, he found it by the Heat of the Air to be
melted, and by Comsequence to be impulverable, in which State it continued
whilst he lived in that Country: but when he was returned to Tangier, he found
it both there, and in the neighboring Parts, pulverable again.

Nel capo di Comorino si termina cosi IN esta, come IN. Francesco Barretto
Relatione della Provincia di Malavar. p. 52.
IN inverno dalla part, di la dal capo verso Notte, and dal' altra part
correspond ill tempo assai contrario e diverso, di maniera che, chi va
navigando, per quella costa nel mese di Ottobre, sino ad Aprile naviga nel
esta, e non puo in tutto questo tempo, passare il capo per Esser iui la
stagione dell inverno, et ill Padre, che resiede nelle Chies ch' appartengono
al Capo di Comorinone Alcune la state, il che e cosa di gran Meraviglia,
essendo cio nel medessimo tempo nella distanza sola mente di due, otre miglia.

An eminent Virtuoso answered me, that in Tirol he had visited a very deep Mine
into which he descended three hundred Klasters, which by his Computation makes
about eighteen hundred of our Feet: That he passed not through, that he took
notice of, one hot Region by the way. That at the Bottom of the Mine he
breathed very freely, because of the Air-Shafts, by which Access was given
laterally to the superior Air; and that being thinly clothed with one of the
Digger's Habits, he found at the Bottom the Air temperate, as to Heat and Cold,
though it were then Summer-season of the Year: so that notwithstanding what is
said of Antiperistasis, no intense Cold was retreated thither, to shun the Heat
of the superior Air.

An ingenious Gentleman, very conversant in our English Mines, of one of which
he is Owner, answered me, that the deepest Mine he had particularly visited,
was a Tin Mine, whose Depth was sixty six Fathoms, that is almost four hundred
Foot. That descending into this Mine in Summer, he found it very cold at the
Bottom, and the greatest part of the way going down, without perceiving any hot
Region. And when I asked him how soon he begun to find a sensible Cold in
descending, he told me, that he found it within two Fathom or less of the
Orifice of the Pit; and that in this and diverse other Mines he perceived a
sensible Cold to begin before he got down a Yard, or perhaps half a Yard
beneath the upper Part of the Fast, as the Minemen call the solid Earth, in
which they distinguish from the loose Earth that lies above it; and is, if I
may so call it, the Scurf of the Earth, that is far more light and porous than
the other, though it be upon this loose Earth that Plants grow, and into which
even great Timber Trees themselves shoot, and spread their Roots seldom or
never reaching to, or penetrating into the Fast, though this lie sometimes near
enough to the external Surface of the crusty Earth.

An exact Relation of the Pico Teneriff, taken from Mr. Clappham.
ABout the 20th of August, 1646, Mr. Clappham, together with Mr. Philip Ward,
John Webber, John Cowling, Thomas Bridge, and George Cove, all of them very
considerable Merchants, and worthy of Credit, with one Guide, Servants and
Horses to carry their Wine and Provisions, did set out from Oratava, a
Port-Town in the Island of Teneriff, situated on the North, at two Miles
Distance from the main Sea: They traveled from twelve at Night till eight in
the Morning, by which time they got to the Top of the first Mountains toward
the Pico de Teraira; here, under a very great and conspicuous Pine Tree they
brake their Fast, dined, and refreshed themselves till two in the Afternoon,
and then proceeded through much sandy way, over many lofty Mountains, but naked
and bare, and not covered with Pine-Trees, as their first Night's Passage were,
which exposed them to excessive Heat, till they arrived to the Foot of the
Pico, where they found many huge Stones which seemed to have been fallen down
from some superior Part. But before we proceed further, to give any Account of
this Journey, give me leave here to intersert the Opinion of Dr. Pugh, a Person
of very great Reputation, at this time in the City, who lived twenty Years
himself on the Place, both in the Quality of a Physician, and a Merchant, and
was very curious and inquisitive into all that was in the Island: His Opinion
is, that the whole Island of Teneriff, being a Ground mightily impregnated with
Brimstone, did in former times take Fire, and blow up all, or near upon all at
the same-time; and the many Mountains of huge Stones calcined and burnt, which
appear every where about the Island, especially in the South-West Parts of it,
were raised and heaved up out of the Bowels of the Earth, at the time of the
general Conflagration; and the greatest Quantity of this Sulphur lying about
the Center of the Island, raised up the Pico to that Height, at which it is now
seen. And he says, that any one upon the Place, that shall carefully note the
Situation and Manner of these calcined Rocks, how they lie for three or four
Miles almost round the bottom of the Pico, and in such Order one above another,
almost to the very Sugar Loaf (as it is called) as if the whole Ground, and
rising up together with the Accension of the Brimstone, the Torrents and Rivers
of it did with a sudden Eruption roll and tumble them down from the rest of
the Rocks, especially (as was said before) to the South-West; for on that side,
from the very Top of the Pico, almost to the Seashore, lie huge Heaps of these
burnt Rocks, one under another: and there remain to this time the very Tracts
of the Rivers of Brimstone, as they ran over all this Quarter of the Island,
which has so wasted the Ground beyond recovering, that nothing can be made to
grow there, but Broom. But on the North Side of the Pico, few or none of these
Stones appear; and he concluded hence, that the Vulcano discharged it self
chiefly to South-West. He adds further, that Mines of several Metals were
broken and blown up at the same time: These calcined Rocks resembling some of
them Iron Oar, some Silver, and others like Copper, particularly at a certain
Place in these South-West Parts, called the Azuleios, being very high
Mountains, where never any English but himself (that he ever heard of) was.
There are vast Quantities of a loose bluish Earth, intermixed with blew
Stones, which have on them a yellow Rust, as that of Copper and Vitriol; and
likewise many little Springs of vitriolate Waters; here he supposes was a
Copper-Mine. And he was told by a Bell-founder of Oratava, that out of two
Horse-Loads of Earth, he got as much Gold as made two large Rings: And a
Portuguese told him, who had been in the West Indies, that his Opinion was,
there were as good Mines of Gold and Silver there, as the best in the Indies.
There are likewise hereabouts nitrous Waters and Stones covered with a deep
Saffron colored Rust, and tasting of Iron. And further, he mentions one Mr.
Gilbert Lambell, a Friend of his, who of two Lumps of Earth or Oar, brought
from the Top of this Side the Mountain, made two Silver Spoons. All this he
confirms from the late Instance of the Palm-Island eighteen Leagues from
Teneriff, where a Vulcano was fired about twelve Years since, the Violence
whereof made an Earthquake in this Island, so great, that he and others ran out
of their Houses, fearing they would have fallen upon their Heads: They heard
the Noise of the Torrents of flaming Brimstone, like Thunder, and saw the Fire
as plain by Night, for about six Weeks together, as a Candle in the Room; and
so much of the Sand and Ashes brought from thence, by the Wind, by Clouds, fell
on his Hat, as filled a Sand-box for his Ink-horn. Thus far he.

To resume therefore the Narrative of their Journey; about six a Clock this
Evening, they began to ascend up the Pico; but being now a Mile advanced, and
the way no more passable for their Horses, they quitted and left them with
their Servants. In this Mile's Ascent some of their Company grew very faint and
sick: and from Dr. Pugh's Report of eighteen in his Company, that went up about
the middle of August, long after this, but ten got up, and these had all drank
very plentifully below; the rest so disordered by Fluxes, Vomitings, and aguish
Distempers, they could go no farther: Their Horses Hair stood upright, like
Bristles, with the vehement Cold, who stood shaking, and refused to eat any
thing till they came down. But calling for some of their Wine, which was
carried in small Barrels-on a Horse, they found it so wonderfully cold, that
they could not drink it, till they had kindled a Fire to warm it, although yet
the Temper of the Air was very calm and moderate; but when the Sun was set, it
began to blow with Violence, and grew so cold, that taking up their Lodging
under certain great Stones in the Rocks, they were constrained to keep great
Fires before the Mouth of them all Night. About four in the Morning they began
to mount again, and being come about a Mile up, Mr. Cowling, one of the
Company, failed, and was able to proceed no further. Here begin the black
Rocks. The rest pursued their Journey till they arrived to Sugar Loaf, where
they begin to travel again in a white Sand, being fore-shod with Shoes, whose
single Soles are made a Finger broader than the upper Leather, to encounter
this difficult and unstable Passage, till they are half way up; and a Spaniel
that went up afterward with Dr. Pugh, (as he relates) went crying all the way,
having his Skin burnt off his Feet; and then being ascended as far as the black
Rocks, which are all flat, and lie like a Pavement, they climbed within a Mile
of the very Top of the Pico: but Mr. Clappham, who was the foremost, would have
persuaded Mr. Cove to descend again, as imagining the Top of all on Fire: but
at last overcoming that Apprehension, and persisting, they gained the Summite,
where they found no such Smoke as appeared a little below, but a continual
Breathing of a hot and sulphurous Vapor, which made their Faces extremely sore.

In this Passage they found no considerable Alteration of Air, and very little
Wind; but being at the Top, it was so impetuous, that they had much ado to
stand against it, whilst they drank the King's Health, and fired each of them a
Piece: Here they also brake-fast, but found their Strong Water had quite lost
its Force, and was become almost insipid, whilst their Wine was rather more
spirituous and brisk than it was before.

The Top on which they stood being not above a Yard broad, is the Brink of a
Pit called the Caldera, which they judged to be about a Musket Shot over, and
near fourscore Yards deep, in shape like a Cone, within hollow like a Caldron,
and all over covered with small loose Stones, mixed with Sulphur and Sand, from
Heat; and stirred up with any thing, puffs and makes a Noise, and so offensive,
that Dr. Pugh was almost stifled with the sudden Emanation of Vapors, upon the
removing of one Stone of these; these Stones are so hot, as they are not to be
easily handled: They descended not above four or five Yards into the Caldera,
in regard of its sliding from their Feet, and the Difficulty; but some have
adventured to the Bottom. Other observable Materials they discovered none,
besides a clearer sort of Sulphur, which looks like Salt upon the Stones.

From this famous Pico they could ken the Grand Canaries, fourteen Leagues
distant; Palma 18, and Gomera 7 Leagues; which Interval of Sea seemed to them
no larger than the River of Thames about London: they discerned also the
Hierro, being distant above twenty Leagues; and so to the utmost Limits of the
Sea much farther.

So soon as the Sun appeared, the Shadow of the Pico seemed to cover not only
the whole Island, and the Grand Canaries, but the Sea to the very Horizon,
where the Top of the Sugar Loaf, or Pico, visibly appeared to turn up, and cast
its Shadow into the Air it self, at which they were much suprized. But the Sun
was not far ascended when the Clouds began to rise so fast, as intercepted
their Prospect, both of the Sea, and the whole Island, excepting only the Tops
of the subjacent Mountains, which seemed to pierce them through.

Whether these Clouds do ever surmount the Pico, they could not say; but to
such as are far beneath, they sometimes seem to hang above it, or rather wrap
themselves about it, as constantly when the North-West Winds blow: This they
call the Capp, and is a certain Prognostic of ensuing Storms.

Mr. John Webber, one of this Company, who had made a Journey two Years after,
arriving at the Top of the Pico before Day, and creeping under a great Stone to
shroud himself from the cold Air, (after a little space) found himself all wet,
and admiring whence it should proceed, perceived it at last to come from a
perpetual Trickling of the Water from the imminent Rocks above him.

Many excellent and very exuberant Springs they found issuing from the Tops of
most of the other Mountains, gushing out in great Spouts, almost as far as the
huge Pine Tree which was mentioned.

Having stayed some time upon this Top, they all descended by the sandy way,
till they came to the Foot of the Sugar Loaf, which being steep, even to almost
a Perpendicular, they soon passed: and here they meet a Cave of about ten Yards
deep, and fifteen broad, being in Shape like an Oven or Cupola, having a Hole
at the Top, which is near eight Yards over; by this they descended (an active
Spaniard showing them the way) by a Rope, which their Servants held at the Top,
whilst the other End being fastened about his middle, he swings himself, till
being over a Bank of Snow, he slides down and lights upon it. They are forced
to swing thus in the Descent, because in the middle of the bottom of this Cave,
opposite to the Overture at the Top, is a round Pit of Water, resembling a
Well, the Surface whereof is about a Yard lower than the Snow, but as wide as
the Mouth at the Top, and is about six Fathom deep, as Mr. Lambell reports, who
plumbed it. They suppos this Water not a Spring, but dissolved Snow, or Water
blown in; for some Years it lies so full, one cannot get into the Cave for
Water trickling through the Rocks.

About the Sides of the Grotte, for some Height is Ice, and Icecles hanging
down to the Snow: but being quickly weary of this excessive cold Place, and
drawn up again, they continued their Descent from the Mountains by the same
Passages they went up the Day before; and so about five in the Evening arrived
to Oratava, from whence they set forth: their Faces so red and sore, that to
reduce them and cool them, they were forced to wash and bathe them in Whites of
Eggs, etc.

The whole Altitude of the Pico in Perpendicular, is vulgarly esteemed to be
two Miles and a half.

No Trees, Herbs or Shrubs in all the Passage, but Pines; and amongst the white
Sands a kind of Broom, being a bushy Plant; and at the Side where they lay all
Night, a kind of Cardon, which has Stems of eight Foot high, the Trunk near
half a Foot thick, every Stem growing in four squares, and emerging from the
Ground like Tuffets of Rushes; upon the Edges of these Stems grow very small
red Buttons or Berries, which being squeezed, produce a poisonous Milk, which
lighting upon any part of a Horse, or other Beast, fetches off the Hair from
the Skin immediately: Of the dead Part of this they made their Fires all Night.
This Plant is also universal over the Island, and is happly, and as I
conjecture, a kind of Euphorbium.

In some part of this Island also there grows a crooked Shrub, which they call
Legnan-vell, which they bring for England as a sweet Wood. There are likewise
Apricoks, Peaches, and in Standards, which bear twice a Year: Pear Trees also
which are as pregnant; Almonds of a tender Shell, Palms, Plantanes, Oranges and
Lemons, especially the Pregnadas, which have small ones in their Bellies, from
whence they are so denominated. Also they have Sugarcanes, and a little Cotton
and Colloquintida; the Roses blow at Christmas; there are good Carnations, and
very large, but Tulips will not grow or thrive there: Sampier clothes the Rock
in abundance, and a kind of Clover the Ground. Another Grass growing near the
Sea, which is of a broader Leaf, so luscious, as it will kill a Horse that eats
of it, but no other Cattle. There is also an Herb which they make Thread of.
Eighty Ears of Wheat have been found to spring from one Root, but it grows not
very high; the Corn of this is transparent and bright, like unto the purest
yellow Amber; and one Bushel has produced 130 in a seasonable Year.

The Canary-Birds (which they bring to us in England) breed in the Barrancos of
Gills, which the Water has fretted away in the Mountains, being Places very
cold. There are also Quails, Partridges larger than ours, and exceeding
beautiful; great Wood-Pigeons, Turtles at Spring, Crows; and sometimes from the
Coasts of Barbary appears the Faulcon. Bees are carried into the Mountains,
where they prosper wonderfully.

They have wild Goats on the Mountains, which climb to the very Top of the Pico
sometimes. Also Hogs, and Multitudes of Conies: Camels are brought from
Lancerote, besides other Cattle.

Fish. The Cherna, a very large and excellent Fish, better tasted than any we
have in England. The Mero, Dolphin, Shark, Lobsters without the great Claws,
Mussels, Periwinkles, and the Clacas, which is absolutely the very best
Shellfish in the World; they grow on the Rocks, five or six under one great
Shell, through the Top whereof they peep with their Nebbs, from whence (the
Shells being broken a little more open with a Stone) they draw them forth.
There is likewise another Fish like an Eel, which has six or seven Tails of a
Span in length, united to one Head and Body, which is also as short. Besides
these they have Turtles and Cabridos, which are preferable before our Trouts.

The Island is full of Springs of pure Water, tasting like Milk; and in La
Laguna (where the Water is not altogether so limpid and olear) they percolate
it through a kind of spungy Stone cut in form of a Basin.

The Vines which afford those excellent Wines, grow all about the Island,
within a Mile of the Sea; such as are planted farther up, are nothing esteemed,
neither will they thrive in any other Islands.

For the Guanchios, or the ancient Inhabitants, Dr. Pugh gives this full
Account.

September the 3d. about twelve Years since, he took his Journey from Guimar, a
Town inhabited for the most part by such as derive themselves from the old
Guanchios, in the Company of some of them, to view their Caves, and the Bodies
buried in them. This was a Favor they seldom permit to any, (having in great
Veneration the Bodies of their Ancestors, and likewise being most extremely
against any Molestation of the Dead) but he had done many several Eleemosinary
Cures amongst them, (for they are generally very poor, yet the poorest thinks
himself too good to marry with the best Spaniard) which endeared him to them
exceedingly; otherwise it is Death for any Stranger to visit those Caves or
Bodies.

These Bodies are sewed up in Goat Skins, with Thongs of the same, with very
great Curiosity, particularly in the incomparable Exactness and Evenness of the
Seams; and the Skins are made very close and fit to the Bodies: most of these
Bodies are entire, the Eyes closed, Hair on the Head, Ears, Nose, Teeth, Lips,
Beard, all perfect, only discolored, and a little shrivled: likewise the
Pudenda of both Sexes. He saw about three or four hundred in several Caves,
some of them are standing, others lie on Beds of Wood, so hardened by an Art
they had, (which the Spaniards call Curar, to cure a Piece of Wood) which no
Iron can pierce or hurt. He said, that one Day being a Hunting, a Ferret (which
is in use there) having a Bell about his Neck, ran after a Coney into a Hole,
where they lost the Sound of the Bell; the Owner being afraid he should lose
his Ferret, seeking about the Rock and Shrubs, found the Mouth of a Cave, and
entering in, was so affrighted, that he cried out: it was at the Sight of one of
these Bodies, very tall and large, lying with his Head upon a great Stone, his
Feet supported by a little Wall of Stone, the Body resting on a Bed of Wood, as
before was mentioned.

The Fellow being now a little out of his Fright, entered in, and cut off a
great Piece of the Skin that lay on the Breast of this Body, which the Doctor
says was more flexible and pliable than ever he felt any Kids Leather Glove,
and yet so far from being rotten, that the Man made Use of it for his Flail
many Years after.

These Bodies are very light, as if made up of Straw: and in some broken Limbs
he observed the Nerves and Tendons, and also some Strings of the Veins and
Arteries very distinctly.

His great Care was to enquire of these People, what they had amongst them of
Tradition, concerning the embalming and Preservation of these Bodies? From some
of the oldest of them (above a hundred and ten Years of Age) he received this
Account: That they had of old one particular Tribe of Men that had this Art
amongst themselves only, and kept it as a thing sacred, and not to be
communicated to the Vulgar; these mixed not with the rest of the Inhabitants,
nor married out of their own Tribe; and were also their Priests and Ministers
of Religion: that upon the Conquest of the Spaniard, they were most of them
destroyed, and the Art lost with them, only they held some Traditions yet of a
few Ingredients that were made use of in this Business.

They took Butter of Goats Milk, (some said Hogs Grease was mingled with it)
which they kept in the Skins for this Purpose; in this they boiled certain
Herbs; 1st. A sort of wild Lavender, which grows there in great Quantities on
the Rocks. 2dly. An Herb called Jara, of a very gummy and glutinous
Consistence, which now grows under the Tops of the Mountains only. 3dly. A kind
of a Cyclamen or Sow-Bread. 4thly. Wild Sage growing plentifully in this
Island. These, with Stones bruised and boiled in the Butter, rendered it a
perfect Balsam. This prepared, they first unbowelled the Corpse; and in the
poorer sort, to save Charges, they took out the Brain behind: and these Poor
also were sewed up in Skins with the Hair on, whereas the Richer were (as was
said before) put up in Skins so sinely and exactly dressed, as they remain most
rarely pliant and gentle to this Day. After the Body was thus ordered, they had
in a Readiness a Lixivium, made of the Bark of Pine-Trees, with which they
washed the Body, drying in the Sun in Summer, and in Stoves in Winter; this
repeating very often. Afterward they began their Unction with the Balsam, both
without and within, drying it again, as before: This they continue till the
Balsam had penetrated it self in the whole Habit, and the Muscles in all Parts
appeared through the contracted Skin, and the Body became exceeding light; then
they sewed them up in the Goat Skins, as already mentioned. He was told by
these ancient People, that they have above twenty Caves of their Kings and
Great Persons, with their whole Families, yet unknown to any but themselves,
and which they will never discover. Lastly, he says, that Bodies are found in
the Caves of the Grand Canaries, in Sacks, and quite consumed, not as those in
Teneriff. Thus far of the Bodies and Embalming. Anciently when they had no
knowledge of Iron, they made their Lances of Wood, hardened as before, some of
which the Doctor has seen: he has also seen Earthen Pots so hard, that they
cannot be broken, of these some are found in the Caves, and old Barrancos, and
used by poorer sort of People that find them, to boil Meat in; likewise they
did Curar Stone it self, that is to say, a kind of Slate now called Tabona,
which they first formed to an Edg or Point, as they had occasion to use them,
either as Knives, or Lancets to let Blood.

Their Food was Barley roasted, and then ground with little Mills, which they
made of Stones, and mixed with Milk and Honey; this they still fed on, and
carried it on their Backs in Goat Skins.

To this Day they drink no Wine, nor care for Flesh; they are generally very
lean, tall, active, and full of Courage.

He himself has seen them leap from Rock to Rock, from a very prodigious
Height, till they came to the bottom, sometimes making ten Fathom deep at one
Leap. The manner is thus.

First, they tertiate their Lance, (which is about the Bigness of a half-Pike)
that is, they poise it in their Hand, then they aim the Point of it at any
Piece of a Rock, upon which they intend to light, sometimes not half a Foot
broad; at their going off they clap their Feet close to the Lance, and so carry
their Bodies in the Air; the Point of the Lance first comes to the Place, which
breaks the Force of their Fall; then they slide gently down by the Staff, and
pitch their Feet upon the very Place they first designed, and from Rock to
Rock, till they come to the bottom.

Their Novices sometimes break their Necks in Learning. He added several
Stories to this Effect, of their great Activity in leaping down Rocks and
Clifts, and how eight and twenty of them made an Escape from the Battlement of
an extraordinary high Castle in the Island, when the Governor thought he had
made sure of them.

He told also (and the same was seriously confirmed by a Spaniard, and another
Canary. Merchant then in the Company) that they whistle so loud, as to be heard
five Miles off; and that to be in the same Room with them when they whistle,
were enough to endanger breaking the Tympanum of the Ear: And added, that he
being in the Company of one that whistled his loudest, could not hear perfectly
for fifteen Days after, the Noise was so great.

He affirms also, that they throw Stones with a Force almost as great as that
of a Bullet, and now use Stones in all their Fights, as they did anciently.

Mr. Sydenham told me this Day, that upon the 18th of August, he and his
Company began their Journey toward the Pike of Teneriff, setting out from L'
Oratava, a Town seated on the lower Part of the Mountain, from which Town to
the Sea there are three Miles of way always descending.

He began his Journey on Sunday about 10 a Clock at Night, and traveled till
five in the Afternoon of the Monday following, resting two Hours by the way;
the Ground was continually rising, and during this time they traveled about 10
Miles of their way upon Mules.

Resting upon Monday till 12 a Clock at Night, they resumed their Journey, and
traveled till about 9 in the Morning, at which time they arrived at the Top of
the Sugar Loaf, or highest Pile of the Mountain.

They went up on the South Side of the Hill, on which Side there was no Snow,
though on the North Side there were much. They stayed about two Hours on the
Top of the Sugar Loaf, and then returned to that Part of the Hill where they
had lodged the Night before.

I asked Mr. Sydenham what was the Estimate made by the most knowing Persons of
the Island, of the Height of the Hill? and he told me, that the Guides
accounted it to be one and twenty Miles high from the Town, which, as was noted
before, is seated three Miles above the Sea. And he added, that a Seaman with
great Confidence affirming himself to have accurately enough measured by
Observations made in a Ship, and to have found the Perpendicular Height of the
Hill to be about seven Miles.

I asked him also from what Distance the Top of the Sugar Loaf could be seen at
Sea, according to the common Opinion of Seamen? He answered, that the Distance
was wont to be reckoned threescore Sea-Leagues, of three Miles to a League;
adding, that he himself had seen it above forty Leagues off, and yet it
appeared exceeding high, and like a bluish Pyramide, manifestly a great deal
higher than the Clouds. And he also told me, that sometimes Men could from
thence see the Island of Madera, though distant from it 70 Leagues; and that
the great Canary, though 18 Leagues off, seemed to be very near them, as if
they might leap down upon it.

He told me, that the higher Part of the Region of Snow was two Miles, or two
Miles and a half lower than the Foot of the Sugar Loaf; and that on the upper
part of the Hill they felt no Wind.

Mr. Sydenham told me, that being at the Top of the Sugar Loaf, drinking the
King's Health, he endeavored to shoot off a Birding-Piece he had carried up
with him, but though he snap'd it above twenty times, he could not make it go
off; whereas when he came down into the ordinary Air, the first time he tried
to shoot; it went readily off. I asked him whether he had taken notice that the
Flint struck out any Sparks of Fire or no at the Top of the Hill, and whether
he had mended and altered the Flint coming downwards? To the first he answered
he did not remember, to the other that he remembered he did not.

He also told me, that having carried up a Borracha of Sack, when they came to
the Top of the Mountain, they drank diverse Healths very freely, but could not
find themselves heated, or sensibly discomposed by the Wine; whereas when they
were come down into a thicker Air, they manifestly felt the heady Operation of
the Liquor, which then made their Guide and one of their Company drunk.

He described the Sugar Loaf to be in the midst of a barren Plain, in the upper
Part of the Mountain, and to be exceeding steep. The Top of the Sugar Loaf is
made shelving inward almost like a Dish. But in many Places of it there appear
little Holes (regularly placed) as it were so many little Vents to a great Fire
burning in or below the Bowels of the Mountain. He told me, that the Guide
dissuaded him from going to the middle of this shelving Top, affirming it to be
exceeding dangerous: but he ventured to thrust the scowring Stick of his Gun
somewhat deep and rudely into one of those Holes, from whence there arose a hot
Steam, which had like to have killed him, and hindered him from further Trials.
He added, that the Top of the Mountain seemed to be little else than Stones and
Sulphur, and that there were great Store of Pieces of Brimstone, which are
guessed to be sublimed up from the internal Parts of the Hill.

Being asked, whether he was sick or no in the Ascent? he said, that both he
and all his Company, which were about a dozen Men, were sick for three or four
Hours, when they came into the subtle and piercing Air of the upper Part of
the Mountain: but as they went down again, they were not sick. And being asked
what kind of Sickness it was they felt? he said it was like Sea-sickness.

He told me, that the Sack they carried up with them to refresh themselves,
seemed to them at the Top of the Mountain so very cold, that they were not able
to drink above two or three Drops at a Draught, by reason of the Operation of
the excessive Cold upon their Teeth. He added upon my Inquiry, that his Feet
were not more than ordinarily warm, and yet one of the two Pair of Pumps he
carried up with him were burnt off his Feet by the Brimstone.

When I asked him about the Difference of Seasons at the same time in the same
Mountain, he told me, that he passed over one of them by Name.

On the one Side of which it was excessively hot near the Top or Ridg, as well,
though not quite so much, as in the lower Regions on the Side of the Mountain;
but within a Mile or two on the other Side of the Ridg he found Winter-Weather,
as to Cold and Storminess, and yet there was Snow as well on the other Side as
on this.

To what Depth the Water will be frozen in hard Winters.

To what Depth the Earth will be frozen in that Season.

Whether Muscovian Ice be considerably, or at least sensibly harder than
English Ice.

Whether by casting up Water, or by spitting, the Liquor will freeze before it
comes to touch the Ground.

Whether Brandy, Sack, etc. will freeze in Russia.

Whether Instruments of Iron and Steel be much more brittle there than here.

Of the cracking of the Timber in wooden Houses, and the Causes of it.

Of the Preservation of Flesh, Fish, Herbs, Eggs, etc. in hard Weather.

Of the curing of those whose Nose, Cheeks, etc. are frozen.

Of the Symptoms of those that are frozen to Death.

Of the keeping of dead Bodies.

TITLE XX.
Of the Air in reference to Light; its Perspicuity, Opacity, Reflections,
Refractions, Colors, Light, and Lightning.

A Very learned Traveller affirmed to me, that having occasion to reside
sometimes on the Riviera or Coast of Genoua, he had often observed, that from a
high Place he could both Morning and Evening clearly discern the Island of
Corsica; and sometimes also other Places in that Sea, though he could not see
them at Noon, how fair and clear so ever the Weather was, when the Sun was in
or near the Meridian.

His late Majesty K. Charles the Second, doing me one Day the Honor to
discourse about several Marine Observations, was pleased among other things to
acquaint me with this rare Phenomenon. He was one Day walking upon the Beach
on the Strand, not far from Dover, to enjoy the fresh Air, and the Prospect of
the Sea, when casually looking forwards to the Verge of the visible Horizon, he
was very much surprised to discover there a new Coast, with rising and falling
Grounds, newly, as it were, emerged out of the Ocean, in a Place where no such
thing had been seen before. The Strangeness of this unlook'd-for Apparition
made Him suspect something of Illusion offered to his Eyes by the Beams of the
Sun that shone upon the Neighboring Objects; wherefore he rubbed his Eyes, and
the new Scene not vanishing, he called to his Royal Highness the Duke of York,
(who was present when his Majesty was pleased to make me the Relation) and to
some of the attending Courtiers that were nearest at hand, to make them
Partakers and Witnesses of this delightful Spectacle, which after it had been
gazed on a little while, did somewhat slowly disappear, as if it had sunk down
again into the Ocean. Of the Cause of this rare Phenomenon, I ventured to
propose to the King this Conjecture: That the Place where it was seen lying the
same way that the Coast of France did, and that Coast being but a little too
far off to be discerned before, it might very well happen, that either by
Action of the Sun, or rather by subterraneal Steams, the Air interposed between
the Shore and his Majesty's Eyes, was filled with Vapors and Exhalations that
made it much more refractive than formerly; and by Help of this supervening
Refraction, the French Coast that lay beyond it was raised, and as it were
lifted up, in reference to the Sight, and so became visible as long as that new
Refraction lasted: And when the Steams that occasioned it, were either got up
too high, or were by the Winds or Sun too much dissipated or dispersed, the
Apparition ceased, together with the unusual Refraction that caused it. And in
favor of this Conjecture I alleged that familiar Experiment in which a Piece
of Gold, or the like convenient Object, being put into the bottom of an empty
Cup, and the Eye being so placed, that the Object is but just hid from it by
the Interposition of the Side of the Cup, if Water be poured into the Vessel,
though neither the Eye nor the Object be at all removed, yet the Piece of Gold
will be plainly seen, because the Surface of the Water, which is a thicker
Medium than the Air, breaking the Rays that tend from the Object toward the
Beholder's Eye, according to the Laws of Refraction, that is from the
Perpendicular they are so bended, that those fall now into the Pupil, that if
it were not for the Water, would either fall upon the Side of the Cup, and so
be hindered from passing forward; or else would fall upon the Eyelids or
Eyebrows, or some other Part above the Pupil, and so would not make the Object
visible.

The Duke of York was also pleased to tell me, that he was somewhat surprised,
when being near the Borders of Scotland, in a Season that did not promise much
fair Weather, he saw one Morning the Sky very red, and thereupon said, that he
feared they should have foul Weather, according to the usual Prognostic of
Countrymen and Mariners: but some of the Scottish Nobility that attended his
Highness, told him, that in that Country such red Mornings did not bode a foul
Day, but rather promise a fair one; which Prediction of theirs was justified by
the Event. Upon which occasion I enquired of a very intelligent Scottish
Nobleman, how far the Observation held in his Country? To which he answered,
that with a due Limitation it was most commonly true; for though when the
Redness seems to be very near the Ground, and appears in somewhat narrow
Streaks of an intense Red, it signifies bad Weather; yet if the Morning Redness
appears elevated in the Air or Sky, especially if the Wind be Easterly, it
usually foretells a fair Day.

Some Observations of Capt. James, in his Northern Voyage, Mr. J. T. and others.
February. I practiced some Observations by the rising and setting of the Sun,
calculating the time of his rising and setting, by very true running Glasses.
As for our Clock and Watch, notwithstanding we still kept them by the Fireside
in a Chest, wrapped in Clothes, yet were they so frozen, that they could not go.
My Observations by these Glasses, I compared with the Stars coming to the
Meridian: By this means we found the Sun to rise twenty Minutes before it
should; and in the Evening to remain above the Horizon twenty Minutes (or
thereabouts) longer than it should do: And all this by reason of the
Refraction. Capt. James.

March. This Evening the Moon rose in a very long Oval along the Horizon.

April. The Weather continued with this Extremity until the fifteenth, at which
time our Spring was harder frozen than it had been all the Year before. I had
often observed the Difference betwixt clear Weather and misty refractious
Weather, in this manner: From a little Hill which was near adjoining to our
House, in the clearest Weather, when the Sun shone with all the Purity of Air
that I could conceive, we could not see a little Island, which bare off us
South-South-East some four Leagues; but if the Weather were misty, (as
aforesaid) then we should often see it from the lowest Place. This little
Island I had seen the last Year when I was on Danby-Island. The 13th I took the
Height of it instrumentally, standing near the Seaside, which I found to be 34
Minutes, the Sun being 28 Degrees high. This shows how great a Refraction here
is. Yet may this be noted by the way, that I have seen the Land elevated by
reason of the refractious Air; and nevertheless the Sun has risen perfect
round.

January 6. I observed the Latitude with what Exactness I could, (it being very
clear Sunshine Weather) which I found to be 51, 52. This Difference is by
reason that here is a great Refraction.

January 21. I observed the Sun to rise like an Oval along the Horizon; I
called three or four to see it, the better to confirm my Judgment, and we all
are agreed, that it was twice as long as it was broad. We plainly perceived
withal, that by Degrees as it got up higher, it also recovered Roundness.

Attending upon Sir Peter Wych, in his Journey for Warsaw the Beginning of
June, 16 69/70, whilst we lay about three Polish Miles from the City, attending
the Preparations for his Reception there, we had very clear and extreme cold
Weather; and for two Days together we observed the Sun and two Parhelions, or
three Suns, from above ten a Clock to near twelve, not the least Cloud
appearing in the Air, but that so serene, that we took notice of the Icy
Spangles in the Air, flying about like Atoms in the Sun's Beams. This is also
worth taking notice of; that whereas in ordinary frosty Weather any smooth
Iron, or other Metal, whether Heads of Sticks, Pomels of Swords, or Barrels of
Guns, being brought out of the open Air into a warm Room, there will presently,
first a Dullness in the Glass, and then Drops of Water appear: At this time
there would immediately appear the Likeness of an hoar Frost. Now whether the
Particles of Cold be so subtle as to pierce or enter into polished Metal, I
will not determine; tho the Experience of wetting one Finger with his Spittle,
and forthwith laying it to Iron when it freezes hard, by its immediate
Adhesion, even in the Moment of touching it, would make some way for the
Affirmative. That same Month returning back from Warsaw, I saw, upon my
Journey, the Sun rise with a large Pillar, colored like a Rainbow;
perpendicular over it, out of a clear Horizon; and I remember Monsieur Hevelius
told me, he observed it once set with the like, N.

In Cornwall they observe in their driving home Levels or Sink, the Waters do
also manifestly partake of the Minerals, for in some Mines they are Sanative,
where Iron is observed; and in others apt to cause Wounds to fester and rankle.
As the first was most manifest at Karne Key, the latter at Relistian, both
famous Tin-Works.

Asking of a Chemist that traveled with a famous Virtuoso of my Acquaintance
over part of the Alps that is said to be much subject to Thunders, diverse
Questions about Thunder, I had among other Answers, this, That he and my Friend
being together at the Top of a forked Mountain, between whose Parts there lay a
Valley, that seemed almost covered with a thick Cloud; and though the Weather
were clear at both the Tops, he observed that the subjacent Cloud being big
with Thunder, the Lightning appeared quite through it, and seemed to lie deep
in it, so that casting his Eyes down upon the Cloud, he fancied that what he
saw, was, (to use his own Comparison) as if a shining Fish were moving to and
fro very swiftly in a somewhat troubled Water. If I had seasonably had the
Relation, I had enquired of my Friend about it; but I was the more inclined to
believe it, because I remember, that passing over a part of the Alps, less
high than that where the recited Observation was made, though it was very fair
Weather, and a clear Sky at the Top of the Mountain where we were, yet a great
way beneath us we saw dark Clouds, through part of which we afterward in our
Descent were obliged to pass, though then (whether part of the Matter had been
in the mean while discussed, I examine not) it seemed to us little different
from a thick Fog, which when we had passed through, we found the Weather fair
and clear enough to the Foot of the Mountain.

Meeting with an inquisitive Nobleman that lived long at Naples, I asked him
whether he had ever seen any of those famous Apparitions that are said
sometimes to show themselves in or near the Sicilian Strait, and is known by
the Name (if I mistake not) of Morgane? To this he answered me, that during the
Springtime, he had once the Curiosity to try whether this Tradition had so
much Ground as was commonly believed; and that accordingly on several fair
Mornings he rose before the Sun, and looked solicitously along the Coast,
without seeing any thing that answered his Expectation: But not being
discouraged by these Disappointments, he one Morning perceived, as he thought,
two Steeples in a Neighboring Town where he knew there was but one; which
Phenomenon inviting him to continue his Curiosity, he chose the first fair and
cloudless Morning to rise early on; and casting his Eyes toward the lately
mentioned Town, and the Coast it was not remote from, he was surprised with a
delightful Prospect of a new Town beyond the other, and incomparably greater
than it, and furnished, as it seemed to him and a Doctor of Physic that
accompanied him, with Walls and Towers, and Steeples and Houses, and other
things that were delightful, as well as wonderful to behold. But he answered
me, that the Colors were not near so lively as the Figures, being for the most
part somewhat dim, though adorned here and there with some Redness: but this
odd Spectacle, as it was not invariable during the whole time it lasted, did
not continue very long; for when the Sun was gotten up to such a Height above
the Horizon as made his Beams powerful, they quickly confounded all these Airy
Structures in a kind of Chaos, and made the fantastic City vanish.

Moist Vapors are not the only Cause or Sign of the Opacity of the Air, since
that dry blighting East Wind, which from the Effects Country People call a red
Wind, makes the Air at a Distance seem bluish and thick. This is the Wind
which these two Years last past, has been so pernicious to Apples, and indeed
to all sorts of Trees, not only to blast the Fruit, but the very Leaves of such
Trees as it met withal, just in the Tender (as the Woodmen call it) i. e. when
they are newly expanded out of the Buds. Mr. J. T.

That Air is sometimes more clear and transparent, and sometimes more dark,
and, as it were, muddy, being clogged and opacated with terrestrial Steams, is
every Man's Observation. But there are some Phenomenon that depend upon the
Density, Diaphancity, etc. of the Air, that are not so vulgarly taken notice
of: For besides those that require Skill in the Doctrine of Refractions, on
which therefore I shall not now insist; there are some others that may be worth
your notice, which I shall give a Taste of.

Considering the differing Accounts that are given by good Authors, of the
number of the Fixed Stars, and comparing them with some Observations of our
own, I was thereby, and upon some other Grounds, induced to suspect that the
differing and unheeded Constitutions of the Air might occasion a Difference in
assigning the Number of the Stars: which made me inquire of several Navigators
and Travelers, some into the torrid Zone, and others into the frigid ones,
what Difference they found in contemplating the Stars in those Climates, and in
ours; and by this Inquiry, I learned that in some Places where the Air is very
pure, Celestial Observations may be more happily made. And particularly because
I supposed that intense Cold, by precipitating the darkning Vapors out of the
Air, may probably make it more defecate and clear. I desired an ingenious
Physician that traveled in Muscovy, to take notice of any thing that should
favor or disfavour this Conjecture. In Compliance with which Request of mine
he informed me, that traveling one Night in a Sled in the more mediterranean
Parts of Russia, the Weather being extraordinary cold, he was invited to quit
his Sled a little to consider the Sky, where he saw so many Stars, and so much
brighter than he had ever seen before, that he was almost as much surprised as
delighted with so glorious a Spectacle, which he showed to some of his
Fellow-Travellers that shared in his Wonder.

And this brought into my Mind, that remembering that the ingenious Capt. James
being forced to winter in Charlton-Island, which though but of the Latitude
almost of Cambridg, is but little, if at all, less cold than Nova Zembla it
self, I should probably find something pertinent to our present Subject in so
diligent an Observer. I resorted to his Voyage, where I met with these notable
Observations.

January 30 and 31, there appeared in the Beginning of the Night more Stars in
the Firmament than ever I had seen before, by two thirds. I could see the Cloud
in Cancer full of small Stars: and amongst the Pleiades a great many small
Stars. About ten a Clock the Moon did rise, and then a quarter of them was not
to be seen. The Wind for the most part of this Month has been Northe^ly, and
very cold, etc. Capt. James, p. 62.

The Russian Emperor's Physician confirmed to me by word of Mouth, what he had
some Years since told me in a Letter, that one Night which was exceeding cold
and clear, being awakened out of his Sleep by a Shake that had like to have
overturned his Sled, he looked out and saw more Stars by far than ever he saw
in England, or the Neighboring Parts of Europe, and particularly that he saw
many about the 7 Stars, or the Pleiades, and diverse others he had not seen
before in several other Parts of the Sky. He farther told me, that these Stars
seemed far more beautiful and bright than was usual, insomuch that he doubts
not, that if it had not been for the Snow, some of them would have cast a
discernable Shadow. For Confirmation, he says, that the Phenomenon were not
only taken notice of by him, but by others that traveled with him; and that
though he often gazed at the Sky, since that time he never could see there near
so many Stars, nor so bright.

December 4. I had not time the last Week to tell you of something, that to us
that have not been long in this Country seems strange, but the People of this
Place say happens very often.

On the 29th of the last Month, after I had written and sent away my Letters,
looking out of the Dutchesses Window to see what Weather it was, I saw toward
the N E. along the Horizon, it looked as light, and just as if it had been
Break-of-Day, (it was then about a quarter past eleven) and gave as great a
Light; I went then into the Drawing Room, and looking out of that Window, could
look more Northerly, and saw it was more light due N. and saw several Streaks
of Light, like the Tail of the Blazing Star, all pointing N. and S. one of
which was as long or longer than that we saw last Year, for it reached from the
Horizon, and passed between Charles's Wain and the N. Star, and reached up just
over our Heads. The small ones sometimes disappeared: and then we saw others of
the same Dimensions appear in other Places, they were all near the great one;
two of them seemed as if their Light had come from the two Guards in Charles's
Wain; and when they vanished, others appeared more South. I went to the other
Side of the House, and saw that the Light reached from the W. or W N W. by the
N. to the E. or E N E. I did not go out, because it blew very hard, and was
very wet, contenting my self to see it out of the House, but sent Geo. Man up
the Hill, who saw the same, and it was so clear they could see the Frith.

About the New Moon before, there was such a Light as this seen by Lord
Belcarus, as he came in the Night from St. Andrews to his House, and by the
Seamen of the Yacht at Leith, and by some here in Town: But though the Sky was
not then so clear, there being broken Clouds, yet it gave such Light, as they
could read very plainly, as they told me; that began about 7, and lasted till
9. This last I did not see till after 11, and at a quarter of 12 it began to
lessen, at which time I went to Bed, and the Tails were then no more to be
seen. Tell Dr. Flamsted of this, and know of him, whether he has seen or heard
of such kind of things.

This was from his Royal Highness the Duke of York, then High Commissioner in
Scotland.

An intelligent Gentleman that lived in Africa, being asked by me, how far off
he was able to see the Top of the Pico of Teneriff at Sea? replied, that by the
Estimate of the Captain of the Ship, it was near 50 Leagues, and yet it
appeared to him so high above some Clouds, and so near, that he was fain to
cast his Head up to see it.

TITLE XXI.
Of the Operation of the Air on the Consistency of Animal Substances.

AS on the one side the Schools teach the Air to be a simple and elementary
Body, that is, only hot and moist; so on the other Side, the Generality of Men
are so accustomed to judge of things by their Senses, that not finding the Air
to be a visible Body, they ascribe less to it than even the Schoolmen do; and
what is invisible, they think to be next Degree to nothing. And indeed both the
one sort of Men and the other, are wont to consider the Air only as a
Receptacle, that barely harbors the visible and palpable Bodies committed to
it, or as it were deposited in it, without acting upon them, unless it be
perhaps a little upon the Account of its manifest Qualities, Heat and Moisture.
But for my part, who look upon the Air under another Notion, and think it may
as well alter as receive the Bodies that lie exposed to it; I am apt to allow
it in reference to some Bodies, certain other Faculties and Powers, among which
some may be called Generative and Maturative, and others Corruptive; and this
not only in respect of Animals and other Bodies of a slighter Texture, but even
of Salts and Minerals themselves.

An observing Man that had sailed to and fro between Europe and the
East Indies, answered me, among other things, about their way of transporting
Cheese; That the Cheese they used to take along were Cheshire, of a very
considerable Thickness, which they enclosed in leaden Boxes fit for them, and
thereby were able to preserve them sound till they came to the East Indies. But
in case they were not able, or neglected to make use of such Boxes, he several
times observed, that cutting a Cheese in two, when they were any thing near the
Equinoctial, that most part of it would be very dry and brittle, and seemed as
if it were spoiled: Whereas the Parts about the middle were so fat and soft, as
if all the unctuous Parts that were wanting in the dried Portion of the Cheese
had retired thither, and was between Cream and Cheese. Which Conjecture was not
contradicted by this, that if they cut some of them Cheeses, when having left
the Torrid Zone behind them, and had made a good Progress in the Temperate
Zone, they found the external Portion good, and the Consistence of the Cheese
uniform enough.

Quere, Whether the moist Particles that fly in the Air, be not the great
Cause of all Corruption of Bodies, since Acosta says, that in Peru, where it
seldom rains, all things, like dead Bodies, keep a great while uncorrupted? The
like may be observed of Egypt, if it be not to be rather imputed to the Nitrous
Salt with which the Air of that Country so much abounds. Mr. J. T.

A Man of Letters, that diverse times crossed the Line in great Portugal Ships,
answered me, That when they came near it and under it, he observed among other
things, that there was a very manifest Change made in the Consistence of their
Biscuit; that most of their Meat, and even their Salt Fish was much impaired, so
that they were scarce able to eat it; and that their Pilot, who had been 23
times in the Indies, assured them, he observed when they came to the
Equinoctial, that fresh Water would not there be at all troubled or stinking,
but clear and sweet, as if it were but newly put into the Cask.

Doctor Stubbs being inquired of by me concerning, etc. told me, that in
Jamaica the silken Stuffs that were brought thither, will rot even whilst they
keep their Color, if they be shown to the Air; though if they be not showed
thereto, but kept up close, they were not observed to rot, or be discolored.

TITLE XXII.
Of the Operation of the Air on the Consistency of Vegetable Substances.

MAY 16. We opened a small Glass-Receiver ground to a Plate of Glass, in which
there had been included for three Years and some Months, (though I know not how
many) the half of a Lemon cut transversly, together with a Mercurial Gage: The
Lemon kept its Color pretty well, and its Shape very well, save that at the
Orifice the upper Part of the Pulp was depressed, seeming as it were dried up
by the Recess of the Liquor contained in it; which Liquor did now stagnate upon
the Glass Plate. When this began to be disjoined from the upper Glass, there
rushed in, not without Noise, a pretty deal of external Air, which argued that
the Air afforded by the included Lemon in so long a time, had not been near
sufficient to fill the Cavity of the Receiver. Neither the half Lemon nor the
Liquor had any ill Scent, or other sign of Putrefaction or Corruption; neither
of them had the least Mould, which gave me a Suspicion, as far as it could be
grounded upon this Experiment, that such a Mould as might have been expected,
being (as may be guessed by the Microscope) a Congeries of a very small kind of
Vegetables, could not any more than many greater ones, be produced without the
Concurrence of the Air. The Liquor was clear enough, and without Faeces, being
in Color between brown and reddish. It contained an acid Taste; and when I put
a little of it upon Sirrup of Violets, it turned it to a Purplish Color; and
which is more, being put upon small Fragments (not Powder) of red Coral,
presently began manifestly to corrode them, and that in the Cold.

To the Heat and piercing Moisture of the Air combined together, may be
referred the Observation of an intelligent Scholar, from whom, when I asked him
what he had taken notice of about these Qualities, when he sailed under or near
the Line, (which he did several times) he told me, that diverse Pastils or
Lozanges that he was wont to carry in his Pockets, were so dissolved, that they
spoiled his Pockets, and obliged him to cut them out, though the Pastils of the
same kind did never lose their old Consistence till he came near the Equator,
nor keep their new Consistence after he had passed some Degrees beyond it, but
grew solid again as before.

TITLE XXIII.
Of the Operation of the Air on the Consistency of Mineral Substances.

INquiring of an ingenious Swedish Gentleman that was a great Dealer in the
Metals his Country abounds with, whether the great Cold of sharp Winters in
those Northern Climates had not a sensible Operation upon Iron: I learned from
him, that in the chief Copper Mine (which he had curiously visited) being to
draw up the Oar from an exceeding great Depth, they fastened their Baskets, not
as they use in other Mines, to Iron Chains, but to Ropes made of Ox or
Bull-Hides; and that chiefly for this Reason, That during the hard
Winter-Frosts that are there usual, the Links of their Iron Chains were very
subject to be broken by the great Cold joined to the Weight of the Oar, to the
great Danger, and oftentimes the Destruction of the poor Workmen that were
digging beneath: which Inconvenience was avoided by employing Leather, which
the Cold could not make brittle, instead of Iron.

Asking an ingenious Master of a Glass-House, whether he had not observed that
Glasses, though as well neal'd as is ordinary, would sometimes of themselves
break with a Noise long after; he answered me affirmatively: adding, That
particularly having one time had an occasion to lay by for about half a Year or
longer, a numerous Parcel of Glasses, when he came to take them out, he found
that about a fourth Part of the whole Batch was frozen of themselves; and that
in most or all of them, the Cracks proceeded from some seeming Stone or great
Grain of Sand, which yet indeed was not Sand, but some part of Salt that had
not obtained a sufficient Comminution.

A learned Gentleman that is Owner of an Iron Mine, informs me, that he has a
House in Suffolk within 6 Miles of the Sea; and though the House be but 80
Years old, yet the Iron Bars of the Window that look toward the Sea, are
swelled, and (as he calls it) rotten, being brittle, and easy to be crumbled
into Powder. And when I asked him whether the Wind that came from the Sea to
these Windows were not Southern, he answered affirmatively. And to confirm what
I was saying of the Operation of Sea Salt upon Iron, he told me, that having
had occasion to cause many Bars of Iron to be laid in a Place upon the
Neighboring Shore, above the high-Water-mark, a great Storm chanced to
increase the Tide so far as to drench those Bars for some Hours after; which
remaining in the Air, they were very much impaired, great thick Flakes being
easy to be struck off from them when they came to be hammered.

A very experienced Mason informed me, that the Cathedral of Salisbury is made
of Purbeck-Stone, which in the Air grows softer and softer, and will moulder
away; and so will some Blechington-Stone, though not exposed to wet; whereas
the Stones dug up at Painswick, within four Miles of Gloucester, being very soft
and friable at first, will by lying in the Air (as he has particularly
observed) acquire a Crust-hard and Glassy like Marble; and the oftener it is
washed, the sooner will it acquire this hard and yellowish Crust, which reaches
but a very little way (scarce the Thickness of half a Crown) beneath the
Surface contiguous to the Air.

TITLE XXIV.
Of the Air in reference to Fire and Flame.

A Gentleman of my Acquaintance being asked by me about the burning of Candles
in Grooves (or Sutts) that are not furnished with Air-shafts, he told me, that
the Depths I desired to be informed of were very uncertain, and varied
considerably, according to the different Nature of the Soil, and perhaps other
Circumstances, so that sometimes a Candle would go out much sooner, and
sometimes it would continue burning, though it were let down to the Depth of
eight, ten or more Fathom. That when they come into close Ground, though their
Candle will burn at first, yet after a while working, (more especially if the
Stone be full of Mundick) the Dust raised by their Working will make their
Candles go out, so that they must leave working for a time, except they will be
at the Charge of conveying down Air by Pipes. I mention this as different from
other sorts of Damps. N.

Experiments touching the Relation between Flame, Air.
THE burning of Candles, etc. under a Glass Bell. The burning of Spirit of Wine
under a Glass Bell. The burning of Match, Touch-wood, Sponck, etc. under a Bell.

The keeping of Animals under the same Instrument whilst the Flame is burning.

The burning of Bodies to Ashes in sealed Glasses.

The doing the like in exactly closed Receivers.

The burning of Cotton in a sealed Glass.

The burning of the Mixture of Flames under Water in an E. R.

The burning of Spirit of Wine and Oil of Turpentine in Glass Vessels with
slender Necks.

The Experiment of burning Gunpowder.

Another of the Pistols not firing in an E. R.

The burning of a saline Substance in an E. R.

The burning of Mixtures of Saltpeter in an E. R.

TITLE XXV.
Of the Air in reference to Fermentation.

WE took a small handful of Raisons, and having November.
put them into a Bolt-head, (not large, but half filled with Water) we drew out
the Air, and then we removed the Portable and exactly closed Receiver, and put
it on the Digestive Furnace, that the Warmth of that Place might promote the
Fermentation in spite of the Unfavourableness of the Season of the Year. After
a while there appeared Signs of Fermentation by the emerging of the Raisons,
which swan for some Days on the Top of the Water, most of them beset with
numerous Bubbles; nor did above very few of them subside at last, though after
some Days the Bubbles grew fewer and fewer, and there appeared a Sediment at
the Bottom of the Glass.

A Fortnight after they were first sealed up, the upper part of the Glass was
accidentally broken whilst I stood by; whereupon the external Air rushed in
with some Noise: and I taking the Vessel in my Hand, perceived the Surface of
the Liquor to be overspead with Bubbles, almost like the Forth of Bottle-Drink:
there seemed to me to come out at the little Orifice made where the Apex was
broken off, a visible Fume, which had a somewhat languid Smell. The Liquor was
high colored of the Raisons, and seemed to have extracted something from them
that gave it a better Consistence than that of Water.

TITLE XXVI.
Of the Air as the Receptacle of Odours.



TITLE XXVII.
Of the Operation of the Air on the Odours of Animal Substances.

MAY 23. We opened an exhausted Receiver, wherein was pretty Store of Verjuice,
or green and sour Grapes. And though they had lain there we are sure about
three Years, and possibly much longer, yet there appeared no Mouldiness at all
upon any of them: But the Surfaces of the uppermost Grains were somewhat
discolored, perhaps by a saline and confusedly formed Efflorescence, which
having looked upon through a Glass, and also tasted, I guessed to be a kind of
Tartar. The like Liquor that the Grains had afforded had an acid Taste, and
would in the Cold corrode Coral, but the Grains smelled somewhat musty. In all
this time the Verjuice had produced so little Air, that we could scarce take
notice of it by the Mercurial Gage that had been shut up with it.

I inquired of my Lord of Sandwich, and a couple of Gentlemen that accompanied
him, whether it be true which is reported of the Purity of the Air at Madrid,
that though they have no Houses of Office, but every Night throw out their
Excrements into the Streets; yet by the Morning there remains no more Smell of
them. To which I was answered, That 'twas true the Excrements were so disposed
of, but that Madrid is the stinkingst Town they ever came into; yet that 'twas
difficult to discern in the Morning any peculiar Smell of what had been cast
into the Street by Night; but they jointly affirmed, that the Place where the
Ambassador's numerous Family resorted to make Water in, did not smell of Piss;
and that they often observed the Dogs and Cats that lay dead in the Streets
were deprived of Stench: and his Lordship supposed that the Stench of a dead
Mule would in few Hours vanish.

TITLE XXVIII.
Of the Operation of the Air on the Odours of Vegetable Substances.

MAY 16. At the same time we opened another small Receiver, wherein above three
Years before some large Pieces of Orange had been included: The Rinds of these
were much discolored, their Surfaces being almost black. They had scarce
afforded any Liquor, and yet we could not perceive the least Mould in any of
them, nor had they a putrid Smell.

TITLE XXIX.
Of the Operation of the Air on the Odours of Mineral Substances.



TITLE XXX.
Of the Operation of the Air on the Tastes of Animal Substances.

HE answered me, that they could very well preserve Meat, as Beef, without
salting it, as long as the Frost lasted, that is, during the whole Winter. But
when it was once thoroughly frozen, they could not dress it so as to make it
relish like good Meat. Mr. Nickson.

TITLE XXXI.
Of the Operations of the Air on the Tastes of Vegetable Substances.



TITLE XXXII.
Of the Operations of the Air on the Tastes of Mineral Substances.



TITLE XXXIII.
Of the Operations of the Air on the Colors of Animal Substances.

ENquiring of a Man of Letters, that had the Curiosity to travel into the
Inland Parts of Brasil, whether in that Country the Air had not a great
Influence upon the Colors of Clothes: He told me it had, and even upon Black;
insomuch that a kind of black Taffety, which is the usual wear of the better
sort, will, after it has been worn a very few Days, degenerate into an Ironish
Color: yet he answered me, that in the Shops where it is carefully kept from
the Air, the Taffety continued of a good Black.

Nor is it only upon the Color of Stuffs, but of Animals too, that he says the
Brasilian Air has an Operation; for he says, that at a Place 50 Leagues beyond
Parigna, there is a Region where white People do in a very short time grow
Basannez (or tawny,) though a little way out of that particular Region, as for
Instance beyond it, they quickly recover their wonted Color.

He told me, that upon Charleton Island they have Flocks of certain Birds,
which the English there call Partridges, though they resemble ours more in Bulk
than Shape, being somewhat like wild Pigeons, but a good deal bigger: These he
says are white in the Winter, and gray in the Summer.

TITLE XXXIV.
Of the Operations of the Air on the Colors of Vegetable Substances.

ALearned Man that was Physician to the Governor of Jamaica, being at his
Return asked diverse Questions by me, concerning that Island, gave me among
others, the following Answer: Lignum Vitae, said he, and most other Trees at
Jamaica, when they are newly cut down, wherever you cut the Wood, that part
which is exposed to the Air will quickly grow green, though that which is a
little beneath it be yellow, or of another Color; and this Lignum Vita, when
green, is as soft as Oak, or softer; and many other Jamaica Woods that are
soft, when newly cut down, will afterward so harden in the Air, that ordinary
Tools will make no Impression upon them; and the Nails that pierced them easily
before, can no more be forced out of them; and this is chiefly conspicuous in
the Cabbage-Tree, which being a Wood soft enough when it is cut down, the Pith
which is very copious will quickly rot of it self, and the rest of the Tree
serves for a Pipe of perhaps 100 Foot long, that will not corrupt under Ground,
but grow almost as hard as Iron.

Enquiring of an inquisitive Traveller, what he had observed about the Power of
the Air, which I had been informed was great, in working upon diverse Bodies at
the Island of St. Jago: He told me, that he and his Company had not staid long
enough there to make much Observation of that kind; but that seeing Aloes
growing plentifully there, they had gathered some Plants of it, whose Juice he
found, as I have here in Europe, to be very clammy, and excessively bitter,
and, which was wondered at, of a very dark Color; but having carried them in
the Ship toward the Equinoctial, they found for a time the Juice to be
altered, having lost almost all its Bitterness, and acquired a green Color.

Stains of Linen will best go out at the time of the Year, when the Fruits or
Plants whose Juice made them, are in their Prime: This a Gentlewoman assured me
she had tried in new Linen stained with Juice of Quinces; and the Lady N. N.
affirmed, that she had particularly tried it in Stains made with the Juice of
Hopps, which she says are the worst Stains of all; and which having in vain
tried to get out of her Linen, she laid up her Linen in her Chest, and at the
time of the Year when Hopps flourish, she found the Stains vanish of themselves.

TITLE XXXV.
Of the Operations of the Air on the Colors of Mineral Substances.

AConsiderable Instance of the Changes that the Contact of Air is able to
produce even upon solid Minerals, I gave those that saw it by the following
Experiment. We took one part of Lapis Calaminaris, and about four Parts of good
Saltpeter; these being well powdered and mixed, were put into a strong
Crucible, and kept in a vehement Fire some Hours, by which means the Matter, as
we expected, was alcaliz'd: upon the thus prepared Lapis Calaminaris we poured
a convenient Quantity of fair Water, which afforded us a Solution that was
somewhat muddy, but appeared of a deep red: this we poured into a wide-mouthed
Glass, which we set in a Window, that it might be the more accessible to fresh
Air. There after a while our darkish red Solution turned quite green, and more
Diaphanous than before; but continuing for some Days to keep the Glass in the
same Window, (which respected the South) we found our green Solution to lose
its Color by Degrees, and at last to be resolved into a transparent Liquor,
and a subsiding Powder, that was not at all green, but red, or like Brick-Dust.
These Changes of Color succeeded in more than one Parcel of our Mineral
Solution.

We took a very strong Spirit of Vinegar, and boiled it a while on crude
Filings of Copper, without finding that 'twas manifestly colored by that
Operation, nor yet by letting it lie some Hours in the same Glass Egg wherein
it had been boiled. Wherefore supposing this want of Coloration to depend upon
the Air's not cooperating in the best manner it might easily be made to do, we
poured the Liquor and the Filings together into a broad flat Glass, (which we
placed in a Window shelving) so that though the Filings were wet, yet but one
part of them was covered to any Depth by the Menstruum. This done, we observed,
as was expected, that the Filings exposed to the Air, changed Color, and
became of a greenish Blew; whilst those that were under the Liquor manifested
no Change of Color, but kept that which belongs to Copper, till the Menstruum
evaporating by Degrees, they also being accessible to the Air, acquired the
same Color with the former Vinegar. Q. Whether in a longer time the Coloration
would not have been made?

We took some Filings of Copper, and divided it into two Parcels; one we put
into a flat and shallow Glass with a wide Mouth, and the other into a Glass
Viol, whose Neck was of the Breadth usual to such Vessels. Upon each of these
Parcels of Filings we poured a convenient Quantity of one and the same strong
Solution of Sal Ammoniac made in fair Water, and without covering each of the
Vessels, let them stand by one another for a competent time. Of which Trial the
Event was such as was expected; namely, that the Liquor in the Viol was but
faintly colored, when that in the open Glass, that had a large Surface exposed
to the free Air, was very richly tinged. And this Circumstance is not to be
forgotten, that whereas all the lower part of the Solution was of a deep Blew
almost like Ultra-Marine, that part which was contiguous to the Air was covered
over with a kind of Film like thin Ice, which was of a very differing Blew,
exceeding like that of the finer sort of Turcoices.

We took two small Parcels of Filings of Copper, and put each of them into a
small Piece of Paper, with the Edges turned upward, and then put upon each of
them three Drops of good Spirit of Sal Ammoniac. One of these Papers we left in
the Window, the other we put into a small Receiver, which by help of our Engine
was emptied in little more than a Minute of an Hour. At the End of two Minutes,
after the putting on of the Spirit, there appeared a manifest Blew on some
Parts of that Paper that was left in the Window; but that which was in the
exhausted Receiver, being deprived of the Air that should befriend its
Operation, continued there full a quarter of an Hour or more (by a Minute
Clock) without appearing to be at all colored: Wherefore taking off the
Receiver, we removed the Paper to the same Window where the other stood, and
within about two Minutes it began to disclose a Blewness, which within about
two Minutes more was considerably heightened.

Into a slender Viol, wherein we put a convenient Quantity of the Volatile or
Urinous Spirit of the Lees of Wine (elsewhere by us described) which was of a
yellow Color, we let fall some Filings of Copper; and stopping the Glass well,
we drew a Tincture, which according to Expectation was manifestly green, but
not of the pleasantest and most transparent sort of green Liquors; then
suffering the Viol to rest in a Window for many Days, we observed that the
Liquor did then but slowly return to a yellow Color, which when it had
acquired, without any Mixture of Greenness; we opened the Viol for a very
little while to let in the Air, and then stopped it well again; the admitted
Air quickly began to change the Surface of the Liquor into a green Color;
which, though slowly, extended it self downwards, till it had tinged the whole
Liquor. This Color afterward, by long standing, did by Degrees grow to a pale
Yellow.

The 19th of August presented me with some Phenomenon that made me almost
despair of reducing all those of our variable Liquors to a settled Theory. For
coming that Day at about ten a Clock in the Forenoon to a Closet where I kept
several Vials furnished with this Liquor, I perceived one of them that stood in
the Window, that had once almost quite lost its Color, to have re-acquired a
very fair Blew, at least as deep as that of the Sky in a fair Day. This Viol I
the rather watched, because I had taken notice, not without somewhat wondering
at it, that for two Days before, instead of losing, according to Custom, the
little Remains of Color, that after many Days standing it yet retained; the
Color began again to increase, though the Viol were constantly kept stopped as
before; and that which made this regaining of the Color seem more strange,
was, that there stood just by it another Viol furnished with the Spirit, and
with Filings taken out of the same Parcels, yet the Liquor of this Parcel
continued colorless. Wherefore suspecting that some Accident might have
happened, whereby some little Portions of Air might have insinuated themselves
through the Cork of the altered Liquor, I cast up my Eyes to another Viol that
stood in so high a Place that was not easy to reach it, and where it had long
rested, and lost its Color: But upon this View I was confirmed, that the
Change lately mentioned in one of the Viols, was not from the Cork, but from
some unobvious Cause: For though this upper Viol was furnished with a good
Glass Stopple; yet the Liquor it contained was again grown Caeruleous, though
the Liquor of another Viol that stood just by it continued colorless.
Wherefore to satisfy my self further, I presently went to a private Place,
where I had in a Cavity made in the Thickness of a Wall set aside two Viols,
that several Days before had quite lost their Color; and my former Surprise
was increased, when I found that one of them which was stopped with a Cork,
continued colorless; yet the other that had a Glass Stopple, and stood just by
it, had regained a fair Caeruleous Color. Both these were fitted for Trial,
with the same Spirit and Filings, and the same Day with the others
abovementioned; and the Heat of the Weather had so little Influence upon this
Effect, that this Day was remarkably cold, being made so by a Northern Wind,
which made me observe it more so than I had found it for some time before.

I must not forget on this occasion, that I was invited by the foregoing
Phenomenon, to look upon some Spirit, not Oil of Amber, that I had kept in a
Viol for several Days upon Filings of Copper, and had sometimes exposed to the
Air by unstopping the Glass, and found, that though formerly the Spirit kept
its native Color better than I desired, yet it had acquired a green Color,
which whether it will lose again by longer standing, Time must determine.

The slender Viol, with Spirit of Honey mentioned No the (...) though it had
been wont to exchange its yellow Color for a blew, by the Contact of the
external Air in a very short time, and sometimes within a Minute or two; yet
being opened this Afternoon, in the same Place where it used to be so, did not
in above an Hour's time turn blew, but remained a transparent yellowish Color.

The Viol with a Glass Stopple, mentioned No 945. being for diverse Weeks left
unstirred in the Window where it stood before, I several times observed it to
lose and regain Color; and though sometimes it would only appear of a more
faint or a more rich Blew, yet sometimes also it would appear either quite or
almost colorless, and perhaps in a Day or two after it would be again as blew
as the Sky. And this, though I could not find that any thing in the Weather was
the true Cause of this Change, since the Liquor would not only gain, but lose
Color in colder Weather; and so it would also do in warmer: But on
Michaelmas-Day I found it to have attained a deep Blew; and though since it has
been now and then somewhat more dilute, yet during all the past Month of
October, I remember not to have seen it any thing mere colorless; and this Day
being the first of November, I found it to have resumed a high Color, though a
Viol with a Glass Stopple, which had for many Weeks stood just by it, and
formerly did diverse times correspond with it in its Changes, has continued all
the last Month of a very pale Blew, without either deepning its Color, or
growing quite colorless.

An inquisitive Gentleman of my Acquaintance, being asked by me about a
Mountain in Wales, called (...), where solid Stones are said to change their
Color very oddly, told me, that within sight of that Hill, in a large Piece of
Ground that was then newly put under Tillage, he saw good Numbers of Stones
that looked like Flints, and were full as hard, if not harder; the Color of
most of them was dark, the rest gray: these Stones, which when the Ground was
newly turned up, were Rust-coloured, he observed afterward to grow lighter and
lighter colored; so that after three or four Years, being invited by this
Observation to take notice of it at his coming to that Place again, he found
these Stones almost all of them turned white. About which Phenomenon,
questioning the ancient Inhabitants, with some Expressions of Wonder, they
seemed to make little of it, and assured him, in the Neighboring Mountain
almost all the Stones that were exposed to the Air, underwent the like Changes,
and within a few Years were blanched.

Having put some Mercurius sublimatus dalcis, and Vitriolum Romanum (tied up in
several Papers apart) into one Box, at the end of twenty two Months I found the
sublimate Mercury wholly changed into a Substance so like Antimony, that some
not ignorant of the Materia Medica, have taken it for the same: and the
Superficies only of the Vitriol had acquired the same Color, but was not at
all altered within. This from a credible Relator.

TITLE XXXVI.
Of the Air destroying or introducing other less obvious Qualities into Animal
Substances.



TITLE XXXVII.
Of the Air destroying or introducing other less obvious Qualities into
Vegetable Substances.

AN intelligent Gentleman that staid a Year in Guinea, related to me, that he
and his Company found the great Heat and Moisture of the Air to dispose Bodies
so to Putrefaction, that he observed the white Sugar to be sometimes full of
Maggots; and found that diverse Drugs, Salves, and other medicinal things that
were brought with him, had quite lost their Virtue; and some of them,
especially Ointments, were verminous. And he added, that in the Island St. Jago
(one of those of Cabo-verde) they laid store of Sweetmeats upon Tables to the
Heat of the Sun, to dry up the superfluous Moisture, which in strange Abundance
they had contracted the preceding Night, which otherwise would quite spoil the
Sweetmeats, and bring them to putrify.

Oxford, though seated for the most part of it on a gravelly Hill, I have known
to be very disagreeable to some moist Splenetick and Valetudinary Bodies, who I
have heard complain, that they could not be so well there as elsewhere,
especially in the Spring; so that I take the Air of that Place to be generally
moist. Mr. J. T.

Air too dry, though sufficiently hot, is not favorable, for the Production of
diverse Insects: for I have observed these two last dry Springs, that there has
been no soft Garden-Snails to be found abroad, and very few Fleas bred in the
House, which I impute to extraordinary long Dryness of the Air, for want of
moist Vapors to nourish them; since in wet Summers we always swarm with Snails,
Gnats, Fleas, etc. whereas this Year we have few or none.

TITLE XXXVIII.
Of the Air destroying or introducing other less obvious Qualities into Mineral
Substances.

OBservandum etiam quod Antimonium Diaphoreticum Zwelfer, page 800.
quocunque modo, sive cum solo Nitro aut addito etiam Tartaro, paratum sit,
tractu temporis aeri expositum pravam, and quasi malignam induat naturam,
sumptumque intra corpus cordis angustias, cardialgias, lipothymias, vomitusque
and similia prava Symptomata procreet, quae facile tamen evitabimus, si vel
singulis diebus vel tribus mensibus recenter illud conficiamus, vel jam paratum
Antimonium diaphoreticum vetustum addita portiuncula Nitri, aut etiam absque
Nitro, per unam vel alteram horam Vulcano tradamus, penitusque igniamus,
iterumque si Nitrum additum fuerit, edulcoremus, and parumper reverberemus.
Purchas's 2d Part, lib. 6. cap. 8. A vulgar Experiment generally affirmed, as
by Alpinus in Med. Egypt. l. 4. c. 8. who long lived here upon the Testimony of
Paulus Moucilus, the French Consul, Baptistae Elianus a Jesuit, and John Varot
an English Man.


To prove that it proceeds from a natural Cause, this one, though strange,
yet true Experiment, will suffice, Take of the Earth of Egypt adjoining to the
River, and preserve it carefully, that it neither come to be wet nor wasted;
weigh it daily, and you shall find it neither more nor loss heavy until the
17th of June, at which Day it begins to grow more ponderous, and augmenteth
with the Augmentation of the River, whereby they have an infallible Knowledge of
the State of the Deluge, proceeding, without doubt, from the Humidity of the
Air, which having a Recourse through all passible Places, and mixing therewith,
increases the same as it increases in Moisture.

A learned Physician of the College of London confessed to me, that he found by
his own Observation, that Antimonium Diaphoreticum, being kept some Years,
though in a covered Vessel, acquired a Vomitive Quality, which it had not
before; and that having long kept in a stopped Glass a Parcel of his own Ceruss
of Antimony, of which he used to give 12, 15, or more Grains, without finding
it Emetick; he found that in process of time it was so degenerated, that when
he gave four or five Grains, it would cause Vomits.

Earth laid up together in the Air for four, five or six Years, does make far
better Pots for Closeness, and holding of the Fire, than that which has lain
but one Season above Ground, though that it self be much better than that which
is newly dug up, which will be very apt to crack in the Fire, or when it comes
to wet; as also those Bricks that lie at the Top of the Furnace, and therefore
are not so thick covered as they burn, and are apt to deceive Builders when
they come to be exposed to the Rain and Weather.

TITLE XXXIX.
Of the Air in reference to the Propagation and Vegetation of Plants.

AN ingenious Traveller that frequented the Pyrenean Mountains, especially that
which many count the highest of them, and is known by the Name of Pic de Midi,
affirmed to me, that he, as well as several others, had manifestly observed a
scarce credible Difference between that Side of those Mountains that regards
France, and that which reaches to Spain; for at the same time the former was
verdant and flourishing, and yielded a delightful Prospect to the Traveller, as
well as plentiful Provisions to the Inhabitants: the Spanish Side of the Hills
was parched, and russet, and barren, and looked dismally, like a Wilderness:
Which great Difference of Countries, observable in the same Hills at the same
time of the Year, he imputed to the fierce Parching, and sometimes blasting
Winds beat upon the Spanish Side, and made that look so squallid, whilst the
Hills that suffered this Mischief on one side, did by their Height check these
hurtful Winds, and skreening from them, the French Side of the Mountains left
them to enjoy Advantages that the Soil and Climate furnished them with.

TITLE XL.
Of the Air in reference to the Generation, Life and Health of Animals.

DE vita igitur ac morte, and iis pene omnibus quae Aristot. de Respirat. cap.
21. and parag. 87.
huic considerationi affinia sunt, dictum est. Desanitate vero morboque non
solum medici sed and Physiciest, causas quadantenus refer. Quatenus vero hi
differant, and quatenus diversa contemplantur ignorare non convenit. Equidem
quod confinis sit quadantenus haec Medici Physicique Tractatio, and res ipsa
testatur. Nam and Medici, quicunque paulo elegantiores and diligentiores sunt,
de natura dicunt, and artis sua principia inde sumere dignantur; and Physici
omnes fere, qui concinnitatis aliquid habent, tractationem naturae usque ad
medicinam persequuntur.

August 13. The Temperature of the Air, both as to Salubrity and other Regards,
may be derived as well from the subterraneal Steams, as the superficial
Effluviums of the Earth, and both these sorts of Steams being variously
transported and shuffled, and compounded by the Winds and other Motions of the
Air, upon the Mixtures of them, the local Qualities of the Air, in differing
Places, may be supposed to result.

About three Months before the late great Plague began in London, (in the Year
1665) there came to Dr. M. a Patient of his, to desire his Advice for her
Husband; and the Doctor having inquired what ailed him, she answered, that his
chief Distemper was a Swelling in his Groin, and upon that occasion added, that
her Husband assured her of his being confident that the next Summer the Plague
would be very rife in London: for which Prediction he gave this reason, That in
the last great Plague he fell sick of that Disease, and he then had a
Pestilential Tumor; so in two other Plagues that since happened, though much
inferior to that great one, each of them had a rising in his Body to be its
Forerunner; and now having a great Tumor in the forementioned Place, he
doubted not but it would be followed by a raging Pestilence, which accordingly
ensued. Having heard much Talk of something of this Nature, as related by the
Doctor, I inquired of him how much of it was true, and received for Answer the
foregoing Narrative.

You did not perhaps expect that the mere local Motion of the Air should be
mentioned by me among the Causes of the Effects of its Changes: And indeed the
Phenomenon I have yet met with reducible to this kind, have been but very few,
notwithstanding which I shall take notice, that this local Motion may in
certain Cases operate on other Bodies, either as it turns the Air into a Wind,
or as the tremulous Motion of the Air is modified into found, or as the Air is
put into a vehement and disorderly Motion by Thunder.

As to the first of these it is evident, that upon the Vehemence or Slackness,
and the Places whence and where the changing Wind happens to blow, there may
diverse Effects ensue, especially in animated Bodies. And this not only as the
Wind is accompanied with Cold and Hear, or Moisture, or Dryness, but (to
restrain our selves to Instances more closely pertinent to our present Purpose)
as the Wind is flowing Air, or an Aireal Stream, for only as such it may
ventilate the Places through which it passes, and by expelling the Stagnant
Air, and introducing other Air, may contribute to many of those Changes
(especially as to the Health of Animals) that we see to depend upon the
Alteration of Air, and perhaps among the more tender sort of Animals, there may
be found some in which the Motion of the external Air, though excluded by Walls
and Windows, may have a considerable and immediate Operation: For I have
learned by Enquiry from some curious Natives of Languedoc (where I had the
Curiosity to look after Silkworms, abounding in that Province) that in case it
happened when the Worms having eaten their fill, began to dispose themselves to
work their silken Eggs; in case, I say, it then happened to be thundering
Weather, a great part of the Worms, especially the less vigorous, would be
destroyed.

He affirmed to me, that in some Mines of above a thousand Foot deep, he saw
Horses that had been let down by Ropes to the 3d part of the Depth, that is
above a hundred Yards, and that several of them died either in the letting
down, or by the Change of Air; yet several of them survived, and were employed
about the Engines belonging to the Mines, and seemed not to have any sensible
Inconvenience as to Respiration, though in the Receptacles they wrought in,
they were furnished with Air but from the Groove through which they were let
down, and by a moderately big Shaft.

An ingenious Traveller that has had the Curiosity to visit the Mines of
several Countries, as Bohemia, Saxony, Swedeland, etc. answered me, that the
deepest Mine he saw in Bohemia was of about 2000 of our Feet.

An intelligent Person that was for many Years Consul of the English Nation at
Tripoli in Barbary; and at another time Governor of the Castle (called) of the
Coast, belonging to the English African Company in Guinea, being discoursed
with by me, about the Diseases incident to that very unhealthy Place, and about
the Worms that bred in Men's Legs, told me, That the great Noxiousness of the
Air was not constant, but frequently ceased, and returned within no long
Compass of time; insomuch that all his Men would continue in Health for many
Days together, and then on a sudden diverse of them would fall sick, especially
of Fevers and Fluxes that usually killed them in forty eight Hours or less.

Dr. C. chief Physician to the Russian Emperor, confirmed to me, that being in
Russia in the Winter, when the Frost was very hard, and the East or North-East
Wind blew cold, if he turned his Face toward the Wind, and walked against,
(which at other times he was wont, and took a Delight to do) he found himself
unable to fetch his Breath, and almost stifled, as if the Air were very thick,
or rather a great Stiffness brought upon the Organs of Respiration, whereby he
was unable to move them as at other times, so that he was fain to turn his Head
from the Wind that he might be able to fetch his Breath.

An observing Person being asked about a Tradition of Seamen, that the Lice of
Europeans die when the Ships pass the Line: answered me, that he did not find
it to be true, as it is wont to be delivered; but this he plainly observed in
several of our English with whom he sailed, that all the Lice quitted their
Bodies, and got up into their Heads, whence they dispersed themselves again
when the Ship had left the Equator a pretty way behind it.

But I remember that another Acquaintance of mine, that diverse times passed the
Equinoctial in Portugal Ships, which use to go to the Indies well crowded with
People, many of them more poor than cleanly, answered me, that he had heedfully
observed those Peoples numerous Lice to die away as they cross the Line, though
in no long time after the same sort of Cattle would begin to molest them again.

His Royal Highness the Duke of York, at his Return out of Scotland, having
been pleased to discourse with some of us, that had the Honor to be then near
him, of some Observations he made in his Journey, mentioned among other things,
that Agues were very unfrequent in Scotland, which yet that Year were very rife
over almost all England. This gave me afterward the Curiosity to inquire of a
studious Person, who is one of the chief of the Scottish Nobility, what he knew
about the Unfrequency of Agues in his Country. To which his Lordship replied,
that as to Quartan Agues it was generally taken notice of; insomuch that when
News was brought, that a Gentleman whom he named fell sick of that Disease,
amongst them in the Country it was looked upon as a strange and remarkable
thing. And though diverse Persons bring Quartans out of England to Edinburg, yet
they so seldom keep them long there, that a Scottish Physician, whom he named to
me, offered to lay five to one of the quick Recovery of several Patients of
his, if they would make some reasonable Stay in that City.

Aer autem corrigetur causa corruptionis ablata, and Roderici Fons. de Sanit.
tuend. page 105, 106.
quod jam inductum est mali extinguendo, si igitur ex nimio humore aer
putrescit, ignibus accensis qui omni putredini remedio sunt, exsiccandus, sic
ignes, per vias and domus fiant ex odoratis plantis, qualis Laurus est, Mirtus,
Pinus, Cupressus, Rosmarimus, and reliquae ejus generis, qua ratione pestem
Athenis Hippocrates extinxit; vapores praeterea maligni per aerem sparsi,
dissipandi sunt, id quod a magnis ventis fieri solet. Sic Olysiponi, cum trium
dierum ingens procella venisset pestis extincta nuper est and in Maroco ingens
pestilentia vento quodam evanuit; qui veluti e furnace (adeo calidus erat)
exire videbatur, aerem autem nos imitando ventos commovere poterimus; si
bombardarum strepitus multos fieri curemus; si vero vapores ex paludibus, ac
stagnantibus aquis fieri videntur; eas resiccare aut novare oportet frequenter,
maxim per aestatem. Renovantur autem novis supervenientibus aquis quas e
fluminibus per canales traducere oportet; aut siccandae sunt factis rivulis,
and fossis per quae superfluant ad flumina; quod cum primus magnus Etruriae Dux
Cosmus Pisis fecisset; and magna animi contentione, nunc faciat Ferdinandus,
factum est, ut saluberrimus ejus urbis aer per omne anni tempus sit redditus
verum si cadaverum inhumatorum multitudo aerem inficit; magna and profunda
facta fovea sepeliantut; si ab immunditie, and excrementis, quae per urbem and
domos sparguntur, id quod, ut reor Bisantii, and Olysiponi, in causa est, cur
pestis adeo saeviat, ac duret, mundare oportet omnia; viae ac domus quotidie,
vel saltem semel in septimana repurgandae.

1. Joh. Beguinus in Tyrocin. Chymic. lib. 2. cap. 13. Dignum admiratione est,
quod quamvis in vicinia Hydriae Comitatus Goriciensis, ubi reperitur copiose
Mercurius, singulis fere annis Lues pestifera grassatur, illa tamen semper
immunis ab hac manner soleat, idque viri provectae aetatis se observasse, and a
majoribus suis accepisse, mihi sancte confirmarunt. Hinc patet, Mercurium esse
summum omnis putredinis ac corruptionis alexipharmacum. 2 Michael Majerus in
lusu de Mercurio. Argentum vivum est plurimorum morborum alexipharmacum, and ut
testantur quidam, ipsius Pestis (cum eo loco ubi Mercurius effoditur, and
tractatur, nunquam aut rarissime hoc Contagium grassetur) dummodo maneat in sua
propria natura, and non a salibus aut aquis corrosivis inficiatur, ac venenosus
reddatur.

A very ingenious Physician that traveled much in the East Indies, and visited
some Islands in the South Sea, to which our English were not permitted to have
Access, being asked of me some Questions about the Effects and Changes of the
Air in those Parts, related to me, that having made some stay in the famed
Island of Ternate, he learned, that the Dutch (who had mastered the
Inhabitants) did, upon a Composition made with the King for his Damages, cut
down almost all the numerous Clove-trees that grew in that Island, that thereby
they might keep up the high rate of that Spice, as indeed they have done.
Whereupon there happened a Change in the Temperature of the Air, that gave
cause to conclude, that the Exhalations of the Blossoms which (being dried)
afford the Cloves, were not only very pleasant, but very healthful too: For no
long time after the Excision of these fragrant Trees, the Island became very
unhealthful, which this Physician very probably imputed to the corrosive and
noxious Steams, which plentifully issuing out from a kind of Vulcan, or
smoking, and sometimes burning Hill, depraves the Air of that Island that is
but little, but had their hurtful Effects formerly prevented by the Aromatic
and benign Emanations of those numerous Blossoms and Trees that richly
impregnated the Air, and by their volatile and oily Salts, opposed and hindered
the Effects of the sulphurous, and other sharp Steams of the Vulcan. And my
Relator assures me, that this Change of the Air's Constitution was so
remarkable, and acknowledged when he was there, that whereas formerly sick and
valetudinary Persons used to be sent thither from Batavia to recover their
Health by the Goodness of the Air (as we often send consumptive Persons into
France) the Air at his being in Ternate had been for diverse Years so
unhealthful, that the Dutch were fain (from Batavia, or other more healthy
Places) to send Men twice a Year to relieve the Garrisons, and bring back the
many sick they usually found at their Arrival in that formerly healthy Island.

An observing Physician lately returned from Tangier, answered me, that though
otherwise it be a healthy Place, he took notice that 'twas not unusual for new
Comers to find themselves feverish for many Weeks, or some Months after their
Arrival, especially if the piercing easterly Wind happened to reign. This, he
says, he found in himself, not only by a constant Heat and some other Symptoms,
but by that main one of the praeternatural Quickness of his Pulse. He added,
that this Disease, though very mild, held him near four Months: When the
Easterly Winds happened to blow, on which his Feaverishness so depended, that
he could easily, when he awaked in the Morning, know without asking whether
that Wind blew or not.

May 16. We put into a small Receiver five or six little Ants, which run about
very briskly; but the Air being pumped out, they presently lost their Motion,
which they soon recovered upon the restoring of the Air to them. Then the Air
was again withdrawn, and the Insects thereby brought to lie (some upon their
Backs) as stark dead: in which Condition they were suffered to remain about
five or six Hours; after which the Air being let in upon them, they
nevertheless continued seemingly dead for many Minutes, (as we guessed between
15 and 30) but at length all recovered, running nimbly up and down the Glass,
though it were late at Night.

Si Patrono queste barche dalla costa della pescaria, e Relatione della
Provincia di Malavar. page 64 and 65.
vanno all isola di Ceilam, nella costa della quale per la lunghezza di venti
miglia, tree sole miglia lontane da terra, set braccia abbasso arrivando sino
alli dieci nel fondo, si ritrova infinita quanta di madreperle, escono per
questa pesca le barche la matina col vento di terra, and arrivando al posto
delle madreperle, gettare l'ancore, e fermaresi in quel posto, cominciano a
tuftarsi nel mare i marinari, de quali ogni barca ne ha quindeci, e venti, e
ciafcuno di essisi lega nel mezzo, con una fune, della quale ha cura uno, che
resta in barca e con un' altra func segandosi una pietra alla gamba, un' altro
ha pure cura di quella, e cingendosi un' sacco di cuoio dinanzi, mettendosi le
guante all mani, cosi legato si tufta con violenza nel mare, lentando quelli
le funi, e col peso della Pietra, va con grandiss' violenza giu, and arrivato
ch'e, scioltasi dalla gamba quella fune, con la quale sta legata la pietra,
resta egli libero, and la pietra viene subito tirata soprada quello, che n'ha
cura, et il marinaro poi comincia con molta follecitudine a pigliare quelle
madreperle, che li vengono dinanzi, e le met nel sacco, e sentendosi mancare
la respiratione, tocca la fune, con la quale sta legato nel mezzo, e quello
subito con grandiss' velocita lo tira et arrivando nella barca, scaricando le
madre perle ripiglia fiato, e dopo torna a legarsi di nuovo la pietra, e di
nuovo si tufta come sopra's 'e detto, e sempre cosi per tutta la giornata. Et e
tanto faticosa questa pesca, ch' essendo, tanto profunde le Madre perl nel
mare, molti mancando loro la respiratione si trovano affogati.

It is, by long Observation and often repeated Experience, found certain, that
if any Foreigner lie on shore all Night at Johanna, they seldom miss to be
taken with Sickness there, or within a few Days after their Departure from the
Island, and are commonly seized with putrid Fevers, whereof most die in two or
three Days, though those that have remained upon the Place all Day-long, for
several Days together, are almost always safe, if they go on board of Ship
every Night about a Mile, or a little further, from the Shore. The Island
abounds with the greatest Variety of Plants and Trees that can be almost
imagined in that Circumference, and is generally excessive hot in the daytime,
but cold after Sunset. Whence it may possibly be supposed, that the most
volatile Parts of those promiscuous (and probably many of them poisonous)
Plants, exalted in the daytime by Degrees, and suddenly condensed at Night,
may by Inspiration infect the Mass of Blood much after the same manner as in
Pestilential Airs. The Inhabitants themselves are very much subject to Fevers,
(of what sort I could not learn) for which they cut or scarify their Breast or
Abdomen in several Places: but they observe that few live, except their Fever
terminates in a considerable number of Botches in diverse Parts of the Body.
There is one Hill there remarkable for Height, which is seldom or never free
from thick Fogs or Clouds hovering over the Top of it, sometimes higher,
sometimes lower, according as the Weather alters.

Upon the Coast of Cormandell, and most maritime Places of the East Indies,
there are sometimes (I think yearly) Fogs so thick (notwithstanding it is then
very hot) that all, or most Inhabitants from other Nations, and the tenderer
sort of the Natives, are necessitated to keep their Houses, with the Doors and
Windows fast shut, there being little or no Commerce at that time.

At Balassore in the Bay of Bengale, and in diverse other Parts in that Country,
there happens after great Rains, so great Corruption of the Air, that the
stinking Smell is very nauseous to the Inhabitants: which I presume may be
chiefly occasioned by a great number of Frogs, and other Reptiles (wherewith
those Places abound) left upon the dry Places after the Inundation, and then
putrified by the excessive Heat of the Sun. At this time there is great
Sickness and Mortality amongst the Natives, chiefly by violent Fevers.

In the return of English Ships from the East Indies, they generally put their
sick People on Shore at St. Helena, where they find so sensible Alteration,
that although carried thither, there are few that do not recover so much Strength
as to walk about in two or three Days, which, in all Probability, must chiefly
be attributed to the Alteration of Air, not of Food, there being in most Ships
much the same Benefit of fresh Provision for those that are diseased.

Le chemin plus court de Mosul a Bagdad, est par la Mesopotamie; mais on n'y
trouve aucun Village, and le Samiel y regne tout l'Ete depuis Mosul jusques a
Sourat; ce qui oblige a prendre l'eau, sur le Tigre ou ce vent ne Souffle
point. Le nom de ce vent et compose des mots, Sam et jel, c'est a dire poison
et vent comme qui diroit vent de poison. Ce pourroit etre le vent urens, don't
parle Job xxvii. 21. Lorsque quelqu' un a respire ce vent, il tomb mort
subitement quoi qu'il en ait quelques uns qui ont le temps de dire qu' ils
brulent au dedans. D' abord qu' on est mort, on devient tout noir, et si on
tire le mort par le bras ou par la jambe ou par un autre endroit la chair quite
les os et rest enter les mains de ceux qui la touchent. Thevenot dans le
Bibliotheque Universel Tom. xiii. p. 266.

Doctor Colins relates, that in Muscovy their Horses are much subject to a very
scurvy Disease, whose Russian Name I have forgot, from which the Natives are
wont to preserve them, by keeping Goats in their Stables: And being asked by
me, whether he had this by Tradition, or upon his own Trial? He affirmed, that
he had found it true himself, and that he therefore was wont to keep Goats in
his own Stable.

The ingenious Mr. Rycaut, English Consul at Smyrna, being asked of me, whether
at Smyrna as well as at Aleppo, he observed that the Plague that uses to rage
in the former part of the Summer, degenerates into other Diseases about the
latter End of June, and beginning of July: He answered me, that at Smyrna the
Observation does not hold so much as at Aleppo; but yet at Smyrna they
generally observe, that about that time of the Year, though exceeding hot, that
the Malignity of the Plague does notably lessen, for it is not quite so
infectious, nor near so generally mortal as it was in the former part of the
Summer. When many Years ago I heard of this strange Phenomenon of the
Pestilence at Aleppo, I began to think whether a possible, though not perhaps
the true Cause of it may not be such as this: That the Pestilential Corpuscles
that rove up and down in the Air, during the former part of the Summer, require
such a Bulk or Grossness to enable them to exercise their pernicious
Operations; but when the Weather grows to be exceeding hot, that Heat of the
Air becomes able to dissipate those Corpuscles, and deprive them of that Bulk
that we have supposed necessary to their destructive Efficacy. For Illustration
of this Conjecture, we may take notice of the Smoke that issues out of the Weik
of a Candle newly blown out; for whilst the sooty Corpuscles retain their
Bigness and Texture, they are able to offend the Nostrils very much by their
Stink, and sometimes to cause Convulsive Motions and Abortions in teeming
Women; but if you apply a Flame to this Smoke, it presently discusses this
fuliginous Matter, and dissipates it into Particles of quite another Nature,
which by this means are deprived of all their offensive Smell, and some other
ill Qualities. It may also be said, that the great Increase of Heat in July,
may enable the Sunbeams, by penetrating, the Earth deeper, and agitating its
lower Parts stronger, and producing Crevisses, and other new or formerly
obstructed Passages in the upper Parts of it, may elevate into the Air diverse
saline and other new Corpuscles, which may either divide or dissipate the
Pestilential ones, or else by associating themselves with them, make up new
Concretions, differing from the Pestilential Corpuscles, in Bulk, Shape,
Texture or Motion, in most or all of these, by which means the morbifick
Corpuscles being much altered, their Operations on the humane Bodies they
invade, may be so too, and the Diseases they produce may become less malignant,
or degenerate into some other Disease. And if it be demanded why this does not
happen elsewhere as well as at Aleppo and Smyrna? it may be answered, That the
Concourse of Causes may not be the same, and particularly that the Soil of
those two Places may be peculiarly disposed to emit Pestilential Corpuscles of
such a determinate Nature, with such a Degree of Heat, and dissipable by a
greater, or with a more intense Heat, to afford also Exhalations capable to
correct the former, as it is delivered by good Authors, and ingenious Men have
confirmed it upon their own Observation, that yearly, at Grand Cairo, in the
Heat of Summer the Plague ceases to be mortal, and almost to be infectious,
when the Nile begins to overflow, which wonderful Change I should not so much
ascribe to a Frigeration of the Air, that usually accompanies the Swellings of
the Waters, (since Pestilences rage in much cooler Weather than can be supposed
in so hot a Climate as that of Egypt in July) as to some nitrous and other
corrected Exhalations that are plentifully emitted by the freshly arriving
Waters.

There is an Account that has not, that I know of, been taken notice of, upon
which the supervening Coldness and Heat of the Air may pro tempore very much
alter the Qualities of it, in reference to the Bodies and Health of Men: For
the Air being a fluid Body as well as Water, and impregnated with Salts of
different kinds, some merely saline, and others associated with sulphurous and
other kinds of Particles; it seems not improbable, that what happens in that
grosser fluid Water, impregnated with differing sorts of Salts, and altered by
succession of Heat and Cold, takes place also in the Air. I purposely tried in
Water, that by dissolving in it convenient Quantities of two differing Salts,
though whilst the Liquor was hot, or perhaps so much as lukewarm, they would
swim together undistinguishably in the Liquor, and so were in a Capacity to act
jointly, and as the Schools speak, action communi, on diverse Occasions: yet
when the Liquor was cold, and sometimes when there was only a considerable
Remission of the Heat, the saline Particles of one kind, being not capable of
being any longer sufficiently agitated by so faint a Degree of Heat, would
convene into Grains or Cristals; and losing their Fluidity and Motion, visibly
separate themselves from the other kind of Salts, which yet continued fluid in
the Water where it could now act but by its own particular Qualities, and not
as formerly, action communi.

The clearest Instance I found of this Observation was afforded me by an
Experiment made with the Solutions of Alum and Nitre; a Relation of which I
find among my Adversaria, in the following terms.

Equal Parts of Alum and Nitre being dissolved in the same Portion of fair
Water; and the Liquor being in good measure evaporated, the Earthen Vessel that
contained it was set in the cold, by which means, at the bottom and the lower
part of the sides, the Alum appeared to be first coagulated in many Octaedrical
Grains, no Chrystals of Nitre yet being visible. Afterward, upon a further
Evaporation of the Water, and the Removal of the Vessel from the Fire, there
appeared more Grains of Alum, but as yet no Nitre: wherefore having yet further
evaporated the Liquor, at length the Nitre shot plentifully into fine little
Chrystals of the Shape proper to that Salt.

This is the Account my Note-Book contains of this Trial, which seems to invite
us to conjecture, that of the numerous sorts of saline Corpuscles that rove up
and down in the Air, whilst it is well heated by the Sun, or other Causes, some
sorts may by the Absence of that Heat, or some supervening Causes of Coldness,
be made to separate from the others, which were thereby contemperated, or
perhaps enabled to cooperate to diverse Purposes that they were not fit for
alone; and to form Concretions, which though not singly visible, may be too
great to be kept in a State of Fluidity by the diminished Heat of the Air.

A Mouse lived ten Minutes at least with a quarter Air, and three afterward.

TITLE XLI.
Of heavy Bodies sustained in, or taken up into the Air.



TITLE XLII.
Of Dew.



TITLE XLIII.
Of Rain.

AN eminent Virtuoso informed me, that in the Country of Campen, he had seen
diverse Pits that are dug for Turf, or rather Peat, which were not deep, for
the most part, but reached to a kind of quick Sand, upon which the Rain
falling, did by Degrees in some Years, form a kind of slimy Earth or Clay,
which was much of a martial Nature; and being skilfully handled, would yield
good Iron.

The same Person assured me, that he had diverse times distilled the Water of
Campen in new and fine Glasses, and still found them to leave a considerable
Quantity of stony Matter at the Bottom, notwithstanding the Rectification.

Quicquid erit, sine fuco significat, velut Rottenberg, L. 1. c. 8. De Mont.
Bohemiae, p. 26. A Milessow monte temporum praesagia capiuntur.
Silesiae compastum appellant, perinde Milessow Temporum prognostes, jure
merito dici posset. Vidi ex proximo totum aliquando montem densissimis Nebulis
contectum, ea prorsus imagine, qua Mons Sinai Moyse in Nebula latente
depingitur, at caeteri circum Montes, innubes and hilares velut rerum
gerendarun ignari stabant, Sol ipse formosissimus ibat; at accolae locorum
domum fugiebant, pecora urgebant, meque, ut domum protinus recipirem,
properarem, and equos currum trahentes concitari juberem, monebant, neque horae
quadrans intercessit, jam Coelum obduci, Sol contegi, eripi omnis aspectus.

Virg.
Immensum Coelo ruit agnem aquarum;
-- ruit arduus ether,
Et pluvia ingenti sata laeta, boumque labores.
Diluit, implentur fossae, and quae divinus Poeta prosequitur. At contra etiam
accidere vidi, ut caeteri fumarint montes, Milessow nihil se commovente, nihil
aut nubilum, aut turbidum minante; Incoloe rogati, nihil esse magnopere
timendum a caeteris spondebant, hunc unum intuendum esse, horum nubila omnia a
Milessow quodammodo devorari.

TITLE XLIV.
Of Hail.

ON ecrit de l'Isle en Flandres le 25 May, style nouveau, qu'il tomba dans
cette ville la une graifle dout les moindres grains estoient comme des oeufs de
Pigeon. Cet orage a pass sur la Citadelle and la ville, and na pas laisse une
vitre entiere du cost du vent: les maisons sont toutes decouvertes, and les
arbres rompus, les bleds coupez, and les perdrix and les lieures morts. On a
pese plusieurs grains de cette graisle, dout les uns estoient d'un quarteron,
de demi livre, de trois quarterons, et les plus gros d'une livre and
d'avantage. Il y en avoit un entr' autres qui avoit dans le milieu une espece
de matiere brune qu'ou mit dans le feu, qui fit fair un grand bruit. Il y en
avoit un qui estoit diaphane, lequel estant mis aupres du feu, fondit tout
aussi tossed comme du plomb, quoy qu'il fut beaucoup plus dur que les autres.

TITLE XLV.
Of Snow.



TITLE XLVI.
Of other things falling out of the Air.

EO ipso anno quo Dux Eboracensis postremo rediit e Scotia Londinum, depluere
tanta copia pisciculi halecibus color, figura, sapore quam simillimi in
superiore Gallocidiae in Scotia part non procul a mari, ut duo terrae jugera
ad Robertum Murray de Brughton equitem pertinentia nunc Londini, ut audio,
degentem, cooperuerint. Rem autem totam serenissimo Duci Eboracensi prius de
eadem ab eo interrogatus, quod tum certior ab aliis de hac pluvia factus esset,
tanquam testis oculatus, ut qui aliquos horum pisciculorum videram; confirmavi:
is porro ingeniosissime, summaque very specie nodum ita solvit, ut diceret hos
pisciculos una cum aquis furentium ventorum gyro in turbinem actis evectos esse
nubes, e quibus non procul inde pondere rursus suo relapsi fuerint in vicinam
terram.

TITLE XLVII.
Promiscuous Experiments and Observations of the Air.



TITLE XLVIII.
Desiderata in the History of the Air, and Proposals toward supplying them.



Books Printed for, and Sold by A. and J. Churchill, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row.
TItus Livius's Roman History. Boccacio's Novels and Tales. Sir Paul Ricaut's
Lives of the Popes of Rome. -- History of the Turks. Two Vol. Rushworth's
Historical Collections. Lloyd Dictionarium Historicum, Poeticum, Geographicum.
Statutes of Ireland. Bolton Justice of Ireland. Sir George Wheeler's Travels
into Greece. Leybourn's Dialling. Buchanan's Chronicle and History of the Kings
of Scotland. Machiavel's Works. Thesaurus Brevium. Sir Simon Dew's Journal of
Parliament, Q. Elizabeth. Dr. Brady's Introduction to the History of England.
Milton's Paradise regained. Leybourn Cursus Mathematicus. Sir Roger L' Estrange
Aesop's Fables. Bp. Hall's Contemplations. Clark Praxis Cur. Ecclesiasticis.
Dr. Gibson's Anatomy. Dr. Patrick Mensa Mystica. Gentleman's Recreations.
Monsieur L' Clerc's Logica, etc. Drelincourt of Death. Leybourn's Arithmetic.
Protestant Reconciler, Complete. Homer's Iliads. Poetae Minores. Royal Grammar.
Gibbon's Heraldry. Partridge's Treasury of Physic. Bp. Wilkins of Prayer and
Preaching. Thibault's Chemistry. Glasier's Chemistry. Valerius Maximus,
English. Two Treatises of Government. The Three Letters for Toleration. Some
Considerations of the Consequences of Lowering Interest, and raising the Value
of Money. Sir William Temple's Observations on Holland. -- Misellanea. Dr.
Burnet's Travels. Plato Redivivus. Selden's Table-Talk. Debates of Oxon and
Westminster Parliaments. Titi Petronii arbitrii Satyricon, cum fragmentis
Attaece Graecaerecuperatis. Anno 1688. Livii Orationes selectae. 12o. Sleidan
de quatuor summis Imperiisve. Aristotle's Rhetoric, English. Dr. Whitby's
several Pieces. Partridge's Astrology. Isocrates Orationes, large 12o. Lat.
Guide to Heaven. 24o. Latin Testament, the Cambridg Edition.

