AN ESSAY Of the Great EFFECTS OF Even Languid and Unheeded MOTION. Whereunto
is Annexed An Experimental Discourse of some little observed Causes of the
Insalubrity and Salubrity of the Air and its Effects.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Richard Davis, Bookseller in Oxford. 1685.

ADVERTISEMENT OF THE Publisher.
IT IS thought fit the Reader should be informed, That the ensuing Tract (about
the Effects of Languid Motions) was designed to be a Part of the Author's
Notes about the Origin of Occult Qualities, and should have come abroad
together with the Papers about the Effluvia of Bodies (most of which are
already published.) And accordingly it was printed seven or eight years ago:
which Circumstance is here mentioned, to give a Reason why several Particulars
were omitted in the Body of the Discourse, that will be found annexed to the
End of it. For these occurring to the Author whilst he cursorily read over the
Tract it self, when it was upon the point to be made public, 'twas thought fit
rather to subjoin them by way of a short Appendix, than to let any thing be
lost that seemed pertinent to so difficult and uncultivated a Subject, as That
they belong to. The Reader is farther to be advertised, That of the Three
Preliminary Discourses, which the Author intended for Introductory Ones to
What he designed to say more particularly about the Mechanical Origin or
Production of Occult Qualities, One was concerning the Relations betwixt the
Pores of Bodies and the Figures of Corpuscles: but that the great Intrieacy and
Difficulty He found in this copious Subject, made Him consent, That the
Discourse of Local Motion, which should have accompanied it to the Press,
should be printed long before it. And those Papers about Pores and Figures
having been for a great while out of the Author's Power, He now to gratify the
Stationer with something that may in Their stead make up the formerly printed
Essay a Book of a convenient Bulk, has put into his Hands what now comes forth,
about some Unheeded Causes of the Healthfulness and Insalubrity of the Air:
which being chiefly attributed to Subterraneal Steams, Subtle and for the most
part Invisible, are as near of kin to the other Effluviums treated of in the
Introductory Discourse, as is requisite to keep the mention that is made of
them in this Book, from appearing very incongruous.

AN ESSAY Of the Great EFFECTS Of Even Languid and Vnheeded LOCAL MOTION.
CHAP. I.
HOW superficially soever the Local Motion of Bodies is wont to be treated of
by the Schools, who admit of diverse other Motions, and ascribe almost all
strange things in Physics to Substantial Forms and Real Qualities; yet it will
become Us, who endeavor to resolve the Phenomenon of Nature into Matter and
Local motion, ( guided, at the beginning of things, immediately, and since
regulated, according to settled Laws, by the Great and Wise Author of the
Universe,) to take a heedfull notice of its kinds and operations, as the true
Causes of many abstruse Effects. And though the industry of diverse late
Mathematicians and Philosophers have been very laudably and happily exercised
on the nature and general Laws of this Motion; yet I look upon the Subject in
its full extent to be of such importance, and so comprehensive, that it can
never be too much cultivated, and that it comprises some parts that are yet
scarce cultivated at all. And therefore I am not sorry to find my self obliged,
by the design of these Notes, (written, as you know, to facilitate the
explicating of Occult Qualities) to endeavor to improve some neglected Corners
of this vast field, and to consider, Whether, besides those effects of Local
motion which are more conspicuous, as being produced by the manifest striking
of one body against another, where the bulk, etc. of the Agent, together with
its Celerity, have the chief Interest; there may not be diverse effects, wont to
be attributed to Occult Qualities, that yet are really produced by faint or
unheeded Local motions of bodies against one another, and that oftentimes at a
distance.

But, before I enter upon particulars, this I must premise in general, (which I
have elsewhere had occasion to note to other purposes,) that we are not to look
upon the bodies we are conversant with, as so many Lumps of Matter, that differ
only in bulk and shape, or that act upon one another merely by their own
distinct and particular powers; but rather as bodies of peculiar and differing
internal Textures, as well as external Figures: on the account of which
structures, many of them must be considered as a kind of Engines, that are both
so framed and so placed among other bodies, that sometimes Agents, otherwise
invalid, may have notable operations upon them, because those operations being
furthered by the Mechanism of the body wrought on, and the relation which other
bodies and Physisical Causes have to it, a great part of the effect is due, not
precisely to the external Agent, that it is wont to be ascribed to, but in great
measure to the action of one part of the body it self (that is wrought on) upon
another, and assisted by the concurring action of the neighboring bodies, and
perhaps of some of the more Catholic Agents of Nature. This Notion or
Consideration being in other Papers particularly confirmed, I shall not now
insist upon it, trusting that you will not forget it, when there shall be
occasion to apply it in the following Notes.

There may be more Accounts than we have yet thought of, upon which Local
motions may perform considerable things, either without being much heeded, or
without seeming other then faint, at least in relation to the considerableness
of the Effects produced by them. And therefore I would not be understood in an
exclusive sense, when in the following Discourse I take notice but of a few of
the abovementioned Accounts; these seeming sufficient, whereto, as to Heads,
may be conveniently enough referred the Instances I allot to this Tract.

And concerning each of these Accounts, I hold it requisite to intimate in this
place, that I mention it only, as that whereon such effects of Local motion,
as I refer to it, do principally depend: for, otherwise, I am so far from
denying, that I assert, that in diverse cases there are more Causes than one, or
perhaps than two of those here treated of apart, that may notably concur to
Phenomenon directly referred to but one or other of them.

To come then closer to our subject; I shall take notice, That among the
several things, upon whose account men are wont to overlook or undervalue the
efficacy of Local motions, that are either Unheeded or thought Languid, the
chief, or at least those that seem to me fittest to be treated of in this
Paper, are those that are referable to the following Observations.

CHAP. II.
Observat. I. Men are not usually aware of the great efficacy of Celerity, even
in small Bodies, and especially if they move but through a small space.

WHat a rapid Motion may enable a Body to do, may be judged by the powerful
and destructive Effects of Bullets shot out of Cannons, in comparison of the
Battering Engines of the Ancients, which, though I know not how many times
bigger then the Bullets of whole Cannon, were not able to batter down Walls and
Towers like Bullets, whose bulk compared with theirs is inconsiderable. Other
examples of a like nature might be without impertinency alleged on this
occasion; but, because the latter part of our Proposition contains that which I
chiefly aim at, I shall proceed to Instances fit to prove That.

I have sometimes caused a skillful Turner to turn for me an oblong piece of
Iron or Steel, and placing my naked hand at a convenient distance to receive
the little fragments, perhaps for the most part lesser then small pins heads,
as they flew off from the rod, they were, as I expected, so intensely heated by
the quick action of the Tool upon them, that they seemed almost like so many
sparks of fire; so that I could not endure to continue my hand there. And I
remember, that once asking an expert workman, whether he (as I had sometimes
done) did not find a troublesome heat in the little fragments of Brass that
were thrown off when that metal was turning? He told me, that heat was
sometimes very offensive to his eyes and eyelids. And when I asked, whether it
was not rather as Dust cast into them, than from their Heat; he replied, that
besides the stroke, he could sensibly feel a troublesome heat, which would make
even his Eyelids sore: And that sometimes, when he employed a rough Tool, that
took off somewhat greater Chips, he had found the heat so vehement, that not
only 'twould scorch his tender Eyelids, but the thick and hard skin of his
hands: for proof whereof he showed me in one of his hands a little blister,
that had been so raised, and was not yet quite gone off.

And inquiring about these matters of a famous Artist, employed about the
finishing up of cast Ordnance, he confessed to me, That, when with a strong as
well as peculiar Engine he and his associates turned great Guns very swiftly,
to bring the surface to a competent smoothness, the tools would sometimes throw
off bits of metal of a considerable bigness, which, by reason of their bulk and
their rapid motion, would be so heated as to burn the fingers of the
Country People that came to gaze on his work, when he, for merriment sake,
desired them to take up some of those pieces of metal from the ground. Which I
thought the more remarkable, because by the Contact and Coldness of the ground
I could not but suppose their Heat to have been much allayed. Not to mention,
that I learnt from an experienced Artificer, that in turning of Brass the
little fragments of that metal acquire an intenser Heat than those of Iron.

I remember also, that, to vary the Experiment mentioned just before this last,
by making it with a body far less solid and heavy than Brass or Iron, I caused
an Artificer to turn very nimbly a piece of ordinary wood, and holding my hand
not far off, the powder, that flew about upon the operation, struck my hand in
many places with that briskness, that I could but uneasily endure the Heat
which they produced where they hit. Which Heat whether it were communicated
from the little, but much heated, fragments to my hands, or produced there by
the brisk percussion on my hand, or were the joint effect of both those Causes;
it will however be a good Instance of the power of Celerity even in very small
bodies, and that move but a very little way.

It Is considerable to our present purpose, that by an almost momentany
percussion, and that made with no great force, the parts, even of a vegetable,
may be not only intensely heated, but brought to an actual Ignition; as we
have several times tried, by striking a good Cane (of that sort which is fit
for such Experiments) with a steel, or even with the back of a knife. For, upon
this Collision, it would send forth sparks of fire like a flint.

To the same purpose may be alleged, that, by but dexterously scraping good
loaf-sugar with a knife, there will be made so brisk an agitation of the parts,
that store of sparks will be produced. But that is more considerable, which
happens upon the collision of a flint and a steel: For, though Vitrification be
by Chemists esteemed the ultimate action of the fire, and though, to turn sand
or stones, though very finely poudered, into glass, it is usually required that
it be kept for diverse hours in the intense fire of a glass-house; and though,
lastly, the glass-men complain, that they cannot bring flints or sand to fusion
without the help of a good proportion of Borillia or some other fixed salt: yet
both actual Ignition and Vitrification are brought to pass almost in a moment
by the bare vehemence of that motion that is excited in the parts of a flint
when it is struck with a steel: For those sparks that then fly out, (as an
Ingenious person Mr. Hook
has observed, and as I have often seen with a good Microscope,) are usually
real and permanent parcels (for the most part globulous) ofstone vitrified and
ignited by the vehemence of the motion. And that this vitrification may be of
the stone itself, though steel be a metal of a far more fusible nature then a
flint, I am induced to think, because I have tried, that not only flints with
steel, but flints with flints, and more easily pieces of Rock Crystal between
themselves, will by collision strike fire. And the like effect of collision I
have found my self in some precious stones, harder than Crystal. And
afterward inquiring of an ingenious Artificer that cuts Diamonds, Whether he
had not observed the like, when Diamonds were grated on by the rapid motion of
his mill? He replied, that he observed Diamonds to strike fire almost like
Flints; which afterward was confirmed to me by another experienced cutter of
Gems; and yet having made diverse trials on Diamonds with fire, he would not
allow that fire itself can bring them to fusion.

Nor are fluid Bodies, though but of small Dimensions, to be altogether
excluded from the power of making considerable impressions on solid bodies, if
their celerity be great.

Whether the Sunbeams consist, according to the Atomical Doctrine, of very
minute Corpuscles, that, continually issuing out of the body of the Sun,
swiftly thrust on one another in Physically-straight Lines; or whether, as the
Cartesians would have it, those beams be made by the brisk action of the
Luminary upon the contiguous fluid, and propagated every way in straight lines
through some Ethereal matter harbored in the pores of the Air; it will be
agreeable to either Hypothesis, that the Sunbeams, refracted or reflected by a
burning-glass to a focus, do there, by their concourse, compose a small portion
of fluid matter; and yet the Celerity, wherewith the soft and yielding
substance is agitated, enables so few of them as can be circumscribed by a
Circle, not a quarter of an inch in Diameter, to set afire green wood in less
than a minute, and (perhaps in as little time as that) to melt not only Tinn
and Lead thinly beaten, but, as I have tried, foliated Silver and Gold.

The operation of small portions of fluid matter on solid bodies will be
farther exemplified in the IV. Chapter, by the effects of the blown flame of a
Lamp on glass and metalls; so that I shall here need but to point in general at
the wonderful effects that Lightning has produced, as well by the Celerity of
its motion, as by the matter whereof it consists. Of which Effects, Histories
and the writings of Meteorologists afford good store; and I have been an
admiring observer of some of them, one of the last of which was the melting of
metal by the flame in its passage, which probably lasted but the twinkling of
an Eye.

And even a small parcel of Air, if put into a sufficiently-brisk motion, may
communicate a considerable motion to a solid body; whereof a notable Instance
(which depends chiefly upon the Celerity of the springy corpuscles of the Air)
is afforded by the violent motion communicated to a bullet shot out of a good
wind-gun. For, when this Instrument is well charged, the strongly-comprest Air
being set at liberty, and forcibly endeavoring to expand it self to its wonted
laxity, its corpuscles give a multitude of impulses to the bullet, all the
while that it continues moving along the barrel, and by this means put it into
so rapid a motion, that I found by trial, the bullet would in a moment be
flatted, almost into the figure of a Hemisphere, by being shot off against a
metalline plate.

And farther to show, How swift that motion must have been, and with what
Celerity a vehement agitation may be communicated to the parts of a Solid body,
I shall add here (though the Phenomenon might be referred to the V. Chapter,)
that, though the contact of the Bullet and the metalline plate lasted probably
but a physical moment; yet the minute parts of the bullet were put into so
various and brisk an agitation, that making have to take it up before it should
cool, I found it too hot to be with overmuch ease held between my fingers.

CHAP. III.
Observat. II. We are too apt to think, that Fluid bodies, because of their
softness, cannot have by their bare motion, especially if insensible, any
sensible effect upon Solid ones; though the fluid moves and acts as an entire
body.

IT IS not my purpose here to insist on the efficacy of the motion of such fluid
bodies as may have their motions discovered by the eye, like streaming water;
or manifestly perceived by the touch, as are the winds that beat upon us: since
'twere needless to give Instances of such obvious things, as the great effects
of overflowing waters and violent winds; the later of which, notwithstanding
the great tenuity and softness of the air and the Effluvia that swim in it,
have been sometimes able to blow down not only timbertrees, but houses and
steeples, and other the firmest Structures. But the motions I intend to speak
of in this Chapter are such, as we do not immediately either see or feel; and
though these be exceeding rare, yet the operation of Sounds, even upon solid
bodies, and that at a distance from the sonorous ones, afford me some Instances
to my present purpose, which I shall now proceed to mention.

It has been frequently observed, that, upon the discharge of Ordnance and
other great Guns, not only the sound may be distinctly heard a great way off;
but that, to a good distance, the tremulous motion of the Air that produces
sound, without producing any sensible wind, has been able sensibly to shake,
and sometimes violently to break, the glass-windows of houses and other
buildings, especially when the windows stand in the way wherein the propagation
of the sound is directly made. It Is true, that these observations are most
frequent, when the place, where the Artillery is placed, stands upon the same
piece of ground with the Houses whose windows are shaken; and so it may be
suspected, that the Shake is first communicated by the Cannon to the earth or
floor on which they play, and is afterward by that propagated through the
intermediate parts of the ground to the foundations of the houses, and so to
the windows. And I readily grant, and may elsewhere show, that a violent
impulse upon the ground may reach to a greater distance than men usually
imagine: But in our present Case I see no necessity of having recourse to any
thing but the wave-like motion of the Air for the production of our
Phenomenon, since the like may be produced by Local Motion transmitted by
Fluids, as may appear by the following Instances.

I was once invited by an Engineer, to see trial made of a strange Instrument
he had to sink ships, though great ones, in a few minutes; and though an
unlucky Accident kept me from arriving there 'till near a quarter of an hour
after the trial had been made on an old fregat, with better success than my
Philanthropy allowed me to wish; yet causing my self to be rowed to the place,
where the great vessel was newly sunk, the odness of the effect, which was
performed upon the water by a small Instrument outwardly applied, made me
inquisitive, what noise and commotion had been made: And I was informed partly
by the Engineer himself, and partly by some acquaintances of mine, who among a
great number of Spectators stood aloof off in ships and other vessels lying at
anchor, to see the event; that, upon the Engine's operating, the explosion was
so great, that it made a kind of storm in the water round about, and did so
rudely shake vessels that lay at no inconsiderable distance, as to make those
that stood on them to stagger.

In the late great Sea Fight between the English Fleet commanded by his Royal
Highness the Duke of York, and the Dutch Admiral Opdam, (who therein lost the
Victory and his Life,) though the Engagement were made very many Leagues from
the Hague, yet the noise of the Guns not only reached to that Place, but had a
notable effect there; of which when I enquired of the English Ambassador that
as yet resided there, he was pleased to assure me, that it shook the windows of
his House so violently, that not knowing what the Cause was, he was surprised
and much allarmed, apprehending, that some rude Fellows were about to break his
windows to affront him. And if there be a greater disposition in some other
bodies than there is in Glass-windows to receive strong impulses from the Air
agitated by Sounds, these may be sensibly, though not visibly, wrought upon,
and that at a good distance, by the noise of a single piece of Ordnance; as may
appear by that memorable Circumstance of an odd Case about a Gangrene mentioned
by the experienced Simon Pauli in his ingenious Tract de Febribus malignis,
page 71. Atqui aeger ille Gallus brachio truncatus, octiduum quidem superfuit,
sed horrendis totius corporis convulsionibus correptus; qui quoque, (ut and
illa addam observatione dignissima,) dum in Domini sui aedibus ad plateam
Kiodmoggerianam, Roman Laniorum appellares, decumberet, ac, me ac aliis
aliquandiu ad Lectum illius considentibus quidem, sed nobis non attendentibus,
exploderentur tormenta bellica ex Regiis ac Praetoriis navibus, sinistra
truncum dextri brachii fovens ac complectens, toties quoties exploderentur
singula exclamabat, Au, au, me miserum! Jesu, Maria, contundor penitus: adeo
permolesta and intolerabilis illi erat Tormentorum explosio, and quidem ex loco
satis longinquo, terra non firma aut contigua, verum super salo aut mari
Balthico, instituta. By this it appears, that the Guns, whose discharge
produced these painful motions in the Patient, rested upon a floating body.
And I remember, that an illustrious Commander of a very great Man of war, being
asked by me, whether of the many wounded men, he had in his ship in a very long
Sea Fight, none of them were affected by that noise of the Enemy's Cannon
discharged in ships at a distance? He answered me, that some, whose bones were
broken, would sadly complain of the Torment they were put into by the shake
they felt at the going off of the Enemy's Cannon, though they were too much
accustomed to the report of great Guns, to be, as 'twas a bare noise, offended
by it. If after all this ti be surmized, that these motions were not conveyed
by the air, but propagated by the water, (and, in some cases, some part of the
shore) from the ships, where the Guns were fired, to the Houses where the
windows were shaken, or the places where the wounded men lay: I answer that, if
this could be made probable, it would accommodate me with very eminent
Instances for the Chapter of the Propagable nature of Motion: And though it be
very difficult to find such examples of shakes excited by sounds as are not
liable to the mentioned objection; because the sonorous bodies here below do
all either strike, or lean, upon such gross and visible bodies as the Earth and
Water; yet there is one kind of Sound, that must be confessed to be propagated
by the Air, as being made in it; and that is Thunder, whose noise does
sometimes so vehemently affect the Air, though without producing any sensible
wind, that both others and I have observed it very sensibly to shake great and
strong Houses, notwithstanding the distance of the clouds where the noises were
first produced. And I remember, that, having inquired of some Sea-Captains,
that in stout vessels sailed to the Indies, whether they had nor in those hot
Regions observed their ships, though very much less tall then houses, to be
shaken by vehement Thunders? I perceived, that some of them had not much heeded
any such thing; but a couple of others told me, they had observed it in their
ships; and one of them told me, that once, when the claps of thunder were
extraordinary great, some of them shook his ship so rudely as to make the
unwonted motions disorder his great Guns. All which I the less wonder at, when
calling to mind, what I have mentioned in the foregoing Chapter and elsewhere
of the power of the Celerity of motion, I consider, that there is no Celerity
that we know of here below, that is near so great, as that wherewith a Sound is
propagated through the air. For, whereas the diligent Mersennus observes, that
a bullet shot out of a Cannon or a Musket does not overpass two hundred and
forty yards in a Second, or sixtieth part of a minute; I have more than once
diligently observed, that the motion of Sound passes above four hundred yards
in the same time of a Second here in England; which I therefore add, because
Mersennus relates, that in France he observed a Sound to move in that time many
yards more; which may possibly proceed from the differing consistence of the
English air and the French.

The great Loudness of these sounds, and the vehement percussion that the Air
receives in their formation, will probably make it be easily granted, that
'twas only the Impetuosity of the motion of the Medium, that gave the shake to
the windows and other solid bodies that I have been mentioning to have been
made to tremble by the report of Cannon or Thunder: But yet I will not on this
occasion conceal, that perhaps it may without absurdity be suspected, that Some
of those tremulous motions of solid bodies might either depend upon, or at
least be promoted by, some peculiar disposition, that Glass (which is endued
with springiness,) and some other bodies that perhaps are not quite devoid of
that Quality, may have to be moved by certain congruous Sounds (if I may so
call them) more than they would by others, though perchance more loud. But
though this surmize should be admitted; yet it would not render the
lately-recited Instances improper for the design of this Discourse, but only
would make some of them fit to be referred to another Chapter; to which I shall
advance, as soon as I shall have annexed an odd Observation of the experienced
Platerus, which argues, that, where there is a peculiar Disposition, even in a
firm body, it may receive considerable impressions from so languid a motion
(though in likelihood not peculiarly modified) of the air as is not sensible to
other bodies of the same kind.

Foemina quaedam (says he) Plater. Observe. Lib. 1. p. 185.
in subitaneum incidit morbum, viribus subito prostratis, se suffocari
indesinenter clamitans, etsi neo stertoris nec tussis aliqua essent indicia;
maxim vero de aura quadam adveniente, si vel leviter aliquis adstantium se
moveret, quae illam opprimeret, conquerebatur, seque suffocari, si quis propius
accederet, clamitabat: vixdum biduum in ea anxietate perseverans, expiravit. To
which he adds: Vidi and alios aegros, de simili aura, quae eos, si quis illis
appropinquaret, in suffocationis periculum induceret, conquerentes; quod semper
pessimum esse signum deprehendi.

CHAP. IV.
Observat. III. Men undervalue the motions of bodies too small to be visible or
sensible, notwithstanding their Numerousness, which inables them to act in
Swarms.

MOst men, when they think at all of the effluvia of bodies and their motions,
are wont to think of them as if they were but much finer sorts of Dust, (whose
grains, by reason of their smalness, are invisible,) which, by the various
agitation of the Air, are as 'twere by some faint wind blown against the
surfaces of the bodies they chance to meet in their way, and that they are
stopped in their progress without penetrating into the interior parts of the
bodies they invade. And according to this Notion, it is no wonder, that men
should not fancy, that such minute bodies passing, as they suppose, no further
than the surfaces of those on which they operate, should have but faint
operations upon them.

But we may have other thoughts, if we well consider, that the Corpuscles we
speak of, are, by their minuteness, assisted, and oftentimes by their figure
enabled, to pierce into the innermost recesses of the body they invade, and
distribute themselves to all, or at least to multitudes of the minute parts,
whereof that body consists. For this being granted, though we suppose each
single effluvium or particle to be very minute; yet, since we may suppose, even
solid bodies to be made up of particles that are so too, and the number of
invading particles to be not much inferior to that of the invaded ones, or at
least to be exceedingly great, it need not seem incredible, that a multitude of
little Corpuscles in motion (whose motion, may, for ought we know, be very
swift) should be able to have a considerable operation upon particles either
quiescent, or that have a motion too slow to be perceptible by sense. Which may
perhaps be the better conceived by the help of this gross example:

If you turn an Ant-hill well stocked with Ants-eggs, upside down, you may
sometimes see such a heap of eggs mingled with the loose earth, as a few of
those Insects, if they were yoaked together, would not be able at once to draw
after them; but if good numbers of them disperse themselves and range up and
down, and each lay hold of her own egg, and hurry it away, it is somewhat
surprising to see (as I have with pleasure done) how quickly the heap of eggs
will be displaced, when almost every little egg has one of those little
Insects to deal with it.

And in those cases, wherein the invading Fluid does not quite disjoin and
carry off any great number of the parts of the body it invades, its operation
may be illustrated by that of the wind upon a tree in Autumn: for, it finds or
makes it self multitudes of passages, for the most part crooked, not only
between the branches and twigs, but the leaves and fruits, and in its passing
from the one side to the other of the tree, it does not only variously bend
the more flexible boughs and twigs, and perhaps make them grate upon one
another, but it breaks off some of the stalks of the fruit, and makes them fall
to the ground, and withal carries off diverse of the leaves, that grew the
least firmly on, and in its passage does by its differing parts act upon a
multitude of leaves all at once, and variously alters their situation.

But to come to closer Instances: suppose we cast two lumps, the one of Sugar,
the other of Amber, into a glass of beer or water, they will both fall
presently to the bottom. And though perhaps the Amber may be lighter than the
Sugar, (for, I have found a notable difference in the specific gravity of
pieces of Amber,) yet the aqueous particles are far from being able to displace
the Amber or any sensible part of it, or exercise any visible operation upon
it: But the same minute particles of the liquor being of a figure that fits
them to insinuate themselves every way into the pores of the Sugar, though the
lump consisted of very numerous Saccharine Corpuscles, yet the multitude of the
aqueous particles, to which they are accessible, is able in no long time to
disperse them all, and carrying them along with themselves, make the whole lump
of Sugar in a short time quite disappear.

The point above discoursed of, may be more nimbly exemplified in some Chemical
operations, and particularly in this. If, by a due degree of fire, you abstract
from running Mercury four or five times its weight of good Oil of Vitriol,
there will remain at the bottom a dry and brittle substance exceeding white;
and, if upon this Heap of Mercurial and Saline bodies, which sometimes may be
coherent enough, you pour a good quantity of limpid water, and shake them
together, you may see in a trice the multitude of little white grains, that
make up the mass, pervaded, and manifestly altered, by the dispersed
Corpuscles of the water; as will plainly appear by the change of the Calx or
Precipitate from a white mass into one of a fine Limon-colour.

But to give instances in Fluid bodies, (which I suppose you will think far the
more difficult part of my task,) though you will easily grant, that the flame
of Spirit of wine, that will burn all away is but a visible aggregate of such
E^^luvia swiftly agitated, as without ^^y sensible Heat would of themselves
invisibly exhale away; yet, if you be pleased to hold the blade of a knife, or
a thin plate of Copper, but for a very few minutes, in the flame of pure Spirit
of wine, you will quickly be able to discern by the great Heat, that is, the
various and vehement agitation of the minute Corpuscles of the metal, what a
number of them must have been fiercely agitated by the pervasion of the igneous
particles, if we suppose, (what is highly probable,) that they did materially
penetrate into the innermost parts of the metal; and whether we suppose this
or no, it will, by our experiment, appear, that so fluid and yielding a body,
as the flame of Spirit of wine, is able, almost in a trice, to act very
powerfully upon the hardest metalls.

The power of extreamly-minute parts of a fluid body, even when but in a
moderate number they are determined to conspire to the same operation, may be
estimated by the motions of Animals, especially of the larger and more bulky
sorts, as Horses, Bulls, Rhinocerots and Elephants. For, though the animal
spirits be minute enough to be invisible, and to flow through such tender
passages, that prying Anatomists have not been able in dissected Nerves to
discern so much as the channels through which they pass; yet those Invisible
Spirits, conveyed (or impelled) from the Brain to the Nerves, serve to move in
various manners the Lims, and even the unwieldy bodies themselves of the
greatest Animals, and to carry them on in a progressive motion for many hours
together, and perhaps enable them to spring into the Air, and move through it
by leaping; though diverse of these Animals weigh many hundred, and others
several thousand of pounds.

I will not here consider, whether the following Experiment may at all
illustrate Motions that are produced by the fluid parts of Animals in some of
the consistent ones: But I presume, it may confirm the Observation maintained
in this Chapter, if I add, what I have tried of the considerable force of a
number of aqueous particles, as flexible and as languid as they are thought to
be, insinuating themselves into the pores or Intervals of a rope that was not
thick. For in moist weather I sometimes observed, that the aqueous and other
humid particles, swimming in the air, entering the pores of the hemp in great
numbers, were able to make it shrink, though a weight of fifty, sixty, or even
more pounds of lead were tied at the end to hinder its contraction, as appeared
by the weights visibly being raised in wet weather above the place it rested at
in dry.

But to return to what I was formerly speaking of the Determination of the
motion of Fluids; I shall, on this occasion, observe, that, though the wind or
breath, that is blown out at a small crooked pipe of metal or glass, such as
Tradesmen for its use call a Blow-pipe, seems not to have any great celerity,
especially in comparison of that of the parts of flame; and is it self of
little force; yet, when by this wind the flame of a Lamp or Candle is directed
so as to beat with its point upon a body held at a convenient distance from the
side of the flame, the burning fluid, determined, and perhaps excited by this
wind, acquires so great a force, that, as we have often tried, it may be made,
in a few minutes, to melt not only the more fusible Metals, but silver, or
even copper it self; which yet may be kept for many hours unmelted in a
Crucible kept red-hot, or even in the flame of the Lamp or Candle, unassisted
by the blast.

And if we can so contrive it, that a flame does not come to invade only the
surface that invests a body, but comes to be intermingled with the smaller
(though not the smallest) parts it consists of, as with its filings or its
powder; the flame will then have a far more quick and powerful operation than
the body exposed to it. This I exemplify (in other Papers) and in this place it
may suffice to observe, that, whereas a pound or two of Tartar may cost you
some hours to calcine it to whiteness, if the flame have immediate access only
to the outward parts; you may calcine it in a very small part of that time, if,
mixing with its gross powder an equal weight of good Saltpeter, you fire the
mixture, and keep it stirring, that the parts of the kindled Nitre may have
access at once to very many parts of the Tartar, and have opportunity to
calcine them. And by somewhat a like artifice, I elsewhere teach, how Nitre it
self may without Tartar be speedily reduced to a Calcinatum, not unlike that
newly mentioned. But it may be said, that some of the foregoing Instances (for
it cannot be truly said of all) may indeed illustrate what we are discoursing
of, but will not reach home to our purpose.

I shall therefore consider the Lodestone, which you acknowledge to act by the
emission of Insensible particles. For, though Iron and Steel be solid and
ponderous bodies, and Magnetical effluvia be corpuscles so very minute, that
they readily get in at the pores of all kind of bodies, and even of Glass it
self; yet these Magnetical effluvia, entering the steel in swarms, do in a trice
pervade it, and a multitude even of Them, acting upon the Corpuscles of the
metal, do operate so violently on them, that, if the Lodestone be vigorous
enough, and well capped, it will attract a notable proportion of steel, and
surmount the gravity of that solid metal, which I have found to exceed, when
the stone has been very good and little, above fifty times the weight of the
Magnet by whose effluvia it was supported: For, to these I rather ascribe
Magnetical attraction and sustentation, than to the impulse or pressure of the
ambient air, to which many Corpuscularians have recourse; because I have found
by trial (which I elsewhere relate) that the pressure of the ambient air is not
absolutely necessary to Magnetical operations.

I remember, that, to help some friends to conceive, how such extreamly-minute
particles as Magnetical effluvia, may, by pervading a hard and solid body, such
as Iron, put its insensible Corpuscles into motion, and thereby range them in a
new manner, I took filings of Steel or Iron freshly made, that the Magnetical
virtue might not be diminished by any rust, and having laid them in a little
heap upon a piece of paper held level, I applied to the lower side of the
paper, just beneath the Heap, the pole of a vigorous Lodestone, whose
Emissions traversing the paper, and diffusing themselves through the incumbent
metal, did in a trice manifestly alter the appearance of the Heap; and, though
each of the filings might probably contain a multitude of such small Martial
Corpuscles as Steel may be divided into by Oil of Vitriol or Spirit of Salt;
yet the Magnetical effluvia, immediately pervading our metalline heap, did so
remove a good part of the filings that composed it, as to produce many erected
aggregates, each of which consisted of several filings placed one above
another, and appearing like little needles, or rather like the ends of needles
broken off at some distance from the point. And as these little temporary
needles stood all of them erected (though more or less, according to their
distance from the Pole of the Magnet) upon the flat paper; so they would,
without losing their figure or connection, be made as it were to run to and fro
upon the paper, according as the Lodestone, that was held underneath it, was
moved this way and that way; and as soon as that was taken quite away, all this
little stand of pikes (if I may so call it) would (almost in the twinkling of
an eye) relapse into a confused heap of filings.

There are two ways of explicating the turning of Water into Ice; one or other
of which is approved almost by all the Corpuscularian Philosophers. The first
is that of the Cartesians, who give an account of Glaciation by the recesse of
the less subtle particles of the Etherial matter, without which the finer
parts were too small and feeble to keep the Eellike particles of water
flexible, and in the form of a liquour. The Atomists on the other side ascribe
the freezing of water to the ingress of multitudes of frigorifick Corpuscles,
as they call them, which, entering the water in swarms, and dispersing
themselves through it, crowd into the pores, and hinder the wonted motion of
its parts, wedging themselves (if I may so speak) together with them into a
compact body. But which soever of these two Hypotheses be pitched upon, the
Phenomenon it self will afford me a notable Instance to my present purpose.
For, the Particles of water, and much more the Corpuscles of cold, are
confessed to be singly too small to be visible, and their motions are not said
to be swift, but may rather be judged to be slow enough; and yet those minute
aqueous, or more minute frigorifick particles, because of their number, produce
in the glaciation of the liquour so forcible a motion outward, as to make it
break bottles, not only of glass and earth strongly baked, but, as I have
several times tried, of metal it self, that being full of the liquour were
firmly stopped before the supervening of the Cold. And the expansive endeavor
of freezing water is not only capable of doing this, but of performing so much
greater things, which I elsewhere relate, that my trials have made me sometimes
doubt, whether we know any thing in nature, except kindled Gunpowder, that bulk
for bulk moves more forcibly, though the motion seems to be very slow.

CHAP. V. (Of the Propagable Nature of Motion.)
Observat. IV. Men are not sufficiently aware, how propagable Local Motion is,
even through differing Mediums, and Solid bodies.

THere are four principal Occasions on which I have observed, that men are wont
to think the Communicating of Motion much more difficult than indeed it is.

And first, there are many, that observing how usually those bodies that hit
against hard ones rebound from them, easily persuade themselves, that Motion
can scarce be transmitted or diffused through Solid bodies. But though it be
true, that oftentimes in such cases the progressive motion of the body or the
Solid, that is struck or impelled, be either inconsiderable, or, perhaps, not
so much as sensible; yet the impulse may make a considerable impression, and
may be communicated to a great share of the particles of that matter, whereof
the solid mass consists; as we see in the striking of a timber-beam at one end,
the motion, though perhaps it were not strong at the first, may become sensible
at the other. Though Bell-metal be so hard a body, that it is reckoned harder
than iron itself, insomuch that oftentimes it resists even files of Steel,
which readily work on Iron; yet this solidity hinders not but that, as I have
found, conveniently shaped vessels of Bellmetal, though thick, will be sensibly
affected by a motion that neither is strong, nor touches them in more than a
short line, or perhaps than a Physical point. The truth of this I have found by
trial on more than one such vessels and particularly on one that was
hemisphaerical, which being placed or held in a convenient posture, if I did
but gently pass the point of a pin for a little way along the brim of it, it
would sensibly resound, and that (to a very attentive ear) so long, and in such
a ringing manner, as made it highly probable, that the parts, immediately
touched (and not so much as scratched) by the point of a pin, were not only
put into a vibrating motion themselves, but were enabled to communicate it to
those that were next them, and they to those that were contiguous to them; and
so the tremulous motion was propagated quite round the bell, and made diverse
successive Circulations before it quite ceased to be audible. And if, in stead
of drawing a Line on the brim of the vessel, I struck it, though but faintly,
with the point of a pin, though the part immediately touched would be but a
physical point, yet the motion would be, like the former, propagated several
times quite round; as was argued by the ringing and duration of the produced
sound, though this metalline vessel were seven inches in Diameter, and of a
considerable thickness. Nor was a solidity like that of Brass requisite to
produce these effects. For I found them to ensue much after the same manner,
when I employed only a short and slender thread of Glass, which though little,
if at all, thicker than a pin, was yet hollow quite through. Now if it be true,
as it is highly probable, that Sound, as it belongs to the air, consists in an
undulating motion of the Air, and so in our case requires a vibrating motion in
the sonorous body to impart that motion to the Air; we must grant in our
Instances a wonderful propagableness of motion, even when it is not violent, in
Solid bodies themselves; since the point of a pin, gently striking a part, no
bigger than it self, of a mass of very solid metal, could thereby communicate a
sensible motion, and that several times circulated, to millions of parts equal
to it in bulk, and much exceeding it in hardness. And since the effect was more
considerable, when the trial was made in a much greater, than in a smaller
vessel; it is probable, that, if I had had the opportunity of experimenting on a
large and well-hung Bell, the Phenomenon would have been more notable; as it
also seemed to be on our vessel, if, in stead of striking it with the point of
a pin, we cast, though but faintly, against the lower part of it a grain of
shot, less than a small pins-head, or let a little grain fall, from about one
foot high, upon the inside of the inverted Hemisphere. And to show, that even
soft and yielding bodies, and but faintly moved, are not to be excluded from a
power of putting such hard ones into motion; I shall add, that I found almost
the like effects to those above mentioned, by passing the pulp of my finger a
little way along the lower part of the vessel. Nay, that fluid bodies
themselves may communicate such an intestine and propagable motion, to harden
solid ones, I may have hereafter an occasion to show by the effects of a small
Flame, and the Sunbeams on glass and steel. And I shall here on this occasion
add this word about the Propagation of Motion produced in solid bodies by heat,
that it much depends upon the particular Textures of the bodies. For I found,
that when I heated a piece of glass or of a fire-stone, I could without
inconvenience hold my naked hand upon parts that were very near (suppose within
an inch off) the ignited portions of them. But, if we take a rod of Iron, for
instance, and heat one end red-hot, the heat of that end will be so propagated
toward the other, that it will offend one's hand at several times the
distance, at which one might conveniently hold the rod, if it were of glass.

In many buildings it may be observed, (and is thought a sign of the firm
Cohesion of their parts,) that a stamp of one's foot, nay or bare treading, or
some such other less brisk impulse, made in one room, will have a sensible
effect in all or most of the others. And it often happens, that, by the hasty
shutting of a door, the whole house is made to tremble; whence we may argue,
that, even among solid bodies, motion made in one place may be readily
propagated to many others: And if, as to the latter of the Instances, the
sudden impulse and compression of the Air, made by the door supposed to be
hastily shut, have any considerable share in the effect, the Phenomenon will
serve to show the efficacy even of such a motion of a fluid body, as we cannot
directly feel upon diverse large and firmly connected solid bodies.

In Earthquakes the tremulous motion sometimes extends so very far, that,
though it seems highly probable, that the shake that is given to one part of
the Earth by the firing and explosion of subterraneal exhalations, (if that be
the true and only cause of Earthquakes) is not capable of reaching near so far
as diverse Earthquakes have done, but that the fire passes through some little
subterraneal clefts, or channels, or hidden conveyances, from one great Cavity
or Mine to another; yet it is not improbable but that the vehemently tremulous
motion does oftentimes reach a very great way beyond the places where the
explosions were made. Since, though Seneca would confine the extent of Nature.
Quaest. Lib. VI. Cap. 25.
Earthquakes to two hundred miles, yet observations made in this and the last
Century warrant us to allow them a far greater spread. The Learned Lib. III.
Cap. 26.
Josephus Acosta affirms, that in the Kingdom of Peru in the year 1586 an
Earthquake reached along the shore of the Pacifick sea 160 Leagues; and adds,
that sometimes it has in those parts run on from South to North 300 Leagues.
And in the beginning of this our age ( Anno Dom. 1601) good writers relate a
much larger Earthquake to have happened, since it reached from Asia to that Sea
that washes the French Shoars, and, besides some Asiatick Regions, shook
Hungary, Germany, Italy and France, and consequently a great part of Europe.
And if that part of the Narrative be certain, which relates, that this lasted
not much above a quarter of an hour, it will be the more likely, that this
Earthquake shook great Tracts of Land beyond those places, to which the fired
matter, passing from one cavity to another, could reach in so short a time: As
you will the more easily guess, if you try, as I have done, that in trains of
Gunpowder it self the fire does not run on near so swiftly as one would
imagine. But though I have been in more Earthquakes then one; yet, since they
were too sudden and too short to afford me any considerable observation, I
shall say no more of them; but proceed to take notice, that oftentimes the
motion of a Coach or Cart, that passed at a good distance from the place that I
was in, has made the buildings so sensibly shake, that I could not but wonder,
that so great a portion of so firm and sluggish a body, as the Earth, could, by
a cause that seemed very disproportionate to such an effect, be made to tremble
it self, and manifestly to shake firm buildings that were founded on it. And
this observation made me the more inclinable to give credit to their Relations,
who tell us, that in a calm night, the march of a troup of horse may be felt,
by attentive Scouts watching at a great distance off, by the shake that the
ground receives from the trampling of the horses; though I formerly suspected
much, and do yet a little, that the impulse of the air conveyed along the
resisting surface of the ground, might mainly contribute to the effect that is
ascribed only to the motion of the soil.

Before I advance to the Second Member of this Chapter, it may not be
impertinent to note, that in peculiarly disposed bodies, and especially in
Organical ones, a very languid motion may have a far greater effect, than it
could produce by a bare propagation of it self. For it may so determine the
motion of the Spirits or other active parts of the body it works on, as to make
multitudes of them act as if they conspired to perform the same motions. As
when a ticklish man, by having the pulp of one's finger passed gently along the
sole of his foot or the palm of his hand, has diverse muscles and other parts of
his body and face put into preternatural or unusual motions. And most men by
being lightly tickled with the end of a feather or straw, within their
Nostrils, have their heads and many parts of their bodies put into that violent
Commotion, wherein Sneezing consists. And I remember, that having for some time
been, by a distemper, (from which God was graciously pleased a while after to
free me,) quite deprived of the use of my hands; it more than once happened to
me, that sitting alone in a Coach, if the wind chanced to blow a single hair
upon my face in the Summertime, the tickling or itching, that it produced, was
so uneasy to me, 'till by calling out to a footman I could get it removed,
that, though I could well bear it as long as I was wont to do, when, having the
use of my hands, I could relieve my self at pleasure; yet if I were forced to
endure the itching too long, before any came to succor me, the uneasiness was
so great, as to make me apprehend falling presently either into Convulsions or
a Swoon. But it is time to proceed to the second Member of this Chapter.

2. Others there are, that cannot believe, that Local motion, especially if it
be languid, can be propagated through differing Mediums, each of which, save
that wherein the Motion is begun, must, they think, either repel, or check and
dead it. To these I shall recommend the Consideration of an Experiment, I
remember I made before some Learned men in our Pneumatick Engine. For, having
caused a large and thick glass Receiver to be so blown, that it had a glass
button in the inside of that part which upon the Engine was to be placed
upwards; I caused a Watch to be suspended by a little Silverchain fastened to
that button by as slender and soft a body, as I thought would be strong enough
to support my watch; and then, the Glass being cemented on close to the
Receiver, to prevent a Commerce between the Cavity of it and the Air, the
watch, that hung freely near the middle of the Cavity of the Receiver, made it
self to be heard by those attentive Listners, that would hold their ears
directly over the suspended watch, whose motions were thereby argued to have
been propagated, either through the included air, or along the string to the
concave part of the Glass, and through the whole thickness of the Glass to the
unequal part, and thence, through the interposed air to the Ear. And this
mention of watches minds me of what I often observed in a small striking watch,
that I have worn in my pocket. For, when it struck the Hours, and in some
postures when the balance did but move, I could plainly feel the brisker
motions of the Bell, and sensibly the languid ones of the balance, through the
several linings of my Breeches, and some other interposed soft and yielding
bodies; and this, though the watch (as I said) was small, and the balance
included in a double case, and though the outwardmost were of (what they call)
Chagrine, and the innermost of Gold; which I therefore mention, because that
closest of metals is observed more to dead sounds and motions than harder
metals, as Silver, Copper, and Iron.

That Motion may be propagated through differing Mediums, may seem the more
probable by the shakings that are often felt by men lying on beds that stand in
rooms close shut, when loud claps of thunder are produced (perhaps at a great
distance off) in the clouds. And whether it will be fit to add to this Instance
that which you have lately met with in the III. Chapter of a wounded Frenchman
at Copenhagen, I leave you to consider.

I know not whether it will be very proper to take notice on this occasion of
an odd Phenomenon recited by the experienced Agricola De not. eorum quae effi.
e Terra Lib. IV. Cap. 7.
in these words. Si animal dejicitur in antrum Viburgense, quod est in Carelia,
Regione Scandiae, erumpit, ut perhibent, sonus intolerabilis magno cum flatu:
Si leve pondus in specum Dalmatiae, quamvis, inquit Plinius, tranquillo die,
turbini similis emicat procella.

3. As those of whom I took notice at the beginning of this Chapter, are
backward to allow, that Motion may be considerably propagated through solid
bodies; so on the contrary, there are others that are indisposed to think, that
it is near so propagable as indeed it is through fluid bodies; because they
presume, that the easy cession of the parts of fluids will dead the impulse
received by those of them that are first acted on by the impelling body. And

4. There is yet another sort of Naturalists, who, though they may be brought
to grant, that Motion may by propagated even through a soft and yielding
Medium, cannot believe, that it should through such a Medium be propagated to
any considerable distance; being perhaps induced to this opinion by observing,
that, though a body somewhat broad as well as solid, as the Palm of one's hand
or a battledore, be moved through the Air swiftly enough to make a wind; yet
that wind will not be strong enough to be felt any more than a very little way
off. Wherefore, because the Instances, to which I assign the remaining part of
this Chapter, may be for the most part applicable to the removal of both these
prejudices; It may for brevity sake be expedient to consider them both together.

If Luminous bodies act on our Eyes, not by a substantial diffusion of
extremely minute particles, as the Atomists would have it, but by a propagated
Pulsion of some Subtle matter contiguous to the shining body, (as the
Cartesians and many other Philosophers maintain;) 'twill be manifest, that a
body less than a small pin's head may give a brisk motion to a portion of fluid
matter many millions of times greater than it self; since in a dark night a
single spark of fire may be seen in differing places, whose distance from it
exceeds many thousand times the spark's Diameter. Not to mention the great
remove, at which the flame of a small taper may not only be seen, but appear
greater than near at hand. And if we compare the Diameter of that bright Planet
Venus, which yet shines but with a borrowed and reflected Light, with its
distance from the Earth, we may easily conclude, that the fixed Stars, which
probably are so many Suns that shine by their own native Light, must impell a
stupendous proportion of Etherial matter, to be able at that immense distance
to make such vivid Impressions, as they do, upon our Eyes. But to descend to
Instances less remote and disputable, I shall, in order to the removal of the
two lately mentioned prejudices, proceed to consider; that, though it be true,
that Fluid bodies do easily yield to Solid ones that impell them, and thereby
oftentimes quickly dead the motion of those Solids; yet the motion, being lost
only in regard of the solid body, is not lost, but transmitted and diffused in
reference to the fluid. As when a log of wood, or any such body specifically
lighter than water, is let fall in the middle of a pond, though its progress
downwards be checked, and it be brought to rest quietly on the surface of the
water; yet its motion is not lost, but communicated to the parts of the water
it first strikes against, and by those to others, 'till at length the curls or
waves produced on the surface of the water spread themselves, till they arrive
at the brinks, and would perhaps be farther expanded, if these did not hinder
their progress. From which instance we may learn, that, though the nature of
fluid bodies, as such, requires, that their parts be actually distinct and
separately moved; yet the particular Corpuscles that compose them, being (at
least here below) touched by diverse others, the new motion that is produced in
some of them by an impellent Solid, must needs make them impell the contiguous
Corpuscles, and these those that chance to lie next to them, and so the impulse
may be propagated to a distance; which you will the more easily believe may be
great, if you consider with me, both that in a fluid body the Corpuscles, being
already in the various motion requisite to fluidity, yield more easily to the
impellent, and also that being fully, or very near it, counterpoised by others
of the same fluid, a scarce imaginably little force may suffice to impell them;
insomuch that, though the brass Scale of a balance, of diverse inches in
Diameter, may well be supposed to outweigh many myriads of such particles as
compose water, wine, etc. yet, (as I elsewhere more fully relate) when such a
scale was duly counterpoised with another like it, I could easily put it into
various motions only with the invisible Effluvia of no great piece of Amber.
And if we consider that obvious Instance of the swelling Circles made by
casting a stone into a Pond or other stagnant water, we shall be the more
easily persuaded, that, even in a heavy fluid, a motion may reach a far greater
way, than men are usually aware of, beyond the parts on which it was first
impressed.

On this occasion I must not omit a strange Observation given me by a very
experienced Navigator, that much frequents the Coast of Groenland, and other
Arctick Regions, to fish for whales. For this person being discoursed with by
me about the effects of the breaking of those vast piles of Ice, that are to be
met with in those parts, assured me, that not only he had often heard the Ice
make in breaking terribler noise than the loudest claps of thunder with us, but
that sometimes, when the Seawater had, as it were, undermined the foundation
of the mountainous piece of Ice, he has known it at length suddenly fall into
the subjacent Sea with so much violence as to make a storm at a great distance
off; insomuch that once, when he lay two Leagues off of the place where this
stupendous mass of Ice fell, it made the waves go so high as to wash clear
over the stern of the ship, with danger enough to some of his men, and to sink
several of his shallops that were riding by, though scarce any small vessels in
the world use to be so fitted for rough Seas as those about Groenland.

And whereas, though the Air be a much thinner fluid, we are apt to think it
indisposed to propagate motion far, give me leave to tell you, that we may take
wrong measures, if we think, that, (for instance) the undulating motion, into
which the Air is put by the action of sonorous bodies, reaches but a little
way, as we are apt to presume it does, because we judge of it by the effect it
has on our ears when the sound is made in disadvantageous places. For one,
that, for instance, hears a Lute or a Viol played on in a room furnished with
hangings, will be apt to think the sound faint and languid in comparison of
what it would appear to him, if the same Instrument were played on after the
same manner in an arched room without hangings; these soft and yielding bodies
being apt to dead the sound, which the figure and hardness of the Vaulted room
would reflect. And so, when a man speaks aloud in the free Air, we are not wont
to take any notice of a progress made by the motion of the Air beyond the place
we are in, when our ears receive the sound; but if the place happen to be
furnished with an Echo, though at many times that distance from the speaker, we
may then easily take notice, that the motion of the Air was carried on, and
that with good vigor, to a far greater distance than else we should have
observed. And I have often thought, that, even by the better sort of our
Echoing places, we are not informed, to near how great a sphere the motion,
which the Air is put into by Sounds, may extend it self, where its diffusion
and vigor are not hindered nor weakened by bodies either placed too near, or
indisposed to promote its operation.

What has been lately said of the great diffusion of Sounds, if themselves be
loud and great, will appear highly probable, by what is related by the Learned
Fromundus, From. Meteor, Lib. II. Art. 9.
who being Professor of Philosophy at Lovain, in the Year 1627, had
opportunity enough to know the Truth of what he relates; namely that, at the
famous Siege of Ostend in Flanders, the thunder of the great Ordnance was heard
at above thirty Dutch Leagues, which, according to the vulgar reckoning,
amounts to a hundred and twenty of our English miles. And that is yet, as he
truly observes, more strange, and makes more for our present purpose, which he
adds concerning the diffusion of the sound of a Drum, which, he says, was, upon
a time, heard at Sea twelve Leagues off.

But to return to what I was saying of Echo's, to confirm my conjecture about
them, I shall think it needless to offer you any other Argument, than that
which you will draw your self from the Notable Relation I met with in the
Learned Varenius Geograph. general. Lib. I. Cap. XIX.
of an Observation made by David Fraelichius, who, in the Company of a couple
of Students, had the curiosity (in the month of June) to visit the mountain
Carpathus, esteemed the highest of all the Hungarian Hills, and said to be much
more steep and difficulty accessible than any of the Alps themselves.
Fraelichius then (in my Author) having related with what difficulty he and his
Companions ascended above that Region of the Air, where they met with clouds
and vehement winds, adds this memorable Observation, for whose sake I mention
the story: Explosi (says he) in ea summitate sclopetum, quod non majorem
sonitum primo prae se tulit, quam si tigillum vel bacillum confregissem; post
intervallum autem temporis murmur prolixum invaluit, inferioresque montis
parts, convalles, and sylvas opplevit. Descendendo per nives annosas intra
convalles, cum iterum sclopetum exonerarem, major and horribilior fragor quam
ex tormento capacissimo inde exoriebatur: hinc verebar, ne totus mons concussus
mecum corrueret; duravitque hic sonus per semiquadrantem horae, usque dum
abstrusissimas cavernas penetrasset, ad quas Aer undique multiplicatus
resiliit. Et talia quidem objecta concava in summitate se non illico
offerebant, idcirco fere insensibiliter primum sonus repercutiebatur, donec
descendendo antris and convallibus vicinior factus, ad eas fortius impegit.

CHAP. VI.
Observat. V. Men usually think not what the modification of the invisible
motion of Fluids may perform on the disposed bodies of Animals.

IN this Observation I expressly mention the disposed bodies of Animals, to
intimate, that there is a peculiar aptitude required in those Animals, or some
particular parts of them that are to be sensibly affected by such motions as we
are treating of, which would otherwise be too languid to have any sensible
operation on them.

It seems the less strange to me, that continuing Sounds, and other somewhat
durable Impulses of the Air or other Fluids, should have a manifest operation
upon Solid bodies, when I consider the multitude of strokes that may in a very
short and perhaps scarce observable time, be supposed to be given by the parts
of the fluid to the Consistent body. For, though each of these single would
perhaps be too languid to have any sensible effect at all; it being opportunely
and frequently repeated by the successive parts of the fluid, as by so many
little swimming hammers or flying bullets, they may well have a notable effect
upon the parts of a body exposed to their action: As may be argued from the
great swing that may be given to Pendulums by a very languid force, if it
successively strike the swinging body, when having finished its excursion, it is
ready to return toward the Perpendicular; as also from the tremulous motion
that is imparted even to the metalline string of a Musical Instrument, by the
congruous motion the Air is put into by another trembling string, (as there may
be hereafter occasion to declare.)

I remember, Scaliger tells a pleasant story of a Knight of Gascony, whom the
sound of a Bagpipe would force presently to make water; adding, that a Person
disobliged by this man, and resolving to be merrily revenged on him, watched a
time when he sat at a Feast so as he could not well get out, and brought a
Bagpiper to play unawares behind him; which he did so unluckily, that the
Music had presently its wonted effect upon the poor Knight, to his great
Confusion and the laughter of the Company. On which occasion I shall add, that
I know a very Ingenious Gentleman, who has confessed to me, that the noise of a
running Tap is wont to have almost the like operation upon Him.

It Is a common Observation, that the noise that an ungreased cartwheel makes in
grating against the axel-tree, and the scraping of a knife upon a plate of
silver or pewter, and some other such brisk and acute Sounds, do so affect
diverse parts of the Head, as to produce that effect that is commonly called
setting the Teeth on edge; which whether it proceed from any commerce between
the Auditory Nerves, and those that are inservient to the motion we have
mentioned, I leave Anatomists to consider. But these effects of acute sounds
are much less considerable than that which I elsewhere relate of an Ingenious
Domestic of mine, who several times complained, that the tearing of brown
paper made his Gums bleed: which argued that the sound had an operation not
only upon the nervous and membranous parts, but the blood and Humors
themselves.

Sir Henry Blunt, in his voyage to the Levant, giving an account of what he
observed in Egypt, has, among other remarkable things, this passage: Many
rarities of Living creatures I saw in Gran Cairo, but the most ingenious was a
nest of four-legged Serpents of two foot long, black and ugly, kept by a
Frenchman, who when he came to handle them, they would not endure him, but ran
and hid in their hole; then would he take his Cittern and play upon it: They,
hearing his Music, came all crawling to his feet, and began to climb up him,
till he gave over playing, then away they ran.

This recalls to my mind, what some men of repute, and particularly the Learned
Kircherus, relate concerning a great Fish, in or about the Streights that sever
Sicily from Italy, which is said to be much affected with a peculiar kind of
Tune, (harsh enough to Humane ears) by which the Mariners are wont to allure it
to follow their vessels. And it may much strengthen the Conclusion maintained
in this Chapter, if there be any certainty in the famous tradition, that the
Lion is terrified and made to run away by the crowing of a Cock: I say, if,
because though I doubt not but some peculiar kinds of Sounds, as well as of
other sensible objects, may be particularly and exceedingly ungrateful to the
Sensories of this or that peculiar kind of Animals, and consequently to the
ears of Lions; yet a late French Traveller into the Levant gives me cause much
to question the matter of fact, affirming, that rowing along the brink of
Tigris or Euphrates, (for I do not punctually remember which,) they were, for
many hours in the night, terrified by Lions that attended them along the brink
of the River, and would not at all be frighted by the frequent crowing of the
Cocks that chanced to be in the passengers Boat. Of which unconcernedness of
the Lions, our observing traveller took much more notice than the Lions
appeared to do of the crowing of the Cocks. I might on this occasion say
something of the received Tradition, that many sleeping persons will be more
easily waked by being called upon by their own usual names, than by other
names, though uttered with a louder voice. But this it may suffice to have
mentioned; nor will I here insist on that more certain example of the operation
of a Sound, which is afforded by the starting of men or greater Animals, upon a
surprising, though not vehement, noise; though this oftentimes puts so many of
the Spirits and Muscles into motion, that the whole bulk of the Animal is
suddenly raised from the ground, which perhaps it could not be by the bare
counterpoise of some hundreds of pounds: This, I say, I will not in this place
insist on, because the Phenomenon seems to depend rather upon the loudness or
acuteness of the sound, than upon any determinate modification of it,
particularly relating to the Animal it self.

But the eminentest Instance of the efficacy of peculiarly modified Sounds upon
disposed bodies, is afforded by what happens to those which are bit by a
Tarantula. For though the bitten person will calmly hear diverse other tunes,
yet when a peculiarly congruous one comes to be played, it will set him a
dancing with so much vigor as the spectators cannot but wonder at, and the
dancing will sometimes continue many hours, if the Music do so, and not
otherwise. I know there are some that question the truth of the things related
of these Tarantati, (as the Italians call them,) and I easily grant, that some
Fictions may have been suffered to pass under the countenance of so strange a
Truth. But besides the affirmations of some Learned men, (as well Physicians as
others) my Doubts have been much removed by the Accounts I have received from
an Ingenious Acquaintance of mine own, who at Tarentum it self, whence the
Insect takes its name, and elsewhere, saw many bitten persons in their dances,
some in public and some in private places, and amongst the rest a Physician,
on whom the tune that fitted his distemper had the same operation as on the
other Patients. And the Learned Epiphanius Ferdinandus, who practiced Physic
in Apulia and Calabria for many years, not only delivers upon his own personal
observation, several Narratives of the effects of Music upon the Tarantati,
but invites any that may doubt of the truth of such Narratives to repair to him
at a fit season, undertaking to convince them by ocular Demonstration.

I know a very honest and sober Musician, who has diverse times affirmed to me,
that he could at pleasure, by playing a certain Tune, (which he acquainted me
with, and which did not much move others) make a person (whom he named to me)
weep, whether she would or no. And I might add, that when I have been taking
Physic, or am any thing feverish, the repetition of two verses of Lucan seldom
fails (as I have often tried) of producing in me a chilness, almost like that,
but fainter, that begins the fit of an ague. But on this Instance I look not as
a strong proof of the Physical efficacy of Sounds; because those two verses
having been emphatically read, when diverse years ago I lay sick of a slow
fever, and could not rest, they made so strong an impression on me, that
whenever I am under a Discomposure any thing near like that, that then troubled
me, those verses revive, as 'twere, in my brain and some other parts that
disposition, or rather indisposition, with which my first hearing of those
verses was accompanied.

It may be the less admired, that the vibrating motion of the Air, that
produces sounds, should have such effects upon disposed Organical bodies, since
Light it self, which either consists of briskly moving effluvia far more
subtle than aerial corpuscles, or is propagated by the pulse of a far more
subtle body than Air, may have a notable operation upon disposed bodies. For
we commonly observe, that the Sunbeams, by beating upon the face or eyes of
some that come suddenly out of a shaded place into the Light, presently make
them sneeze; which you know is not done without a vehement motion of diverse
parts of the body. And though Color be but a modification of Light; yet,
besides that 'twas anciently a practice, as the History of the Macchabees
informs us, to show red objects to Elephants, to make them more fierce, it is a
familiar observation, that red clothes do offend and irritate Turky-cocks. And
that is more remarkable, which is related by the very Learned Physician
Valesius, of a person that he knew, who, if he looked upon red objects, would
not only have his Eyes offended, but was subject to an effusion of Humors in
the neighboring parts.

CHAP. VII.
Observat. VI. Men suspect not what efficacy the Invisible motions of Fluids
may have, even upon inorganical bodies, upon the score of some determinate
Congruity or relation betwixt a peculiar Texture of the one, and the peculiar
modification of the others motion.

THough the Experiments delivered in the foregoing Chapter have, I presume,
sufficiently manifested, that the modification given to the motions of the Air
by sonorous bodies may have considerable effects upon Animals, in whose
organized bodies the curiously contrived parts have an admirable connection
with, and relation to, one another, and to the whole Symmetrical fabric they
make up; yet, I fear, it will scarce seem credible, that sonorous motions of
the Air, not very loud, should find, even in bodies Inanimate and Inorganicall,
such congruous Textures and other Dispositions to admit their action, that even
more languid Sounds, peculiarly modified, may sensibly operate upon them, and
much more than sounds that are louder and more vehement, but not so happily
modified. To make this good by particular Experiments, I shall begin with that,
which, though the effect may seem inferior to that of most of the others, I
judge fittest to manifest, that the produced motion depends upon the
determinate modification of that of the impellent Fluid.

That a certain impulse of Air, made by one of the Unison-strings of a Musical
Instrument, may suffice to produce a visible motion in another, is now become a
known experiment; of the Cause and some unobserved Phenomenon of which I
elsewhere more fully discourse. But, that it may not be suspected in this case,
that the shake of the untouched string is communicated to it by the propagated
motion of the Instrument it self, to which the string, that is struck, is also
fastened; I shall add, that, according to what I elsewhere relate, I found by
trial purposely made, that a string of Wire, (which you will grant to be a more
solid body than an ordinary Gut-string,) may be without another string brought
to tremble by a determinate Sound made at a distance, which produced but such
an impulse of the Air, as could neither be seen nor felt by the Bystanders,
nor would communicate any sensible motion to the neighboring strings. It Is
true, that in this case the string, in which the trembling was produced, was a
single, long, slender and springy body, fastened at both ends to a stable one;
and therefore it may seem altogether groundless to expect, that any thing like
this effect should be by the same cause produced in bodies that do not appear
so qualified. But, as we elsewhere show, that a certain degree or measure of
tension is in order to this Phenomenon the principal Qualification, without
which all the other would be unavailable; perhaps 'twill not be absurd to
enquire, whether, in bodies of a very differing appearance from strings, the
various Textures, Connexions, and Complications, that Nature or Art, or both,
may make of the parts, may not bring them to a state equivalent to the Tensions
of the strings of Musical Instruments, whereby diverse of the mentioned parts
may be stretched in the manner requisite to dispose them to receive a vibrating
motion from some peculiar Sounds: And whether these trembling parts may not be
numerous enough to affect their neighbors, and make, in the body they belong
to, a tremulous motion discernible, though not by the Eye, yet by some other
sense. This conjecture or inquiry you will, I hope, have the less unfavourable
thoughts of, when you shall have considered the following Experiments.

I remember, that many years ago I found by trial, that, if a somewhat large
and almost hemispherical Glass, though not very thin, were conveniently
placed, a determinate sound, made at a convenient distance from the concave
surface of the Glass, would make it sensibly ring, as a Bell does a while
after it has been struck. But this noise was the effect of a determinate sound;
for, though the voice were raised to a higher tone, or if the sound were made
louder, the same effect would not ensue. I remember also, th^^, some years
after, I observed, that large empty drinkingglasses of fine white metal had
each of them its determinate Tension, or some disposition that was equivalent
as to our purpose. For, causing the strings of a Musical Instrument to be
variously screwed up, and let down, and briskly struck, we found, as I
expected, that the motion of one string, when 'twas stretched to a certain note
or tone, would make one of the Glasses ring, and not the other; nor would the
sound of the same string, tuned to another note, sensibly affect the first
Glass, though perhaps it might have its operation upon another. And this
Circumstance is not, on this occasion, to be omitted, that, after we had found
the tone proper to one of the Glasses, and so tuned the string, that, (I say)
when that was struck, the Glass would resound. Having afterward broken off a
part of the foot of the glass, yet not so much but that it continued to stand
upright, the same sound of the string would no longer be answered by the
Vessel, but we were obliged to alter the tension of the string, to produce the
former effect. The Learned Kircherus, as I have been informed, somewhere
mentions a correspondence between some liquours and some determinate sounds;
which I suppose may be true, though the trial did not succeed with me, perhaps
for want of such accommodations for so nice an Experiment as I could have
wished, but could not procure: But if you can, you will oblige me to make the
trials so as to satisfy your self and me, whether the agitation of the liquour
be caused immediately by the motion of the Air, or be communicated by the
intervention of the tremblings of the Vessel.

An Artist famous for his skill in making Organs, answered me, that, at some
stops of the Organs, some seats in the Church would tremble. But, because I
suspected by his Relation, that the greatness of the sound chiefly effected it,
because, when that Pipe, which they call the open Diapason, sounds, the chair
or seat, on which the Organist sits, and perhaps the neighboring part of the
Organ trembles; I shall add, that I have diverse times observed certain sounds
of an excellent Organ to make not only the seat, I sat on in the Church,
tremble under me, but produce an odd tremulous motion in the upper part of my
Hat, that I could plainly feel with my hands. And that, which makes me apt to
believe that this effect depends upon the determinate tone, rather than upon
the loudness of the sound, is, that I have oftentimes felt, and diligently
observed such a kind of motion in the upper part of my Hat, upon the
pronouncing of some words in ordinary discourse; in which case the effect could
not with probability be referred to the greatness of the Sound, but its
peculiar fitness to communicate such a motion to a body so disposed.

Nor is it only in such small and yielding bodies, as Hats and Strings, that
Sounds that are not boisterous may produce sensible effects, for, if they be
congruous to the Texture of the body they are to work on, they may excite
motions in it, though it be either solid or very bulky: of which I shall here
subjoyn a couple of instances.

An ancient Musician affirmed to me, that, playing on a Base-viol in the
chamber of one of his Scholars, when he came to strike a certain Note on a
particular string, he heard an odd kind of jarring Noise, which he thought at
first had either been casual, or proceeded from some fault in the string; but,
having afterward frequent occasion to play in that same room, he plainly
found, that the Noise, he marvelled at, was made by the tremulous motion of a
Casement of a window, which would be made to tremble by a determinate sound of
a particular string, and not by other Notes, whether higher or lower.

To this first Instance I shall add the second, which, I confess, I was not
forward to believe, till trial had convinced me of the Truth; and I scrupled it
the rather, because, if the reflection of determinate Sounds should appear to
proceed from the peculiar kind of tremulous motion into which the parts of the
resonant body are put, it may incline men to so great a Paradox, as to think,
that such a motion of the Air as our Bodies do not feel, may produce a
trembling in so solid a body as a Stone-wall of a great thickness. The
Experiment or Observation it self I shall give you in the same words I set it
down some hours after I made it, which were these.

Yesterday I went to satisfy my self of the truth of what had been told me by
an ancient Musician, to whom I had been relating what I had observed of the
effects of some determinate Sounds even upon Solid bodies, and of whom I
enquired, if he had met with any thing of the like nature: taking him along
with me, I found, that though the place be but an Arch, yet it would not answer
to all notes indifferently, when we stood in a certain place, but to a
determinate Note, (which he afterward told me was Ce fa ut a little flatted,)
to which note it answered very resonantly, and not sensibly to others, which we
made trial of, whether higher or lower than it; and, (which added to the
strangeness,) when I made him raise his voice to an Eighth, as consonant as
those two Sounds are wont to be in all other cases, the vaulted Arch did not
appear to us affected with the Note. The Musician added, that he had tried in
most Arches all about the City, and could not find such a peculiarity in them,
as being to be made resonant by all Notes or Sounds indifferently that were
strong enough; and also, that as this Arch for this hundred years has been
observed to have this property, so an ancient and experienced Builder informed
him, that any Vault that were exquisitely built, would peculiarly answer to
some determinate Note or other.

CHAP. VIII.
Observat. VII. Men look upon diverse Bodies as having their parts in a state of
absolute Rest, when indeed they are in a Forced state, as of Tension,
Compression, etc.

THis Observation will probably seem paradoxicall. For, when an entire Body,
especially if it be of a solid Consistence, and seem to be of an homogeneous or
uniform matter, appears to be movelesse, we are wont to take it for granted,
that the parts, which that body is made up of, are perfectly at Rest also. But
yet this will scarce be thought a reasonable supposition, if we do but rightly
consider some obvious Phenomenon, which may teach us, that, whilst a whole
Body, or the superficies that includes it, retains its figure, dimensions and
distance from other stable Bodies that are near it, the Corpuscles that compose
it may have various and brisk motions and endeavors among themselves. As, when
a bar of iron or silver, having been well hammered, is newly taken off of the
Anvill; though the Eye can discern no motion in it, yet the touch will readily
perceive it to be very hot, and, if you spit upon it, the brisk agitation of
the insensible parts will become visible in that which they will produce in the
liquour. Besides, when the Lath of a Cross-bow stands bent, though a man do
neither by the Eye nor the Touch perceive any motion in the springy parts, yet
if the string be cut or broken, the sudden and vehement motion of the Lath,
tending to restore it to the figure it had before it was bent, discovers a
springiness; whence we conclude it was before in a state of violent
Compression. And, though the string of a bent Bow do likewise appear to be in a
state of Rest; yet, if you cut it asunder, the newly made extremes will fly
from one another suddenly and forcibly enough to manifest, that they were
before in a violent state of Tension. And on this occasion I could add diverse
Instances taken not only from the works of Art, but those of Nature too, if
they did not belong to another paper: But, one sort of Observations 'twill be
proper to set down in this place; because in those already mentioned, the bow
and string were brought into a violent state by the mere and immediate force of
man. I shall therefore add, that there are diverse bodies, in which, though no
such kind of force appears to have antecedently acted on them, we may yet take
notice of a state of violent Compression or Extension, and a strong endeavor
or tendency of the parts, that to the Eye or the Touch seem at rest, to shrink
or to fly out; and this endeavor may in some Cases be more lasting and more
forcible than one would easily suspect or believe. But examples of this kind
you must not expect that I should give you out of Classick Authors, since in
them it is like you have not met with either an Instance or a Conjecture to this
purpose; but some few things that I tried my self, and some others that I
learnt by Inquiry from some Tradesmen, whom I judged likeliest to inform me, I
shall briefly acquaint you with.

I have sometimes observed my self, and have had the Observation confirmed to
me by the ingeniouser Traders in Glass; That a Glass, that seemed to have been
well baked, or nealed, (as they call it) would sometimes, many days or weeks,
or perhaps months, after it is taken from the fire, crack of its own accord;
which seems for the most part to happen upon the score of the strong, but
unequal, shrinking of the parts of the Glass. And the Glass-men will tell
you, that, if they take their Glasses too hastily from the fire, not allowing
them leisure to cool by degrees, they will be very apt to crack. But I
remember, that, to satisfy some Ingenious men, I devised a way of exhibiting a
much more quick and remarkable Phenomenon of that kind. Having made then, by a
way I elsewhere teach, a flat Lump of metalline Glass, two or three or four
times as thick as an ordinary Drinkingglass, I observed, as I expected, that,
though it had been melted in a very gentle fire, its very fusible nature
needing no other, and though it were removed but very little from the fire, it
was so disposed to shrink upon a small degree of Refrigeration, or rather
abatement of Heat, that, before it was sensibly cold, it would crack with a
noise in so vehement a manner, that, notwithstanding the ponderousness of the
matter; which had been purposely laid upon a Level, parts of a considerable
bulk, weighing perhaps some Drams, would fly, to a not inconsiderable distance
from one another. And this Experiment I took pleasure to make more than once.
And if you will be content with an Instance which, though otherwise much
inferior, may not be unwelcome, for its being easily and readily made; I shall
offer you one that I have often repeated. Take a piece of Copper, (if the Plate
be thick, it is so much the better,) and, having thoroughly brought it to a red
or white Heat among kindled Coals, take it from the fire, and when it begins to
cool a little, hold it over a sheet or two of white Paper, and you will
perceive good store of flakes to fly off, not without some little noise, one
after the other, and sometimes perhaps as far as the farthermost edges of the
paper; which flakes or scales seem by their brittleness and color, to be but
parts of the surface of the metal vitrified by the vehement action of the fire,
and afterward by a too hasty refrigeration shrinking so violently, as to crack
and leap from one another, like the contiguous parts of the string of a Viol or
other Musical Instrument, that breaks by the moisture of the Air. And on this
occasion I shall add, that, having afterward inquired of an expert Artificer,
that made metalline Concaves, about the shrinking of his mixtures of metalls,
he confessed to me, that he usually observed them to shrink upon Refrigeration.
And the like I my self have observed in Iron of a great thickness, and
purposely fitted to a hollow body of metal, which it would not enter when it
was ignited, though it would when 'twas cold. But to show you by a notable
Instance or two, both that Metals may shrink, and that they may do so with a
very considerable force, I shall add, that I found by inquiry, that the lately
mentioned Artificer, after he had made some large Concaves of an unfit mixture
of metals, and having removed them from the fire, had been very careful to
keep the cold Air from them, lest they should cool too hastily, observed yet to
his great loss, that, when they came to be further refrigerated, they would
(perhaps after three hours) crack with a great noise, though this metalline
mixture were perchance harder than Iron, and three or four times as thick as
common Looking-glasses. But the misfortune of another Tradesman afforded me a
yet more considerable Phenomenon. For this excellent Artificer, whom I often
employ, and with whom I was a while since discoursing of these matters,
complained to me, that, having lately cast a kind of Bell-metall upon a very
strong solid Instrument of Iron of a considerable superficial Area, though the
metal were suffered in a warm room to cool, from about eight a clock on
Saturday night till about ten or twelve on Monday morning, and were then (which
is to be noted) considerably hot to the touch; yet it cooled so far, that,
shrinking from the Iron that would not shrink with it, the Bell-metall cracked
in diverse places with noises loud as the Report of a Pistol, though the
metal, he affirmed to me, was an inch and half, or two inches thick. And the
same person showed me a large Cylinder of Iron, about which, for a certain
purpose, a Coat of Bell-metall had been cast some days before, on which
(Bell-metall) there was a crack near one end made by the coldness of the Iron,
though the thickness of the Bell-metall, as near as I could measure it,
exceeded an inch, and (as the Workman affirmed) an inch and a quarter.

Nor is it only in such mixtures as Bell-metall, which, though very hard, may
be very brittle, but even in a metal that is malleable when cold, that the like
Phenomenon may be met with, as I have been assured by another ingenious
Artificer, of whom I inquired, whether he had taken notice of the shrinking of
metalls; who affirmed to me, that, having had occasion to cast about a Cylinder
of Iron a ring or hoop of Brass, he found to his trouble, that, when the metal
began to cool, the parts shrunk from one another so as to leave a gaping crack,
which he was fain to fill up with soulder quite cross the breadth of the ring,
though this were above an inch thick.

I should not, Pyrophilus, have in this Chapter entertained you with more
Experiments of others than of my own, if I had the convenience of living near
Founders of metalls, as the Tradesmen had whose Observations I have rectied,
and whose sincerity in them I had no cause to question. And both their
Experiments and mine seem to teach, that a body may be brought into a state of
Tension, as well by being expanded and stretched by the action of the fire upon
the minute parts, as by the action of an external Agent upon the entire body.
And, to speak more generally, the state of violent Contraction and Compression
may not unfitly be illustrated by a Bow that is bent. For, as the Bow it self
is brought to a state of Compression by the force of the Archer, that bent it;
so by the Elastical force of the bent Bow, the string is brought into a violent
state of Tension, as may be made evident by the cutting off the string in the
middle; for then both the Bow will fly suddenly outward, and the parts of the
string will swiftly and violently shrink from one another. And according to
this Doctrine, the effect of other bodies upon such as are thus brought into,
what men call, a Preternatural state, is not to be judged barely according to
usual measures, but with respect to this latent Disposition of the Patient: as,
for instance, though the string of a Viol not screwed up, will not be hardened
by the vapors that imbue the Air in moist weather; yet a neighboring string
of the same Instrument, though perhaps much stronger, being screwed up, and
thereby stretched, will be so affected with those vapors, as to break with
noise and violence. And so when one part of a piece of Glass is made as hot as
can be, without appearing discolored to the Eye, though a drop or two of cold
water have no effect upon the other part of the same Glass, yet if it touch
the heated part, whose wonted extension (as I have elsewhere proved) is altered
by the fire that vehemently agitates the component particles, the cracking of
the Glass will almost always presently ensue.

If against these Instances it be alleged, that it is possible to assign
another cause of the seemingly spontaneous breaking of the bodies mentioned in
this Chapter, than that which I have proposed, it will not much concern this
Discourse to examine the Allegation; for, whatever the latent Cause of the
Phenomenon may be, the manifest Circumstances of them suffice to show, that
bodies, which, as to sense, are in a natural state of Rest, may be in a violent
one, as of Tension, and may have, either upon the score of the contexture of
the parts among themselves, or upon that of some interfluent subtle matter, or
some other Physical Agent, a strong endeavor to fly off or recede from one
another; and that, in diverse bodies, the cause of this endeavor may act more
vigorously than one would easily believe: and this suffices to serve the turn
of this Discourse. For I presume that a person of your Principles will allow,
that Local Motion must be produced by Local Motion, and consequently, that,
without a very strong, though invisible and unheeded one, such hard and solid
bodies as thick pieces of metal could not be made to crack.

I know not whether I may on this occasion acquaint you with an odd Relation I
had from a very honest and credible, as well as experienced, Artist, whom I,
for those reasons, have several times made choice to deal with about precious
Stones, and other things belonging to the Jewellers and Goldsmiths trades. For,
considering with him one day a large lump of matter, which contained several
Stones that he took for course Agats, and which were joined together by a
Cement, that in most places was harder than most ordinary Stones, I perceived
that there remained diverse pretty large cavities in this Cement, which seemed
to have contained such Stones as those that yet made parts of the lump. Upon
which occasion he affirmed to me, that several of the Stones grew whilst they
were lodged in those cavities. And when I told him, that, though I had been
long of an opinion, that Stones may receive an increment after their first
formation, yet I did not see how any such thing appeared by those we were
looking upon: He gave me in many words an account of his Assertion, which I
reduced to this, that the Stones he spoke of, did, after they were first
formed, really tend to expand themselves by virtue of some Principle of growth,
which he could not intelligibly describe; but that these Stones being lodged in
a Cement extremely hard, and therefore not capable of being forced to give way,
their expansive endeavor was rendered ineffectual, but not destroyed: so that
when afterward these Stones came to be taken out of the Cement wherein they
were bedded, and to whose sides it is like they were not exquisitely congruous,
the comprest Stones, having their sides now no longer wedged in by the harder
Cement, quickly expanded themselves, as if 'twere by an internal and violently
comprest spring, and would presently burst asunder, some into two, and some
into more pieces: of which he presented many to his friends, but yet had
reserved some, whereof he presented me one, that I have yet by me, together
with some of the mass, whose Cement I find to bear a better polish than marble,
and to be very much harder than it. And, in answer to some questions of mine,
he told me, that he had taken up these Stones himself, naming the place to me,
which was not very far off, and that he observed all that he told me himself,
and more than once or twice, and that I needed not suspect, as I seemed to do,
that 'twas the strokes employed to force the Stones out of their Beds, that
made them break. For, besides that many of them, which (it seems) were not
comprest enough, did not break, several of those, that did, were taken out,
without offering them any such violence, as that their bursting could with any
probability be imputed to it.

CHAP. IX.
Observat. VIII. One main cause why such Motions as we speak of are overlooked,
is, That we are scarce wont to take notice but of those motions of Solid
bodies, wherein one whole Body drives away another, or at least knocks visibly
against it, whereas many effects proceed from the intestine motions produced by
the external Agent, in, and among, the parts of the same body.

THis Observation is like to be much more readily understood than granted, and
therefore I shall offer by way of proof the following Experiments.

We caused in a large brass Stopcock the movable part to be nimbly turned to
and fro in the contiguous cavity of that part that was made to receive it, in
that part of the Instrument that is wont to be kept fixed. And though this
motion of the Key were made only by the bare hand, yet in a short time the
mutual attrition of the contiguous parts of the Instrument made so brisk an
agitation in the other parts, that the incalescence made the metal it self to
swell, insomuch that the Key could no more be turned, but remained fixed, as if
it had been wedged in, so that, to make it work as before, it was necessary by
cooling it to make it shrink a little, and so take off the mutual pressure of
the Key, and the other part of the Stop-cock. Nor is this to be looked on as a
casual Experiment; for, besides that it was made more than once, and is very
analogous to some other trials of mine; I found, that a maker of such
Instruments complained to me, that he was several times forced to intermit his
work, and plunge his Instrument in cold water, before he could, by grinding,
adjust the Key to the cavity it ought to fit.

I presume I need not take notice to you, that this Experiment confirms what I
elsewhere mention of the dilatation of metals themselves by Heat, and therefore
I proceed to the next Instance.

This is afforded by the known Experiment of passing one's wetted finger upon
the orifice of a Drinkingglass almost filled with water. For, though the Eye
does not immediately discern any motion, that, by reason of the pressure of the
finger, is made by one part of the glass upon another; yet, That a vibrating
motion is thereby produced, may be argued by the dancing of the water,
especially that which is contiguous to the pressed sides of the glass, by which
it is oftentimes so agitated, that numerous drops are made to leap quite over,
and others are tossed up to a good height into the Air. And that there may be
considerable motions in the sides of the glass, whilst it does not break in
pieces, we may probably guess by this, that, in Drinking-glasses artificially
cut by a spiral line, both I, and others, have often found by trial, that, a
glass being dexterously inverted and shaken, the parts will vibrate up and down
so manifestly, as sometimes to lengthen the glass, by my estimate, a quarter of
an inch or more, and yet, the glass being set again upon its foot, it appeared
that it had not been hereby at all injured.

That two pieces of Iron or Steel, by being strongly rubbed against one
another, will at length acquire a temporary Heat, is not hard to be believed:
but that an edged Tool of hardened Steel should, by having its edge rubbed
against, have a manifest and permanent change made in its Texture, you did not
perhaps suspect; and yet, having had the Curiosity to cause some metals, and
particularly Iron and Steel, to be turned by an excellent Artificer, I learned
partly by his experience, and partly by my own, that the edge of the
Steel-tool, with which he by degrees shaved off the protuberant parts of the
metal, would be so heated and agitated, that, in no long time, if care were not
taken to prevent it, the tool would be brought to look of bluish and yellowish
colors, and, permanently losing its former temper, would become so soft, as to
be useless for its former work, unless it were again artificially hardened:
and therefore, to prevent the trouble of tempering his tools again, this
Artist, from time to time, dipped it, when it began to grow too hot, into a
certain liquour, which he affirms, upon much experience to have a peculiar
fitness for that purpose.

Nor is it always necessary that the body, that makes the parts of an inanimate
body work considerably on one another, should be either very hard, or
impetuously moved. For, I remember, that, having once by me some short bars of
fine Tin, I resolved to try whether, merely with my naked hands, (which you
know are none of the strongest or hardest,)* I could not procure a considerable
internal Commotion among the parts; and accordingly, laying hold on the two
ends of the bar with my two hands, I slowly bent the bar toward me and from me
two or three times, and having by this means broke or cracked it in the midst,
I perceived, as I expected, that the middle parts had considerably heated each
other.

What use may be made of this Experiment in the search of the hidden cause of
Elasticity, would be less properly considered in this place than in another.
But since I have named that Quality, I shall take this rise to intimate, that
if the restitution of a springy body, sorcibly bent, proceed only (as some
Learned Moderns would have it) from the endeavor of the comprest parts
themselves to recover their former state, one may not impertinently take notice
of the Elasticity that Iron, Silver and Brass acquire by hammering, among the
Instances that show what in some cases may be done by a motion wherein the
parts of the same body are, by an almost unheeded force, put to act upon one
another. But if Springiness depend chiefly upon the pervasion of a subtle
matter, as the Cartesians would have it, then the Instances will properly
belong to another Subject.

The foregoing Examples may also suffice to make out (what I am unwilling to
refer to another Head) this subordinate Observation, That men are more usually
than justly prepossessed with an opinion, that nothing considerable is to be
expected from the motion of a body against another, unless the former do make a
manifest percussion or trusion of the latter. But, because this prepossession
especially prevails in cases where the body that is by friction or attrition to
affect the other, is it self soft or yielding, I shall on this occasion add a
few Instances to remove this Prejudice.

An Artist, eminent for grinding of Optical glasses, confessed to me, that
sometimes when he went about to polish his broader glasses, though but upon a
piece of Leather sprinkled with Puttee, that friction did so heat or otherwise
agitate the parts of the glass, as, to his great loss, (...) make it crack from
the edge to the middle; which seemed the more strange, because we fee, what
intense degrees of Heat glasses will endure without cracking, if the fire be
but gradually applied, as this Artist's glasses mus^ have been gradually heated.

But I think it worth inquiry, whether in this case the whole work be performed
by mere Heat, and whether there intervene not a peculiar kind of motion, into
which some bodies are disposed to be put by a peculiar kind of friction, which
seems fitted to produce in manifestly springy bodies, and perhaps in some
others, (of which diverse may be springy that are not commonly taken to be so,)
such a vibrating or reciprocal motion, as may have some notable effects, that
are not wont to be produced by moderate Heats, nor always by intense ones
themselves. The trembling of the parts of a Drinking-glass, and the visible
vibration of the long and great strings of a Base-viol, upon peculiar sounds,
may give some countenance to this conjecture. And that in some bodies there may
be such a tremulous motion produced, by rubbing them upon so soft a thing as
Wool, or upon a piece of Cloth, I tried by this Experiment:

We cast into a hollow Vessel, very smooth within, and of an almost
Hemispherical figure, several ounces of good melted Brimstone, and having
suffered it to cool, and taken it out, the Unequal surface, as had been desired,
came off well polished; then this conveniently shaped lump, which had (if I
well remember) four or five inches in Diameter, being briskly rubbed in the
same line forwards and backwards, upon a Cushion or some such woollen thing, in
a place free from other noises, I could, by holding my ear to it, and
attentively listening, plainly hear a crackling noise made by the agitated
parts, which continued a brisk, and, as I supposed, a vibrating motion for some
time after the friction was ended.

That there may be a considerable Commotion produced among the internal parts
of bodies, by rubbing them even against soft bodies, I have diverse times
observed, by the sulphurous steams that I could smell, if, after having a
little rubbed a lump of good Sulphur upon my Clothes, I presently held it to my
nose. Which brings into my mind, that I have had the like effect from much
harder and closer bodies than Sulphur, when they were rubbed upon bodies that
were so too. For having purposely taken hard Stones cut out of men's Bladders,
and rubbed a couple of them a little against one another, they quickly
afforded, as I expected, a rank smell of stale Urin.

That Diamonds themselves will, by rubbing upon woollen clothes, be made
Electrical, seems to argue, that even Their parts are set a moving: And that
the Commotion reaches to the internal parts, I am the more apt to think,
because I have a Diamond, that, if I rub it well and luckily against my
Clothes, will, for a little while, shine or glimmer in the dark; which is the
same Phenomenon that I elsewhere relate my self to have produced in the King's
larger Diamond, by giving it one brisk stroke with the point of a bodkin, where
the Light that presently appeared in the Gem, seemed not referrable to any
thing so likely as the sudden Commotion made in the internal parts of that
peculiarly constituted Stone.

What a peculiar modification of motion, distinct from its degrees of Impetus,
may do in Fluid bodies, we have formerly in this Essay taken notice of. But
perhaps it may be worth while to enquire, what kinds there are of it, and what
effects they may have in the parts of Solid bodies themselves. For I have
observed, that though those Stones that the Italian Glass-men use are very
hard, and, if I misremember not, have several times afforded me sparks of fire
by Collision; yet, by rubbing them a little one against another, I found, that
such an agitation was made in their parts, as to make them throw out store of
foetid exhalations: And it is possibly to the stony Ingredient that Glass owes
the Quality I have observed in it, and elsewhere mentioned, of emitting
offensive steams. And it is remarkable to our present purpose, that, though so
vehement an agitation of the parts, as is given to Glass by Heat, when it is
made almost red-hot in the fire, does not make it sensibly emit odours; yet
barely by dexterously rubbing two solid pieces of Glass against one another, one
may, in a minute of an hour, make those fixed bodies emit such copious steams
as I found, not only sensibly, but rankly, foetid; though one would think
those stinking exhalations very indisposed to be forced off, since they were
not expelled by the vehement fire, that the Glass long endured in the furnace
where 'twas kept melted.

There are few things that show better, both how the parts of Inorganical
bodies communicate their vibrating motions to one another, and how brisk those
motions are, than that which happens upon the striking of a large Bell with a
Clapper or a Hammer. For though the stroke be immediately made but upon one
part; yet the motion, thereby produced, is propagated to the opposite, and the
successive vibrations of the small parts do, even in so solid and close a body
as Bell-metal, run many times round; as may appear by the durableness of the
ringing noise, which seems plainly to proceed from the circularly successive
vibrations of the parts, which, unless they briskly tremble themselves, can
scarcely be conceived to be fitted to give the Air that tremulous motion, whose
effect on the Ear, when the first and loud noise, made by the percussion, is
past, we call Ringing. And this motion of the parts of the sounding Bell may be
further argued by this, that, if the finger, or some other soft body, be laid
upon it, the sound will be checked or deaded, and much more, if a broad string,
though of a soft substance, be tied about it. And not only an attentive Ear
may often make us guess, that the ringing sound is produced by a motion
propagated circularly in the Bell, but this vibrating motion may sometimes be
also felt by the tremulous motion communicated by the trembling parts of the
Bell to the finger, that is warily applied to it. That this motion passes in a
round, from one side of the Bell to the other, seems manifest by the great
difference of sound, especially in regard of ringing, that may be observed in a
sound Bell, and in a cracked one; where yet all the matter and the former
figure are preserved, only the intireness or continuity, which is necessary to
the circulation (if I may so call it) of the tremulous motion, is at the Crack
stopped or hindered. And that the motion of the parts is very brisk, may be
guessed partly by what has been said already; but much more if that be true,
which, not only is traditionally reported by many, but has been affirmed to me
by several Artificers that deal in Bells, who averred, as an experienced thing,
That if a conveniently sized Bell were bound about, any thing hard, with a
broad string, and then struck with the usual force, that it would otherwise
bear very well; that percussion would break it, giving a disorderly check to
the brisk motion of the parts of the Bell, whereof some happening to be much
more (and otherwise) agitated than others, the force of their motion surmounts
that of their Cohesion, and so produces a Crack.

But, in regard great Bells are not easy to be procured, nor to be managed
when one has access to them, I shall add, that I took the Bell of a large
Watch, or very small Clock made of fine Bell-metall, which had no handle or
other thing put to it, save a little Bodkin or skiver of wood, whose point we
thrust into the hole that is usually left in the middle of the Basis; and this
sharp piece of wood serving for a handle to keep the Bell steady enough, we
placed in the cavity of it, near the edges, (for that Circumstance must not be
omitted,) some black mineral Sand, or, in want of that, some small filings of
Steel or Copper, or some other such minute and solid Powder, which yet must not
be too small, and then striking moderately with the Key against the side of the
Bell, we observed, (as we expected) that, whilst it continued briskly ringing,
it made many of the filings to dance up and down, and sometimes to leap up,
almost like the drops of Water, formerly mentioned to skip, when the brim of
the Glass was circularly pressed by the wetted finger. Which prompts me to add,
that, having put a middlesized drop of water (for in this case the quantity is
a considerable Circumstance) near the lower edge of the Bell, 'twas easy to
make it visibly tremble, and be as it were covered over with little waves, by a
somewhat brisk stroke of the Key on the opposite side. And this effect was more
conspicuous, when a very large drop of water was placed near the edge, on the
unequal side of a hand-Bell, whose Clapper was kept from any where touching the
inside of it. And to obviate their jealousy, that, not having seen the manner
of the abovementioned motion of the Sand, might suspect that 'twas produced by
the impulse which the Bell, as an entire body, received from the percussion
made by the Key, we several times forbear putting-in the filings, till after
the stroke had been given; which satisfied the Spectatours, that the dancing
and leaping of the minute bodies proceeded from the same drisk vibrations of
the small parts of the Bell, which, at the same time striking also the Air,
produced a ringing sound, which might very well, as it did, out-last the
skipping of the filings; the exceedingly minute particles of the Air being much
more easily agitable, than the comparatively gross and heavy Corpuscles of the
Powder. And this success our Experiment had in a Bell, that little exceeded an
inch and half in Diameter.

And here, Pyroph. I shall put an end to this Rhapsody of Observations, hoping,
that, among so many of them, some or other will be able to engage you, if not
to conclude, yet at least to suspect, that such Local motions, as are wont
either to be past-by unobserved, or be thought not worth the observing, may
have a notable operation, though not upon the generality of bodies, yet upon
such as are peculiarly disposed to admit it, and so may have a considerable
share in the production of diverse difficult Phenomenon of nature, that are wont
to be referred to less genuine, as well as less intelligible, Causes.

FINIS.
AN Experimental Discourse Of some UNHEEDED CAUSES OF THE Insalubrity and
Salubrity OF THE AIR, Being a Part of an intended Natural History of AIR.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Richard Davis, Bookseller in Oxford. 1685.

THE Preface.
HAving heretofore had occasion to draw together under certain Heads, diverse
unpublish'd Observations and Experiments of my own, and some of other men, by
way of Memorials for a Natural History of the Air; I thought fit by more
largely treating of two or three of the Subjects distinctly mentioned in my
Scheme of Titles, to give a Semplar or Specimen of what may be done upon the
other Heads of the designed History. Upon this account I treated somewhat
largely of the Salubrity and Insalubrity of the Air, as a Subject, which for
the importance of it to Men's healths and lives, I thought deserved to be
attentively considered, and have its Causes diligently inquired into. And
having observed that among the six principal Causes of the healthfulness or
insalubrity of the Air, namely the Climate, the Soil, the Situation of the
Place, the Seasons of the Year, the reigning winds and Contingencies (whether
more or less frequent) and especially Subterraneal Steams, having I say
observed that among these Causes there was one, viz. the last named, about
which, I thought I could offer something, that I had not met with in the Books
of Physicians that treat of it; I was thereby invited to set down my Thoughts
and Observations by way of Conjectures, which I was made to believe would
appear uncommon, and would not prove useless. These Observations and Reflections
I referred for clearness and distinctions sake to four Propositions. But when I
had gone thorough the three first, and made some progress in the fourth, being
hindered by diverse Avocations to make an end of it, I laid by the whole
Discourse in a place which I thought a safe one, but when afterward I had some
opportunity to dispatch what remained, I found all the diligence I used to
retrieve the entire Manuscript unsuccessfull. At this surprising Accident I
confess I was somewhat troubled; because whatever may be thought of the
discursive part of those Papers, the Historical part contained diverse matters
of Fact, that I did not meet with in Books, nor can now distinctly remember,
and will not perhaps be lighted on by even Physicians, or such Naturalists as
derive their knowledge only from them. It Is upon this consideration, that
having afterward met with many Papers that belonged to most parts of the
unhappy discourse, I thought fit to put them together in the best order I
could, that I might not loose what might give some light to so important a
Subject as the Theory of Diseases. And this course I the rather pitched upon,
because before the Papers about the Salubrity of the Air, I missed two other of
my Manuscripts, whereof the former contained a Cellection of Medicinal things,
and the second a defense of the Mechanical way of Philosophizing about Natural
Things, as it respects Religion. And I remembered that having formerly lost a
Manuscript I was much concerned for, I purposely made a noise of it, whence I
supposed the Plagiary would conclude himself unable to make it pass for his.
And in effect the Book was in a while after privately brought back, so that I
found it laid in a By-place, where I had before as fruitlesly as carefully
sought it.

AN Experimental Discourse Of some Unheeded CAUSES OF THE Insalubrity and
Salubrity OF THE AIR, etc.
THE sixth and last thing upon which the Salubrity and Insalubrity of the Air
depends, is the impregnation it receives from Subterraneal Effluvia. And,
though this be a cause not wont to be much heeded by Physicians themselves; yet
I take it to be oftentimes one of the most considerable in its effects.

The Effluvia that pass into the Air, may be distinguished into several sorts,
according to their respective Natures, as has been elsewhere shown; wherefore I
shall now only take notice of the differences that may be taken from place and
time; upon which account we may consider, that some of them arise from the
Crust (if I may so call it) or more superficial parts of the Earth; and others
have a deeper Original, ascending out of the lower parts, and as it were
Bowels, of the Terraqueous Globe. And to this difference taken from place, I
must add another, perhaps no less considerable, afforded by Time; which
difference relates chiefly to the second sort of Steams newly mentioned.

Of the Subterraneal Effluvia, some are almost constantly or daily sent up into
the Air, and those I therefore call Ordinary Emissions; and others ascend into
the Air but at times, which are not seldom distant enough from one another, and
those I call Extraordinary Emissions; whether they come at stated times, and so
deserve the title of Periodical, or else uncertainly, sometimes with far
greater, sometimes with far smaller intervals, and so may be called fortuitous
or irregular. But, though I thought it might render what I am about to say more
clear, if I made and premised the two foregoing distinctions, yet because in
many cases, Nature does not appear solicitous to observe them, but at the same
time imbues the Air with Steams referable to diverse Members of these
distinctions, I shall several times, though not always, take the liberty to
imitate her, and consider the Effluvia of the Terraqueous Globe, in the more
general Notion, that they are so.

I know it is frequently observed, and usually granted, that Marrish Grounds,
and wet Soils are wont to be unhealthfull, because of the moist and crude
vapors, that the stagnating waters send up too copiously into the Air. And on
the other side, dry Soils are, because of their being such, generally looked
upon as healthy. Nor do I deny, that these Observations do most commonly hold
true; but yet I think, that besides what can be justly ascribed to the moist
vapors, or dry Exhalations, we have been speaking of; in many places the
healthfulness and insalubrity of the Air may be ascribed to other sorts of
Effluvia from the Soil, than those that act merely, or perhaps principally, as
these are either moist or dry.

PROPOSITION I.
TO deliver my Thoughts about this matter somewhat more distinctly, I shall lay
them down in the four ensuing Observations or Propositions, whereof the first
shall be this: It seems probable that in diverse places, the Salubrity or
Insalubrity of the Air considered in the general, may be in good part due to
subterraneal Expirations, especially to those that I lately called Ordinary
Emissions. For in some places the Air is observed to be much more healthy, than
the manifest qualities of it would make one expect: and in diverse of these
Cases I see no Cause to which such a happy Constitution, may more probably be
ascribed, than to friendly Effluvia sent up from the Soil into the Air; which
Particles either by promoting transpiration (that great instrument of health
and recovery;) or by hindering the production, or checking the Activity, of
Morbifick ferments; or by mortifying and disabling some noxious Particles, that
would otherwise infest the Air, or by other ways, that I shall not now stay to
enumerate; may not a little contribute to keep the Bodies of those that live in
that Air, in that regular and desirable state, we call Health. I know indeed
that it is generally thought, and often true, that Mineral Bodies do send up
Exhalations, hurtful not only to Plants, but to Men; but when we mean
Subterraneal things indefinitely, though (Men are wont to look upon them but
slightly under a general confused Notion) we employ a word more comprehensive
than most men are aware of, there being a great variety, as well as multitude
of Bodies, that Nature has lodged in her dark Storehouses under the surface of
the Earth. And of these differing sorts of Bodies, though it is probable that
the greatest part are such whose Effluvia are unhealthfull to Men, yet there
may be others whose Emanations may be friendly to him; I have known it observed
that over some Tin Mines in the Western parts of England, not only Trees, but
far more tender Plants, as Grass, are wont to prosper and flourish, and (if I
much misremember not) I have seen verdent Trees growing just over a vein of
another sort of Mineral, that lay near the surface of the Earth: And it is
likewise observable about those that constantly dig in those Tin-Mines, that
they do not lead a short and sickly life as in many others, but arrive at a
great and vigorous Age. And an Ancient Possessor of some of these Mines being
asked by me, whether amongst the otherwise differing Exhalations that ascended
into the Air, he did not find a difference as to smell bad or good; he
answered, that though most of those visible fumes had a smell that participated
enough of Sulphur or Bitumen to be offensive, yet some others were so far from
being ungrateful, that they were well scented. And on this occasion I
remember, that not long since, a Friend of mine, and another Virtuoso, being
Partners in a chargeable Attempt to discover a Mine, in digging deep for it,
they accidentally broke into a vast Subterraneal Cavern, into which, because
the Diggers would not venture to descend, one of these curious Gentlemen caused
himself to be let down, and there found the Air very temperate and refreshing,
and that he long breathed it with delight, and on the floor, or Soil (which
reached farther than he could discover) he found many and various Minerals most
of them embryonated, or imperfectly formed, and store of a kind of Mineral
Earth, whose smell was fragrant and very pleasant both in his Judgment, and
that of some Ladies. And though, when some of those Minerals were brought to
me, a small lump of this Earth that was among them, had been kept so long in
the Air, as to spend most of its Odoriferous Particles, yet the smell it still
retained, was, though but faint, yet pleasing.

That from Fossiles that lie hid under the surface of the Earth, and have a
considerably large Spread, there may ascend store of wholesome Effluvia into the
Air, seemed to me the more probable by what I noted at my last being in
Ireland, where, being invited by a Brother of mine to pass some time in a
Country house of his, to which there belonged a very large Sheep-walk that
produced short, but excellent Grass; I learned (and was easily persuaded by
some things I took notice of) that this place was justly reputed very
healthful, and this Salubrity of the Air, together with the sweetness of the
Grass, some circumstances invited me to ascribe to this; That the Soil was
sustained by a large tract of Limestone, which I supposed to emit continual
exhalations into the Air; which conjecture will perhaps with the less scruple
be assented to, if I add that it has been long and generally observed, that as
far as the Limestone extends, that tract of ground makes the Snow that falls on
it thaw, or melt much sooner, than it does on the Neighboring Lands.

After I had made this Observation, I mentioned it in discourse to an
inquisitive Person, that had seen and been employed about several Mines; and I
asked him whether he had met with any thing of this kind; to which he answered
me, that in Derbyshire, at a place which he named to me, he and others had
observed, that a large tract of Limestone land was so warm (as they speak) as
to dissolve the Snow that fell on it, very much sooner than another great scope
of Land, which was divided from it but by a glin, where the Soil did not cover
Limestone, but Freestone.

Afterward, discoursing of this Subject with an ingenious Person, that had
visited the Hungarian, and Bohemian Mines; he told me, that during his stay
among the former, he often walked abroad with the Overseer of them, a famous
and experienced Mineralist, who delighted to breathe the fresh morning Air upon
some Hills abounding with Minerals; that his Guide made him observe, that when
they were over a tract of Land that afforded much of that noble Oar (which by a
German Name he called Rot-gulden ertz) he found the smell to be pleasing, and
the Air refreshing. And whereas, in passing over some other Mines, he found
himself molested by offensive fumes; he felt no such effect, when he was upon
that scope of ground under which there lay veins of Cinnabar, or, if you
please, a Mine of Quicksilver Our: And his ancient Guide told him, that next
the Rotgulden ertz before mentioned, the Soil containing these Cinnabarine
veins, was that whose incumbent Air was the most eligible for pleasantness and
Salubrity. And I the less wonder, that in some places the subjacent Fossiles
should impregnate the Air with wholesome Effluvia, because I remember I had the
Curiosity to ride many Miles, (though in the depth of Winter,) to see a scope
of ground that was famous for a good Pottery; where, besides many other Mineral
Earths that I took notice of, there was a Pit or Groove, that reached, if I
mistake not, fifteen or twenty foot beneath the surface of the ground; whence
they dug up a kind of white Clay, so richly impregnated with subtle and noble
parts, that it afforded a Chemist or two of my Acquaintance (for I had my self
no opportunity to distill it) good store of a Subtle Spirit, of a Volatile and
Saline Nature, which upon trial they highly extolled for it is Cordial, and
other Virtues in Physic; and which, by some peculiar Mechanical trials I made
with it, I concluded to abound with a Volatile Salt, not unlike that of Urine
or Hartshorn. And since by this instance we see, that some unsuspected Fossiles
may be enriched with Medicinal and Fugitive Salts and Spirits; it may
reasonably be supposed, that these ascending into the incumbent Air, may highly
conduce to the Salubrity of it. And the Curiosity I have had to examine
Chymically some Boles, and other Bodies, which are wont to be unregardedly
comprised under the confused notion of Earths, makes me suspect, that there may
be far more Species of Salubrious Fossiles than many have yet taken notice of.

But peradventure you will much the more easily admit in general, that
Subterraneal Tracts of great extent may for a very long time send up into the
Air copious Expirations, not discernable by any of oursenses, nor commonly
suspected to be found in that Body, if you please to consider with me (what I
do not remember to have been taken notice of to this purpose) that the common
Air we live in, and breathe, does always abound, and for many Ages has been
impregnated, with the Copious Magnetical Effluvia of the Earth; which our
industrious Gilbert, and after him some learned Jesuits and others, have proved
to be a great, though faint Magnet; and whose emanations, as they constantly
stream through the Air, I have elsewhere by particular Experiments shown to be
capable of passing through the Pores of Glass it self, and acting almost
instantaneously, and yet manifestly, upon Bodies hermetically sealed up in it.
But, though from what has been said it may be inferred, that it is not
improbable the Salubrity of the Air in some places may be chiefly, or at least
in part, due to the wholesome Expirations of Subterraneal Bodies; yet, generally
speaking, the Air is depraved, in far more places than it is improved, by being
impregnated with Mineral Expirations. And indeed, besides that, among the
Minerals known unto us, there are many more that are noxious, than that are
wholesome; the power of the former to do mischief is wont to be far more
efficacious, than that of the latter to do good; as we may guess by the small
benefit men receive in point of health by the Effluvia of any Mineral, or other
Fossile, known unto us, in comparison of the great and sudden mischief that is
often done by the Expirations of Orpiment, Sandarach, and white Arsenick; for,
though that sold in Shops is factitious, being made of Orpiment sublimed with
Salt, yet it is found Natural in some Hungarian, and other Mines. On which
occasion, I remember that the ingenious Person lately mentioned to have with
his Guide taken the Air upon the Hills of that Mineral Country, answered me,
that, when his Guide and he walked over some veins of these noxious Minerals,
he met with several Odorous Steams, which, though differing from one another,
agreed in this, that they were all offensive to him; and particularly, some of
them by their unwelcome sharpness, and others by giving him a troublesome
difficulty of respiration. I will not here urge those sulphurous steams, that
so suddenly deprive Dogs of sense and motion, in the Neapolitan Grotta de Cani;
because there the Exhalations are too much included, and as it were pent up:
But it is very proper to allege for my present purpose the Aorni or Averni,
which are mentioned by good Authors to be found, some in Hungary, and some in
other Countries; for in these places there ascend out of the Earth such noxious
and plentiful exhalations, as kill those Animals that draw in the Air they
infect; and some of them are able to precipitate, even the Birds that fly over
the Caverns that emit them. But there are a multitude of Places, where it is not
so manifest that hurtful exhalations ascend into the Air, and yet they really
do so: There being in many places whole tracts of Land, that near the surface
of the Earth abound with Marchasitical Minerals, as these do with a sharp
vitriolate Salt, which, together with the ill conditioned Sulphur that they
also plentifully contain, ascend into the Air, and render it corrosive. On
which occasion I remember, that for Curiosities sake I took some English
shining Marchasite; and caused a pound of it to be distilled in an Earthen
Vessel with a good fire, by which means, notwithstanding it is dryness, I
obtained two or three spoonfuls of a Limpid Liquor, that smelled very strongly,
like that which the Helmontians call Gas Sulphuris; and which appeared
manifestly to be of an acid Nature, both by the taste, and by it is readily
corroding, and dissolving unbeaten Coral, even in the cold, to mention here no
other Trials that I made with it. And the Mineral afforded me, together with
this Liquor, about an ounce and three quarters of inflammable Sulphur, part
whereof ascending (as may be guessed) in the form of very agile Corpuscles,
these fasten themselves all about to the inside of the Receiver, and there
composed diverse thin Coats, or Films, as 'twere, of Sulphurous matter sticking
to one another; which at their first taking off, and for some time after, might
be bent or folded like leaves of paper, but afterward harden in the Air.
Mineralists, and some other good Authors, mention diverse Places as abounding
with Marchasitical Fossiles, but I am apt to think, they are far more common
than is vulgarly taken notice of; for I have met with them where one would
little expect them. And, though in England all our Vitriol (which is now
plentifully vended into Foreign parts) be made of Vitriolate Stones, or Bodies
that pass for stones; yet that is not true which our Mineralists are wont
thence to conclude, that there is no other Vitriolate or Marchasitical matter
in England: for a famous dealer in Fossiles, having found a Mine, which he knew
not what to make of, and therefore carefully concealed, addressed himself to
me, because, he said, he knew I would not betray or supplant him: and having at
his desire taken a private view of what he had discovered, I presently found it
to be a vein, that lay at some depth under ground, and ran along (how far I
know not) like a vein of Metalline Oar, (and for such upon that account he
mistook it) consisting of a black and heavy stuff, which upon a few easy
trials I quickly found to be of a Vitriolate Nature; insomuch that, somewhat to
my wonder, I was able to make it yield in few hours store of pure Vitriol,
without any troublesome or artificial preparation.

PROPOSITION II.
It is probable that in diverse places some Endemical Diseases do mainly, or at
least in part depend upon Subterraneal Steams.

UNder the name of Endemical Diseases, I do not comprise those only that are
very peculiar to this or that Country; as the Plica is said to be to Poland,
(whence it receives its name of Polonica;) or an odd kind of Colique in one
part of France, (from which it is called la Colique de Poictou;) but also those
that are more rise in some Countries than in most others; such as Agues in
Kent, and in that part of Essex they call the Hundreds; the Consumption (though
that be an ambiguous name) in England, whence Foreign Physicians call it the
Tabes Anglica; and Fluxes of the Belly in Ireland, where they are so rise as
commonly to pass under the name of the Country Disease.

That these Endemical, or (if we may so call them) Topical Distempers, do in
many places proceed from some excessive Heat, Moisture, or other manifest
quality of the Air; from bad Diet, vulgar Intemperance, and other Causes that
have little or no connection with Subterraneal Reeks, I readily grant. But, that
in some places the Endemical Disease may either be principally caused, or much
fomented, by noxious Effluvia, I am inclined to suspect upon the following
grounds.

1. There are some places, in which the Endemical Disease cannot be probably
imputed to any manifest Cause; as he may perceive that shall consider how often
it happens, that the Causes which are assigned of such Diseases, if they were
the true ones, must produce the like Distempers in many other places, where yet
it is notorious that they are not Endemical. 2. That Subterraneal Bodies may
send up copious Steams, of different kinds, into the Air, has been already made
out. 3. It has been also shown, that the Matters that send up these Effluvia,
may be of a large extent. And I remember on this occasion that I have sometimes
observed, and that in more Countries than one, a whole tract of Land that
abounded with Minerals of one kind; and within no great distance, as perhaps a
Mile or a League, another large tract of Land, whose Subterraneal part abounded
with Minerals of a very differing sort. 4. We have also above declared, and
it is highly probable from the nature of the thing it self, that those copious
steams (Saline, Sulphurous, Arsenical, Antimonial, etc.) that impregnate the
Air, may very much conduce to make it hurtful to a humane body, in the way
requisite to produce this or that determinate Disease: as I not long since
related from the Chemist that visited the Hungarian Mines, that in some places
he found the Reeks ascending from them into the Air (though in an elevated
place, and exposed to the Winds) make him as it were Asthmatical, and give him
a troublesome difficulty of Respiration. And here let me add an Observation,
which perhaps will not be thought fit to be slighted by Physicians: namely,
that some parts of the substance of the Air (for I speak not of its Heat,
Coldness, or other such Qualities) do not only affect humane bodies, or at
least many Individuals among them, as they are taken in by Respiration, but as
they outwardly touch the Skin: and the Skin being (as I have elsewhere shown)
full of Pores, and those perhaps of different sizes and figures, those
Corpuscles that get in at them may have their operation, even upon the most
inward parts of the body. To make this more clear and probable, because it is a
thing of importance, I desire these things may be observed.
1. That when I speak of the Air, I do not in this place understand that Air,
which I elsewhere teach to be more strictly and properly so called, and to
consist of springy Particles; but the Air in its more vulgar and laxe
signification, as it signifies the Atmosphere, which abounds with vapors, and
exhalations, and in a word with Corpuscles of all sorts, except the larger sort
of springy ones; and many of them may be so small, and so solid, or so
conveniently shaped, as to get entrance at some of the numerous Orifices of the
minute or miliary Glandules of the Skin, or at other Pores of it. Thus, though
paper be not pervious to the uncompress'd elastical parts of the Air, yet it
may be easily penetrated by other Corpuscles of the Atmosphere: for I remember,
I have for Curiosities sake prepared a dry body, out of a substance belonging
to the Animal Kingdom, which being lapt up in paper, would, without wetting or
discoloring, or any way sensibly altering it, pass in a trice through the
Pores of it in such plenty, as to have not only a visible, but a manifest
operation on bodies placed at some distance from it. And though a bladder
almost full of Air, having its neck well tied, be held near the fire in various
postures, the elastical Air, though rarefied, or attenuated by the heat, will
rather burst the bladder, (as I have more than once found) than get out at the
Pores, yet we have often made a certain substance, belonging to the Mineral
Kingdom, that, if a bladder were wet or moist, (as the Skins of living Men are
wont to be) would readily pervade it, and have a sensible operation, even upon
solid bodies placed within it. This Experiment (that I can repeat when I will)
is therefore the more considerable to our present purpose, because in the
bladder of a dead Animal, the Porosity may be well supposed to be much less
than it was in the Animal when alive; in which state the parts of the humane
body are much more perspirable than one would easily believe, partly because of
the heat that is continually diffused from the heart, and partly because of the
copious steams that are in perpetual motion, and keep the parts warm, moist and
supple: And it is not to be pretermitted in our present instance, that the
bladder of Urine consists not of a single Membrane, and is probably of a
stronger texture, by reason of the subtle salt liquor it is instituted to
contain, than many another Membranes of the body, or the Epidermis. And this is
the first thing I would have noted.

The next is, that, whereas in the Instances newly recited, and some others
that are by and by to be mentioned, the effects were produced when the ambient
Air, impregnated with Mineral Corpuscles, had but a very short time (perhaps
not many minutes) to work upon the bodies exposed to it: In those Countries
that are very subject to Endemical Diseases, the Inhabitants are wont to live
all the year long, and perhaps during their whole life, exposed to the action
of the vitiated Air: and how much a far shorter time will serve, to make the
Corpuscles that rove in the Air, penetrate into bodies of no very close
contexture, may be guessed by the breaking even of the bigger strings of Lutes
and Vials, by the numerous (though invisible) vapors, that get into them in
rainy weather; and much more by the effects of such vapors, when insinuating
themselves in swarms into the Pores of a Rope, they shorten it so forcibly, as
to enable it, by shrinking it self to lift up and keep suspended considerable
weights, as I have elsewhere shown by trials purposely made. These things may
render it probable, that, though in a small compass of time the noxious
Effluvia that rove in the Air, may be too thinly dispersed in it, to insinuate
themselves in any considerable number at the Pores of the Skin; yet, by reason
of the continual contact of the Air, (especially as to the Face, Hands, and
some other parts) which may last day and night for many months, or perhaps
years, there may be opportunity for a considerable number of morbifick
Particles, to insinuate themselves into the cutaneous Pores.

3. And thus having once got entrance, they may by the capillary Vessels that
reach to, or terminate at the Skin, pass on to somewhat larger Vessels; and so
may get into the mass of blood, and by its Circulation be carried to all the
parts of the body; and so be enabled both to deprave the blood, and other
juices themselves, and to gain access to any determinate part of the body,
which their peculiar shapes, figures, etc. qualifies them to produce some
particular Distemper in. This whole Doctrine may be made more probable, by what
experience shows of the virtues of certain Plasters, especially Mercurial ones,
in Distempers that are not at all, or at least are not chiefly Cutaneous; and
(which comes more home to our Argument) of the efficacy of Periaptae, and
Appensa, such as Piony-root, Bloud-stone, Lapis Nephriticus, Quicksilver in a
Quill, a dried Toad in a Cesnet Bag, etc, whereof, though many answer not the
Characters that are wont to be given of them, yet some of them, experience has
convinced me to be of greater efficacy than I expected: And much more activity
may be presumed to be, in diverse noxious Effluvia from Subterraneal Bodies; as
may be gathered from the effects of the Mercurial Girdles, that some unwary
persons wear to cure the Itch; and from what I elsewhere relate of the fits of
the Colicque, often produced in a Friend of mine by the Effluvia of masses of
Loadstone. And this last example may serve for a proof of another part of our
Hypothesis, by showing that Mineral Effluvia, may not only be noxious in a
general way, but may produce this or that determinate Disease. That Arsenical
Appensa, though much extolled by diverse Physicians themselves, and sold dear by
Empyricks, as (if worn near the Heart) wonderful Amulets against the Plague,
have (especially in some persons and circumstances) produced some of the
noxious effects of Arsenical Poisons, and particularly caused in some great
faintness and dispiritedness, I find by the Testimony of diverse eminent
Physicians. To which I shall add a remarkable one, which may probably be
referred partly to this third Observation, as well as to what I lately
delivered about the bad effects of Mineral Exhalations, breathed in with the
Air they vitiated: and I the rather mention this Case, because it is not only
an odd one, but is a considerable Argument to show, that noxious Mineral
Expirations may manifestly produce a determinate Distemper in unlikely parts of
the body. The Observation is this; I knew, and on some occasions employed, a
Chemical Laborant that fansi'd that he could make a rare Medicine out of red
Arsenick, (as some call what others style Sandarach,) which is thought to
differ little from common Orpiment, saving its being much higher colored: this
Laborant then working long and assiduously upon this Mineral, and rubbing it
frequently in a Mortar, came diverse times to me; and complained of a
disaffection he thence contracted in the Organs of Respiration; for which I
gave him something that happened to relieve him; which encouraged him to
complain to me of another Distemper, that, though not so dangerous, did often
very much molest him: which was, that when he was very assiduous in the
preparation of his Sandarach, it would give him great Pains, and (if I
misremember not) some Tumors too, in his Testicles: And this, for ought I
know, happened to him as long as he was earnest about that Process; for the
Medicines that had relieved him in his other Distemper, did not remove this:
and I having occasion to go for a while into the Country, found him gone at my
return. It may strengthen the Conjecture lately proposed, of the possible
insinuation of Effluvia that rove in the Air, at the Pores of the Skin, if I
add that I have had the Curiosity to enquire of more than one Traveller, that
had visited the famous Pico of Tenarif (at whose upper part there are found
scattered parcels of Sulphur, and diverse manifest tokens of a Vulcan) whether
the Sulphurous Steams (that I supposed to be copious near the top of the
Mountain) did not work upon the silver Money they had in their Pockets, and
discolor it: to which he answered that 'twas no uncommon Observation, to find
at men's return from visiting the top of the Hill, that the Money they carried
about them was blackn'd, and that he himself had particularly observed it to be
so: which might easily gain credit with me, who have diverse times made a
preparation of Sulphur, which, even in the cold, sends out exhalations so
penetrant, that, having for trials sake put some pieces of Coin (which ought
not to be Golden) into a Leather Purse; they were able, and that in not very
many minutes, to discolor manifestly the Money, in spite of the interposition
of the Purse that contained it. But I had a more considerable instance of the
efficacy of the Sulphurous Expirations of the Pico of Tenarif, by a sober
Person that is one of the chief Directours of the famous East-India-Company of
London; who, being questioned by me about some circumstances of his Journey to
visit the top of that stupendous Mountain, answered me, that among other
effects the Sulphurous Air had upon him, (who is of a very fine complexion) he
found at his return to the bottom, that his light-colour'd Hair had manifestly
changed color, and was in many places grown forked at the ends. These
Observations may make it probable, that Mineral Exhalations may not only affect
humane Bodies, as they are drawn into the Lungs with the Air they swim in, but
as they insinuate themselves into the Pores of the Skin.

One considerable Objection I foresee may be made, against the Proposition I
have been all this while endeavoring to render probable; namely, that it is
scarce conceivable, that in so many Ages as Endemical Diseases have afflicted
some Countries, the Subterraneal Matter, to which I do in great part impute
some of them, should not be wasted and spent. I might perhaps on this occasion
move a doubt, whether we have had such continued accounts of the temperature of
the Air, of all the Countries where Diseases are now Endemical, as to know that
they have been always so; and that some of those Diseases have not been worn
out here or there, and some others have not of later Ages begun to appear in
this or that place. But contenting my self at present to have hinted this
Question, I shall not stay to discuss it; but proceed to offer three things, by
way of direct answer to the Objection.

1. And first, I think it very possible, that diverse Subterraneal Bodies that
emit Effluvia, may have in them a kind of propagative or self multiplying
power: I will not here examine, whether this proceed from some seminal
Principle, which many Chemists and others ascribe to Metals, and even to
stones, or (which is perhaps more likely) to something analagous to a Firment,
such as in Vegetables enables a little sour dough to extend it self through the
whole Mass; or such, as when an Apple or Pear is bruised in one part, makes the
putrified part by degrees to transmute the sound into it is own likeness; or
else some maturative power, whereby an inanimate Body may gradually admit of
such a change, or acquire such Qualities, as may be in Men's estimate perfective
of it, and perhaps give it a new denomination; as Anana's in the Indies, and
Medlars, and some other fruits here in Europe, do after they are gathered,
acquire (as it were, spontaneously) in process of time, a consistence and
sweetness, and sometimes Color and Odor, and in short such a state as by one
word we call maturity or ripeness: and so some Metalline Ores, and some Mineral
Earths themselves, have been observed by Mineralogists, to acquire in tract of
time such a change, as to afford some Metal or other Body, which either it did
not afford before, or at least did not afford so copiously, or so well
qualified. This I have purposely made out in another Paper: and the Observation
particularly holds as to Niter, which is thought to be the most Catholic
Fossile we have; and to be at least one of those Fossiles, that do the most
plentifully emit Effluvia into the Air.

2. When I consider, that even in those Mines that are accounted deep ones, the
Spades of Men are not wont to reach to the ten thousandth part of the thickness
of the Earth, between its Surface, and its Center, which yet is but its
Semi-diametre; I cannot but confess, that we know very little of the Nature or
Constitution of the lower part of the Terrestrial Globe; since we know little
or nothing experimentally, of what lies beneath that Comparatively very thin
Crust or Scurf, (if I may so call it) that Humane Industry has been hitherto
confined to. And upon this account I do not think it absurd to suspect, that
from the lower Subterraneal Regions there may be, either continually, or
periodically, emitted into the Region of Mines (if I may so call it) great
store, and variety of Mineral Exhalations, which may continually repair the
loss of those, that from time to time ascend out of the Fossile Region (as I
may also call that of Mines) into the Atmosphere. But the things I could
allege to Countenance this Conjecture, must not be insisted on in this place.
Therefore I proceed to consider.

3. That Bodies so heavy, and consequently so abundant in parts of solid matter
crowded together, as Minerals, and other Fossiles are wont to be, may well be
supposed capable, without destructively wasting themselves to emit store of
such minute Particles as Effluvia, for an exceeding long time. This will be
easily granted by him that shall consider the particulars laid together in a
small Tract, that I purposely writ, about the admirable Subtilty of Effluvia.
And 'twill be the more easily believed, if it be considered how long some
Load-stones, severed from their Mine, have been kept in the Air without any
notable, or perhaps so much as sensible diminution of their Virtue. And this
brings into my mind what an eminent Physician, who was skilled in Perfumes,
affirmed to me about the durableness of an Effluviating power, that was not
natural to a Metal, but adventitious, and introduced by Art: for he assured me
that he had a Silver Watch-case, that had been so well perfumed, that though he
usually wore the Watch in his Pocket, it continued to be well scented sixteen
years. The same Person had a way of perfuming factitious Marble quite thorough,
whose grateful Scent he affirmed would last exceedingly; and of this perfumed
Marble he presented me a Ball, which having been some months after gotten from
me by a great Lady, I was disabled from observing the durableness of the
fragrancy.

I might perhaps be thought wanting to my Cause, if, before I dismiss the
Proposition I have been all this while discoursing of, I should not observe,
that Subterraneal Effluvia may contribute to Endemical Diseases, not only as
they vitiate the Air, that Men breathe in, or are immediately touched by; but
as they may impregnate or deprave the Aliments that men feed upon. For first,
they do mingle themselves with the water, which either men drink it self alone,
(as is the Custom with many Nations, and of some men in most Nations; or make
of it their Bear, Ale, or other factitious drinks, prepared of Water and
Barley, Oats, Rice, etc. That diverse Springs, and other Waters are imbued with
Mineral Corpuscles, may be judged by some of the Medicinal Springs: for, though
diverse Acidulae and Thermae afford good store of palpable Sulphur or Salt, yet
all do not; and having purposely examined a famous one, I could with a pair of
nice Scales scarce discover any sensible difference at all between the
Medicinal Water, and the common Water that was to be met with thereabouts. And
that which impregnated this, and which I found by trial on my self, and some
other Bodies, enabled it to work very manifestly like a Mineral Water, was a
sort of Corpuscles so minute and subtle, that if the Bottles were not kept
well stopped, they would in a short time vanish, and leave the Liquor dispirited.
Experience has assured me, that there are ways of making common water violently
and hurtfully operative upon Humane Bodies, though its sensible qualities would
not make one suspect any change in it: but the ill use that bad men may make of
such Liquors, makes me forbear to express my self more clearly: nor is it
necessary that I should add anything to confirm the proposed conjecture, save
what may be inferred from these two Particulars; the first whereof is the
scarce at all sensible change that may be made in water, and some other
Liquors, that are made strongly Emetick by Crocus Metallorum, and by Antimony
vitrify'd without addition: and the second may be taken from those Averni,
whence there continually ascend such pernicious Exhalations, as in some places
intoxicate or kill even the Birds that fly over those poisonous vents; for if
such Exhalations, or even far less deadly ones, should (as they may be
reasonably supposed, sometimes to do) meet with either running or stagnant
Waters in their ascent, there is little doubt to be made, but they will
impregnate them, and make them noxious. And on this occasion we may pertinently
recall to mind, what I have formerly delivered about a place upon the Borders
of Lancashire, where the Water and Mud of a Ditch is so copiously impregnated
with Subterraneal Exhalations, (whether they be bituminous, sulphurous, or of
some unknown kind) that they may easily be fired at the surface of the Water,
or Earth, and made to burn like a Candle, as an ingenious man did at my Request
successfully try.

But there is another account, upon which the Effluvia of the lower parts of
the Earth may have a greater stroke in producing of Endemical Diseases; namely,
as they mingle with the Water, and other Liquors that are necessary to the
nutrition and growth of Plants; and, by depraving those juices, make the
vegetables that are nourished by them unhealthy for the men that eat them, or
make drinks of them: and these noxious Exhalations may be supposed in many
places to impregnate the juices of the Earth, much more copiously than they do
the running or stagnant Waters lately spoken of: because the difficulty of
pervading the Earth in their ascent, may so long check them, as to make them
very numerous in a small space, and perhaps make them convene into Bodies, so
far of a Saline Nature as to be dissoluble either in common Water, or some
other Subterraneal Liquor; by whose help, as by vehicles, they may insinuate
themselves into the roots of Plants, and be thence conveyed to other parts.
Diverse things might be alleged to keep this conjecture from being improbable,
if I had leisure to insist on them: but I I shall now only mention two things
that on this occasion come into my mind: the first whereof is, that enquiring
of a famous Chemist, who lived in a Country abounding with Mines of Vitriol,
whether he did not observe, that the Oaks growing over them were more solid, or
heavy, than those Trees are elsewhere wont to be; he answered me, that he did,
and that the difference was remarkable: The other is, that the parts of some
Minerals, (probably by reason of the smallness and solidity of the Corpuscles
they consist of) are capable of insinuating themselves very plentifully into
the pores of growing Vegetables, without being really subdued by what
Philosophers are pleased to call the Concocting Faculty of the Plant; and,
instead of being assimilated by the Vegetable, they retain their own Mineral
Nature, and upon the recess or evaporation of the juice that served them for a
vehicle, may sometimes discover their being Mineral, even to an unassisted Eye.
For I remember I have seen a piece of a Vine, that grew not far from Paris,
which being broken, I perceived a multitude of the internal Pores of the root,
and, if I mistake not, part of the Trunk also, to be stuff't with Corpuscles of
a Marchasitical Nature; as manifestly appeared by their Color, and their
shining luster, and also by their weight.

There goes a Tradition among learned Men, that the leaves of Vines that grow
in some places of Hungary, whose Mines afford Gold, are as it were gilt on the
lower side, by ascending Exhalations of a Golden Nature: whether this be true
or no, I shall not take upon me to determine: but I remember, that having made
enquiry about the truth of it, of a very ingenious Traveller, whose Curiosity
led him to visit heedfully those famous Mines: he told me, that he did not
remember he had observed what is reported about the Leaves of the Vine: but he
knew very well that at Tockay (a place that affords the famousest Wine of
Hungary, and indeed the best I have drunk) very many of the kernels of the
Grapes would appear guilt over, as it were, with leaf gold. To what has been
already discoursed, may be added, that since men are not wont to feed upon
either Beasts, or Birds of prey, as carnivorous Animals usually are, but upon
such as live upon Grass, or Seeds, or other vegetable substances, and drink
nothing but fair water; the noxious exhalations that make vegetables, and water
unwholesome, may by their means have a very bad influence upon Sheep, Cows,
Deer, Pigeons and other Animals that seed upon such depraved vegetables, and
drink such noxious waters; and consequently may be very hurtful to those men
that feed upon such Animals, and may by the depraved aliment they afford,
determine them to an Endemical Disease, such as that vitiated nutriment is
fitted to produce.

Perhaps it will not seem improper to add on this occasion, that it is possible
that in certain places the latent Minerals may be of such a Nature, as that
their Effluvia may, instead of promoting, hinder the Production of some
particular Disease, whether Epidemical or Endemical in the Bodies of them that
inhabit those Places. For as Physicians observe that the more manifest
morbifick causes of some sicknesses, are quite contrary to those of others, so
I think it not improbable, that there may also be a mutual contrariety, between
those latent morbifick causes, that are sent up by subterraneal Agents. And
therefore it need to be no wonder, if some of these should either disable those
to which they are Hostile, or should at least work in Humane Bodies a great
Indisposition to admit their hurtful Operations, which methinks those
Physicians and Chemists should easily grant, who with a boldness that I do not
applaud, prescribe Amulets, wherein Arsenick, or some other poisonous Drug is
employed, as preservatives from the Plague, against which, I doubt the chief
Succors they afford, proceeds from the Confidence or Fearlesness they give
those that wear them. But to return to our subterraneal Effluvia, since there
are diverse whole Countries, or lesser places, that are either altogether, or in
great part, free from this or that particular Disease; as in several parts of
Scotland from Agues, especially if I mistake not Quartans, are very unfrequent,
insomuch that a learned Physician answered me, that in diverse years practice he
met not with above three or four, and in several large Regions of the
East Indies, notwithstanding the excessive heat of the Climate, the Plague is
very rare: since (I say) these things are so, it seems not altogether
improbable that the subterraneal steaws may contribute to this advantage, by
impregnating both the Air, the Earth, and the Water, with Corpuscles endowed
with Qualities unfriendly to these Diseases, which seems to be somewhat the
more credible, because it has been observed that some vast Tracts of Land will
neither breed nor maintain venomous Creatures, as is undoubtedly believed of
the whole Kingdom of Ireland, where I confess I neither did see any alive, nor
met with any other that did; for as to Spiders, though they breed in that
Country, where I have seen many of them, and sometimes even upon Irish Wood,
yet they are unanimously believed not to be poisonous there: And some Writers
tell us, how truly I know not, of some other Countries, to which they affirm
the like Privilege to belong. But there is one instance afforded us by
Begninus, who traveled much to visit Mines, which if it be strictly true, is
very notable for my present purpose. Dignum admiratione est, says he, quod
quamvis in vicinia Hydriae Comitatus Gloriciensis, ubi reperitur copiose
singulis fere annis Lues pestifera grassatur, illa tamen semper immunis ab hac
manner soleat, idque viri provectae aetatis se observasse and a majoribus suis
accepisse, mihi sancte confirmarunt. To which I should add the Testimony of the
Learned Michael Mayerus, who pronounces Mercury to be an Alexipharmacum against
diverse Diseases, and particularly the Plague, if I did not suspect by his way
of mentioning this last Disease, that he but borrowed his Encomium of Mercury
from Begninus. But however; what has been related, has invited me to consider,
whether there may not be some virtue, as well as some danger, in Amulets of
Quicksilver that are by many extolled against the Plague. But this onley upon
the bye.

PROPOSITION III.
It is Likely, that diverse Epidemical Diseases are in great part produced by
Subterraneal Effluvia.

I Am very well aware, that diverse Diseases that extraordinarily invade great
numbers of people at the same time; (and were therefore, by the Greeks called
Epidemical) may be rationally referred to manifest Intemperatenesses of the Air,
in point of Heat, Cold, Moisture, or some other Obvious Quality. And therefore
the Proposition speaks but of some Epidemical Diseases, and imputes those it
speaks of to Subterraneal Effluvia, not as total, but as partial, and sometimes
as principal, Agents in the production of them.

In favor of the proposed Conjecture thus explained, I shall offer two things
to Consideration.

I. And first, it seems not very improbable, that diverse of those Morbifick
Excesses (especially if they be sudden) that are observed in the Air, may
proceed from the unusually copious ascent of hurtful Exhalations that mingle
with the Air, and diffuse themselves through it. We are greater Strangers than
we commonly take notice of, to the Subterraneat part of the Globe we inhabit:
and if I had leisure, and thought it necessary, I could show, that there are a
great many odd and surprising things to be met with in the Structure and
disposition even of those parts of the Earth, that lie but a little way beneath
the surface of it, and partly have been, and partly may easily enough be,
actually penetrated by the industrious Labors of men. And as for the deeper
Subterraneal Regions, we are so much more unacquainted with them, that we are
scarce fit so much as to conjecture, how far they extend, or what kind of
Materials they contain, and what is the gross, and (if I may so speak) the
Mechanical Fabric of the greater Masses, whether solid or fluid, they consist
of: And least of all can we determine what Motions, whether periodical, or
others, these Masses, or other Portions of deeply lodged Matter, may have.

On such grounds as these, I conceive* it possible, that, among the many and
various Effluviating Bodies, that the terrestrial Globe may conceal in its
Bowels, there may be some, whose reeks ascending plentifully into the Air, may
occasion in it an excess of Heat, Cold, Moisture, thickness, or some other
manifest Quality. So that sometimes (not to say many times) even those manifest
Intemperatenesses of the Air, to which an Epidemical Disease is wont to be
wholly imputed, (though perhaps not very justly) may in part proceed from
Subterraneal Bodies; for I elsewhere show, that these by their Conflicts, or
Mutual Actions on one another, may excite great and sudden Heats, and on that
account send up such copious Steams into the Atmosphere, as may produce there
sudden and excessive Heats, Lightnings, Thunders, etc. And I shall now add
(what perhaps will appear somewhat strange) that I think sudden and
unseasonable Refrigerations of the Air, may proceed from the action of
Subterraneal Bodies upon one another: for Trial purposely made has informed me,
that there are certain Minerals, whereof some may be employed in their crude
Simplicity, and the other requires but a slight Preparation, such as it may
have in the Bowels of the Earth; which Minerals being put together, will
produce by their Reaction an intense degree of Cold, not only as to sense, but
when examined by a sealed Weather-glass.

The Changes of the Air that produce Epidemical Diseases are sometimes so great
and sudden, that they cannot, in my Opinion, with probability be imputed to the
action of the Sun, or the Moon, (which are causes that act in too general, and
too uniform a way, to have those particular and anomalous Effects attributed to
Them;) as probably as they may be to Subterraneal Bodies, that often act with
more suddenness and impetuosity, and without any regularity, at least that is
known to us. The difference we find in Seasons, that bear the same name, and
should be alike in temperature^, is oftentimes very great, and sometimes also
very lasting. It is proverbially said in England, that a Peck of March Dust is
worth a King's Ransom: So unfrequent is dry Weather during that Month, in our
Climate. And yet in some years, and particularly the last, 'twas a rare thing
to have a shower either in March, April, or May, sometimes in the Month last
named, there are Heats greater than in the Dog Days of that same Year; though
usually here in England, diverse Mornings of that Month are cold, and some of
them frosty. And now and then I have observed in the same Months and Days, at
no great distance from one another, that the Weather has been sultry hot, and
has also produced a great Snow. We have seen Summers like that which is
remembered for the Siege of Colchester, that for almost the whole Season, where
more dark and rainy, than several Winters have been observed to be. To which
purpose I remember, that when I was about to write the History of Cold, I was
fain to watch almost a whole Winter to find two or three frosty days, to make
an Experiment or two I had need of, that required not a Cold that was either
lasting or very intense. But Instances of this kind are so obvious, to those
that are at all heedfull Observers, that I may safely pass them by, and
inculcate that the Sun being in the same Signs, at the same Times of the Year,
it does not appear, how He should produce so great a disparity of the
temperature of the Air in Seasons of the same denomination; (as the Winters or
the Summers of differing, and yet perhaps immediately consecutive, Years.) And
therefore I do not so much wonder, that many Learned Writers fly to Astrology
for an account of these irregular Phenomenon, and ascribe them to the
influences of certain Stars; notwithstanding what diverse eminent Philosophers,
and some great Astronomers too, have said to prove the vanity of Judiciary
Astrology.

I shall not now stay to discuss the Question, whether the Stars have any
influence distinct from their Light and Heat: because, my Opinion about it
being somewhat peculiar, I have discoursed of it in a Paper by it self. But
this I shall now say, that the fixed Stars being but general, and (if I may so
speak) indefinite Agents, almost unimaginably remote from us, it is nothing near
so likely that such Effects as (besides that they happen very suddenly and
irregularly) are oftentimes confined to a Town, or some other narrow Compass,
should be produced by certain Stars: as that they should be so by Subterraneal
Bodies, which are near at hand, of very various natures, and subject to many
irregular and differing Motions, commixtures, reactions, and other alterations.
I have known a great Cold in a day or two invade Multitudes in the same City,
with violent, and as to many Persons fatal Symptoms; when I could not judge,
(as others also did not) that the bare coldness of the Air could so suddenly
produce a Disease so Epidemical and hurtful: and it appeared the more
probable, that the cause came from under ground, by reason that it began with a
very troublesome Fog.

That there may be many Subterraneal Bodies, which by their commixtures may
produce a sudden Heat, will be easily granted by those that know, (what I
elsewhere purposely make out) that there are Subterraneal Menstruums; and are
acquainted with Chemical Operations, such as the great effervescence made, when
Oil of Vitriol is put upon filings of Iron, or Spirit of Niter upon Butter of
Antimony; to which I might add many other of the like kind that I have tried,
as when Spirit of Niter is put upon filings, either of Iron, Copper, or Tin, or
upon crude Quicksilver; which I shall content my self to have named, because I
have another Instance that comes closer to our present purpose. For whereas I
have shown above, that there is in many places great store of Marcasitical
matter beneath the surface of the Earth, and sometimes very near it; I shall
now add that I have purposely tried, that putting a little Spirit drawn from
Niter, (with which Salt the Earth in many places abounds) or a little Oil of
Vitriol, upon powdered Marcasites (which being hard Stones are more difficultly
wrought upon, than many other Subterxaneous marcasitical Bodies of a looser
texture) there presently ensued a strong reaction between the Liquid and the
Solid Bodies, whereby was produced much heat, not without visible fumes, and
Strongly Scented, though not visible, Exhalations. And such kind of Odorous
Effluvia were emitted, upon the putting a little Spirit of Salt upon our
Powdered Marcasites. And because Sulphur is a mineral that (either pure, or
copiously mixed with others) is to be plentifully met with in the Bowels of the
Earth, and in many places burns there, I shall add, that I have found acid
Spirit of Sulphur (made the common way) to work sensibly upon marcasitical
matter, hard enough coagulated. An experienced German Chemist relates, that in
some parts of his Country he met with Vitriol Stones, or Marcasites, that, by
the action of mere common Water resting a competent time upon them, will grow
so hot as to enable the Liquor to retain a sensible Heat, when it had passed a
pretty way from them. And, as I elsewhere show, that many Accidents may
occasion the breaking out of Waters, or the change of their course in
Subterraneal Places; So, that common Water may produce in a very short time
considerable degrees of Heat in Mineral Bodies, may appear by mixing with two
or three pounds of fine Powder of common Brimstone a convenient quantity, (for
now I remember not well how much I took) of filings of Iron, for this mixture
being thoroughly drenched with common Water, did in a short time grow intensely
hot, and send up such a thick Smoke as good quicklime is wont to do, whilst
men Slake it with Water.

It is observable to our present purpose, what account was given me by a
Domestic of mine, that lived in the North part of England, of a certain
Mineral Groove which he had often occasion to resort to: for, when I asked
whether the Damp that place was molested with, did frequently recurr; he
answered me, that at the time he was there it would annoy the workmen, (if they
did not take good care of themselves) more than once in one day. And by
Enquiries that I made of others that were conversant in Mines, I learned, that
in diverse places they were molested with Damps, that came not at stated
Periods, but irregularly; sometimes with much greater, and sometimes with far
lesser, Intervals between them: the times of their duration being also not
seldom unequal. So that, supposing such noxious Effluvia to be plentifully
emitted from the lower parts of the Soil, it need be no wonder, that an
Epidemical Disease should be rise in this or that particular Town or part of a
Country, without spreading much farther; and that it should begin suddenly in
places where it was not expected: for, besides that these swarms of Effluvia,
being produced by casual concourses of Circumstances, may oftentimes be
excited, and invade this or that place, without giving the Inhabitants any
warning, besides this, I say, it is not always necessary that these noxious
Effluvia should be generated just under the places they molest, since the
motion of the Air, especially when the Wind sits favorably, may suffice to
carry them to the Town or other place that feels their ill effects: and yet
they may seem to be almost confined to those places; sometimes because the
neighboring places are not inhabited enough to make their ill qualities taken
notice of; but more frequently because, by being diffused thorough a greater
tract of Air, they are more and more dispersed in their passage, and thereby so
diluted (if I may so speak) and weakn'd, as not to be able to do any notorious
mischief.

And here I Consider too, that it is not always necessary that the harm that is
done by these morbid Constitutions of the Air, should proceed only or
precisely from these Subterraneal Exhalations we are speaking of, by virtue
only of their own qualities, which they bring with them from under ground. For
it is very possible, that these Effluvia may be in their own nature either
innocent enough, or at least not considerably hurtful, and yet may become very
noxious, if they chance to find the Air already imbued with certain Corpuscles
fit to associate with them: for, though these sorts of Particles were perhaps
neither of them apart considerably hurtful, yet there may from their
Combinations result Corpuscles, of a new and very morbifick nature.

This may be somewhat illustrated by considering, that the spirituous steams of
Saltpeter are not wont sensibly to work on Gold, nor yet the spirituous Parts
that the Fire raises from Sal-armoniac; and yet when these two sorts of
Particles convene, there results from their Coalitions certain Corpuscles of a
new nature, that compose the Liquor Chemists call Aqua Regis; which by its
fretting quality corrodes and dissolves Gold. By Analogy to this we may
conceive, that sometimes the Subterraneal Effluvia may find the Air already
impregnated with such Corpuscles, that by associating themselves therewith they
may compose Corpuscles far more capable, than themselves were whilst apart, of
having ill Effects upon the Mass of Blood, or some determinate Parts of Humane
Bodies, and consequently of produceing Diseases there.

And this Instance may appear the more apposite; because it may be said, that
as, though Silver and Gold, and Diamonds and Rubies, etc. be put together, and
Aqua Regis be poured upon them, it will leave all the rest uncorroded, and fall
only upon the Gold; so the newly produced Corpuscles that I have been speaking
of, whether breathed in with the Air in Respiration, or carried up and down by
the Blood, or other Liquors of the Body, may pass by other parts of it without
doing them any sensible harm, and attacking this or that determinate part,
produce there some Disease such as the fabric and situation of that part
peculiarly dispose it to be affected with.

And I shall add on this occasion, that in our Hypothesis we may render a
probable reason, why in some Epidemical Diseases, some persons may escape much
better than other, that seem likely to be, at best, as obnoxious to them,
without a recourse to the peculiar Constitutions of the Bodies of differing
Persons; for it may be conjectured, that the noxious Corpuscles that infest the
Air, may (especially in windy weather) be very unequally disperc'd through the
Air, and many fly in far greater or lesser numbers within equal spaces of Air;
and consequently the Persons, that have the ill luck to be in the way of the
more numerous swarms of morbifick Corpuscles, may be much more prejudiced by
them than others, though of weaker constitutions, who happen to be attaqu'd but
by few of them.

On which occasion, I remember, that a great many Trees in some Land that
belongs to me, having been suddenly much endamag'd by a wind, that was not able
to do it by it is bare strength; I had the curiosity to view somewhat heedfully
a Tree that stood in the Garden, and perceived that all the considerable
mischief was done to that side of the Tree, which respected the corner whence
the hurtful Wind blew, the Leaves of the other side continuing fresh and
verdant, as being by the other part of the same Tree fenced from the Wind: and
it was farther observed, that even the exposed side of the Tree was not
everywhere endamag'd; for there were diverse parts, where the Leaves continued
sound and green, though neighboring Leaves were some more, some less (for all
that were prejudiced were not totally) blasted: the sound Leaves and the
discolored being so odly mingled, that I conjectured the cause of the mischief
to have been this; that some Arsenical or other corrosive or poisonous
Exhalations, being suddenly emitted from the Subterraneal parts into the Air,
were by the Wind they chance to meet with there, hurried along with it, and
blown against the Bodies that stood in it is way, moving in the Air, like
Hail-shot discharged out of a Gun, here in a closer, and there in a more
scattering order, so that as more or fewer of them happend to fall upon the
same Branch or Leaf, they left more, or less marks of their passage, by
destroying the texture and color in the Leaves or parts of them they chanced
to beat upon. And this may possibly be the cause of some of those sudden and
sometimes fatal Effects, that I have known in some places the people talk much
of, complaining, that such a one had his Eyes, or his Face, or only one side
of it blasted, by a malignant Wind, of which I thought I saw an Example in a
Domestic of my own, whilst in such a Wind he was riding after me, who (thanks
be to God) had no such mischief done me.

But the Vulgar have entertained such strange Conceits and Stories about these
Blastings, on which account some of them say that Men are Planet-struck that
the fabulous things mingled with those that are possible, have made intelligent
Persons reject them all.

One thing more I shall take notice of in favor of our Hypothesis, which is,
that it well agrees with what has been observed, not without some wonder, of
the very short duration of some Epidemical Diseases, in certain Times and
Places. For this may proceed from hence, either that all the Morbifick
Expirations ascended into the Air almost at once, or at least within a short
time, and so were easily spent, that is by diffusion or dispersion so weakened,
as to be disabled from doing much mischief: or else the Subterraneal Commotion
that produced them may pass on from one place to another, and so cease to
afford the Air incumbent on the first place, the supplies necessary to keep it
impregnated with noxious Exhalations. And it agrees well with this Conjecture,
that sometimes we may observe certain Epidemical Diseases to have as it were a
progressive Motion, and leaving one Town free pass on to another. Of which some
Observations that I have made, incline me to think, that if Physicians would
heedfully mind it, they might take notice of several Instances.

One thing more may be added, as consonant to our Hypothesis; namely, that
sometimes an Epidemical Disease ceases in this or that place, almost as sudden
as it invaded, or at least in a much shorter time than Physicians expected. For
according to our Hypothesis it may well happen, that after one sort of
Exhalations, whose peculiar Qualities make them Morbifick, have depraved the
Air incumbent on a particular place; there may by a new or farther Commotion of
Subterraneal Bodies, be sent up into the Air store of Expirations of another
kind, which meeting with those that formerly impregnated it, may either
precipitate them, and so free the Air from them; or by other operations on
them, and sometimes even by Coalitions with them, so alter their nature as to
disable them from doing any farther mischief.

This I shall illustrate, if not confirm, by that very remarkable Phenomenon
that is yearly observed at Grand Cairo in Egypt; for, (though I know not
whether or no the Corpuscles that produce it arise from under Ground, the
affirmative part of the Question being not improbable) it appears, that by the
intermixture of adventitious Corpuscles, with the formerly Pestilential Air,
it is so altered and corrected, that within one day or two, if not within a
lesser compass of time, there is a stop put to the progress of the Plagues;
that in that favorable time of year, namely about the middle of Summer, scarce
ever misses of raging in that populous City: and, which is more admirable,
these sanative Corpuscles (if I may so call them) operate so powerfully, that
of those that are already seized by that fatallest of Diseases, the Plague, few
or none die of it, after once these Antidotal Particles have sufficiently
impregnated the Air. I confess so great and sudden a change is very wonderful,
and I should scarce think it credible, if I had not had the means and curiosity
to enquire about it of diverse persons, some of them very intelligent, that
either curiously visited, or also made some considerable stay in, that great
City; and found them agree in the main about the truth of the matter of fact;
which is much confirmed to me by so eminent a Testimony as that of the learned
Prosper Alpinus, who for several years practiced Physic in Grand Cairo, and as
an Eyewitness delivers what he relates more authentically, as well as more
particularly, than any I have met with. And, though he endeavors to give
several reasons of this strange and sudden cessation of the malignity of the
Plague, yet I doubt they are not sufficient for so wonderful an effect; unless
we take in some new Exhalations, that then impregnate and correct the Air.

And we shall scarce doubt of the great interest these have in the effect
produced, if we give credit to what the recentest Writer I have met with of
Voyages into Egypt, has lately published about the annual Pestilence at Grand
Cairo, a City he much frequented. This Author, in the account he gives of the
present state of Egypt, relates that a little after the middle of our June (and
usually upon the very seventeenth day) there begin to fall toward the last
quarter of the night, near the morning, certain drops of a kind of Dew, which
causes the River to be fruitful, and purifies the Air from all the Infection
of Camsims, by which I presume he means the Pestilence: for after some lines
interposed he subjoins, The Drops or Dew purifies the Air, for as soon as it
falls the Plague ceases to be mortal, none dies of it; the Air is wholesome,
all Distempers cease, and if any person grows sick, he never dies.

And then, he adds, This Dew gives life to every thing; and when it falls upon
the Wheat, it causes it to continue many years without corruption or Worms,
and is far more nourishing than that Corn on which it never falls. For this
cause they never house the Corn of the Grand Seignior in the Barns, till this
Dew is fallen upon it, that it might keep the longer without Worms.

As well this Conjecture, as some other things delivered here and there in this
Paper (about the Salubrity of the Air,) may probably gain the more credit, if I
here subjoin what I learned by inquiry from a very ingenious Gentleman, who was
owner of one or more of the Mines, that afford the Phenomenon I am to mention.
Which is this, That in the Tin-mine Countries in Devonshire, it sometimes
happens, (as perhaps I may have elsewhere noted to another purpose,) that upon
a sudden, a Spot of ground, and that not always narrow, will be as 'twere
blasted by the ascending hurtful Fumes; insomuch that not only the Grass,
Fern and other more tender Vegetables, will be turned black, and as it were
burnt or scorched up; but now and then Trees also, without excepting Oaks
themselves will be blasted and spoiled by the powerful Operation of these
subtle and poisonous Effluvia.

It will probably be here expected, that among the Epidemical Diseases that our
Hypothesis derives from Subterraneal Effluvia, I should particularly treat of
the cause of Pestilential Fevers, and the Plague it self. But, though some such
Fevers may not improbably be in great part imputed to the noxious Expirations
of the Globe we inhabit; yet, as to the true Plague it self, I freely confess I
am at a loss about it is Origin.

The sacred Writings expressly teach, that some Plagues, and particularly that
which in David's time swept away in three days 70000 Persons, have been in an
extraordinary manner inflicted by God. And to me it appears either scarce
possible, or far more difficult than those that have not attentively enough
considered the matter, are wont to think it; To deduce the abstruce Origin,
strange Symtomes, and other odd Phenomenon of some Plagues that are recorded in
History, from merely Corporeal Causes.

On the other side, it seems unphilosophical, and perhaps rather seems than is
very pious, to recur without an absolute necessity to Supernatural Causes, for
such Effects as do not manifestly exceed the power of Natural ones: though the
particular manner of their being produced, is perchance more than we are yet
able clearly to explicate. And I think it the more questionable, whether all
Plagues are Supernatural Exertions of God's Power and Wrath against the Wicked,
because I observe that Brutes (which are as well incapable of moral Vice, as
moral Virtue) are yet oftentimes subject to Murrains, such as may without
incongruity be looked upon as the Pestilences of Beasts. And it is the less
likely, that these sweeping and contagious Maladies should be always sent for
the punishment of impious men, because I remember to have read in good
Authors, that, as some Plagues destroyed both Men and Beasts, so some other
did peculiarly destroy Brute Animals, of very little consideration or use to
Men, as Cats, etc.

Upon these and the like Reasons I have sometimes suspected, that in the
Controversy about the Origin of the Plague, namely, Whether, it be Natural,
or Supernatural; neither of the contending Parties is altogether in the right:
since it is very possible, that some Pestilences may not break forth, without an
extraordinary, though perhaps not Immediate, interposition of Almighty God,
provoked by the Sins of Men: and yet other Plagues may be produced by a
Tragical concourse of merely Natural Causes.

But though the difficulties that incumber each of the opposite Opinions, keep
me both from Dogmatically asserting, that All Plagues have a Supernatural
Origin; and from denying that Any have it: yet, to say something on such an
occasion, though I can speak but very hesitantly, I shall venture to add, that,
whether or no the true Plague be said to descend to the Earth from a higher
Sphere than that of Nature; yet its Propagation and Effects are (at least for
the most part) carried on mainly by a malignant disposition in the Air; without
which some Plagues could never have been so catching as they were, nor so
suddenly mortal; and that in diverse Pestilences this malignant Disposition in
the Air, may probably be in great part imputed to some kinds of Subterraneal
Expirations, I am prone to think; and that chiefly upon two Accounts.

The first thing that induces me to this Conjecture, is, that not any of the
several Causes to which the Plague is wont to be imputed seems to me to be
sufficient. Those that fetch it from the malevolent aspects and influence of
the Celestial lights, besides that they suppose some things very difficult to
be proved, have recourse to Agents too remote, too general, and too
indeterminate, to be acquiesc'd in as the Causes of such particular Symtomes
and Phenomenon, as oftentimes accompany Pestilences. And as for those other
Sects of Physicians that confidently derive the Plague, some from Internal
Putrefaction, and others from excessive Heats, noisome Stinks, Corrupt
aliments, and such other Celebrated Causes; though each party alleges
plausible Reasons for its own opinion, yet their objections against their
adversaries are much stronger than their arguments are for themselves. And the
Learned Diemer-broeck, though his own Hypothesis seem to be more Theological
than Philosophical, has much enervated the Arguments brought for the several
opinions lately named, and by him dissented from.

The Reasons he employs to refute all the received opinions about the Origin
of the Plague, except his own, are diverse of them worthy of so learned a man;
to whom, though I had leisure to transcribe them, I should refer the Curious:
my present design being only to deliver some few things that seem more
favorable to my Conjectures, than to his Opinion, and were suggested to me,
partly by my own Thoughts, and partly by the informations, that, to examine
those Thoughts, I procured by consulting some uncommon Authors, and asking
Questions of great Travelers and Navigatours. By this means I came to learn,
that diverse great Countries are usually free from the Plague, that according to
the vulgar Hypotheses, ought to be as much subject to it, if not more, than
England, France, Italy, and those other parts of Europe and Asia, where that
fatal Disease rages from time to time in the parched Regions of Africa, to
which the Excessive Heats would make one expect, that the Plagues should make
far more frequent visits than to our temperate European Countries; Leo
Africanus informs us, that some parts are so seldom afflicted with that
dreadful Disease, that it usually spares the Inhabitants 29, or 30 years
together. And he expressly records, that in Numidia it self, (if I much
misremember not the Countrey's name, notwithstanding the raging heat of the
Climate, the Plague is wont to be produced but once in a hundred years. Our
Purchas' s Philgrimage, lib. 6. cap. 13.
Purchase informs us that in the Land of Negro's it is not known at all. And to
omit what some Travelers and Navigatours relate of Japan, as if it were seldom
or never invaded by the Pestilence; I do not remember that in New England,
which contains a great extent of Land, though I have had both Curiosity and
opportunity to inquire after the Diseases of that Country, I ever heard the
English take any notice of the Plague, since their settling there above
threescore and ten years ago. And as for the East Indies, Sir Philibert
Vernatti, a Virtuoso of great fame and authority at Batavia where he resides,
in his ingenious Returns to the Queries sent him by the Royal Society (of
Naturalists) answers thus to the fifteenth. [ Pestis morbus est Indiarum
Incolis incognitus] The Plague is a Disease unknown amongst the Indians. And of
the Countries that lie yet more remote, as the great Empire of China, and the
Kingdoms of Tunquin, and of Cochinchina, that great Traveller Alexander de
Rhodes, who spent 30 years in those parts, affirms, that the Plague is not so
much as spoken of there. And yet the same Jesuit does, upon grounds probable
enough, estimate the number of the people of China alone to be two hundred and
fifty millions; [a number I take to exceed by far that of all the Nations of
Europe.] Now when I consider, how vast Tracts of Land are comprised in those
Countries, some of which the Plague does not at all, and others but exceeding
unfrequently, invade; this Immunity seems to me very unfavourable to most, if
not all, the opinions received among Physicians, as also that of Diemerbroeck
himself who derives the Plague from a Supernatural Cause, the wrath of God
against the sins of men. For in Regions of such extent, and diverse of them very
populous, which are seated under very differing Climats, and which are some of
them inhabited by Nations, that make war with numerous Armies, fight bloody
battles, leave heaps of unbury'd Bodies exposed to the putrefying heat of the
Sun; are sometimes forced, as well as others to live upon very unwonted and
unwholesome foods; that worship stocks and stones, and beasts, and some of them
Devils, whom they know to be such; that are at least as guilty as Europeans, of
Assassinats, Poisonings, Rapes, Oppression, Sodomy, and other crying Sins: in
these Regions, I say, it is not imaginable but that great Intemperatures of the
Air, especially, in point of Heat, Stench of dead Bodies killed in fights,
unwholsomness of Aliments, malevolent aspects of Celestial Bodies, high
provocations of the divine Justice, and in short, all the Causes, to one or
other of which the several parties of Physicians are wont to refer the Plague,
should be wanting any more than in our Europe; and yet the Plague which is
presumed to be the Effect of one or other of those Causes, is not here observed
to be produced.

I know that it may be said, that the Historical things I have been reciting,
do not only oppugn the several received Opinions of Physicians about the cause
of the Plague, but disfavour my Conjectures too. But if this be said, I desire
it may also be considered, that my Judgment about the Plague consists of two
Parts; One, that it is exceeding difficult to assign the true and adequate Cause
of the Origin of the Pestilence; and the Other, that whatever be the Cause of
its First Eruption, its Propagation and diverse of its Symptoms, may be
probably enough referred to the depravation of the Air by Subterraneal Steams,
and their Effects. If this be duly considered the Historical Observations will
appear not to overthrow the First member of our Hypothesis, but rather to
confirm it: and it is upon this account that I have mentioned them in this
place. And as to the Second member it may be said, that since in the East
Indies and the other Countries, I have named, as privileged from this raging
Disease, it is not observed to break out: as it cannot be said that
Subterraneal Effluvia do in those Countries promote the Propagation of it; so
it cannot be proved that they could not do it, incase the Plague were begun by
other Causes. But in regard I think it not improbable that sometimes the Plague
is not only fomented but begun by noxious Expirations of the Terrestrial
Globe, I shall add that this supposition, though I confess it be somewhat
disfavour'd by some of the lately mentioned Observations, yet is not absolutely
inconsistent with them. For First, it may be said that some of the Countries I
speak of, may be destitute of those noxious minerals to which we impute some
Plagues, it holding true in Minerals as well as in Plants. Non omnis fert omnia
tellus, and to omit what I have not without some wonders observed, of the
Limits of differing sorts of Mines and Mineral Veins in very bordering parts of
the same tract of Land, I cannot but here take notice, that though Sulphur be
in many Countries usually found, and that in plenty where there are other
Metalline Veins, insomuch that Chemists make it one of the three Principles of
all Metals, yet in the Mines of England more strictly so called, I do not
remember I ever met with so much as an Ounce of Native Sulphur, and I could not
find by diverse Mineralists, of whom I purposely asked the question that they
had met with any among the various Mines they had frequented. It may also
happen that there may be hurtful Minerals in a Country, and yet not capable
of often producing or promoting Pestilences there, even upon moderate
Earthquakes. For it is possible that these Orpimental or other Noxious Minerals
may have their Beds or Veins lying so deep in the Earth, that they are not
ordinarily able to send up Effluvia, strong and copious enough to make a
Pestilential depravation of the Air, and even in lesser Earthquakes the
commotion or agitation of the ground, especially if the Earthquakes proceed
(as one may suspect that diverse of them do) from the sudden fall of ponderous
Masses in the hollow parts of the Earth and the shakings of the ground thereby
produced, and sometimes spreading far, may not reach so far downwards as much
to affect these very deep Mines, and yet some other more violent Earthquakes,
may affect even these; upon which ground one may give some tolerable account
why the Plague in some parts of Africa has been observed to rage but once in
thirty or once in an hundred years; for there may be periodical Paroxysms, if I
may so call them, or grand and vehement Commotions in Subterraneal Parts,
though men have not yet, for want of sufficient Longevity or Curiosity observed
them. On which occasion, I remember that a late judicious French Historian
recounts that in part of the last age, and part of this, a very pernicious
Disease of the nature of a Colic reigned in France every tenth year for a long
tract of time. And the Experienced Lib. 2. P. M. 323.
Platerus relates, that at Basil, where with great success he practiced Physic
fifty six years, the City was afflicted with furious Plagues once about every
tenth year for seventy years together, of each of which Pestilences he gives a
particular account in his useful observation. It may also farther be said,
that those Exhalations in the East Indies, etc. that would otherwise be
pestiferous, may be corrected by other Expirations that may be either of benign
nature, or of such a nature, as though noxious in themselves, may fit them by
combining with those that would be pestiferous to disable them to be so, as I
elsewhere observed out of Beguinus, that a Country abounding in veins and
masses of Cinnabar, which is the Ore of Quicksilver, was preserved from the
Plague, when the neighboring Regions were wasted by it; and I shall illustrate
this matter somewhat farther by taking notice, that though Corrosive Sublimate
be so mischievous a Mineral Composition, that a few grains may kill a man, yet
the fumes of this combined with those of Crude, common Quicksilver, which are
themselves unwholesome enough, make Mercurius dulcis, which is a mixture so
innocent, that being well prepared, and well administered, it is both safely and
usefully given even to Children.

If what has been said will not suffice, I shall propose another possible way
of accounting for the immunity of some Countries from the Plague. For one may
conceive that in such Regions the Soil, and other assisting Causes may
constantly produce in the Air such a Constitution as is found in the Air of
Egypt, during the time of the increase, and overflowing of Nile, which usually
lasts every year for several weeks, for during this time the Air is so
antipestilential, that not only the Plague does not make a new Eruption; but is
either wonderfully checked or quite suppressed in those houses that it has
already invaded, so that its mortal infection reaches no farther, and that it
may not be thought incredible that some Countries may have, if I may so speak,
an antidotal Nature, in reference to some pernicious Evils, I shall represent
that there are some whole Countries which are privileged from producing Vipers,
Toads, and other venomous Creatures, as is vulgarly known concerning Ireland,
where I could never see any such, nor find by Enquiry of either the Natives, or
English Inhabitants, that they had met with any in that Kingdom, where it is an
uncontrolled tradition, that if Poisonous Creatures have been carefully brought
there from other Parts, they have died almost as soon as they came thither.
There are some other Islands to which a like hostility to venomous Animals is
ascribed: and as it seems not inpossible that some Countries should have a Soil
that so impregnats the Air as to make it suppress or quite enervate many
differing sorts of Poisons, so others may by their Constitution be qualified to
master or resist poisonous Expirations or wandering Corpuscles that elsewhere
are wont to produce the Plague. And this may suffice for the first thing
whereon we ground our Hypothesis.

The Second thing that invited me to the above proposed Suspicion or
Conjecture, is, That it affords a not improbable account of some considerable
things, relating to the Production and Phenomenon of the Plague.

(1.) As First, it is observed that sometimes the Plague breaks out, when there
has not preceded any such immoderate distemper of the Air, or any casual
Enormity capable of producing so great and anomalous an Effect. Nay, which is
more, it has been observed, that very great and unusual intemperatenesses of
the Air have several times happened, and diverse notable and threatening Aspects
of the Stars have been noted by good Writers without being followed by the
Plague. The celebrated De abditis rerum cause. lib. 2. c. 13.
Fernelius relates, that near the time he writ this Observation, that Year,
which of all those that had passed in the memory of Man, was all the World over
the most immoderately hot, and was yet most healthful. And the same Author
reports the Plague to have begun in the midst of Winter, and to have gone off
in Summer, and that several times ardent Summers have been altogether free from
the Plague: which I also have noted to be true. Johannes Morellus observes,
that in his Country after a dry Winter, and wherein the North Wind reigned,
though it were succeeded by a most temperate and healthful Spring, yet this
brought in the Plague, and that, when the North Wind was predominant and the
Air pure and sincere. Which I the less scruple to believe, because I observed
something very like it in the Constitutions of the Air, that preceded and
accompanied the dreadful London Plague that broke out in the year 1665. Which
Phenomenon much disfavour their Opinion that impute the Plague to the excesses
of the manifest Qualities of the Air; but are agreeable to our Hypothesis,
since by what has been formerly delivered, we may gather that Noxious
Subterraneal Fumes may be suddenly, and without any warning belched up into the
Air, and, by depraving it, produce fatal Diseases in many of those that are
constantly surrounded by it, and draw it in, almost every moment, with their
breath.

Of the deadly Hurtfulness of diverse Subterraneal Expirations, at their first
Eruption, there are many Histories extant in approved Authors: And we have
observed Instances of that sort, in the Times and Countries we live in. But,
because all Poisonous, and even mortal, Exhalations are not therefore truly
Pestiferous, but may, like many other Poisons, kill the Persons they
immediately invade, without qualifying them to infect others; I shall add a
Passage out of that Excellent Historian Monsieur de Mezeray who relates in the
life of Philip de Valois, that the Plague that happened in France in the Year
1346. was so contageous and destructive, that scarce a Village, or even a
House, escaped uninfected by it. He adds, that this Pestilence, than which none
had been observed more furious and spreading, began two years before in the
Kingdom of Cathay, by a vapor that was most horribly stinking, which brake out
of the Earth like a kind of Subterraneal fire, consumed and devoured above 200
Leagues of that Country, even to the very Trees and Stones, and infected the
Air in a wonderful manner. From Cathay, says he, it passed into Asia and
Greece, thence into Africa, afterward into Europe, which it ransacked
throughout. Other Instances, of Pestilences begun by noxious Subterraneal
Fumes, I have met with in good Authors; See Diemerbroeck de Peste, lib. 1.
cap. 8.
but cannot now recall the Particulars to mind, and therefore shall pass on to
the second Observation.

(2.) In the next place then; whereas it is noted by diligent Observers, that
there is a wonderful diversity in several Countries, and even in the same
Country at several distant times, of those raging Diseases, that Physicians
agree in calling the Plague, (whence it happens that such Medicines or Methods
of curing as are in one Plague succesfull, as Phlebotomy, Purging, etc. do
oftentimes in another prove dangerous, if not mortal) whereas (I say) this
great variety has been observed in Plagues; it may be fairly accounted for, by
the great number and diversity that has been actually found, or may be
reasonably supposed, in the numerous Minerals, and other Bodies that nature has
laid up in the Subterraneal Regions: especially if we consider, that the
number of such Bodies may be much increased and diversified, by the various
combinations which may be made of them, not only by casualties, but by the
action of Subterraneal Fires, and aestuaries, and menstruums, such as I have
elsewhere shown to be lodged beneath the turf or superficies of the Earth. And
the ascending Corpuscles of those Mineral Bodies, being most of them solid and
subtle, may produce in the Blood; and so in the Body, far more odd, and
violent Symtomes, than the peccant Humors that use to beget ordinary Diseases.
Which may be one reason, and perhaps the chief, why the ancient Heathens, and
Hippocrates himself, acknowledged in Pestilential Diseases (...), somewhat of
Divine, surpassing ordinary Nature.

What these Mineral Substances are, whose steams produce such odd and dismal
Symtomes, I think exceeding hard to determine. Yet, if I were to name one sort,
I should perhaps think the least unlikely to be Orpiment. For, of the Poisonous
Minerals we are acquainted with, I know not any of which there is greater
quantity in the Bowels of the Earth; especially taking that name, in the
latitude allowed it, by those skillful men, that make three sorts of it, viz.
Yellow, Red and White Orpiment, diverse of whose mischievous Effects seem to
agree well enough with the Symtomes of some Plagues, and may be guessed to have
at least a considerable interest in the production of them. But yet, to speak
heartily, I do not think that these Minerals are the causes, even of all those
Pestilences whose efficients may come from under the Ground: For several
reasons, and some drawn from Experience, make me think that the Subterraneal
Regions have many kinds of very mischievous fossiles, of which Physicians, and
even Chemists, have no knowledge, and for which they have not any distinct
names; and that the various associations of these, which Nature may by Fire and
menstruums make under Ground, and perhaps in the Air it self; may very much
increase the number, and variety of hurtful Matters, and also heighten their
hostility to Humane Bodies: as I think may be argued from the factitious White
Arsenick that is commonly sold in Shops, which though usually made of Orpiment,
by the addition of so innocent a Body as common Salt, (which is found in great
plenty under Ground,) is observed to be far more poisonous than Orpiment it
self. And I remember that a skillful Chemist, having in my presence tasted some
prepared, and, as was thought, somewhat corrected Arcenick; was quickly invaded
by such Symtomes, as he thought would presently kill him. But, through God's
blessing, I quickly put him out of danger, though not out of pain, by early
prescribing him store of Oil of sweet Almonds, and something made of Lemmons,
that I chanced to have by me: But to return to what I was saying; Sandarach
seems to be, but Orpiment whose yellow Color is deepn'd to Redness: and native
Arsenick, (for I have seen such a thing, though it rarely comes into England,)
seems to be little other than pale or white Orpiment. And indeed in Hungary,
all three may be found not far from one another in the same Mine; As I learned
by Inquiry from an observing Eyewitness, by whose means, and of another
Chemist, diverse Native Orpimental Minerals (to say nothing of Realgar) because
it is a Factitious combination of Orpiment and Sulphur, came to my hands. And
as this sort of Fossiles comprizes more numerous and various ones, than is
vulgarly noted, so the very noxious effects of the Effluvia of Orpiment, are
not unknown to diverse Physicians: and the Learned Sennertus gives a particular
Senn. M. P. E. vi. p. 65.
instance of it in a Painter, who upon opening a Box where Orpiment, which men
of his Profession use as a Pigment, had been long kept, had his face all
swelled, and was cast into fainting Fits. And as White Arsenick is of a more
piercing and corrosive nature, so it were not difficult to show out of the
Writings of eminent Physicians that its effects have diverse times proved very
hurtful, and sometimes mortal. When but externally worn in Amulets, especially
if the Pores of the Skin were open by exercise and sweat; and the nature of the
Symptoms produced seems to confirm our Hypothesis, since the Persons that wore
these Arsenical Amulets were affected, some with great anxieties about the
Heart, some with inflammation, some with burning Fevers, some with exulceration
of the Breasts, so some with Pussles like those of the Plague, and these were
sometimes black, as if made with a Caustic: most Patients were affected with
great weakness and faintness, etc. as if they had swallowed Poison; and of one
young Man it is recorded, that having heated himself in a Tenniscourt with an
Amulet upon his Breast, the virulence of its Corpuscles made him fall down
stark dead upon the Spot. And it is a considerable Circumstance in these
Observations, that several Patients were cured of the Symptoms that seemed to
be Pestilential ones by the same Remedies that are Alexipharmacal against the
Plague, whence it may also be made probable, that the Plague it self many times
is a natural, though a dreadful and anomalous Disease, since its Effects and
Symptoms so much resemble those of acknowledged Poisons, and have been cured
by Antidotes effectual against other Poisons.

I have not time to mention what I have my self tried and observed about the
bad effects of Orpiment, and its kinds. But I remember, that enquiring of an
ingenious Man, who sometimes visited a Mine which was known to abound with
Orpimental Fossils; he answered me, that when he walked over the neighboring
Grounds, he found himself much disordered, especially in his Thorax by the
Effluvia, and that the Mine-men and Diggers were subject to a malignant
anomalous and dangerous sort of Fevers, though he said he was apt to impute, I
know not how truly, some part of their obnoxiousness to it, to their drinking
too much strong Wine. But though it is probable the Effluvia of Orpimental
Bodies may have a great interest in several Plagues, yet, I strongly suspect
that many others may proceed from the steams of such Subterraneal Bodies as are
not yet distinctly known to us; and possibly have their Effluvia variously
combined, either beneath or above the surface of the Earth. I say above;
because I have several times, and that without heat, combined separately
invisible fumes of differing kinds, into manifestly visible ones in the free
and open Air.

And that the Subterraneal Effluvia may produce effects, and therefore probably
be of natures, very uncommon, irregular, and if I may so speak, extravagant,
may appear in those prodigious Crosses that were seen in our time, viz. in the
Year 1660. in the Kingdom of Naples, after an eruption of the fiery Mountain
Vesuvius: of which Prodigies the Learned Kircherus has given an account in a
particular Diatribe. For these Crosses were seen on Linen Garments, as
Shirtsleeves, Women's Aprons, that had lain open to the Air, and upon the
exposed parts of Sheets; which is the less to be admired, because as Kircher
fairly guesses, the mineral vapors were by the texture that belongs to Linen
[which consists of threads crossing one another for the most part at or near
right Angles] easily determined to run along in almost straight lines, crossing
each other, and consequently to frame Spots resembling some one, and some
another kind of Crosses. These were extremely numerous in several Parts of the
Kingdom of Naples: insomuch that the Jesuit that sent the Relation to Kircher
says that he himself found thirty in one Altarcloth, that fifteen were found
upon the Smock sleeve of a Woman, and that he reckoned eight in a Boy's Band:
also their color and magnitude were very unequal, and their figures
discrepant, as may appear in many Pictures of them drawn by the Relatour: they
would not wash out with simple water, but required Soap; their duration was
also unequal, some lasting ten or fifteen days, and others longer before they
disappeared. And these Crosses were found not only upon Linen Garments exposed
to the Air, but upon some of those (belonging to Altars) that were kept locked
up in Chests (to which possibly they might have access by the Key-holes, or
some unheeded chinck.) To which strange Phenomenon if I had the leisure to add
some others that I have met with in Agricola, and other approved Authors,
whose Relations my memory does not now serve me particularly to cite; I presume
it would appear yet more probable that Subterraneal Effluvia may now and then
be of a very Anomalous nature, and produce strange effects, and among them
variety of Pestiferous ones in the Air.

But, to add this upon the bye: though I fear Physicians will not be able to
discover all the subterraneal Bodies whose Effluvia produce or contribute to
the Plague: yet I do not think it impossible that by diligent observations and
trials, sagacious Men may discover diverse of them; and perhaps Antidotes
against them.

And though the business of this Paper be to treat of the Causes, not the
Remedies of the Plague; yet I love Mankind too well, to suppress on this
occasion an Observation, that, by God's blessing, may in some cases, save the
lives of many. In the late great Plague that swept away so many thousands at
London, there staid in the City an Ingenious Physician, that was bred by the
Learned Diemerbroeck, (whose Book De Peste, I prefer to any I have yet read of
that Disease.) This Doctor (whose name I am sorry I have forgotten) hearing
that I was desirous to receive an account of the Plague from some intelligent
Eyewitness, and having soon after some occasion to pass near the Place in the
Country where I then resided, was pleased to give me a visit, and a rational
account of the main things I desired to know; and when I inquired about his
method of Cure, after he had told me that he had twice had the Plague himself,
whereof he showed me some effects; he added, that after many and various
trials, he perceived that abundance of his Patients died, after the Bubos,
(Carbuncles) or Pestilential Tumors appeared; because upon a little
refrigeration of the Body by the Air, and oftentimes by the very fear that
disheartened the Patient, the Tumors would suddenly subside, and the
Pestilential Matter recoiling upon the Vital Parts, would quickly dispatch the
fatal work. Wherefore he bethought himself of a method, by means of which he
assured me, he had not lost one Patient of very many he treated; if he could
but, as he usually did, by good Alexipharmical, and Cordial Remedies, enable
and excite Nature to expel the peccant Matter into a Tumor; for then he
presently clapped on an appropriated drawing Plaster, which would never suffer
the Tumor to subside; but break it, or make it fit for opening, and thereby
give Nature a convenient vent, at which to discharge the matter that oppressed
her. This Plaster 'twill easily be thought I was desirous to know; and he told
me 'twas a Chemical one, and that 'twas no other than the Magnes Arsenicalis of
Angelus sala, whose description, because the Book wherein it is found, is in few
hands, I have here annexed. If this prove as successful in other Plagues, as it
did to those that used it in that of London; there will be just cause to admire
and praise the benignity of Divine Providence, which in a poisonous Mineral,
that probably does oftentimes concur to produce the Plague, has laid up a
remedy for it.

Emplastrum attractivum Pestilentiale nostrum.
Gummi Sagapeni, Ammoniaci, Galbani an. iii. Terebinthinae coctae, cerae
virginis ana ivss. Magnetis Arsenicalis subtiliter pulverisati ii. radic'
Aronis pulverisat' i. Gummi depurentur cum aceto scyllitico, and ad
consistentiam Emplastri coquantur, and postea ponderentur, deinde cum rebus
aliis fiat Emplastrum lege artis, hoc Emplastro Carbunculus obducatur, quod
paucis horis venenum extrahit.

Praeparatio Magnetis Arsenicalis antea dicti.
Arsenici Chrystallini, sulphuris vitri, antimonii crudi ana, haec tria in
mortario ferreo pulverisentur, in vase fortissimo vitreo, ponantur ad ignem
arenae donec vitrum optime incalcscat, and praedicta solvantur and liquentur
instar picis, quod observabitur quando filum quoddam immittitur in fundum quod
extractum postea instar Terebinthinae trahetur ubi satis coctum erit, postea
remove vitrum ab igne, and ubi refrigeratum est rumpe, and subtiliter
pulverisa, and ad usum serva.

By the same motive (Philanthropy) I am induced to add on this occasion, that
having had some opportunity to oblige an ancient and very experienced
Physician, to whose care was committed a great Pesthouse, where the Contagion
was so strong, that he lost three Physicians that were to be Assistants to him,
and three Surgeons of four that were to be subservient to him; I disir'd to
learn of him, if he counted it not too great a secret, what Antidote he used to
preserve himself from so violent and fatal an Infection. This request he
readily granted, but withal told me, that his method would not seem to me
worth mentioning, if I were one that valued Medicines by their Pompousness, not
their Utility. For, besides ardent Prayers to God, and a very regular Diet, his
constant Antidote was only, to take every Morning fasting a little Sea Salt
dissolved in a few spoonfulls of fair Water; which he made choice of, both
because it kept his Body soluble without purging or weakening it, and for other
Reasons which I must not now stay to set down. I know this Medicine may appear
a despicable one; but yet in my Opinion it ought not to be despised, after such
Experience as I have related has recommended it. For I think it desirable, that
notice be taken of all Remedies, that have been found by good Trials, not bare
Conjectures or uncertain Reports, available against the Plague. For, since
Pestilences, as we have lately noted, are exceeding various in their kinds,
it is very possible, and not unlikely, that their Appropriated Remedies may be
so too. And therefore I would not easily lay aside every Medicine, that this or
that Learned Physician may speak slightly of, or even may declare that he has
found it unsuccessfull against the Plague; since the same Medicine may be
available in a Pestilence of another kind, in which perhaps the Remedies
commended by the Physician we speak of, will be found inefficacious.

This Consideration forbids me to pass by what happened to me in the great
London Plague abovementioned; namely, that a very Learned Physician having
once recommended to me an Herb little noted in England, as a most effectual and
experienced Antidote against the Plague, I caused it to be cultivated in a
Garden (as I still do every year;) and when the Pestilence raged most, having
some of it by me, made up with a little Sugar in the form of a fine green
Conserve, I sent it to two infected Persons, who, by the Divine Benediction on
it, both of them recovered. But having made but those two Trials, I dare not
ground much upon them only; though I usually keep the Plant growing in a
Garden, partly because both the Taste and Color; one or other of which in most
Antidotes is offensive, are in this pleasant; and partly because some little
Experience has invited me to believe the Commendations that I have found given
of it, against the Bitings of venomous Creatures: whereof I remember a notable
Instance is recorded by Petrus Spehrerius of a In Observat. nobil. apud
Schenkium, l. 7. Observe. Med. Tit. de venenis ex animalibus.
Roman, who having with his Staff pierced or crushed a Viper, that he took to
be dead, had so strong a Venom transmitted along the Staff, that the ensuing
Night he had a very great Inflammation in both his Lips, to which superven'd an
exceeding Ardent Fever and strange Tortures; from all which Serianus Pacyonius,
a noted Physician that was called to him, freed him as it were by Miracle, by
the Juice of Goats-rue, or as others call it Galega, that grew copiously in
that Place. It may without disgust be taken somewhat plentifully, (and so it
ought to be) in its entire substance as a Salad; or else one may give its
Conserve, its Syrup, or, which is better, its Juice newly expressed.

(3.) It likewise agrees with our Hypothesis; that sometimes the Plague ceases,
or at least very notably abates of its Infectiousness and Malignity, in far
less time than according to the wonted course of that ravenous Disease,
Physicians did, or rationally could expect. For sometimes it may happen, that,
though the Temperature or Intemperateness of the Air continues the same, the
matter that afforded the Pestiferous Exhalations may be either spent under
ground, or so altered by combination with other subterraneal Bodies, or by some
of those many Accidents that may happen, altogether unknown to us, in those
deep and dark Recesses. And if once the Fountain of these noxious Effluvia be
stopped, so that those that are in the Air cease to be recruited, the Wind and
other causes may in a short time dissipate them, or at least dilute them with
innocent Air, so far, as to keep the Disease they produced from being any thing
near so mischievous as before. And here I consider, that it may several times
happen, that, though the Minerals that emit the hurtful Expirations, remain
where they were under ground, and be not considerably wasted, yet their fatal
Effects may not be lasting, because the Effluvia were generated by the conflict
of two or more of them, which vehemently agitated one another, and sent up
fumes, which ceased to ascend, at least in great plenty, when the Conflict and
Agitation ceased. As, I have tried that by putting good Spirit of Salt upon
Filings of Steel or Iron in a conveniently shaped Glass, there will be made a
great conflict between them, and without the help of external Heat, there will
be sent up into the Air store of visible Fumes of a very Sulphurous Odor, and
easily inflammable, which copious elevation of Fumes will lessen or cease, as
does the tumultuous agitation that produced them. And so likewise, if you pour
Aqua fortis upon a convenient proportion of Salt of Tartar, there will be at
first a great ebullition produced, and, whilst that continues, store of red and
noisome Fumes will be elevated, but will not long outlast the commotion of the
mixture, whose active parts will in no long time combine into a kind of nitrous
Salt, wherein the noxious parts of the Menstruum are as it were pinioned, and
hindered from evaporating or ascending, though really they retain much of their
pristine nature, as I elsewhere show.

It may also happen, that soon after that commotion of subterraneal Matter,
which sent forth pestiferous Exhalations, a more intense degree of subterraneal
Heat, or perhaps the same latent Fire, extending it self farther and farther,
may force up Fumes of another sort, that being of a contrary nature, may be, if
I may so speak, antidotal against the former; and by precipitating them, or
combining with them, may disable them from acting so mischievously as otherwise
they would. To countenance which I shall tell you, that I have sometimes
purposely made Distillations, in which one part of the Matter being, after the
operation ended, put to the other, there will ensue a sudden and manifest
conflict between them, and sometimes an intense degree of Heat. And that
mineral Exhalations, though otherwise not wholesome, may disable pestiferous
Effluvia, may be gathered from what I lately noted about a Country, which
abounding with veins of Cinnabar, was, probably by their expirations, preserved
from the Pestilence. And our Hypothesis will perhaps appear somewhat the more
probable, if we reflect on what I lately mentioned of the sudden check, that is
almost every Summer given to the Plague, which at that time is wont to reign at
Grand Cairo. For since it is generally observed and complained of, that
Morbifick Causes do their work much more effectually than Sanative ones. It
seems very probable that Exhalations ascending from underground into the
Atmosphere, may be capable of producing pestilential Fevers, and the Plague it
self, since those Corpuscles that impregnate the Egyptian Air upon the swelling
of the Nile, are able to put a speedy stop, not only to the contagiousness,
but to the malignity of the Plague, even when it is assisted by the Summer Heat,
which at Grand Cairo is wont to be excessive.

But having insisted perhaps too long on this Egyptian Pestilence, I shall
only add, by way of Illustration of the Conjecture that invited me to mention
it, that the accession even of Expirations that are not themselves wholesome,
may sometimes serve to correct the Air, and put a sudden check to an Epidemical
Disease. For Corpuscles of differing kinds may by their Coalitions acquire new
Qualities, and each sort of them lose some of those they had before: as,
suppose there wandered in the Air a great many Effluvia, which by their
determinate shape and bulk were apt to corrode or irritate the Lungs, or the
Membranes of the Brain, etc. as those of Nitre are to corrode Silver; it may
happen that another sort of Reeks, though in their own nature unwholesome, may,
by associating themselves with the first sort, and composing with them
Curpuscles of new qualities, abolish or much weaken the noxious ones they had
before, in reference to this or that part of the Humane Body. Though the
Spirits of Saltpeter will readily corrode Silver, yet if you add to them (as
for some purposes I am wont to do) about half as much or less of the spirituous
Particles of common Salt, (which yet are corrosive enough, and will fret
asunder the parts of Iron, Copper, Antimony, etc.) there will emerge a Body
that will not at all corrode pure Silver.

PROPOSITION IV.
It Is very probable, that most of the Diseases that even Physicians call New
ones, are caused either chiefly or concurrently by Subterraneal Steams.

THE Product of my first Endeavors to bring credit to the foregoing
Proposition, appearing to have miscarried, when I came to send to the Press the
things I had written about it; that at least what can be preserved of it may
not be lost, I shall substitute in stead of it the following Account.

At the entrance of my Discourse I observed that the Term new Disease was much
abused by the Vulgar, who are wont to give that Title to almost every Fever,
that, in Autumn especially, varies a little in its Symptoms, or other
Circumstances, from the Fevers of the foregoing Year or Season. And therefore I
declared, that by new Diseases I meant only such, whose Symptoms were so
uncommon, that Physicians themselves judged them to deserve that appellation;
Such, for instance, as the Sudor Anglicus or Sweating Sickness; that Disease
which the learned Wierus and others call in Dutch Die Varen; an unheard of
Disease described by Ronseius, that in the Year 1581 invaded and destroyed many
in the Dukedom of Lunenburg; to which many Physicians add the Rickets, and
others generally the Lues Venerea. Having cleared the Terms, I next considered
whether there were really any new Diseases properly so called, and gave some
reasons to suspect that some Diseases, which among Physicians themselves have
passed for New, were extant before in rerum natura, though not in the Country
wherein even the learned judged them to be new. And I intimated, that to
examine this Suspicion thoroughly, it is not safe to acquiesce in the Books of
Physicians only; but it is fit to consult the Writings of Geographers, whether
ancient (among whom I particularly recommended Strabo) or Modern, together with
the Relations of Historians, Navigators and other Travelers. And here I
inquired, without determining any thing, whether the Lues Venerea be, as most
Physicians are wont to suppose a Disease wholly new, or only new to our
European World, and brought hither from some African or other remote Region,
where it may be probably suspected to have long been Endemical.

But taking it for granted, with the generality of Physicians, that some new
Diseases are to be admitted; I advanced to consider some of the Causes, to
which they may be imputed; And to give some reasons, why I do'nt acquiesce in
their Opinion, though very general, that derive them only or chiefly from the
varying influences of the Heavenly Bodies. For the most powerful of those,
namely the Sun and Moon, act in too general and indeterminate a way, to afford
a sufficient account of this affair. And as for the other Lights, the fixed
Stars, besides their being universal and indefinite agents, their scarce
measurable remoteness makes it justly questionable, whether they have any
sensible Operation upon any part of our Bodies, save our Eyes. And, though I
deny not that great intemperateness of the Air, as to the four first Qualities,
as Heat, Cold, Dryness and Moisture, are wont (not over justly) to be called,
may dispose men's Bodies to several great Distempers, and may also be concurrent
causes of those we are speaking of: yet neither can I acquiesce in these, when
I consider how much more frequently they happen, than new Diseases do; and that
their action, though various, is too general and indeterminate to persuade me,
that they can be the adequate causes of effects so rare and anomalous* as
Diseases odd enough to deserve the Title of new.

But now; the Subterranean Region of our Globe, besides that it is always near
us, abounds with variety of noxious Minerals, and probably conceals great
quantities of differing sorts of them, that are yet unknown to us. And A
Discourse of Subterraneal Steams as they affect the Air.
since we have elsewhere proved, that there want not causes in the Bowels of
the Earth, to make great and irregular, and Sometimes sudden Confluxes,
Conflicts, Dissipations, and other considerable Changes, amongst the Materials,
that nature has plentifully treasured up in those her secret Magazins. And
since, in making out the three former Propositions, we have manifested, that
the Subterraneal parts of the Globe we inhabit, may plentifully send up Noxious
Effluvia of several kinds into the Air; it ought not to seem improbable that
among this Emergent variety of Exotic and hurtful Steams, some may be found
capable to disaffect Humane Bodies, after a very uncommon way, and thereby to
produce new Diseases; whose duration may be greater or smaller, according to
the lastingness of those Subterraneal causes, that produce them. On which
account it need be no wonder, that some new Diseases have but a short duration,
and vanish not long after, there appearing the Source or Fomes of the Morbifick
Effluvia, being soon destroyed, or spent: whereas some others may continue
longer upon the Stage, as having under ground more settled and durable causes
to maintain them. Which last part of the Observation may be illustrated by what
happened in Calabria; which Province, though it have been observed to have
acquired, within these two or three ages, the faculty of producing Manna upon
certain Trees C. Magnenus de Manna, cap. 9. Dic amabo, Altomari, cur ante
trecentos annos nullum Manna fuit in Oenotria; jam certe aderant Pagi ibidem
urbesque vicinae neque fefellisset curiosam Incolarum solertiam. etc. 15. ante
240. annos nullum Mannae Calabreasis in Autoribus vestigium est.
; yet this great change, though sudden enough, had it seems such stable causes,
as well as of great extent, that it has lasted several scores of years, and
continues in that Country to this day.

I am not ignorant that the whole Doctrine propounded in the four Propositions
about the Insalubrity of the Air, is not at all comfortable either to Patients
or Physicians: But important Theories deserved to be inquired into, and, if
true, to be delivered though we could wish they were untrue. And judicious men
rather thank than blame those that have given us account of latent or
unsuspected, though perhaps irremediable causes of Diseases and of death; or
have recorded the Histories of some Poisons, whereof the true Antidotes are yet
unknown. Uncommon Notions about Diseases may serve to enlarge the Physicians
mind and excite his attention and curiosity: and, besides that they may keep
him from too obstinately persisting in the use of received Medicines, though
unsuccessfull, upon a Supposition that the Disease can have no other causes,
than those wont to be assigned it by Classick Authors: besides this, I say; I
do not despair, but that either the sagacity or fortune of this inquisitive
age, or at least of Posterity, may by the blessing of God be happy enough to
find proper Remedies, even for those Diseases that proceed from Subterranean
Effluvia, when once by proper Signs they shall be distinctly discovered; (Of
which power of appropriated Remedies) I have known some Instances, as to the
very bad Symptoms produced by Antimonial and some other Mineral Fumes.

Some of the Points discoursed of under the fourth Proposition, were of
affinity enough to Paradoxes to have need of being illustrated or confirmed by
Observations and Experiments. And therefore having accidentally retrieved some
of this last named sort, I shall venture to subjoin them as a Specimen, though
without Transitions or Applications, but just as I found them thrown together,
in one loose sheet, wherein I lighted on them. But it is time to conclude with
the recital of the promised Experiments. Which I would immediately do, but that
I hold it fit to premise, by way of Introduction to them, that I hope the
Things hitherto discoursed will appear much the more probable, if we shall
prove by Experiments, that which seems much less likely than any thing we have
above delivered; namely, that Metals completely formed and malleable may be
elevated into the Air, and that perhaps without any great violence of Fire, in
the form of Exhalations and Vapors; the singly invisible Corpuscles still
retaining their Metalline nature. This at least, as to some Metals, I have
endeavored to prove in another Tract, [entitl'd a Paradox about the Fuel of
Flames.] But because that Discourse was never published I will here set down
two or three Experiments, (not mentioned, that I remember in it.) Which I do,
the more willingly, because it may be a Thing of no small moment in Physic, if
it be shown that Fixed and solid Bodies, such as Metals are, may by art be
reduced into such minute Corpuscles, that without loosing their nature and all
their Properties, they may become parts of Fumes, or perhaps of invisible
Vapors, or even of Flame it self.

Particulars belonging to the IVth Proposition.
EXPER. I.
WE took three Parts or Pounds of Dantsic Vitriol (which is blew and somewhat
partakes of Copper) and two Parts or Pounds of good Sea Salt; these being very
well powdered and mixed were distilled with a strong naked Fire, to force out
all that could be driven over: and by this means we not only obtained a Spirit
of Salt of a manifestly bluish Color, but there ascended also a considerable
quantity of Powder, which being shaken with the Liquor, settled at the bottom
of it in the form of a Powder, which was judged to consist of Corpuscles of a
Cupreous nature, and perhaps also of some of a Martial nature. But I unhappily
neglected the opportunity of examining this Powder, which came up in quantity
enough to have served for various Trials.

EXPER. II.
By substituting English Vitriol (which is green, and is much more abundant in
Iron than that of Dantsic,) and proceeding in other respects as in the former
Process, we obtained a very yellow Spirit, with a considerable quantity of a
yellowish Powder, that was guessed to be a kind of Crocus Martis.

EXPER. III.
We took very thin Plates of Copper, and cast them into a Retort, upon an equal
or a double weight (for we did not always use the same) of good Mercury
Sublimate; and luting on the Receiver, gave a Fire by degrees for several
hours: by which means we usually obtained some running Mercury, (which seemed
to be very well purified and was perhaps also impregnated) together with some
Sublimate that had not fastened upon the Copper. And at the bottom of the
Retort we had good store of a ponderous and brittle substance, that did not
look at all like a Metal, but rather like something of a Gummous or Resinous
nature, being also fusible and inflammable almost like sealing Wax. This,
having not opportunity to prosecute the Experiment at home, I put into the
hands of an industrious Physician, that was earnest with me to impart to him
the Process, and let Him pursue it for me. He according to my direction exposed
this Metalline Rosin (if I may so call it) grossly beaten to the free Air,
where it did, according to Expectation, in a short time change Color, and turn
to a kind of Verdegreece: which being dissolved in good Spirit of Salt gave a
Solution of a very lovely green Color. This being slowly distilled ad
Siccitatem, yielded but a very weak and phlegmatic Liquour; and the Caput
Mortuum was again dissolved in fresh Spirit, and the Menstruum abstracted as
before. This was done several times, till the matter was so impregnated, that
the Menstruum being drawn off from it, came over as strong almost as when it
was put on. This done, the thus impregnated Verdegreece was diligently mingled
with Tripoly, or some such insipid and fixed additament, and distilled with a
strong Fire; by which means it afforded good store of a Liquour Colorless like
common Water: which made the Physician suppose the Experiment had miscarried,
till I having dropped into it a Colorless Liquor, namely Spirit of Hartshorn or
of Sal-armoniac; He was much and delightfully surpised, to find it presently
disclose a deep and lovely blew Color. What afterward became of this odd
Spirit, I need not here declare; what has been said being sufficient, to show
that Corpuscles of Copper may be elevated in the form of Exhalations both
transparent and Colorless. The next following Experiment though in part
mentioned by some Chemist is here subjoined, because it is necessary and applied
to a particular purpose.

EXPER. IV.
If from good* Cornish Tin you warily distill an equal or double weight of
Venetian Sublimate, into a very large Receiver very well luted on to the
Retort, you will obtain a spirituous Liquor, which as soon as the free Air
comes to touch it, will send up abundance of white Exhalations in the form of a
thick Smoke, which will continue to be emitted much longer than one would
imagine. But that which I desire to have particularly observed in this
Experiment is, that though this Liquor be thus apt to emit Smoke, not only
plentifully, but as one would think with Violence, yet I found by Trial, that
even when I put it into a Vessel not strait mouthed, if I did but lay a piece
of a single leaf of Paper flatwise upon the Orifice of the Glass, so as to
cover it all, the visible production of the Fumes would presently cease; and
the Liquor would lie like common Water, as long as the Paper lay, though but
lightly upon the Glass; though upon the Removal of that, the Liquor would send
up plentiful Fumes as before, which seems to argue, that some Metalline
Substances may, by the contact of the Air, have their Copious ascension into
the Atmosphere very much helped and promoted, as if the Air had Saline or other
sort of Particles in it, that are in reference to some Mineral Bodies of a very
volatilizing nature. The way by which I have diverse times elevated the Fixedst
of* Metals, Gold it self, I have delivered in another Paper, and shall not here
repeat it. But I shall now set down an Experiment that when it is carefully
made, is easy to be performed, and yet affords a notable and sensible Proof,
that the Corpuscles of a Metal may be made to ascend, and that plentifully,
even with a very moderate Heat, under the form of ordinary Fumes or Smoke. To
effect this I devised the following Experiment.

We took Copper and dissolved it in good Aqua fortis, till the Menstruum was
Satiated with it, in the strong Solution we steeped a while some brown or other
porous Paper, that being fitter than the finer, to soak up the Menstruum; then
slowly evaporating the superfluous moisture, we put a quantity of this
imperfectly dried Paper upon the Hearth, at such a distance from a Fire of
actually flaming Wood that the Paper was not kindled, but yet was so scorched,
as to afford very plentiful Fumes: these looked like ordinary Smoke, whilst
they moved through the Air, and would questionless have mingled with it, and
been dispersed through it, if the Body that emitted them had not been purposely
placed for a future design. But when the motion of the Air toward the Flame
had carried these Fumes to it, the Metalline Smoke did, as I expected, disclose
its nature; for being actually kindled, it tinged the Flame of a lovely Color,
for the most part Blew, and sometimes Green, as it happened to be variously
mixed with the Flame and Smoke of the Wood.

THE END.
A Short Supplement TO THE ESSAY OF THE GREAT EFFECTS OF Even Languid and
Vnheeded LOCAL MOTION.
THAT I may not be altogether wanting to the Expectation that may have been
raised, by a Passage in the Advertisement prefixed to the foregoing Essay; I
shall here subjoin some Particulars, which perhaps will not be unwelcome to the
Readers, that occurred to my remembrance, whilst I was, with a transient Eye,
reviewing the Heads of the past Discourse. But these Paralipomena or
Supplements will be but few, not only because of my want of leisure to review
the Tract they belong to deliberately, but also because some Instances, that
might be here subjoined, may be more opportunely brought in in other Papers.

To the IIId. Chapter.
THAT the Motion of the Air that accompanies Sounds may be propagated to great
Distances, and yet make considerable Impressions on the Bodies it finds there,
disposed to admit its Action, may be notably confirmed, by a Phenomenon I have
met with, in the learned Mathematician Borellus, who relates it upon his own
knowledge, and not undeservedly magnifies it: which I shall therefore recite in
his own Words. Borel. de vi Percussionis. Prop. CXI.
Aderam ( says he) Tauromenii Siciliae, quando Aetna mons eruptionem quandam
effecerat prope Ennam, urbem fere 30. Milliaria a Tauromenio distantem, tunc
vicibus interpolatis eruptiones ingentes ignis vorago efficiebat, grandi sono
and strepitu, and tunc omnia Tauromenii aedificia, tremore concutiebantur, in
quo Circumstantiam notatu dignissimam observavi: scilicet, quod domus and
aedificia quae direct exposita erant prospectui ejusdem voraginis,
vehementissime concutiebantur; reliquae vero domus, quae conspectu voraginis
privabantur, satis lent and leniter tremorem efficiebant. Upon which matter of
fact he thus argues: Profecto, si hujusmodi tremor factus fuisset a concussione
and resilitione soli Tauromenitani, omnes domus aeque concussae fuissent, and
aequali tremore agitatae, ita ut non possit conspectus voraginis tam insignem
and evidentem inaequalitatem tremoris procreare; igitur necessario a tremore
ejusdem aeris incusso in parietibus domorum libere percussiones excipientum,
agitatio illa efficiebatur. Videas hinc, ( infers he) quanta soni ad 30
milliarium distantiam efficacia sit.

To the Vth. Chapter.
THAT Motion may be propagated far, through Bodies of differing Natures, may be
inferred from what is mentioned in this Chapter, especially about Earthquakes.
But because it may reasonably be suspected, that the Active Matter which
produces those stupendous Motions, is dispersed into diverse Places, and may be
of considerable Extent, I shall here subjoin, out of the Eloquent Famianus
Strada, an Instance, which is much the most memorable to my purpose that I
remember to have met with in History; to manifest to how great an extent a
Motion excited in a very narrow compass, perhaps but a very few fathom square,
may be propagated through differing Mediums, and one of them as solid as Earth.
This famous Historian then, having described a stupendous Work, that had been
with great skill and care made by the Prince of Parma, to keep the City of
Antwerp, which he closely besieged, from being relieved by the River Scheldt
(which, though not broad, is deep) proceeds to relate, that an Engineer, who
was a great Master in his Art, having undertaken to destroy this great Work
with a Vessel (which I think we may call a Floating Mine) fraught with
Gunpowder, Fireworks, etc. performed it with so tragical a success, that some
Spanish Officers that were present, reckoned 800. to have been killed outright,
besides a great number that were wounded and maimed. But that Part of the
Narrative which comes home to our present purpose, is delivered in these Words.

On a sudden the fatal Famian. Strad. de Bello Belg. Dec. 2. lib. 6, vel 7.
Ship burst, with such a horrid crash, as if the very Sky had rent asunder,
Heaven and Earth had charged one another, and the whole Machine of the Earth it
self had quaked. For the Storm of Stones, Chains and Bullets being cast out
with Thunder and Lightning, there followed such a Slaughter, as no man, but
that actually it happened, could have imagined. The Castle on which the
Internal Ship fell, the Pile-work of the Bridge to St. Mary's Fort, that part
of the Naval Bridge next the Castle, Soldiers, Mariners, Commanders, a great
number of Cannons, Armor and Arms; all these this furious Whirlwind swept away
together, tossed in the Air, and dispersed as Wind does Leaves of Trees. The
Scheldt prodigiously gaping was first seen to discover its bottom, then
swelling above the Banks, was even with the Rampires, and overflowed St. Mary's
Fort above a foot. The motion of the panting Earth N. B. extended its force and
fear above nine Miles. [If he means the Miles of that Country, or Dutch
Leagues, they amount to 36 English Miles.] There were found Stones, and that
very great ones, as Grave-stones, and the like, a Mile off the River, struck
into the Ground, in some places four Palms.

To the VIth. Chapter.
Observation I.
WHAT is delivered in this Chapter about the Operation of Sounds and Animals,
particularly that which is mentioned ( Page 72.) about the Effect of Music
upon Serpents at Grand Cairo, may be not only confirmed but exceeded, by a
strange Relation that I had from a Person of unsuspected Credit* Which
Narrative having appeared to me so considerable, as well to deserve a place
among my Adversaria, I shall subjoin that part of it which concerns our present
Subject, in the words wherein I find it set down.

Sir J. C. a very candid and judicious Traveller, favoring me yesterday with a
visit, told me among other remarkable things relating to the East Indies,
(which Countries He had curiously visited) that He with diverse European
Merchants had seen, (and that if I mistake not, several times) an Indian, who
by many was thought to be a Magician, that kept tame Serpents of a great bulk.
And that when the Owner of them played upon a Musical Instrument, these Serpents
would raise themselves upright into the Air, leaving upon the Ground but 3 or 4
Inches of their Tail, upon which they leaned for their support. He added, that
at the same time that they erected their Bodies, they also stretched and
lengthened them in a strange and frightfull manner; and whilst they were thus
slender, they were taller than He or any man of ordinary stature. But that
which appeared to Him the most wonderful and surprising, was, that they
manifestly seemed to be very much affected with the Music they heard; insomuch
that some Parts of the Tune would make them move to and fro with a surprising
agility, and some other Parts of it would cast them into a Posture, wherein
they seemed to be half asleep, and as it were to melt away with pleasure.

To the VIth. Chapter. Page 75.
Observation II.
BEcause the Truth even of the principal effects of the Biting of the
Tarantula, has of late been publicly called in question, I was glad to meet
with an ingenious Traveller, that in Calabria or Apulia was Himself bitten by
one of those venomous Insects; and though it were but slightly, yet the Effects
He felt in His own Body, and those greater ones He saw produced in other
Persons, that were more unhappily bitten, brought Credit to the main of what
sober Writers affirm of the Symptoms and Cure of that Poison. And the learned,
etc.

To the VIIth. Chapter. Page 83.
MUCH of what is delivered in this Chapter and elsewhere, about the Operation
of Air or invisible Fluids (whose Motions affect not the Touch) upon Congruous
Solids, may be confirmed by that notable Experiment, which has been published
in an Elegant Discourse by the learned Morhofius; about a Dutch Wine Seller in
Amsterdam, by name Nicolaus Petterus, who, having found the Tone or Note
peculiarly belonging to a large bellied drinking Glass, Such as the Dutch call
Romer, and many here call Rhenish Wine Glasses, would, by accommodating his
voice exactly to that Tone, and yet making it loud and lasting, make the
Vessel, though not visibly touched, first tremble and then burst; which it
would not do, if the Voice were, though but a little, too low or too high. This
notable Experiment has been seen by many Vertuosi, both before and since he
published it. And the very ingenious Writer, as he passed through London, not
only related it to me, but very civily offered me farther satisfaction, if I
could furnish Him with a Romer, which I was very sorry that where we then were
was not to be procured.

To the VIIIth. Chapter.
Observation I.
IT may add probability to some things delivered in this Chapter and in diverse
other Passages of this Treatise, if I here recount a strange Phoenomenon, that
came into my memory whilst I was running over those Parts of this Discourse.

The Phoenomenon, in short, was this. Having met with diverse pieces of
transparent Glass, which I had reason to think to be of a Texture or Temper
very differing from ordinary Glass, I thought fit to try, whether some of them
were not far more springy and brittle than their thickness would make one
expect. And accordingly, though I found several wherein the Experiment would
not succeed, especially if their figure were not convenient, yet with some
others, I had very good success, and particularly with some that were shaped
almost like the sharper End of the neck of a Retort. For though these pieces of
Glass were much thicker than such necks are wont to be, being perhaps 6 or 7
times as thick as common drinking Glasses, yet I more than once made the Trial
succeed so well, that, by obliquely scratching them, or tickling them if I may
so speak, on the inside with the head or point of a Pin, they would forceably
burst into many pieces in my hand. In which surprising Phoenomenon, the matter
of the Glass seemed to contribute something to this odd Effect, of so languid a
motion, but much less than the Texture, or Tension, it obtained by the peculiar
way of ordering it in the Fire and the Air.

To the VIIIth. Chapter.
Observation II.
TO show that the Suspicion I mention my self, a little before the end of this
Chapter, to have had, that the breaking of the Stones there spoken of might
possibly be produced or promoted by some impressions, remaining after the
strokes employed to force the Stones out of their Beds, was not altogether
without ground.

I shall here observe, that it need not seem incredible, that faint strokes and
attritions may leave more lasting and operative Motions among the Insensible
Parts, even of compact and solid Bodies, than one would readily imagine. For I
have several times found, sometimes by Observations designedly made, and
sometimes by undesigned Accidents, that, having caused somewhat thin Vessels of
Glass, especially Urinals, to be diligently made clean with Sand mixed with
Water, to loosen or grate off the foulness that adhered to the sides of the
Vessel; though the Vessels, after having been thus made clean, did not appear
to have received the least injury, and would continue very entire perhaps for
several hours, yet after that time they would of themselves break with noise,
and thereby become unserviceable for the future. But though this happened to
many Urinals, yet, because to more others it did not, it seemed probable that
the dissilition depended chiefly upon the peculiar texture of the Glass in this
or that Vessel, whether acquired by a mixture of the Ingredients, that was not
uniform enough or made in a due proportion; or else by the too hasty
refrigeration of the Vessel, especially if it chanced, as is not very unusual,
to be cooled more hastily in one part than another.

To the IXth. Chapter. Page 110.
Observation I.
BEcause there are diverse Gems; particularly those Transparent ones that are
Red or Blew, that are much harder than Iron or steel, it may much strengthen
the Proof of our 8th Observation, if I here relate that a Jeweller to a great
Princess answered me, that when he polished Saphyrs, Rubies, and some sorts of
other hard Gems, upon his Mill, they would seem when attrition had made them
very hot, to be all on Fire, like so many little Coals: And that each of them
had the light it afforded tinged with a Color proper to the Stone; so that the
Ruby gave a Red Light, the Saphyr a Blew, etc. And I remember that inquiring of
a skillful Cutter of Diamonds and Polisher of Gems, whose Customer I had been,
about some Conjectures I had concerning things belonging to his Profession, he
answered me that sometimes, when he polished certain Stones, especially Rubies,
that were pretty large and perhaps not thick, he could plainly perceive that
the Stone gaped at and near the Edge, as if it were begun to be cracked; which
sign admonished him to make haste to slacken the Motion of the Mill, lest the
Stone should absolutely burst; which if it did not he could not perceive any
Flaw in it when it was thoroughly cold, but, which was strange, it appeared as
entire as ever. He added, in confirmation of what he had said of the intense
Heat that Gems would sometimes acquire by Attrition, whilst they were in
polishing, that having lately given by this means too great a degree of Heat,
to an Oriental Topaz (which sort of that Gem is very hard,) it cracked upon the
Mill, in so much that one part of it quite separated from the rest, and spoiled
the Stone in the capacity of a Gem; as a Proof whereof he had laid it aside for
me, and would needs make me accept it, as a curious, though not an useful,
thing.

To the IXth Chapter.
Observation II.
TO confirm what has been said in the 8th Observation, to show that slow and
insensible Intestine Motions of the Parts of a Body that seem quiescent, may be
very operative, chance afforded me a notable Instance, which was this. I had,
to preserve a Liquor from which I expected a curious Experiment, enclosed it in
a strong Vial, to whose neck a thick Glass Stople was but too exquisitely
adapted. This Vessel I set upon the Edge of a Window, in a high and secure
place, that it might not be moved. There it continued many Months, or, if I
misremember not, above a Year. And the Liquor was of such a nature, that if any
Body had, though but for a few Moments, taken out the Stople, I could easily
discover it. But after all this while, one day that I was sitting in my Closet,
at a good distance from the place in which the Vial stood, I heard a loud and
brisk noise, almost like the report of a Pistol, and then perceived that
something came rolling to my Feet: I hastily took it up, and, found it to be
the thicker and larger part of the Stople of my Vial, which of it self had
flown off, leaving the remaining part so closely and strongly adjusted to the
Neck, which served it for a kind of Socket, that I could by no means pull it
out thence. At this Accident I was not a little surpised, considering the
thickness of the Solid Glass, and that it had stood so long unmoved, and that
the bigger and heavier part of the Stople broke off from the other with such
violence, and was carried from it by invisible motors to so great a distance.
Which seemed the more strange, because there was no shaking nor treading in the
Room, that could put the parts of the Glass into Motion, there being no Body
present but my self, who was sitting quietly and studying.

To the IXth Chapter.
Observation III.
TO confirm what I have in the eighth Observation and elsewhere delivered about
the latent Motion of Parts that may be in a Body not only quiescent but solid,
I shall here add a strange Instance, which was afforded me by a Diamond,
belonging to an ingenious Merchant of that sort of Gems, who brought many fine
ones out of the East Indies. For having at the Diamond-Mine it self, purchased
amongst other Stones that grew there, a rough Diamond that he valued at about a
hundred pound, and had well considered when he bought it; coming to look over
his purchase again once more, about Ten Days or a Fortnight after, he was much
surpised to find, to his great loss, that this Diamond had of it self cracked
in several places, and so became of little or no value, but as 'twas a Rarity:
and indeed I could not without wonder, see so fair and hard a Stone so oddly
spoiled with Clefts, that seemed to penetrate so very deep, that 'twas guessed
'twould not be very difficult to pull the parts of the Stone asunder. And on
this occasion he told me, that he had admired this Accident at first, much more
than he did afterward. For complaining of it to diverse Merchants and
Jewellers, that he met with in those Parts; he was told, that, though it seldom
happen, yet 'twas no such wonderful Accident; The like misfortune having
befallen others as well as him.

A Postscript.
THAT every common Reader may understand whatever is contained in the foregoing
Treatises, the Publisher thought fit to english the Latin Passages that are not
translated by the Author.

I. Tract I. Page 21.
Simon Pauli, in his ingenious Treatise of Pestilential Fevers, p. 71. tells us
of a sick Frenchman, who lived several days after his Arm was cut off, though
he was all the while most cruelly tortured by not ordinary Convulsion Fits: But
what is most observable is this that I and others sitting one day by his
Bedside, but not taking notice that the great Guns were going off from the
King's Ships, he laying hold, and cherishing the Stump of his Right Arm, broke
out at every shot into these pitiful words: Jesus Maria, What do I not suffer!
I am quite bruised; so troublesome, and insufferable to him was the shooting of
the great Guns, though at a great distance, they being, fired not in a joining
Continent, but on the Balthick-sea.

II.
Platerus in the First Book of his Observations, p. 185. gives us this
following Account, p. 26.

A Woman being fallen sick on a sudden complained continually of her being
strangled, though there was no great appearance thereof; this she ascribed
chiefly to a certain Air, or Wind, which she was so sensible of, that if any
Body happened to come near her, she would immediately complain of her being
choked, and died the second day of this odd Distemper: To which he adds, I
have known several others complain of a not unlike Wind, and that they were in
danger of being choked, if any body came near 'em: which I conceived always to
be a very ill sign.

III. Page 57.
If you throw down an Animal into the hole of Viburg, which is in Carelia, a
Country in Scandia, it is reported that there breaks immediately forth a
great and insufferable sound, together with a strong wind: if a small weight be
thrown into the Gap of Dalmatia, though, says Plinius, in a calm day, there is
a storm immediately raised not unlike that which is occasioned by a Whirlwind.
Agricola de Natura eorum quae effl. e terra, l. 4. c. 7.

IV. Page 67.
I discharged a Pistol, being upon the top of the Hill, which at first made no
greater noise than that which usually happens at the breaking of a small Rod:
but after a little while the noise became stronger, and filled the lower parts
of the Hill, the Valleys, and neighboring Woods. Now coming down lower through
Snow that had lain there several years, and having discharged again the Pistol,
the noise became on a sudden louder than that of the greatest Guns. Which gave
me some grounds to fear that the whole Hill, being thus shaken, should at
length subside: this sound lasted half a quarter of an hour, till it had
penetrated into the remotest Grotto's, whence the parts of the Air thrusting
one another had been strongly rever berated: and because no such concavities
were in the top of the Hill, the sound was first insensibly reverberated, till
coming lower and nearer the Grotto's and Valleys it was strongly dashed against
'em.

V. Tract II. Page 48.
It Is worthy our admiration, says Beguinus, that though in the Neighborhood of
Hydria, in the Country of Gloricia, where a great quantity of Mercury is
found, the Pest almost every year rages, yet it is always free from the
Plague: and this was confirmed to me by Persons of a very great Age, who said
they had received it from their Ancestors.

VI. An Attractive Pestilential Plaster. Page 84.
Take of the Gums Sagapen, Ammoniac, Galbanum three ounces, of boiled
Turpentine, and Virgin-wax four ounces, and a half, of the Arsenical Loadstone
well pulveris'd two ounces, of Arons Root pulveris'd anounce; let the Gums be
depurated with the Vinegar of Squills, and boiled to the consistency of a
Plaster, and lastly weighed; then according to the usual method with other
things make up a Plaster: cover the Carbuncle with this Plaster, and in a few
hours it will draw out all the venom.

The true Preparation of the forementioned Arsenical Loadstone.
Take equal parts of Crystal-arsenick, of Sulphur of Glass, of Crude Antimony:
bray them to powder in an Iron Mortar, set them in a strong Glass on a fire of
Sand, till the Glass be very hot, and the foremention's Druggs melted like
Pitch: which you shall know when having thrust a Thread into the bottom, the
matter sticking to it does rope like Turpentine; which is a sign of its being
well enough boiled: remove then the Glass from the fire, and when it is cold
break it; reduce the matter into small powder, and keep it for your use.

A Passage belonging to the Supplement.
Borel. de vi percussionis prop. CXI. has these observable words. I was at
Tauromenium in Sicily when the Mountain of Aetna broke out near Enna, a Town
distant about thirty miles from Tauromenium; whilst the Gap did send out now
and then with a great noise fire and flame all the Houses of Tauromenium were
sensibly shaken: and it was observable that such Houses as looked directly
toward the Gap, were most of all agitated. Those that looked otherwise shaking
more slowly, upon which matter of fact he argues thus: had this trembling been
occasioned by the shaking of the Ground of Tauromenium, all the Houses had been
equally shak'd, since this inequality of motion could not be ascribed to their
different situation. Hence then we must needs conclude that this agitation was
produced by the impression of the Air upon the Walls of the Houses, which
demonstrates to us the great efficacy of a sound, though at thirty miles
distance.


