The Explication of the Figure
aa The Beam. bb The Dishes cc The Frame to suspend the Beam upon which d a
Sliding Socket e Its arm containing f a Pully over which g An other Pully
passes h A Line fastened to i A movable weight by which ye Beam is raised up,
and let down. k A Hair to suspend l The Body to be weighed in the water held
in m The Glass Cestorn n The Buckit for Liquors o The Box of Grains p The
Forceps to manage q The Pile of Weights r The handle of the Ballanc ssss The
Table.




Medicina Hydrostatica: OR, HYDROSTATICKS Applied to the MATERIA MEDICA.
SHOWING, How by the Weight that diverse Bodies, used in Physic, have in Water;
one may discover Whether they be Genuine or Adulterate. To which is subjoined,
A Previous Hydrostatical Way of Estimating ORES. By the Honorable ROBERT
BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Smith at the Sign of the Princes Arms, in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1690.

THE PREFACE.
I Am far from being fond of their Practice, that affect to give pompous and
promising Titles to their Books; in so much that my Friends have several times
reproached me with inclining too much to the opposite Extreme. But yet I am not
averse from prefixing to the ensuing Paper, the Title of Medicina Hydrostatica;
not only for the Convenience of Citations, (which are usually troublesome to
make in Tracts that have long Titles;) but because too I am Invited, if not
Authorized to do it, by the Example of the famous and judicious Sanctorius; who
scrupled not to prefix the Name of Medicina Statica, to a Writing almost as
Small, as it is Ingenious, which applys the Balance to Some Uses relating to
the Medicinal Art, perhaps not More, than will be here found proposed of the
same Instrument, improved by some Additions. And it is scarce to be doubted, but
that in this Inquisitive Age, the Sagacity of the Curious will make, both of
what he has discovered, and of what I have delivered, useful Applications, that
neither He, nor I, ever thought of.

If the chief thing, I aimed at in Writing, had been to gain Applause, I would
have taken a more likely way to obtain it, than by treating of a Subject,
wherein few will think themselves concerned, (though many in reallity be so, and
whose Importance does not at first view appear.) And this Subject too, the
Nature of it has obliged me, to treat of in such a way, that it will be almost
as unpleasant to the Reader to peruse so unadorned a piece, as it was
troublesome to the Author to write so Toilesome an One. And indeed when I came
to take notice of the Number of Particulars, that I had brought together into
this little Book; I did my self somewhat wonder, how I came to be prevailed
with to lay out so much Pains upon so uninviting a Subject. But Knowledge and
Health are two such valuable things, that I durst not refuse to undergo, even a
toilesome Task; whilst I was encouraged by the Hope, that was given me, that
this kind of Labor may conduce somewhat to those desirable Ends; if not
otherways, yet at least by exciting the more curious among Physicians,
Chemists, and Others, to enlarge their Inquiries, and by helping them to remark
diverse things relating to Medicinal Bodies, that they are wont to overlook.

I had probably better consulted my Reputation, as well as my Ease, if, having
contented my self with those few uncommon Notions, and Observations, that the
rest of the Book was built upon; I had left the Applications made of them to
particular Bodies, to the industry of Others. I shall not solicitously excuse
my self, for not having bestowed more Ornaments upon the following Essay; since
the Nature of the Subject and Drift of the Writer, are sufficient to justify
the Plainness of my Style to the Judicious. I may have somewhat more cause to
Apologize for this; That I have not cast a Treatise about a Subject wherein
Mechanics are so much employed, into the Form of Propositions; and given it a
more Mathematical Dress. But I was unwilling by that means to discourage those
many, who, when they meet with a Book, or Writing, wherein the Titles of
Theoreme, Problem, and other Terms of Art, are conspicuously placed, use to be
frighted at them; and thinking them to be written only for Mathematical
Readers, despair of understanding it, and therefore lay it aside, as not meant
for the use of such, as they.

But there is another thing, upon whose score, I confess, I ought to wish for
indulgent Readers. For the Papers compiled into this Essay, having been written
in loose Sheets, and at such distant times, that diverse Accidents intervened
between them; the loss of some of those Papers, as well as others of different
Natures, and my want of Health, and Leisure, obliged me to change more than
Once my proposed design, and to employ sometimes the Style of a private Letter,
and sometimes again, that of a Discourse intended for the Public; By which,
means some Things, and some Expressions, that were suitable to the Design I
had, when I committed them to Paper, became incongruous, when the Scope and
Scheme of my Discourse were altered, especially Some parts of the Copy being
out of my hands, when I should have adjusted the Others to them. But though these
Irregularities may keep the parts of this Essay, from being so coherent as they
should be; yet they will not prove very prejudicial to an intelligent Reader;
who, finding the Matters of Fact, and the Notions, to be true, may,
notwithstanding the want of an uniform Contexture, make good use of them.

Though diverse little Memoirs and other things, that occured to me from time to
time, whilst I was bringing together the following Papers, have insensibly
swelled them into a Book; yet the Essay it self was in my First intention, but
a large Fragment of a greater work: whereof an Account is given in the Letter
to a Friend, (that is premised to a Paper annexed to the following Essay,)
which (Letter) having been intended for a kind of Preface to the last Scheme of
the whole larger work; if the Reader please to peruse it, he will there find
the Rise, and Scope of this little Tract, as well as of the other parts of that
designed Book; and some other things, that may make it needless to lengthen
this Preamble by any thing more than two Advertisements. Of these, One is,
that, being reduced by diverse unexpected, and unwelcome Accidents to forego my
first design, and give only two or three Specimens of what was intended, and
more than begun; I made choice of the Title of the Chemical Changes of Bodies
by Coloration, as a Sample of the Chemical part of the Treatise; and I pitched
upon the Subject of this present Essay, as a Specimen of the Mechanical part of
the same Treatise; The other Advertisement, is, that the Reader need not be
startled, to find some little Variations of Specific Gravity, among some of
the Memoirs laid together in this Essay, because he will in due place be told,
See the Chapters.
why such things ought to be expected. And in the mean time, it may, I hope,
suffice to say, that such Variations are neither new, nor easily avoidable
things, in making Hydrostatical Experiments or others of Affinity to them. For
Proof of which, to Readers, that, for want of having made Trials themselves,
may distrust what we have said, I shall produce a Couple of notable
Testimonies. The first is given by so industrious and diligent a Mathematician,
as Mersennus himself. For he heartily acknowledges, when he has occasion to
mention some Trials of the learned Ghetaldus, Varietas ponderandi, quae sepius
in quibusdam Granis contingit, similis est Varietati Astronomicarum
Observationum quae semper fere quibusdem minutis, sive Primis, sive Secundis
differunt. Mersennus in Phoenominis Hydraulicis.
and of the accurate French Engineer Monsieur Petit, and of his own; that the
Variety of weighing, which often happens to amount to some Grains, is but like
the Variety of Asstronomical Observations; which do almost always differ in
some Minutes or some Seconds. To which he soon after adds an Intimation, that
shows, that he expected not an exact uniformity between the Observations of
Ghetaldus, etc. already made, and the Trials of an Experimenter, that would
examine them by making the like again.

To this first Testimony we shall subjoyn the Second, which is, that our famous
Experimenter, the Lord Verulam himself, writing of a Subject, that in several
things has much Affinity with ours, confesses, that it is not to be doubted, but
that many of the Bodies, which he has set down in his Table of their
Dimensions, Hist. densit and Rarit. P. M. 12. Editionis Londinen. in Octavo.
and Weights differ in the same Species or Denomination; some being heavier
than others, and that therefore there is some Contingency in this Affair, so
that it is not necessary, that the Individuals he made his Trials with should be
exact Standards of the Nature of their respective Species, or should, (which
makes directly to my present purpose) agree altogether to a Title with
Experiments of other Men.

But this scarce evitable Imperfection of Hydrostatical and the like
Experiments does not hinder, but that by their help we may make good Estimates
of the Weights, and Bulks, of very many Bodies; and among them of not a few
that belong to two sorts of the three, that our Illustrious Author acknowledges
to be reducible to his Way of Mensuration. And these Estimates will (if I
mistake not) be found, not only preferable to those that can be made of the
same Bodies by Geometrical Instruments; but (which is more considerable for the
Reader) accurate enough to be very useful on a great Number and Variety of
Occasions. Which last Clause, I purposely add to insinuate, that the
Hydrostatical Way of Mensuration may be usefully applied to several Bodies and
Cases, that do not at all seem to relate to the Materia Medica, as would appear
by inserting here what is delivered about Metrical, and about Exploratory
Experiments and Observations, in other Papers; if that were not too foreign to
the ensuing Essay, as not belonging to the Subject, or to the Design of it.

Medicina Hydrostatica. The CONTENTS.
Chap. I. THat Boles and less valued Stones may have as great Medical Virtues,
as Gemms. One quality only, viz. the Specific gravity of Fossiles, discovered
by this way of exploring them. That Rock-Chrystal, being the most pure and
Homogeneous kind of Stone, is pitched upon as the Standard, which in weight is,
by computation, to clear Water of equal bulk, as two and an half to one. One
Use of this way of weighing stony substances, viz. how far they partake of a
Metalline Nature, or that of some other Mineral. From p. 1. to 7. Chap. II. The
way of weighing sinking Bodies in Water. How to discover practically the
proportion in weight, between the Solid and the Liquor. From p. 7. to 21. Chap.
III. An account of several Solid Bodies thus examined, viz. Lapis Haematites,
Lapis Lazuli, and Lapis Calaminaris. A Note, That the greater or lesser weight
of such bodies, does not necessarily imply greater or lesser Medical Virtues,
or Noxious Qualities in them. From p. 21. to 28. Chap. IV. A second use of this
Hydrostatical way of Inquiry, viz. To find out, whether a Mineral Body
propounded, as likely to be a stone, or of a stony Nature, be so indeed. This
tried in Coral, Pearl, Calculus humanus and Bezoar. From p. 28 to 33. Chap. V.
A Third Use, viz. to discover, the resemblance, or the difference between
bodies of the same denomination. From p. 33. to 35. Chap. VI. A Fourth Use,
viz. to discern genuin Stones, whether Animal or Mineral, from Counterfeit
ones. From p. 35. to 39. Chap. VII. A Fifth Use, viz. to make probable
Estimates of the genuineness, or the degree of purity of several bodies, that
are, or may, usefully be employed in Physic, though they be not Stones or
Minerals, provided they be heavy enough to sink in Water. An Advertisement to
Jewellers, and Physicians, what Gems are to be most esteemed of by either. An
experiment of fasing Zaphora with Venice Glass, as also a Granate. From p. 39.
to 44. Chap. VIII. How to make Hydrostatical Inquiries into Liquids; for
instance, Mercury. From p. 44. to 54. Chap. IX. The way of weighing
Hydrostatically the Pouders of sinking bodies, small sands, or the fragments of
greater bodies. An Advertisement for the more exact weighing of these and other
things. From p. 54. to 61. Chap. X. The way of Examining Hydrostatically a body
that will dissolve in Water, or easily mingle with it, viz. to weigh it in
Oleous Liquors (in Oil of Turpentine, for instance) which will not dissolve it.
From p. 61. to 67. Chap. XI. How to find out by the Hydrostaticks, the gravity
of fluid bodies, viz. by weighing some one solid body in as many of them, as
you please. E. G. Amber in the lighter sort of Liquors; a Globular Glass
Hermetically sealed with Quicksilver in it, or Rock-Chrystal, in either lighter
or heavier. The Uses of examining Liquors by an Hydrostatical Solid. From p.
67. to 85. Chap. XII. Several ways to find out the weight of Liquids in Water,
and other Liquors. From p. 85. to 93. Chap. XIII. Of what use this
Hydrostatical Examination of Liquids one in another, may be to Physicians. From
p. 94. to 99. Chap. XIV. Two Reasons why, in many Cases it is not necessary the
Scales employed in Hydrostatical Experiments should be extraordinary good. An
Objection against this Method of finding out the weight of sinking bodies in
Water, from the different weight of the Water that may be made use, answered.
From p. 99. to 105. Chap. XV. Hydrostratical Stereometry applied to the Materia
Medica. Sect. I. How to find the weight of a Cubical Inch of Water; and how by
means of this being found out, to find the dimensions of a Solid heavier in
specie than Water. Sect. II. How to measure by the same means the solid
Contents of a Body lighter in Specie than water, whether it be of that sort of
Floating Bodies that are of a closer texture, than easily to be invaded by
water; or of That, that so abounds with pores, as to be disposed to imbibe the
water too much, while the Experiment is a making. The same Experiment's to be
made in Oil of Turpentine, of Bodies that are apt to dissolve in water. From p.
105. to 130. Chap. XVI. Two Questions answered. The First, Whether I have
proposed the best ways that can be thought of, to examine Bodies
Hydrostatically? The Second, What credit may be given to the Estimates of the
weight, and proportions of Bodies, obtained by Hydrostatical Trials? From p.
130. to 143.
A Previous Hydrostatical Way of Estimating ORES. The CONTENTS.
Sect. I. COntaining a fundamental Observation necessary, in order to make this
previous Examen, viz. the finding out the Specific gravity of a pure Stone (v.
g. Crystal, etc.) by the Hydrostatical way of Trial, delivered above in the
Medicina Hydrostatica. From p. 151. to 154. Sect. II. A more general Use of the
aforesaid Observation, viz. to find out, whether a Fossile have much, or
little, or nothing, of a Metalline nature in it, by comparing its weight this
way, with That of a pure Stone. Three Fossiles thus examined, viz. the Magnet,
Emeri and Lapis Haematites. From p 154. to 159. Sect. III. and IV. Five Remarks
to illustrate the former Observation, and make it more distinct. From p. 159.
to 167. Sect. V. A more particular notice taken of Marchasites, which by their
shining streaks or other glistering parts, and their ponderousness, are apt to
delude the Unskillful. From p. 167. to 172. Sect. VI. An Advertisement to
Examiners of ORES, concerning Flux-powders. From p. 173. to 175. Sect. VII. and
VIII. Some Observations about Native Gold, and the Hydrostatical Examen of Gold
and its Ore. From p. 175. to 185. Sect. IX. The Hydrostatical way of exploring
Sand-Gold. From p. 185. to 189. Sect. X. Two or Three Chemical ways of
Examining Sand-Gold. From p. 189. to 194. Sect. XI. An Advice to those who are
given to the search of Mines, to take notice of any Unknown or Vnommon
Fossiles, they meet with; and to Examine them Hydrostatically. How to examine
Ores, or Wombs, of Metals, which may be found disguised in the form of Earth or
Mud, in an Hydrostatical Bucket. From p. 194. to 200. Sect. XII. That this last
way of examen may be of use in diverse Cases. p. 201.202 Sect. XIII. The most
profitable use of the Hydrostatical Bucket, is, to use it in weighing variety
of colored Sands and Gravels. From p. 202. to 207. Sect. XIV. That there is
such a thing as Volatile Gold; And that corpuseles of a Golden Nature may be in
Fossiles, wherein they have not been suspected. From p. 207. to 209. Sect. XV.
An advice to those who will apply the Hydrostaticks to Fossiles, that they
procure Samples of Ores of the same Species out of different Mines; and find
out what proportion of Metal they contain. From p. 209. to 215. An
Advertisement concerning the Table annexed. p. 216.217.
ERRATA.
PAge 189. l. 3. r. Trial of such Wares. l. 4. dele, such Wares. p. 193. l. 3.
r. or both. p. 195. l. 10. r. poise. p. 199. l. 4. dele, And. p. 205. l. 1. r.
But therefore. p. 207. l. 3. r. the Operation.

Medicina Hydrostatica: AN ESSAY.
CHAP. I.
I have, in a former Tract, endeavored (and, as I am told in Print, and
otherwise, not altogether unsuccessfully) to make it probable, that diverse, if
not most, of the real Virtues (for many fabulous Ones have been ascribed to
them) of Gems or precious Stones, may in great part proceed from the Qualities
of Metalline and Mineral Substances, That, whilst the Matter was either fluid
or soft, were (more or less plentifully) incorporated with the stony Matter,
which hardened afterward into a Gem. The same Phoenomena and Reflections, that
led me to the Opinion newly recited, induced me to think it also very probable,
that diverse Boles, Clayes, and other Earths, and, much more, that several
Minerals; which, though not looked upon as Metalline Oars, and several Stones or
stony Substances, that, by reason of their Bigness or Opacity, or perhaps
unpleasant Colors, have been judged unworthy to be numbered among Gems or
precious Stones, may yet be endowed with considerable Medical Virtues; and
perhaps with greater than the finer Gems themselves, because in these despised
Stones and Minerals, there is often found a greater store of Metallic and
Mineral parts, which while they were in solutis Principiis, as Chemists speak,
might with ease plentifully insinuate themselves into these more open Bodies,
where being settled they were not locked up so fast and strongly, as in the
noble^ Gems; such as Diamonds, Rubies* Saphirs, etc. which are of so Compact,
and as 'twere Glass-like, a Nature, that diverse Corrosive Liquors, and Aqua
Fortis it self, are unable to penetrate and dissolve them; though, as hereafter
will appear, these inferior Medical Stones, and other Minerals, may be opened
by the like Menstruums.

Upon these Grounds, I thought it might be a thing of use to Physicians, as
well as to diverse Mineralists and Mine-workers; if I imparted to them a Way of
Exploring many Fossils, that I do not remember I had met with, either among
Physicians or Chemists: And though this Way of Exploration pretends not to
discover directly more than one Quality of the Body examined by it; yet that
Quality, being its specific Gravity, is so radical and considerable a one,
that it may lead a Sagacious Enquirer further than at first sight one would
think.

I considered then, that the most pure and homogeneous kind of Stones we know
of, and that seems the freest from all adventitious Mixtures, and even Tinctures
TR's* is Rock-Chrystal: And therefore I pitched upon This, as the Standard I
would employ, to make Estimates of the greater or lesser recess from Simplicity
or Homogeneity of the Stones, or other Stone-like Substances, whose specific
Gravity I should examine.

We took then some Pieces of native Crystal, clear and colorless, and having
carefully weighed them first in the Air, and then in Water, we found, by
Computation, that pure Crystal was to clear Water of the same Bulk, as Two and
an half, or thereabouts, are to One: So that, to clear the Matter by an
Instance, if we suppose an hollow Cube, of Brass or other Metal, to be filled
as carefully as may be, (for the upper Surface will scarce be exactly Level)
with j. of Water, and if afterward the Cavity of the emptied Vessel be exactly
filled with a Cubical piece of Rock Crystal; this Stone will weigh ij and
about an half. Some of my Trials indeed, made with tender Balances,
represented the Proportion of these two Bodies, with some petty Variation. But
besides, that it is not improbable, that differing pieces of Rock Crystal it
self, though of equal Bulk, may not be precisely equal in Ponderosity; besides
this, I say, the Variation I found from the newly assigned Proportion was so
small, that having just intimated, that for the most part it rather savoured a
little the specific Gravity of the Crystal, than fell short of it; we may
neglect it without any prejudice, worth taking notice of, to the Use that is to
be made of this Proportion in this Paper. And for as much as there may be some
Scruple, though groundless, made about the Origin and Nature of Crystal: I shall
add, by way of Confirmation of what has been delivered, that I procured some
strong Icicles, that had been fastened to Vaults, etc. as Bodies that would be
acknowledged to be true Stones, and yet to have been in a Liquid Form; and
having Hydrostatically examined these Concretions, the specific Gravity, though
not exactly the same in all, appeared to be little differing from that of
Crystal; the solid Body exceeding the Weight of the fluid water, it Was
Weighed in, about two times and an half, (a little more or less.)

Use I.
To apply this Fundamental Observation to the Uses designed in it, when I had a
mind to make a probable Discovery, (for by this Way I pretend to no more)
whether in a Stone, or Stone-like Body propounded, the merely stony Matter were
more or less commixt with some adventitious Substance of a Metalline Nature, or
that of some other Mineral more ponderous than Crystal, I carefully weighed
it: First in the Air, and then in the Water, according to the Method formerly
declared, and if by Virtue of its specific Gravity, its Proportion to Water of
the same Bulk, exceeded the Proportion of five to two (which to avoid
Fractions, may be commodiously substituted to that often already mentioned of 2
1/^ to one) I concluded it probable, that the Concretion had in it a Portion of
adventitious Matter, heavier in Specie than Crystal or mere Stone, by how much
more or less the solid Body exceeded the Weight of Water equal to it in Bulk,
by so much greater or lesser a Portion of Heterogeneous Matter was guest to be
commixed with the stony in the propounded Concrete. This may be illustrated, as
well as proved, by the Examples that should presently follow, but that it will
be fit, before I descend to Particulars, to premise a Paper that concerns the
whole Design of this Tract.

CHAP. II.
THOUGH the Way of weighing Solids in Water has been delivered by the ingenious
Marinus Ghetaldus, and, out of him, by some few other Authors, and though
therefore I might excusably dispense my self from delivering it distinctly: Yet
since their Books are scarce, and the knowledge of this Way is almost every
where supposed in these Papers, I hold it very fit, that it should once be
proposed in this Tract, not only for that Reason, but for Two others. One, that
a dextrous way of finding out the Weight of Bodies in Liquors, may be of far
more use than Men seem to be yet aware of, being capable of being made, by a
little Variation and Improvement, of good use to Naturalists, and even to
Chemists. And the Other, that perhaps you will find cause to think, that
Experience and Reflections on it may have furnished me with some few Expedients
and Cautions for the better Practice of this Art, and for the avoiding of some
Errors, that may be very easily, and perhaps have been, run into, for want of
the Cautions here given.

The Way of weighing sinking Bodies in Water.
The Solid Body, given to be examined, is to be tied about with an Horse-hair
of a competent length, which Hair at its other end is to be fastened to one of
the Scales of a tender and exactly equilibrated Balance, so that, the proposed
Body, being exactly weighed in the Air, and then immersed in a Glass or other
fit Vessel, almost full of fair Water, may hang freely in that Liquor, being on
every side encompassed by it. This done, you must put into the opposite Scale
as many Weights* as serve to bring the Body hanging in the Water, to an exact
Aequilibrium with the Counterpoize, and consequently the Beam of the Balance
to an Horizontal Situation. Then take out the Weights newly employed, which
give you the Weight of the Body in the Water, and deducting it from the Weight
formerly taken of the same Body in the Air, and by the remainder, which will be
the difference of these two, divide the whole Weight of the given Body in the
Air, and the Quotient (whether consisting of whole Numbers, or a Fraction, or
both) will show the Proportion, in specific Gravity, between the examined
Solid, and as much Water as is just equal to it in Bulk. To make this more
easily intelligible by an Example; We took a fine piece of white Marble, (that
Stone seeming the most pure, and most free from Mineral Tinctures of any common
opacous Stones) this being put into a good Balance, whose Scales were well
equilibrated, was found to weigh in the Air, ij iij 1. Grains IX. which, for
Convenience of Supputation, we reduce to 1169 Grains, then an Horse-hair was
tied about this piece of Marble, and the other end of the same Hair was
fastened to one of the Scales, under which, at a convenient distance, was
placed a somewhat deep Glass, almost full of fair Water, in this Liquor the
Stone was made to hang freely, beneath the Surface, and in the opposite Scale,
there were put Weights enough to bring it to an Aequilibrium with the other,
these Weights were found, being reduced to the former Denomination, to amount
to 738. Grains, which gave us the Weight of the Marble in Water, (which was
much less Weight than the former, because the Stone was partly sustained by the
Water) this being subtracted from the Weight of the same Stone in the Air,
there remained 431. Grains, which gave us the Weight of as much as was equal to
the Stone in Bulk. By this remainder the Weight of the Marble in the Air, viz.
1169 being divided, the Quotient was found to be 2 and 71/100, or near enough
7/10 for the Proportion in specific Gravity of White Marble to water. The
Demonstration of this Practice is founded on what I have elsewhere given,
Hydrostatical Paradoxes.
and it may, in another way, be found in some of the Commentators on
Archimedes, de Insidentibus, humido.

For understanding of the Summary Direction newly given, it may be useful to
subjoyn the following Notes: First, it is manifest by the Nature of the thing,
that the Body, proposed to be weighed, ought to be heavy enough to sink in
Water, since otherwise its Weight in that Liquor being none at all, cannot be
significantly deducted from its Weight in the Air; but if there be occasion to
Weigh in Water a Body lighter in Specie than it, as Beeswax, a piece of
Firr-wood, etc. It may be done, though not without some trouble, by joining to it
a Body, heavy enough to make the Wax sink with it, but this Case belongs not to
this place.

2. An Horse-hair is made choice of, for Hydrostatical Operations, because its
said to be Equiponderant to so much Water; and though I have not found that to be
strictly true, yet an Horse hair is fitter to be employed in these Trials, than
any other string, I know of; and its specific Weight usually differs so little
from That of Water, that the Difference may be safely enough neglected; and if
the Solid proposed be too heavy to be sustained by a single Horse-hair, one may
twist two, (or, if need be) more of them, to make the string strong enough to
sustain the Solid.

3. I shall add, that I have met with Bodies, about which, by Reason of their
Roundness, as in Bullets, or of some other inconvenient Figure, we could not
well fasten an Hair, or other string, wherewith to tie it to the Balance. Now,
on such occasions, I caused some Hairs to be so contex'd, as to make a kind of
a little Hoopnet, whose Meashes were not great enough to let the Body slip
through them. In this small Vessel, whether you call it a Net or a Basket,
which was tied by an Horse-hair (single or twisted) to one of the Scales, we
put the solid Body to be weighed, and proceeded in the Operation, as if the
Body were tied but with a string.

4. But here it must be carefully noted once for all, that whenever any
Hydrostatical Trial is made with an Horse-hair; there must be put into the
Scale that holds the Counterpoize, as much of the same Hair, as can be guest to
be of the same Weight with that part of the string that sustains the Body in
the Water, which appears to be above the Surface of the Water; for this Liquor
takes off the Weight only of as much of the Hair as is immersed in it, so that
the unimmers'd part of the string adds to the Weight of the Solid hanging in
Water; and therefore, ought to be compensated by an equal Weight put into the
opposite Scale.

5. When I kept a Balance, only or chiefly, for Hydrostatical Trials; I found
it expedient, on diverse occasions, to take off one of the Scales with the
strings belonging to it, and substitute in its room a piece of Lead, or other
Metal of a Conical, or some other convenient, shape, exactly Equiponderant to
the opposite Scale, and at the same end of the string, to fasten one end of the
Horse-hair that tied the Body to be weighed in Water. And sometimes also, when
I did not take off one of the Scales, I caused it to be perforated in the
middle, (yet, without lessening its Weight) that so the Body, to be immerst,
might hang very Perpendicularly from the midst of the Scale. The Motives, that
induced me to these Practices, cannot be so well set down in few words; and
therefore shall be now left unmentioned, especially because the Practices
themselves, though on some occasions convenient, are not necessary.

6. There remain yet a couple of Remarks, which must less than any be
pretermitted, if Men would avoid some Errors, that are but too often slipped
into, by the Makers of Hydrostatical Trials. We are then (First,) to take
notice, that the Body, to be examined, hang freely in the Water, so that no
part of it any where touch the bottom or the sides of the Vessel, or reach
above the upper Surface of the Water contained in it; for, if any of these
Circumstances be not taken care of, (as it happens, when we are not heedful
enough) the true Weight of the Solid is somewhat altered; and if any Corner, or
other part of the Body, (and the like may be said of the Horse-hair, it is tied
with) though but a small one, appear above the Surface of the Water: That extant
Portion, being not at all sustained by the Liquor, adds (more or less) to the
Weight, that the immerst Body should have. Care also must be had, that, as
nothing but the Water do touch the hanging Body, so, no part of the Water may
touch the Scale whence it hangs. I have several times observed, that immerst
Bodies have been concluded to weigh more in the Water than really they did;
because, through such a want of Heedfulness, as is not uncommon, the
Experimenters did not take notice, that if the string were too short, or the
Vessel too full; the vibrating Motions of the Balance, would, at one time or
other, carry down the Scale, the suspended Body was tied to, so low, as to make
one part or other of it touch the Surface of the Water: some Drops of which
Liquor would readily stick to it, and, because they adhered to the nether part
of it, would lie concealed from an Eye that was not prying, and by consequence
would sensibly add to the Weight of the Scale, and make the Body be thought
heavier than indeed it was; which Oversight must needs be very prejudicial,
when one makes Experiments that require Exactness.

7. But the most usual Cause of Mistakes i^ Hydrostatical Trials, (especially
such, as are made on small Bodies) wherein a little Error may be greatly
considerable, is this; that Men are wont to think it sufficient, (in these
Trials) that the Body to be examined, be totally immerst in the Water; whereas
it does not only often, but most commonly happen, that the given Solid, and the
string that is tied about it, carry down with them diverse Particles of Air; and
perhaps too, it may find and extricate others, that lay concealed in the Pores
of the Liquor it self; which Aerial Particles fasten themselves to the little
Asperities, that they meet with on the Surface of the immerst Bodies, in the
form of Bubbles, which, like so many little Bladders full of Air, endeavor to
buoy up the Body they adhere to* and on that account do, in Proportion to their
Number and Bigness, lessen the Weight, which the immerst body would otherwise
have in Water. And therefore, great care is to be had, especially in nic^
Experiments; that, by shaking the string, and warily knocking the Body against
the sides of the Glass, the adhering Bubbles may be displaced, and emerge to
the top of the Water* And I shall add a desire, that on some occasions this
Caution be made use of more than once in the same Trials; because I have
several times observed, that now and then after the immerst Body was freed from
the first Bubbles that appeared about it, others did succeed, before an end was
made of weighing the Body; out of some of whose unperceived Cavities, or Pores,
(whether superficial or lying deeper) perhaps the latent Air could not easily
on a sudden be driven by the Water. I have been the more Circumstantial in
explaining the summarily proposed Method of Weighing Bodies in Water, because
Experience has shown, that it is not near so easy, as, upon the first reading
of it, one would presume* to be exact in the Practice of it.

Having obtained the Weight of a Body proposed; First, in the Air, and then in
Water, according to the Method plainly delivered; 'twill not be difficult to
discover Practically the Proportion in Weight, between the Solid and the
Liquor. I say Practically, because the Rule is easy enough, though the
Demonstration is not so readily to be understood by them, that are not
acquainted with the Principles of the Hydrostaticks. The Theorem, upon which
our Practice is grounded, was first, that we know of, delivered by the most
sagacious Archimedes; whose Commentators have busied themselves in
demonstrating it in a Mathematical way, as I have since endeavored to do in a
Physical way, and more easy to Naturalists in the Hydrostatical Paradoxes.
Archimedes's Proposition is this, That a Body, heavier than Water, weighs less
in Water than in the Air, by the Weight of as much Water as is equal to it in
Bulk or Magnitude: Whence it is not difficult to deduce a Rule sufficing for our
present purpose. For if you subtract the Weight of the Body proposed, whilst it
is every way environed with Water; from the Weight of the same Body, which it
was found to have in the Air; the residual Number or Difference gives you the
Weight (taken in the Air) of as much Water as is equal in Magnitude to the
Solid proposed; so that, having now two Bodies, one Firm, and the other Liquid,
together with the Weight of each of them apart; to find their Proportion, you
need but divide the greater by the lesser; and the Quotient compared to One,
that is, to an Unite, will be the Antecedent the of the Proportion desired
between the solid Body and the Water; which is mentioned, but, as it is the
Liquor that is generally employed in these Experiments, for otherwise the Rule
will hold, mutatis mutandis, in other Liquors, as well as in Water.

CHAP. III.
ANd now having premised these Remarks, and thereby made way for the clearer
Understanding of the subsequent part of this Paper; we shall proceed to the
Examples, that this not unnecessary Digression has diverted us from propounding.

There is a deeply Red and Opacous Mineral, that commonly passes in the Shops
under the Name of Lapis Haematites, though it seems to have more Affinity to that
which diverse Authors call Schystos. But whatever be the most proper Name that
belongs to it, it is an hard Fossile, which, though little used by our English
Physicians, is in several Places abroad in great Request; and that not without
cause, as far as I can judge, by what I yet know of it; and especially, for
that Somniferous Quality, that may be observed in some of its Preparations. But
it is not here, though it is elsewhere, my Purpose to deliver its Medicinal
Virtues; but only to examine, whether, according to our Method, it ought to be
concluded to abound with Metallic Particles, (perhaps but Embryonated,) to
whose Intermixture some of its Virtues may probably be ascribed. Therefore, in
a very good Balance, having weighed a piece of English Haematites, that
chanced to amount to about iij ij ^/4, First, in the Air, and then in Water; we
found its Proportion to this Liquor, as 4 15/100 to 1. At which Ponderosity, if
I had not formerly made the like Experiments, I should have been surprised; as
you probably will be, when you consider, that this Metalline Stone did not very
much want of almost twice the Weight of a mere Stone of the same Bulk. This
great Weight much confirmed me in the Conjecture I had made; that in this Lump
was contained a good deal of Metalline Substance. And this induced me (to add
that upon the by) to examine my Guess, by subliming it, when finely powdered,
and diligently mixed with an equal, or double, Weight of Salarmonia^. For then
having tasted, with the tip of my Tongue, of this Saffron-coloured Sublimate; I
found it; as I expected, very Astringent or Styptick, as diverse Preparations of
Mars are wont to be; and, for further Proof, having put less than a Grain of it
into a spoonful or two of good Infusion of Galls; there was immediately
produced a Black, and as it 'twere Inky, Mixture.

Lapis Lazuli is sometimes made use of by Europaean Physicians, but more
frequently by Arabian and other Eastern Ones, for diverse purposes, but
especially to make Evacuations by Vomit. This Emetick Faculty seemed, likely
enough, to belong to it upon the Score of a Metalline Ingredient; and
accordingly, having examined Hydrostatically, a piece that was judged
moderately rich, we found the Proportion of it to an equal Bulk of Water, to be
as 3. to 1. which argues That, notwithstanding its briskness in Operation, it
contained a much lesser Proportion of Metalline Substance, than Lapis
Haematites, or diverse less Operative Minerals.

Observation about the Loadstone, as it is a Mineral.
I elsewhere show, that the Loadstone may be applied to Medicinal Uses, and that
it emits Effluvia, that are not Magnetical, and may have sensible Operations
upon the Body of Man. On which account, it was not improper to examine it
Hydrostatically; by which means I found, that the Weight of a Lump of
Loadstone, that I judged to be either English or Norwegian; was in Proportion
to Water of the same Magnitude, as 4 91/10^ to 1. But of the specific
Gravities of Loadstones, much more may be met with in another Paper.

Lapis Calaminaris is often enough used in Physic, especially by Chemists, to
dry; and to imbibe Acidities. For which Uses, I prefer it before diverse more
famous Drugs: But, though it is wont to be employed, only as an external Remedy;
yet some things, that I found in some uncommon Chemical Preparations of it,
made me think, it may deserve to be further examined and tried. A famous and
not unlearned Empyrick, to whom I willingly communicated some Processes, that
he desired of me; when I asked him about a Medicine, whose Success brought him
a great number of Patients, for griping Fluxes, and some Dysenterical ones;
heartily discovered his Medicine to me, and solemnly assured me, it was
nothing, but pure and well-ground Lapis Calaminaris, seasonably given in a just
Dose; as in a fitter place I have more fully declared. This made it obvious for
for me to conjecture, that Lapis Calaminaris participates of a Metallic
Nature, as may be argued from its Operation upon Copper, which is thereby
turned into Brass. Wherefore weighing a piece of this Fossile, first in Air,
and then in Water, it appeared to be to this Liquor as 4 169/100 to 1.

If I had not among other Papers lost Some, wherein I had Registered a good
Number of Trials of this kind made upon differing Fossiles; 'twould be easy
for me to add to the four already recited, others manifestly conducing to the
same Purpose. But presuming, that those already delivered may at present
suffice; I shall now subjoyn a few Observations, whereof the first may become
the Candor and Impartiality of a Lover of Truth, and the rest intimate some
further Uses of the Hydrostatical Way of exploring hard and ponderous
Concretions, hitherto treated of.

I must not therefore forbear to admonish you, that, though when an hard Fossile
propounded, is found to be much heavier than Crystal of the same Bulk; it is a
very probable Token, that in the Solid Concretion, there is a notable Portion,
greater or lesser, of some Metalline or other ponderous Mineral Body, whence
its good or evil Qualities, in reference to human Bodies, may probably be
deduced; Yet, this hinders not, but that it is very possible, for a Fossile to
be endowed with Medicinal Virtues, or to have noxious Qualities, on the account
of a Portion of extraneous Matter; though its specific Gravity does but little
exceed that of Crystal, or the advantage seem but inconsiderable. For, (to
pass by other Reflections) a very small Proportion of Adventitious, Metalline,
or Mineral, Substance, if it be of an Operative Nature, may, in some Cases,
suffice, to diffuse its self through the rest of the Mass, and impregnate it
with active Qualities. Which may be partly Illustrated, and partly Proved, by
some Experiments that will be hereafter met with, in one of the Chapters.

CHAP. IV.
Use II.
TO hint somewhat about the further Utility of our Hydrostatical Way of Inquiry;
I shall take notice in the first place, that it may assist us to guess, with
probability, whether a Mineral Body propounded, as likely to be a Stone, or of
a stony Nature, be so indeed. Thus Coral, for instance, is by some thought to
be a Plant, by others a Lytho-dendron, but, by the greater Number, it is
reckoned among Precious Stones. In this Dissent of Opinions, the specific
Gravity may be of considerable Use. Wherefore, we thought fit to weigh a piece
of choice and well colored red Coral; first, in the Air, and then in the
Water, and found its Proportion to the Weight of as much of that Liquor, to be
as 2 68/100 to 1. So that its specific Gravity much favors their Opinion, who
take it to be a Stone, since it not only equals that of Crystal, but somewhat
exceeds it.

There are Some, that will have Pearls, because of their Hardness, and their
being treated of by Jewelers, and others that write of Gems, to be of a stony
Nature. Wherefore I thought fit examine their Ponderosity also. But not having
now with me any Trial of that kind; I shall substitute One that I made upon a
monstrous Pearl, that was presented me by a Person that took it out of the
Oyster. I call it Monstrous, because though it be well enough colored, yet its
Shape is irregular, and its Bigness extraordinary; as is also its Weight,
amounting to full 206 Grains. This being weighed in Water, its Proportion in
Gravity to an equal Bulk of the Liquor was found to be as 2 ^1/^00 to 1. So
that its specific Weight was much about the same, with that of Crystal.

There are Many, that take the Stones formed in Men's Bladders, for as true and
genuine Stones, as Those that Nature forms in the greater World; and speak
much, and sometimes not without ground, of the great Hardness of diverse of
them. But, though I deny not, that, in a laxer Sense, they may well enough pass
for Stones; yet I should rather call them Animal Stones, than simply Stones;
this Name having been constantly and generally used, to signify Mineral or
Fossile Stones: which, by our Way of Exploration, may be easily distinguished
from human Calculus's, and other like hard Concretions, found in the Bodies of
some Animals. For, having examined a good Number of these Stones, I found, that
not only the Chemical Analyzes, I made of them, of which I elsewhere give an
Account, manifested them, how hard soever they were, to be Concretions
belonging to the Animal Kingdom, not the Mineral: But, by an Hydrostatical
Examen of diverse of them, I found them to differ much, in specific Gravity,
from true Fossile Stones. Of this you will, in its proper place, meet with
several Instances; so that it may here suffice to mention Two, that now chance
to come to hand. Namely, that a Calculus humanus weighing above vjss was found
to be in Proportion to an equal Bulk of Water, as 1 76/100 to 1. And another,
that weighed iv and above an half, in the Air, being also weighed in Water,
appeared to be to this Liquor, as 1 69/100 to 1.

I mention these Stones as belonging to the Materia Medica, though they are looked
upon rather as Diseases, of which, indeed, they are very sad Productions,
because a famous and experienced Physician, that Practiced long in the
East Indies, and had better Opportunity than almost any European had before
him, to try the Virtues of Bezoar, does either equal or prefer the Calculi, we
are speaking of, even to Oriental Bezoar.

And to show, that Men are not the only Animals, wherein Stone-like Concretions
differ in specific Gravity, (and so may be distinguished, by that difference,)
from Crystal and such like true Stones; we shall subjoyn Two or Three
Experiments, made upon choice Bezoar Stones, not exceeding a middle Size, such
being the likeliest not to be adulterated. The first of these weighing in the
Air iij, and odd Grains, was found to be in Proportion to Water of the same
Bulk, as 1 47/100 to 1. Another weighing somewhat less than iij, was to the
Weight of an equal Bulk of Water, as 1 53/100 to 1. I might add diverse other
Instances of the like Import; and tho I think them not necessary, yet I shall
subjoyn One more, because it is afforded by a Bezoar stone, taken out of another
of the same kind: This Kernel-stone, if I may so call it, being Weighed in the
Air wanted Nine Grains of iij, and its Proportion to Water of the same
Magnitude, was found to be as that of 1 55/100 to 1. In all which Instances, we
may observe, that these Animal Stones not amounting to twice the Weight of
Water equal to them in Bulk, have less of specific Gravity, by above a Fifth
part, than a true Fossile Stone (such as Crystal) is wont to be endowed with.

CHAP. V.
THE Use lately proposed of our Hydrostatical Way of Exploration, suggests to
me Another, Use III.
which may be deduced from it, as a kind of Corollary.

This comprehends two, somewhat differing, Ways of applying the Observations,
we have lately mentioned. For first, we may by the Hydrostaticks be assisted to
discover, with Probability, the resemblance, or the difference that may be
between Bodies of the same Denomination, so that some subordinate Species of
them, may perhaps be distinguished, as well as several Individuals of the same,
or lowermost, Species. Since, for Instance, we have found a notable difference
between the specific Weights of several Loadstones, that were dug up in
several Countries or Mines; if greater Number and Variety of Experiments, of
this kind were made, we should possibly find, that, Caeteris paribus, the
Loadstones of one Country, or of one Mine, are considerably heavier than Those
of another; as, if I mistake not, I usually observed, the Norwegian and the
English Loadstones to be heavier in Specie, than Those that are said to come
out of a warmer Region, Italy; whose Island of Elba abounds with Mines, whereof
I saw one entire Mass, that I judged to weigh a great many hundred of Pounds.
And this difference of Weight between Fossiles of the same kind, when it is
considerable, may be of good use to help us to distinguish between the Stones
of the same lowest Species, that are proper to differing Countries or Mines*
But, in Case the unequal Weight proceeds, as it often does, from an
Adventitious Matter, that insinuated it self into the more genuine Matter of
the Fossile, whilst 'twas Fluid or Soft, it may much assist us to guess at the
greater or lesser Purity of Homogeneousness of the Fossile proposed; which
Discovery may, on diverse occasions, be of no small use to the Physician, the
Jeweller, or the Naturalist.

CHAP. VI.
BUT the Second thing comprised in our Corlolary, Use IV.
may in diverse Cases be of much greater Utility and Importance, as being very
proper to help us to discern genuine Stones, whether Animal or Mineral, from
counterfeit Ones; which too often pass for true, to the great prejudice of
Physicians and Patients, and the great Loss of Lapidarie's, and their
Customers. For as there are few Qualities appertaining to ponderable Bodies
here below, that are so radicated, (if I may so speak) as their Ponderosity is.
So there is scarce any Quality, wherein it is so difficult for Impostors, to
make a notable Alteration unperceivedly, as the specific Gravity. I said, for
Impostors because, though in several Cases, it is not so very difficult, to alter
the specific Weight belonging to this, or that, kind of Bodies; yet in those
very Cases, it may be exceeding difficult, and perhaps impractible, to make a
considerable Change in tha^ Quality, but by such Additions, o^ Operations, as
will make a sensible Change in some other Qualities too and thereby expose the
Fallacy to b^ discovered. And this will especiall^ prove difficult in many
Cases to vulgar Cheats, and Counterfeiters, or Adulterators of Gems, and other
valuable Minerals; because the little knowledge they have of the Numerousness,
and Variety, of Natural and Artificial Productions, confines them to a small
Number and Diversity of Means, to accomplish their fradulent Designs. And
whilst they are intent, but upon counterfeiting the more obvious Qualities of
things; and perhaps of eluding the known and vulgar Trials Men are wont to
acquiesce in; they are not like to take Care to maintain the specific Gravity,
and secure their adulterated Wares, against an Hydrostatical Way of Examen,
which, probably, they never so much as heard of. By this means, several Perls,
for Instance, may be discovered to be Counterterfeit, without, in the least,
injuring them. And I remember, That some factitious Corals, that, for
Divertisement, I made, to show what might be done in that kind; were,
notwithstanding their fine Color, Shape, and Glossiness, easily discoverable,
by their having a specific Weight manifestly exceeding That, which belongs to
natural Corals.

Before I knew better Ways, I have sometimes, for Recreation, by the help of
Minium made Pastes, or factitious Gems, which, though transparent, and finely
enough colored, yet, because they contained some vitrified Lead, added to the
other Ingredients to promote the Fusion, were liable to be detected by an easy
Hydrostatical Trial of their Ponderosity. I have likewise seen a fair Bezoar
Stone, that so resembled a genuine Stone, That a great Price was set upon it.
But being brought me to be judged of, I made little doubt of its being
Counterfeit, by reason of its appearing to me as heavy as a Mineral Stone of
that Bulk; though the Possessor being loath to expose it to an uncommon Trial, I
could not so cogently evince, that I had a clear Reason to disadvise the
purchase of it.

CHAP. VII.
AFter these Instances, (which are not the only, Use V.
that might be alleged of this kind) the affinity of the Subjects invites me
to take notice of another Use, or, at least, a Variation of the former, which
may be made of our Hydrostatical Way of examining Solids. For it may, on diverse
occasions, assist us, to make probable Estimates of the Genuineness, or the
degree of Purity of several Bodies, that are, or may, usefully be employed in
Physic; though they be not Stones or Minerals, provided they be heavy enough to
sink in Water. For when we have once found the specific Gravity of a
Concretion of this sort, that we know to be Genuine, and well-conditioned in
its kind; this degree of Ponderousness may serve us for a kind of Standard,
whereby to judge of others, of the same Denomination, or that are said to be of
a like Nature.

To illustrate a Remark, that has no more of Difficulty in it than This, fewer
Instances will suffice, (if any be necessary) than you will meet with in the
following Part of this Tract, wherein they will opportunely occur. And
therefore, instead of setting them down in this place, I choose to give you an
Advertisement, that would surprise you, if I had not formerly hinted somewhat,
appliable to the same purpose, by no great Variation. For that which I am about
to observe to you, is, That, I think, there should be made a great difference
between the Estimate, that Men make of some Stones, to which the Shops give the
Name of Gems, according as the Estimate is to be made by Jewellers and
Goldsmiths, or by Physicians and Chemists. For the Tradesmen, who usually aim
but at the Beauty and Luster of the Gems they would Sell, may justly esteem
those Caeteris paribus the best, that are in Specie the lightest, because such
are generally more uniform as to Sense, and more Transparent; and also, receive
their Color from Pigments of finer Parts. But, on the contrary, those, that in
Gems seek mainly, if not only, for the Medicinal Virtues; may justly value
Those most, that are most Ponderous: as having more plentiful Portions of the
Metallic, or Mineral, Substances, whence the greatest part of their Virtues
is, as has been formerly noted, in Probability, to be derived. And this
difference in specific Weight, in Stones that have the same Name given them, I
sometimes found to be far greater, than one that has not tried it would
imagine, as may appear by some Instances, applicable to this Argument, that
will hereafter be met with. But yet, I would not hence infer, that even such
Stones, whether transparent or not, as appear fine, and are but light in their
kind, must be devoid of Particles, whether Metalline, or of kin to them, whence
they may be endowed with considerable Medicinal Virtues. For there are Mineral
Pigments of so subtle a Nature, that so small a Quantity as will scarce make
them sensibly heavier than Gems that are less, or perhaps not at all colored,
may be diffused through the whole Matter; and, at least, impregnate every
sensible part of it: This I shall Illustrate by the following Experiment,
devised for that purpose.

Five Grains of powdered Zaphora, being mixed with j ss of finely powdered
Venice Glass, and kept a full hour in Fusion in a Furnace, that gives an
exceeding violent Fire, afforded a transparent Mass, that was throughout of a
fine blew Color, and that deep enough; so that one part of the Pigment
sufficed to tinge, by Fusion, above an hundred parts of the Glass: And when for
Curiosity, we made the Proportion of the Zaphora a little greater, taking Eight
Grains of the Pigment to j of Glass, that is, One to sixty; the Mixture having
been kept for the like time in strong Fusion, the Mass was so deeply colored,
that the Proportion of the Tinging stuff to the rest of the Water, appeared
too great to make a handsome Gem.

And further to manifest, that a Quantity of Metalline Matter, though it be but
very small, may suffice to give a Tincture, and so to impart a Virtue to a
Glassy Body, and even to Gems; I shall add an Experiment, that perhaps you will
think somewhat strange. I had long conjectured, that there was in Granats,
especially in some that were deeply colored, pretty store of Metalline
Corpuscles of a Martial Nature, and that those Corpuscles are more than
sufficient for the Granate it self, into whose Composition they enter, though not
visibly, because of their extreme Minuteness. Upon this supposition, I took a
Bohemian, or rather German, Granate, (for I never saw any Bohemian so large)
that I had kept by me for a Rarity, because of its Bigness and deep Color, tho
it was not a fine Stone to look on, notwithstanding its being transparent in
those Edges that were thin. This being reduced to very fine Powder (but not in
an Iron Mortar, lest should take something from the Metal) we exactly mixed Eight
Grains with an Ounce of finely pulverized Chrystalline Glass; afterward the
Mixture was kept two hours in a Furnace, that gives a stronger Fire than
ordinary VVind-Furnaces, by which means we obtained, as I expected, a pretty
uniform Mass tinged of a sufficiently green Color, such as prepared Iron, or
Steel, gives to pure Glass.

CHAP. VIII.
WHat has been hitherto delivered, may serve to show, in some measure, the Uses
of our Hydrostatical Way of examining Drugs, upon a Supposition that they are
Solid, and neither very minute, nor too light to sink in Water. But I must not
forbear to confess, and even give Notice, that there are many Simples, and
other ponderable Substances, that may, upon good Grounds, be said to belong to
the Materia Medica; which yet want One, or More, of the newly expressed
Conditions. Wherefore I must not conceal, that there are Three things, which,
though not necessary to the Understanding of the Usefulness of the foregoing Part
of this Discourse; may, if they can be performed, much conduce to Facilitate
(for I dare not say, to Complete) the Hydrostatical Way of examining Bodies,
heavier in Specie than Water. And therefore, though I confess it no easy Task to
surmount the Difficulties to be met with in this Attempt; yet I shall endeavor
to lessen them as much as I can, by offering to you the Expedients, that I was
wont formerly to make use of in the Three Cases, I am about to mention: Namely,
First, When the Body to be examined was Liquid, and consequently, I could not
be immediately taken hold of by an Horse-hair, or any other slender String.
Secondly, When the Body proposed was either in the Form of Powder, or consisted
of Fragments that were so small, that it 'twas not possible, or, at least, not
fit, to fasten each of them to an Hair; and suspend it after the manner of a
Body of a greater Bulk. And, Thirdly, When the Solid to be Hydrostatically
examined, though great enough in Bulk to be tied about, was dissoluble in
Water; and consequently unfit to be weighed in that Medium: Since therein its
Gravity must continually decrease, whilst the Operation was performing.

As to the First of the Three Difficulties; lately mentioned, I suppose, I need
not solicitously premise, that the Liquid Substance, to be Hydrostatically
examined, ought to be heavier in Specie, than the Water, or other Fluid, it is
to be weighed in; and of such a Nature, as not to be apt (at least, speedily)
to mingle it self with it: since, otherwise, the proposed Liquor will either
emerge in that it should be weighed in, or else be confounded with it, and so
retain no distinct Mass, or Gravity.

Supposing then, that the Liquor, to be examined, has belonging to it the Two
newly recited Conditions, we made use of this Expedient to explore its
specific Weight. We took a small Jar, or wide-mouthed Glass capable of
containing an Ounce or two of common Water, and weighing in the Air about,
Three or four Drams (more or less, as occasion requires.) This Glass, which*
for Brevities sake, we are wont to call Hydrostatical, or else Glass-Bucket; we
weigh very carefully once for all, first in the Air, and then in the Water, and
by the difference of the Weights we find, according to the known Hydrostatical
Method, a Weight equivalent to That of the Substance of the Glass in Water is
so that such a Weight being put into the opposite Scale of the Balance, the
Vessel hanging under the Sur^ace of the Water, may be considered as having no
Weight at all, that is, no Praeponderancy. And consequently, the Weight of a
Body contained in this Bucket may be looked upon, as That of the Body it self
in Water, without being increased by that of the Vessel; so that, in our
Instance, the Bucket makes a Mass of Quicksilver, though Fluid, as ponderable as
if 'twere coagulated into a Solid Body.

The Glass-Bucket being thus provided once for all, we put the proposed Mercury
into it, and weigh them together in the Air; whence deducting the already known
Weight of the Vessel it self in the Air, the Residue gives the Weight of the
Quicksilver alone in the Air. This done, by the help of an Horse-hair, we tie
the Bucket to one of the Scales, (or to either end of the Beam,) and letting
it, with the Quicksilver in it, slowly sink into a Glass, or other Vessel,
competently full of fair Water, and hang so, that the Bucket may not any where
touch, either the bottom, or the sides of the larger Vessel; we reduce by
Weights, put into the opposite Scale, and added to the formerly mentioned
Counterpoise of the Bucket in the Water, the Balance to an exact Aequilibrium,
without raising the Bucket quite to the Surface of the Water; this newly
obtained Weight, of the immerst Quicksilver, being deducted from its Weight in
the Air, it is easy, by the known Hydrostatical Method, to obtain the
Proportion in Gravity, between the given Mercury, and an equal Bulk of Water.

To expedite this Operation, it may be convenient to have in readiness (as I
was wont to do,) a couple of Weights, of Lead, or Tin; the greater exactly
equal to the Weight of the Glass-Bucket in the Air, and the other equal to the
Weight of the same Bucket in Water. For, by keeping these two Weights
constantly in readiness, One has at hand a Counterpoise of the Vessel, in which
soever of the two Medium's it is employed in; which saves them, that have
frequent occasion to use the Balance, much of the time that must otherwise be
spent to adjust it.

This Advertisement being premised, the lately propounded Operation will be
best understood by an Example; we took a small Glass-Jar capable of holding
about ss. of Water, and put it into one Scale of a tender Balance; whose other
Scale we furnished with a Counterpoise, or Weight, equal to the Glass. Into this
little Vessel, we then put 1, that is, Four hundred and eighty Grains of
Mercury (affirmed to be Spanish, which is counted the richest) and the Glass
with this Mercury in it was, by an Horse-hair, made to hang from one of the
Scales, into a deep Glass Vessel of Water. Whilst it wa^ in that state, there
was in the opposite Scale a Counterpoise to the Glass it self in the Water, so
tha^ the Drams and Grains, that 'twas requisite to add, gave us the Weigh^ of
the Quicksilver only, the Weigh^ of the Glass, being already accounted for.
But Care was first taken, that the open-mouthed Vessel should be every where
environed with Water, and diligently freed from adherent Bubbles; and that a
piece of Horse-hair should be added to the Counterpoise, to compensate that
part of the String or Hair tied about the Bucket, that was in the Air,
intercepted between the Scale, it was fastened to, and the Surface of the
Water. By this means, we found the Weight of the Quicksilver in that Liquor,
to amount to 446 Grains, which being subtracted from the Weight of the
Quicksilver in the Air, the difference was 34 Grains, by which the greater
Number being divided, the Quotient was 14 and about 1/1^. So that the Mercury,
employed in this Operation, appeared to be in Gravity to Water of the same
Bulk, as 14 11/^^^ to 1. I said, the Mercury employed in this Operation,
because, in former Trials, I scarce found common Quicksilver, that was bought
in Shops, to weigh full Fourteen times, and sometimes scarce 13 and as much as
a Bulk of Water equal to it; whether the Ponderousness of our last used Mercury
proceeded from hence; that, as some Chemists extol Spanish Mercury, as
participating more than others of a Golden Nature, (which Opinion, a Trial,
that I purposely made of That employed about the late Experiment, did not
disfavour;) So, there was in this of Ours something of unfixt Gold, that
somewhat increased its Weight; I leave to further Enquiry.

If you can command, as I cannot, the Learned Ghetaldus's Archimedes Promo^us:
Since, as I am informed, He there sets down the intensive Weight of
Quicksilver Hydrostatically found; it may be worth your while to consult that
scarce Book, and compare the things you may meet with there, relating to
Quicksilver, with what I have now delivered. To which I shall add, That this I
may here give you Notice of in general; That, having on Chemical and other
Accounts, had more occasion than most Men, to make Trials of this sort, I did
not find all running Mercuries, though they did not appear adulterated, to be
precisely of the same Weight: Nay, even destilled Mercuries, if once combined
with Metalline Bodies, and particularly, if they were animated, and drawn from
fine Gold; I found to differ more from common Mercuries sold in Shops, than
These did from one another; and even between common Mercuries, notwithstanding
their having been Destilled, we found a notable Disparity. But to enlarge on
this Subject, were improper in this Place, where I mentioned the Weight of
Mercury: But to give so clear (though but single) an Instance of the Way of
measuring the Weight of ponderous Liquid Bodies in Water, as may warrant me to
say; That, by this Method, though not always with the same ease, we may explore
the specific Weight of other Liquors, that are in equal Bulk heavier than
Water, and yet are indisposed to mingle with it; such as are the Chemical Oils
of Cinnamon, Cloves, Guajacum, etc. But the chief thing, that has made me the
the more Circumstantial in delivering the foregoing Experiment, was, that this
practical Direction, for weighing one Liquor in another, will hereafter appear
to be appliable to useful Purposes, especially when we come to mention, in the
following Chapters, several Cases, wherein Liquors of a Nature very different
from Water, may be substituted in its stead.

CHAP. IX.
AS for the Way of Examining Hydrostatically the Powders of sinking Bodies,
such as Minium, Puttie, etc. or such small Solids, or Fragments of greater
Ones, as by reason of their Littleness or inconvenient Shape, are singly unfit
to be tied with an Horse-hair to the Balance; as the Fragments of Rubies, and
other precious Stones, wont to be sold by Weight at the Drugsters or
Apothecaries Shops: the Way of discovering the Weight of these in Water,
differs not much from That lately delivered of weighing Quicksilver in that
Liquor. For on these occasions also, we employ such a Glass-Bucket, as was
lately described; and having made it very dry, as well within, as without; We
put into it the Metalline Calx, or other heavy Powder, or a convenient Quantity
of the Fragments of Gems, or a competent Number of small, though entire, Bodies,
as Pieces of Native Cinnabar, Seed-pearl, etc. and proceed with these, as we
did with Quicksilver. Only this Caution is to be heedfully taken along, that
we warily, and little by little, put into the Bucket, whilst it is yet kept in
the Air, and has the already weighed Powder, or Fragments in it, a convenient
Quantity of the same Water, it is to be weighed in; that the Liquor may have
time to insinuate it self between the dry Bodies, and even the Corpuscles of
the Powders, and expel thence the Air, that was harbored in the Intervals
betwixt them; which little Aerial Portions, if not thus seasonably expelled,
would, upon the immersion of the Vessel, produce in the Water store of Bubbles,
that would buoy up, or fasten themselves to the Fragments, or other small
Bodies, and make the Experiment uncertain, or fallacious. And if it be a
Powder, that is to be weighed; unless it be before hand thoroughly wetted, and
thereby freed from Aerial Particles, and reduced to a kind of Mud; there is
Danger, that some dry Corpuscles of the Powder, will, when the Vessel is under
Water, be buoyed up, and get out of it, and, floating on the Surface of the
incumbent Water, take off from the true Weight, that the immerst Powder should
have in that Liquor.

If this Way of examining Bodies be carefully employed by a dextrous Man,
furnished with a tender Balance, it may be of considerable use, not only to
Physicians, Druggists, and Apothecaries, that are conversant with the more
precious Kinds of sinking Bodies, that belong to the Materia Medica; but also
to Lapidaries, and Goldsmiths, whom it much concerns not to be imposed upon by
counterfeit Gems, or by other Stones of price, that are not duly conditioned,
in their kind. Thus the Fragments of the Five precious Stones, That (upon what
grounds, I now inquire not,) are made Ingredients of some Noble Compositions,
as Confectio Hyacinthi, etc. these Fragments, I say, may each sort of them
apart be usefully examined by their Weight in Water, by him that knows the true
specific Gravity of a parcel of the finest, or else of such as he judges to be
fittest for his purpose. And, to add That upon the By, whereas Granates are
reckoned among the Five Medicinal precious Stones, and in some Pharmacopoea's
are preferred to the First place, as the best: I have found so great a
difference, in point of Ponderosity, between European Granates and American
Ones, whereof some were sent me as a Present from New England, and others, I my
self picked plentifully enough out of an odd American Mineral, that I suspected
to contain them; that it was very obvious to think, their Virtues might be very
different, if not as to Kind, yet, at least, as to Degrees: And not only such
factitious Pearls as have deluded many, and sometimes even famous, Jewellers,
(as one of themselves, that was Lapidary to a great Monarch, confessed to me)
may oftentimes by this Expedient be discovered, especially if Mercury (though
disguised) be employed in making them; but, we may probably by the same Method
discriminate the natural Pearls of several Countries and Sorts, whereof I have
seen a far greater difference than one would expect; and I have somewhere yet
by me natural Pearls of such various Colors, as well as Shapes, as have
somewhat surprised even the Curious. But because it more concerns Physicians
and Patients, to be able to make Estimates of Seed Pearl, that are on many
occasions of good use to health; than to know the Genuineness of those bigger
Ones, that are seldom made use of, but for Ornament; I shall here mention the
result of an Experiment, which I find among my old Notes, to have been made by
me, when I was furnished with very fine Oriental Seed-Pearls. For having
examined these by the Way, we are now discoursing of, as judging them Orient
enough to be fit to be Patterns, wherewith to compare Others; we found these to
Water of the same Bulk, 2 75/100 ( i. e.) to 1.

But in This, and in those other Trials, whose Difficulty, or Importance,
require, that we make them as exactly, as we are able. I must advertise you,
that it is not fit to trust to the Steddiness of your hand, in holding the
Balance, but that you make use of a Gibbet, (as they call it,) or some other
stable Prop to support it. For the Hand often shakes, and makes the Instrument
that it holds, to do so: and oftener grows weary before the Scales have had time
to play up and down, and at length settle in a determinate Situation; wherein
if you miss of a true Aequilibrium, the Hand must undergo a new Penance:
Whereas, when the Balance hangs on a stable Fulcrum, you have both your Hands
to help you, and need not be tempted by Weariness to desist, before the
Balance be brought to rest in a perfect Aequilibrium. The Neglect or Omission
of this Practice, I take to be one main Reason, (for the want of good
Balances, or of Skill to use them, is oftentimes Another) why so many of the
Experiments, that require weighing, are Erroneous; as they that cautiously
examine them (as I have sometimes had occasion to do) may easily find. And
therefore, (to add That, upon the By,) I hope, you will not make haste to
censure the Accounts I give of Hydrostatical Trials, because they do not always
agree with Those of other Men's; since perhaps they did not employ, either more
Diligence, or better Instruments, than I.

CHAP. X.
THe last of the Three Cases, formerly mentioned: Namely, What is to be done,
when the Body to be Hydrostatically examined, will dissolve in Water, or easily
mingle with it? Imports a Question, difficult and troublesome enough to be
resolved. Nor can this Examen be performed by a single Operation, which yet
sufficed in each of the Two foregoing Cases. And having seriously considered
the Matter, the best Expedient I could then think of was, That, which diverse
years ago, I propounded in an Assembly of the Royal Society, and grounded on
this Reflection, That though the Body proposed could not be immediately weighed
in Water, yet we may substitute another Liquor that will not dissolve it, and
thereby investigate the specific Gravity, in reference to that Medium; and
then, by comparing the difference of those Two Liquors in point of Gravity, One
may come to discover, What the Body proposed would have weighed in Water, in
case it could have been kept there a competent time, without having any part of
it dissolved. Considering then, that, except Quicksilver, the visible Fluids
we can command, are either of an Aqueous, or of an Oily, Nature; and that most
Bodies, whereof we can make Solutions in Liquors of the former, will not (at
least, sensibly) suffer themselves to be dissolved by those of the later, Kind,
whilst a proposed Solid is weighing in them: We presumed that the most Saline
Bodies, such as Alum, Vitriol, Sal Gem, to which may be added, Borax,
Sublimate, etc. might be commodiously weighed in Oleous Liquors. Among these I
made choice of Oil of Turpentine, rather than Oil- Olive, or any Chemical
Essential Oil: Partly, because, being of common use, it is to be procured in
sufficient Quantity, and, being very cheap, is seldom adulterated, as Chemical
Oils are too often found to be; and, partly, because being a distilled Body, it
may be presumed to be free from Aqueous Parts, of which Experience has shown
me, that common expressed Oil is far from being destitute: But because Two
Liquors, that are indeed both of them Oils, are wont to have distinct Names
given them in the Shops; I shall here intimate, that I do not, when I have my
Choice, make use of that which many call the Oil of Turpentine, but of That
which first comes over, which those that distinguish them, call the Spirit of
Turpentine: I prefer This, (I say,) because it is clear, almost like fair Water;
whereas, That which is called the Oil, besides that it is less Fluid, is
commonly of a Yellow Color, which does lessen its Transparency, and may be
compounded with some of the colored Bodies to be weighed in it.

There are many Persons, that would find it very difficult, and to whom, on
most occasions, 'twill not be necessary, to know the determinate Proportion in
Gravity, between Oil of Turpentine, and the Solid that is weighed in it; and to
discover, by the help of that Gravity, what the Body proposed would weigh in
Water, in case it could be kept for a competent time in that Medium, without
having any part of it dissolved therein. And therefore, Though, if you desire it,
I shall, God permitting, annex the Method of performing this Task (which, you
know, requires more Calculation, than every common Reader is able to go through
with) to the end of this Tract: Yet, for the present it may perhaps be
sufficient, as well as fit, that I give you notice, that those, that have not
Skill enough to determine, by the Hydrostaticks, the Proportion between sinking
Solids, and the Liquor they are weighed in, may yet be assisted by what we have
delivered about Oil of Turpentine, to make a not unuseful Estimate, What is the
specific Gravity of diverse Bodies, in reference to others of the same, or a
differing, Species; and by that means, to make a probable Guess, Whether or no
it be rightly Conditioned; if he be but provided with one piece of the Body,
which he knows to be Genuine or well qualified. For This may serve him as a
Standard, whereby to examine other Bodies of the same Denomination, that he may
have occasion to Purchase, or to Sell, or to Employ. As, suppose a Tradesman
be to buy a parcel of Sublimate, he may take an Ounce, for instance, or half an
Ounce of some of That he knows to be good or rightly made: Then having
carefully weighed it in Oil of Turpentine, and set down how much it weighs
therein; if he takes an Ounce, or half an Ounce of the Sublimate, he would make
Trial of, he may weigh that, as he did the other, in the same Liquor, wherein
if it give the same Weight with the Standard, it is a good Sign; but if it
weighs not so much, it is a Sign that it has not its full or due Proportion of
Mercury, and too great a Proportion of Salts, whence its comparative Lightness
proceeds. The same Way of trying may be made use of, for the Examen of
Mercurius Dulcis, and diverse other Bodies, totally or partly, dissoluble in
Water, as of Alum, which is often Sophisticated with some baser Salt; and of
Roman Vitriol, which is sometimes either counterfeited, or adulterated by the
help of Roch All^m, and a Tincture of Copper. And according as the Weight in
Oil of the Body proposed, recedes more or less from the Weight of the Standard,
so the Adulteration may be probably concluded to be lesser or greater.

CHAP. XI.
BEfore I go off from this Subject, it is fit that I give you notice, that the
Hydrostaticks may supply us with another Way of Estimating the intensive
Gravity of Bodies, Solid or Fluid, that may on some occasions be of good use.
The Way I mean is this; we take a solid Body more than heavy enough to sink in
Water, and carefully observe, once for all, its Weight in the Air; then we
weigh the self same Solid, first in One of the Liquors we would examine, and
then in another; and so onwards, if there be more than two: And having noted
the difference between the Solid, and each of the Liquors, it is easy to find,
according to the Practice elsewhere delivered, the specific Weight of each,
and the Proportions betwixt them. And in regard it is but One and the same
Solid, that is compared to the differing Liquors; whatsoever their Number be,
it will not be difficult, to compare the specific Gravities of those Liquors
betwixt themselves, and to discover by the Weight of the First, That of any of
the Others that One pleases.

The proposed Way having been but Summarily delivered, it will not be amiss to
subjoyn some Remarks relating to it.

And First, If you intend to employ but One Solid in your Examen of Liquors,
'twill be necessary you make Choice of such an one, as has a much greater
specific Gravity, than is necessary to make it sink in Water. For there are
some Liquor^ that are far, perhaps twice, more ponderous than This newly named.
Secondly, The Body ought to be heavy enough to sink in all Liquors but
Quicksilver, (for in That, none but Gold is ponderous enough to sink.) But if
your Trials are to be made upon Liquors that belong to the Vegetable, or
Animal, Kingdom, the Body you employ need not be near so ponderous; though it
ought to be more so than Water, because (as I found by Trials purposely made)
some Liquors, that are very Spiritous and Volatile, are yet much heavier in
Specie, than Water. It Is not very easy to pitch upon such a single Solid, as
may have all the Qualities in reference to our Purposes, that may be desired in
it, if it be to be made use of for a long time. For Thirdly, Besides that, it
ought not to lose of its Weight, (and consequently to change it,) by the
insensible Avolation of Effluvia, and that it must be, as was freshly noted, of
a considerable specific Gravity. Fourthly, It ought not to be too big, or too
intensely heavy, lest it be too heavy for a tender Balance, or require too
much Liquor to inviron it. Fifthly, It ought to be of such a Texture as not to
be dissolved, or corroded by any of the several Liquors, some of which may be
sharp and piercing Menstruums, that it is to be weighed in; and those too of
differing Natures. Sixthly, It should also be of such a Make, as is not easily
liable to be broken, or otherwise spoiled, that it may last, till all the
designed Experiments, though many, be made with it. Seventhly, and lastly, it is
desirable, that it should be of a natural and uniform, as to Sense, and
procurable Substance; that the Experiments, made with it, may be easily enough
communicated to Others, and, if they think fit, tried over again by them; and
that, if any be judged worthy, they may be transmitted to Posterity.

Several Bodies there are, that I looked upon as more fit than most Others to
be employed about the Trials, we are treating of. The chie^ of these were
Brimstone, Hard Wax Ivory, and White Marble. But tho each of these, especially
if fitly shaped, may be of use on some particular occasions; yet every one
wanted some of the desirable Qualifications lately mentioned. And therefore, I
made much more use of Three other Bodies, not because they were such as I could
Wish; but because they were the least remote from being such, among those I
could Procure. The first of these was a piece of Amber between Three and Four
Drams in Weight, of an high Yellow Color, but very Transparent, and of an
uniform Texture and convenient Shape. This was judged fit to be employed, when
we were to examine the lighter sorts of Liquors, such as common Water,
Rainwater, etc. Wine, Brandy, rectified Spirit of Wine-Vinegar, and the
Liquors drawn from it, Cydar, Beer, Ale, Urine, many Waters and Spirits
destilled from Bodies belonging to the Vegetable, and to the Animal, Kingdoms.
But it is not proper for the more ponderous kind of Liquors; since 'twill not
sink to the Bottom, but float at the Top, not only of some Liquors of the
Mineral Kingdom, (as will ere long appear;) but in several Liquors afforded us
by the Saline parts of Bodies belonging to the Vegetable Kingdom; as you will
find within a few Pages.

The Second Body, I employed, was a Globular Glass, which I caused to be blown
at a Lamp, and to be Hermetically sealed at the Neck, which was purposely made
very short, after there had been Lodged in it as much Quicksilver, and no
more, as we guessed would serve to sink it in any Liquor, except Quicksilver;
This, by reason of its great Bulk, in reference to its Weight, was fit to
discover Differences in Weight, minute enough between the Liquors 'twas weighed
in; and 'twas out of Danger of being corroded, even by sharp Menstruums; and
therefore, on diverse occasions, I preferred this Instrument to any of the other
Two; but it is disadvantag'd by these Inconveniences, that it is difficult to be
made, or procured, that it is hard to be preserved, being very easy to be
broken, and that partly on this Account, and partly on Others, it can scarce be
a fit Standard in reference to such Observations, as are to be communicated to
Others, and transmitted to Posterity.

Wherefore for Experiments that are to be imparted and recorded, I made use of
a Solid, which though heavier in Specie than was necessary to enable one to
compare together the lighter sorts of Liquors, and to discover their minuter
Disparities in point of Weight, is yet a natural Standard not subject to be
broken without gross Negligence, nor to be dissolved, or corroded by the
Liquors, 'twas to be immerst in, however of various Kinds, and very sharp, and
ponderous enough to sink in all of them, except Quicksilver, and yet not near
so ponderous, as the lightest Metals, or many Metalline Bodies; this Solid I
speak of is Rock Crystal, which I formerly represented, as for its Purity,
Homogeneity, etc. fit to afford a Measure, to which other Bodies may be
compared in Weight, and by that means among themselves. And of this pure
Concrete, we employed an almost complete Globe, (weighing in the Air ij ss
Grains 3,) save that it had in one part of it two small Holes near one another,
and easily stopped up with hard Wax, after there had been put through them an
Horse-hair, by whose means the Ball was easily fastened to the Scale from
whence 'twas to hang in the Water. The bigness of this Globular Body made it
the more fit to discover the lesser Differences between Liquors in point of
intensive Gravity. But because we may have oftentimes occasion to know the
Weight of Liquors, of which, by reason of their Preciousness, or Rarity, we can
command but small Quantities, as it frequently happens, if we be to try the
Weight of Chemical Oils, Tinctures, Essences, etc. We thought fit, for such
Liquors, to provide a piece of Crystal, such as Nature had framed it, viz. an
Hexagonal Prisme, with a kind of Pyramide at the end, which is opposite to the
extreme, at which 'twas broken off from the Body, it grew on. For this clear
and finely shaped Crystal, (or, what is very near of kin to it, white
Amethyst) by reason of its oblong Figure, might be commodiously weighed in so
slender a Cylindrical Glass, as required but a small Quantity of Liquor to
cover and surround a conveniently shaped Body, that weighed, in the Air, but
half an Ounce and sixteen Grains. And to render the Observations, made with
these two Bodies of Medicinal and other Liquors, (for there are several of
these Trials, that belong not to this Tract) the more useful to Experimenters,
I shall here desire you to take notice once for all, that the Ball of Crystal
was to Water of the same Bulk, as 2 57/100 to 1 or thereabouts; and the
Prismatical Oblong piece of Crystal was to a Quantity of the same Liquor,
equal to it in Magnitude, as 2 66/100 to 1.

I have the more particularly delivered the Way of exploring the Gravity of
several Liquors with one Solid, because there may be made of it a couple of
Applications, that may, on several occasions, be of use, not only to Chemists,
Physicians and Apothecaries, but to diverse other Experimenters, that are not of
either of their Professions.

These Applications do, I confess, belong to another Paper, ( viz. an Essay
about some Uses of Chemistry improved) that was written diverse years ago. But
since, by reason of the loss of diverse Leaves of it, I know not whether, much
less when, 'twill come abroad, I shall at present borrow some few things of it
to accommodate my present Design.

First then, the piece of clear Amber formerly mentioned, or some such
convenient Body, that is not too little, nor in Specie, too heavy, may serve
the Chemist, Apothecary, and others, to make probable Guesses of the Degree of
Spirituosity, or of Thinness, that is to be found in many Liquors belonging to
the Vegetable, or the Animal, Kingdom; which may be done with far less Error by
this Way, than by those uncertain Signs, on which the common Ways of guessing
are wont to be grounded. For having once provided a Liquor, by Comparison
whereto One may safely make Estimates of Others of the same Kind, or
Denomination, 'twill be easy, by observing the differing Weights of the Amber
in several Liquors to judge of the Fineness of any of them in its Kind; for,
Caeteris paribus, That is the thinnest, or abounds most in Spirituous parts,
where the Solid weighs more than in the Other, as for instance, The Amber we
employed, that in Water weighed 6 Grains, in common Red French Wine weighed 8
Grains, in common Brandy of a pretty good sort, such as that of Nantz 1^ 1/^
Grains, and in vinous Spirits highly rectified 34 1/^ Grains. The same Way one
may employ, to judge of the Strength of Spirits of Vinegar, Acetum Radicatum,
etc. but with a great difference in the Application. For it may pass for a
general Rule, That, it is probable, that, of Liquors destilled from Wine, Cydar,
Ale, and other fermented Liquors, the Hydrostatical Body (if I may so call it)
weighs more or less, according as the Liquor it is weighed in, is more or less
Spirituous; but, on the contrary, in Acid Spirits and Liquors, the less the
Solid weighs, the stronger One may repute that Liquor to be: That greater
Decrement of Weight proceeding usually from the greater Proportion, it
contains, of Salts that are not Volatile.

I must not here pretermit one Convenience of the Way newly proposed, that may,
in tract of time, save you some Money, and, at least, will enable you to
Husband better, than in the vulgar Method you can, Liquors that you may have
but small Quantities of, or that are worthy to be preserved. For, you know,
it is usual with many Chemists, and especially those that are more circumspect
than others, to try the Goodness of their Spirit of Wine, or Brandy, or other
Spirits drawn from fermented Liquors, by setting Fire to a spoonful of the
Spirit to be examined, in order to see, how much of it is totally inflammable,
and how great, or little, a Portion of Phlegm will be left behind. But, not
here to mention the Scruples I propose in another Paper, about this Way of
trying Ardent Spirits, I shall now only take notice, that, by the newly recited
Way, you lose or spoil all that you try, and the better the Spirit is, the
greater is your Loss, whereas by the Hydrostatical Way, the Liquor is examined
without being destroyed.

It Is now fit to add, that, by the help of the foregoing Observations, One may
also make Estimates of Liquors of the same kind not destilled, whether
fermented or not fermented; as several Sorts of Beer, or of Ale, or of Cydar,
or of Juices of Apples, or of Pears, newly pressed out. And the same
Hydrostatical Solid may be employed, to compare with one another, in point of
intensive Weight, Liquors of differing kinds, as Wine, Beer, Ale, Meads, Cydar,
Perry, Verjuice, expressed Oils, Essential Oils of differing Bodies, etc.

But, in case the Liquors to be employed be very ponderous, Amber will not be a
fit Solid to be examined about them; for I have found by Trial, (what one would
scarce suspect) not only that it would swim or float, in diverse Liquors made by
Solution of Salts, whether in the moist Air, or even in Water, such as Oil of
Tartar per Deliquium, Solution of Salt of Tartar in as little Water as may be,
and Solution of the Salt of Potashes, etc. But some destilled Liquors would
not suffer my pellucid Amber to sink to the Bottom, as I found by Trial made
with Oil of Vitriol, with Spirit of Nitre, and even with good Spirit of Salt.

Besides, there may be another Use made of our Hydrostatical Solid, which may,
on diverse occasions, be as Serviceable to Experimenters in general, by
assisting them to proportion, to their purposes, the Strength of the
Menstruums, and other Liquors, they are to employ; as the former use is to
Destillers and Apothecaries, for discovering the Strength of the already
prepared Liquors, that they would examine. For there are diverse Experiments,
that either do not succeed, or, at least, do not succeed so well, unless the
Menstruums, or other Liquors, employed in making them, be of a determinate
Degree of Strength, (which is usually knowable by a certain Degree of intensive
Weight.) This will be the more easily granted, if (as I have elsewhere shown)
the Strength and Spirituosity even of some Liquors, whose chief Virtue and Use
is to be good Solvents, may yet be unfit to dissolve, as well because their
Strength exceeds a certain Measure, as because, by their Weakness, they fall
short of it; Of this, I remember, I gave an Instance in Aqua Fortis, whose
strength, as it is Name intimates, is reckoned the best Quality it can have; for
I found, that if it were rectified so much as to make it as strong, as we
could, or but somewhat less strong than that, it would not dissolve Silver, but
required to be weakened by an Addition of Water; and I found, that the
Menstruum, though it were not much rectified, would not near so well dissolve the
Filings or Raspings of crude Lead, when 'twas moderately strong and fit to
dissolve Silver, as when 'twas allayed with a considerable Quantity of Water,
especially if afforded by Rain, or by Destillation. I shall add, that, in
making Extractions from many vegetable Substances, for Medicinal Uses, Chemists
themselves may fall into a Mistake, when they affect to employ their most
rectified Spirit of Wine, as the best Menstruum for their purpose: For the
Medicinal Virtue of not a few such Bodies does not reside only in what Chemists
call their Sulphur, and might perhaps more properly be called the Resinous
Part, which indeed is best dissolved by such Spirit of Wine, as is carefully
dephlegm'd; but also in a more Gummous, and, partly perhaps, almost
Mucilaginous Substance, for whose Extraction a moderately Phlegmatic Spirit is
more proper; because of the Aqueous Portion, that is mingled with the
inflammable One; since we see, that some Gummous Bodies, as Gum Arabic, Gum
Tragacanth, etc. are not disposed to be dissolved by the best rectified Spirit
of Wine, as they are by Aqueous Liquors, as Water, weak Spirit of Wine, etc.
and some, though dissoluble in both kinds of Menstruums, are yet less easily so
in strong Spirit of Wine, than in waterish Menstruums; as may be observed
particularly in Myrrh; for other Instances applicable to these Advertisements
belong to another Paper.

And what has been now said, may serve to persuade you, that it may be of good
use, on diverse Occasions, to take Notice of the Degree of Strength of the
Menstruum, or other Liquor, we employ about this or that nice Experiment; that
when we have occasion to reiterate it to the same Purpose only, we may be able
to bring the Liquor we make use of to the same Degree of Strength with That,
which we formerly emyloyed, and by which the designed Effect was produced. But,
in Experiments that should be very Critically made, 'twill not be amiss to bear
in mind this Caution, that if the Liquor be very ponderous in Specie, as Oil of
Vitriol, or Oil of Tartar per del quium, 'twill be fit to put something into
the Scale, from which the Solid hangs, to make Compensation for that part of
the Hair that is immersed, since Horse-hair not being of the same Specific
Gravity with this Liquor, (though it be presumed to be so with common Water) is
to be considered, as a somewhat lighter Body, capable of buoying up the Solid a
little; and therefore its Comparative Levity should be compensated.

CHAP. XII.
BEsides the Way, we come from discoursing of, there is indeed another Way,
which we have, on diverse Occasions, found useful, to compare different Liquors,
that are of the same Magnitude, in point of Weight. This is done by
successively filling a Vial greater, or smaller, furnished with a pretty long
and slender Cylindrical Stem, to a certain stable Mark made near the Top, with
the several Liquors to be compared together in point of Gravity.

But this Way I must here do no more than name, not so much because I speak of
it in a convenient place of another Paper, as because it is not Hydrostatical.
But there is also another Way to discover, Whether or no, Two, or more, Liquors
proposed differ in Specific Weight, and to make some, not groundless, Estimate
of their Differences. This is done by a hollow Cylinder of Brass, or other
Metal, made somewhat heavy at the bottom to make it swim upright, that sinks
more, or less in several Liquors, as they are lighter, or heavier, one than
another. But the diligent Mersennus himself, who proposes this Way, confesses
it to be very difficult to make sure Observations by it. To which, I shall
therefore add but this, that, being a Metal, it may be corroded by Acid
Menstruums, and if it be of Brass, or Copper, it may be wrought upon or injured
by Urinous Menstruums, too.

What Mersennus said of this Instrument, may be applied to another, though
differing from it, both in Shape and Matter. For it is made of two Glass
Bubbles, and a very slender Stem, which is Hermetically Sealed with a Ballast
in the lowermost of Quicksilver, to keep it steady, when partly immerst in
Liquors, in which this Instrument, like the Metalline Cylinder, sinks deeper in
lighter Liquors, than in heavier, in a measure somewhat answerable to their
Differences in Gravity. But, though I have, on several occasions, employed these
Instruments, and found them not unuseful, when I did not confine my self to
One, or Two, but made use of several of different Sizes, according to the
various Liquors, I was to examine; yet what you may elsewhere find about this
Instrument, dispenses me from saying any more of it in this place, than that,
for some of the ends aimed at in this Chapter, it is inferior to the Way of
examining Liquors by the help of the Balance.

There is also another Way, that is Hydrostatical, proposed by Mersennus, of
weighing of Liquors in Water, and it is This; He bids you take a Glass Vial, to
which, being first weighed in Air, and then in Water, you are to adjust a
Stopple of Wax, or Cork, that will fit it exactly. This done, you are to fill
the Vial with the Liquor you would examine, so that no Air be left between it,
and the Stopple. The Vessel thus filled, you are to weigh in Water, and
substract from its Weight there, the formerly noted Weight of the Glass it self
in Water, and also That of the Stopple; which done, the remains will give the
Weight of the Liquor proposed in Water. This Method I lately chanced to find
propounded by (the Writer newly named) the industrious Mersennus in his
Hydraulicks; but, I remember not, that he affirms himself to have made use of
it; And though it may be serviceable on some occasions, yet, I fear, it will be
troublesome in Practice. For, (to omit some inconvenient Circumstances)
ordinary Vials, capable of containing a competent Quantity of Liquor, are,
usually, too heavy to be employed with tender Balances; and common Stopples
(such as Mersennus may be well supposed to have employed) will be subject to
diverse inconveniences; as, that they may be penetrated by some Liquors, and
corroded by others, and if they be made of Cork, or of common Wax, or any other
Substance lighter, in Specie, than Water, 'twill not be easy to find its
specific Gravity; especially since Evaporation, and other Accidents make this
it self vary; and whatever Matter, Vegetable or Animal, it be made of, the
Vessel will cost you two Operations, One to discover the Weight of the Vessel
in Water, and the Other that of the Stopple, (at that time) which is
troublesome. Wherefore, when I met with this Way in the ingenious Mersennus, it
seemed to me more inconvenient, than One, that, I remember, I had formerly
thought of, and which I have sometimes put in Practice, by choosing a Vial not
too large, and of a round Figure, that being the most capacious under such a
Superficies, and, instead of other Stopples, fitting it with one of (the like)
Glass, carefully ground to the Neck of it. For, by this means, the
inconveniences of a Stopple lighter than Water were avoided, nor would the
Stopple alter its specific Gravity, either by Imbibition, or Evaporation, nor
would it be penetrated by the most subtle Spirits, nor corroded by the most
fretting Ones. To which may be added, because, in some Cases, it may be
considerable, that a Glassstopple, as it will not be wrought on by the Liquor
contained in the Vial, so it will not communicate any Tincture, or extraneous
Quality, to the Liquor, which cannot be affirmed of a Stopple of Cork or Wax,
in reference to some Subtle and very Corrosive, or otherwise very penetrating
Liquors, this Hydrostatical Bottel (as for distinction sake I call it) being
together with its Stopple carefully weighed, First in Air, and then in Water,
(that the Gravity of the whole Instrument in that Liquor may be settled once for
all) we filled it exactly with the Liquor to be examined, and so proceeded, as
we if were to weigh Quck-silver according to the Manner formerly declared in
the Eigth Chapter. The Weight of the given Liquor in Water being thus obtained,
its Proportion in Weight to Water of the same Bulk may be easily discovered by
the Way formerly delivered in the Second Chapter (or the Tenth Chapter.) This
way of examining Liquors may, on some occasions, do good Service, and I did the
rather, now and then, make use of it, because it is applicable to all kind of
Liquors, whether heavier in Specie than Water, or lighter.

If you lay aside the Stopple, the round Ball it self may be made use of, on
several Occasions, instead of that Hydrostatical Bucket, formerly mentioned;
for the weighing of Quck-silver, and diverse heavy Powders; especially if they
be Course Ones. But if the Instrument be fitly shaped, and not too heavy, there
may belong to it a greater Convenience than. This. For when you have, and are
willing to spare, Liquor enough to inviron the little Bottle, it may be
usefully substituted to the Hydrostatical Bubble, with Quicksilver enclosed,
that I formerly recommended. For, by reason of its exact Stopple, it has no
need of an Hermetick Seal, (which is not easy to be be made or procured*) and
it is far less Subject to be broken, than a Bubble. And yet that which I most
made use of, (and which weighed about i ii^ ss. Grains xix, or 709 Grains)
being well stopped with only Air in it, would link by its own Weight in Water,
and in Liquors lighter than This, as Wine, Brandy, etc. And if it were to be
employed in Liquors much more Ponderous than Water, as Aqua Fortis, Oil of
Tartar perdeliquium, etc. 'twas easy to make it fit to be weighed in them
also; by putting into it a Quantity of Quicksilver (or some other fit Body) of
a determinate Weight, as two, three or four Drams, before we stopped it: Which
Balast, when the Operation is over, may, if it be Quicksilver, be easily taken
totally out, and kept apart for the like Uses: and the empty Bottle, and
Stopple, may thereby become fit again, to be weighed in Water and lighter
Liquors.

But notwithstanding all this, because Glasses, for size, shape, and weight,
fit for Balances, tender enough, and furnished with Glass Stopples exactly
fitted to them, are very difficult to procure; and the Way it self is subject
to some of the Inconveniences, that we imputed to other Ways not long since
mentioned: it seems, that, generally speaking, See the Chapter.
this Way of finding the Weight of Liquors in Water, is Inferior for common
use, to those more simple Ones, that we formerly recommended.

CHAP. XIII.
Use VI.
HAving now laid down the Method of weighing one Liquor in another, it is
allowable, and may be fit, that we subjoyn some Application of it: Especially,
because it will become me to make good, in some measure, what, I remember, I
formerly hinted to you, viz. that, in the subsequent part of this Paper, there
would be delivered a further Use, which may be counted the VIth. of the
Hydrostaticks in examining Medicinal Bodies. And though by the Instances we
lately had occasion to propose in some of the Chapters preceding This, diverse
things referable to this Use, are set down already; Yet I should not content my
Self, (as I now must do) to point at the chief Heads or Kinds of things
referable to it; if, on a Subject that is more fertile, than it seems, want of
leisure did not restrain me from descending to treat of the particular
Instances, that belong to them.

Among the Services then, that the Hydrostaticks may do a sagacious Physician,
I must not omit One, though it has not hitherto, that I know of, been propounded
by any Author. And, I hope, you will not think it improper to be taken notice
of here, though it do not regard only the Materia Medica, but is applicable (as I
may elsewhere relate that I made it) to diverse Subjects, that are referable to
other Parts of Physiology: Since diverse Bodies, that seem not so directly to
regard the Materia Medica, as it is usually reposited in the Shops of Drugsters,
have been, in some times and places, and may deservedly be now made to afford
Matter for Remedies, to a free and ingenious Physician.

I consider then, that there are many Liquors, whose specific Gravity it may
be useful to know, not only, as it may help to distinguish Genuine, or well
conditioned Ones, from Them that are not so, but for other good Purposes too.

Instances of this kind may be afforded by the Juices of Herbs and Fruits;
where (according to the Direction given in the last Chapter) we first weigh a
determinate Quantity, as an Ounce, or so many Drams, in our Hydrostatical Jar,
or Bucket; and putting some Oil of Turpentine on it, we sink it warily into
that Liquor; whose specific Gravity in reference to refined Silver, clear Rock
Crystal, (or some other Body, if we know it to be as pure) has been carefully
found out and registered: For, by this means, (as we have lately manifested)
substituting this Oil for common Water, we may discover the specific Gravity
of Liquors, not to be weighed in Water, because they mingle with it. And thus
we may find, not only the difference in Ponderosity between the Juices of
Plants of differing kinds, as of Wormwood and Roses, and sometimes of the
subordinate Species of the same Genus, as of Absynthium Vulgar, Ponticum,
Romanum, etc. and Roses White, Red, Damask, Yellow, etc. but we may on some
occasions observe, whether, and, if at all, how far, the keeping of a Juice for
some time, more or less, or the Fermentation of it, or the Putrefaction, will
alter its specific Gravity. There are also other Liquids used by Physicians,
and not ponderable in Water, that may be by this Way examined, as Honey,
Vinegar, Verjuice, etc. And by the same Way may be also discovered and
compared, the specific Weight of the Juices of Fruits of different kinds, as
of Grapes, Apples, Pears, Quinces, etc. and of subordinate Species belonging to
the same Genus, as the newly expressed Juices, that make Sacks, French-wines,
Rhenish-wines, etc. and those Liquors, that are pressed out of several sorts of
Apples, as Pippins, Pear-mains, John-Apples, Queen-Apples, etc. And in diverse
of these, a Person that is curious enough, may probably, by the Method we have
been proposing, be enabled to take Notice of the Differences produced in the
specific Gravity (whose Changes are usually accompanied with those of
Consistence, etc.) in the several successive States, wherein the Liquors may be
found at different times; as (not to mention the Juice of unripe Grapes, viz.
Verjuice) the Juice of ripe Grapes is in very differing States, when it is newly
pressed out; when it begins to ferment; when it is yet but New Wine; when it has
attained its full Maturity and Perfection; when it begins to degenerate into
Ropy, pricked Wine, etc. and when it is absolutely changed into Vinegar, or else
into Vappa.

But here it ought not to be concealed from you, That in this kind of
Experiments, to make use successfully of the Hydrostatical Bucket is a Task
difficult enough, for Reasons that a few Trials will easily discover. And
therefore, though I would not discourage the Skilful, yet for those that do not
find themselves dextrous at making Experiments, I think it advisable to
employ, instead of the Bucket, Amber, or some other convenient Hydrostatical
Solid, or rather (which is better) a Glass-bottle and Stopple, such as We
formerly described; but as large, as may well be employed without over-loading,
or injuring, the Balance.

CHAP XIV.
AS I thought 'twas fit to give the foregoing Advertisement, by way of Caution,
in the Cases that occasioned it; so having considered the Nature and Scope of
the Hydrostatical Experiments in General, that belong to this Essay; I shall
venture to add for the Encouragement of those, that are better furnished with
inquisitive Minds, than with nice Balances; that though in diverse Trials,
especially Those that are made about precious things, as Gold, Pearls, Diamonds
and other Gems; there is no relying upon any, but very Good and tender
Balances; Yet, on many other occasions, it is not necessary, though it be
desirable, that the Scales, we employ, should be extraordinary Good. And this
for two Reasons: First, because many Hydrostatical Experiments are such, that a
little Variation from the exact Proportion of the Solid to the Liquor, or
between Bodies of the same Denomination, can lead us into no considerable
Error; or, at least, not defeat the Experimenters main Design; as, with a
Balance that is not nice, One may sufficiently distinguish between an human
Calculus, and a Pebble, or other ordinary Stone; and between Course and Fine,
native Cinnabar: And between a true Guinea, or other piece of coined Gold, that
is not very small, and a counterfeit One, of Brass, or any such mixture, though
never so finely guilt.

And Secondly, Because, as there are few Physical Experiments, wherein
Mathematical Preciseness is necessary, and fewer wherein it is to be expected;
So in many Hydrostatical Trials, it is very probable, that the difference of
Bodies of the same kind, or Denomination, flowing from their Compositions, and
internal Textures, will make a discernable, though but small, difference in their
specific Gravity: As, in Rock-Chrystal it self, we have found some pieces to
be to Water, as 2 1/10, or a little more, to One; and others, to be to the same
Liquor, as Two and Six, or between Six and Seven Tenths to One. And therefore,
how exact soever the Balance be, there must be some Allowance made for the
diversity, that may be found in the Bodies themselves, that are examined, which
diversity may perhaps produce, at least, as great a Difference in the
Proportions we seek for, as needs to be expected from a small Difference of
tenderness, in the Balances we employ. And indeed, neither One of those
Differences, nor the Other, (nor perhaps Both together,) is wont to be so
considerable, as to challenge much regard in Physical Experiments; or at least,
as to hinder it to be true, that, on most occasions, the Hydrostatical Way of
examining the specific Weight of Bodies, is preferable by far to any other Way
of doing it, that has been Practiced.

Before I proceed to the remaining part of this Essay, it will be worth while
to obviate an Objection, that I foresee may be made by Critical Naturalists,
against the Method hitherto delivered, of finding the Proportion in Weight,
betwixt a sinking Body, and Water of the same Bulk. For it speciously may, and
probably will, be objected, that, by this Method, we cannot discover the
Proportion between a Solid Body, and Water in General; but only betwixt the
proposed Body, and the particular Water it is weighed in; because there may be a
great Disparity between Liquors that are called, and that deservedly, common
Water. And some Travelers tell us from the Press, that the Water of an Eastern
River, which, if I mistake not, is Ganges, is by a Fifth part lighter than our
Water.

But to this plausible Objection, I have Two things to Answer.

And First, having had, upon several occasions, the Opportunity, as well as
Curiosity, to examine the Weight of diverse Waters, some of them taken up in
Places very distant from one another; I found the difference between their
specific Gravities far less, than almost any Body would expect. And if I be
not much deceived by my Memory, (which I must have recourse to, because I have
not by me the Notes I took of those Trials) the difference between Waters,
where One would expect a notable Disparity, was but about the Thousandth part
(and sometimes perchance very far less) of the Weight of either. Nor did I
find any Difference considerable, in reference to our Question, between the
Weight of diverse Waters of differing kinds, as Spring Water, River-water,
Rainwater, and Snow-water, though this last were somewhat lighter, than any of
the rest. And having had the Curiosity to procure some Water brought into
England, if I much mis-remember not, from the River Ganges it self; I found it
very little, if at all lighter, than some of our common Waters.

And now I shall represent in the Second place, that I do not pretend, (and
indeed it is not necessary) that the Proportion, obtainable by our Method,
should have a Mathemacal Preciseness. For in Experiments where we are to deal
with gross Matter, and to employ about it material Instruments; it is sufficient
to have a Physical, and almost impossible to obtain (unless sometimes by
Accident) a Mathematical Exactness; as they will scarce deny, that have, as I
have done, considered, and made Trial of the Difficulties, that oppose the
Attainment of such a Preciseness.

CHAP. XV. Hydrostatical Stereometry, Applied to the MATERIA MEDICA.
SECT. I.
THere is an Use of Hydrostaticks, which though it do not directly tend to the
Examen of Drugs, or Simples received into the Materia Medica, yet may be
Serviceable both to the Physician and the Naturalists, in delivering their
Descriptions; and so it may indirectly conduce to the knowledge of them; and
help, on some occasions, to distinguish between Genuine Simples (especially
Fruits) and those that are not so; It Is known, that the Writers of the Materia
Medica are wont to set down the Bigness of the Bodies they describe, by very
uncertain Guesses; and those that, to be more accurate, assign them determinate
Measures, are wont to do it, by saying, that such a Fruit, or other Body, is,
for Example, an Inch, or two Inches, or half a Foot long; and half an Inch, or
a whole Inch, or two Inches and an half, in breadth. But it is obvious to those
that are not great Strangers to the Mathematics, that, according to this Way
of describing Bodies, there may be, by reason of the great Variety of Figures,
especially irregular Ones, they are capable of, a very great Disparity of
Magnitude, or Bulk, in Bodies, to each of which, the same Length and Breadth
may belong or be applied.

I should here be able to present you an Hydrostatical Way of determining the
Bulk of Bodies, both much nearer the Truth, than that newly recited, and
grounded as well on Experiments as Mathematics; if among other Papers, I had
not unfortunately lost One, that I wrote many years ago, about the measuring of
Solids, by the help of Liquors. But though I cannot, out of my Memory, recover
the Theoretical part of that Writing, (whose Loss I regret, because it had been
examined by One of the exactest, as well as famousest, Mathematicians of our
Age, whom I invited to be present at the chief Experiments) yet, I think, I can
call to mind as much of the Practical Applications of it, as may suffice for my
present purpose.

The ground of the Way, I am about to propose to you, will be easily understood
by the following, though but short, Account. I caused to be carefully made by
skilful Artificers several Cubes, both of different Sizes and different
Materials, as Marble and Metal; whose sides were each of them, as near as the
Artist could make them, either an exact Inch, or precisely more Inches than
One, according to our English measure; which is said to differ very little from
the correspondent One of the old Romans. These Cubes were carefully weighed in
trusty Balances: First, in the Air, and then in common Water. And though I found
some little (and but little) difference, between the Products of the Trials;
yet that Difference being no more than might reasonably be expected from the
scarce avoidable Imperfection, even of good Artists and their Tools; We
concluded, that One might, without any considerable Error, take a Medium (as
they speak,) between these Products, and allow even to this Medium, a Latitude
of some Grains; since that Latitude will not amount to the Sixtieth part of the
Weight of a Cubical Inch of Water. Since therefore some of our Trials inclined
us to judge, that about Two hundred and sixty; and some others to think, that
about Two hundred fifty two; and others again, that about Two hundred fifty
six, came nearest to the true Weight of a Cubical Inch of Water; we thought our
selves at liberty to make use of that Number, that should appear most
commodious for Practice, by reason of its Divisions and Subdivisions into
Aliquote Parts; Especially if the Body to be examined were not great; since, in
that Case, Two or three Grains more or less would not be considerable,
especially in a Physical Experiment, where Geometrical exactness is not to be
expected, nor indeed required; and a far less accurate Estimate will be less
unaccurate, than can with any certainty be made by the formerly mentioned Way
of judging, by the Length, Breadth, and Depth (or Thickness) of the Body
proposed.

I made the less Scruple to pitch upon the last of the Three forementioned
Numbers of Grains, not only, because it affords many Aliquote parts for a
Number that is no greater, since barely by a successive Bipartition, it affords
Seven such Parts, viz. 128.64.32.16.8.4. and 2; But, because I was encouraged
by an Experiment differing from those already mentioned. For, having caused to
be purposely made by a good Artist, an hollow Cube of Brass, whose Cavity was
fitted to contain a just Cubical Inch of Matter; (either Solid or Liquid,) we
put it into one Scale of a tender Balance, with a just Counterpoize in the
other, and placed it there, as Horizontally as we could. Then we warily put
into it, little by little, as much common Water, as it would contain, without
either overflowing, or having its Surface, manifestly turgid; putting also from
time to time in the opposite Scale, small Weights to keep it from swerving too
much at once from an Aequilibrium. And though it is extremely difficult in
Practice, to discern with certainty, when the Vessel is so exactly filled, that
a Drop, or even Two, or Three drops, more or less, cannot be added, or taken
away, without being observable by the Eye; Yet, for this very Reason, we
thought our Experiment agreeable enough to our Supposition, when we found, that
by so light an Alteration, the Weight of the Water, when the Scales were
heedfully Counterpoized, amounted to near about Two hundred fifty six Grains,
which Number we shall therefore hereafter employ, as expressing the Weight of a
Cubical Inch of Water.

And now to apply the past Discourse to our present Purpose.

Suppose, for Example, that a Solid, heavier in Specie than Water, having been
weighed first in the Air, be found to lose of its Weight in the Water ss
Sixteen Grains, that is, Two hundred fifty six Grains, I say, that the
Dimensions of this Solid, if it were of a Cubical shape, would make it equal to
a Cubical Inch: So that, (to express the thing yet more clearly,) if the given
Body be supposed to be an easily fusible Metal, as Tin, or Lead; and being
melted to be warily poured into the hollow Cube formerly mentioned, and
suffered to cool, it would just fill it and no more; and consequently be a Cube
of Metal; whose Length, Breadth and Depth are equal to one another, and each of
them to an Inch. For, as it is a Fundamental Theorem in Hydrostaticks;
demonstrated Mathematically by Archimedes, and else where Physically by me;
that a sinking Solid weighs less in Water than in Air, by the Weight of as
much Water as is equal to the Solid in Bulk; and since we have lately shown by
Experiments, that a Cubical Inch of Water weighs ss. 16.) Grains, that is, 256
Grains; it will follow, that when the Decrement of a Bodies weight in Water is
found to be 256 Grains, the Solid content of that Body is a Cubical Inch: Since
an Aqueous Body weighing 256 Grains is equal in Magnitude, as well to the Solid
propounded, as to a Cubick Inch of Water. And here it may prevent a Scruple, to
observe, that, to make Bodies equal in Magnitude, it is not at all necessary,
that they should be of the same Weight, or of the same Matter; as is evident in
Bullets of Copper, Tin and Gold, cast separately and dexterously in the same
Mould. For though they be equal in Bulk; yet the Bullet of Copper will be much,
heavier than that of Tin; and the Bullet of pure Gold will be more than twice
as heavy, as that of Copper. Whenever therefore you meet with a Solid,
ponderous enough to sink in Water, that being weighed in that Liquor loses ^
Grains of the Weight it had in the All^^ you may conclude, the Magnitude o^
Bulk of that Body to be equal to a Cubical Inch; of whatever Matter it
consists, not of what Shape soever, regular or irregular, it be. And in case
the Solid proposed do (as it will very often happen) lose of its Weight in the
Water less than 256 Grains; you may conclude its Bulk to be proportionably less
than a Cubical Inch. And such is the Convenience of the Number we have pitched
upon, which abounds in Aliquote parts; that every 32 Grains, that the Solid
loses of its Weight in the Water, answers to an Eighth (that is, half a
Quarter) of an Inch in the Bulk of the Body: as, if the Decrement be 128
Grains, the Solid will be half a Cubick Inch; and if it be but 64 Grains,
'twill be but a quarter of a Cubick Inch; and so if it be 160 Grains, 'twill be
^/^, that is, half and half a quarter of an Inch Cube: and on the other side,
if the Decrement of the given Body exceed the Standard, viz. 256 Grains, twice,
thrice, etc. then that Decrement being reduced to Grains, as suppose it weigh i
+ Grains 32 (amounting to 512 Grains;) or i ss + Grains 48 (amounting to 768
Grains) the Body will be equal to two or three (single) Cubical Inches. And if,
after the Division there remains a Fraction, 'twill not be difficult to
estimate it, to him that considers what has been newly delivered.

SECT. II.
TO discover Hydrostatically the Solid Contents of a Body heavier in Specie
than Water; to him that knows how to make use of the Method newly delivered,
'twill not not be very difficult. But to measure, by the help of Water, the
Solidity of a Body lighter in Specie, than that Liquor; is a work not so easily
performed. It may somewhat lessen the Difficulty, to premise, that there are
two sorts of Bodies, that will naturally not sink in Water. For some are of a
closer Texture, and will not be easily invaded by that Liquor; at least, in so
short a time, as they are of necessity to be kept in it: and others abound with
Pores, that dispose them to imbibe the Water, they must be kept immersed in,
till the Experiment be dispatched.

To begin with the First sort of Bodies: It Is known to Hydrostaticians, that,
according to a Theorem of Archimedes, the weight of a Body belonging to that
kind, may be gathered from the weight of the Water, that is equal, in
Magnitude, to that part of the Body, that is immerst in that Liquor, when the
Solid floats freely upon it; as, if a Paralelipipedon, or a Cylinder, of Wood,
12 Inches long, being placed upon Water, should rest there, when a 12th part of
it lies beneath the Surface of the Liquor; in this case, the Weight of the
Water, equal in Bulk to that immerst 12th part, would be equal to the weight of
the whole wooden Body. But because the Bodies, whose Bulk Physi^ians and
Chemists may have occasion to Examine, will very seldom happen to have Shapes
so near those of regular Ones; 'twill scarce be worth our while to enlarge upon
this Way of Estimating light Bodies; which 'twill be so troublesome to make fit
for most Men's Practice, that, unless it be desired, I shall not trouble you
with it; but forthwith proceed to what will conduce far more to our present
Design, which being, To measure the Solid Contents of Bodies, not so heavy
(intensively) as Water, and for the most part irregularly shaped; It will be
necessary, that we employ a Method differing from what we have hitherto made
use of. In the First step of this, though not in the Second, we may be helped by
the industrious Mersennus: Who probably borrowed his Way of Ghetaldus, from
whose Promotus Archimedes, he professedly borrows many things.

But because, that, on this occasion, Mersennus, affecting Brevity, has made
himself obscure; so that what he writes can scarce be understood, but by
Mathematical Perusers; I shall, for the sake of another sort of Readers,
deliver the propounded Method, though not in so few words, yet more clearly, and
orderly: First then, you shall weigh in the Air, the Body, (lighter than Water)
to be examined: Secondly, you shall take a Place of Lead capable of making this
Body sink with its self in Water, and of some Weight not encumbered with
Fractions, as just a Dram, half an Ounce, an Ounce, etc. Thirdly, you must
weigh this Plate in Water, and by substracting its Weight in this Liquor, from
what it weighed in the Air, you must obtain a Difference, which will give the
weight of as much Water, as is equal in Bulk to the immersed Lead. This, for
distinctions sake, may be called, The specific Weight of the Lead in Water.
Fourthly, you must tie together (which you may best do by One or more
Horse-hairs,) the Plate of Lead, and the lighter Body, and note the Weight of
the Aggregate; which, as you know, is nothing but the Sum of the respective
Weights of the lighter, and of the heavier, Body. Fifthly, you must weigh this
Aggregate in the Water, and substract its Weight in that Liquor, from the
Weight that the same Aggregate had in the Air; and the Difference will be the
Specific Weight of the said Aggregate in Water. Sixthly, From this Difference,
substract the formerly found Specific Weight of the Plate alone in Water, and
the Remains will give you the Weight of the lighter Body in the same Liquor.

Thus far our Author; without whose help, we may easily dispatch the rest of
our Work, by the Method employed already of measuring Solids heavier than
Water. For the lately obtained Weight of the light Body in Water, being,
(according to the Method formerly proposed,) divided by 256 Grains, will give
you the Solid content of that naturally floating Body.

But because a Method, that is difficult enough to be put in Practice by those
that are not more than ordinarily well versed in Hydrostaticks, requires to be
illustrated by an Example; I shall subjoyn an Experiment, that may serve, not
only to clear up this Practice, but, in good measure, to confirm it too; We
took then a piece of Oak conveniently shaped, and that weighed in Air, 193
Grains. To this we tied with an Horse-hair, a Plate of Lead weighing just half
an Ounce, i. e. 240 Grains. But before we tied them together, the Lead was
weighed in Water, where it lost of its former Weight 20 Grains, which, being
deducted out of the 240 Grains lately mentioned, left a Difference or residue
of 20 Grains, for the Specific Weight of this piece of Lead, (For I have
seldom found Lead quite so heavy) in the Water. Then the Aggregate of the Wood
and Lead was weighed: First, in the Air, and found to be 433 Grains and an
half, and Then in Water, where it amounted but to 162 Grains; which being
subtracted from the Aggregate of the same Bodies in the Air, the Residue, or
Difference, was found to be 271 and Grains: From which Difference, the other
Difference of 20 Grains (which had been lately found) of the Leaden Plate alone
in the Water, being deducted, there remained 251 Grains and for the Weight of
Water equal in Bulk to the given piece of Wood. If this number had amounted to
256 Grains, of which it fell short but 4 Grains, we might have concluded the
Solidity of it to be a Cubick Inch; since 256 Grains of Water, which we
formerly found equal to a Bulk of Water of a Cubick Inch, was also now found
equal to the Bulk of the given piece of Wood. And indeed, intending (as I
formerly intimated) to give an Example, that should not only Illustrate, but
Confirm, the proposed Practice; I caused the Wood I employed to be formed into
as exact a Cube of an Inch every way, as I could procure from a Joyner, that
bragged of the Pains he had taken about it: So that the Difference of its
Weight in Water from 256 Grains, the Weight of a full Cubick Inch of that
Liquor, may probably be imputed to some little Imperfection in the Figure of
the Wood, or some other light Circumstance, not considerable enough to be much
regarded.

Of this Experiment one of my Notes gives the following Account.
I. The Oaken Cube in Air weighs (iii Grains xiii.) 193 1/^. II. The Weight of
the Lead in Air, (iv.) 240. III. The Weight of the Lead in Water (iiiss Grains
x.) which, being subtracted from its Weight in Air, leaves for its Specific
Weight in Water 220. 020. IV. The Aggregate of the Two in Air is 433 1/^. V.
The weight of both together in Water, is -- Which being subtracted from its
Weight in Air, gives the Difference of both the Aggregates, 162. 271. VI. The
Difference between the weight of Lead alone in Air, and in Water, or which is
all one, the Specific weight of the Plate alone, viz. being subtracted from
the Difference of the weights of the Aggregates in Air, and in Water, gives
[for the weight of the Cube proposed,] 020. 251.
The Way of measuring Bodies, that has been hitherto delivered, is appropriated
to such, as will not at all, or, at least, will not readily, be dissolved in
Water. But because there are diverse other Solids, as Lumps of Salt, Alume,
Vitriol, Sugar, etc. whose Magnitudes it may be fit for inquisitive Men, of
more Professions than One, to know, and to compare; I shall to what has been
already said, subjoyn this Advertisement; That the same Way may be applied to
measure the Magnitudes of Solids dissoluble in Water, if, instead of this
Liquor, we substitute Oil of Turpentine; whose Proportion, and Specific
Gravity to Water, we have found, or is otherwise known to us. When I first made
this Reflection, I had not such Conveniences, as when I found the weight of a
Cubick Inch of Water, to determine the weight of a Cubick Inch of Oil of
Turpentine. But, having yet lying by me the hollow Vessel of Brass, whose
Cavity was an exact Inch, that I employed to find out the weight of a Cubick
Inch of Water; I made use of it on this occasion too: and found that, when it
was carefully filled with such Oil of Turpentine, as we were wont to employ
about Hydrostatical Experiments; the contained Liquor amounted but to 221
Grains, and an Eighth (part of a Grain;) by which number the Difference of the
weight of a Solid in the Air, and in that Oil, being divided, the Quotient will
give you the Solid Contents of the examined Body.

After so circumstantial an Account, as we have given, of the Way of
Hydrostatically examining such floating Solids, as, like the Wood we employed,
are of a Texture at least moderately close; it may be seasonable, to proceed to
the mention of the Second sort of floating Bodies, that I formerly told you
might be proposed to be weighed in Water: Namely, such as, by their Porosity or
Laxeness of Texture, are subject to imbibe too much of that Liquor; even in as
little time as is necessary for the dispatch of the Experiment.

In his Phenomenon Hydraulica, page 185.
Mersennus (more briefly than clearly) proposes an Expedient in this case,
which is to cover over the Body to be weighed in Water with Wax, Pitch, or some
other Gluten, as he calls it, whose Specific Weight in Water must be first
known. But, I take Beeswax to be much preferable to the other Two. For Pitch
is so apt to stick to Ones Hands or Clothes, that it is troublesome to apply
it, and very difficult to get it off: And as for Glues, most of them,
especially the more common, are dissoluble in Water, and therefore not so fit
for the purpose as Beeswax, (for That, I presume, he means by Wax;) which has
this Convenience in it, that its Proportion to Water being usually constant
enough, and the Gravity of those two Bodies differing but little, one may more
easily dispatch a good part of the Experiment; which is thus to be performed.
Take the Solid (lighter than Water, that you would examine Hydrostatically, and
having weighed it in the Air, over lay it carefully with a thin Coat of
Beeswax, so that no part of it may remain uncovered, or accessible to the
Liquor. Then take also in the Air the Weight of the Wax you have employed, and
fasten to the Body thus coated, a Plate of Lead, or Tin, heavy enough to make
it sink, and observe the weight of the Aggregate in Water. This done, substract
the weight of as much Water, as is equal in Bulk to the Wax, and proceed with
the rest, as is before taught. Mersennus declares this Practice by this
Instance, if the Wax that invests the proposed Body be of xxij in the Air, the
Bulk of Water equal to it will be xxi; and therefore a Quantity of Water of
xxi, must be first taken away, or subtracted, that the remaining Bulk, equal
to the (immerst) Body, may, by its Gravity, show the Gravity of the Body
(proposed,) as has before been said.

But, because the Way, above delivered, can help us but to the knowledge of the
Weight of the proposed Body in Water; we must, to discover the Solid Content of
it, proceed further than our Mersennus enables us to go; and therefore we must
divide the Weight of the Solid in Water, already found, by 256 Grains, that by
the help of the Quotient we may obtain the Solid Contents of the proposed Body.

I have sometimes (to add That upon the By,) thought of, and tried, another
Expedient, to hinder smaller Solids, whether lighter or heavier in Specie than
Water, from imbibing the Ambient Liquor. In order to this, I first found the
Weight of a Cubick Inch of Quicksilver, (which is not difficult to discover by
its Proportion to Water of the same Bulk.) And then we brought the Body to be
measured, into a Vessel, whose Solid Contents were known before; and Thirdly,
all that was not possessed by the firm Body, being filled with Quicksilver,
'twas easy enough to know by the Difference in Weight of That Quicksilver,
from the Weight of the Quicksilver, requisite to fill the whole Vessel, to how
much Quicksilver the environed Body was equal. And by this means, and the
knowledge before gained of the Weight of a Cubical Inch of Mercury, the Solid
Contents of the Body proposed was not difficult to be obtained. But I forbear
to give more than this Intimation of an Expedient, which, besides that it
belongs properly to another Essay, is rather Mechanical than Hydrostatical. And
for the same reason, I forbear to set down one Way of measuring the Contents of
Irregular Solids, delivered in some Books of Practical Geometry; and another,
but yet unpublished, Way, differing enough from the Former, that tends to the
same purpose.

CHAP. XVI.
BUt, I perceive, that it is now more than time, that I should put an end to a
Labor, that has, I fear, tired you, because, I am sure, it has tired me. And
yet I dare not conclude this Tract without briefly answering a couple of
Questions, that, I foresee, may justly enough be asked me by a Peruser of the
foregoing Essay.

And first, I presume it may be demanded, Whether I have proposed the best Ways
that can be thought of, to examine Bodies Hydrostatically? To which Question I
answer, that, upon diverse Considerations, some of which have been mentioned
here and there in the Body of the foregoing Essay, I did not think my self
obliged solicitously to Invent, or propound, new Instruments for the
Hydrostatical Examen of Bodies. For though I am not Ignorant, that diverse more
curious and Artificial ways of finding out their Weight in Water, or their
Solid Contents by it, may be devised by Persons more skilful and sagacious than
I. And though also I think it not unlikely, that, when the Utility of such
Practices comes to be taken notice of, Artificial Instruments will be found out
to Facilitate, or otherwise Improve them: Yet, I thought it became me at first
to propound only the more simple Ways of Operating, as the most likely to
invite the Generality of those, for whose sake this Essay is made public; and
to require, for the main part of our Experiments, only the Use of the Balance,
as an Instrument easily procurable, and already, for other purposes, in most
Men's hands, without mentioning, at this time, any more Artificial Instruments;
though some of them are such, as I have long since not only had thoughts of, but,
for my own Uses, practiced; which Intimation may be countenanced, if it were
needful, by the mention of that little Instrument, for distinguishing between
true and counterfeit Guineas, or the like Pieces of coined Gold, by the help of
Water; which was several Years ago published in the Philosophical Transactions,
and has since (without staying for my Improvements of it) been made Use of by
Some, and usurped by Others. But of such things, no more in this place.

Having answered the First Question, it remains, that I consider the Second,
wherein though I shall aim at Brevity as much, as in the former, yet I fear, I
shall not be able to discuss it in as few Lines, as I did That. I presume then,
it will be asked, What Credit may be given to the Estimates of the Weight, and
Proportions of Bodies, obtained by Hydrostatical Trials? Since, we see, that
though Mathematicians, not knowing, or not applying, our Observation about the
Specific Gravity of Rock-Chrystal, and the Nature of Oil, especially that of
Turpentine, have given us but the Proportions of Metals, and some very few
other Familiar Bodies, as the Loadstone, Wax, Honey, Oil and Wine; yet those few
that have not transcribed from one another, differ in the Tables, they have
left us, of the Comparative weight of those few Bodies.

This Question is so comprehensive, that, I think, it cannot well receive a
single Answer; and therefore, I shall offer Two things to be considered about
it.

And first, I freely acknowledge, that there is no exact Uniformity in the
Observations delivered about the weight of Metals, and the other Bodies newly
named, among the few Authors that have written of this Subject; and there would
probably have been yet more Difference in their Accounts, if some, even of
those Writers, had not avowedly made use, to their purposes, of as much as they
thought fit of the Tables of Ghetaldus.

Nay, I shall not think it very strange, if I find, that the Experiments of the
same Man, made at distant times, and in other differing Circumstances, should
not all of them exactly agree. For I have already noted, and, I think, in more
places than One, that there will scarce be found so great an Uniformity in
Qualities, and particularly in Specific weight, among Bodies of the same Kind
or Denomination, as there is generally presumed to be. There may be also some
Difference, though but little, betwixt the Waters Men employ, especially if the
Air be at One time (as in July) intensely hot, and at Another (as in January)
exceeding Cold. The Difference also of Degrees of Goodness of the Balances,
Men employ about nice Experiments, is not altogether inconsiderable. But there
is a thing of greater Moment than this, toward the hindering Hydrostatical
Experiments, and even Statical Ones themselves, from being so accurate, as
those, that are not versed in such Matters, may require. The thing I mean, is,
the Difficulty of finding an exact Uniformity in Weights of the same
Denomination, which, for that Reason, are vulgarly supposed to be exactly
equal; But, to know how far this Supposition is to be relied on, it may at
present suffice to set down some Passages of a Mathematician justly famous for
his diligence, and who has made it his particular Work to examine these Matters
scrupuolusly. The first Passage, I shall allege out of his Writings, shall be
the short Account he gives of many Trials he made of natural Grains, whence all
sorts of weights have been deduced. In Praefatione ad Librum de Mensuris,
ponderibus and nummis.
Cum (says he) omnia grana, vel semina, quae reperiri solent in atriis
venalibus Lutetiae, ad Stateram expendissem, vixque granum ullum inter ejusdem
speciei grana grano alteri exact respondisset, in incertis ludere nolui. The
same Author informs us, that the Roman Grains differ from the French Grains;
since, as, he observes, 688 Grains of the former sort, are Equiponderant but to
576 Grains of the later sort. And he subjoyns, that, whilst he was writing
these things, there was found by the more exact weights of the Mint, an Error
in the former Estimate, of at least half a Grain in 36 Grains.

And elsewhere he gives notice, that, by two Relations, sent him from Rome,
about the Number of Grains, Mersennus in the Paper entitled, Parisiensia
Pondera, Corollar. 1. and 2.
contained in a Roman Ounce, it appeared, that even that Number varied, since
One of those Relations reckoned 612 Grains in an Ounce, whereas the other
allowed it but 576 Grains. And yet this I do not wonder at, because I have my
self found it so difficult in Practice, to get and keep Weights (for, as little
as this is wont to be suspected, the the very Air may, in time, a little alter
them,) as exact, as I desired, that I left off the hopes of it. And one Remark,
though commonly overlooked, I think too considerable to be here omitted. For, In
the Paper called Galic. Nummis.
whereas the accurate Ghetaldus's Tables of the Weight of Metals, and some few
other Bodies, in reference to one another, are looked upon as the most
Authentic that have been published and are accordingly made the most use of:
It Is certain, that the Weights he employed are not divided, as Ours are. For,
though indeed according to him, as well as with us, the Ounce consists of Four
and twenty Scruples; yet the Scruple, which with us is divided but into 20
Grains, he divides into 24. But to return to Mersennus, a while after he had
told us of the Difference between his repeated Trials, and Those of other Men,
in determining the Weight of a certain Body, he has this Passage; which shows,
that he was not over-confident of the Preciseness of all his own
Determinations. Cum autem (says he) page 37. lib. 16. Dixi, Chelin^m, undecim
dici denariorum, credunt tamen alii december dunt axat, nil assero.

Having gone thorough the First part of my Answer, to the Second Query above
proposed, it remains, that I proceed to the Other part; which perhaps will not
need more than the following Reflection.

I consider then, that though it be granted, that Hydrostatical Experiments are
not always either singly accurate, or exactly agreeable among themselves; yet
they may well be, both accurate enough to be of very good Use, especially in
Practice; and less remote from being quite accurate, than any other Ways that
have been hitherto known to be Practiced, of determining the Proportions of
Bodies in point of Weight and Bulk, and of measuring the Solid Contents of
stable Bodies, whether heavier in Specie than Water, or lighter.

The First part of this Reflection may be deduced, as a Corollary from, or at
least confirmed by, the greatest part of the foregoing Essay. And indeed, as
little Skill as I have in Hydrostaticks, I would not be debarred from the Use
of them, for a considerable Sum of Money; it having already done me acceptable
Service, and on far more occasions, than I my self at first expected;
especially in the Examen of Metals and Mineral Bodies, and of several Chemical
Productions. And I have been able more than once or twice, to undeceive Artists
and other Experimenters, that, bona fide, believed they had made, or were
Possessors of, Luna fixa, (as they call it) and other valuable things: And to
make a good Judgment of the Genuineness or Falsity, and the Degrees of Worth,
or Strength, in their kind, of diverse richer or poorer Metalline Mixtures, and
other Bodies, (some Solid, and some Liquid,) whose fair Appearances might
otherwise have much puzzled, if not deceived, me.

But of This more may be found in another Paper. For I must hasten to the
Second part of our designed Reflection, by representing, That our Hydrostatical
Methods of discovering the Weights and Bulks of Bodies, though they be not
Mathematically accurate, yet they are less remote from being so, than any Way
of Mensuration of Bodies, (especially such little Ones, as we usually have need
to examine on the account of the Materia Medica,) by the Geometrical
Instruments, that are hitherto known to be Practiced; or, by the Way, Verulam
in Historia densi and rari, p. m. 8. etc.
whereby the Tabula Coitionis and Expansionis Materiae per Spatia in
Tangibilibus, etc. was framed by the renowned Sir Francis Bacon; whose
judicious Reflections upon the Rarity and Density of Bodies, such as their
measures are delivered in that Table, do sufficiently manifest, as the
Philosophical Genius of the Author, so the Utility that may be derived from
even such Determinations of the Bulks and Weights of Bodies, as fall short
enough of being accurate.

I might here relate, that, to convince some curious Persons, how much
Hydrostaticks may be made serviceable to as accurate Mensurations, as ought to
be expected in Physical Experiments; I desired a Virtuoso, First, to put
together two Lumps of Metal ( viz. of Tin, and of Lead) in a certain
Proportion, that he was to conceal from me, but to set down in Writing to
prevent Mistakes. Then I desired him to melt the Metals (whose respective
Specific Gravities I knew before) into one Mass, and give me that Mass. And
Thirdly, I weighed it carefully in Water; and did also Algebraically examine
it. Which being done, I told him, that the Lead, he had employed, amounted to
such a Weight, and the Tin to such another; which being compared with the
Quantities he had committed to Paper, the Difference was found to be little
more than one Grain, and this it self probably proceeded from some scarce
avoidable Imperfection in the melting, pouring out, etc. of the given Bodies.
But because specious Arithmetic was employed in this Work, (to which, yet it
was not absolutely necessary,) I shall lay no Stress upon it; because, if I
mistake not, the past Discourse may suffice to give the Hydrostatical Ways, of
Mensuration of Bodies, a preference to their Competitors; and may keep it from
being presumptuous, to say, that they may be received as the best for Practice,
till some other more accurate, and yet as firmly grounded, and as Practicable,
Ways of accomplishing the same purposes, shall be proposed.

FINIS.
A Previous Hydrostatical Way OF Estimating ORES.

Advertisements.
I Know there is a greater Number of different kinds of Fossiles, than Those
that are yet known to belong to the Materia Medica. And, I confess, that the
Persons, which the following Paper is chiefly designed to assist, are those
that explore Minerals with an Aim not at Health, but at Profit. But yet I was
content, that the ensuing Discourse should accompany the foregoing Essay, as a
kind of Appendix to it, because many of the Subjects, about which both Tracts
are conversant, are the same; and the Fundamental Observation, (viz. about the
Specific Gravity of Crystal or Marble,) and the Hydrostatical Way of applying
it, in Explorations, is the same in both: and also, (and indeed, chiefly,)
because I was made to believe, that it might, especially at this Season, be
grateful, and not unuseful, to diverse Searchers after profitable Minerals.

This Paper (as the Inscription intimates,) was designed to be sent to the
Learned Secretary of the Royal Society; when it was expected, that he would
begin again to publish Monthly the Philosophical Transactions, that had been
long suspended, and as long desired by the Curious. But since some Accidents
have occurred, that occasion a further delay of their Publication, it was not
thought fit, this Paper (after having been long already) should be any longer
confined to my Closet. It Is true, that this Discourse, containing but an
Application of an Hydrostatical Experiment; I am far, as I ought to be, from
proposing it as a Treatise of the Docimastical Art; whose grand Instrument is,
the Fire Skilfully managed. For which reason I have foreborn to set down in
this Paper, any of the Flux Powders, or other Ways of Examining Ores, or of
Reducing Them, or other Fossiles, to Metals or Regulus's; that either
Say-Masters are wont to employ, or I have devised, or tried, upon Minerals.
But, this notwithstanding, our unpractised Way of Estimating Ores, may not be
useless; and for that reason, will not perhaps be unwelcome to some, that Love
Mineralogy, much better than they Understand it: Especially coming forth at a
time, when many industrious Persons of this Nation are excited to look after
profitable Minerals, by the Repeal (that has been made, since our Appendix was
written,) of a discouraging Act of Parliament, made in the Reign of Henry the
IV. And though our Hydrostatical Way, of Estimating Fossiles, will not determine
how Rich or Poor they are in this or that particular Metal; yet, (as is
intimated at the beginning in the ensuing Paper,) it it may, on many occasions,
serve to k^ep those that are Venturous, and not Skilful, from being deluded by
Cheats, or from deluding themselves with illgrounded Expectations; which the
Promising appearances of diverse Fossiles, especially Marchasites, will
temptingly Invite, but never Answer.

A Previous Hydrostatical Way OF Estimating ORES. Addressed to the Secretary of
the R. S.
SECT. I.
Sir,
AT a time, wherein so many ingenious, or industrious, A Way proposed for the
previous Examen of Ores.
Men appear very Solicitous to discover and to work Mines, both Here and in New
England, and Others of his Majesty's American Colonies; it will not, probably,
be thought unseasonable, nor prove unwelcome to the Seekers of Subterraneal
Treasures, if my desire to do them a piece of Service, make me borrow of a
Paper, I long since wrote about some things relating to the Materia Medica, a
few Paragraphs, that contain a Way of Exploration of Minerals; which though it
reaches but to One of their Qualities, will, perhaps, by reason, of the
Considerableness of of This, keep, on certain Occasions, some Searchers after
Mines from beginning chargeable Works, or prosecuting them with too great
Expectations, which are usually followed by proportionable Disappointments. And
I make the less Scruple to suffer this Fragment to leave its Company, and
present it self to you; because, after the misfortune, I have formerly
signified to you, of the Loss and Spoiling of several of my Writings, I know
not when, if ever, I may have Opportunity of Communicating to my Friends the
Treatise, that these Paragraphs belong to.

That Part of the forementioned Treatise, that concerns my present purpose, is
founded on an Experiment, whereof what you are about to read, is One of the
Applications.

I shall then succinctly inform you, that the Observation, whereon my Discourse
was grounded, is double, as will by and by appear; and that the Rise of it,
which will help to understand the Nature and Influences of it, was this. I
thought fit, (for Reasons elsewhere given) to find out, what was the Specific
Gravity of a pure Stone, such as I supposed Crystal or White Marble, or a
Stony Isicle, to be; and found it by the Hydrostatical Way of Trial, (doubtless
not unknown to You,) that is delivered in the Essay called Medicina
Hydrostatica, whereof when you please, you may command a sight, to have to
clear common Water, equal to it in Bulk, or Magnitude, pretty near the Ratio,
or Proportion of two and an half to one; or, which is somewhat more obvious to
conceive, as five to two. I said, pretty near, because it is not always exact,
nor need be for our present purpose, but usually enough does somewhat rather
exceed that Proportion than fall short of it; but that is so little, that it
may, on all common Occasions, be safely enough neglected by a Mineralist: Though,
if one pleases, one may make use of the Proportion of 2 to 1, that is, of 11 to
4.

SECT. II.
THe Uses, that may be made to our present purpose of this Fundamental
Observation, are either of a more General, or of a more Particular, Nature.

As to the first of these; When my Intention is only to discover in general,
Whether a Fossile propounded, or perhaps casually lighted on, may with
probability be judged to contain any Substance, either Metalline, or belonging
to some Fossile of Affinity to a Metalline Nature; and also, Whether, in case
the first Question be resolved in the Affirmative, the proposed Body does,
indefinitely speaking, contain much, or but little, of the Metalline or other
Adventitious Substance: When, I say, I would only make those General Inquiries,
I weigh the Body I would examine, first in Air, and then in Water, and observe
the Proportion in Specific Gravity between them; and if I find it weigh either
less, or but little more, than Crystal or Marble of the same Bulk, I judge it
unlikely to contain any Metalline Portion, considerable for its Quantity. And
if it weigh manifestly, or somewhat considerably, more than Marble or Crystal,
I guess, that, in Proportion to that Excess, it abounds, more or less, with a
Metalline Ingredient, or one or other of Affinity to a Metalline Nature.

To explain my self a little by two or three Examples; it is known, that the
Magnet is vulgarly reckoned amongst Stones, and its great Hardness confirms Men
in that Opinion. But having observed, that Loadstones, especially those that
come from some Places, that I elsewhere take notice of, seem to be apparently
more ponderous than common Stones of the like Bulk; We weighed them in Air and
Water, and found their Specific Gravity, especially of some of them, The
Author means a Paper containing Experiments and Observations about the
Loadstone, as it is a Mineral.
so far to exceed That of Crystal or Marble, that it could not be difficult
for us to conclude, that these Fossiles contained a not inconsiderable
Proportion of Metalline Matter, which, by Collateral Experiments, delivered in
another Paper, appeared to be of a Martial or Ferruginous Nature.

Emeri is a Fossile well known to many Tradesmen, especially Armourers, and
Gunsmiths, by whom it is commonly reputed a mere Stone. But finding that its
Weight in Water considerably exceeded That of Crystal of the same Bulk, since
it was to that Liquor very near, as 4 to 1; I conjectured, that it contained a
Metalline Substance, as afterward, by proper Trials, I found it to do. Upon the
same ground, (its Weight in my hand) I concluded, that Lapis Haematites, that
is commonly sold in Shops, and, as its Name witnesses, passes for a Stone, did
not sparingly participate of a Metalline Ingredient; in prosecution of which
Conjecture, I quickly thought on Ways whereby I discovered, that Iron or Steel
was the Metal it contained.

And not to accumulate Instances in this place, I shall advertise you in
general, (what perhaps may hereafter be found useful to several Enquirers)
that, upon the Grounds hitherto mentioned, I was invited to guess, that diverse
Bodies, that were little suspected to be of a Metalline, or Mineral, Nature,
did really contain a Portion of Substance that was so. And, I remember, in
particular, that, having met with Granats of several sizes, that were not
Bohemian, but were found in other Parts of Europe, and some that I discovered
in a kind of Talc, that was brought me from America; which Angularly figured
Stones, I suspected by their Weight to be Metallic, and found, by
Hydrostaticks, to have a Specific Gravity considerably surpassing That of
Crystal. Upon these Grounds, I say, I supposed them to participate, and that
not very sparingly, of a Metal, one or more; and, by other Ways of exploring,
found, that I had guessed aright; since I was able, notwithstanding the great
Compactness of such seemingly vitreous Bodies, to discover there a
Decomposition, and extract thence a Metallic Substance.

To these I might add other Fossiles, and some that were not, even by Men not
unskilful, suspected to have any Metalline Ingredients. But I have not time to
speak of Them, and therefore shall proceed in the lately begun Discourse.

SECT. III.
TO illustrate then the general Observation, formerly laid down, and make it
more distinct, I shall subjoyn the following Remarks.

First, I do not pretend, by this Way, to make any more than probable
Conjectures and Estimates, about the Contents of the Bodies, I examine by it:
But though the Estimates, grounded on it, be not always True, yet they may be
frequently Useful, as may be gathered from some of the subsequent Observations.

Secondly, If the Fossile proposed be lighter, especially if it be much
lighter, than so much Crystal, it is an almost certain Token, that it is not a
Metalline Ore. And this Negative use, if I may so call it, of our
Hydrostaticks, may be more safely relied on, than the Affirmative Consequences
usually can be. Thus, when I find that Jet, though a Fossile dug up in Veins,
especially in the Pyrenean Mountains, (as a Learned Man, whose Brother has
there a Mine of Jet, assured me) has far less of Specific Gravity, than
Crystal, I conclude it to be no Metalline Body. The like Inference I make, on
the same ground, as to Fossile Amber or Succinum, Sulphur vive, and the
Observation holds in common Sulphur, (clear or Semidiaphanous) English Talc,
Venetian Talc, and some other firm Concretions, whether Brittle or not, that
are dug out of the Earth. Among these, I think fit to mention particularly
Black-Lead, lest the Name it bears, should deceive Men into a Belief, that it is
an Ore of that Metal. For having found its Weight, in reference to Water, to be
but as 1 86/100 to 1. And, gathering from the Smalness of its Specific
Gravity, that it would prove to be very unlike our true common Lead Ores, I
found, upon Trial purposely made, that, 'twas a Mineral sui generis, and
seemed, upon the score of more than one Quality, to be of kin to a sort of
Talc, that I have met with.

Thirdly, We should distinguish between the several Uses, that Fossiles may be
sought for, and examined, by Men of different Professions, or Designs. And
therefore, if a Fossile be found to be somewhat, and yet but very little,
heavier in Specie, than Crystal or Marble; it may possibly have a Metalline or
Mineral Portion, which, though very small in quantity, may consist of such
Efficacious parts, as may make it deserve the Esteem of a Jeweller, a
Physician, or a Chemist. But if the Surplus of Specific Gravity be
inconsiderable, the Fossile it self will be so too to a Mineralist, that seeks
not to gratify his Curiosity, or make a good Medicine, but to fill his Purse.
For the Charge and Trouble of working a Fossile, so poor in Metalline
Substance, will probably either exceed the Profit, or keep it from being
considerable; whereas, if the Specific Gravity do much exceed That of Marble
or Crystal, it may give good hopes of proving a Subject profitable to be
wrought on.

Fourthly, But, here I must give notice, that, though for the most part, the
great Ponderosity of a Fossile proceeds from a Portion of some Metalline
Substance, more strictly so called, that is imbody'd with the other part of the
Concrete; yet this alone is indeed a certain Sign, that the Fossile is not a
mere Stone, but is not alone a sure Sign, that the Mineral Portion is properly
Metalline; and therefore, where there is just Cause of doubt, it is best to
endeavor by some Collateral Signs to resolve it. The Reason, why I thought fit
to give you this Admonition, is, that, besides Metalline Ores more properly so
called, there are other Fossiles, which some call Semi-Metals, others Media
Mineralia, and others again give other Appellations to; which Fossiles, though of
Affinity to Metals, are wont to be distinguished from true Metalline Ores; such
(Fossiles) as are (that I may here name the principal of them) Antimony,
Bismuth, (usually in our Shops called Tin-glass) Lapis Calaminaris, and
Pyrites, commonly called Marcasites, and vulgarly, in English, Vitriol Stones.)
But there will not perhaps occur many Cases, wherein it will be necessary to
have recourse to Collateral Signs, to discern, Whether the Mineral Portion of a
Fossile, be, in a stricter Sense, of a Metalline Nature, or not: For these
Semi-Metals that I speak of, are most commonly found either in Veins, or in
Masses, or great Lumps of their respective Kinds; and easily discover, to one
that considers them with so much as a moderate measure of Attention and Skill,
what Species of Fossiles they belong to. I have indeed from Devonshire received
a Lump of Matter, which the Owner of the Mine, not knowing what to make of,
desired my Opinion of, wherein I found some Antimony mixed with Lead, which was
the Predominant Body. But such Mixtures occur not often enough, at least here
in England, to keep our Way of Estimating ponderous Fossiles from being, on
most occasions, useful.

SECT. IV.
FIfthly, 'Twill be almost necessary to give you notice in this place, that
there may be a twofold Estimate made of the Specific Gravity of Ores; One,
when the Metalline Body proposed is weighed in its natural State, that is, as
it is taken out of the Earth, accompanied with the Sparr, or other Heterogeneous
matter, that firmly adheres to it, (only the loose Earth being first washed
off:) and the Other, after it has been beaten small and separated from stony,
and other Heterogeneous, Substances, by the help of Water; where being
skilfully agitated, there is easily discovered a notable Disparity in Weight
between these, and the Genuine, or Metalline, parts of the Ore, which being
thus severed from the rest, are called, for instance, washed Tin, if afforded
by a Vein of that Metal. And sometimes also it is very Useful, if not Necessary,
to prepare the Ore by rosting it, (as they speak) once, or oftener, or by
keeping it several hours in a competently strong Fire, as is usually enough
done to prepare Copper-Ore, especially if it be stubborn. I have distinctly
mentioned these Two States, wherein the Weight of an Ore may be estimated;
because, I have observed, that in several Cases 'twill much import the
Experimenter to distinguish them carefully. For several Ores, which, in their
natural State, have too little of Specific Gravity, to make them judged worth
the Charge of being wrought, may yet, being prepared by Water and Fire, afford
a Metalline Portion so heavy in Specie, that it may give fair hopes of
containing in it some Portion of Silver, or of Gold; and, in that case, a small
Proportion of the Former, and a much smaller of the Later, would render the Ore
considerable, and make it pretty Rich; though not in reference to the quantity it
yields of the predominant Metal, as Lead, Tin, or Copper; yet in a more
absolute Sense, as it may better recompense the Charges of him that shall work
it. Which brings into my mind, that sometime ago a piece of Lead Ore, then
brought out of Ireland, being offered me to judge of; I found it so light in
the Lump, that I thought it not at all worthy to be wrought for Lead; but
afterward upon Trial it appeared to be, though very poor in that Metal, yet so
well stored with Corpuscles of Silver, that I scrupled not to encourage the
Owner to bestow Pains and Cost upon it.

SECT. V.
BUt there is one Kind of Minerals, that I have observed to impose on Men so
often, that I think it necessary to take a particular notice of them in this
place. For, not to mention Examples, that I might draw out of the Books of
Travelers and Navigators, I have met with I know not how many, that have built
great hopes, and some, (which is worse) that have been at Charges upon those
illusory Expectations of great matters from Marcasites. And, I remember, I have
had sent me, or brought me, not only from Places nearer home, but from hotter
and colder Countries of the Indies themselves, Fossiles, whereof I was
earnestly desired to give my Opinion, that I found to be but Marcasites: And
many of these Fossiles having two Qualities, that make them very fit to delude
the vulgar, and the unskilful, namely, first, a Multitude of shining streaks,
or other glistering parts usually of a Color near enough to That of Gold, and
sometimes to That of Silver; and then, a Ponderousness usually not inferior, at
least, to that of true Metalline Ores; Marcasites, I say, being thus fitted to
delude the unskilful, I have had much ado to undeceive some, that brought or
sent me them from America, of the pleasing Confidence they had entertained,
that these promising Fossiles were Lumps of rich Ore of Gold, or Silver.
Wherefore since their Ponderousness (which is the Criterion of Minerals, I am
now treating of,) is One of the Two chief Things that delude so many, I think
it expedient, to subjoyn some few, but various, Instances of the Specific
Gravity of Marcasites, whereby it may appear, that some of them are, Bulk for
Bulk, far more ponderous than diverse true Metalline Ores, that I have tried,
have been found to be. And indeed this great Ponderosity has several times
invited me, before I made any Artificial Trial of propounded Fossiles, and
sometimes before I took them out of the Bags or Papers to look on them, to
judge, though perhaps to the Surprise of those that brought them, that they were
not true Ores, but Marcasites. And, because this Mistake is speciously
grounded, and has deceived many, whereof some have undertaken Voyages betwixt
Europe and the Indies, upon confidence of the value of these glistering Stones;
I shall decline a little the Method of this Paper, which confines me to the
Hydrostatical Way of exploring Minerals, to advertise those whom it may
concern, that they may easily try almost any Stone, that, by its great Weight
and Luster, they suspect to be a Marcasite, if they put it, either within a
Crucible, or, without One, into a well-kindled Fire, and blow now and then upon
it with a pair of Bellows. For, by this means, the Sulphur, wherewith
Marcasites are wont to abound, (so that I remember, that even by Destillation
in a close Vessel, I had iv of good Brimstone, like the vulgar, out of lbiij of
the Stones) will take Fire, and burn with a Flame for the most part blew, like
that of common Sulphur. And, if when it ceases to flame and smoke, you take it
out of the Fire and let it cool, you will find it deprived of all the gaudy
appearance of rich Metal it had before, and turned to a brittle blackish
Substance, differing enough from That of a Metalline Ore, more strictly so
called. These last words I add, because, in a lax Sense, it is easy to show,
that Marcasites, at least those that I have tried, may be looked upon as a kind
of Metalline Bodies. For, besides that I have found diverse of them to contain
Particles of Copper, I found all, that I purposely examined, to contain, and
some of them plentifully enough, Corpuscles of Iron or Steel, as plainly
appeared, when, after the newly mentioned Calcination, (for with crude
Marcasites I found not the following Trial to succeed) I applied to the
pulverized Remains a vigorous Lodestone; to which great multitudes of Martial
Corpuscles quickly adhered. And, I remember, I found in a Catalogue of the
Fossiles of Misnia, published by the experienced Kentmannus, that, under the
Head or Title of Pyrites, he brings in several Marcasites, whereof some
contained Copper, others Silver, others Gold, and others both the last named
Metals; which brings into my mind, that, having presented, among other English
Minerals, a curiously shaped, and very fine Marcasite, to a Virtuoso, that is
now Overseer of one of the Emperors best Mines; He quickly examined it by a
peculiar Way, not known to me, hoping to find in it some Gold or Silver; but,
instead of that, obtained a Portion of running Mercury, which he was pleased to
present me, and which, I presume, I may have yet by me.

Though I thought it needful to give the foregoing Caution about Marcasites, for
the Reasons before expressed, yet my Design is, only to keep the less skilful
from being deluded by their promising appearance. For otherwise I do not deny,
but that it is possible for a skilful Artist, to make (at least of some sorts)
of them a gainful use; either by fixing the Volatile Gold or Silver, that may
be found in some of them; or, by graduating Silver, by their means; or, perhaps
by some other Ways, that I can but guess at. But (to add That on this
occasion,) that, for which I much more value Marcasites, is, That (NB) somewhat
more than bare Conjectures make me think, that, being dexterously handled, and
perhaps even without Additions, they may afford very noble, as well as
uncommon, Medicines; and particularly in Continual Fevers, though their
Operation be usually scarce sensible, but by their good Effects.

SECT. VI.
ON this occasion, I must not forbear to give an Advertisement, that may be of
good Use to diverse Examiners of Ores, especially such, as are Novices in the
Art of reducing them. And it is This, that, as to many, who make Trials of
Ores, though they much value their own Flux-Powders, or Those that are cried up
by others, yet they commonly act, as if they expected nothing from those that
they prefer, but that they should more than Others facilitate the Fusion of the
Ores; as that which being once done, the Metalline part will be separated by
its own Weight, or, as it were, Spontaneously. But yet, having purposely
examined the Matter more nicely, and compared the Quantities of Metal, that we
obtained from two Portions of equal Weight of the same Ore, we found that those
Proportions did very considerably differ, though that which yielded least Metal
was flux'd down with a Fondant (as the French compendiously call, what Our men,
after the Germans, call a Flux-Powder,) that is dear enough, and not
undeservedly esteemed, when such Ores are to be handled. And I little doubt,
but that from other Metalline Ores, a greater Portion of pure Metal may be
obtained by some, but little employed or known, Fondants, and perhaps cheap
Ones too, than by Others that are much more in use and famous; Of which I may
elsewhere give some Instances: Now, One that first occurs to my Memory, was
afforded me, by two equally heavy Portions of the same Lead Ore devoid of
Sparr; whereof One, being reduced with a due Weight of Nitre and Tartar
fulminated together, afforded much less of Malleable Lead, than was obtained by
means of half or a quarter of the Quantity of Filings of Mars, which, for
Trials sake, I then employed on the Other; to show, how much better a Reductive
of that kind of Ore, that Metalline Flux was, than even a sharp and fiery fixed
Salt.

And yet, (to give you an Instance in a much more precious Mineral than Lead
Ore,) I shall add, that having, for Curiosities sake, tried some Ounces of good
native Cinnabar finely pulverized; one half with a fixed Alcaly of Tartar, and
the other with a different Flux-powder, we obtained from the first Parcel twice
as much Mercury, as we did from the other half, destilled with another fixed
Alcaly; even though it were of a Mineral Nature.

Some Observations about Native Gold. SECT. VII.
GOld, being by far the most Noble, and Precious, of Metals, About the
Hydrostatical Examen of Gold and its Ore.
it may be ill taken, if I should here leave the Ore or Mineral, that affords
it altogether unmentioned; and therefore, though I have but Two, or Three,
Observations pertinent to my present Subject, to offer about it, yet I think it
may not be useless to say somewhat of that Ore in this place.

I know, there are many learned Men, and even Chemists, that think, there are
no such things as Gold Mines, properly so called. And, I confess, that I my
self was long kept from being confident of the Affirmative. And I was induced
to this Diffidence by considering, that though having had the Honor for diverse
Years to be a Member of his Majesty's Council for Foreign Plantations* I had
the opportunity to converse with a considerable Number of Navigators, and other
great Travelers, and with diverse Persons, that had settled themselves in the
Indies, I made it more than once my business to inquire, not, Whether they knew
of any Golden Mines in the popular sense of the word, for, I knew, that there
are in Hungary, Macedonia, and some other Countries, Mines that afford Gold
enough to deserve to be wrought for it: but* Whether there are any real Mines,
or Veins, whereof Gold is manifestly the predominant Metal. Having, I say,
proposed to many this Question, I was answered, That some of them indeed had
heard of such Mines, but none of them had ever seen any. But afterward I saw
some Ore that I judged true, that was presented to his Majesty ( Charles the
Second; and I also received from an unknown Virtuoso, residing in the East
Indies, together, with a very civil Letter (which I wished had been more
Historical and less Complemental,) among other less valuable pieces of Ore, One
in whose Clefts, and a little beyond them, there appear some Lumps, wherein by
their Color, and other Signs, it is so apparent, that Gold is the predominant
Metal, that I little doubt, but that, if I would spoil the Lump by breaking the
Spar, I should find these Metalline Protuberances Malleable, without the help
of the Fire.

But being unwilling to destroy the Entireness of it, I shall make only a few,
and short, Remarks about this Ore.

The biggest Piece, and that which was best furnished with Metalline parts,
being about an Ounce and a quarter in Weight, contained so great a Proportion
of Spar, in reference to the Metal, that its Weight to an equal Bulk of Water
was but as 2 91/100 to 1.

But somewhat to compensate this Smalness of the Metalline Portion; That, that
was of it, seemed to be all Gold, there being no Sign of any other Metal in
that Lump of Ore, nor in some lesser Ones that I received with it.

The Spar (as our Mine-men use to call that stony Matter, in which the true Ore
is immediately lodged,) did not look like the Spar of Lead Ore, or that of any
other of our English Metals that I have seen, but seemed at first view to be a
kind of white Marble with a dash of Yellow.

And upon Trial, I found it to differ more from the Spar of Lead Ore, which,
with us, is usually White, and and almost Semi-diaphanous than in the Color.
For, whereas our Spar of Lead Ore is oftentimes so soft or tender, that it may
easily enough be cut with a knife, we found the Sparry Portion of our Gold Ore
to be a Solid stone, and that so hard, that, being struck with a piece of
Steel, it would yield Sparks of Fire.

Whereas also I found, that the Spar of Lead Ore would be easily enough, and in
a short time, (as about a quarter of an hour) calcined to a kind of Lime; our
Golden Spar, though kept some hours red hot in a Crucible, did not appear to be
at all calcined. And whereas I had formerly observed, that I could easily
dissolve the Spar of Lead Ore in some Acid Menstruums and even in destilled
Vinegar it self, I did not find, that our Golden Spar, though kept diverse hours
in stronger Menstruums, as Spirit of Salt, Aqua Fortis, and Aqua Regis, was
dissolved or manifestly wrought upon by any of them; as if it were of a glassy
Nature, as well as of a very hard One.

A piece of Spar, that had scarce any Gold at all that could be discerned,
being Hydrostatically examined, was in Specific Gravity to Water, as 2 65/100
to 1. which Ponderosity does but very little exceed That of white Marble, or
That of some good Spar of Lead Ore that was compared with it.

If I had received a greater Quantity of Gold Ore, I should have given a less
imperfect Account of this Subject. But these Notes, such as they are, may,
perchance, not be unwelcome to some of those many English and other Searchers
for Mines, that have never seen true Gold Ore, or have not had Liberty to make
any Trials upon it, and yet are in Search of Gold Mines, especially in Jamaica,
where, if I much mis-remember not, the General Venables.
inquisitive Gentleman, that conquered it for the English, told me, at his
return thence, that the Spanish Governor of the Island, when his Prisoner,
confessed to him, That there was Mineral Gold, though the Spaniards did not dig
deep for it for want of Workmen.

SECT. VIII.
BUt by the mention I have made of the true Ore of Gold, I would not discourage
any from seeking for that rich Metal in the Veins of some other Metals;
because, in diverse of these, I know it may sometimes be found blended with
predominant Minerals. This may appear by those Hungarian Copper Mines of
Cremnitz, Memoirs for the Natural History of T^^.
whence a considerable Quantity of Gold is yearly obtained. I have elsewhere
also taken notice, that I have seen an English Tin-Ore, Part of which I
presented to the King, wherein there lay, in little Cells, a good number of
small Leaves or Chips of Gold, which I saw there with pleasure. And though the
Tin-men, not being able to separate them with Profit, usually melted both the
Metals together, and sold the Product for mere Tin; yet an experienced
Gentleman, who was Owner of the Mine, assured me, that One of his Workmen, who
had many little Children, employed them with good Profit, to pick the Gold with
their small Fingers out of the skilfully broken Ore. And though Lead-Mines be
looked upon, as those, which the Matter, whereof Gold is made, is seldomest
found to be near, and does as it were avoid; yet, there is a place in Scotland,
(whose Name I remember not,) where, over a Lead Mine, upon or near the Surface
of the Ground, they oftentimes find Grains or bigger pieces of Native Gold
without Spar; some of which by the ingenious Owners favor, I was Master of,
and thought sometimes worthy of being presented to that curious Examiner of
Ores, his Highness Prince Rupert. And still I have one bit of Native Metal by
me, which, if I much mistake not, I had from the same place: which Fossile,
though I found it Hydrostatically (because being Native I would not melt it) not
to be, as the Owner supposed, pure Gold; yet Gold is the predominant Metal in
it, and the piece weighs forty odd Grains.

Since I wrote the last foregoing Lines, I have, in an old Collection of my
Notes, found Three; whereof the First is thus set down, A Grain of Scotch Gold,
such as Nature had made it, without any adhering Stone or Spar, weighed iij +
21 Grains: The Second thus, Another Grain of the same Gold, that had here and
there some little Stone or Spar sticking to it, and partly enclosed in it,
weighed iij + 3 Grains; So that the Heterogeneous Substance being, according to
my Estimate, abated, it weighed about iij: And the Third is subjoyned in these
Terms, A Grain of Scotch Gold weighed in Air, 43 Grains; in Water. 39 Grains:
Diff^r. 3^ Propor. 12 ^/^ to 1.

This Lightness of a Yellow Metal (heavier than Brass or Silver) deserves a
Reflection; but I cannot stay to make it.

It several times happens, that, among the lesser Grains of Gold, that are more
properly called Sand-Gold, there are found pieces, some of which I have seen,
that are singly big enough to be tied about with an Horsehair, and so weighed
in Water, as Lumps of Ore of other Metals are wont to be. And to such bigger
Fragments of Gold, it is manifest, by what has been already delivered, that our
Hydrostatical Way of exploring may be usefully applied. For since, according to
the famous and diligent Mersennus, and some esteemed Writers, pure Gold is to
Water of the same Bulk, as (about) 18 to 1; and by my Examen of very fine Gold,
I found, that it equals about Nineteen times the Weight of as much Water, (I
say, about, because I unhappily lost the exactest of my Trials upon Gold, among
those made upon the other Metals in a most exquisite Balance) as is equal to
it in Bulk; it will readily appear, Whether the Fragment proposed be perfectly
pure or not. For, if its Weight amount to near Nineteen times as much Water in
Quantity, we may conclude it to be unallayed; and, as it wants less or more of
this Ponderosity, we may conclude it to be more or less pure.

SECT. IX.
It Is known, that, since we began effectually to cultivate the African Trade,
it frequently brings into these Parts, besides things of less value,
considerable Quantities of what, from the most usual Size of it, is by many
called Sand-Gold; but which, by reason of the very unequal Bulks of the Grains,
may perhaps justly be called Fragments of Gold; since being brought from the
Maritime parts, where no Mines of Gold are yet found, they seem to have been
broken off and washed away from hidden Veins by the violence of Waters, that,
having carried them as far as they were able, left them a Prey to Men. Now,
(because that unless it be perhaps brought by, or for, some Virtuoso) there is
scarce any Gold that comes into Europe in Lumps, under the form of Ore; but a
great deal that is brought from Guinea, (and those other parts of Africa,
which, for that reason, are comprised under the Name of the Golden Coast) in
the Form chiefly of Sand or Gravel, grosser or smaller, and partly also of less
minute Pieces; it may conduce to the scope of these Papers to take notice,
that, in making Estimates of the Genuineness, and the degrees of Purity of
these native Fragments of Gold, our Hydrostacal Way of exploring may be of no
small use.

For first, when we have once discovered the Proportion between pure or
exquisitely refined Gold, and Water equal to it in Bulk; (which Proportion I
have lately given exactly enough, for our present purpose,) it is easy, by our
Hydrostatical Method, to examine the Fineness of any other Gold proposed; so,
at least, as to know, whether it be perfectly Fine; and if it be not, whether
it do considerably fall short of perfect Fineness. But since of this I
elsewhere treat, I think it more proper to observe in this place, that when
once a Man has found the true Specific Gravity of a parcel of Sand-Gold,
(smaller or courser,) whose Degree of Fineness he knows by Collateral Trials,
or some other Means, (whatever they be) He may (as was formerly noted when I
spoke of Metalline Ores,) take this Specific Gravity for a Standard, with
relation to which, he may make his Estimates of the Fineness of other parcels
of the like native Gold, that he is concerned to buy, or to examine. And, by
this means, he may oftentimes prevent that chief Fraud of the Negroes, whereof
several Traders to the Golden Coast are not a little apprehensive; as being in
danger to be much damnified by it. For they complain, that, though the Blacks be
otherwise, for the most part, but a dull sort of People; yet they have often
made a shift to cheat the Traders, by clandestinely mixing, with the right
Sand-Gold, Filings of Copper, or rather of Brass, whose Color does so resemble
that of Gold, that the Fraud is not easily discerned. And in the Account of a
late Voyage, made by the French, to the Coast of Africa, to Trade especially
for Gold, it is acknowledged, that the Officers were egregiously cheated by the
Blacks, who, instead of paying them for the Wares they brought, with Powder of
true Gold, gave them Powder of Brass, or gilt Copper, which those that were not
accustomed to make Trial of, are, as the Relater complains, such Wares, in a
scarce evitable danger to be cheated: as these French men confess they were in
one day to the worth of a thousand Crowns. But, in regard, that, as Trial has
informed me, Brass is not quite half so heavy as fine Gold of the same Bulk; if
there be any considerable Quantity of Filings of Brass with the Gold; This
Mixture being put into such an Hydrostatical Bucket, or wide-mouthed Glass, as
is mentioned in the Essay, will manifestly weigh less in Water, than if it were
all Gold. And by comparing its Specific Gravity, with that formerly found, to
the Grain-Gold pitched upon for a Standard; the greater or lesser Decrement of
the suspected Gold, will help to make an Estimate of the Quantity of Brass,
mingled with the natural Gold.

SECT. X.
BUt, though my present Undertaking do not oblige me to consider Sand-Gold,
otherwise than Hydrostatically; and, though it highly concerns Merchants and
Others, that deal in so rich a Commodity as Gold, and that is by so many
studiously adulterated, to be furnished with nice and trusty Balances; yet,
because diverse Persons, especially Seamen, that trade to the Gold Coast and
other parts, where Sand-Gold is to be met with, do, (perhaps too often) without
being furnished with good Scales and sufficient skill to use them, venture upon
buying such precious Wares; it will not be to depart from my general and main
Design, which is to serve the Public; if I deviate a little from my Subject,
and add to the Hydrostatical Way, lately proposed, of examining Sand-Gold, Two
or Three Chemical ways to the same purpose. First, then, if he, that would
purchase Sand-Gold, doubts, that there are Filings of Brass (or of Copper) mixed
with it; in case he have Aqua Fortis at hand, he may quickly discover the
Cheat, if there be any. For, it is known to Chemists, that Aqua Fortis will not
work upon Gold, and therefore, if there be Filings of Brass mixed with it, the
Operation of the Menstruum upon those, together with the Color betwixt blew
and green, it will thereby acquire, will discover the Deceit. But, because if
Nature has mingled much Silver with the Gold, the Proof by Aqua Fortis will
require Skill, and may puzzle those that want it; I shall add, that good Spirit
of Urine may be substituted in its stead. For, I elsewhere show, that 'twill
readily work upon Filings of Copper or Brass in the Gold, and gain from them a
fine blew Color; and this being a Menstruum not corrosive, like the other, but
harmless to most Bodies, and a good Medicine for human Bodies in several
Diseases, (as the Jaundice, Pleurisies, some kind of Fevers, Coughs and
Asthma's) may be fit to be carried about in Voyages, and to be preferred to
Aqua Fortis. And, to make the Operation of this Liquor on Filings of Brass far
more quick, than if the Solution be attempted an ordinary Way; I thought upon
the following Expedient. I took Filings of Brass, (and the like may be done
with those of Copper,) amounting to the Weight but of Eight or Ten Grains, or
perhaps less; and having with my Finger spread them somewhat thin upon a small
piece of white Paper, I moistened them thoroughly with good Spirit of fermented
(or putrified) Urine, (which will not dissolve Gold) that, by this means, the
Air might promote the dissolutive Action of the Menstruum; which, accordingly,
it did so well, that, to the surprise of the Beholders, there appeared, in less
than a quarter of an hour, and sometimes in a few minutes, a manifest, if not
also a deep and pleasant, blew Color upon the Paper, or on some of the
Filings, (as both. Those that carry with them Spirit of Hartshorn, or such
other Volatile Alcalys for Medicinal Uses, (as some modern Ship-Chirurgeons
do;) may, for a need, employ That instead of Spirit of Urine. Nay, one may for
the same purpose make use of Urine it self never destill'd, if it be Stale and
Rank enough, (as it grows to be, sooner in hot Airs than in others:) Since
having for Trials sake moistn'd with such Urine some Filings of Brass, thinly
spread on a piece of Paper, there was a manifest Blewness produced in about a
quarter of an hour. But I thought also of another Way, which I presumed would
be better liked by most Traders, as more Commodious; because the Agent, being
in a dry Form, cannot, like Spirituous Liquors, be spilt; and though it be more
easily procured, may serve the turn almost as well. This Agent is common Sal
Armoniack, of which, when I have occasion to use it, I reduce a greater
quantity to Powder, than I guess the quantity of Water, I shall need, will
dissolve; that the Liquor may be satiated with the Salt. With this Brine I
thoroughly wet Filings of Brass, (or Copper) after the forementioned manner,
thinly spreading them with my Finger on a piece of Paper, or some other fit and
flat Body; and in a short time (as about a quarter of an hour or less,) there
will appear a Greenish blew Color, drawn from the Brass by the Liquor: Which
(Liquor,) I suppose, I need not tell you, will not work on the Gold, wherewith
the Brass is mingled.

SECT. XI.
I Have observed such a Variety of appearances, and disguises, of Metalline
Bodies, and some other Minerals, that I would advise those that are given to
the Search of Mines, and other Fossiles to have their Eyes always open, when
they pass (especially by Land) from one place to another; that they may be
ready to take notice of any unknown, or uncommon, Fossile, that they chance to
see in their Way; and that having taken it up, they do not neglect to ponde it
in their hands (which after a little Practice 'twill not be difficult to do,
though not exactly, yet not unusefully) and, if they judge it to exceed the
Weight of Crystal, or Marble, to examine it Hydrostatically at their first
Convenience. For there are in England, as well as in diverse other Countries,
useful Fossiles, that are wont to be overlooked by the unskilful* and I have
found in this Kingdom, even upon, or very near, the Highways, Eagle-stones; and
some other Minerals, that were not suspected to be of English growth. And, I
remember, that having occasion in the Country, to pass by the Workhouse of an
ingenious Potter, that I sometimes employed in his Profession; and having
viewed the ground somewhat attentively, among some other uncommon Fossiles that
I took notice of, I made a discovery of Manganese, or Magnesia, whereof I gave
the Potter an Advertisement, which he afterward thankfully made use of, having
found the Mineral very proper for the glazing and and coloring of his Vessels.

Nor was this the only kindness, that skill in Mineralogy, as little as mine
was, enabled me then to do him. For he having invited me to view, very
privately, a place wherein there was great store of a Fossile Substance, that
Men knew not what to make of, because they had not seen, nor heard of, the like
in England: The knowledge I had of some Italian Mines, made me quickly guess,
What it was that was taken for an unknown Metal. For it is true, that this
Mineral was not divided into Lumps of such Shapes and Bignesses, as make
glittering Fossiles pass for Stones among the unskilful, such as are the
Marchasites whereof they make Vitriol, and are found by the Seashore, in or
near the Isle of Wight, and, (though not so plentifullly) in other parts of
England (where I have found them;) but ran a great way (and I had not Time or
Liberty to try How far) under ground, like a Vein of Metalline Ore. But this
notwithstanding, I judged the Mineral to be but a Marchasite, in a Form,
unusual indeed in England, but which is not without resemblers in some parts of
Italy; which Conjecture I found true the same day, by some easy Trials, that
manifested it to abound much more in Vitriolate Salt, than any Marchasite that
I had examined in the form of Stones. So that, though I had no opportunity to
try, whether or no it contained any better Metal than Iron; yet I concluded,
that, Caeteris paribus, it might be employed to to make store of Vitriol, in
far less time, and with far less cost, than the Marchasites made use use of, in
the Vitriol Works at Deptford, or elsewhere in England.

I remember also, that a Mineral of an odd, though pretty, appearance, being sent
me, whose Species was unknown to the Mine-men that dug it up, I guessed that it
was a Fossile, that I had not found in a good Printed Catalogue of our English
Minerals, (namely) the Ore of Bismuth. And in this Conjecture some Trials,
purposely made of that Mineral, sufficiently confirmed me; and gave me cause to
be sorry, that the Vein, that afforded it, was so very small, as the Diggers
found it, of an Ore, that has Properties Curious enough; and is by some famous
Chemists affirmed to have some that are, not only Rare, but Wonderful.

But the chief thing that invites me to recommend, in this place, to those that
Travel, an heedful eye on the Ore-like, or ponderous Substances, that may occur
to them, is, That One of the Applications of our general Remark, about the
Specific Gravity of Fossiles, may be extended to an Use, that has not, that I
know of, been made by Mineralists, and and which yet I thought fit not to
overlook: because I see no need, we should be confined to examine only those
Fossiles, whereof we can obtain Parcels, big enough to be weighed in Water in
the entire Body. For besides other Minerals, that may be found profitable to
the Physician, the Drugster, or the Mineralist; the Ores, or Wombs, of Metals
themselves, may be diverse times found disguised in the Form of Earth, or of
Mud, easy to be dried: Which Fossiles, though (because they chance not be found
in Lumps) unfit to be kept immediately suspended by an Horse-hair; may be
conveniently enough examined by the help of a Glass-Jar, whose Weights in Air,
and Water, and their Difference, (which gives the Specific Weight of the
Vessel) have been taken once for all, which I usually call an Hydrostatical
Bucket. For this Vessel, being almost filled with the propounded Fossile, and
carefully counterpoized in the Air, and then thoroughly wetted with Water; and
when it is so, warily let down into the Water, and kept suspended by an
Horse-hair to a tender Balance; when, these things, I say, are done, the
Difference between the Weight of the Mineral and Vessel, when they are under
Water, and their former Weight, being observed; and the Specific Weight
already found of the Vessel it self in Water, being subtracted from that
Difference; there will remain the Weight of the Fossile only, (which we here
suppose, to be heavier in Specie than Water, and not to be dissoluble in it) or
the Mineral it self, in that Liquor; and consequently, the Proportion between
that Body, and Water of the same Bulk, as is elsewhere sufficiently declared.

SECT. XII.
TO manifest, that This Expedient may be of use in diverse Cases, I shall only
here observe, that a late Author, who has published an Account of Swedland,
declares, that one of the best sorts of Swedish Iron (which, you know, is much
esteemed in its kind) is diverse times found, in the Form of a red Mud, at the
bottom of Lakes, or far lesser Stagnant Waters: which I the more readily
believe, because I have found some English Okers (that pass but for red Earth,
or Stone of that Color;) to be richer in Iron, than I found some famous Ores
of that Metal to be. And another experienced Writer, who gives us an Account of
the Gold and Silver Mines of America, among which he spent several Years, takes
notice, that Gold it self is found, from time to time, disguised into a reddish
Earth, or is (though unsuspectedly) harbored in it. Vannochio.
An Italian Mineralist, of repute in the last Age, does also take notice, that
a reddish sort of Earth does sometimes contain a Portion of the richest Metals.
I have observed some Europaean Diamonds, as many call a sort of clear and
finely-Figured Chrystals, to grow in a red Earth; whence I have taken up pretty
store of them. And an inquisitive Traveller, who has been in the Indies,
presented me with a certain Earth, which he affirmed to be from the Diamond
Mines, (I presume, in the Kingdom of Colchonda) which I found to be also red,
and which I made some Trials of, that belong not to this place.

SECT. XIII.
BUt the profitablest Use, that a Mineralists may make of our Hydrostatical
Bucket, is, to employ it much in weighing Variety of colored Sands, and
Gravels; particularly, some hereafter to bementioned.

And to let you see, by an easy Instance, how apt we are to overlook Sands for
want of trying them by Weight, I shall not tell you, that I have sometimes seen
a sort of Sand that was slighted as common or worthless, which, being washed
and viewed in a Microscope, though none of the best, looked like an Aggregrate of
small Granats, and perhaps was so; but shall here content my self to instance
in that black Sand, that is commonly used in London and elsewhere, only to dry
up the Ink of Words that have been newly written. For having observed when I
had some quantity of this in my hand, that it was manifestly heavier than
common Sand; I thought it worth the being examined by the Hydrostatical Bucket;
by which Trial, that which we employed, appeared to be to Water of the same
Bulk, near about as 4 6/10 to 1. And having, for Reasons that I cannot stay to
mention, judged this Sand to be a Mineral of a Martial Nature, I was confirmed
in my Conjecture, by melting it down with two or three parts of Antimony, and
casting it into an Iron Cone. But I was more than confirmed in the same
Conjecture, when, having tried it with a vigorous Loadstone, I found it to be
far richer in Metal, than any of the English Iron Ores I had made Trial of, and
(except perhaps One) than any of the Outlandish: For, having taken, at
adventures, some Drams out of a much larger Quantity, and weighed it; I found,
that at least Seven parts of Eight would easily be taken up by the Magnet. But
such Observations as these, are not the things that chiefly move me to
recommend the Examen of Sands and Gravels to the Mineralist; particularly,
those sorts of them, that, being somewhat ponderous, are Reddish or Yellow,
especially if they retain those Colors, after they have been made red hot, and
quenched in cold Water.

Therefore to proceed to the mention of richer Sands, it is known, That, from
the Coast of Guyny, Europaean Traders, of several Nations, do yearly bring
Gold, to a great value, which is washed or picked out of the Sand. And even in
Europe there are Rivers, whose Sand is inricht by Grains of Gold, for which the
Tagus that runs by Lisbon, and Pactolus, were famous among the Ancients. I knew
an industrious Chemist, who owned to me, that he got Gold with Profit, from the
Sand, which he found in some places of the Banks of the Rhine: and there is a
little River in Savoy proceeding from the Mountains there, on whose Banks, after
a Land Flood, I saw poor People busy themselves in seeking for Grains of Gold.
Some Trial, (also) that I caused purposely to be made, confirmed me in a
Conjecture, which possibly may hereafter prove Beneficial to many; namely, that
the Sands of diverse places, if they be Skilfully treated by a dextrous Chemist,
may afford much more Gold, than is picked or washed, out of them in Form of
Grains. For besides, that there may be many Atoms, or Corpuscles, of Gold that
are so very minute, and stick so close to Grains of Sand, that they are neither
taken notice of by the Eye, nor separable by washing, and picking; besides
this, I say, there may, as I conceive, be many Particles of Gold incorporated
with the Body of the Sand, which may be a Kind of Womb for matter of a Golden
Nature, that a skilful Artist, by the help of proper Additaments, may separate
with Profit especially, if, with Litharge or Minium, he first reduce the Sand
to a Glass, and then take care to get the Volatile Gold, by giving it a pure
Body fit to retain and fix it, such as is fine Silver: Out of which, I
remember, we separated by Quartation, (though without Profit, because of the
Charges, and of the small Quantity we could work with at once,) from as much
vitrified Sand, and two or three fluxing Additaments of small price, as were
contained in one Crucible, (that broke too, before Operation was near done,)
sixteen Grains of pure Gold; that you may yet see, if you desire it.

SECT. XIV.
IT need not startle you, that, in reciting this Experiment, I made mention of
Volatile Gold. For, though, I know, that diverse learned Men, and some able
Chemists themselves, look upon it as a Fictitious thing; and that seems to bear
a kind of Contradiction in its very Name; in regard of the perfect Fixity they
presume to be an Essential property of Gold: yet I do not scruple to dissent
from them, being warranted so to do by my own Experience. For, I have, more
than once, made use of a Way, wherein, by the help of an Additament,
inconsiderable as to Bulk, and less as to Weight; one may, without a naked
Fire, and in a Glass retort, sublime Gold, (not prepared by previous
Calcination) sometimes in the Form of a yellow, or golden colored, Salt; and
sometimes, when the Operation succeeded better, in the Form of thin Chrystals
prettily shapt, Glossy, and as red as Rubies. But this upon the by; it may
perhaps be more useful to Searchers of rich Fossiles not found in Lumps, if I
take this occasion to observe, that when they meet with Sands, Earths, Mineral
Fragments, etc. that considerably exceed Crystal in Specific Gravity; and by
the Place wherein they are found, or by other Tokens, give hopes of their
containing Corpuscles of a golden Nature: When this, I say, happens, it will
not be advisable, hastily to reject such Bodies; but rather carefully to try,
Whether they do not deserve a better Usage. For, having sometimes had the
opportunity to discover Corpuscles of Mars, as Chemists call Iron and Steel, in
a far greater Variety of Fossiles, and of Disguises, than even many noted
Chemists would have imagined, or some of them could, upon heedful Trial,
discover; I was much confirmed in my Suspicion, That Corpuscles of a Golden
Nature may be concealed in diverse Bodies, which are thought not to contain any
Metal; and that in more of those Minerals, that are looked upon as Ores of some
other Metal, because of its being manifestly Predominant, there may be mingled
pretty store of Particles of Gold or Silver; which (because of the greater
Quantity of that other Metal, or Mineral, that does, as it were cover or
disguise them;) lie unperceived, and usually unsuspected, by Persons not very
well acquainted with such Matters; and yet may, by One that is very skilful, be
separated even with Profit.

SECT. XIII.
BUt the Grounds of the forementioned Suspicion being as yet but Conjectural, I
shall decline the particular mention of them in this place; and shall rather
Advise, with reference to Ores in General, that those that would apply the
Hydrostaticks to Them, do labor to procure Samples of the Ores of differing
Mines, especially if they be found in the same Country; and do either by Trial
or strict Enquiry inform themselves, what Proportion of the Metal, that
denominates them, they contain. For these Portions of Ores and Minerals, being
carefully weighed in Air and Water, and their Specific Gravities, being
thereby made known, they may serve for a kind of Standard, by Comparison
whereto we may oftentimes make not altogether unuseful Estimates of the
Metalline Portions contained in other Parcels of Ore, of that Species, whether
afforded by the same Mine, or Vein of it, or by any other of the same Metal)
Hydrostatically examined.

For Instance, our English Lead-Ores, that are worth taking notice of, may be,
for distinction sake, divided into Three Kinds or Orders, and in each of these,
there may be allowed a Latitude for greater, or lesser, Degrees of Goodness.
The First sort is of those Ores, that, in the ordinary Way of melting, hold
some of them from 30 lb of Lead, in an hundred Weight of Ore, to 40; and others
to 45 lb of the same Metal, and these by several are slighted, as mean; and
scarce, if at all, worth working; especially, those that hold under 35 or 40.
As for the Second sort, that reaches from 45. to 60 lb, in the hundred; the
most usual Proportion, I have found in many Trials has been about half the
Weight of the Ore in clean and Malleable Lead. These Ores are thought in,
differently good and worth working: But other Ores comprised in this Second
sort, held about 55, and some near 60, and these were looked upon, not only as
Good, but pretty Rich. And for the Third Sort, it consists of those that yield
from 60 to 80. in the hundred, and these Ores are justly reputed very Rich, (in
lead) especially these that come any thing near 80; for, I confess, I never met
with any that reached so far, but was assured by an ingenious and skilful
Gentleman, Master of his Majesty's Royal Mint, that he had found some such upon
Trial. But for me, I think that I have not above twice or thrice met with any
that yielded me above 75. These looked exceedingly Promising, as if they were
all Metal, and I observed, whether the thing were casual or not, some Lumps to
be composed of diverse great Cubes like Dice, sticking very hard to one another.

The Considerations, that moved me to offer the Advice given at the beginning
of this Section, invited me to make Researches of the Specific Gravity, not
only of diverse English Ores, as of Lead, Tin, etc. Of which I had carefully
made a Collection, (that was lost by a sudden Fire, broke out in the place
where I kept them,) but of the Ores that were presented me from several
Countries, both in Europe and America; as Swedish Copper and Iron Ores, German
Silver and Tin-Glass Ores; Hungarian Antimonial Ores; New English Lead, Iron,
and Copper Ores, etc. The Effects of some few of which Researches, that chanced
to come to hand, whilst I was seeking for some Hydrostatical Trials of Drugs, I
thought it not amiss to insert in a Table annexed to the Medicina Hydrostatica;
because perhaps they may be of some use, in making a previous Conjecture, about
a Mines being, or not being, likely to be wrought with Profit, all other things
concurring, that should do so. Which last Clause I desire should be taken
notice of; because there are diverse other Circumstances, besides the Proportion
of the Metalline part in the Fossile, that are fit to be considered, [as, the
Plenty, or Scarcity, of the Mineral; the Easiness or Difficulty of coming at
it, because of its depth, or its being, or not being troubled with Waters, etc;
its Nearness to Plenty of Fuel; and the Convenience of Water to drive Mills;
its Nearness to, or Remoteness from, the Sea, or some Navigable River,
convenient for its Transportation, to omit other important Circumstances]
before One begins to work a Mine; which as they happen to be Commodious, or
Inconvenient, may render the Attempt Advisable, or Imprudent.

But Sir, I perceive, (though late) that I have forgot, I was to write, not a
Book of the Trial of Ores, and other Minerals, but a moderately, sized Letter,
about an Hydrostatical Way of Exploring their Specific Gravity. And therefore,
to avoid increasing the already too great Prolixity of this Paper, by making an
Apology for it, I shall lengthen it, only to beg you to Pardon it, and to look
upon the Writer, as

SIR, Your most humble and Obedient Servant R. B.

Advertisement.
TO give the Curious the Satisfaction of seeing at one view, and so of easily
comparing together, the Specific Gravitys of a good Number and Variety of
Bodies; and to save them the labor of turning over many Leaves of the
foregoing Tract, to find the particular Body, whose Ponderosity they desire to
know; I have caused to be annexed a Table, containing in an Alphabetical Order
(though not a scrupulously exact One;) the Names of the Drugs, and other Bodies,
whose Gravities are delivered in the foregoing Papers; without scrupling to add
some others, that I chanced to light on, in turning over some of my old and
forgotten Notes.

But I must to the following Table premise this Advertisement, (warranted by
several passages of the foregoing Papers here laid together) That it is not to
be expected, Every one that shall try the Specific Gravities of the Bodies
here mentioned, shall find all of them to be precisely the same, that the Table
exhibits: Since, (not to mention, that perhaps every Experimenter will not
employ so much Care, and be assisted with so much Use, in making Hydrostatical
Trials, as Those this Table consists of were made with) the Difference, that
may sometimes be found between his Trials and mine, may very probably be
imputed to that Variety of Texture and Compactness, that may be found in
several Bodies of the same kind, or Denomination; neither Nature, nor Art,
being wont to give all the Productions that bear the same Name, a Mathematical
preciseness, either in Gravity or in other Qualities.

The TABLE.
A Weight In Air in Gr. In Water in Grains. Proportion. AMber 306 12 1 4/100 to
1. Agat 251 156 2 64/100 to 1. A piece of Allomstone 280 152 2 1^/100 to 1.
Antimony good and supposed to be Hungarian One 391 295 4 7/100 to 1. B Bezoar
stone 187 61 1 48/100 to 1. A piece of the same 56 22 1 64/100 to 1. A fine
Oriental one 172 60 1 53/100 to 1. Another 237 61 1 34/100 to 1. C Coral red
129 80 2 63/100 to 1. Crystal 256 140 2 21/100 to 1. Cornelian 148 103 3
29/100 to 1. Calculus humanus 2570 1080 1 72/100 to 1. Coco-shell 331 85 1
34/100 to 1. Native Crabs Eyes. 77 36 1 89/100 to 1. Crabs Eyes Artificial. 90
54 2 48/100 to 1. Calx of Lead 138 123 8 94/100 to 1. Copper Stone 65 49 4
09/100 to 1. Common Cinnabar 802 702 8 1/^0 to 1. Cinnabar of Antimony 197 169
7 3/100 to 1. Cinnabar Native 197 171 7 57/100 to 1. Coral White 336 204 2
54/1002 to 1. Another piece fine 139 85 2 57/100 to 1. Calculus humanus 302 97
1 47/100 to 1. Copper Ore 1436 1090 4 15/100 to 1. Copper Ore Rich 413 314 4
17/100 to 1. Cinnabar Native, very sparkling 226 194 7 6/100 to 1. G. Gold Ore
not Rich, brought from the East Indies 1100 682 2 63/100 to 1. Another Lump of
the same 1151 717 2 6^/100 to 1. Granati Minera 217 147 3 1/10 to 1. Granate
Bohemian 4 1^/100 to 1. H Haematites English 1574 1156 3 76/100 to 1. I Ivory
173 83 1 2^/100 to 1. L Lapis Manati 450 293 2 36/100 to 1. A Fragment of the
same 218 123 2 29/100 to 1. Another 345 197 2 33/100 to 1. Another from Jamaica
2011 1127 2 27/100 to 1. Lapis Lazuli one piece 385 256 2 ^^/100 to 1. Lead Ore
686 590 7 14/100 to 1. Another Lapis Calaminaris 477 380 4 2^/100 to 1. Lapis
Judaieus 261 2/1 164 2 ^^/100 to 1. M Marcasites 8^4 631 4 ^2/100 to 1. Another
from Stalbridge 243 189 4 to 1. Another more shining than ordinary 287 227 4
1^/100 to 1. Mercury revived from Ore Manganese a piece 321 230 3 ^^/100 to 1.
Mineral Cornish like a shining Marcasite 145 129 9 6/100 to 1. O Osteocolla 195
108 2 ^^/100 to 1. Ore Silver choice from Saxony 458 366 4 97/100 to 1. Another
Piece 1120 960 7 to 1. Ore Lead from Cumberland Rich 1872 1586 ^^/100 to 1. R
Rhinoceros horn 8563 4260 1 99/100 to 1. Rock-Chrystal, another Piece 256 140 2
^0/100 to 1. S Saphir Seed-Pearl Sulphur vive 371 185 2 to 1. Germane very fine
306 152 1 98/100 to 1. Slate Irish 779 467 2 49/100 to 1. T A Piece of Talc
like Lapis Amianthus 596 334 2 31/100 to 1. Talc Venetian 802 508 2 7^/100 to
1. Talc Jamaican 1857 1238 3 to 1. New English Tin Ore, Mr. Huberts 812 613 4
^/100 to 1. Tin Ore black Rich 1293 984 4 11/100 to 1. Another piece Choice
2893 2314 5 to 1. Tutty a piece 104 83 5 to 1. Tin-glass 468 419 9 55/100 to 1.
V Vitrum Antimonii per se 357 282 4 76/100 to 1. Vitriol Engl. a very fine
piece 1093 512 1 88/100 to 1. Unicorns horn a piece 407 195 1 91/100 to 1.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHen I began to send the Essay, called, Medicina Hydrostatica, to the Press,
and drew up the foregoing Preface to it, I intended it should in the same Book
or Volume, be accompanied by another Help or two, to explore, and Improve the
Materia Medica. But when the Essay it self, and the annexed Epistle about a
previous Exploration of Ores had been Printed off; I could not but perceive,
that the Bulk of those two Tracts so far exceeded what I expected, that if I
subjoyned what I at first designed to add to it, it would prove a misshapen
Book, and inconvenient to be opened, wherefore it seemed expedient to divide
the whole intended Work into two Volumes or Tomes, whereof what had already
past the Press, should make the first, which that it might be the sooner
serviceable should forthwith come abroad by it self, and the Second should
consist partly of the other Papers abovementioned, as relating to the Materia
Medica, and partly, of a Supplement to the first Tome, containing diverse
Historical Paralipomena, that by mistake were omitted, and are fit to be there
supplied out of a fuller Copy, then that which by an Oversight was made use of
at the Press.

FINIS.

