THE Martyrdom OF THEODORA, And of DIDYMUS.

By a Person of Honor.

LONDON: Printed by H. Clark, for John Tailor at the Ship, and Christopher
Skegnes at the Golden Ball, in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1687.

SUCH AN ACCOUNT Of the following BOOK, Sent with it to a FRIEND; As may serve
instead of a PREFACE.
TO convince you, Sir, how much more I am concerned to have you think, I can
Obey well, than Write well; I venture to send you the Account, (as imperfect
and unpolished as it is) that you are pleased to command Of the last Hours of
Theodora. But I must beg your leave to accompany it with another Account
(though but a short one) how I came to meddle with this Subject; and why what I
present you about it, is so much Maimed, and has no more Uniformity.

Having had occasion many years ago to turn over a Martyrology, and some other
Books, that related to the Sufferings of the Primitive Christians; I chanced to
light on those of a Virgin, who, though (to my wonder) she was left unnam'd by
the other Writers that mentioned her, seemed plainly to be the same, that is by
one of them expressly called Theodora: I own, I was not a little affected, at
the reading of such moving and uncommon adventures as hers: and finding her
story to be related, by the Author that named both her and her Lover, not only
very succinctly and imperfectly, but very dully too; I found my self tempted so
to enlarge this Story, as that it might be contrived into a somewhat voluminous
Romance: But upon second thoughts, it appeared incongruous to turn a Martyr
into a Nymph or an Amazon: And I considered too, that (to omit what else might
be objected against that sort of Composures) as true Pearls are Cordials and
Antidotes, which counterfeit ones, how fine soever they may appear, are not; so
True Examples do arm and fortify the mind far more efficaciously, than
Imaginary or Fictious ones can do; and the fabulous labors of Hercules, and
Exploits of Arthur of Britain, will never make men aspire to Heroic Virtue
half so powerfully, as the real Examples of Courage and Gallantry afforded by
Jonathan Caesar, or the Black Prince. But yet, thinking it great pity, that so
shining a Virtue as Theodora's should prove Exemplary, but to her own time, and
to one City; and remembering, that soon after the Age which she Ennobl'd, it was
counted among the Primitive Christians an act of Piety, to build fair
Monuments, upon the formerly abject Graves of the Martyrs; to repay, by Honors
done to their Memories, the indignities and Disgraces they had suffered in
their Persons; I thought fit to try, if I could rescue from more unskilful
Hands than even mine, a story that abundantly deserved to be well told.

But upon further thoughts, I soon foresaw, that this Task was not more worthy
to be undertaken, than it would prove difficult to be well performed: For the
Martyrologist having allowed scarce one whole Page, to a Relation, that perhaps
merited a Volume, had left so many Chasms, and so many necessary things
unmentioned, that I plainly perceived, I wanted a far greater number of
Circumstances, than that he had supplied me with to make up so maimed a story
tolerably complete. And as the Relation denied me matter enough to work upon,
so the nature of the Subject refused most of those Imbellishments which in
other Themes, where young Gallants and fair Ladies are the chief Actors, are
wont to supply the deficiences of the matter. Besides, my task was not near so
easy as it would have been, if I had been only to recite the Intrigues of an
Amor, with the liberty to feig surprising adventures, to adorn the Historical
part of the account, and to make a Lover speak as Passionately as I could, and
his Mistress as Kindly as the indulgentest laws of decency would permit. But I
was to introduce a Christian and pious Lover, who was to contain the
expressions of his Flame within the narrow bounds of his Religion; and a
Virgin, who, being as modest and discreet as handsome, and as devout as either,
was to own an high Esteem for an excellent Lover, and an uncommon Gratitude to
a transcendent Benefactor, without intrenching either upon her Virtue, or her
Reservedness. And I perceived the difficulty of my Task would be increased, by
that of Reconciling Theodora's Scrupulousness to the humors of some young
Persons of Quality of either Sex, who were earnest to engage my Pen on this
occasion, and would expect that I should make Theodora more kind, than I
thought her great Piety and strict Modesty would permit. But for all this; the
esteem I had for the fair Martyrs Excellencies, and the compliance I had for
those that desired to receive an account of so rare a Persons actions and
Sufferings, made me resolve to try what I could do. Which I adventured upon
with the less Reluctance, because, though I esteemed it a kind of Profaneness,
to transform a piece of Martyrology into a Romance; yet I thought it allowable
enough, where a Narrative was written so concisely, and left so unperfect, as
That I had to descant upon; to make such supplements of Circumstances, as were
not improbable in the nature of the thing, and were little less than necessary
to the clearness and entireness of the Story, and the decent connection of the
parts it should consist of. I supposed too, that I needed not scruple, to lend
Speeches to the Persons I brought upon the Stage, provided they were suitable
to the Speakers, and Occasions; since I was warranted by the Examples of Livy,
Plutarch, and other Grave and Judicious Historians, who make no scruple to give
us set Orations, of their own framing, and sometimes put them into the mouths
of Generals at the head of their Armies, just going to give Battle: though at
such times the hurry and distraction that both they and their Auditors must be
in, must make it very unlikely, either that they should make elaborate
Speeches, or their Hearers mind and remember them well enough to repeat them to
the Historians.

Encouraged by these Liberties, which I thought I might justly allow my self: I
drew up, as well as I could, what you have been told I wrote about Theodora.
This I thought fit to divide into two parts; in the first whereof, (which was
less remote from being Romantic) I gave somewhat at large the Characters of
them both. I mentioned the rise and progress of Didymus's Love; the degeneracy
of the then Christians, which provoked Divine Providence, to expose them to a
very Bloody Persecution: I declared, how Theodora being involved in it, was
brought before the President of Antioch; how she resolutely owned her Religion
before him, answered His Arguments, and resisted both his Promises, and his
Menaces; how thereupon the Judge doomed her either to Sacrafice, or to be
prostituted in the the public Stews. How she, after an eager Debate in her own
mind, refusing to offer sacrifice, was, (notwithstanding her silence) led away
to the infamous place; how being shut up there alone in a Room, she employed
the little time, that was granted her to consider whether she would yet burn
Incense to the Roman Idols, in fervent Prayer to the true God, for a rescue of
her Purity, not her Life; in order whereunto, she designed and hoped by
Resistance and Contumelies to provoke her first Assailant, to become her
Murderer, rather than her Ravisher.

These were the chief Contents of the first Book. Those of the second, were
more Historical; and consisted of an account of the last hours of her Life, and
particularly of those Sufferings that ended in her and Didymus's glorious
Martyrdom. This piece having been perused by those for whose sake I wrote it;
was so fortunate, that it having, without my leave, been ventured into several
hands, as a Book of a nameless and unknown Author, it was lucky enough to be,
by some indulgent Readers, attributed to One, and by some to Another, of the
two Persons, that were at that time counted the best writers of disguised
Histories. But among the many Hands it passed through, it seems it fell into
some, out of which a great part of the loose sheets, (which were not bound in a
Book, but only tacked together) were not to be retrieved: whether it were by
the negligence, or the contempt, that some had of so unpolished a Work; or
whether there were some fatality in the Business, that Theodoras Sufferings
should outlive her, and her Story be as ill used as her Person had been. This
loss, (if it can deserve that name) I did not much regret: Since I intended not
to make the lost Papers public, and had received much greater approbation and
thanks than they merited, from the particular Persons they were designed for.
But after I had for many years worn out, not only the sense, but the memory of
this loss: It was made more troublesome to me, than ever it was at first, by the
earnest solicitations of some eminent Persons, that had a great power over me,
and some of them the repute of great Judges of this kind of Composures. For
having seen several Sheets, that I accidentally lighted on, in tumbling over
some long neglected Papers; they obliged me to cause those old rude sheets to
be transcribed. And though almost all the first Book was wanting, (upon which
account, I could not be removed from my Resolution not to trouble my self about
it) yet there was so much of the Second Book, but in parts no way Coherent,
little by little retrieved, that a pretense was afforded to press me to repair
those Breaches, and restore out of my memory, or otherwise, a piece, which they
would needs persuade me might do some good, by rendering Virtue Amiable, and
recommending Piety to a sort of Readers, that are much more affected by shining
Examples, and pathetical Expressions, than by dry Precepts, and grave
Discourses.

If some of your more scrupulous Friends shall object, that I have mentioned
Theodoras Beauty more often and advantagously, and represented her Lovers
Passion more Pathetically, than the subject of the story exacted, and the truth
required in History would warrant; I shall not altogether deny the Charge:
Being rather content to have it thought, that a youthful (...) heated fancy
transported (...) Pen, somewhat beyond the narrow bounds of History, than that
so Pious a person as Didymus did not keep both his Flame, and the Expressions
of it, within the limits of Reason and Religion. But though I pretend not to
justify, all that has been said in the strain of an Encomiast, or a Lover, yet
I hoped that I may much Extenuate, if not Excuse it, by representing such
things as these.

That I have been careful, that Theodora should not be made to do, or say, any
thing, that, the great Obligations she had to her Rescuer considered, do
entrench either upon her Piety, or her Virtue, or so much as upon her
Reserv'dness.

That as for Didymus; I might say, that probably he thought, those Celebrations
that would have been Flattery to another Lady, were but Justice to a Person so
Extraordinary, and so accomplished as his Mistress; and that he thought it
allowable, not to suppress the chaste effects of a Passion, that has not only
been incident to Heroes, but perhaps helped to make them such. But I will
rather say, that those only are like to find much fault with his Expressions,
who consider not how free they are from any degree of Profaneness or
Immodesty: And who are not accustomed to the reading of Stories, where Lovers
are introduced, and made to Praise and Complement in a far more Bold and
Romantic way, than I allowed my self in the following Paper. In which, all the
Deference, wherewith Irene as well as Didymus treat Theodora, may be be
accounted for by this; That I remembered to have, in some Author or other,
found Mention made of a Person about Dioclesian's time, Whom I took for our
Martyr, that was intimated to be of high Quality, if not a Princess. which
Title I had without scruple given Her, If I had been half as sure that she Was
a Princess, as that she Deserved to be One.

That perhaps I was not unwilling, both to show the Persons I wrote for, that
One might have glittering Idea's of Beauty, without being dazzled by them; and
also to convince them, that high Complements and passionate expressions, are no
certain Marks of His being really Smitten (to speak in a Lovers Phrase) that
can Employ them; since I retained my wonted freedom of mind, while I was
Writing; and presented them by the mouth of Didymus, but what Fancy, not
Passion indicted.

And lastly, I was induced to allow my self a more fashionable Style, than
would perhaps be suitable to a mere Sermon, or Book of Divinity, because I
feared, that the Youthful Persons of Quality of both Sexes, that I was chiefly
to regard, would scarce be sufficiently affected by unfortunate Virtue, if the
interweaving of passages relating to Beauty and Love, did not help to make the
Tragical story, Delightful, and the Excellent Sufferers Piety, Amiable.

If it be objected, that in some of the discourses of the two Martyrs, there
are Passages that argue more Knowledge, than is likely to have been found in
Lay Persons no Elder than they. I answer, that such Discourses indeed were
somewhat strange, if they were ascribed to a young Gallant, and a younger Lady,
of Our degenerate Times; wherein so many Persons of that sort, make Diversion
their grand Business; and, having as little Leisure as Concern to mind any
thing, but their Pleasures and petty Interests, think it their Privilege to
know little of Religion, and leave to meaner People the study of things Serious
and Useful. But, though among this sort of Persons, it were so difficult to
find many that would Emulate such Knowledge and Virtue as shined in Theodora,
that I fear they would not so much as believe them; yet among better qualified
Judges, the lately proposed objection will be of no great force, if it be
considered, that Didymus and Theodora lived in the Primitive and devout times
of the Church, and in the Roman Empire, when the Christian Religion was as
diligently Taught by Excellent Divines, as frequently Opposed by Arguments, and
violently assaulted by Persecutions. Upon which scores, the zealous Candidates
of Martyrdom, many of which obtained the Crown of it, even in their greener
Age, were early and skilfully instructed in the truths of their own Religion,
and furnished with good Arguments, both to Defend It, and Confute the Erroneous
Opinions and Impious worships of their Heathen Adversaries. Nor is it any
wonder, that they should think That Religion worth Studying, that they thought
worth Dying for. I will not here examine, whether the Ignorance wont to be
imputed to Women, be Their fault, or that of their Accusers, and whether it is
any natural want of Capacity, or rather want of Instruction, that keeps most of
them from Knowledge, though This regards not Sexes. But without inquiry,
whether it be not our Interest, or our Envy, that Makes Women what we are wont
to decry them for Being; I shall not scruple to own, that I have sometimes had
the honor to converse with Ladys, that convinced me, That, to attain to a
great proficiency in Knowledge, it is not necessary to be a Doctor of Divinity,
or so much as a Man, since they discoursed of Divine things, with no less Wit
than Piety. And to return to our Martyr, if we may judge by the Effects, we may
reasonably suppose, that our Virgins Parents not only thought it their Duty,
but took much Pleasure, to Cultivate so excellent and promising a Subject as
their fair Daughter. Since great advantages of Nature and general Grace should
rather Invite, than Excuse, Improvements by Education; as even the Garden of
Eden, though an admirably fertile Soil, and planted by God's own Hands, was not
so left to itself, but that Adam was appointed to dress it, and to keep it. And
if the Discourses of our Martyrs are sometimes less short than they might have
been made; I hope it may be some excuse, that I was not unwilling, to lay hold
now and then of the Rises afforded me by some occasions, to show, that
Romantic Subjects are not, as too many Persons of Quality think them, the Only
ones, that may be treated of in a Gentleman-like style; and that even some
noble Questions in Divinity, and some of the severer Dictates of the Christian
Morals, may be discoursed of, without the harshness of the School Terms, or the
downright plainness of some better Meant, than Penned, Books of Theology and
Devotion.

It Is like Sir, you will think it strange, that I make so Pious a Person as
Theodora, offer her Breast to Didymus's Sword, and by soliciting him to Kill
her, tempt him to an Action, which would make her guilty of a Murder, and make
him greatly accessory to it. But possibly her Action would not appear very
strange, if we were not too enclinable to estimate the Affairs of Past Times,
and Remote Regions, by the Opinions and Customs of our own Age and Countries.
For, what ever we now justly think of the sinfulness of Destroying a Man's self,
whether immediately or otherwise, yet I must not deny, but that diverse of the
Ancient Christians thought it not Criminal, when it was necessary for the
preservation of Chastity. And, if I much misremember not, St. Jerome himself,
where he speaks of the unlawfulness of Self-destroying, intimates, that he
excepts the Case of an inevitable danger of a Rape. But my chief answer is,
that having found the Virgin Martyrs proposal expressly delivered by the Author
I was to follow, I judged it the part of an Historian not to suppress it; which
I acknowledge, I the rather declined to do, because Theodoras offer was a noble
evincement, both of her Gratitude and her Generosity. And therefore, instead of
Omitting so considerable an Action of hers, I chose rather to Set my thoughts a
work, to find a plausible Color for it. Which whether I have happily done, by
supplying her with the Example of a Prophet, who, though he would not cast
Himself into the Sea, yet solicited Others to cast him, (and that having first
bound him) I must leave You to judge.

I freely confess, Sir, that, if the following Piece had been written by One,
that I were fond of Censuring, I could my self find enough in it to Criticize
upon; and should object against it, besides the want of Uniformity throughout,
That if judged of by the strict Rules of Art, it ought to pass for an Irregular
Piece. And therefore I shall not wonder, if Nicer Critics, and more versed in
Exquisite Composures than I pretend to be, shall find fault with this Artless
one of mine. But the reception that the following Papers met with, from the
Persons for whom they were chiefly written, affords me the Consolation
derivable from the ingenious saying of that excellent Wit, who declared, He had
rather the Dishes served up at his Treat, should please the Guests, than the
Cooks. And I might say too, that some of the Passages that may meet with
Censure, would perhaps escape it; if in writing this Book many years ago, I
had not had some Aims, that I then thought more fit to be Pursued, than I now
do to be Declared. Yet I will not here dissemble, that I know it may be thought
by some, that this Paper should have consisted less of Conversations, and more
of Narratives. But I chose the way of Writing I have employed, partly because
the Authors I met with furnished me with so very few matters of Fact, that if I
would have confined my self to Relations; I must have comprised this piece in a
very few Pages, and have finished it presently after I had begun it: And partly
too, (and indeed much more) because (as I lately began to intimate) my chief
design was not so much, to perform the Office of a mere Historian, as to take
Rises from the several Circumstances I should relate, to convey unperceivedly,
into the minds of those young Persons of Quality for whom I wrote, Sentiments
of true Piety and Virtue. And these I thought would not so happily gain
admittance and entertainment, if they were presented in a Scholar
like-Discourse, or aprofess'd Book of devotion, as when they were taken, not
from common places but from the Nature of the Things and Persons Introduced;
and without formality Instilled by the occasional discourses of a young
Gentleman and fair Lady, for whom the Beauty and the Merit ascribed to the
Speakers, had given the Hearers as great Esteem and Kindness. And I shall not
scruple to own, that I, who who value time above most other things, did not
think it worth the expense of mine, to give my self the trouble of Writing a
Book, only to give others a Divertisement in Reading it. And whilst I was
Conversing with such Excellent Company, as our noble Martyrs, and Meditating on
such Serious Subjects, as are Death, and the Worth of that Heavenly Religion
for whose sake They despised It; I found my self Incited, and thought my self
Obliged, to aim less at the Pleasing of some few Nice Exactors of Regularity,
than to Possess many Readers with high and noble Sentiments of the Christian
Religion, and the sublime Dictates of it; and thereby both Elevate their minds
to a generous Contempt of all they can lose and suffer for it, and Fill them
with bright Idea's of Heroic Virtue, and of the much brighter Glories that
will Crown it. By such Reflections, I was induced not to omit some Passages
that seemed likely to further the main Ends I pursued, though I foresaw, that
perhaps some rigid Judges would say, that they might have been spared. For as I
writ not a Romance, wherein Authors are wont to aim no higher, than to Delight
the Delicate Readers, and Escape the Critical ones, by making their Composures
Diverting and Regular; so I presumed that to employ a more Useful, though less
Fashionamble way of Writing, was allowable for Me, who ought to endeavor in
such a piece as This, rather to propose Patterns of Virtue, than Models of
Skill or Eloquence; and to think it more Successful, if the Readers shall upon
perusing it, Imitate our excellent Martyrs Piety, than if they should only
Applaud their History. Which both as to Style and Reasonings, is freely
submitted to your Judgment, by

Sir, your most etc.

ERRATA.
PReface Page 3. line 19. read Jonathan Caesar, etc. p. 5. l. 11. r. feign
Contents Chapter 1. r. Chamber. Chapter 3. r. thinking. P. 80. l. 16. r. manifest
Danger, etc. p. 89. l. 14. r. and let her see, etc. p. 152. l. 14. r. enough.
p. 222. l. 17. r. her Kindness, etc. p. 227. l. 1. for having, r. did. ibid. l.
4. for assumed, r. assume. p. 238. l. 15. r. of all other, etc.

Some Books Printed for, and Sold by John Tailor, at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Free Enquiry into the Vulgarly Received Notion of Nature, made in an Essay,
addressed to a Friend. In English and Latin, for the Benefit of Forreiners. By
R. B. Fellow of the Royal Society.

The Declamations of Quintilian, being an Exercitation or Praxis upon his
Twelve Books, concerning the Institution of an Orator. Translated (from the
Oxford Theater Edition) into English, by a Learned and Ingenious Hand, with the
Approbation of several Eminent Schoolmasters in the City of London.

The Happy Ascetick, or the best Exercise; with a Letter to a Person of
Quality, concerning the Lives of the Primitive Christians. By Anthony Horneck,
D. D. Preacher at the Savoy.

Academia Scientiarum: Or the Academy of Sciences. Being a short and easy
Introduction to the Knowledge of the Liberal Arts and Sciences. With the Names
of those famous Authors that have written on every particular Science. In
English and Latin. By D. Abercromby. M. D.

THE Martyrdom OF THEODORA.
BOOK II.
CHAP. I.
THough it may seem ill-natured to leave the Chaste Theodora in so deplorable a
Condition, yet it is requisite to do so for a while, that we may learn what was
attempted to rescue her out of it.

It is not to be doubted, but that, Didymus was not long kept a stranger to the
barbarous usage she had suffered. That of so illustrious a Lady could not but
make a great noise, and reach a multitude of ears; and especially those of so
concerned a Person as Didymus: The wounds of Lovers tender hearts, giving them
oftentimes secret Presages of approaching misfortunes relating to their Love:
As many other wounded men have the unhappy Privilege of being able, by feeling
of pain, to discern such approaches of ill weather, as affect not unhurt men.

Didymus therefore being quickly too much ascertained of the unwelcome News of
the distress of his fair Mistress, was too generous a Lover to deliberate,
whether he should expose his life for her rescue: His deliberation being only
about the means, how to make so difficult an attempt a prosperous one. In order
to this, he happily finds out one of the Officers of the Guards, that were
placed about the infamous House, to which Theodora was condemned: Who having
been his fellow Soldier in the Roman Armies; he hoped would either for the sake
of Virtue or of Didymus, be prevailed with to further so handsome a Design as
his.

Wherefore addressing himself to this Commander, with a very obliging and yet
civil Freedom: Generous Septimius, says he, I cannot but look upon it as one
of the chief advantages I have obtained by venturing my Life in the Roman
Camps, that I had the happiness to be acquainted with you there, and to be a
spectator of your Gallantry; which did not only then raise me to a desire of
imitating it, but allows me now to own a request to you, that none but a
gallant Person ought to be entrusted with, or would easily grant. Generous
Didymus, replies the Roman, When I accompanied you in following our propitious
Eagles, I found so great a contentment in your acquaintance, and so strong a
spur to Glory, in your examples, that I looked upon the advantage of having
been your fellow Soldier, as preferable to the honor of Leading the most
numerous Troops I may at any time Command. And I shall think all the hazards I
then exposed my self to, abundantly rewarded, if any power they have procured
me, may enable me to do you service. Tell me then frankly, in what case, and
after what manner, you would have it employed for you; and as I assure my self,
that so virtuous a Friend as Dydimus, will desire nothing but what is just, so
he may assure himself, not to be refused any service, that is but Dangerous.

Our Lover emboldened by so encouraging a declaration, first made him a very
grateful Acknowledgment for it, and then proceeded to say, If you have ever had
the happiness to be acquainted with Theodora, or so much as to have seen her,
'twould be needless, as well as improper, for me to offer at giving you a
Character of her, which you must needs think injurious to her. But if you have
not, the shortness of the time will only permit me to assure you, that not only
she has given me those Sentiments of her Excellencies, that I never had, nor
ever thought my self capable of having, for any of her Sex; but that in other
Persons strangely indisposed to admit such impressions, she has often excited
such wonder and such flames, as very rarely have been produced in other men,
and perhaps, more rarely been merited by other women.

This admirable Person, for exercising among other virtues, that of an
invincible Constancy, to her Religion, and refusing to Sacrifice to Venus,
Flora, and some other of those Deities, whom her Perfections might, though her
Religion did not, exempt from adoring; is by your savage President condemned to
be exposed to the public Lust: And a Party of those gallant Roman Soldiers,
that use to be so gloriously led on by you, to win Battles, conquer Kingdoms,
and enlarge at once the Fame and Limits of the Empire, are now employed to
captivate innocent Virgins, and defend their brutish Ravishers. You may easily
guess by this, continues he, that my request is like to prove an earnest one;
that you would please to treat with some of those soldiers of yours, in whom
you think you have the greatest Interest, and dispose them to assist me in
rescuing Theodora out of so infamous a Prison, and accept from me greater
recompenses for doing a handsome action, than they can expect from the
President, for doing a barbarous one; I hope I need not tell you, in the have
this affair requires, that all possible care will be taken to keep you from
being endangered by Theodoras deliverance, nor will I add how unexpressible an
Obligation you will lay on me, to heighten my gratitude to some proportion to
your Favors; because I know it must necessarily fall short of them, and are
due to a person that loves to do gallant Actions for their own sake, and had
rather have great debts of gratitude, remain due to him, than paid to him;
wherefore I shall only mind you, that the time is so short, that if your
assistance be not as quick as obliging, I fear 'twill be as ineffectual. I
shall quicken you only by assuring you, that when you act for the accomplished
Theodora, you act for a person that has a Right to all that Beauty and Virtue
can give one a Title to.

With the same freedom, replies Septimius, with which you have owned to me your
Religion, I declare to you, that mine is that of my Country, and my Ancestors;
and that I worship those propitious Deities, that have made the Romans the
Conquerors of the World, and rewarded those that adored them with an Universal
Monarchy; but though I exceedingly approve so triumphant a Religion, yet I
confess to you, that I do not like the ways that the President takes to
propogate it: such cruel methods being apt to make the world suspect, that our
best Argument is Force: And whilst the Persecutors think it a glorious thing to
see the Temples filled at any rate; I had rather see in them fewer but sincere
Votaries, than have them thronged with such pusillanimous Dissemblers, as would
not come in, unless they were Scared in, thither. And, though Terrors and
Torments work sometimes upon the weaker sort of Christians, yet the more
resolute do so often despise them, that our Persecutions convert not those
unhappy persons, but frequently stagger many of our own; and I confess freely
to you, Didymus, that all the Christians Arguments work less with me, than our
inhumane manner of confuting them. But I do not only disapprove, but detest,
this infamous Practice of our President; which makes him loose not the respect
only and the pity, but the common Humanity we owe to Women, and think to do
the Goddesses a service, by disfiguring their fairest Images here below, with
the most shameful of Blemishes. I cannot bring my self to imagine, that such
gentle Deities, can like such barbarous Worshippers, who not only immolate to
them the lives of men, but what is far more precious, the Virtue and Honor of
Women; for if I could believe they like such Sacrifices, I should think them
unworthy any Sacrifices at all. You will easily therefore, Didymus, credit me,
that I was absent when my soldiers were put by the insolent Judge, upon so mean
an employment. He durst not have offered to have obtruded it upon them, had I
been there; or if he had, I had dared to use him as his insolence had deserved.
But without loosing time in passionate Expostulations, about things made
remediless, by being past, let us speedily apply our selves to the rescue of
Theodora. For, though I have heard strange things of her, and such as made me
think Fame a great Flatterer, if not a frontless Liar, yet I believe the
Reports about Theodora, as I believe the Delphick Oracles, now that I find so
undeniable a Testimony of her merit, as her being your Mistress. I will
therefore without delay, prepare some Soldiers to assist you in her Rescue, and
I cannot doubt the success in an attempt made to serve a distressed Beauty, and a
generous Friend. If there be occasion, you need not doubt of my more openly
appearing for you. For how highly soever such an action may provoke the
President, or even the Emperor, I hope to let you see, that you have trusted a
Roman, a person that had rather be the object, than the minister of their
Cruelties, and would not be accessory to such a misemployment of Absolute
Power, to be made a Sharer in it.

As soon as Septimius had ended these words, he did, to prevent those
acknowledgments he saw Didymus was about to make him, take that gallant Youth
by the hand; and leading him toward the place, where he expected to find the
Soldiers he most confided in, he entertained him in the way about the
hopefullest Expedients for the compassing of his admirable Mistresses Rescue.
And having afterward sent for the two persons, he thought likeliest to be
prevailed on, to a convenient place, near to that to which they had brought
Theodora; he brieflly, but pathetically, declaring to them, how much the brave
Didymus was his friend, and how much he deserved to be so, enflamed them with
an indignation at the savage Presidents disgracing them, by so infamous an
employment, as they were now about; and then assured them of rewards from
Dydimus, suitable to the liberality of so generous a Person: After which
withdrawing himself, to give Didymus a short account, how far he had proceeded,
he left the rest to be completed by him; who prompted by his native
liberality, and his high concern, did not stay to cheapen his Mistresses
Liberty, but with the hasty Passion of a Lover, proffered them more than even
Septimius's promises gave them reason to expect: Nor would he have declined to
embrace any Articles of Agreement, they could have proposed, though the parting
with his Life had been one, so Theodoras Deliverance were another.

The sense these soldiers had of the affront put on them, by the President,
joined with the Ambition they had to please their loved Commander, and the
gratitude his friends profus'd Bounty had newly obliged them to; made them
quickly accommodate Didymus with a military Habit, and prepare some of their
Comrades to allow him the first admittance into her Chamber; partly by sharing
some of the newly received Presents among them, and probably by representing
him to them, when thus prepared, as a person who having been passionately in
love with Theodora, and been scornfully slighted by her, was desirous at any
rate, to satisfy at once his appetite and his revenge. And by this means,
before that short time was expired, that had been as an Act of Grace, allowed
the disconsolate Virgin, to deliberate whether she would yet comply with the
Judge; an entrance into her Chamber was permitted to her Lover; who (in order
not only to his present but further Design) had purposely closed the vizor of
his Helmet; upon which score, not being knowable by his fair Mistress, he met
with from her the reception we have formerly related.

CHAP. II.
THough, in the sad Condition wherein our disguised Lover, found his desolate
Mistress, her sorrow and her fears, did somewhat cloud her Beauty, yet they
could not hinder her looks from being so charming and majestic, as to create
less pity than respect. Wherefore with gestures, wherein this was as visible
as he could make it, he told her, without approaching too near; Do not, Madam,
I beseech you, add to your other troubles, the apprehension, that because I
appear in the circumstances of a Ravisher, I come to commit a Rape: Theodora is
so great an ornament to the Christian Religion, and her Purity is an ornament
so dear to Theodora, that Heaven will not permit, either that Antioch should be
robbed of one, or she of the other. And therefore, that Providence which you
have so generously trusted, has sent me to your rescue, which after the care I
have taken to dispose things without doors, 'twill not be difficult to compass,
if you please to make use of the Military Habit I have brought hither, disguise
and convey your self hence. Nor need you be solicitous, what will become of me,
for I am under the same care of the same Providence, that now justifies your
reliance on it, by providing for your escape: And I that found means to come in
hither, may be succesful in attempting a Retreat, or if I should not succeed in
it, I shall not miss the joy of paying my Duty, where I had the most desire and
cause to do it; and shall leave the world with the satisfaction of having
highly obliged it, by the preservation of the most accomplished Person in it.
And Madam, (continues Didymus) that you may not doubt the willingness or the
intentions wherewith this offer is made you, be pleased to know that it comes
from the now fortunate Didymus, who justly thinks that in aspiring to your
acceptance of it, he does less proffer a service, than beg a favor, that will
not only be a full Recompense, but a high Obligation.

The name of Didymus, and Discourse so suitable to it, made by him that assumed
it, soon dissipated the dismal apprehensions his habit, and her circumstances
had given her: She knew so well his Courage, his Virtue, and his Love, that
nothing unlawful or mean, was to be feared; but the boldest things, if they
were as noble as hazardous, might justly be expected, from him: So that this
attempt did perhaps as much oblige her, as it surprised her. Wherefore, as soon
as she had recompos'd her lately disordered thoughts, she told him, with looks
serene enough to let him see how much she trusted him; This action, generous
Didymus, is of a nature so extraordinary, that my ingratitude would be so too,
if my sense of it were not. To own and rescue a persecuted and affronted Maid,
and to do it with more hazard than you need run in the Roman Armies, to
purchase Fame and Honors, in an action so disinteressed, and so unexampled,
that I want words to celebrate it, as well as merit to deserve it, and power to
requite it. But I admire so rare an effect of Virtue, (continues she) can
consent to the destruction of its Author. No, Generous Didymus, it is enough
that the virtues* of Christians be treated as crimes by the Romans: They must
not meet the like usage from Theodora; she must not purchase a life, that she
values as little her self as others have cause to do, at so high a rate, as
your partial Charity persuades you to set upon it. For even those that do now
most pity me, would repine at the preservation of my life, if it should cost
that of a Hero. Especially, if I should designedly be accessory to so great a
Loss: Which accompanied with a public Indignation, and my own Reproaches for
my Ingratitude, would certainly make that Life a Burden to me, that at so dear
a rate you would preserve as a Blessing. But --

Here Theodora was going to proceed, when her grieved Lover, fearing that if
she did so, she might make some Declaration unfavourable to his Wishes, thought
fit to endeavor to prevent it, by saying to her with a profound respect. Ah,
Madam, do not make your mistaking Compassion more cruel to me, than the
severity of the Romans themselves, which we Christians justly Tax, can possibly
be. For they will but in a few moments take away that Life, which you would at
once protract and render Miserable. Do not, I beseech you, Madam, (continues
he) think my services Meritorious, because they are paid you in this place, and
in your Persecuted Condition. No, Madam, Theodora has Prerogatives enough, to
make many less unworthy (though not more zealous) than I, ambitious to serve
her, in what Circumstances soever Providence shall think fit to place her.
Whatever the Romans, that worship Fortune and Victory as Goddesses, and find
their Prosperity the powerfullest Argument to support and spread their
Religion, may think of Sufferings embraced for Conscience sake: sure we
Christians, that adore a Crucified Savior, who, as he took upon him the form
of a Servant, was put to Death between two Thieves, as a Slave and a Malefactor
too; ought not to let any Persecutions, or Indignities, lessen our Veneration
or Concern for those that choose to Suffer for him, and imitate as well as own
him, whatever it cost them. Nor, Madam, (pursues Didymus) needs your having
been brought to this place, make you think your self at all dishonored, in the
Opinions of those that can make just Estimates of things. They look on
Sufferers for truth with His undeceiveable Eyes, that, by one of the Penmen he
inspired, having mentioned those Persons that for Religions sake were
Imprisoned, Destitute, Tormented, Affronted forced in the Skins of Beasts, to
wander like them in Deserts, and lodge in Dens; Honors them with this
Character and Testimony, more glorious than all the Panegyricks of Orators, and
Laurels of Conquerors, That the World was not worthy of them. And such Judges
will think Venus an Infamous Courtezan, though the Romans adore her in their
Temples; and will not think Theodora the less excellent Person, for having been
condemned on the score of Virtue to a Scandalous place. Honor were a mean
thing, and not worthy to have its loss much feared, or regretted; if we could
forfeit it without having forsaken Virtue; and much more, if we could be
deprived of it for having closely followed Her. Nothing can blemish true
Reputation, that cannot be declined without manifest injury to Religion, which
justifies our Acting whatever it imposes. The Angels themselves that were sent
to Sodom, scrupled less to go even thither, then to disobey him that made it
their duty to do so, nor were polluted by entering into that abominable place;
and being attempted by the brutish Inhabiters of it, carried thence the
Angelical Purity wherewith they came thither.

Didymus thought fit to say what has been repeated, that he might Console so
chaste a Virgin as Theodora, who had still enjoyed, as well as merited, a
spotless Reputation; by assuring her, that the barbarous Affront she had been
exposed to, for Constancy to her Religion, had not, among unbiased Judges,
lessened the high Esteem her former Life had justly given them of her Virtue.
But he would not discourse long of a Subject so Nice; that 'twas difficult not
only to insist on it, but so much as to mention it, without being uneasy to so
tender a Modesty as hers he was speaking to. Upon which account, passing on to
another Argument, he told her, These things I have mentioned, Madam, to let you
see, how little I can pretend to merit by the Circumstances of the duty I pay
you; and consequently, how little you need scruple to accept of my further
Service, without which my past Endeavors will be useless to us both. And give
me leave to own to you, Madam, that 'twas not without much trouble, as well as
surprise, that I heard the incomparable Theodora's Merit so much injured, as to
have the valuableness of my Life put into the Balance with that of hers, nay,
and made to Preponderate. Alas, Madam, there are Legions, that as well as I
dare expose their Lives to the greatest hazards, and run greater dangers for
some despicable pay, or a sew worthless Leaves, than I do to serve my Religion,
and the fairest Professor of it. Every day affords thousands of such Men as I:
Else the Roman Camps would not be so frequently Recruited, and those Numbers
that fall in Breaches, or in Battles, would not have their Rooms so ambitiously
supplied, by Men that see them do so. But such Persons as attain to be both the
Ornaments of their Religion, and the Honor of their Sex, must be so Excellent,
and are so Rare, that it is not every Age that produces so much as one of them.
Such Exemplary Ladies, do as well improve as enoble the times and places they
live in: The respect and love Men have for them, makes their good Counsels very
persuasive; the loveliness of their Persons is so diffused to their Actions,
as, by making Men forward to take them for Examples, adds to to their Virtues,
both a great Splendour, and a powerful Influence. That Theodora is not only one
of that small Number, but eminent in it; nothing but her Presence, could keep
it from being uneasy for me to evince. But, Madam, (continues he) though in
such Circumstances as mine, your scrupulous Modesty may keep Men silent, yet it
ought not to keep them from being Just. Your profound Humility may draw a
Curtain, that may hide your Virtues from your Eyes; but in the Eyes of others,
it cannot but increase their Number, and exceedingly add to their Luster. You
need not therefore, Madam, (pursues he) scruple to receive the Service I aspire
to do you, upon an injurious apprehension, that it is above Reward; whilst
indeed it pretends not to any at all, except the Satisfaction and Honor, that
will be inseparable from the performance it self. Here Didymus paused for some
moments; being sensible, how difficult a task he was entering upon: Since
'twas, without prejudicing his Love, to own to his Mistress her self, that he
did not serve her upon the score of That. But however; the sincerity of his
affection, and the great desire he had to make his persuasions prevalent,
hastened him to prevent her Answer, by thus prosecuting his Discourse: It Is
true, Madam, that Theodoras perfections did not miss in me, to have the
operation that they are wont to have, upon those that enjoy the opportunities
of considering them: and if she had been in a distress greater than that she is
now in, though her Religion had not at all contributed to bring her into it, I
should joyfully have exposed my self, to a greater hazard than I now run, to
rescue her from it. But, Madam, that is not our case; for that which now brings
me hither, is none of those sentiments, that if I were possessor of a Crown,
would bring me to lay that and my self at your feet, and think my self more
happy in your acceptance of it, than in all the advantages and prerogatives
that could belong to it. For, Madam, the resolution that led me hither, was not
inspired by the fair, but by the devout and virtuous Theodora. If she had no
Charms, but those that cannot be seen with bodily Eyes, or if her visible
Beauty were but moderate, or none at all; her Exemplary Piety and Unshaken
Constancy, shining in such extraordinary Expressions of them, as she has this
day given, would make me think my self unworthy of Life, if I should stick at
hazarding it to save so precious a one, as hers, and what I knew she would far
more unwillingly loose; and thereby do some right to Divine Providence, which,
by so unexampled a reliance on it, was thought in some sort engaged to answer
so uncommon and entire a Trust. After what she did for Christ, I did not think
I could do enough for her, if I did less than I have endeavored to do. And
therefore, Madam, (concludes he) I hope as well as beg, that you will no longer
scruple to accept of that rescue, that Providence offers you, by an unmercenary
and most wlling hand, but will to make use of this Military Garment (at which
words Dydimus with great respect, pointed at His) and allow my endeavors, by
procuring your safety, to secure my happiness.

To this moving Speech, the fair person, that 'twas addressed to, returned this
calm Answer.

Though the handsome and obliging things you have been pleased to say, Generous
Didymus, have made all the impressions on me that they ought to have; yet I
must, with your pardon, freely tell you, that they naturally afford an
inference, quite opposite to what you would conclude from them; since, by
discovering more and more of your Gallantry and Friendship, they let me still
further see, how much the World would loose, by being deprived of so much
Virtue, and how unexcusable I, above all others, should be, if I should be
willingly accessory to that loss. Your too too excessive Complements, I must
not pretend to answer; since 'twould be too great a reflection on Your
Judgment, as well as Mine, to think you meant them for any thing more than what
I have called them. But in answer to the serious part of your Discourse, I
shall tell you, that, if I had proceeded in what I was going to say to you,
when you interrupted me, I had, perhaps, prevented some of the things you have
said, by freely acquainting you (as I now mean to do) with the state of my
Case, and the intentions it suggested to me. When the inhumane President
(continues Theodora) had condemned me, either to offer Sacrifice in an Idol
Temple, or be led away to this infamous place; I was in such a perplexity and
agony as can hardly be conceived, especially by a Person that is not of my Sex;
for Death it self was thought too mild an evil, to be one of those, among which
I was condemned to make my choice. On the one side; the infamy of this
detestable place was that which I could not think on, without the utmost horror
and indignation: and not only my Sex and Breeding, but even the Dictates of
more than one Virtue, (Modesty and Chastity) concurred to highten my abhorrence
of it. But on the other side; I remembered, that I did not vow Obedience to God
with any exceptions or reserves; that I was both a Disciple and a Worshipper of
a Persecuted and Affronted Redeemer, for whom (though there were not an
infinite Inequality between our Conditions) I could not suffer more, than he
had already suffered for my sake; having not only endured the Cross, but
despised the Shame, which the Jews insolent Malice, and the Romans Barbarous
Custom, had annexed to it. And I thought that, perhaps, Providence had led me
into this distress, to give me an Opportunity of showing, that I could do more
than die for Christ. But I must not now trouble you, with the various thoughts
that distracted my Mind on this dismal occasion; on which all that I could say,
to those that rudely pressed me to give a positive answer, was, that of the
things they proposed, I plainly saw that both were to be refused, and therefore
I could make choice of neither. But since I would make no Election for my self,
their Malice soon made one for me, of this detestable place. I was so
confounded, and as it were stunned, at the first steps they forced me to take
toward it, that I scarce knew what to think, or what I did; save that I
remembered, that Idolatry was in the Sacred Books represented as a most odious,
though Spiritual, Fornication; and that Apostasy would be my own Crime, whereas
the Consequences of refusing it, could make me but the Object of another: And
remembering my self to be a Daughter of him, that against Hope believed in Hope,
to follow God's Call, I did like him, Obey, not knowing whither I went: Yet
having this Satisfaction, that I acted according to the Dictates of a well
informed Conscience, so that, whatever the way might prove, I need not fear to
be misled by closely following an Infallible Guide.

Here the Chaste Virgins words were a little interrupted by the flowing Tears,
and the inevitable Discomposure, that were produced by the sad remembrance of
the distressed Condition she was recounting. But having, as soon as she was
able suppressed, those visible effects of her virtuous Grief, she thus pursued
her Discourse.

Revolving these and the like thoughts in my Mind, I arrived at this infamous
place. And being for a while left alone in this Room, to try whether yet I
could be brought to change my Mind; the nearer approach of what I was to
endure, making it look more hideous to me, than, till then, I thought 'twas
possible for any thing to appear, made me presently think of flying for Refuge
to the dark Sanctuary of Death; and by dispatching my self drown in my yet
untainted Blood, both my own dismal fears, and my Persecuters brutish hopes.
But then there came into my mind, what I had been often taught, and, whilst I
was unconcerned, judged rational to believe, of the unlawfulness of Killing
ones self, upon any account whatsoever. I considered, that God, who made our
Love unto our selves, the standard of the affection we owe our Neighbor, in
forbidding us to destroy another Life, must be supposed much more to prohibit
us that violence against our own. And if Fratricide be justly listed amongst
the blackest Crimes, because of that Relation the slaughtered persons have to
those that Kill them; how Criminal upon that score must be the Murder of our
selves, where the Relation is not nearer, only because it is too near, to be
properly any at all? The Sovereign Author and absolute Lord of our Lives,
having thought fit to employ us here in his Service, we cannot, without
violating our Duty to him, desert it until we have performed his Errand, which
is, to glorify him by our Lives; till loyalty to his Truth, or his Commands,
convince us, that we may better glorify him by our Deaths. Such Considerations
as these would, I hope, have restrained me from ending my Life with a Crime;
but the thoughts of it were quickly suppressed, by my remembering that in this
place, I was destitute of Instruments to act it with. Wherefore remembering that
Daniel had been preserved, though not from the Lions Den, yet in it; and his
three Friends were not delivered from the Fiery Furnace, till they had been
cast into it; and having learned by those Examples, that no Succors can come
too late, that God designs for our Rescue, I betook my self to Prayer, as the
most hopeful, as well as the most innocent course, I could take; and with an
ardency, heightened with the extremity of my Distress, I was beseeching God,
though with the loss of my Life, to preserve a Purity, that by his Grace had
been hitherto kept unblemished, when your unexpected entrance brought me a
return of those Prayers, I had yet scarce uttered. Judge then, Generous Didymus
(subjoyns Theodora) by the Condition I was in, how much I must think my self
Obliged, by so brave and seasonable an attempt to deliver me out of it.

To serve so bright a Virtue, lodged in so noble a Shrine, I thought, Madam
(says Didymus, Interrupting her) to be as much my Duty, as to have found an
Opportunity to do it, is my Happiness: and if you please to permit me, as I now
hope you will, the Honor and Satisfaction of completing my Endeavors to
deliver you; I shall much more value my self, upon the having paid you that
Service (though it be more proportionate to my power, than to my desires) than
if I had rescued a Roman General, or for successful attempts, been made one my
self.

When Thanks are purchased by Merit, replys Theodora, to disclaim a right to
them, does not forfeit it, but increase it; nor need you make me any new
Professions, since after the Testimonies you have given me already of your
Virtues, and your Friendship, I should make my self unworthy of them, if I
doubted of their Reality, or Greatness. Yes; Didymus, I believe what you
declared, of the Disinterestedness of your proceedings in the Rescue of a
Person of no greater Merit, than I can pretend to: Since the Circumstances of
your Attempt, make it appear too generous to let me suspect, that the Aim of it
was other than noble too. And indeed, after what you have done (continues She)
it would ill become me to scruple to be further obliged by you, and therefore I
shall venture to make you a Request, as soon as I shall have acquainted you
with the Reasons, it is grounded on.

Didymus being surpised at this welcome Declaration, was going with Transports
to assure Her, he could deny her nothing, nor obey her in any thing without
Joy; when she prevented him, by thus continuing her Discourse. You know, my
Generous Deliverer, that Virgins have so great and clear a Right to keep
themselves such, against all outward Assaults; that Monarchs themselves (whose
Force is not to be by force opposed, when it tends but to deprive us of our
Lives) may be forcibly resisted, when they strive to offer Violence to our
Chastity. Since then, an untainted Purity is a Jewel, that the Possessors are
allowed to preserve and defend, even by uncommon ways, if others will not
serve; and such as would in other Cases be unwarrantable: Though I do not, as I
lately told you, think it lawful, as many do, to secure Virginity by
Self-Murder; yet I cannot disapprove their Opinion, that allow a Virgin in case
of Extremity, to emplore that Death from another hand, that she is forbidden
to give her self, with her own; since in such a Calamitous Condition, Heaven,
by debarring her all other ways of escaping from Defilement, seems to approve
of this. And the Scripture informs us, that though the Prophet Jonas held it
unlawful to drown himself, yet he persuaded those that Sailed with him, Jonah
1. 12.
to cast him bound into the Sea, when neither they nor he expected he could
outlive many Minutes (as indeed 'twas not without a Miracle that he did.)
Wherefore, pursues Theodora, if you will perfect what you have so Obligingly
begun, you must lend me your Arm and Sword, to free me by a speedy Death, from
mischiefs much greater than it. The Romans will easily believe, that my
resistance and provocations transported you to a Revenge, at which the
barbarous usage I have received at their hands, makes it unlikely they will be
much offended: The grant of my request will not hinder you from being, what you
are pleased to think a Title, Theodoras Deliverer. For, in the estimation of
Equitable Judges, as well as in Hers, 'twill suffice to give you a right to
that Title, That you have delivered her from her geatest Calamity and Danger.
Nor will the good office I desire, be inconsistent with my obtaining the Honor
of Martyrdom: St. John the Baptist, because his bold Zeal for the Laws of
Religion, gave the first rise to those Persecutions that terminated in his
Death, is justly reckoned among Martyrs, though he was privately beheaded in
his Prison, at the solicitation of a Curtezan: and if one willingly suffers
death for the Truth, or the Interest of Religion, there needs not a Scaffold or
a Stake, and a public Executioner, to make such a person a Martyr. And since
the Persecutions that now make havoc of the Church, are like to continue long;
and since I am resolved, by Gods assistance, never to avoid them, by any either
unlawful or unhandsom way: the Escape you would persuade me to, would but for a
while delay those Sufferings I ought not to shun, and would make them much less
acceptable, by my having endeavored to avoid them; especially by an action so
mean, if not criminal too, as to consent to the loss of an excellent Person,
that most generously exposed himself for my safety. Deny me not therefore,
concludes Theodora, with Tears in her Eyes, the last request I shall ever make
you; but by sheathing your Sword here, (at which words she pointed with
blushes, at her fair and innocent Breast) be pleased, by one quick and
charitable Stroke, to perfect my deliverance, without making me Stain it with
the Blood of my deliverer; free us both from eminent Danger, me of being
Dishonored, and you of being Tormented; and by the same Act of Friendship,
secure me the Coronet of Virginity, and procure me the Crown of Martyrdom.

Great was the Surprise, and greater was the Trouble, wherewith Didymus heard
the conclusion of this Discourse: In answer to which, as soon as his
astonishment would permit him to speak; Ah Madam, says he, what have you ever
seen in the unfortunate Didymus, that could tempt you to make him so strange a
proposition. That I, whose Errand hither was to venture my Life in your
Service, should my self destroy the admirable Person I came to Rescue; and that
Didymus should imbrue his guilty Hands in Theodora's innocent Blood, to save
one drop of which, He would gladly shed all his own. As your Piety deserves to
be the Pattern of more than one Age, so I doubt not, but that in times very
remote from ours, your Memory will shine as bright, as your Virtue and your
Eyes do now; and then, how hideous a Monster must I appear to Posterity, that
will look upon me as one, that could in a trice, pass from pretending to be
your Deliverer, to be really your Murderer; and this for no other Reason, than
that you were pleased to manifest a great concern for my Preservation? And
pardon me, Madam, (continues Didymus) if I tell you, that your Generosity makes
you forget some of your other Virtues, and even of the Dictates of the Religion
you have hitherto adorned; Since your Commands, if obeyed, would engage me to
commit a Crime, and make you your self, more than accessory to it. For, Madam,
since you acknowledge Self-Murder to be unlawful, how can your Commands give me
a right to take from you, a Life, that you have not power to dispose of? and
what Excuse can I have, without so much as the pretense of acting under
Authority, to destroy an Innocent Person? For, Madam, since I am to declare,
why I presume to do the thing in the World I would least be put upon, to
disobey Theodora; give me leave to tell you, that, should I execute what you
require, the Action would not be excusable in either of us. For as Adam sinned
in doing a forbidden thing, though she that prevailed with him to do it, Was
first in the Transgression; and the Jewish Prophet was torn in pieces by a
Lion, though he did what he was seduced to, by the persuasions of a Prophet: So
the Scripture clearly condemns David of Murder, because he killed Vria, though
not with his own hand, yet with the Sword of the Children of Ammon: And the
Scripture tells us too, that God plagued the Children of Israel in the
Wilderness, because, as the Text expresses it, They made the Calf, that Aaron
made. And indeed, by whatever Hand innocent Blood is shed, the Guilt of it will
light upon the Person that procured it to be spilt. And to this I must add,
That since Christians are in some cases, not only permitted, but Exhorted, if
not Commanded, To lay down their Lives for one another: The high value and
concern, I justly have for yours, makes me conclude, that this is certainly one
of those Cases, and consequently, that I may lawfully offer you a Service,
which you, perhaps, cannot lawfully refuse: Since Providence has left you no
other Innocent way, than the acceptance of it, to escape your present danger.
And the guilt of Self-Murder may, for ought I know, be Contracted, not only by
a positive Act, but by an Inflexible refusal of the proffered means of Safety.
Pardon me, I beseech you, Madam, pursues Didymus, if the great Concern I have
for such a Person as Theodora, has Extorted from me, a greater plainness of
Speech, than my profound Respect for Her would permit me, upon any other
occasion. And because I perceive that, that which makes you most scruple to
grant my humble Request, is, That your Superlative Generosity, and what your
Humility persuades you to think Gratitude, make you solicitous for the
preservation of a Life, hazarded for your sake; I must assure you, Madam, that
your Inflexibleness will no way make provision for my safety. For, if I should
be Condemned by your cruel Commands, to leave you exposed to the barbarous and
defiling rudeness of those Brutish Satyrs, that impatiently wait without, the
regret and shame, of having mis'd the Honor of Theodora's Rescue, will give me
far greater Torments, than the Romans can, for having effected it. And I must
add on this Occasion, Madam, (continues he, not without some change of Color
and Voice) that some Sentiments (which though I think not this a fit time or
place to name, have been much Confirmed and Heightened, by what I have this day
had opportunity to observe) have so fast tied my Happiness to your Welfare,
that the presence of my Soul is scarce more necessary to my Life, than your
Safety is. Nor fancy, Madam, that the belief I own of the unlawfulness of
Self-Murder, will secure my Life: for there are other ways, to procure Death to
him that is weary of Life, than his own Sword, or a draught of Poison; since
Passion alone, when raised to a competent degree, may do the office of either
of those. And since Joy it self, though the most pleasing and friendly of the
Passions, has by its Excess, proved destructive of Men's Lives; why may not
Grief, and Shame, and Indignation, which are Passions more violent, and very
unfriendly to Nature, be able to produce as fatal Effects? And to show you,
Madam, (continues Didymus) how much reason I have to think, that your Condition
dispenses me from obeying the Dictates of your Generosity, let me. -- But,
before Didymus had annexed his Reasons, a Noise made without, gave him a hot
Allarm, and made him fear, the patience of some that waited without, would not
last very much longer; and therefore addressing himself to Theodora, with a
Countenance as Petitioning as his Words, and Eyes, in which his Courage could
scarce repress the Tears: How long, Madam, says he, will you upon groundless
Scruples, neglect an Opportunity, whose Omission will be Irreparable. And how
can you justify to God, the slighting the means His Providence presents you,
of easily securing your Safety. Ah, Madam, then (concludes Didymus) by one
quick and necessary Resolve, regain your Liberty, preserve your Honor, and
secure your Life. But if nothing that has relation to your self alone will move
you, be pleased to reward the Services I have Essayed to do you, with the
implored grant of your own Safety; and permit me for this once, rather to Serve
you than Obey you. Nor need your generous Solicitude for me, hinder, or retard
your Resolution: The World will not blame a Spotless Virgin, for doing what is
necessary to keep Her self such; nor look upon it as a part of Ingratitude, to
grant, to one that has done his best to serve Her, a Recompense, that he is so
ambitious of, as to venture his Life to obtain it at her Hands. In short,
Madam, for the time allows me not a long Discourse, if your Cruelty will not
permit me to prevent your Death; Grief, and other Passions, will not allow me
to survive it: And then, (supposing I should fail of making retreat) would it
not be a much more happy Fate, that the constant Didymus should Die, for having
saved the matchless Theodora, than for having lost Her?

CHAP. III.
TO these pathetick Words he thought not fit to stay for an answer, but
retiring to a corner of the room, he divested himself of his military Coat, and
upon his knee, presented it to Theodora. She in the mean time, reflecting upon
his Arguments, was by their force, convinced, that the motion she had made him,
of killing her, was grounded upon a dangerous Error. And the noise that had
been made, in the outward room, alarming her, at least as much as it had done
him, let her see she had no further time left her to deliberate. And therefore,
being prevailed with, by supplications, made in so persuasive a way, that it
appeared a far less cruelty, even toward him, to accept, than finally to
refuse, his offer: She first made her Blushes, and her silence intimate her
consent, and then declared it more expressly, by raising him, and taking out of
his hand what he presented to her. And to his joy (which his foresight that his
success would be fatal to him, could not hinder from being very great) she
received from him instruction how to put it on, and permitted him (though not
without strange disorder in her mind and looks) to assist her: For as it was
absolutely necessary to do it; so he did it with all imaginable care, to
distress so nice a Modesty, as little as was possible: And therefore, as soon
as ever he had done that, with all the respect and decency the place and
occasion would by any means permit, all that could be done without him, he left
her to do herself, withdrawing to a part of the room, whence he could not see
her. Which Retreat he was induced to make, not only out of civility and
respect, but perchance because the dangers that threat'n internal Chastity,
have this peculiar fate, that usually those persons are most careful to shun
them, that are the most resolved, and the best able, to surmount them.

As soon as the mutual Exchange of their habits had made it decent for them to
discourse together, the disguised Virgin, with Cheeks covered with Blushes, and
with looks so obliging, that they alone would have recompensed Didymus for any
less service than that she now received, addressing herself to her Benefactor;
If your Reasons, says she, had not convinced me, that I could not without a
crime free my self from my wretched Condition by death, and if yet death were
not the only way, by which, if I decline your generous proffer, I can possibly
shun, what I far more apprehend than death, dishonor; I should not leave you in
a danger, wherein only your concern for Religion and for me, has engaged you.
But I doubt not the same Charity, that put you upon making me your generous
proffer, and pressing me not to decline it, will make you pardon a fault, to
which your own Reasons and Importunity have made you highly accessory;
especially since I know you think a tenderness of Honor, and an abhorrence of
all Defilement, to be things so allowable in a Virgin, as very much extenuate,
if not justify, what they require of her. And indeed I shall do you but right,
when I thankfully acknowledge, that in this whole transaction about my Rescue,
your carriage has been such, as would leave me no doubt, if ever I had been so
unjust as to have any, of the purity and disinterestedness of your intentions,
by which I am not a little confirmed in the opinion I have always had, That
Virtue may inspire as Noble and as Hazardous Enterprises, as Passion can. I
know that in this days work, you aimed at higher Retributions than could be
expected from one in my Condition. But yet I think my self obliged to assure
you, That your Heroic Acts of Virtue and Friendship, have not been exercised
toward a Person insensible of them; but that your Merit, and your Favors, have
produced all the esteem and other Sentiments, which they ought to produce, in a
Person, that is not altogether incapable to discern and value them. And if the
Prayers of a disconsolate Virgin, then saved by you, when all the rest of the
World had abandoned her, can have any interest at the Throne of Grace; they
will obtain for you, Blessings as great as your generosity to me has been; and
not less lasting, than my Sense of it will be; and you will, during a long
protracted life, either be allowed quietly to enjoy the Glory, your many
meritorious Hazards of it have purchased, or else be enabled to find a
happiness in your very Sufferings, by virtue of those peculiar Consolations
that are reserved for a persecuted Condition; as anciently Manna was vouchsafed
the Israelites, only whilst they were Exiles in the Wilderness. The quick
success God has been pleased to grant my Prayers for my own deliverance, lets
me not despair to find him propitious, to those I shall with no less ardency
put up for yours: But if your Charity should expose you to further danger, I
solemnly promise you, that you shall find, I have been instructed, as well as
obliged, by your generosity, and would not have left you exposed for my sake,
that I might shun any danger that had threat'ned but my life.

And now the mournful Virgin, being to bid her accomplished Votary a farewell,
which probably enough would prove the last; by a manifest change in her
countenance, and the tone of her voice, and by the multitude of tears that fell
from her fair Eyes, convinced him no less of the trouble she was in upon his
account, than any verbal expressions could do it; though she said to him, in a
most obliging manner, Farewell my Generous Deliverer; and may that God, who sees
with what reluctance I consent to your danger, free you happily from it, and
richly recompense that noble Charity that led you into it. I hope we shall yet
see one another again upon Earth. I am confident we shall meet joyfully in
Heaven; by which I must confess my self very highly favored, not only in my
Deliverance, but in the instrument of it; since God makes me not beholden for
my Rescue to any common person, but is pleased so to order it, that I receive
the greatest of earthly Benefits, from the most Generous of men.

Madam, replies the much troubled Didymus, your own unequaled perfections, and
the operation they have had on me, make me so much yours, that your wishing me
happy, does more toward the making me so, than your humility will allow you to
be aware of. You have too much Merit, Madam, to let the Services I have paid
you, have a title to any; and what I have had the happiness to perform, is but
what was every brave man in Antioch's duty to endeavor. But if your Goodness
will needs make you think, that my poor Services should have another (for they
can scarce have a greater) recompense, than you have already given them, by
suffering them to conttribute to your safety; and if you will vouchsafe to
allow the memory of him that did them, a room in your thoughts, (which is the
happiest Station it can aspire to upon earth:) I humbly beg your faithful
servants Image may be looked on without any troublesome degree of pity; since
his condition will then need none, and the Idea would very much misrepresent
the Original, if it should disquiet her, whom he never approached, but to serve
Her. It Is suitable, Madam, to this frame of mind, that for Theodoras sake I
must now deny my self so much, as to hasten her departure, least some cross
accident should prevent it: At which words, looking on her with a countenance
that all his Courage could not keep from a discernable Change: Farewell, said
he, incomparable Theodora, may you continue long the Ornament and the Pattern
of your Sex: And since we see that some Fruits may be as well preserved in
Honey, as others in Brine and Vinegar, may the height of your Virtue be kept
up, but the objects of it so changed, that by a settled Prosperity you may
henceforth haveoccasion to exercise your moderation and your gratitude, instead
of your courage and your patience. Once more Farewell, concludes he, unequaled
Theodora; and may you live but with as much Contentment, as if I suffer for
you, I shall die with Satisfaction.

Though these moving Expressions, and the accent wherewith they were delivered,
did very sensibly touch a person so well natured and grateful as Theodora; yet
she thought the fittest return she could then make to her Lover's discourse,
was, presently to follow the advice he was so earnest to have her speedily
embrace. And therefore, bidding him farewell only by a look, wherein high
degrees of sorrow and gratitude were plainly mingled; she immediately disposed
herself to quit that dismal place: Which then afforded a noble instance, how
little a great mind can be hindered from disclosing it self to be so, by the
Stage it is obliged to act upon. For whilst in diverse of the stately Temples of
Antioch, Whores, (such as Venus and Flora,) and Ravishers, and Adulterers,
(such as Jupiter and Mars) were solemnly adored; in an infamous Scene,
dedicated to public Lust and Violence; the strictest Chastity was exercised,
and Martyrdom it self was contended for.

Having once ventured into the outward room, That Providence, to which she had
in such discouraging Circumstances trusted her Virgin Purity, would not leave
the rescue of it, incomplete; but whilst the waiting Ruffians were eagerly
contending, who should succeed the person they took by the Habit to be Didymus,
(and whose face they did not wonder to see muffled, presently after so savage
an action as they supposed him to have committed) brought her safely out of
that infamous Place. Whence, by the least frequented Passages she knew, she was
was quickly conveyed to the house of her dear Friend Irene, which happened to
be nearer than her own.

There to avoid suspicion, some of her friends and relations were met together,
to lament her Captivity, and join in Prayer to him that alone could deliver
her, to be directed by God how they might (if it were possible) contribute to
her rescue. But, though their Prayers were probably made with more zeal than
hope, they were not a little alarmed, when looking out to see who knocked at
the door, they saw, as they thought, a Soldier, who would not have been quickly
let in, if Irene had not presumed it to be Didymus, who was coming to offer his
Service to his captivated Mistress. But it is not easy to express the wonder
and the joy, with which they soon discovered that this was not Theodoras Lover,
but herself; whose Beauty and her military Dress, would have made her, had the
Roman Guards discovered her, pass for their Pallas. Nor was such a Habit,
though improper for a Virgin, unsuitable to a Great, as well as Chaste Conqueror.

But though her presence never needed the endearment of a Surprise, yet the
unexpectedness of it at that time and place, added to the Transports it
produced; especially in Irene: Who after a thousand gratulations and caresses,
at length begged in the name of the impatient Company, to know how the blessing
they all received in her freedom, was procured. To which reasonable request she
answered, by making a short but faithful Narrative, of what had occurred since
the time she was cited before the President, till she came to take Sanctuary
among them; piously concluding, that, as what she had done not misbecoming a
Christian, was altogether by the assistance of Divine Grace, so the succor she
received to bring her out of danger was by the Conduct of Divine Providence,
which in her delivery made use of the high virtue and generosity of Didymus.
This Relation made the Company first return Thanks and Praises to the Divine
Goodness, which were followed by the celebrations of the happy Instrument of
it: every one, as it were by turns, endeavoring to vye, who should most
commend so venturous and disinteressed a Lover. Nor perhaps did Theodora her
self, inwardly dissent from that grateful company. For, though her modesty and
reservedness kept her from declaring her Sentiments, as others did theirs; yet
perhaps that was because She thought, that having given a Candid account of his
deportment, her Narrative had made her praises needless, the History it self
being indeed a Panegyric.

After the Companies curiosity was somewhat satisfied by what Theodora had told
them, and both Irene and she had made a request to a Gentleman that knew
Dydimus well, to endeavor to bring them speedy notice of what had happened to
him, or was like to befall him: The two excellent Ladies retired to the
apartment of Irene. There the pious Theodora, having devoutly paid her solemn
Thanks and Praise, for her almost miraculous Deliverance, to the Divine Author
of it; she was accommodated by her Friend, with Clothes befitting her Sex. Nor
was it difficult for Irene, (though on so sudden an occasion) to furnish her
with a Habit she liked for besides, that a Person so shaped and fashioned as
Theodora, could make almost any dress Graceful; she used to pity the mean
vanity of those Ladies, that could be either Ambitious or Proud of what they
must owe to a Tailor or a Dresser, and affected to be taken notice of, not so
much for what they are, as for what they wear: And therefore, though she did not
scrupulously decline fashionable Clothes because they were so; yet all the
Ornaments that passed the limits of the modestest Decency, she always as
little valued, as she needed them.

CHAP. IV.
BEfore this rare Couple returned to the rest of the Company, Irenes kindness
for Didymus made her think, she ought not to loose this opportunity, of doing
good offices to her absent Friend. And therefore having (as she easily might)
brought the discourse to fall upon his late performances; I hope, Madam, says
she to Theodora, you are now satisfied, that the Character I gave you of the
greatness of my Cousins Virtue, and the Ardency of his Flame, was dictated more
by his Merit than my Friendship. I were very ungrateful, replies Theodora, if I
did not willingly acknowledge his Generosity to be altogether extraordinary,
and that, as he could not oblige me more highly than he has done, so it was not
possible that he should do it more handsomely.

I know, Madam, says Irene, that Theodora may freely choose among all the
illustrious Youth of Antioch, what person she would please to make happy: And,
without considering her less obvious, though more admirable, Perfections; far
less Beauty than she is Mistress of, has in our times, given the Possessors a
share in the Imperial Throne, and perhaps too, placed them upon the Roman
Altars. But yet, continues she, since I have the honor to know you too well,
not to be confident, that you value Piety and Virtue, and a Flame regulated and
excited by them, above those outward advantages which weaker Spirits are
influenced by; I think I may presume to say; that I know not any person in
Antioch, to whom the fair Theodora may with less Condescension vouchsafe a
Share in her Favor, than to him, that had the happiness to give her so clear a
proof, of the ardency, the purity, and the disinterestedness of his Flame.

If I had not, reply's Theodora with a somewhat dissatisfied look, been much
surprised at the beginning of your Discourse; I had immediately stopped you
there: And lamented my infelicity, that Irene, whom I thought my self happy in
having for my Friend, allows her self what is so repugnant to true friendship,
as flattery is. I could, continues Theodora without pausing for fear of being
prevented; easily, and with the approbation of many of the best Judges in
Antioch, return the fair Irene her own Complements, if I thought fit to imitate
what I cannot approve. And to Speak seriously, continues She, neither you nor
I, nor any of our Sex, ought to think Skin-deep Beauty as great a Blessing, as
it is an applauded one. For without our fault, and in Spite of our care to
preserve it, a Thousand accidents may, and time certainly will, ruin the
Loveliest Faces; and perhaps to that degree, as not in the remains to leave it
credible that ever they were hansom. It Is true that those vain Men, whose
Passion masters their reason, are wont (for the most part with designs we ought
not to be proud of) to Speak extravagant things, and too often even profane
Ones, of the beauties they profess to adore. But though they really meant
(which they very seldom do) all they say, in praise of those they represent as
Goddesses; yet I think a considering person will scarce be very proud of
receiving that Title, from those who can think that a few Colors and Features
luckily mingled, are sufficient to make a Deity. An uncommon degree of Beauty,
adds she, exposes the owner to extraordinary troubles, from the Envy of those
that want it, and the Importunities of those that court it. And, without as
much caution and watchfulness as turn it into a trouble, it too often proves a
strong Temptation to those that admire it, and a dangerous Snare to those that
possess it. And if I had the vanity to think, what you would persuade me to
believe, I should yet take Beauty in a woman, to be like a rich Perfume; which
though it be a thing very grateful in most companies, and perhaps (especially
at first) very delightful to the wearer, yet does often discompose, not only
strangers she chances to converse with, but the best Friend she has; and not
seldom does mischief even to herself, by disordering her head, or casting her
into fits of the mother. I beg your pardon, Dear Madam, says the fair Irene,
with somewhat of sadness in her looks, that whilst I had so much Beauty in my
eye and thoughts, I forgot, that it was in Theodora accompanied with a far
greater and scrupulous Humility; and I did not apprehend that I could be
thought guilty of Flattery, so near to a witness (at which words she pointed to
a Looking-Glass, that hung up in the Room) ready to justify more than I had
occasion to say. I willingly acknowledge with you, that the amiableness
discoverable by the Eyes of every gazer, is a thing far less desirable than
desired: And procures the possessors more praise, than it brings them
happiness. And for my part, adds she, if I had the weakness to believe my self
Mistress of what the folly of some had made them flatter me with, yet I should
not be over much pleased with a Quality, that would add to those harms my
frailty makes me guilty of, those which I never intended; and makes Ladies so
mischievous, to those that most love them, that even when they do not rob men
of their Innocence, they deprive them of their Quiet. I confess therefore,
Madam, (continues Irene) that it was injurious to insist upon the praises of a
face, when, how little soever it can be Matched in its own kind, it is
accompanied with Several Beauties of a much nobler kind. But that which induced
me to speak as I did, was, to let the fair Theodora see, that I was justly
sensible, how great a thing I begged for my Friend; when I implored for him an
interest in Her Favor. And I do the less despair of the effects of your
Goodness, both to him and me, because I beg them for an absent friend, who is
not in a condition to speak for himself; and who, as I perceived by the
obliging Relation you were pleased to make, of his Carriage toward you,
declined making you any request, when his Services were so happy as not to be
useless to you. His silence, answers Theodora, in such circumstances, had more
effect on me, than his passionatest solicitations would have produced. But the
thing, I presume, you aim at, for him, is of that moment to me, that I cannot
think fit to discourse of it, till we can do so with more calmness and leisure,
than we can at this time expect. You know, Irene, that I have still looked upon
Marriage as one of the most important Actions of Life: And, though I think they
have too mean a notion of Happiness and Misery, who imagine, that one Creature
can make either of them the portion of another; yet I think, that not only the
dictates of discretion, but those of sincerity and chastity, oblige a woman to
have a great care, not to enter into so near and indissoluble a Relation, upon
any grounds, that are not like to last as long as it, (and consequently, as our
lives:) And therefore, a woman that resolves to be what she should be, when a
wife, ought to deliberate much upon a Choice she can probably make but once;
and not needlessly venture to embarque herself on a Sea so infamous for frequent
Shipwracks, only because she is offered a fine Ship to make the long Voyage
with. But, continues the bashful Virgin, (not without some little disorder in
her looks) since my dear Irene will needs make use of the privilege she has,
to know more of my thoughts than I would disclose to any other perperson in the
world; our friendship prevails with me to tell her, that if I were altogether
at my own disposal, and could be induced to admit such a change of condition,
as I have always been averse from; I should be more influenced in my choice by
the shining Virtues and Extraordinary Services of Didymus, than by all the
Advantages that either Titles, or Riches, or Dignities, could give any of his
Rivals. But, my Dear Irene, (adds she) we live in such times, and I, for my own
particular, am beset with such Circumstances; that 'twere not only very
unreasonable, but wildly extravagant, for me to increase my Commerce with the
World.

For, Irene, continues she, in my opinion, a Christian does not deserve to be
happy, and a true one cannot think he is happy, whilst the Church of Christ is
miserable: At least, as far as outward Calamities can make it. When I see the
Empire overrun with Idolaters and Persecutors; when I see Ravishers and
Whores, adored instately Temples, and the only Worshippers of the True God
driven into Corners, and pursued even thither; when I see such as God is
pleased to declare the World not to be worthy of, Heb. 11. 38.
treated by men as persons not worthy to live in the World; but daily expelled
out of it, with ignominy and torments: When I say, (adds Theodora, with tears
in her Eyes,) I consider the general Desolation of the Church, and that I am
like and willing to be, not a mere Spectator, but a suffering Actor, in this
Tragedy; I cannot, in the midst of Her Sighs and Groans, listen to the
unseasonable Complements of a Lover, think of relishing any Contentment, that
descends not from a place too high for Persecution to reach. In these
Sentiments, subjoins she, I am warranted, by no less Authority that than of an
Apostle; who, though not unfavourable to the Marriage State, disadvises those
women that are free, from entering into it, at least during the present
distress; though that were in his time, very much inferior to those straits we
are now reduced to. Yet, Madam, says Irene, those expressions of Friendship,
that a Conjugal Relation invites, are not only made allowable by it, but
commendable; and are as real duties of Piety, and Virtue, as diverse of the more
abstracted Exercises of Religion. I do not contradict that, replies Theodora,
but look upon that very thing, as a disswasive, from the state of life, you
would recommend. For, if I could think fit, to enter into it, it should be with
a resolution, to do all that becomes me in it. And in such a calamitous Time as
we live in, I could not do that, without coming far more than I now am, within
the worlds reach; since I should think it my duty, and perhaps be engaged upon
another account, to have such apprehensions for a near friends danger, as my
own would be incapable of giving me. And the Contentment I now enjoy, in a
disposition to quit the world without regret, would be destroyed, or at least
allayed, by an uneasiness to part with, what duty and inclination would,
perhaps, too much fasten me to. Here Irene was going to interrupt her by an
answer; when her fair friend prevented her, by thus continuing her discourse:
And to me it seems very considerable, that the Apostle I lately mentiond,
clearly enough intimates, that to persevere in a Virgin-State, in times of
Persecution, gives those that prefer it, the great advantage of serving God
more undistractedly; and consequently of being more entirely and
uninterruptedly employed, in the direct Contemplation and Services, of an
Object so Sublime, that our mind cannot divert to another, without stooping to
an inferior one. And though it be true, that the duties of a Relation, may
rightfully challenge a part of an engaged persons time and care; yet I see not
why one that has no need, should enter into a Relation, that would make those
distracting Duties necessary.

Though Irene found it scarce possible to answer Theodoras Reasons, yet her
kindness to her absent friend, made her unwilling to lose the opportunity their
privacy gave her, to make one attempt more in his favor: Which she did, by
saying to his excellent Mistress; But shall not the as faithful as unhappy
Didymus, be allowed to hope, that if once those dismal Clouds that pour down
showers of Blood, shall be happily blown over, he may have a particular share
in the public joy and Tranquillity; that his Sufferings shall end with the
Persecutions of the Church; that those fatal resolutions, that are so
destructive to his happiness, may cease with their occasion; that Theodoras
Severity will not out live the Roman Cruelty; and that her heart will not be
the last place, where the Emperors cruel Edicts will continue to have a fatal
Operation.

Alas Irene, says Theodora, somewhat troubled to be so pressed; how
unseasonably do you now discourse to me, about things relating to a time, to
which very probably my life will never reach. For, Subjoines She, to deal
clearly with you; I am so far from flattering my self, with an Expectation of
those Halcyon days I wish you may live to see, that I shall not be surpised,
if this day prove the last I shall Spend in this World. And if before Night, I
pass thence into another; where the frailty and Mortality, upon which Marriage
was founded, ceasing, that condition of Life will have no Place; but will be
Succeeded by an Angelical State, where our Friendships, as well as our Persons,
will be Transfigur'd, and made Incomparably more Perfect than they can be here
below.

CHAP. V.
THeodora had Scarce made an end of saying this, when her Conversation with her
fair Friend was Interrupted, by the notice that was given them of, the arrival
of a Gentleman of their Religion, who brought some News that it Concerned them
to know. This advertisement soon brought back these two Excellent Ladies to the
rest of the Company; to which this Intelligent and Inquisitive Person was going
to give an account, which the Sadness of his Looks prepared them to find an
unwelcom one. However; they listened to him with great attention, as well as
Concern: and He after a short Preamble, briefly acquainted them with some
particulars, that will hereafter be more fully related. But that which he
himself seemed most moved at the mention of, and which most affected his
hearers, was this; That when the President had notice of Theodora's escape,
though there wanted not some Generous Men, that endeavored by several
Arguments to diswade him from prosecuting her any further; Yet he was so far
from being prevailed with, to Comply with so reasonable a motion, that he
solemnly Protested, that if ever he could get this Fugitive (as he was pleased
to call, that admirable Person) once more into his power, he would never strive
again to reclaim her by the fear of Infamy, (a thing which, said he, I
perceived She despised) but by the terror of death; Supposing, as he added,
that She would not fly from an Altar, to a Scaffold, a Stake; and resolving, in
case She were inflexible, to Sacrifice her to the indignation of those ^^cens'd
Deity's She had so Obstinately provoked.

The former part of this Discourse, which related to Didymus, his Excellent
Mistress heard not, with out such inward Commotions, that in Spite of the
Calmness and reservedness of her temper, they clearly enough disclosed
themselves in her face, by several Changes of Color, which those that had
lately admired the greatness of her Courage, could not but ascribe to that of
her concern for her distressed Lover. But when the Relator had concluded that
part of his Narrative, that directly regarded her self, though it filled all the
Auditors with grief and terror, Theodora seemed to have gained a new life;
Since in her looks, the visible tokens of a deep sadness, were succeeded by no
less manifest Signs of joy.

While the rest of those to whom the Melancholy account was given, were
entertaining one another with the reflections they made upon it; Irene having
drawn her fair friend aside, was impatient to learn the cause of that pleasing
change, she had observed in her looks.

Whilst, answers Theodora, I was listening to the report of the Eminent Danger,
which the Generous Didymus was Exposed to for my Sake, I could not but be
Extremely Troubled, to find my Self restrained from attempting his Rescue, by
the manifess: Danger, of being by the Barbarous President sent back to the
infamous place, whence your virtuous friend had ventured so much to free me:
But now that the Judge, by a Solemn Declaration, has tied up his own hands from
tempting me, by so justifiable a fear as that of Infamy; 'twas no wonder, my
Looks disclosed some Tokens of a joy, grounded upon so welcome an opportunity to
exercise my Gratitude Without hazarding my Honor.

What? Theodora! says Ierene, as it were Thunderstruck with this unexpected
answer; do you put so small a value upon that wonderful Deliverance, that
scarce an hour ago you did so devoutly and deservedly give Thanks for, that you
will so soon rush into greater dangers, than those that required little less
than a miracle to rescue you from them?

I hope, replies calmly Theodora, that I shall never forget, nor without a deep
sense remember, the admirable rescue you speak of. But I take the most gracious
part of that Deliverance, to consist in my being rescued from Dishonor; and
think it would be much less obliging than it is, if it debarred me from the
surest and directest ways to Glory; and if, to preserve my external Purity, it
did condemn me to Ingratitude, toward the meritorious Instrument of that
Preservation.

Our Lives, says Irene, being trusted to us, as well as vouchsafed us, by God;
are not so much at our own disposal, that it is allowable for us to part with
them, as we think fit: And it is possible for us to abandon them, not only when
we do directly and violently rid our selves of them, but when we do those
things, whose natural Consequence is an untimely Death.

I believe with you, says Theodora, that our Lives are to be reckoned among
those Goods that we are entrusted with, rather as Stewards than unaccountable
Proprietors; and acknowledge too, that certain actions, that do not directly,
may yet criminally, tend to their destruction. But I do not think the care of
our Lives is committed to us, as that of our Souls is, with so indispensable an
obligation to keep them; that it can never upon any terms whatsoever, be lawful
for us to loose them. For, I think Life to be a Talent, which is indeed to be
carefully husbanded and preserved; but is committed to us, not so much to keep
safe, as to negotiate with; and is entrusted to us in order to a condition
better than it self. And therefore, if Religion, or Virtue, require any thing
at our hands, which cannot be performed without endangering, or even loosing
our Lives, in that case to venture them, or to part with them, is a duty; and
consequently at least a justifiable action: And this pursues Theodora, I take
to be my case; who am summoned by Faithfulness to a just Promise, and by
Gratitude to an extraordinary Benefactor, to endeavor the saving of an
innocent Person, who is accused on my account, and has brought himself into a
great danger, only for having most obligingly Rescued me from a greater.

But what, replies Irene, if the attempt you design, is far more likely to
destroy you, than to save Didymus? For the barbarous Judge, is so much an Enemy
to all Christians, as such, and so much incensed against You, for your Escape,
and Him for having been the Author of it; that the Cruelty of that inexorable
man, will make him gladly destroy you both, as far as humane power and rage can
do it. And so, without preserving to the Church of Antioch, one of its
Ornaments, you will deprive it of another, and a greater; by denying it the
Influence it might receive, by so lasting and Exemplary a Virtue, as may justly
be expected in a person so pious, and so young, as Theodora.

The Experience, answers Theodora, that this very day has afforded me, forbids
me to distrust Divine Providence; and keeps me from despairing to find my
endeavors to rescue your Kinsman, succesful; if the Most Wise and Good, as well
as Absolute Disposer, of Events, shall not think it less our advantage, to be
reprieved than crowned. Without presuming therefore, to foresee Events, it is my
part to do what God has vouchsafed to put into my power: and it is not my duty
to rescue Didymus, but it is to attempt it; and thereby acquit my self as far
as I am able, of what I owe to my promise, and my gratitude. If I had the
vanity to think, adds she, that in a person of my Sex and Frailties, such a
Church as that of Antioch, could be much concerned; I should think too, that
the attempt I am about to make, were the best way to make my life somewhat
significant. For, whereas our heathen Adversaries are so blinded with
Prejudices, that they look upon all we do or suffer for Christianity, as the
effects of a kind of Superstitious Frenzy, that seizes us, and transports us,
whenever the Articles of our Faith are contended for: My exposing my self to
their fury, rather than be wanting to the dictates of Gratitude, which they, as
well as we, look on as a Moral Virtue, may help to convince them, that our love
to Virtue is general, and more disinterested, than they thought it: Since
Christians can venture and part with their Lives, as well to shun Ingratitude,
as to resist Idolatry.

This gratitude, (replies Irene) whose excess gives you and us, so much
trouble, is a relative thing; and Benefits or Services received, ought to be
requited by Actions, that are acceptable to those, they are designed to
gratify; but sure, not by such, as we know will be unwelcome to them. And
therefore, (continues she) the faithfulest, and most disinterested of your
Servants, will be far more unhappy, than the Roman Cruelty can make him, if
what he has done, does not convince you, that he can never look upon any thing,
as a favor or retribution to him, that shall destroy, or so much as endanger,
his adored Mistress.

I were very unworthy, (rejoins Theodora) if I did not think Didymus capable of
the highest Sentiments that generosity and friendship can inspire. But he is
too just, to forbid those he loves, to aspire to some share of those noble
Quality's; upon whose account, I am to consider, not so much what his Virtue
will relish, as what his condition requires; there being a sort of Debts, to
which mine to him belong, that ought to be the more carefully paid, the more
frankly they are remitted.

The sorrowful Irene, being exceeding troubled, to see her endeavors
unsuccessful, on an occasion, upon which of all others, she most wished to find
them prevalent, was prompted by her grief, to bring her Eyes to the assistance
of her Tongue; and weeping, said to her inflexible Mistress; If, Madam, you
will not have any compassion for the excellent Theodora, at least take some
pity upon the disconsolate Irene; and if her Arguments cannot move you, be not
at least inexorable to her Fears. You have, (continues she) vouchsafed me the
honor of your friendship, and the happiness of your conversation; and by both
these blessings, have given me so much esteem and kindness, for so great a
Benefactor, that if you deny me, what I now implore, you will turn the noblest
parts of my happiness upon Earth, into instruments of my Infelicity; since, in
a World deprived of Theodora, the desolate Irene, will Languish, rather than
Live, if she should be able to survive so great a Loss.

Theodora, whose Resolution and good Nature were both of them extraordinary,
though she had courage enough to support calmly her own personal Sufferings,
yet she had tenderness enough to be very sensible of those of her Friends. And
the moving expressions of the sorrowful Irene, together with the Tears that
accompanied them, made such an impression on her, that though, having foreseen
this Storm, it did not surprise her, yet it did much distress her, and let her;
see, how many uneasy Victories she was to gain, before she could triumphantly
complete that days work. And though after a short, but sharp, Conflict, between
her kindness and her Resolution, the latter of them prevailed, yet, 'twas not
without some Reluctance and Commotion, that she was able to return this Answer.
Ah, dear Irene, do not exercise so much Cruelty your self, whilst you reproach
me for being Cruel; and do not add to the great affliction of parting with such
a Friend as Irene, that of seeing her so much troubled on my account, and of
seeing myself necessitated to the uneasy Task of denying a Request of hers. If
what I owe to my Religion, and to your generous Cousin, would suffer me upon
any terms, to alter the Resolves it prompted me to; the delaration of your
desire to have me do it, would have made all the Arguments you employed to
persuade me to it, unnecessary. It Is true, that among Virtuous Friends,
kindness may challenge much, but not to the prejudice of Conscience and
Reputation. I hope our Friendship is not, and am sure it ought not to be,
barely a mutual fondness of two young Virgins; but that virtue had a gteater
share in making and continuing it, than Sympathy and Inclination had. And it is
but just, that a friendship, grounded chiefly upon Virtue, should be governed
and regulated by it. Per-Permit me therefore (pursues she) with that freedom
and plainness, that our Friendship allows, to put you in mind, that in the
straits wherein Providence has now placed us, it calls upon us to consider, not
only that we are Friends, but, that we are Christians too; who ought in reason,
as well for our departing as our departed Friends, to listen to the Apostle of
us Gentiles, 1 Thessalonians 4. 13.
who forbids us, upon the removal of those we love, to give up our selves to
Sorrow, as those that have no hope. Indeed, if we were Epicureans, that believe
the Soul as mortal, as the Body; or such other Pagans, as bury in the Graves of
their Friends, the hopes, or at least the confidence, of meeting them again: we
could scarce too bitterly deplore a Separation, that would certainly, or at
least for ought we knew, prove an Eternal one. But having, through the goodness
of God been embracers of the Gospel, and enabled, though but imperfectly, yet
sincerely, to live according to its Dictates, and be ready to die for its
defense; the same Grace may keep us from fearing, that the time of our
separation will be lasting enough, to bear any considerable proportion to that
Eternity, which will be allowed us to enjoy each others Company in. And give me
leave to tell you, Irene, that I cannot rejoice at any expressions, even of
your kindness, that are injurious to your Piety, and bring your love of me,
into a competition with that, which ought to be as unparrallel'd as its Object
is. They love a Creature too much, that think it too good to be parted with,
for the Creators service. It Is a high injury to him, to think we can lose any
thing for him, that he cannot make us a rich amends for. And I must not conceal
my Opinion, that a Christian disparages both himself and his profession, if he
complains, that any loss can make him unhappy, while he possesses the favor of
God. Wherefore, my dearest Irene, (concludes She) let your Friendship alleviate
my Grief, by showing me how handsomely you bear your own; and prefer, I beseech
you, upon this sad occasion, the Exercise of the more generous, to That of the
more tender, Effects of Kindness.

Alas, Madam, says the distressed Irene, all the fine things you say to comfort
me, produce in me, an Effect quite contrary to that you design by them; since
they do but the more discover the Excellency and Kindness of the incomparable
Person I am going to be deprived of; after whose company, I shall find that of
the rest of the World, too insipid, so much as to divert me: and therefore, if
you will not grant me the Blessing of Living with you, at least do not deny me
the satisfaction of Dying with you. For, though Martyrdom be very formidable to
a frail Woman, yet Heaven is more desirable to a Christian; and I shall not
fear to take a Scaffold or a Stake in my way, when I travel to such a Place, as
That, in such Company as yours.

You know, (replies Theodora) as well I, that our Religion commands us to
suffer Martyrdom, when we are obliged to do it; but forbidsus to thrust
ourselves unnecessarily upon so fatal and difficult a work: The Apostles
themselves, whose peculiar Office it was, to be the Heralds and Champions of
the Gospel, were commanded, when they were persecuted in one City, to fly into
another; and accordingly one of the most courageous of them, to avoid needless
and unseasonable dangers, Act. 19. 25.
fled to Jerusalem from Damascus; though to do so, He was fain to be let down
from the wall of this Place in a Basket. And it is but reasonable, we should
not, without a manifest Call of Providence, venture upon a Conflict, in which
we do so much depend upon extraordinary Assistances for the Victory, that the
same bold Disciple, that so confidently promised our Savior, that He would die
for Him, was in an hour or two, the first that renounced him. An inspired
Teacher, who was ambitious to be, as He afterward proved, a Martyr, reckons it
to be the Gift of God, not only to Believe in Christ, but to Suffer for that
Belief. If (continues She) our Conditions were exchanged, and Irene, instead of
me, were by Divine Providence singl'd out for Martyrdom; I should not envy Her
the Glory, of letting many of both Religions see, that Christianity can elevate
the Courage of a Woman, to a degree that they think appropriated to Men. I
would employ my Prayers rather to obtain of Heaven, a divine Support of Her
Resolution, than an inglorious Change of It. And imitating that well natured
Israelite, who, not only willingly but gladly, parted with his dear Ester, when
She went from Him to a Throne; I should be more satisfied with Irene's
Advancement, than with Her Company: And if I did not prefer Her Happiness to my
Own, it would be, because indeed I should look upon them so united, that I
should find Mine in Hers. Let me then (says Theodora) conjure you, by all Our
past and future Friendship, rather to congratulate, than lament, the Remove I
am going to make. And be not troubled, that One whom you have been pleased so
much to Love, is called to be early happy. In such hazardous times as these,
you know not how soon a Persecutor's Sword may send you after Her. And at most,
this Mortal Life is too short, to let our Separation be very long. And in the
mean time, the comfortable Expectation of an unchangeable state, of whose
Blessedness the renewed Fruition of each other, will make a Part, and not the
greatest neither; may Console you for the absence of a Person, that in the
interim will be happy enough to wish You where She is, upon much juster grounds
than you can wish Her where She was. Let it then (concludes Theodora, with
weeping eyes,) be a sufficient proof of my Esteem and Love of Irene, that I
part from Her with Tears, when I am going to a Place, where the Divine Oracles
assure us, Rev. 7. 17.
that all Tears shall be wiped from our Eyes, and be succeeded by a Fullness of
Joy, Psalm. 16. 11.
that shall last for evermore.

CHAP. VI.
THough these Reasonings were such, as Irene knew not well how to answer, yet,
being incapable of acquiescing in any Discourse, that inferred it to be her
duty; to part with Theodora; she resolved to try, whether the persuasions of
the company, (which she knew, would be very forward to assist her) would not be
more prevalent, than hers had been: And that seemed an accident very. friendly
to her design, that just then happened, by the arrival of an intelligent
Gentleman, whom she had a while before employed to learn News of her Friend;
and who, on that score, had been a curious and heedful Spectator, of all that
had passed, at the presidents, in relation to Didymus, and was come to bring
Irene an account of it. To hear this, she and her sorrowful Friend were desired
to rejoin the rest of the company: To which, the high and just esteem they all
had of so brave a Gentleman, as Didymus, gave an impatient desire to be
informed of his Adventures. To satisfy this Curiosity, the Gentleman that was
to do it, did, after a short pause, make them the following Narrative.

I suppose this company needs not be informed by me, of what happened to the
generous Didymus, between the time, that the excellent Theodora was condemned
to an infamous place, and that wherein he had the happiness, of helping her to
make an escape out of it. And therefore without wasting any of that little
time, whereof, I fear, we may have but too great need, I shall proceed to
inform you, that when this astonishment, occasioned by this Surprise, of
finding a Young man in the escaped Virgins Room, was a little over, and they
had clothed Didymus in a habit more decent, to appear in, before a public
Assembly; they led him away to the Judge: to whom some of them related,
maliciously enough, what had passed earnestly begging Justice of him, against a
Person, who (they said) could not but be a Christian; and who was not content,
to be himself an Offender against the Laws, but had dared to rescue another
Offender, from the Punishment to which they had doomed her.

Against this Charge, the undaunted Didymus being asked, what Defense he had to
make, addressing himself to the Judge, made this resolute answer. I stand
accused of a twofold Crime, of being a Christian, and of Theodora's Rescue: And
though I cannot so soon have forgot, how heinous my Accusers have endeavored
to make them appear, yet, instead of denying either of them, I shall own, that
I glory in both.

As for Christianity, in an Age, wherein it is so cruelly Persecuted, I would
not have embraced the profession of it, but that I was resolved, if there were
occasion, to suffer for it. And therefore I shall neither deny what they call a
Crime, nor make an Apology for it, nor deprecate any Infliction, (for so I call
it, rather than Punishment, which still supposes a fault) whereto it can expose
me. Nor could I, without being wanting to the duty of Humanity, refuse my
assistance, to preserve the purity of so noble a Shrine of Chastity, as the
Savage designers of a Rape on Theodora, were going barbarously to violate. And
the inward satisfaction of having done what became me on such occasions, will
support me under any Sufferings, that shall be drawn upon me, but by my Loyalty
to persecuted Truth, and my compassion of distressed Virtue.

The experience I have had, (answers the President) of the effects of those
desperate Errors, you miscall Religion, makes me inclinable enough, to think,
that you, as well as many others of your wild Sect, have both Madness and
Impiety enough, to put off the Apprehensions, as well as the other common
sentiments, of Human Nature, and fear Death, as little as you do the Gods. But
since you pretend to be more virtuous Men, and obedient Subjects, than others;
pray tell me, what you can say, for your rescuing a Malefactor, out of the
hands of those Ministers of Justice, that were going to Execute the sentence of
Condemnation upon her.

If, (replies Didymus) the Sentence you speak of, had doomed her but to Death;
though I should most gladly have suffered it in her stead, yet I had deplored
your Cruelty, without attempting to defeat it. But I confess, I could not
without Indignation, as well as Grief, see such a person as Theodora, who for
her Beauty, Virtue, and other Perfections, is justly admired by all that know
her, and looked upon as the honor of her Sex; most injuriously condemned to so
infamous and barbarous an usage, as were unfit for the meanest and despicablest
of Creatures, that belong to the Sex, (whereof she is the Ornament.) And
considering with my self, that Chastity in Women, and especially in Virgins, is
so much a Virtue, and their right to preserve it, so confes'dly inhaerent, that
all Nations agree, in ascribing to them a right to defend it, without reserve,
against whosoever attempts to deprive them of it; I concluded, that to help a
distressed Virgin to preserve so acknowledged a right, was to defeat Ravishers,
rather than to oppose Magistrates, and not commit a Crime, but hinder the
accomplishing of one. Nor could I think, that 'twas against the Roman Judges I
acted when I opposed Persons, whom their Savage design made me look upon as the
worst sort of Barbarians. And I did not doubt Sir, (continues Didymus) that in
your own Breast, when calmer thoughts shall come there, to succeed those that
lately possessed it, I shall be absolved from an action, which kept you from
dishonouring your self as much, as the execution of your Sentence would have
defiled Theodora; and kept you innocent as to Act, from what would have made
you Enemies for ever, not only of the fairest half of Mankind, but of all those
of our Sex, that retain any Sparks either of Virtue, or good Nature.

If Theodora, (replies the President) were not a Beauty, and one of your
obstinate Sect, I doubt you would never, for her sake, have adventured upon so
desperate an Attempt, as makes you, not more Disobedient, than Obnoxious, to
the Law.

I see not, Sir, (rejoins Didmuys) why it should be a disparagement to
Theodora's Beauty, or to the impressions I have received of it, that all that
it has engaged me to do, has been, with the utmost hazard of my Life, To rescue
her Purity, and deny my self, in the first place, the advantages I endeavored
to deprive others of. But the Charms of her Mind, needed not those of her Face,
to make me attempt to preserve her. I have often in Camps contended, not
without hazard enough, with my victorious Fellow Soldiers, to keep them from
violating the Chastity of Captives, who had neither Beauty to Captivate others,
nor any thing else to engage me in their Quarrel, except their being innocent
and distressed Women. But Theodora; setting her Beauty and Birth aside, has
been so eminent, for all the good Qualities and Excellencies that can
accomplish a Person of her Sex, and especially, for her Chastity, that my Heart
would have reproached mefor, not prizing Virtue enough, if I had declined so
happy an Opportunity, to express the veneration I paid so shining a one, as
Hers. But, (pursues Didymus) I would not by what I have said, be thought to
deny, that my Religion had a share in the attempt I made to serve a Person,
that did so much adorn it, and was so loyal to it. The Christian Doctrine,
among many other excellent things, that it prescribes to its embracers, teaches
them, that in some cases, among which ours is comprised, they Ought to lay down
their Lives for one another. 1 John, 3. 16.
But Sir, (concludes Didymus) you may be pleased to take notice, that what I
acted, was according to the Rules of it too. For I did not oppose the Execution
of your cruel Sentence, by force, but only prevented it by an innocent
Stratagem, whereby my ends were obtained without Bloodshed or Violence; no Man's
Life having been so much as endangered, except my own; which I never thought my
self bound to preserve from any Danger, that Piety or Humanity summoned me to
undertake.

Though the President could not but be sensible, that Didymus had said more for
himself, than was expected; yet, that he might not be thought to be satisfied
with the Defense of a Person, whom he meant to condemn, he told him; I do not
think it strange, that those who dare call the very Worship of the Gods,
Superstition and Idolatry, and and that which all Men but your selves call
Impiety, Religion, should style Rebellion against the Magistrate; Loyalty to
the Truth. But how industriously soever you strive, not only to cloak a
Criminal action, but transform it into a Virtuous one; I can easily, through
all its disguises, percieve the disobedience and refractoriness to Civil
Government, that is so contagious, and so spread among the embracers of your
Sect; that Princes have no other way, but your Ruin, to secure their own
Safety, which would be quickly endangered, if your power and numbers were half
as great, as the disloyalty of your Principles and Practices.

To be a Sufferer for my Religion, (answers Didymus) is that, which I shall not
so properly submit to, with Resignation, as Embrace, with with Joy. But to find
my Religion a sufferer with me, if not for me; and to see Christianity made a
State Crime, while it severely prohibits and condemns all Crimes, and none more
expressly, than disobedience to the just commands of Magistrates; is that,
which, I confess, does not a little trouble me. And therefore, Sir, I hope you
will allow a Person, that is much more concerned to keep his Religion than
himself, from being endangered by this Accusation; to give you a righter
apprehension, than our Calumniators have done, of the innocentest, as well as
the truest, Religion in the World.

Though for my part, (continues Didymus) I think, that the liberty of serving
God, by such ways as are not repugnant to the Light, or Laws of Nature, or the
welfare of civil Society's, is the common right of Mankind, and cannot be
denied Man, without Injustice; yet I do not now plead for it: and you are more
concerned to look to that, than I. For if you make me suffer, for the innocent
use of that Right, which God and Nature have granted unto all men; I shall but
undergo a Transient Punishment, but you will expose your self, to an Eternal,
and (which is worse) to a deserved one. No Persons in the World, can pay more
Obedience to the Laws of their Superiors, than Christians do. We that can shed
the Enemies Blood, and hazard our own, as freely, and perhaps as succesfully,
as any Soldiers in your Armies, suffer you to shed ours, as tamely as any sheep
you have in your folds. And sure, we are very unhappy, as well as you very
incredulous, that those Professions of Loyalty and Obedience, that are not more
visibly written in our Books, than frequently signed with our Blood, cannot
gain Credit with you; nor our death it self convince you, when the wounds that
we quietly suffer to pierce our Breasts, would open you Windows into our
hearts, if some had not a greater mind to pierce them, than to know them. But
the same just care we have to obey Authority, what rate soever the submissions
cost us, forbids us to do those things, for the refusal whereof, Authority
condemns us. For God being, as the only Creator, so the Supreme Governor of
man, his Laws are those of the truest Supreme Authority: and Princes themselves
being his Subjects, and but his Lieutenants upon Earth; to decline their
commands, when ever they prove repugnant unto his, is not so much an Act of
disobedience to the Subordinate power, as of Loyalty to the supreme and
universal Sovereign. And in such cases we are no more Rebels against the
Emperor, when we prefer the performance of Gods Laws, to a compliance with His,
than we should be, in case we should disobey the orders of the Governor of the
Province we live in, if they should prove repugnant to those of Augustus. And
even in these cases; if we cannot yield an active obedience to the commands of
the civil Sovereign, we do not refuss him, the utmost we can consent to, which
is passive obedience: and when our consciences permit us not to do, those to us
unlawful things, that he commands, they enjoin us to suffer unresistedly,
whatever penalty's he pleases to impose. And give me leave Sir, to add, (so
Dydimus continues) that we are so far, from making Religion a Cloak to the
pursuit of present advantages, that you daily see us renounce them all, and our
lives to boot, to maintain our Loyalty to our Maker, without hopes of being
recompensed, but in another World; and even there we cannot expect any, but by
the sentence of a Judge, whom none can either bribe or deceive, and who is more
severe to crimes, than any Persecutor on Earth can be, to Innocents. I will not
tell you, pursues Dydimus, that on the other side, the assurance we have of the
inestimable rewards laid up in heaven, for Loyalty to God and his Truths, and
the internal applauses of a good conscience, are things of so elevating and
satisfying a nature, that our Religion can make the hearts it possesses, not
only detest the Ambition of those Subjects, that aspire to Earthly Crowns, but
perhaps, pity the condition of those Princes, that possess them. But I dare,
Sir, avow, that the harmlesness of our Principles, is not more legible in our
Profession, than in our Practices and Sufferings. For the multitude of
Christians is so great, that [in your Cities, your Country, Tertul.
your Courts of Justice, your Camps, and all places of Public Resort, except
your Temples, they are not only present, but numerous;] and your Enemies, as
well as your Armies, have been sufficiently convinced, they know as well how to
Kill, as Dye; so that it is only because we will not forfeit our Innocence, by a
forbidden way of defending it, that we are exposed to such cruel Sufferings for
it. And I doubt not but equitable Estimators of things will conclude, that our
calmly submiting to such inhuman Usages, sufficiently shows, that we do not
deserve them.

The Judge, discerning still more clearly, that his discourses made much less
impressions upon Didymus, than those of Didymus did upon the Hearers; resolved
to break off this kind of Conversation, and with a stern Countenance, told the
Prisoner, that 'twas high time for him to remember, that he was a Judge, and
not a Priest; and that therefore, though his compassion had hitherto invited
him to employ Persuasions, yet now their unsuccesfulness obliged him to declare
positively, that he was sure the gods, that he and the world worshipped, were
the true ones; and that if Didymus did not forthwith acknowledge them to be so,
by Sacrificing to them, he should quickly feel their power, by being put to a
death, his obstinacy made him both deserve, and appear fond of.

Didymus, without seeming to be at all moved at this rough Language, calmly, as
well as resolutely, replied.

Though Sir, I am most ready, whenever I am called to it, to Suffer for my
Religion, yet I would not be thought to expose my self, for an obstinate
Denial, to hear and consider, what may be objected against it. We Christians,
whatever wilfulness may be misimputed to us, are not so fond of Sufferings, or
of our own Conceits, as not to be more willing to have them brought to the Bar;
than to be condemned there for them: And persecuted Opinions are things, which,
as we do not renounce, so we do not embrace, for their being such. Nor are we
so blind and wilful, as to reject clear Arguments, that would both instruct us
and rescue us too, if any such could be proposed, by the Embracers of your
Religion.

This I say, Sir, continues Didymus, not to contradict what you were saying, of
your being not a Priest but a Judge; but to clear Constancy from the imputation
of Obstinacy, and declare, that if we could see Reasons on your side, fitted to
deliver us from Error, and from death, we would not be so mad, or so perverse,
as to choose rather to renounce Life, than embrace Truth. But pardon me, Sir,
(subjoyns he) if I think, that, though you are commissioned by the Supreme
Power, to be a Judge for Life and Death, yet you are not constituted by the
Supreme Verity, a Judge of Truth and Falsehood. And therefore, I take your
owning to worship many Gods, who, by their very being many Deities, are
sufficiently proved not tobe true ones; for a Declaration of your Opinion, not
a Demonstration that it ought to be mine too. If you press us with Arguments,
we are ready to answer yours, and offer you ours: But when instead of them, you
employ Threats, we do not think it proper to argue against them, but to despise
them; since it is not our Reason that they Assault, but our Constancy. And
therefore, give me leave to tell you, Sir, concludes Didymus, that the
Christian Religion can so fortify and elevate the Mind, and place it so much
above the reach of a Political Jurisdiction, that I shall suffer your Sentence
with far less trouble, than you will soon or late feel, at the remembrance of
your having pronounced it; and you will not find it in the power of all your
executed threats, to ruin either my Constancy, or so much as my Joy.

The Judge, enraged, to see his Power thus despised, and as he interpreted it,
affronted, by a Prisoner; declared, he would defer no longer than one hour
(which space he allowed him to repent his Errors in,) to pronounce against him
the fatal Sentence, and commanded him to be immediately led to the place, where
'twas to be executed; toward which he himself intended to follow at some
distance: Whether it were to feed his cruel Eyes with a Spectacle, whose
tragicalness his revenge would make acceptable to him; or to prevent any Tumult
or Disorders, that the Courage of Didymus, and the esteem and pity it had
excited in the numerous bystanders, might possibly occasion.

CHAP. VII.
AS soon as the Gentleman, that made the past Discourse, had ended it, the just
Idea it formed in the minds of the hearers, and especially of the two Ladies,
of the singular Piety and heroic Courage of Didymus, made such an impression
on the grateful and compassionate Theodora, as exceedingly heightened her
resolution to rescue him, if it were possible, and hast'ned her to begin
immediately to attempt it. In order to which, having observed that the hearers
listened so attentively to what the Relator said, that they then minded nothing
else, she took that nick of time to withdraw herself silently, into another
room; and by a pair of back stairs, conveyed herself out of the house: Whence
by indirect ways, (for fear of being overtaken in the shortest,) she went with
as much have and gladness, to an almost certain death, as others are wont to
shun and escape it with; leaving Irene and her other friends, no less amazed
than troubled, when sometime afterward, they perceived her missing, and found
all the diligence they employed to retrieve her, fruitless. For, Theodora,
fearing she could not long escape the diligence of her Pursuers, unless she
hastened to a place, where she justly thought they would not follow her;
delayed not to go directly toward the Company, that she was told attended the
President, in the affairs that were transacting in his Court. Among these
Attendants, she had not staid long, before she descried her brave Lover, under
a strict and rude Guard; but with a look so manly, and so serene, as showed,
that he deserved another usage; and was not in the least daunted nor
discomposed by that he met with. This moving Sight, so affected the generous
and compassionate Theodora, that though in so public place and manner, she could
with less reluctance dye for Didymus, than she could plead for him; yet her
gratitude surmounting her bashfulness, after some conflict within herself, she
made toward the Tribunal; to which she found a more easy passage than she
expected. For, the advantagiousness of her shape and stature, and gracefulness
of her motions, easily produced for her, such Sentiments, in the admiring
bystanders, as made them with great respect, give her way, and let her,
without disturbance, pass on to the Bar. She had but a very little while staid
there, before the President was moved, by the concourse of those whom Curiosity
and Wonder invited to gaze on the fair stranger, to cast his eyes on Her; and
notwithstanding the unlikelihood, that she should appear there, without having
been Forcibly brought thither; as soon as, out of respect to his Dignity, she
had lifted up her Veil, he discerned that it was she, by a sort of Beauty so
peculiar, as was not easily either to be met with in others, or to be forgotten
by any that had ever seen it.

But, though the Judge were thus surpised at her presence, yet he little less
admired her Courage, than her Beauty, when, with a Face, wherein the Blushes of
her Cheeks, and the Assuredness of her Looks, equally discovered her Modesty
and her Fearlesness, she told him: I know, Sir, that it is a very unusual thing,
for a Person of my Sex and Religion, to come to this Place unsent for. But I
hope you will be pleased to consider, that, as the Action is extraordinary, the
Occasion of it is so too. For both Justice, the Virtue that you sit here to
distribute; and Gratititude, founded upon the highest Obligations, engage me to
appear before you, on the behalf of that brave Prisoner, (at which words she
pointed at Didymus,) and present you the Object, on which you may inflict with
Legal Justice, what you cannot make him suffer, without being taxed of Cruelty.
For supposing a Debt to be due to the Law, yet it would be more Severe than
Just, to prosecute the Security, now the Principal offers to pay the Debt. He
may well be looked upon as my Hostage, whom I now come to redeem: And it is not,
Sir, your interest, to decline the Exchange, since by it you will preserve a
Person, whose Courage, engaged by his Gratitude, may do signal Service in the
Roman Army. And since my Escape was all his Crime, I beseech you, let my
surrender of my self, obtain his absolution.

Here Theodora paused a while, partly to recover from the Disorder, so unusual
and difficult an Effort of her Modesty had put her into; and partly, to observe
the Judges Countenance, upon his hearing what she had said, and to take
measures thence in what she was further to speak. The President in the mean
time continued silent, whether the longer to hear the music of her Voice, or
because so many Charms, as Nature had crowded in her Face, and so much sadness,
as her concern for her Lover had displayed in her Looks, had somewhat mollify'd
him, as they might have done a Tiger. Whereupon the fair Suppliant, hoping that
his not interrupting her, proceeded from some relenting Thoughts, resumes her
Discourse, in these terms. But if, Sir, to procure the dismission of this
Gentleman, your Justice had need to be seconded by your Clemency, perhaps you
never had, nor never will have, an Object whose merit may so well warrant the
fullest Exercise of it. For his Life, ever since he bore Arms, has been
employed in the Service of his Princes, and fearlessly hazarded for their
Greatness. And the Action for which he is now in trouble, is so Heroic, and so
disinteressed an one of Courage and Compassion, that in it he could scarce have
any other motive, than the Greatness of his Generosity, nor other End, than the
Exercise of it. Nor need you fear, that your Clemency on this occasion should
introduce a bad Example; for this of Didymus is never like to be imitated, nor
can be so, but by Persons too virtuous to be Delinquents. And if such Actions
be Criminal, at least it is unlikely they will grow common Crimes. And here
Theodora, perceiving that the impatient Didymus (now come again to himself,
after the astonishing surprise this Adventure gave him) was upon the point to
interrupt her, she thus prevents him. And you, brave Didymus, forbear to oppose
the accomplishment of my just Desires. The course that I now take, is the only
that I could take, to evidence my Gratitude, and to let you see, that you have
not exercised the noblest Acts of Generosity and Friendship, toward a Person
insensible of the Dictates of those Virtues. I could not (continues she) but be
glad to be rescued from the Ignominy of a Rape, but I did not intend to be
robbed of the Glory of Suffering for Christ; which is also the only means left
me to evince, that I Declined Dishonor, and not Death, and never meant so much
to disoblige the World, as for the sake of an insignificant Maid, to deprive it
of one of the most generous of Men. You have left yourself but one way to
increase your past favors, which is, to allow me the only real Expression I
can make of my sense of them, and that in such a way, as can, at most, but make
some little Diminution of them, without pretending to make a Retribution for
them. If therefore (concludes she) you will complete the Obligation you have
laid on me, by preserving to me the Coronet of Virginity, you must not oppose
my obtaining the Crown of Martyrdom.

Didymus had need of all the Respect, that he paid his admirable Mistress, to
keep him thus long, from interrupting a Discourse, that tended so little to his
satisfaction; and therefore she had no sooner put a period to it, than (with a
deep sigh) he told her; Cease, Theodora, cease, to plead for the continuance of
Life, that you are almost as cruel to me, in thus endeavoring to preserve, as
you are, in thus hazarding your own. And if I durst not hope for, from the
President, more than I see I must on this occasion, expect from You; I should
think my self as perfectly wretched, as (whatever your Intentions be) your
proceedings are unkind. But I am confident, our unbyas'd Judge is too
impartial, not to discern in your Discourse, that the excess of your Goodness,
has had the chief interest in the management of your Plea; the case about which
we differ, being in itself so clear, that alone to state it, is sufficient to
Plead it on my Behalf. For, I enticed you to escape out of Prison, and then, at
my own peril, facilitated to you the means of doing so: You leave me behind, as
a Pawn to the Laws, and these finding me in your room, make their great
Minister, before whose Tribunal we stand, doom me, for your Offense, to the
Death designed for your Punishment: Which since I joyfully proffer my self to
suffer for you; or rather, since you suffer it in me your Proxy; the
illustrious President is too well acquainted with his Office, to need to be
told, that, at least in Equity, the Surety's Payment, discharges the Principal
from the Debt; especially, when he not only proffers the Payment, but most
earnestly desires the acceptance of It, as a great advantage to him. I hope
then, Great Sir, says he, (turning himself to the President, with additional
Respect to that he had showed him before,) that you will accept of my Life,
instead of hers, who deserves a long and happy one; and that, when my Sentence
of Condemnation shall be pronounced, and gladly acquiesc'd in, it may Free her,
I am Condemned for. The love of Self-preservation is so natural, that it cannot
be made Capital, without affronting Nature, and punishing as well what Men are,
as what they do: And the love of Purity and Honor does so much become a Chaste
Virgin, that the natural consequences of it are too Commendable, to be fit to
be made Penal. It Is I, who having despised Dangers that I might easily have
avoided, when 'twas Question to do an illegal thing, do yet glory in the Crime,
that am the just and proper Object of the rigor of your Laws: And her Years
are yet so tender, and her Disposition so innocent, that since, if she have
erred, it was by my persuasions, if she be to be punished, it should be in my
person. All that she has since alleged to appropriate my guilt, or involve
herself in it, will, I hope, by a Roman Magistrate be looked on, as it is
indeed, as an argument of her generosity, and not of her crime. And the Romans
are too much friends to gallantry, to punish in a Lady, that Virtue, that they
applaud and crown even in Soldiers.

But now, continues Diydmus, I must address my self to you, O Theodora: And
must complain of, or at least deplore, my infelicity; that after I had done and
suffered, all that I could, though 'twas much less than I would, For the
preservation of so dear a Life as yours; you come now to hazard it, to make
mine end with sorrow. But granting you should prevail, in the no less unwelcom
than generous Attempt, you are pleased to make; how cruel were you, to envy me
at once, the two highest Honors, that my Ambition aspired to; the Glory of
Martyrdom, and that of Theodoras Rescue? Had I as many lives, as you have
virtues, I should esteem them all but a cheap ransom for a few hours of yours:
So unlikely I am, and ought to be, to be either capable or desirous, of being
preserved by your suffering for my actions. And therefore, Madam, if you think
my little Services deserve some recompense; since my highest contentments on
earth, terminate in your happiness, there is no other way left you to reward
them, but the care of your own preservation: It being the only return that I
expect or desire of my Services, that you will not, by your inflexibleness,
finally make them fruitless; but be content to live for his sake, that will
rejoice to dye for yours.

All the while this noble Dispute lasted, the Judge was, though not an
unconcerned, yet a silent Hearer of it: The strange novelty of the contest, and
no less extraordinary generosity and gracefulness of the Contenders, having
given him an attention, that kept him from interrupting them. But when their
debate had proceeded thus far; his stern nature, whose actings had been but
suspended by his curiosity, prompted him to tell the generous Couple; I know
not what presumption makes you plead, as if each of you were the others only
Judge, and had the Supreme Authority of condemning or absolving you; and I were
only an unconcerned auditor, or at least, sat here to ratify the Sentence you
shall agree upon, between your selves. But you will quickly find, to your cost,
that the Roman Laws, and Magistrates, are not to be trifled with.

Great Sir, replies Didymus, you much misapprehend our Conduct, if you think
your self slighted by it: For, 'twas not want of respect to your Authority, and
Power, that made us discourse as we did; but a supposition, not injurious to
you, that you would in the exercise of that Power, manifest that you deserve
it, by tempering it with two excellent virtues, that best become a Magistrate,
Equity and Clemency. This presumption, Sir, and not any disrespectful one, was
that upon which we proceeded in our discourse; still taking it for granted,
that you would not punish two, for that which was indeed, but the fault of one;
and that if either of us were, by the others consent, to suffer; your Equity,
or your Clemency, would prevail with you, to release the other.

Though Didymus, had worded what he said, so cautiously, that a discerning
hearer might perceive, that his expressions related to the Judges Dignity, not
his person; yet that self-flattery, which is but too common an attendant on Men
in Power, making the President take all these respectful words to himself, made
him allow Didymus, without interruption, to proceed in his discourse, and say;
you will easily grant, Sir, that Goodness, whereof Clemency is a noble part,
may bring a Magistrate, who is Heavens Vicegerent upon Earth, as high a
Veneration as Power or Greatness does; if you please to consider, that those of
your Religion, when they would with the most deference speak of God, give the
Title of Most Good the preference to that of Most Great, styling him, as the
Christians likewise often do, Deus Optimus maximus. Certainly, Clemency is
never more a virtue, nor less grudged at by Justice, than when it is exercised
toward Virtuous Persons, by rescuing them from the persecutions of Fortune,
and the unintended rigor of the Laws. I say unintended rigor, says Didymus,
for I cannot think that the Roman Legislators, that have honored injured
Chastity so much in Lucretia, and encouraged Gallantry and other Virtues, by no
less than Crowns and Triumphs; meant to make the productions of Chastity,
Constancy and Gratitude, Criminal things. And, though Christians dissent from
others in matters of Religion, yet those moral Virtues that were so esteemed by
the Romans, do not lose their nature, when practiced by Christians: And those
brave men, whose love to Virtue made them Masters of the World, did not scruple
to honor it in their very Enemies; and did it so much, even in the most
irreconcilable of them, that more than one or two Statues of Hannibal were
erected at Rome; Pliny.
to which Triumphant City it is perhaps more glorious, to have thus honored him,
than vanquished him. And sure they that thought Lucretias Chastity merited so
many Statues, would not think that Theodoras deserved a Stake or a Scaffold.
This Ladies actions and mine, are not so heinous, but that in happier persons,
and milder times, they have been looked on under a notion very differing from
that of criminal ones. But Sir, continues Didymus, addressing himself to the
President, in a very humble manner, if there must needs be offered up some
sacrifice to appease the angry Laws, I beseech you to let their rigor be
satisfied with my Blood, and spare this harmless Lady; to whom, if your
compassion be needful, I hope you will not want it for an object, whose
Excellencies cannot only make it reasonable, but meritorious. For it will
preserve to Antioch its fairest Ornament; and a Life so Exemplary, that to give
it an untimely period, for actions, which, being laudable in their own nature,
nothing but a rigid interpretation of the Law can make criminal, would be to
make the Laws a terror, rather to the good than to the wicked. It would be
thought inhumane to treat her as a delinquent, whom you may justly wish your
daughters should resemble; when by the Grant of what I implore, you will be
sure to receive both the thanks of her Sex, and the applause of ours, and what
out values both, the satisfaction of having saved and obliged one of the most
admirable Persons in the world.

Didymus now perceiving, that the person he pleaded for, was preparing herself
to interrupt him; readdress'd himself to her, and told her; do not, Madam, I
beseech you, require of my obsequiousness, proofs inconsistent with my love;
and add not to my infelicity, by putting me in so uneasy a condition, as to
find it my duty to oppose your desires: Ah! refuse not to oblige the world, by
preserving the most accomplished it can glory in: Deny me not the satisfaction,
whereof I am so ambitious, of being the happy instrument of your deliverance;
and then I may say, that I never could justly dye more seasonably than now,
when being at the height of all my joys, my longer life must of necessity give
an ebb to my felicity; since after the Glory of having saved Theodora, I hope
for no higher on Earth, than that of dying for her. Then perceiving her ready
to renew the Contest, he told her (with a low voice, that the Judge might not
hear him, and with a sadness in his looks, which she, that knew his Courage,
could impute to nothing but his almost boundless concern for her;) Madam,
though the Presidents impatience did not call upon us to conclude our Contest,
yet my condition and resolution ought to put a hasty period to it: For, Madam,
I must positively declare to you, that it would be as bootless as cruel, for
you to think to protect my Life, by the abandoning of your own: Since to owe a
Life to that Cause, would make it not only uneasy but insupportable to me, and
consequently incapable of lasting. So that enjoining me to survive you, would
condemn me to a Life, which after the loss of yours, must be spent, if it could
last, in fruitless deploring that Loss. Forbear therefore, concludes he, I most
earnestly beseech you Madam, to exact such proofs of my Obedience, that it is as
little in my power to give you, as it ought to be in your will to require them;
since for Didymus to survive Theodora, is as great an impossibility, as it
would be an unhappiness. O admirable Contest! where the noble Antagonists did
not strive for Victory, but Death; or endeavored to overcome each other, that
the Victor might perish for the Vanquished: Where Self-love, the most radical
affection of human Nature, is sacrificed to a Love, equally chaste and
disinteress'd: And where Virtue makes each of the Contenders, in geniously
Solicitous to appear Criminal, that the Antagonist may be treated as innocent.
How well does this proceeding prove that inspired Sentence true, that Love is
Stronger than Death, since in this Conflict, the generous Friends, are by the
former, made Rivals for the latter?

CHAP. VIII.
THE afflicted Virgin, to whom these moving things were said, finding that she
should but lose her diswasions on Didymus, thought fit to address herself once
more, to the President; and with humble Gestures, accompanied with Looks, and
with a Voice, that would have softened any that were not invincibly Obdurate,
she told him; Though Sir, the Arguments used by this Gentleman, had far better
proved than they have, that, of us two, he is the fittest person to be
condemned; yet I hope, where you Preside with so much Authority, he will not
fare the worse for being generous; and that what he has done, will be more
prevalent with you, than what he has said. Ever since he was capable of bearing
Arms, he employed them in the service of the Emperors; and in their Camps
cheerfully followed the Roman Eagles, wherever they durst fly: And after his
having this day hazarded himself so generously, out of compassion to a
distressed Virgin; what examples of gallantry may not be expected from such a
Courage, engaged by his Gratitude, when he shall act for the acquest of Glory,
and the Service of his Country? If a guilty intention be necessary to make an
action so, his will not be found to be Criminal; since he did not intend the
violation of any Law, but to second, what we are told to be, the design of all
just Laws; which is, to protect the Innocent, and encourage Virtue. But if by a
rigid interpretation of the Law, he may be brought within the reach of it; I
hope his Misdemeanor will not appear so great, but that your Clemency may allow
him all that I beg for him, which is, that he may be permitted to repair a
mistake in the exercise of his virtue, by the continuation of those Services in
the Roman Army, which will be far more useful to the public than his death, in
his present circumstances, can be. To this Theodora would perhaps have added,
(though she could scarce have done it, without some reluctance from her
modesty) The things, Sir, that he has been pleased to act and hazard for me,
may persuade you, that if, contrary to my prayers and hopes, you should design
severity toward him, you may more sensibly punish him, by my death, than by
more immediate inflictions on himself. And it is like she would have enforced
her arguments and entreaties, for a Person for whom she was so much and so
justly concerned, when the President* vexed to find that both of them so little
valued Life, whose deprivation was the most formidable thing he could threaten
them with, prevented her, by saying, with a stern countenance, No, I will hear
no more, having heard but too much already: It does not become a Roman
Magistrate, to suffer any longer with patience; that Prisoners and Criminals
should daringly disobey the Laws, slight all their threats, and glory in their
violation. What each of you has said to prove himself guilty, affords abundant
reason to condemn you both. Wherefore, since you cannot agree among your
selves, I will be your Umpire, and give both of you what each desires and
merits. You, Obstinate Maid, says he, turning to Theodora, shall dye for
having broken Prison. You Disobedient Soldier, says he to Didymus, shall dye
for having persuaded and furthered her Escape. But to specify your chiefest
Crime, than which there needs no other, nor can be a greater, you both shall
dye because you are Christians, and consequently Enemies to the Roman Emperors,
and the Gods that made them so.

This fatal Doom being pronounced, the Judge ordered the condemned Prisoners to
be taken aside, and strongly guarded, till all things were in readiness for
their Execution: Which preparatives he gave order to hasten. Yet finding by the
discontented looks, and confused murmurs, of the bystanders, that the Charms
and Innocence of Theodora, and the Youth, Courage and Friendship, of both the
no less generous than unfortunate Prisoners, made his Sentence o be far less
liked, than were the persons and behavior of those it had passed upon;
declared, that whilst he was dispatching other public business, he permitted
any that should have Charity enough to make a hopeless Attempt, to endeavor to
convert those obstinate miscreants: Adding withal an intimation, that even they
might speed in their suit, if they would seasonably, with incense in their
hands, flee to the Altars of the Gods, and humbly implore of Them, Pardon and
Safety.

This respite, as it exposed the generous Couple to have their constancy
assaulted by Infidels, ambitious of making such illustrious Persons Proselytes,
so it gave them the welcome opportunity, of interchanging some discourse with
one another.

These Conferences were begun by Didymus; who seeing himself upon the point of
final Separation from his admirable Mistress, could not forbear feeling in
himself such disorders, as on all other sad occasions, his great Courage had
kept him from resenting. And this unusual commotion of mind, was uneasy enough
to oblige him to say, to the fair Person that occasioned it; Though, Madam, the
military course of life I have with some forwardness pursued, has accustomed me
to meet Death in variety of formidable Shapes and Dresses, without being
discomposed by it; yet when I see the world going to be robbed of its noblest
Ornament, and my self to be deprived of the person I most love and admire in
it; and when I see this matchless Person ready to he ravished from us, both in
the flower of her age, and by the infamous hand of an Executioner; I think it
were rather stupidness not to be afflicted, than any weakness to be deeply so.

I was* answered Theodora, so fully satisfied before, of your Friendship and
Compassion; that this new grief of yours, as it is a very needless proof of
them, so it is a very unwelcom one. For, if I were to allow any thing to grieve
me, when I am entering into the fullness of Joy, it ought to be, that I find your
good nature renders this seemingly distressed Condition of mine very uneasy to
You; which through Gods assistance, is very little so to me; and yet will be
less so, if, congratulating rather than deploring our Martyrdom, you will ease
me of the justest and greatest part of my Grief, that consists in being
unhappily accessory to yours, and seeing you needlessly troubled at mine. That
circumstance, adds she, of my death, which I perceive much afflicts you, might
in my opinion more justly lessen, than aggravate your Sorrow. For, I look upon
it rather as a Favor, than an Infelicity, that I am early removed out of the
World, where I see, and suffer, and (which is worst of all) do, so much Ill. To
be early rescued from the Snares of a Dangerous and Persecuting Age, and
preserved from the Evil to come, is rather a Privilege, than a Calamity, to
those that are duly sensible, as I desire to be, that one can never arrive
unseasonably at Heaven, nor be too early happy. And, in this persuasion
(continues Theodora,) I am confirmed by considering, that the First of those
who are recorded to have religiously deceased, in the old Testament, and in the
new, just Abel, and John the Baptist; both of them died young, and perished by
the hands of those that Persecuted them for their Piety. And even that spotless
Lamb of God who did no sin, but by his Satisfaction, Precepts, and Example,
takes away the sin of the World; was sacrificed almost in the flower of his
Age: So little is it an unhappiness, or a mark of Gods disfavour, to escape the
toils and dangers of a troublesome Navigation, by being early, though by a
boisterous Wind, blown into the Port. And, if it could become a Woman to
encourage a Hero, I should exhort both you and my self too, generous Didymus,
(continues she) to entertain our present Condition with Sentiments becoming
Christians. And, as it does not trouble me directly, so it ought not to trouble
you upon the score of sympathy; that I am secured from the hazards and
inconveniences of Age: But be pleased to make use of that Courage, now at the
end of your days, that you have constantly expressed in the course of your
life. And, do not, I beseech you, repine, either that you or I, is to fall by
the hand of an Executioner. For that seeming, and but seeming Ignominy, was the
lot both of our Savior's immediate Harbinger, and of our Savior himself. And,
when we consider for whom, and for what, we suffer; we may find reason enough
to assume the sentiments of the Apostles, who, after having been misused by the
Jewish Council, went from their presence rejoicing, that they had been thought
worthy to Suffer for His name; Acts 5. 41.
for whom we are going to suffer the like things. For, Didymus, Gods gracious
Providence has not left us to perish, by lingering or tormenting Sickness, or
troublesome Old Age; nor yet for some common Cause, or some unimportant End. But
all in our fate is noble: And what to others is mere Death, a debt due to
Nature, or the punishment of Sin, to us is Martyrdom, the noblest act of
Christianity, and shortest way to Everlasting Glory.

A Discourse that relished so much more of a Martyr than of a Virgin, gave
Didymus a rise to continue a Conversation, by which he found himself as well
assisted, as charmed; and therefore observing the serenity of his Mistresses
looks, to be little inferior to the beauty of her face, and remembering what
instances she had that day given of an altogether extraordinary Piety and
Courage; was, by the sentiments these reflections produ'cd in him, prompted to
tell her: I should be justly inconsolable, Madam, to see my self and the world,
upon the point of being deprived of so admirable a Person, as Theodora has, by
this days various Trials, manifested Her self to be; if I were not confident,
that my Loss will be as short as great; and that in the State we are now
entering upon, I shall be allowed what approaching Death will deny me in this,
and shall find in Heaven the endearing happiness of conversing with Her more
freely, than our Persecutions and Her Reservedness would here permit. For
Madam, (continues He,) I am Friend enough to my own Felicity, to believe
assuredly, that those who shall be happy enough to meet in Heaven, will know
one another there, and have their joys hightned by the remembrance of what
past between them upon Earth. For in the blessed State we are hastening to, our
Faculties, and consequently our memory, will not only be gratified with
Suitable Objects, but be improved by enlarged Capacities. And even in a
condition short of that we this day expect; men's knowledge has been advanced,
at least as much as is necessary for our knowing one another, without the helps
that are ordinarily requisite to make us do so. As soon as ever Adam saw Eve,
he could confidently say of her, that she was bone of his bone, and flesh of
his flesh. When Noah awaked from his Sleep, he could tell that during his
sleep, his younger Son had behaved himself irreverently toward him. When our
Savior was tranfigur'd on M. Tabor, the three chos'n disciples that attended
him presently knew Moses and Elias, Matt. 11. 4.
whom they had never seen before, Luke 9. 31.
in spite of the Diguise that the Glory they appeared in put upon them. St.
Paul tells his Thessalonians, 1 These. 2. 19, 20.
they shall be his joy and crown, before their common Lord at his appearing: To
the truth of which it seems requisite, that both the Preachers and the Converts
shall be publicly known at that great appearance, and Assembly of the first
born, whose names are written in Heaven; and consequently, that men there shall
know one another. Our Divine Redeemer, continues Didymus, teaches us, that
there is Joy in the presence of the holy Angels over a repenting Sinner; which
argues, that whether they know of his Conversion in a more intuitive way, or by
the information of those Angels, that are some times sent to this lower world
about human affairs, they yet have a knowledge of particular persons, and take
notice of particular things that concern them. And, which makes exceedingly for
my present purpose, he elsewhere introduces Abraham in Paradise, calling upon
the uncharitable Rich Man, to remember what his own and Lazarus's differing
States had been upon Earth: And, which is yet more, to show, that even in the
place of utter Darkness and Torment, the Memory of past things and persons is
not obliterated; the Rich Man is introduced, as remembering not only Lazarus,
but his own five Brothers, and their dangerous Condition.

The pause that Didymus made, after these words, invited Theodora to tell him:
Since, generous Didymus, I have observed our soundest Teachers to be of
differing opinions about the Subject of your Discourse, and that they do not
look upon it as an Article of Faith, either that the Blessed do, or that they
do not, know one another in Heaven; I presume I may be allowed to think, that
if they do, (which I know is the most received Opinion) they do it in
likelihood with other sentiments than we commonly imagine. For, when the
beloved Disciple teaches, that, though we be here the Children of God, it does
not yet appear what we shall be; and adds only in general, that, when our
Savior, or that Blessed State, shall be manifested, we shall be like Him:
When, I say, I reflect on this, and some things of the same import; I am prone
to fear, that we judge too much of our future glorious State, by wrong
measures, taken from our present frail and mean Condition. And I am apt to
think, that we must stay till we come to Heaven, before we shall frame Ideas
suitable to the Prerogatives of its Blessed Inhabitants. I think our Notions
will then be raised, as well as our Dust, and our Love, and other Affections,
will be transfigur'd, as well as our Bodies. If we know one another, though our
mutual Love may perhaps be greater than it ever was on Earth, yet it will not
be upon the former Accounts; but will be as well better grounded, as better
regulated. That external Beauty, pursues the fair Speaker, that here is so much
doted on and overvalu'd, will there be found so much inferior to that of every
Glorified Body, that the difference and degrees of it will be very
inconsiderable, and unable to make differing impressions on those that shall
remember them: As the refulgent splendour of the Sun obscures all the Stars, and
keeps our eyes from being any more affected by the greatest and brightest, than
by any of the rest. So that our kindness to one another will be very little
grounded upon External Qualities, which will there either cease, or be
eclipsed; nor upon secular Relations, which will there affect us far less, than
our being nearly related to our common Lord; our resemblance to whom will be
the chief, as well as justest Ground of our mutual esteem and affection. When
Children of the same Parents have been early parted, and long bred in distant
places; though when they are grown men and women, they chance to meet again,
it is observed, that at first they know not one another any more than mere
strangers: and when they are informed of their Relation, it is not the little
accidents that happened to them at play; nor some features, that perhaps
pleased one of them in the others Face, but are now very much changed by Time
and Growth; that produce their new kindness: but the knowledge that they are
Children of the same Father, and their finding in each other personal
qualities, fit to adorn their present State, and thereby to challenge kindness
and esteem. And if some years absence can produce so great a Change, as to make
our nearest Relations unknowable by us; and make us look with pity, on the
fondnesses that trifles produced in us in our infancy: What Changes, may we
think, must be made on those that conversed together upon Earth, when after
numerous ages, they shall meet in Heaven, with minds as much changed and
improved as their bodies will then be? Shall we not by the grounds of a
virtuous Complacency, be more affected and united, than we are now by natural
Relations, or by external Beauty, and those other ^rifles that here produce the
greatest Fondnesses?

But Theodora, (answers the surpised Didymus) can you be so rigid as to think,
that pure and virtuous Affections cannot be admitted into Heaven; since the
Scripture informs us, that not only Joy and Desire are to be found even among
the Angels, (who are said to rejoice at a sinners Conversion, and desire to pry
into the Mysteries of our Religion) but Care and Actings for opposite Ends; (as
when the Angel of Persia withstood Michael, and the Angel that talked to
Daniel.) Dan. 10. 13.


I do not absolutely deny, Theodora replies, that the Blessed know one another
in Heaven. And, says she, with a light change of color, I am so far inclin'nd
to believe it is true, as, for Didymus's sake, to wish it so. But, as I lately
told you, I am not apt to think, the sentiments occasioned by that knowledge,
will be such as most men imagine. Besides those Reasons that you have
ingeniously laid together, I think your persuasion of the Saints mutual
knowledge the more probable, because it seems not readily conceivable, how at
the great Day of Judgment, the Justice of God, in rewarding and punishing
particular Virtues and Crimes, can be manifested to the world, without
discovering the Persons by whom they were performed: Since Personal
Circumstances do very much alter the nature of moral Actions. And since the
happy residents in heaven, will have an eternity alow'd them to converse with
one another in; it seems highly probable, that in their various Conferences,
they will meet with, at least sometime or other, occasions, that by less
sagacity than their enlightened minds will then be endowed with, may be
improved to the discovery of the Persons they were formerly acquainted with.
But on the other side, (continues Theodora) we shall have such noble and
charming Entertainments to employ our attention, as will engross it from the
little and despicable Objects, (as we shall then think them) that now amuse or
busy us; as when we behold such a pompous Solemnity as a Roman Triumph, the
variety of splendid and magnificent Objects, that Successively present
themselves to our view, make us so intent upon those surprising Spectacles,
that even the nearest and dearest Relations, though perhaps gazing at the same
Sight, out of the same windows, are apt to forget one another. And (continues
she) even when the Saints actually know and remember one another, they may love
and converse, upon terms very differing from those, that were suitable to their
mortal Condition. Yes, Didymus, (adds she) As there will be no such difference
of Ages and Sexes, in Heaven, as there are on Earth; since all shall there be
like the Angels, and have Bodies conformed to the Glorious Body of their
Redeemer: So, the Rational Friendships, that will be practiced in that happy
Place, will receive their measures from the new and personal Excellencies of
the Friends; from their being Rivals in the Love of God; and from their
differing degrees of resemblance to Him, that is the Brightness of his Glory,
and the express Image of His Person. But, concludes Theodora, we need not spend
more time in discoursing conjecturally about Questions, wherein the Change, we
are now going to make, will soon bring us to be resolved. And in the mean time,
we may well rest satisfied, with this assurance, That since Heaven is a Place,
or State* where we shall be Blessed with the Fullness of Joy; to know and
converse with each other, will be there found, either a part of our Felicity,
or not necessary to it.

CHAP. IX.
WHilst Didymas and his excellent Mistress, stood waiting, till the infamous
Ministers of the Presidents Cruelty, had prepared all things requisite to the
Execution of his barbarous Sentence; among those many Roman Soldiers that were
assembled there, to be spectators of the approaching Tragedy* an Officer, whom
his own Gallantry had strongly inclined to sympathize with a Person, in whom he
saw that Quality so Eminent, thought himself obliged to attempt the diswading
him, from persisting in so fatal a Resolution as he had taken. Wherefore,
approaching our Martyr, with very obliging looks and gestures, and drawing him
aside, The Gods, says he, can bear me witness, generous Youth, that it is not
without some amazement, and more trouble, than any affliction of my own has
been wont to give me, that I see the Possessor of so much Gallantry, upon the
point to be destroyed by an unhappy Constancy, which, though in other cases a
virtue, must, being exercised against the Gods, become a Crime. And therefore,
I cannot but ardently wish, that after having shown so much Patience and
Courage, you would at length express your Prudence too, by letting your self be
persuaded to a Compliance, that may rescue you at once from Impiety and from
Death.

An advice, answers Didymus, that is proposed with so much kindness and
civility, and yet pressed but by such unsatisfying Reasons, does justly deserve
my thanks for it, but not my compliance with it. For the Argument you bring
against my Constancy to the Truth, is only, that my persisting in it will cost
me my Life; which is a proof indeed, that the Religion I profess, will lead me
into Danger, but none at all, that it has misled me into Error.

It Is altogether extrinsick and accidental to a Religions being true or false,
that its Embracers happen to be encouraged by Preferments, or exposed to
Persecutions. Fear is but an ill Counselor in matters of Religion, unless it
be the fear of choosing a bad one, or living unworthy of a good one. He deserves
not the Blessing of having made a good choice among Religions, that does more
seek in his choice, the Concernments of his Life, than of his Soul. And as it is
only for its being the true one, that we should make choice of our Religion: So
having once chosen it, nothing should make us desert it, but a conviction of
its being erroneous, and consequently of its wanting that Truth, whose
appearance made us embrace it. If therefore, you can show me, that the
Christian Religion is false, or that yours is better; I am not so in love with
wandering, as to go on in a wrong way, because I once have, by weakness or
misfortune, been misled into it. But if your Arguments be but menaces, or any
thing that is of that sort, which can only manifest, that the power is on your
side, but do not at all evince, that the truth is not on mine; I must look upon
what you urge, as not deserving to be complied with, but contemned. And if it
were not my custom never to take any thing ill, that I think is meant well, I
should esteem my self not a little injured, by the argument you employ to make
me abandon Christianity. Since, if a person less civil and gallant had made use
of it, I should conclude, that he must suppose me a Coward, to hope, by such
persuasions to make a Proselyte. And though I were less assured than I am, of
the Truth of the Religion I have always owned; yet would I not for all the
world, on this occasion, by professing yours, desert it: Least by forsaking it,
when I am threatened for sticking to it; I should procure my self a disquieting
temptation to suspect, that I did not deal sincerely and impartially in choosing
a Religion; since I made choice of one, that I judged not worthy to be died for.

You mistake my intentions, Generous Didymus, replies the Roman, if you think I
pretended to fright you into Apostasy: my Virtue would as little allow me to
have so unworthy a design, as your Courage would permit a hope, that it should
be succesful. But looking upon my self, as having made a right choice in that
worship of the Gods, I make profession of, I could not think it injurious to
you, to persuade you, rather to Live in the profession of a true Religion, than
to Dye for that of a false one. And since my concerns for your safety, and the
little time you have to deliberate, oblige me to speak freely to you; I cannot
but wonder, that a Person that has courted Honor at the rate you have done,
should lose himself, for One, whom the most Sacred Persons of his own Nation,
crucified as a Malefactor; and who has been so ill natured, as to invite his
Followers, both by express words, and by the nature of the Religion he framed,
which could not but be Persecuted, to involve themselves with him in the like
unhappy fate.

The Notions (replies Didymus, somewhat nettled at this Discourse) that
Idolaters frame to themselves, of the nature of the Christian Religion, are
commonly as erroneous, as the ways they take to confute it, are improper, and
inhumane: And they are usually no less misinformed about the Grounds and
Mysteries of our Religion, than they are mistaken about the Objects of their
own Adorations. It Is true, that the Divine Person I adore, being sent from God
his Father, to be the great Prophet and Reformer of the World, did, with a
Prophetic Freedom, as well as Authority, sharply rebuke the Superstitions of
the Jewish Scribes and Pharisees, among whom he conversed; and did not more
unmask their Hypocrisy, and reproach their Practices, by the Light of his
Doctrine, than by the shining actions of a most exemplary and unblemished Life.
And his Holiness having exasperated these impious Hypocrites, that found their
Authority undermined, and their Persons discredited by him: As their malice was
too great, not to attempt the Destruction of such an Enemy; so his Constancy
was too great, to suffer him to decline the greatest dangers, by declining to
persist in the wonted exercise of his Virtues; whereby he thus became exposed
to a Death, which he foresaw, and frequently foretold, and which he also
willingly underwent, to procure Everlasting Life, for those who should believe
in him, and strive to imitate him.

And that his Death, whereunto he submitted to expiate the sins of others, was
not inflicted on him for his own, was evident, by his being absolved, not only
by the very Judge, to whom a Criminal fear of his Accusers indicted the
Sentence he pronounced against him, but by that Supreme and Infallible Judge,
God himself; who declared by astonishing Prodigies, both in Heaven and Earth,
how much he was displeased with those, that put his Son to Death; and by
raising him from the Dead within three days, to an Immortal Life, proclaimed
how dear he was to him, and gave him Power, to make his Followers Partakers of
that glorious condition he himself was advanced to. So that (continues Didymus)
those Champions of his, whom he vouchsafes to single out from the rest of his
Followers, and call to Martyrdom, have reason enough to look upon that Call, as
an invaluable Honor, and a Privilege: Since, as they are thereby made more
conformable to him, in cheerfully dying for Truth and Constancy; so they will
be made more plentiful sharers in those inestimable advantages, that his own
meritorious Martyrdom procured him. Yes, for those to whom he vouchsafes the
Power and Honor of Suffering for Him, and of imitating him, for the interest
of Truth and Piety; he does not only reserve such future Recompenses, to crown
their Love and Fidelity, but often gives them here such happy foretasts, in a
perfect assurance of it, that I cannot but look upon it, as a vast accession to
that immense Love, that made him dye for Us, that he calls and inables us to
dye for Him.

I confess, (Didymus adds in pursuit of his Discourse) that, as he took upon
him the form of a Man, so he suffered himself to be used as good Men too often
are. But his miraculous power and goodness, sufficiently proclaimed, that he
was not thrown down from Heaven to Earth, as your Vulcan is said to have been,
but that he descended from Heaven, to make Men live an heavenly life: Nor did
he, like many of your Deities, especially your Jupiter, assume an humane shape,
to do actions below the dignity of humane Nature; but he taught Men a Doctrine,
worthy, as well as likely, to be brought from Heaven; and gave them an
exemplary life, whose imitation would fit them to be translated thither: And
then submitted to the Torments and Infamy of the Cross, to purchase for his
followers, by his Death, that heavenly condition, for which he had qualified
them, by his Spirit and his Life.

The Roman Officer, not yet quite discouraged, by the unsuccesfulness he had
hitherto met with in his attempt, resolved to prosecute it yet further, by
saying: The same reason, that somewhat lessens my wonder at your despising
Death, for your erroneous Religion, increases my admiration at your
unconcernedness, to avoid the kind of Death that threatens your obstinacy. For
though the love of glory, may invite a gallant Man, like Didymus, to part with
his life for the attainment of it; yet that same heroic passion, ought to make
those it possesses, more apprehensive than others of those Extremities, wherein
Death is accompanied with Infamy, and made justy terrible with ignominious
Circumstances; of which, none can be more disgraceful, than the receiving it at
the base hand of a common Executioner.

The Weakness and Examples of your Gods (replies Didymus) have too much seduced
you, to make Estimates of Good and Evil, by those popular and pitiful measures,
that I cannot but think very unworthy to be acquiesc'd in by a Christian; who,
to merit that Title, must be somewhat more than an ordinary Man. We judge of
good and evil Actions, by the Laws of God, and right Reason, not by those of
Men in Power. And therefore do not think, that Constancy ceases to be a Virtue,
and consequently an honorable, not a disgraceful quality, because legal
Tyrants will call it Obstinacy, and condemn Men for it, to the same Punishments
that are allotted to dishonorable Actions. The respect our Religion commands
us to pay to a Civil Magistrate, though a Persecutor, permits us not by force
to resist his unjust Sentences. But this Submission of ours, does not at all
keep his Sentences from being unjust, nor forbid us to think them so; and
consequently leaves us the inestimable satisfaction of our Consciences, that
inwardly absolve us, when outward Judges condemn us. And for proof of this, you
cannot but have taken notice, that, whereas truly Criminal, Persons being
conscious of their own Guilt, either deny what they are accused of, or
endeavor by all means, to palliate it, and to avoid the being condemned for it.
We Christians, on the contrary, do not only Confess what you call a Crime, but
Glory in It; and do not deprecate the fate, that attends our Constancy. Nor can
it fright us from undergoing Death, for a glorious Cause, that we must receive
it from an Infamous Hand. For that by which we estimate it, is, the quality of
the action that procures it, not the condition of him that is employed to
inflict it: And, so we can consider with joy, for what, we are not much
troubled to see, by whom, it is that we suffer; being satisfied, that the
Executioners hand may destroy a Malefactor, but cannot make one; and if the
Cause that brings a Man to the Scaffold, be not culpable, the place cannot make
the Death that is there suffered, infamous: Nay, and if Virtue leads him
thither, the Instruments of his Death, cannot keep it from being Glorious;
since this demonstrates the Sufferers unshaken Constancy to be insuperable, not
only by Death, but by that which many have embraced Death to shun, the Contempt
of the generality of Men. Your gallant Roman Commander (Attilius Regulus) is
much less remembered and celebrated, for all his Military Exploits and Attempts,
than for the Cruel Death he suffered, by order of the Carthaginians, to whom,
in performance of a Pomise, he yielded himself up, with expectation of some
such barbarous Usage as he met with. And sure, as a submission to Indignities,
was a duty not meanly glorious in him, to shun the breaking of his Word to his
Enemies; the like resignation of themselves, will not, by unbiased Judges, be
thought an Action dishonorable in Christians, to prevent the violation of
their Faith, solemnly given, not to a Savage Enemy, but to a Divine Friend, who
has already, without any obligation to do it, suffered more shame for them,
than the sublimity of his condition leaves it possible for them to suffer for
him. And though that Greek Philosopher, Socrates, whom your own Oracles, with
more of Truth than they are wont to be guilty of, pronounced the wisest of Men,
was by his own Fellow-Citizens condemned to die by Poison, brought him by the
hand of an Executioner: Yet, since that Sentence was not occasioned by his
Crimes, but his Virtues, the deadly draught did not destroy his Fame with his
Life; and poisoned not his Reputation, which it extremely heightened, but that
of his Accusers, and his Judges; whom after Ages have looked upon, as worse
Criminals than ever they Condemned, and more unworthy Persons, than those they
employed to execute their Sentence. And for my part, (continues Didymus) some
passages of our sacred Records encourage me to expect, that, if a Posthume Fame
be such a Blessing, as many imagine, the Indignities we suffer now, will
hereafter procure it us. For I cannot but hope, and methinks I foresee, that
the Roman Eagles will one day stoop to the Cross of Christ: And the Temples of
your False Deities, will be consecrated to the Service of the True God. The
Sword of the Civil Magistrate, which is now the great and only successful
Argument on your side, will be then in Christian hands, which I wish may never
employ it against your Religion; whose ruin will not require the active
opposition of Power, but the bare withdrawing of its preserving Support. And
then posterity, more enlightened and more just, will read the History of those
Destroyers of the Baptized (which is, at least, the innocenter) part of
Mankind, with the same resentments, with which they will read the havocks made
by Wars, Plagues, Massacres, and other public Calamities.

CHAP. X.
THese Replies of Didymus made an end of convincing the Person, that occasioned
them, that our Martyrs resolution was not to be shaken, either by threats or
persuasions.

But yet the officious Roman, cherishing some hope, that, if Didymus should see
his Mistress ready to be killed by an infamous hand; that Beauty, which had
conquered his heart, would soften it, and thereby make it capable of relenting
impressions; thought fit to make him one address more, and tell him; It is not
without extreme regret, that I see your inflexible obstinacy defeat all my
endeavors to procure your safety. But though your mistaken gallantry, may make
you think it unhandsom in a Soldier, to disclaim a threatened opinion, that he
once adhered to, lest the change should be imputed to Fear or Levity; yet I
hope you will not think, that the strict rules of that destructive Gallantry,
ought to oblige a young Lady, in whose Sex, Courage is, at least, an
unrequired, if not an altogether improper, Virtue. And therefore, I hope you
will not refuse to second my Endeavors, to persuade her, not to throw herself
out of a World, of whose grandeurs and pleasures, her transcendent Beauty
promises her an extraordinary share, as well as her Youth fits her to relish
them perfectly, and enjoy them long.

Didymus, though at first somewhat surpised at this motion, took no long time
to return answer, by saying; I confess, I cannot partake of the trouble you are
pleased to express, for the not prevailing of your Endeavors to alter my
Resolutions. For though the advice you pressed upon me, was obliging in you to
give, yet it would have been Criminal for me to take it.

And as for what you propose, in reference to Theodora, I must desire to be
excused from making myself accessory to your design of tempting her. For, in my
opinion, he that solicites another, to what he believes a Crime, does become
guilty of one; so that, as to what concerns Theodora, without being at all sure
of shaking her Virtue, I should most certainly ruin my own innocence. Yet I
cannot think (says the Roman, interrupting him,) but if you would enforce my
persuasions with yours, the Interest you have in her, would prevail to make her
rather accept of Life, than deny a Person, that she owes so much to; and does
not less highly, than justly, value.

If (replies Didymus) I should yield to use so Criminal means, as to give her
an Example of the Apostasy, you would have me invite her to; the attempt would
be less improbable: But for me to persuade her to what I am just going to give
a convincing proof, that I believe to be worse than Death; would make her both
hate me, and despise me. And to convince you, that such a Motion as you would
have me make, would lose me all the share I may have in her good opinion; I
will dare to own to you, that if I thought her capable, I say not of
endeavoring to seduce me, but of being seduced by me, my esteem of her would
alter upon her change: And though I could not deny my wonder to so rare a
Masterpiece of Nature, as is her visible part; yet there would be a vast
difference betwixt a mere admiration of external Beauty, which must become the
Trophy of Age or Death; and that high veneration, that I now pay to that
admirable Person's intrinsic Worth, and unconquerable Virtue.

Nor should you doubt (continues Didymus) of the Entertainment, that such a
Piety as hers, would give such a Motion as you would have me make; since it
would justly give her a higher resentment of my solicitations, than of all the
importunities of her Heathen Persecutors: for these do but advise her to
decline Danger, by embracing what they think Truth; whereas that which you
would have me to persuade her to, is, to purchase her safety, by renouncing,
what I, as well as She, know to be Truth: And I doubt not, that such a
proceeding would so highly offend her, as to enable her, by a bare Pardon, to
acquit herself of those Respects and Services of mine, to which posssibly a
Person of her goodness vouchsafes some Title to her gratitude.

There is (replies the Roman) so great a difference betwixt the case of a
resolved Soldier, that thinks himself in point of Reputation engaged not to
retreat, and that of a young Lady, from whom no Resoluteness, much less
Obstinacy, can be expected, that I must yet think, our joint persuasions,
though unassisted by your Example, would withold her from Death, now she is
near enough to it to see the horrors of it.

Nay, (rejoyns Didymus) I did not speak what I have been saying about my own
aversness, that I might hinder you from trying your Fortune, if you think fit,
with Theodora's Virtue. I do not envy her Constancy (whose successes have been
hitherto no fewer than its trials) the honor of gaining more than one Victory,
in one day. But what I have been saying, was, to give you one reason, of my
refusing to join with you in your proposed attempt: against which I shall now
offer this other reason, that I think it little less than impossible it should
succeed. For I thought I had already satisfied you, that as to my interest in
Theodora, if it were much greater, than you, for want of knowing us both,
imagine; so great a misimployment of it, would make me justly forfeit it; and
persuasions that would seduce her to Apostasy, instead of making her follow the
Advice, would make her but detest the Adviser. And as to the hopes, you ground
on her seeing herself upon the point of passing out of the World; let me tell
you, that the severe Exercises, to which her strict Piety has long accustomed
her, have so disingaged her affections from temporal things, that, being
already mortified to the pleasures and vanities of the World, Death can now do
no more, but free her from the troubles and persecutions of it. She has
employed a great part of her life, in preparing herself to part with it
joyfully, whenever Nature or Virtue shall require it; and she will find it
very easy to lay it down for Religion, now she is in a suffering Condition,
when in her most flourishing one, she found it enough to wean her from the love
of the present life, that it detained her from the next. Great Virtues, such as
hers, are like great Rivers, which, the nearer they come to the Sea, where they
are to end their course, the greater they are wont to grow, and the more
difficult the stream is to be withstood or hindered from its progress. Theodora
now looks upon herself, as having but one step more to make, to reach that
Crown she has done and suffered so much for: And that glorious Object, viewed
at so near a distance, so ravishes and so possesses her Eyes, that she will
doubtless either not see, or not regard, any thing that would hinder or retard
her taking possession of it.

Here the Roman Officer, somewhat impatient at Didymus's Discourse, would no
longer forbear interrupting it, by telling him; To hear you speak, one would
imagine, that you are not talking of a young Lady, but of some ancient Hero,
that had been long accustomed to despise the Frowns of Fortune, and keep
himself from over-valuing her smiles.

Heroic Virtue (replies Didymus) does as little know Sexes, as does the Soul
wherein it properly resides. A habitude cannot always be Essential to the
Nature of an Heroic Action: Since the first of that kind that one does, is not
the consequent, but the beginning, of a a habitude: And a sincere and settled
resolution to be highly virtuous, may make a Woman (as well as a Man) to be,
that which the noblest subsequent Actions can but declare her to have been. And
a Person that, like Theodora, acts by the assistance, and as in the presence,
of the Deity, may, to maintain her Loyalty to God, and her Title to the
inestimable Rewards he has promised to persevering Piety, both act and suffer
greater things, than those very Heroes you talk of were put upon, by such
barely humane Motives, as Custom, Ambition, or Revenge. And particularly, as to
the point of perseverance against Menaces, and Proffers; these are not like to
prevail against the Constancy of Christians much less possessed with Divine
Love and Hope, than Theodora is. And indeed, there can be nothing upon Earth
capable to bribe Them, to let go the Joys of Heaven, that see themselves
entering upon the Possession, and find themselves sensible of the inestimable
Value of them.

Wherefore (concludes Didymus) you will not, I presume, think it strange, that
I refuse to join with you, in a Design, that I could not so much as attempt,
either with Hope, or without a Crime; and that thinking it worthier of my
Endeavors, to imitate Theodora's Constancy, than to seduce her from it, I choose
rather to be a sharer in the Triumphs of her Virtue, than a Trophy.

CHAP. XI.
THis resolute Conclusion, obliged the Roman Officer to break off a
Conversation, whereby he plainly saw, there was no cause to hope he could shake
the Constancy of Didymus; and much cause to fear, that Didymus's Constancy and
his Discourses, would stagger many of the Heathen Auditors. And therefore
withdrawing himself, much discontented at the unsuccesfulness of his
persuasions, he thought it would be impious, to make any intercession, for
Persons he judged invincibly obstinate, or divert the fatal Proceedings of the
Judge; who having by this time made an end of those other Affairs, whose
dispatch Theodora's respite was not to outlast; called for the innocent
Criminals, and, with a stern Countenance and Voice, demanded, whether they were
yet willing, to appease the Deities they had provoked; and by burning Incense
to them, endeavor to atone for the Affronts they had offered them. Adding,
that there was now no more time left for deliberating, but that they must
immediately renounce their Impious Religion, or suffer Death for it.

But this could not shake the illustrious Prisoners Constancy; which prompted
them to make, with as much haste as the President could desire, an answer, that
consisted but of a short and resolute declaration; That they had lived
Worshippers of Christ; and had a thousand times rather die, than cease to be,
or to profess themselves such: And that for the false Gods, the President would
have them adore; they had rather be their Victims, than their Suppliants; and
fall Sacrifices to them, than offer them any.

This bold profession, so incensed the person 'twas made to, that he
immediately gave order, that the Prisoners should be led away to the place of
Execution; and that the Ministers of Justice, (as he misnamed his Cruelty)
should, without delay, go on with the preparations that were making, to destroy
them. But while these Officers were solicitous to obey those Commands, Theodora
took the opportunity, to tell the generous Companion of her Sufferings: It was
fit, I confess, when we discoursed with Infidels, to recommend the Objects of
our hopes, by giving them the glorious Titles of Crowns, and Triumphs; since
being to defend the reasonableness of our Constancy, by the greatness of the
rewards we expect for it; 'twas very proper to represent those Celestial
Recompenses, under the notion of such Goods, as those we argued with,
acknowledged to be the most noble and desirable. But, (continues she) when we
speak of Heaven among our selves, give me leave to tell you, that I think we
should look upon it under a very differing notion; and make a wide disparity
betwixt the Christians Paradise, and the Poets Elysium. The Triumphs we should
most desire in Heaven, should be, not over our outward Enemies, or personal
Sufferings, but over Sin and Ignorance, and the frailties of our Natures, and
the imperfections of our Virtues. And the positive Blessings that should most
endear Heaven to us, should be, not so much that we shall there be Crowned by
Christ, as that we shall live with him, and follow that spotless Lamb where
ever he goes; That our gratitude it self shall be perfect, as well as the
Blessings that engage it shall be complete; and That we shall have an eternal
Day, to contemplate that Sun of Righteousness, without having that glorious
Object veiled by any interposing Cloud, much less hid from us by the
vicissitudes of day and night. In short, I think, Devotion should in our future
State, aspire to other things, than those that may be the Objects of mere
Ambition.

And now, generous Didymus, (adds Theodora) since we are entering upon the last
scene of our mortal Life; let us, (I beseech you) summon together and rouse up
all the Graces and Virtues we have received from Heaven, and fervently implore
both an increase of them, and a supply of any that our present Circumstances
require; That we may go off the Stage Piously, as well as Handsomely, and both
act and suffer as becomes Christian Martyrs. Let not any Crueltys or Affronts
of our insulting Persecutors, be able to discompose us; but let our evenness of
mind convince them, that they can as little disorder us in our way to Heaven,
as hinder us to get to our Journey's end. But let not our undauntedness appear
the effect of sullenness, or fierceness, or of mere resolvedness; but let it be
so calm and charitable, that we may not be suspected to be the Martyrs, rather
of our Glory, or our Courage, than of our Religion. Let it not be thought that
we hate life, or despise it, but only that we think it a cheap purchase for
Heaven, and for the honor of owning and following a Redeemer, who, to merit it
for us, took the Cross in his way thither.

Admonitions so becoming a dying Christian, received such an entertainment, as
the Piety of it, and the Veneration he had for the giver, might justly
challenge, from so devout and elevated a Soul as that of Didymus: whose
resolute answers to the Roman Officer, together with his behavior, as well
since as before he made them, leaving his Enemies no more expectation that he
could be prevailed with, either to alter his own resolution, or tempt his
Mistress to change hers; he was appointed to be first led away to Execution:
that the sight of his Blood might terrify Theodora, and fright her into a care
to preserve her own. This resolution of his Enemies, did not at all lessen his;
but having easily obtained leave, from the Roman Officers, that could not but
admire his Gallantry, and somewhat compassionate his condition, to say a few
words to Theodora: He went to that excellent Person; and approaching her with a
far greater respect, than he would show to any Power, that could but preserve
that life, which the Romans were going to take from him: He told her: Your
Piety, Madam, and your Example, making me presume, that upon such an occasion
as this, I may with your consent, part with a life, which ever since I had the
Fate to see you, has been so much at your disposal; I am now going without
reluctance to perform that last duty, whereto Religion calls me. But thinking
my self obliged, to begin with the most difficult part of my Martyrdom, before
I bid farewell to the World, my enclination and respect, brings me to take my
last leave of the fairest and excellentest Person in it. If, Madam, (so he
proceeds) I were in a condition of paying you any further dutys, my humble
request to you would be, to have the honor of your further Commands. But since
my condition leaves me not a capacity of serving you for the future, one of my
last Petitions to you must be, to be pleased to look upon my past Services, as
extremely short of the desires of a Person, that loved you with as much
ardency, as your Charms themselves could kindle; and yet with so pure a flame,
that had it been visible, even Theodora's Virtue, could not have disapproved
it. But Madam, (continues he) although to rescue you from the condition you are
in, there is no danger so desperate that I would not joyfully attempt, if I
were again at liberty, and though it were possible I could survive you; yet I am
too much concerned for the nobler part of Theodora, to wish, she would blemish
so spotless a life to save it. Only, Madam, give me leave to be so kind and
Charitable to the World, as to wish that Providence may find some expedient, to
preserve for you, both your Crown and your Head; and that you may arrive so
late at Heaven, as to have time to bless the Earth with a long and Exemplary
Life; and may you lead it with as much Tranquillity, as you will with Virtue;
and without knowing so much as that trouble, which, I fear, your generous
compassion may now and then offer to give you, upon the remembrance of the
faithfulest of your Servants.

These words, and the sad occasion of them, having drawn some Tears into
Theodora's fair Eyes; though the cause of them made them very obliging to
Didymus, yet his concern for her quiet, presently engaged him to help her to
suppress them, by making haste to tell her, that 'twas pity the serenity of her
mind and looks, which Virtue had still kept calm, and even Persecutions had not
been able to disorder, should be discomposed by any other thing. And Madam,
(continues he) though, being confident that your charity will make it
unnecessary for me to beg your Prayers, I was going to make it my petition to
you, that you would vouchsafe now and then to cast a thought on the memory of a
Person, to whose mind you were constantly present: Yet, I must now retract that
humble request, unless you are pleased to grant it me with this qualification;
That the honor you do me, may not be disquieting to you. For how great a
blessing soever it is, to enjoy a place in your thoughts; yet an Idea must
represent quite another man than Didymus, that should, especially on its own
score, become troublesome to Theodora; whose compassion is as well needless, as
undesired; since it is injurious both to her self and me, to look upon Him as a
person to be pitied, that is going to receive the honor and satisfaction, to
suffer in her sight, what he suffers partly for her service. And the place he
implores but in her favorable not her mournful thoughts, will give him the
noblest and desirablest Being, that he can have upon Earth, when he shall be in
Heaven.

The things which Didymus said, and the pathetical way he said them in, did not
leave the fair Person they were addressed to, all the unmov'dness of mind, she
used to be Mistress of on other occasions. And considering these as the last
and dying words of an accomplished Gentleman, that had so highly served and
loved her, she could not hinder her resentments from making her, on such an
occasion, remit somewhat of her wonted reserv'dness. Wherefore with Eyes,
wherein though she endeavored to suppress Tears, she disclosed an
extraordinary Grief; and with Looks, wherein both Gratitude and Obligedness
displayed themselves; she told him, If I looked upon your Virtue, generous
Didymus, as one that were but somewhat extraordinary, I should think my self
obliged to make excuses; and seek your pardon for having been, though
undesignedly, so accessory to the early loss of a life, so worthy to be a long
one. But what you have this day done, makes me apprehend that such Discourses,
would not be very pleasing, to one that delights in such Actions. But do not
think, I conjure you, that, though I cannot pretend to merit or requite
Services of so unusual a strain as yours, I can be insensible, how much I owe
to them, not only upon the score of their greatness, but upon that of the
handsome and generous way wherein you did them. For (continues she, with a
color that somewhat expounded the meaning of what she was going to say) if
after the Virtue and Gallantry you this day expressed, Providence had thought
fit to place me in a condition of making you Retributions, I will allow you to
think, that in choosing them for you, I should have been very much, if not
unreservedly, guided by your wishes. Here she paused a while, and blushed the
latter, that she had said, what to her niceness seemed so much; and the former,
to consider whether he deserved not to have more said to him. But her obliging
looks did so well second and expound, her otherwise, somewhat indefinite words,
that Didymus's Heart readily understood the Language of her Eyes; and her Heart
spoke so clearly in her Cheeks, somewhat that it scrupled to utter by her
Tongue, that, expressing more than she said, without injuring her Modesty she
righted her Gratitude: her passionate Admirer esteeming himself more highly
recompensed, by this permission, to suppose her, kindness than he would have
done by the perfectest assurance of any others love: And fancying, that by the
sight of that new Fire that flashed in her Cheeks, he could descern in her
Breast such a resentment of his Services, as involved an approbation of their
cause, and implied a peculiarity for his Person; he took the high est
retribution he ever did, for the highest he ever could receive from a Lady,
whose Beauty and Reservedness were so great, that no favor of her granting,
could appear little.

But Theodora quickly recovering the disorder, this merited Declaration had put
her into, made have to prosecute her discourse, by adding, But it is my
satisfaction, and will I hope, be yours, that, since you acted upon Religions
score, as well as mine, you will not want a recompense, greater than it had
been possible for me to give you; since in rescuing me upon a Christian
account, you have served a Master, that is able most richly to reward, even
your Performances and Sufferings: And doubt not Didymus, (continues she) but
that, when you shall once be possessed of a Glorious and Immortal Crown in
Heaven, you will have no cause, to be troubled, at your having, upon Earth,
left a Crown of Laurel, or missed one of Myrtle. If I were to tarry, or rather
languish, here below, as many years as your mistaken kindness makes you wish
me; your favors have been so extraordinary, that, without being guilty of an
ingratitude that would be so too, I could never lose the remembrance of them,
nor omit paying you the highest acknowledgements, that the chief place, not
only in my memory, but in my esteem and friendship, could make you. But do not
Didymus, I beseech you, think of my Surviving you, when the holding out a few
minutes longer for Christ, will introduce me into a Condition, where I shall
ever see him, and never offend him. Let us then, (concludes she) quit the
thoughts of this World, that we are going so soon to quit, and begin to fix
them on those joys of another, that we are going to possess for ever; and
during that little time, that is requisite to go take our Crowns, let us summon
up all our powers, to contribute to a behavior befitting such Expectations.
Let our last services to Religion, be our noblest ones, that our Deaths may at
least adorn it, if not propagate it. Let us receive the last effects of our
Persecution, as persons that do not deserve such an usage, and are above the
reach of it. Let us aspire to Christ's temper, in his cause; and suffer Like
him, as we suffer For him: and then we need not doubt, but, in spite of this
short separaration we are yielding to for his Sake, we shall joyfully, and for
ever, meet again, in a better place, and in an inestimably happier condition.

Theodora had scarce made an end of speaking, when, all things being in a
readiness to put the Judges Sentence in Execution, they to whom that infamous
employment was committed, came to bring notice of it to Didymus, who,
notwithstanding the reluctance he had, to part with the admirable, and now
obliging, Theodora; thinking it would misbecome him, to stay for being pressed
on such an occasion delayed not, with all the resolution he was able to assume,
to take his last farewell of her. This cruel separation, being not to have an
end, before both their Lives, was solemnized by that excellent pair, with
Gestures and Expressions so sensible and moving, that, declining an account,
which I could not attempt to give, without sharing very much in a grief, that I
should be able, but very imperfectly, to describe; I shall silently pass over
the Circumstances of this sad Separation, that more troubled the generous
Lover, and perhaps his admirable Mistress too, than that of Soul and Body,
which was presently to follow it. But Didymus, now finally parted from
Theodora, whilst he was moving toward the place of his Sufferings, having by
the assistance of him, whose Religion called Him to them, assumed a temper of
mind, suitable to the glorious work he was going to undertake, and entirely
disposed himself, after having done all that became a Lover, to suffer as
became a Christian.

This was much the less difficult for him to do, because his whole past life
was an excellent preparative, to make him act the last scene of it worthily.
For (to add somewhat on this occasion, to the Character given of him in the
first Book.) Didymus was a Person, in whom Divine Grace had produced so early a
Piety, that he was a well grown Christian, before he was come to be a full
grown Man. And judging the most flourishing time of his Age, to be, for that
reason, the fittest to be Devoted to the most worthy of Objects; He was enabled
both to suppress the heats of Youth, and despise the Vanities of the World;
even while that usually ungoverned Age, made the former most impetuous, and
gave the latter, the great endearment of Novelty. Nor did his being a Soldier,
prove an Obstacle to his Piety. The Examples of Joshua, David, Jonathan, and
other brave Warriers of the Old Testament, show, that Heroic Valor, may be
accompanied with eminent Piety. And the first Proselyte the Heathen World
presented to Christianity, being a Captain, and continuing to be so after his
Conversion; argues, that a Military state of Life, is not inconsistent with the
most innocent of Religions. And for Didymus; as he fought not out of
Fierceness, or Avarice, or Ambition; but to exercise and improve his Virtue; so
amidst all his Military Conflicts, he was still careful To fight the good fight
of Faith: And being taught by the Holy Scripture, that The Life of Man here on
Earth, is a kind of Military one: He used the Roman Camp as a School to a
higher sort of Warfare; where, as the hardships are greater, and the Victories
more difficult, so the Crowns and Triumphs are incomparably more Valuable and
Glorious. A Person thus qualified and disposed, could not find it very uneasy,
to part, for his Religion, with a Life that he had led so well, and hazarded so
often; nor to leave a World, That Sin and Persecutions embitter'd, and That was
presently to be left by Theodora, that he might pass to a place where they
should meet to be Crowned. Wherefore, resolving to show that the approach of a
reputedly infamous Death, was not able, either to shake his Constancy, or
extinguish his Charity; he disposed himself to mingle in his last Actions and
Sufferings, the courage of a Roman Soldier, with the resignment of a Christian
Martyr. And accordingly, walking on toward the place of Execution, with a
calmness and undauntedness, that could scarce have proceeded from a resolution
not strengthened by Faith; as soon as He came thither, He looked round about
him upon the Guards, and other Assistants of this sad Spectacle, in such a way,
as if He raTher pitied them, than liked the Pity, which many of them could not
but by their Tears express for Him, and discoursed to them with all the
gracefulness, that Youth and Courage could give so extraordinary a Person. And
because he supposed, that (as 'twas usual on such occasions of Concourse) there
were among the Spectators, some Military Men that were Christians in their
Hearts, though they had not been called to own it publicly; He addressed
himself particularly to them. And having premised, that he pretended not to
instruct them as barely Christians, because he doubted not, but he had been
prevented by the weighty and moving Sermons of diverse burning and shining
Lights, and guiders of the Church: He told them, he would confine his advices
to what was suitable to the condition he shared in with them, of being
Christian Soldiers. And then he briefly, but pathetically, exhorted them to all
those Virtues and practices, that might recommend both their Persons, their
Profession, and their Religion. The last of which, by many Arguments, (which
his example made the more Impressive) he persuaded them, after having adorned
it by their Lives, to confirm, if they were called to it, by their Deaths:
Without forgetting, that the Fearful, are by the Scripture ranked with the
Unbelievers, Revel. 21. 8.
as destined to the same place of Torment; and without fearing any unmerited
disgrace, so much as that deserved one, threatened by the Captain of their
Salvation, Heb. 11. 10.
to those that shall deny him before Men. He Exhorted them, by their Courage
and Obsequiousness to convince their unbeleiving Superiors; that the valor of
Christians could be eminently active, when their Religion did not confine it to
be passive; and that when Enterprises, how dangerous soever, were as just and
noble as difficult, they could emulate, if not outshine, the Gallantry of those
Deify'd Heroes they refused to Worship. And lastly, having pressed them to be
loyal to the Emperor, and obedient too, as far as was consistent with Fidelity
to Him that made him so: He begged their Prayers for himself, and put up ardent
ones of his own, for the Church, the State, his Persecutors, and particularly,
for the excellent Companion of his Martyrdom. This said; he began to do what
was to be done by him, toward the deliverance of his Soul from his Body; and
having done it with so much serenity of Mind and Looks, that he extorted an
esteem of his virtue, even from those that destroyed him him for it; he let the
Executioner do his part too, (which probably, was done by taking off his Head)
and in a moment passed, from being a suffering Member of the Church Militant,
to be a happy one of the Church Triumphant.

CHAP. XII.
THE Persecutors of Theodora, hoping to intimidate her by so Tragic a
Spectacle, had conducted her to a place, whence she might see all that had
passed; of which 'twill easily be believed that she had not been an unconcerned
Spectator: Her Virtue and Kindness making her a sharer in his Sufferings, by
sympathising with him, and by endeavoring, as far as she could, to relieve him
by her most ardent Prayers; That his constancy under them might be Divinely
Supported, and richly Crowned. But while her thoughts were, with a Divine
grief, Solemnising her loss; those cruel Men that had procured it, being
desirous to make use of the terrifying impressions they supposed she had
received, while they were fresh and recent, advanced to Theodora, bringing with
them the purposely disfigured remains of Didymus; and then told her, that she
was now convinced, that neither Youth nor Gallantry was able to protect, from
the fatal anger of the Gods, those that obstinately refused to Worship them;
and therefore they expected, that, by a seasonable care of herself, she would
shun the imitation of so Tragical an Example. To this the fair Martyr replied,
that she was not at all surpised at what had passed, and therefore, she knew
not why she should be terrified by it. For Didymus and she, and all other
considering Christians, that walk according to their Masters directions, were
wont deliberately to weigh the consequences of embracing a strict and
persecuted Religion, before they made Profession of it: And having foreseen
what it might cost them, and satisfied themselves that it deserved a yet higher
Price; they were not discouraged nor surpised, to be put to pay that price;
especially, when it opened to them an immediate passage to the possession of
what they gave it for. She added, that if the Example of the generous Martyr,
were to have any operation upon her, it ought not to fright her from, but
confirm her in, the profession of a Religion, whose truth he thought worth
dying for; and which, notwithstanding all the handsome concerns he had for her
preservation, he would never speak one word to persuade her to decline, for the
protracting of her Life. His Example, (continues Theodora) lets me see, that no
violences upon Earth, are able to destroy a Courage that is assisted from
Heaven, and fights in view of the glories of it: And his Death manifests, how
quick the passage may, be between this and an incomparably better Life; and
clearly shows, how soon the utmost effect of your Cruelty, can place those that
despise it, above the reach of it. Then casting her mournful Eyes upon the
saddest Object that ever they beheld; If you should, says she, be so inhumane,
as to exercise any further Cruelty upon this now inanimate Prison, whence his
glad Soul has Escaped; you may intend him a mischief, but he will not feel it,
unless it be in the increase of the recompenses of his Martyrdom. You may, if
you please, insult over his dead Body; and those whom his virtue made his
Friends, may some of them be troubled at it: but while you are triumphing at
his Death, and others are deploring it, I doubt not, but the welcomes and joys
he receives in the blessed place he is gone to, make him happy enough, to pity
not only those that hate him, but those that pity him too. What you show me as
the Trophy of your Power, I look upon, as that of his Constancy: and for what
you presume to be Your Victory, He will be really Crowned. The Grave,
(continues she) is, I confess, a sad Prospect, to them that look no further,
and terminate their sight there; but not to those sufferers for the Truth, who,
with the Eye of Faith, looking beyond it, see all those Glories on the other
side of it, that expect them there; whereunto, as some kind of Death must
necessarily be the way, so Martyrdom of all, other is the Noblest. Wherefore,
(concludes Theodora) you will very much miss your aim, if you forbear bringing
my constancy to the last Trial, only upon hopes, that Death dressed with
unusual Horror, by being besmeared with Didymus's Blood, should frighten me
into Apostasy: For, I am much less terrified by his Fate, than encouraged by
his Example. In imitation of which, I declare to you once for all, that, as I
always valued this World too little, to be much afraid to part with it for a
better; So I shall never be brought to quitan excellent Religion for a bad one,
for fear of exchanging a wretched Life for a happy one.

This positive and final declaration of Theodora, did so enrage those to whom
she made it, that, finding themselves quite disappointed of the hopes they had,
to terrify her by their last Expedient, Didymus's Death; they presently led
her away to participate of his Fate, which they found her so resolved not to
decline. And now the admirable Theodora, having received that cruel, but welcome
Command, most readily disposed herself to obey it: And considering how near she
was to put a period to all the afflictions of her Life, by the gloriousest
Action it could be concuded with; and how soon she should enjoy the happiness
of entering Heaven, thorough the streightest and noblest Gate at which it is
accessible: Her Beauty, that was before admirable, appeared more so than ever,
being strangely increased, by the effusions of a Celestial Joy, that did too
much abound in her heart, not to flash out manifestly in her looks; to whose
native Charms, it superadded so much of Luster and Majesty, that she seemed
(upon some peculiar design) to be newly come from the Heaven she was going to.
So great a constancy and cheerfulness of mind, upon so sad an occasion, wanted
not a resembling Operation, upon the generality of the wondering Assistants.
For though the Report, that was quickly spread of so uncommon an Action, as
that of Theodora, done by so extraordinary a Person, as Fame had represented
her to be; had drawn a great concourse of People, to see one that acted, as
well as looked, so handsomely: Yet when they had a while beheld her, and saw the
cruel Instruments of what she was doomed to suffer; among that numerous Throng
of Spectators, there were none that were not Admirers; many that looked on her
with dazzled, and few without flowing Eyes. Every sort of Spectators found
something in her Person and Condition, that made them mournful Ones. The
Christians that chanced to mingle with the rest of the Crowd, Lamented, to see
their Religion deprived of so great an Ornament, and so shining an Example;
though their grief were moderated by considering, that she was entering into a
most happy place, to which they might hope, ere long, to follow her. And in the
mean time, 'twas no small credit to their Religion, that a Lady of her Beauty,
had lived according to the strictest Laws of it; and a Person of her youth and
sex, was ambitious to dye for it. Those among the Spectators that yet retained
Roman Spirits, and were the genuine Offspring of those noble Ancestors, that
scrupled not in Rome it self, to allow public marks of honor to its greatest
Enemies; could not but be troubled, to see so rare a thing as a Female Hero,
punished for a Generosity, that could not sufficiently be Rewarded; and brought
to an untimely, and, in popular estimation, Ignominious End, for having
followed Dictates of Gratitude and Piety. Those Infidels, on whose sentiments
Virtue had more influence than Superstition, were very much dissatisfied with
the rigor of their Magistrates; thought it a discredit to their Religion, to
use such barbarous, and yet ineffectual Courses, to fright Men into it; and
they thought it an invidious service to their Gods, to destroy the fairest
Masterpieces they had made. But those that seemed most to deplore the fair
Martyrs condition, were those that were disposed to have their Affections
wrought on by their Eyes, and were apt to be influenced by Beauty. For these
much repined and grieved, to see so glorious a Sun reduced to set in her East.
They envied Didymus, for having so generously served and suffered for so rare a
Person; who, they thought, instead of the barbarous usage she received,
deserved to be as happy, as her Smiles could make her Adorers. And they allowed
themselves to think, that nothing could be a Virtue, that deprived the World of
so much Beauty. In short, most of the Bystanders grieved, to behold a person,
whose youth would pass for innocence, and whose charms would, give her Captives
among Savages destroyed in Greece by Romans. So that bating those few
Barbarians, whose Superstition and Malice brought her to that Condition: All
the other Spectators of her Sufferings, were deplorers of them too: And many to
that degree, that to judge by Their looks, and those of our fair Martyr, one
would have believed that the Assistants were to be sufferers in the approaching
Tragedy, and She but the Spectator of it.

And now the Matchless Theodora came to the place, whence her aspiring Soul was
to take its flight to Heaven. In order to which, she first looked about her
with a kind of pity, on those, that either never, or later than she, were to be
admitted into the felicity she was presently to possess: And afterward she
paused a while, to recover from some disorder that she was put into; not so
much to see her self environed with Guards, as surrounded with Gazers: and
then, though her Bashfulness made it more uneasy to her to speak to the
Assistants, because her speech must be a public one, than because it must be
her last; yet with a Voice and Gestures, wherein the Modesty of a Virgin, and
the Courage of a Martyr, were happily tempered, she addressed her self to those
that were about her, in such as the following terms.

Since Custom has made it a kind of Duty, that those that come to this place,
should say something to the Spestators; and make a public Confession of their
Guilt, or protestation of their Innocence; I shall in part do both the one and
the other. For I will (...) deny, that I am, what the Laws have condemned me
for being. Yes; I own my self a Christian, and in spite of all my past and
approaching sufferings, I declare, that I think it an honor and a happiness to
be so. But on the other side, I can most truly protest, that I have
transgressed no other Roman Laws, than those that are repugnant to those of God
and Reason. And since we Christians are taught by our great masters Example, as
well as Precepts, not only to forgive, but to love our Enemies, and pray for
our Persecutors; I think my self obliged, and by his assistance find my self
enabled, not only to forgive, as I heartily do, the procurers of my Death, but
ardently to implore for them, the Blessing, and the unmolested Exercise of a
Religion, that they see I value more than I do my Life. And I hope, those in
Authority will, by the frequent Executions that daily succeed one another in
this place, be at ^^^gth convinced, how ineffectual, as well as inhumane, a way
they take, to extirpate Christianity: Which being an Heavenly Light, can be as
little ruined by the Violence employed against it on Earth, as Tempests can
Extinguish the Sun. And because it is likely that Charity or Curiosity has,
among other Spectators, brought hither some Christians, I shall now address my
self to Them; yet not to desire their Pity, but their Prayers, That I may be
enabled to overcome the last Enemy, Death, and finish my Course, in such a way,
as may neither blemish my past Life, nor the glorious Cause I gladly loose it
for. But the chief part of my Request regards your selves, not me. For I must
beg you to remember, that, besides an All seeing Eye, there are many other Eyes
upon you, that pry into your Actions with strong desires to find them Criminal:
And that though the truth, nor the subsistence of Christianity does not, yet
the Credit of it does much, depend upon the Nature of your Actions. For, as all
your personal faults will be imputed to your Religion, so your shining Virtues,
will probably bring many Infidels first to admire, and then to embrace
Christianity; justly concluding, that That Religion must be excellent, that
makes its professors so; and enables, as well as enjoins them, to live
blameless in the World, and go joyfully out of it. If you lead such lives, you
will not be much afraid of Martyrdom; which will but send you sooner to receive
those inestimable rewards of them, that Gods goodness has promised and
provided. I wish you may never have cause, nor upon occasion want Courage, to
enter into Life at that straight Gate, that I am now going to pass through. But
if you be called to that way of glorifying God, let neither the ignominy, nor
the painfulness of it, deter you. It Is not shameful, but glorious, to suffer
for God, for Truth, and for a Crown; and my Example may encourage the weakest
of you to expect, that Gods strength will be made manifest in your Infirmity;
and that there is no Temptation but may be resisted and vanquished, by the
weakest hand, that is supported and strengthened by an Almighty Arm. And though
the distance between Heaven and Earth, our Mortal and our Immortal state, be
very great; yet the passage between them may be very short: and a few moments
may bring us to exchange our Agonys for Ecstasies, and pass from the
Lamentations of our Friends, and the reproaches of our Persecutors, to the
Congratulations of Angels, and the solemn Welcoms of Him, whom even those
Heavenly Spirits adore.

As soon as she had ended this Discourse, though her Soul, abandoning such a
Body as hers, could scarce any where but in Heaven, find an advantage by a
change of Mansion; yet it cheerfully disposed it self to a Separation, that
would give it a closer and more immediate Union with the Divine Object of its
Celestial love. And after she had decently and calmly, made all the
preparation that on her part was requisite for what she was to suffer, she
thought fit to make her Life's last actions, as most of the rest had been, acts
of Piety, and Charity. And therefore elevating her Eyes and Hands toward
Heaven, where her Heart, as well as her Treasure, had been placed long before;
she first paid her God most humble thanks, for the Grace and opportunity he had
vouchsafed her; not only to believe in his Divine Son, but to suffer for him;
and then made a short, but very fervent Prayer, for the Church, for her
Enemies, and for her self. Which done, with a Countenance wherein serenity was
mingled with joy, she gave a sign to the Executioner to do his Office; who
thereupon did all that was necessary to complete her Martyrdom. And the glad
Soul was by the Angels, (whom she had aspired to resemble in Purity and
Devotion) carried to that happy place, whose Glorys are neither to be
Conceived, 1 Cor. 11. 9.
by those that have not seen them, nor Described by those that have; 2 Cor. 12.
4.
such supernatural Felicities, as much Transcending man's Idea's and his
Expressions as they surpass his Merit.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Second Book, Of the MARTYRDOM OF THEODORA.
CHAP. I. DIdymus hearing of Theodora's Captivity and Danger, addresses himself
in order to her Rescue, to a Roman Officer, whose Soldiers were appointed for
her Guard; and by His Favor and their Assistance, He is admitted into her
Chumber, under the Notion of one that came to Ravish Her. CHAP. II. There he
presses her to make an Escape in his Clothes: She for a good while scruples to
make use of this Expedient; and instead of it, proposes that he would Kill her:
(she thinging it Lawful, as many then did, to die by another hand, and not by
her own.) CHAP. III. After this obliging contest, she yields to change Habits
with him, and thus Disguised makes an Escape, and is received into Irenes
House, with great wonder and joy. CHAP. IV. Irene takes this occasion, to
represent to her the extraordinary merits of her Deliverer and Lover. But
Theodora, after very kind acknowledgments of them, declares the Resolution she
had made against Marriage, and the Reasons that had induced her to make it.
CHAP. V. Theodora hearing what had happened to Didymus after her Escape,
resolves, though earnestly diswaded by Irene, to attempt his Rescue. CHAP. VI.
A Gentleman brings an Account, how Didymus was apprehended, and carried before
the Judge: How he owned and defended what he had done, and his Religion: And
how He was Condemned in spite of this Defense. CHAP. VII. Whilst Didymus is
leading away to the place of Execution, Theodora presents herself before the
Judge, and begs to have him Released: Offering to undergo the Death, that he was
Condemned to, on her account. She speaks to Didymus, to persuade him to
acquiesce in that Proposal: Whereupon grows a long Contest between them before
the Judge. CHAP. VIII. He Condemns them both to die for being Christians.
Diverse Discourses pass between them, as they go toward the place of Execution.
CHAP. IX. A Roman Officer strives to persuade Didymus to change his Religion,
by several Arguments: To all which He gives him such resolute Answers, That,
CHAP. X. The Roman despairing to gain him, endeavors to engage him to persuade
Theodora to save her Life; which Didymus refuses to do, for Reasons which
includes an Encomium of Her Virtues. CHAP. XI. None of their Attempts
succeeding, both the Martyrs are commanded to be put to Death. The farewell
Speeches tbat past betwixt them. Their final Separation; immediately after
which, Didymus is first Executed. CHAP. XII. Theodora, being in vain solicited
to shun the like tragical Fate, after a resolute Answer to her Persecutors, and
a short Speech to the Bystanders, acompany'd with a Prayer for them; Receives
the Crown of Martyrdom.
FINIS.

