THE Negotiations OF THE AMBASSADORS Sent to the Duke of Savoy, BY THE
Protestant Swiss-Cantons, In Favor of the Distressed Vaudois.

Wherein there are many things very Curious, and some Letters never before
Published.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, in Russel Street, in Covent Garden. 1691.

A True Account of the NEGOTIATION, etc.
THE Embassy which the Evangelick Swiss Cantons sent to the Duke of Savoy, in
the Year 1686, to intercede with his Royal Highness in favor of the Protestant
Churches of the Valleys, being a business of as much difficulty as importance;
and because it may give occasion to some persons of making different and quite
contrary reflections, I have thought fit to publish a true account of that
Negotiation, that unbiased Persons, being rightly informed of what passed,
may, according to Reason, justly and equitably judge of it.

I will therefore relate the most considerable Passages of this Embassy; and
as I will make use of no Memoirs but what are good and authentic; so neither
Interest, Hatred, or Affection shall influence my Pen; and then if the elegancy
of my Style do not please the Reader, yet I hope he will be satisfied with the
sincerity and truth of the Narration.

It is certain, that of all Protestant States, the Evangelique Cantons have
showed as much love to their Religion as any, by their so zealously espousing
the interest of the Reformed Churches; for ever since the light of the
Reformation first begun to shine in France, they have, to the utmost of their
power, endeavored to forward the work of God in that Kingdom, and did send
several Ambassadors to Francis the First, and likewise to succeeding Kings, to
desire there might be a cessation of those Cruelties which were practiced by
the Romish Clergy against those Faithful People who made profession of the
Truth.

And they have made the same Zeal appear in all the Persecutions which the
Churches of Piemont have suffered; for in those which were in the years 1655
and 1663, they sent Ambassadors to the Duke of Savoy, to mediate with him in
behalf of his Protestant Subjects, and to support them in those Rights, which
by several Grants they had obtained from his Ancestors. In 1686, as soon as
they heard what was contained in the Edict which that Prince had published
against their Brethren of Piemont, it plainly appeared how much they were
troubled; for when the miserable Vaudois were intolerably and most unjustly
oppressed, and still threatened to be treated with all imaginable cruelties, the
Cantons resolved to do all they could to shelter and save those poor persecuted
People.

In former times nothing more was designed against them by their Enemies, than
to coop up those poor Protestants within certain bounds and limits, and to take
from them their right of living in the plain Country, which formerly they had
liberty to do; but now a resolution was taken, not only to deprive them of the
exercise of their Religion in all places, but also of the liberty of their
Consciences; so that now their condition did indeed deserve compassion; and
that People may the better judge of it, it is necessary here to insert a true
Copy of the Duke's Edict faithfully translated.

Victor Amadeus, by the Grace of God, Duke of Savoy and Piemont, and King of
Cyprus.
CHristian Prudence and Policy do many times counsel Men in some manner to
neglect those Sores and Ulcers which are not in a condition to be perfectly
healed, but may grow worse by too hosty a cure. This course has been taken in
other Monarchies, and by our most Serene Predecessors, who indeed never had any
other intention than to draw their Subjects, who professed the pretended
Reformed Religion, out of the darkness of Heresy, which by the unhappy
vicissitude and fatal corruption of times, has from the center of the Valleys
of Luzerne, spread it self so far as to enter into the very heart of Piemont:
And because those Religionists have had Succors from foreign Countries, this
good work could never be brought to its desired end; so that we not being able
to purge this Poison quite out of our Country, we stopped and shut it up in the
Valleys of Luzerne, Angrogne, St. Martin, Ceruse, St. Bartlemy, Roccapiata, and
Perustin, and by Toleration only suffered them to exercise their false Religion
within certain prescribed limits, complying with the necessity of the times,
till it should please God to afford us a more favorable opportunity to bring
back these wandering Souls to the bosom of the Holy, and only Catholic,
Apostolic, Roman Religion: But time having now discovered the necessity of
quite destroying this Serpent, and many-headed Hydra; since the aforesaid
Heretics, instead of answering this favor with humble submission and thanks,
for our gracious Permission and Toleration, have often, with scandalous
disobedience, insolently rebelled against us: And whereas the chief cause of
granting such a Toleration now cease, by the Zeal and Piety of that Glorious
Monarch the King of France, who has brought back again his Neighbor Heretics
to the true Faith; we think the particular favors which we have received from
the Divine Majesty, and which we still enjoy, may accuse us of great
ingratitude, if, by our negligence, we let slip the opportunity of perfecting
this work, according to the intention of our Glorious Predecessors. For the
causes aforesaid, and for other pressing Reasons, by virtue of this present
Edict; we, of our certain knowledge, by our absolute Sovereign Power, and by
the advice of our Privy Council, have Decreed, and Ordained, and we do Order
and Command by these Presents, all our Subjects of the Pretended Reformed
Religion, for the time to come, to forbear all Exercises of the said Religion,
and we forbid them henceforth to Assemble in any Place or private House to
exercise the said Religion, under any Title, Pretext, or Occasion whatever,
upon pain of Death and Confiscation of Goods. In like manner, we Ordain that
the past pretended Toleration be utterly void, and of no effect, what color or
pretense soever may be alleged to the contrary. Our Will and Pleasure also is,
That all Churches, Granges, and Houses wherein the said Religion is at present
exercised, be pulled down and razed, as also all other Places wherein for the
future there may be any such Assemblies, contrary to the Tenor of the
preceding Article, yea, though the Persons to whom such Places belong know
nothing of such Meetings. We further Command all Ecclesiastics, all Ministers
and Schoolmasters of the said pretended Reformed Religion, who, within Fifteen
days after the Publication hereof, shall not embrace the Catholic Religion, to
depart out of our Dominions at the expiration of the said term af Fifteen days,
under pain of Death, and Confiscation of their Goods; with express Command
also, under the same Penalties, that during the said term, before their
departure, they do not Preach any Sermons, Exhort, or do any other Acts of
their said Religion. Moreover, we forbid all that profess the pretended
Reformed Religion, under the aforesaid Penalties, and that of incurring our
displeasure, to keep for the future any School, Public or Private; that their
Children may henceforth be instructed by Catholic Schoolmasters. As concerning
those Ministers, who during the said term shall embrace the Catholic Religion,
our Will is, that during their lives, and after their death their Widows shall
during their Widowhood, enjoy the same Exemptions and Immunities which they
before had, during the Exercise of their Charge. And our further Pleasure is,
That to those Ecclesiastics who shall in this manner be converted, there be
paid, during their life, a Pension, which shall be a third part greater than
the Wages which they had as Ministers of the said Religion; and that after
their death their Widows shall receive the Moiety of that Pension so long as
they continue sole. For what concerns the Children that shall be born of
Parents of the said pretended Reformed Religion, our Pleasure is, That after
the publication of this present Edict, they be baptized by the Priests of the
Parishes which are already established in the said Valleys, or which shall be
established hereafter. We therefore Command their Fathers and Mothers, that
they either send or bring their Children to the Churches, under the Penalty of
the Father's serving Five years in the Galleys and the Mothers being publicly
whipped: and the said Children shall henceforward be brought up in the Roman
Catholic, Apostolic Religion. We expressly Command all Judges, Provosts,
Chatelains, and other Officers, to see that these Presents be duly executed. We
also confirm the Edict which we caused to be Published the 4th of November last
past, concerning the Subjects of his Most Christian Majesty, who profess the
pretended Reformed Religion, who are now in our Dominions, or who have left in
them any Merchandise, Money, or other Effects, and for what concerns other
Strangers of the said Religion, who contrary to the tenor of our Predecessors
Edicts, have settled themselves in the Valleys, without their consent showed in
writing, comprehending also their Descendants, who have been born in it: We
Command, that in case they do not within Fifteen days after the Publication of
this Edict, declare they will embrace the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion,
they shall be obliged, that term being expired, to depart out of our
Territories, under pain of Death, and Confiscation of their Goods. And though by
virtue of our Predecessors Edicts, the Goods which such Strangers have gotten
in our Dominions, ought of right to be applied to our Public Treasury;
nevertheless, intending in this case to show our wonted Clemency, we permit
them to sell their Goods within the said term, and to dispose of them as they
please; yet always with this condition, that there shall be no sale of their
Lands, but to Roman Catholics; and if no such Buyers can be found, the Goods
shall be prized, sold, and annexed to our Demeans at a reasonable price.
Lastly, we command all Magistrates, established by us, all Ministers of State,
Officers, Counselors of Justice and War, and all others who are concerned, to
see that this Edict be inviolably observed, and cause the Council of Piemont to
Register it, and give their entire approbation to every thing therein
contain'd^ And moreover our Will is, That the Publication which shall be made
of this Edict, in all Places, according to the usual form, shall have the same
force and virtue, as if it had been notified to every particular Person; and
that as much credit be given to the Copy Printed by Sinibal our Printer, as to
the Original it self, for such is our Will and Pleasure.

Given at Turin, the 31 th of January, 1686. Victor Amadeo. V. Simione de St.
Thomas.
By the Command of his Royal Highness.
The Evangelique Cantons having heard of this Edict, a while after also knew
that the Vaudois had in vain sought relief against it; for they had presented
Two Petitions to their Prince, which were never answered. By the First, they
desired a Revocation of this Edict; and by the Second, leave to depart out of
his Dominions, within such a term as might be necessary to find a settlement
elsewhere. The Cantons seeing that the ordinary means which had been used to
stop the execution of this Edict had not been effectual, they thought some
extraordinary course was to be tried. They therefore at first wrote to the Duke
of Savoy, Praying that he would make good to his Subjects of the Valleys those
Concessions which had been granted to them by his Predecessors: But when they
saw the Duke delayed to give them any answer, and that they knew he prepared to
execute his Edict by force, they resolved in a Diet held at Baden, in the Month
of February, 1686, to dispatch two Ambassadors to him, to endeavor the
obtaining, by their Representations, that which they could not procure by their
Letters.

The Persons pitched upon for this Embassy were Gaspard de Muralt, and Bernard
de Muralt, both Councillors of State; the First, of the Republic of Zurich,
the other of Berne; who had all qualities necessary to fit them for such an
Employ, either in respect of their Virtue and Piety, or of their Prudence and
Personal Abilities.

These Ambassadors were charged to use their best endeavors to oblige the
Duke of Savoy to revoke the Edict which he had published against the Valley
Churches. And because they had reason to fear that his Royal Highness would
continue firm in his Resolution of causing it to be executed in all points, the
Protestant Cantons, after having maturely considered the state of the People
that composed the Churches, and the Alliances and Forces of the Prince, who
resolved totally to extirpate them, if they refused to submit to his Will, they
thought, in case their Ambassadors could not obtain a Revocation of the Edict,
that then it would be expedient for them to endeavor the procuring of liberty
for those miserable People to retire into some other Country, to sell their
Goods, and to carry with them all that they could get together of their
shipwrack'd Fortune.

The Lords who were present in this Diet were too prudent and judicious to take
any other course but this; they saw on the one hand, how few they were who
could bear Arms in the Valleys; for they were at most but Two Thousand Five
Hundred Men, the greatest part of them ill armed, and had neither Commanders,
Provision, or Ammunition, and could not from any place expect Succors; that
they likewise who had Commanded in the Wars of 1655 and 1664 were now all dead.
But on the other hand, when they considered the Prince's Forces, who had
resolved to abolish their Religion, they saw that they infinitely exceeded
those of his Subjects, who were of a Religion contrary to his; for the Duke had
enjoyed a long Peace; he had a great many good Troops, brave Captains, and
experienced Generals; he had nothing to fear, either from his Neighbors or any
Prince in Europe.

More than all this, the Duke of Savoy's Troops were joined with those of the
King of France, who was then so dreaded, that his very Name made all the
Potentates of Europe tremble; whereas heretofore though the Subjects of France
fought together with the Vaudois, to assist and guard them from the oppression
of their Sovereign, yet, notwithstanding their being so aided, they were driven
out of their Valleys, and could not defend themselves against the single Forces
of their Prince. They farfarther considered, that if by some unexpected chance
the Vaudois should at first have the good luck to get some advantage over their
Enemies, yet in the end, they must needs be overpowered by the great number of
those that attacked them, whose losses could be repaired by being recruited
with new Troops; but the Vaudois could make no new Levies, to fill the places
of those that must be flain in several Combats. More than all this, the Vaudois
having to do with the King of France, who was the proudest Prince in the World,
and who at that time had no Enemy upon his hands, he would have armed all the
People of his Kingdom against them, rather than have failed to bring his design
to pass, wherein he thought consisted his chiefest Glory, and by which he
believed he should merit the highest Place among the greatest Saints in
Paradise.

The Cantons had before their eyes the French Protestants, whom they had
received into their Territories; and comparing their condition with that of
their Brethren of Piemont, they found that even in that miserable state to
which they were reduced, the Vaudois being still able to obtain free leave to
go out of their Country, were in that respect much happier than the French
Protestants, who were not only obliged to quit their Houses and their Country,
when all their Goods were taken from them, but yet could not buy their
Banishment, without hazarding their Lives and their Liberty.

All things thus considered, the Cantons at last concluded they could do
nothing of more advantage for the Piemontois, than to obtain for them that
which they themselves had now, and heretofore desired when they were persecuted
concerning the exercise of their Religion; for in former times they most humbly
petitioned their Prince, that they might seek a retreat in Foreign parts.

The Ambassadors furnished with these Instructions, went into Piemont; and
being arrived at Turin, and admitted to Audience by his Royal Highness, they
declared, That seeing the mediation of their Masters, the Evangelique Cantons,
with his Royal Highness, in favor of his Protestant Subjects, had been always
acceptable and effectual, their Sovereign Lords, having with extreme grief
heard that his Royal Highness had resolved to deprive his Protestant Subjects
of the liberty of their Consciences, and the exercise of their Religion, which
they had enjoyed for many Ages; their Sovereigns moved by Christian Charity, by
the strict union with those of their Communion, and by the confidence they had
in his Royal Highness's Clemency and Justice, had presumed to intercede by
their Letters of Recommendation in favor of their Brethren of the Valleys. But
having received no answer to those Letters, their Masters had charged them with
this Embassy, to testify the consideration they had for his Royal Highness,
and likewise to show how much they were touched with the late Edict which had
been published against his Highness's poor Subjects, and had commanded them to
assure his Highness how sincerely they regarded his Interests, and with all
possible instance to pray him to suffer the Inhabitants of the Valleys quietly
and perpetually to enjoy the exercise of their Religion, and that liberty of
Conscience his Predecessors had granted to them, upon the pressing
Intercessions and Recommendations of many Princes and Protestant States, and
particularly upon the Interposition and Mediation of their Sovereigns: And that
which made them hope to obtain what they desired, was that his Highness's
Subjects had done nothing to render themselves unworthy of the continuance of
the Favor and Affection of their Prince, or that ought to deprive them of the
right which they had acquired by his own concessions, which ought to be
inviolable, because they were not bare and simple Tolerations, but Authentic
Treaties, made with the Inhabitants of the Valleys, and therefore ought to be
perpetual and irrevocable, as may be seen in the Twentieth Article of the Grant
passed in the year 1655, and the Fourth Article of the Patent in 1664, which
declares, That they should be perpetually and irrevocably observed; and that in
effect they have been Ratified and Registered by the Senate of Chambery, to be
Bona fide executed according to their Form and Tenor.

That their Lords were verily persuaded, that his Highness in his own Reign,
full of Glory and Felicity, would not suffer those Grants, followed with many
Declarations and solemn Promises, to be made void, and all the fruit of their
Mediation, Pains, and Care come to nothing.

They hoped that his Highness would not have the World believe he had not the
same esteem and regard for the Evangelique Cantons which his Predecessors had;
or that the perfect Amity, and sincere Correspondence which has always been
between his Royal Highness and their Lords, as good Neighbors and Friends, was
in any wise altered; that his State would be exposed to troubles and
calamities; that the Consciences of his Subjects (which ought not to depend
upon any but God alone) would be forced, by the fear of Death and Torments: In
a word, the Inhabitants of the Valleys would be overwhelmed with Misery, and
reduced to Despair.

They also earnestly prayed his Royal Highness, to receive favorably their
Sovereign's Intercession, in the behalf of his Subjects, made their Brethren by
Communion in one and the same Religion; and that he would suffer himself to be
moved by the Cries, Tears, and Groans of so many innocent Souls, who did
beseech him to suspend the Execution of his Edict, and not to turn his Arms
against his People, who in rendering to God the Religious homage due to him,
desired, with the loss of their Blood, to seal the fidelity which they had
vowed to his Royal Highness.

That if their Mediation did produce the effect which their Superiors desired,
it would be the most convincing evidence his Royal Highness could give them,
that he no less valued their Mediation than his Predecessors of Glorious Memory
had done; and that on their part, they would endeavor by all manner of ways,
to testify their thanks, and to render his Highness reciprocal Services upon
all occasions; and because, in the Conference which the Ambassadors had with
his Royal Highness's Ministers of State, some of those Reasons had been
declared which his Royal Highness had to publish the Edict, whereof they
desired the Revocation, the Ambassadors judged it necessary to answer those
Reasons, to give others to back their own Demands, contained in the following
Memoir.

His Royal Highness's Ministers of State having declared to us, when we
discoursed privately with them, that the Engagement into which, by the
necessity of the present juncture of Affairs, your Royal Highness was forced to
enter, was a great obstacle to the success of our Negotiation; we are obliged
to represent to your Royal Highness, that the Valley-Churches of Piemont did
never separate themselves from the Religion of their Prince; seeing they live
in that which they received from their Ancestors more than Eight Hundred Years
ago, and which they professed before ever they were under the Government of
your Royal Highness's Predecessors; who finding them in the possession of
their Religion, have maintained them in it by several Concessions, and
principally by those of the Years 1561, 1602, and 1603, which have been
ratified by the Senate, and by the Chamber, in the Year 1620, for the Sum of
6000 French Duccatoons, which those Churches paid, as by the very Act of
Confirmation plainly appears; Their Right passed in form of a Treaty, and of a
Law Perpetual, and Irrevocable; which was observed during the life of his Royal
Highness Victor Amadeus, and during the Regency of Madam Royale, which she
confirmed by an Ordinance, in the Year 1638: After this, these Churches
obtained many other favorable Decrees of his Royal Highness Charles Emanuel,
your Royal Highness's Father, of Glorious Memory; particularly in the Year
1649, and 1653; but because, contrary to a Right so well established, by a
Possession time out of mind, and by so many Grants, the Seignior Guastaldo, in
the Month of January, 1655, caused an Edict to be published, which produced
terrible and fatal effects against those poor Churches; all the Kings, Princes,
and Protestant States of Europe, and among others our Sovereign Lords,
compassionating their misery, became Mediators and Intercessors for them to his
Royal Highness Charles Emanuel, and obtained a Confirmation of their
Privileges and Concessions by two solemn Patents, perpetual and inviolable, in
the Years 1655 and 1664, Ratified in due form, and Confirmed by Letters which
he wrote to our Superiors the 28th of February, in the Year 1664; by which
Letters he promised those Patents should Bona fide be Executed; whereto Madam
Royale, your Highness's Mother did likewise oblige her self, by her own
Letters, Daied the 28. of January, 1679. So that your Royal Highness's
Predecessors having so many times passed their Royal Word, especially in the
Patents given in the Presence of our Sovereigns Ambassadors, sent for that
purpose. It cannot be just to break so many formal and Authentic Engagements;
not only because those Concessions and Patents were agreed to in the face of
all Europe, by the Interposition and Mediation of many Kings, Princes, and
States, as perpetual Monuments and Pledges of the Public Faith; but also
because the Words and Promises of Princes ought to be Sacred and Inviolable;
for if such Engagements may be infringed and made null, under pretense that a
Prince is necessitated to it by the juncture of his Affairs, or for the
advantage of them, there will be nothing certain in the World, and nothing but
War and Confusion to be expected; If this Maxim be once estahlish'd among
Sovereigns, Protestant Princes may destroy their Catholic Subjects, and
Catholic Princes do the same to all the Protestants in their Dominions. It is
then certain, whether the thing be considered either as it respects the Honor
and Reputation of a Prince, or whether, it be considered with regard to the
Rules and Principles of true and just Policy, whose chief and only end, is the
safety of Princes, People, and States; it will be found that the Words and
Promises of Princes ought to be inviolable. It Is this which tells us, that
neither the necessity of present Conjunctures, nor any other Interest, can
oblige a Prince so Just, Merciful, and Prudent as your Royal Highness, to enter
into, or make good any new Engagements, which will not only overthrow all that
your Predecessors have done in the sight of the whole World, but will also
expose your own Dominions and Subjects to Fire, Sword, Misery, and Desolation,
and to all that in Rage and Brutality is cruel and inhumane.

We confess it natural for a Pious Prince to desire that there may be but one
Religion in all his Dominions; and being persuaded that that which he himself
professes is the true, he may think Charity binds him to endeavor to make all
his Subjects of his Religion; but it must be also confefs'd, That Religion,
enters into our Hearts by Persuasion, not by Force and Compulsion; and to make
Men taste Divine Verities, we ought to make use only of Instruction,
Exhortation, and gentle means, according to the practice of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and his Apostles.

Though Kings and Princes are Masters of their People, yet they have no Empire
over their Consciences, which are subject to none but God; so that we have
reason to hope your Royal Highness will be so far from forcing the Inhabitants
of the Valleys to do things contrary to the dictates of their Consciences, that
you will restore to them the Peace we implore for them; that you will confirm
their Privileges, and let them have they liberty of rendering to God the
Worship which is due to him, so long as they pay to you the respect and homage,
which, as your faithful Subjects, they owe to your Royal Highness. Your
Highness's Ministers of State have also told us, That your Subjects of the
Valleys have made themselves unworthy of their Prince's favor; but all the
World knows, that before the Publication of your last Edict, they gave your
Royal Highness no cause of Complaint; and therefore, it is not any ill behavior
of theirs that has been the occasion of so rigorous an Order against them:
Beside, if any particular Persons among them since that time have committed any
fault (which yet is more than we know) can any man wonder that miserable
People, driven to absolute despair, should act imprudently? We hope your Royal
Highness has so much Goodness and Mercy, as to pardon faults of his nature,
and you have too much Justice and Equity to punish a whole Community for
Disorders which may have been committed by a few private Persons.

Lastly, it has been pretended that the Patents which his Royal Highness
Charles Emanuel granted in the years 1655, and 1664, did not concern Religion,
but only gave the Protestants leave to dwell in some certain places of the
Valleys; and therefore, neither our Sovereign Lords, nor other Princes who were
Mediators and Intercessors in that Affair have any interest in this: But we
pray your Royal Highness to consider, First, That the business then in
agitation was Religion, and that directly no other thing was treated of: For
beside Signior Guastaldo's Order, which was the cause of such dismal effects,
and took away those Privileges which had been granted to the Vaudois
concerning Religion, there was then a design to force them to do things
contrary to their Consciences; for they were threatened with Death, and
Confiscation of Goods, if within twenty days after they were commanded so to
do, they did not embrace the Catholic Religion.

Secondly, All the Mediation and Intercession of the Protestant Princes and
States had no other foundation but that of Religion and Conscience; it was upon
this very Principle they acted, and their Ambassadors had not been heard or
received, but as they were concerned in a business relating to their Religion;
and it was for this Reason that your Highness's Predecessors, by their Letters,
gave many assurances to their Excellencies the Evangelick Cantons, that the
Patents which they had granted a^ their Intercession should be punctually and
faithfully executed.

Now because your Royal Highness has published an Edict, to take away all that
was granted to them, which forbids them the Exercise of their Religion in all
the Valleys upon pain of Death; orders all their Churches to be demolished,
banisheth their Ministers and Schoolmasters, commands all their Children to be
baptized, and brought up in the Roman Religion, and consequently deprives the
People of the liberty of their Consciences: Our Sovereign Lords, who are united
to those Valley-Churches by the bonds of the same Faith and Belief, think
themselves obliged to continue their Intercessions for them, which we do in
their name; hoping that your Royal Highness will have some regard for our
Superiors, and some pity for your own Subjects.

The Ambassadors, having delivered their Proposal and Memoir to the Marquess
St. Thomas, one of his Royal Highness's Ministers of State, who had the
direction of Foreign Affairs; some few days after received an Answer to it,
very much to the following purpose. That his Royal Highness was very sorry he
could not yield to what they desired in their Masters name; That he had much
better Reasons to maintain his Edict, than those which were offered to him to
revoke it: That he could not make it less strict in any particular: That the
Great Wheels moved and carried on the less: That the Letter which the Cantons
had written to him was not delivered till after the Publication of his Edict:
That having so near him a King no less powerful than jealous of his Authority,
he ought to be very circumspect: That he was obliged to act according to the
present juncture and state of Affairs. That even in Switzerland there was
according to the tendency of Affairs, some times a necessity of taking
resolutions contrary to those good intentions which otherwise Men might have:
That the Marquess St. Thomas had given good and safe Counsel to the two
Deputies sent by the Valleys to his Highness; and that instead of giving any
signs of their submission and obedience, to which they were bound, they had
committed all sorts of Hostilities against his other Subjects; they had been
guilty of a thousand insolences; they held Assemblies, provided Victuals and
Ammunition for War, cut off Passes, and entrenched themselves; all which they
had done during the term of Twenty Five days given them for taking their last
resolution. That the Duke was now too far engaged; the Troops which he had been
at great charge to levy, were already on Foot, that the Edict could not be
recalled without great dishonor to his Royal Highness, and that he was obliged
to cause it to be executed for very great and pressing Reasons, which he left
to the Ambassadors consideration. That the Concessions of 1655, and 1664,
amounted to no more than bare Tolerations; and that the Valleys had no positive
right to exercise their Religion: That Sovereign Princes do nothing that can be
counted unjust, in not suffering any more than one Religion in their Dominions:
That the Cantons themselves did justify his Royal Highness in that particular,
seeing they would suffer no Catholics amongst them: Moreover that the
Concessions granted to those of the Valleys had been juridically examined, and
that the result of that examination was, That the Privileges and Favors which
a Prince granted to his Subjects, might at his Will and Pleasure be revoked:
That his Royal Highness did only forbid the Inhabitants of the Valleys to
exercise their Religion, but did not intend in any manner to offer violence to
their Consciences.

But the Ambassadors, by their Reply, made it appear to the Marquess St.
Thomas, That how strong soever the Reasons were which had induced his Royal
Highness to consent to his Edict of Januar^ last, yet they could not be of so
great strength as those were which had positively engaged his Highness to
observe those Promises which were past before the said Edict; and that no
Considerations, or Reasons of State could free a Prince from the Obligation of
keeping his Word; especially when he engaged himself upon the interposition of
some other Prince; and that as the Patents and Privileges granted to the
Vaudois had been obtained by the Mediation of many Kings, Princes, and States;
particularly by the Intercession of their Excellencies the Evangelick Cantons,
and Confirmed by his Royal Highness; nothing could be alleged to discharge his
Highness from his being obliged to cause them to be punctually observed; and
the rather, because those Patents had been ratified by the Senate of Savoy; and
that the bare Confirmation of 'em in the Year 1620. had cost the
Valley-Churches Six Thousand Crowns.

That if the changes which happen in States, or the different Measures which
according to the Rules of Policy may be taken, should be valuable and
sufficient Exceptions to elude the observation of Treaties, there could be
nothing certain in Sovereigns Promises; Faith would be totally banished out of
the World, and there could never be any assurance that those things should be
performed which had been solemnly stipulated, and there could be no way of
ending War, or concluding Alliances. So that the Concessions granted by his
Royal Highness's Predecessors to the Vaudois did convey to them an indisputable
right, which they could never lose, but by being guilty of some heinous Crime,
or downright Rebellion against their Sovereign: But they are so far from being
justly accused of having any way failed in their duty to him, that they can
produce a Letter from his Royal Highness, dated the 2 d of September, 1684,
which is an authentic, and manifest Proof of their Fidelity, and their
steadfast resolutions to serve him. If since the Publication of your last Edict,
some particular Persons among them have taken Arms, it was not against their
Sovereign, but only to defend themselves against those, who, abusing his
Authority, had fallen upon, and assaulted them; and if any disorder had been
committed, they only were to be chastised who had been the Authors of it; and
it ought not to be imputed to the Collective Body of the Valley-Churches, who
were no way guilty.

It could not be said, That the Valleys had not acquired any Right by the
Concessions of his Royal Highness's Predecessors, or that those Concessions
were but Favors and simple Tolerations; since it is plain, that they are
Treaties past between the Prince and his Subjects, and that these Treaties are
perpetual and irrevocable, and ought to be inviolably observed.

That a Prince is equally obliged to perform the Promises which he makes to his
Subjects, as he is those which he makes to Persons not subject to him; that the
foundation of such Obligations was Public Faith, which ought to govern in all
Princes Treaties, without any distinction made between those with whom they
enter into Engagements; for if it were lawful to fail in the performance of
those solemn Promises they make to their People, it would be impossible to end
any differences which might happen between them, or to appease any troubles in
Kingdoms or States; and that between two Parties in War with one another, there
could be no end of their Quarrel, but by the entire ruin of one of them.

They further said, That if Sovereigns had reason to do what possibly they
could to make all their Subjects of one Religion, yet to compass that, they
ought not to infringe those Treaties they had made with them; and that the only
means which in such a case were lawful to be used, was Instruction,
Exhortation, and all those gentle ways which are likely to make Truth enter
into the Souls of their People, to enlighten their Understanding, and lead them
voluntarily and sincerely to embrace true Religion: But that which deserves
particular consideration in this matter, is, That the Inhabitants of the
Valleys do not hold by Grant from their Princes the liberty of publicly
exercising their Religion, it having been established in the Country more than
Eight Ages ago, and that they enjoyed this Right a long time before they were
Subjects to the Ancestors of his Royal Highness; so that they never having been
of their Prince's Religion, it cannot be said they have quitted it, or that
they are obliged to embrace it.

Beside, his Royal Highness's Predecessors, who permitted the Vaudois to
continue the exercise of their Religion, very well knew that Unity of Faith was
not absolutely necessary for the Public good and safety of their State; for
otherwise they would never have passed such solemn Patents, or from time to
time confirmed them as they have done.

And certainly there is little to be feared from the diversity of Religion
which is in Piemont; because those that are not of the Prince's Communion, are
shut up in a little corner of the Country, and are a People without Authority
or Power, and have no design to spread their Doctrine in any other parts of his
Royal Highness's Dominions.

Moreover, it was to be feared that Protestant Princes might follow his Royal
Highness's Example, and might treat their Catholic Subjects as his Highness
dealt with those of their Religion; and therefore the Interest of his own Party
ought to hinder him from using force to oblige the Inhabitants of the Valleys
to renounce their Religion.

That although his Royal Highness seemed not to force his Protestant Subjects to
embrace the Romish Religion, and was contented with depriving them of the
exercise of their own Religion, leaving to them in other things perfect liberty
of Conscience; yet it was evident that they were not only obliged (under very
great Penalties) to baptize their Children in Catholic Churches, and to bring
them up in the Romish Religion, which was as insupportable and grievous to
them, as to compel the Parents themselves to make profession of it; but they
were also kept from Praying to God according to their Faith, which must be a
terrible torment to their Consciences, and was an imposition upon them as hard
and cruel, as if they were by force compelled to a Worship condemned by the
Religion in which they were educated.

Beside, to forbid People the exercise of their Religion, is to cast them into
indevotion, and even into Atheism, which may prove a greater mischief to them,
than driving 'em by force into the Church of Rome.

In these Reasons there was so much strength, that the Ambassadors hoped they
would make great impression on the mind of his Royal Highness; and that the
Marquess St. Thomas would truly report them, and employ his credit with his
Highness to obtain a Revocation of an Edict, which doubtless he believed to be
just, and which he had not published had he thought it contrary to what a just
and equitable Prince owes to his faithful Subjects.

The Ambassadors were not contented with only representing the just Right of
the Piemont Churches, and maintaining it by sollid Arguments, but they also
spent some days in soliciting his Royal Highness's Ministers, and all others
whose help they thought might make their Embassy succeed; but they more
particularly applied themselves to the Marquess St. Thomas, as to him, on whom
depended all the Good and all the Ill which was to be expected in the Affair;
and if one may judge of things by appearances, the pains they took to dispose
him to be favorable to them were not in vain.

For he protested with an Oath, That he had showed to his Royal Highness all
that was contained in the Reply they had obliged him to present, and that he
had done all he could to make their Arguments prevail for obtaining a
Revocation of the Edict; but the present state of Affairs was the cause of his
not being able to persuade his Royal Highness to grant that which they desired.
However, said he, seeing the Prince's Troops are not yet upon their March, the
Inhabitants of the Valleys may make a show as if they would comply with the
Edict; that not being contrary to the Principles of your Religion, though it be
to the Doctrine of the Catholic Church; and by this means they will disarm the
Prince, and afterward find some way to prevent the mischief wherewith they are
threatened.

Our Doctrine, replied the Ambassadors, does in no wise allow us to dissemble
our Faith, but obliges us to confess with our Mouths that which we believe in
our Hearts to be truth; but this is not the present business: The Question is,
Whether his Royal Highness has power to revoke the Privileges granted to the
Valley Churches; for as they are Engagements into which he entered by the
Mediation of many Sovereigns, and among others, by that of the Evangelick
Cantons our Sovereign Lords, it is certain that nothing ought to infringe or
make them void.

The Ambassadors in the mean time neglected nothing that might make their
Negotiation successful, and therefore made new applications to the Marquess St.
Thomas, and to others of his Royal Highness's Ministers, but they all said (as
if they had concerted what answer to give) that the Edict was irrevocable, by
reason of the present juncture, and the measures which his Royal Highness had
taken.

Beside the Reasons drawn from the Nature of the Grants passed to the Vaudois,
and the concern which the Cantons had that they should be observed, the
Ambassadors represented the inconveniences which might follow the execution
of the Edict* and among others, those which his Royal Highness might well fear
would happen by the entry of Foreign Troops into his Country, by the loss of a
great number of his Subjects, who had done their Prince very great service, and
were still ready to lose their Blood to restifie the love they had for him: By
the diminution of his Revenue, which must necessarily follow the destruction of
those miserable People; and to which might be added, the blame his Royal
Highness must incur, by turning his Arms against his own People, and the damage
which his other Subjects, who were Neighbors to the Valleys, must needs suffer
by a Civil War, with many other Considerations of this nature, which were not
regarded by his Highness's Ministers; who told the Ambassadors, That the
Council of State had examined their Reasons, and did not think them weighty
enough to hinder him from Publishing his Edict against his Subjects of the
Valleys; and though by the execution of it, his Royal Highness might suffer some
inconvenience, yet he must go on, because a change of this nature would be
prejudicial to his Authority; and by being willing to preserve some of his
Subjects, he might be in danger of losing all.

Though the Ministers of State seemed to be firm in their Opinions, and pretended
not to be convinced of the Justice of the Ambassadors Demands, yet it was well
known, that they maintained the Edict against their own judgment; and one of
them freely confessed, that his Highness's Council had not sufficiently
examined the Concessions of the Year 1655, and 1664; and if they had made such
reflections on them as they ought, they would never have been of the opinion
that they might be revoked: But he told the Ambassadors the mischief was not
now to be remedied, and it would be in vain for them to solicit his Highness
to change his mind. Another of them freely confessed that his Highness was not
Master of this Affair, and that those Orders must be executed at Turin, which
had been given at Versailles.

This free and sincere Confession made the Ambassadors conclude, That all
their Instances and Solicitations would prove ineffectual; so that seeing it
would be impossible for them to obtain the Revocation of the Edict, they were
resolved, according to the first Article of their Instructions, to demand that
which they were by the second Article of the Cantons Orders directed to ask,
viz. To procure leave for the Vaudois to retire some where else, and to dispose
of their Goods as they should think fit.

But because by their Instructions they were to propose nothing in this
particular to the Court of Turin, without the consent of the Valley
Inhabitants, they told the Marquess St. Thomas, That seeing many Considerations
had hindered them from entertaining any correspondence mith the Vaudois, they
were willing to go into the Valleys, to know certainly how the People stood
disposed; and when they understood their intentions, they might by some other
Overtures renew their Negotiation; but at the same time declared, they would
not undertake the Voyage without first having his Royal Highness's consent.

The Marquess St. Thomas having reported to his Royal Highness the Ambassadors
design, the Duke sent to let them know, he approved of their resolution, and
that he would give order to the Governor of Lucern, to pay them all the
civility and respect that was due to their Character.

The Ambassadors, as soon as they came into the Valleys, made known their
arrival to all the Communities, who presently sent to 'em their Deputies and
their Ministers, to whom the Ambassadors declared, That they had employed the
most powerful Intercessions they possibly could, to get a Revocation of the
Edict of the 31 th of January; but that they had been told his Royal Highness
had entered into such strict engagements with one of the most Potent Monarchs on
Earth, that it was impossible for his Highness to break 'em; and that he had
resolved to do all he could to unite all his Subjects in the Profession of one
and the same Religion, according as he had solemnly promised; so that there was
not the least hope of obtaining a Revocation of those Orders which had been
given out against them. They also declared, that their Sovereign Lords the
Cantons had commanded them, in case his Royal Highness should persist in his
resolution of causing his Edict to be executed, then to press his Royal
Highness to permit his Subjects of the Valleys to depart out of his Dominions,
and to dispose of their Goods; but in that particular they would do nothing
till they first knew what was their intention, and therefore they wished them
to meet together, and seriously deliberate upon a business of so much weight,
and then make known what they desired of them in the present juncture.

The Deputies and the Ministers having conferred together upon this
Proposition, before they determined any thing, prayed the Ambassadors to give
them their prudent advice: But the Ambassadors at first refused to give them
any counsel in so nice a business; saying, That they themselves knew their own
Strength, the situation of those Places where they intended to entrench; their
Provisions both for the Belly and the War, better than they whose advice they
asked; and therefore they could take better and surer measures themselves, than
could be given them by others.

Nevertheless, at last, not being able to deny their earnest Requests, and
believing they were bound by Charity to assist them in a Concern so slippery,
and full of hazard, they willingly consented to what they desired.

But that they might give them Counsel according to the knowledge they had of
their condition, they informed themselves exactly of the number of those in the
Valleys that could bear Arms; of their Experience, their Courage, and of the
service of their Officers, of the Passages and Avenues of the Country, of their
Stores, of the quality and goodness of their Arms; and above all, whether there
were a perfect and sincere Union among themselves: But understanding that at
most they were not above 2500 fighting Men, and more than 12000 unprofitable
Mouths; that Victuals already began to fail in certain places; that the Troops
of France and Savoy had shut up all the Passages whereby they might be provided
of necessaries; that they could not hope for any Succors; and that it was
easy to destroy them by Famine, or to reduce them by Force; that they had no
Neighbors to retreat to as in former Wars; that the King of France, who
heretofore protected them, was now their greatest Enemy; that they had but few
Soldiers to defend a great deal of Ground; that being separated one from
another, they could not give speedy succor to those that might want it; that
there were in the Valleys Roman Catholics, who would watch all their motions,
and give intelligence to the Court of all that passed; and what was yet worse,
that two great Princes had joined together to destroy them: The Ambassadors
told them, That in the state wherein they were, it was impossible to resist so
great a Force as was ready to fall upon them; and therefore it would be more
for their advantage to choose forsaking their Country, provided they could
obtain leave to sell their Goods, and save as much as they could. They did not*
indeed know positively his Royal Highness's intention in this particular; but
though he had refused to grant that which the Inhabitants of the Valleys had
requested of him in the third Petition they had presented to his Highness, yet
they did hope it might now be yielded to, out of respect to their Masters.

The Ministers and Deputies having heard this advice, entreated the
Ambassadors that they might consult together before they gave any answer; and
then quitting them, they spent more than three hours in consulting one with
another, each Party maintaining their own Opinion with a great deal of heat:
Some said they ought not to quit their Country, but expose their Lives to
maintain their Liberties, which had been so Authentickly granted to them;
saying, it was base Cowardice not to show their Courage, when Religion and the
Cause of God was at stake; that the favor which was to be shown them, would
signify nothing, to such as had not wherewithal to defray the charges of their
Voyage; that they might indeed sell what they had in the Plains, but no body
would buy their Estates in the Mountains. That there was no safety for them
during their departure; that some change might happen in the Affairs of Europe,
which might better their Condition. That perhaps France, thinking they could
make no Resistance, when it saw how bravely they defended themselves, and that
they had destroyed part of their Troops, would recall the rest, and keep them
for some more considerable Enterprise; that they expected Money and Men, which
were to be sent them by Captain Janavell, and that they should not want
Victuals, because by Sallies from time to time, they could oblige their
Neighbors to furnish them with such Necessaries as they wanted.

They that were of a contrary Opinion, answered all this, saying, It was true,
that both Reason and Piety oblige us, to hazard our Lives in defense of our
Liberty, and the Exercise of our Religion, when there is any appearance it may
be done with Success; but when the danger is inevitable, and our ruin certain,
it is Despair and Madness to throw our selves headlong into it, and Men are
their own Enemies and Self-Murtherers, to take Arms against those, whom (do all
they can) it is impossible to vanquish; that they had but few among them, who
were able to defend themselves; and how Brave and Resolute soever they might
be, it was evident, they could not long resist two powerful Armies, and so many
Troops as were ready to attack them on all sides. To think the State of Public
Affairs would change, was to flatter themselves with vain imaginations: That
Men ought to take their Measures according to the present state of things, and
that which apparently was like to come to pass: That common Sense and Prudence,
would never build important Resolutions, upon Miraculous Events: That all
Europe enjoyed perfect Peace, and France was dreaded by all the world, and had
therefore no Reason to fear its being attacqu'd by any Prince, or that any
thing could happen to occasion the recalling of those Troops which were in
Piedmont, to employ them in any other place; that they ought not to depend on
the Succors they expected, and though they that were promised should be sent,
yet against every single man that should come, their Enemies could oppose whole
Companies. That they could not long subsist for want of Victuals, and that though
their Sallies should be successful (which was not likely) all the Provisions
which they would that way be able to get, could not suffice to maintain so
great a number of people; in sine, they made it appear, that Resistance would
infallibly be their total ruin, and that then those Ancient Churches would be
destroyed, which had subsisted with so much Glory, in the midst of so many
Persecutions. And that it was much better, by a prudent retreat, to remove the
Sacred Candlestick to some other place, than to put out the light by rash
Resolutions.

It was said, that such as were of ability might contribute somewhat to those
that were poor, to help them in their Voyage; and their not being able to sell
all their goods, was not such a consideration as ought to stay them; because
life ought to be dearer to 'em than their Lands, and that it was much better,
to lose part of a man's goods, than to destroy himself.

The Ministers and Deputies seeing they could not agree, and that the point in
question could not be otherwise decided, than by their Communities, told the
Ambassadors, that the business in debate being of the highest consequence, they
could not positively resolve upon any thing, without having first assembled
their Communities, to know what they would do in this occasion, and therefore
promised to bring their last resolution to Turin, provided they might have a
Passport for their safety.

The Ambassadors being returned to Turin, informed the Marquess St. Thomas,
that the people of the Valleys, thought it better to die upon the Graves of
their Ancestors, than to lose their Spiritual Liberty, in submitting to his R.
H. Edict; beseeching his Highness, with all due Respect, that he would in some
measure moderate the rigor of it; and that if his R. H. would not mitigate the
Severity thereof, in favor of his miserable Subjects, things must apparently
come to dreadful Extremities, and that the rigor he used in this occasion,
must cause the ruin of a great part of his people. The Ambassadors further
said, that hoping his R. H. would for their Masters sake, moderate those orders
he had given against his Subjects of the Valleys, they had taken the Liberty to
make some Proposals, which might prevent all the mischiefs the rigorous
Execution of the Edict was like to produce; and that they might know the
intention of those people, they prayed the Marquess to obtain a safe Conduct
for such Deputies as should be sent from the Valleys.

But the Marquess St. Thomas told the Ambassadors, That his Royal Highness,
for very good reasons, would not give the Deputies of the Valleys a safe
Conduct; and that the Secretary to their Embassy might be sent to bring back
those Peoples Reasons.

The Secretary was then sent to the Vaudois with this following Letter.

WE doubt not but that your Deputies have faithfully reported to you our
Opinions, which we believe have no other foundation but the Public good of
your Communities, and since our return to Turin, we have learnt many things
which confirm us in our fears for you, we have given you good advice, and we
hope you will follow the Counsel we gave your Deputies, being persuaded that
God by his Divine Providence, will conduct you to some retreat, where you may
have all that is necessary for Life, and also Liberty to serve him in his fear,
according to the dictates of your Conscience; and seeing you know the Condition
of your Affairs require a speedy remedy, and that no time be lest for the
obtaining of it from your Prince, we have thought it absolutely necessary,
immediately to dispatch our Secretary, to let you know, that his R. H. will not
grant any Passports to your Deputies, and therefore we pray you to send us
speedily your resolution in writing, fearing that if you delay to inform us,
our endeavors for you will be no longer acceptable at Court, and so we shall
become useless, and unable to procure free leave for you to depart; which to
obtain, we will, if you please, apply our selves to his R. H. with all possible
care and affection, etc.


The Communities being assembled, the Secretary delivered to 'em the
Ambassador's Letter, which when read, he told 'em, their Affairs grew daily
worse and worse; and that the French Ambassador continually pressed his Royal
Highness to have the Edict executed; that his Royal Highness on his part was
very impatient it was not done, because his Reputation was engaged, or because
he was at very great charge to maintain the Troops that were in his Country;
that seeing it was impossible to obtain a revocation of the Edict, they ought
to think of the best means to mollify his Highness, and procure such a
mitigation of it as might yet be demanded: Lastly, he prayed them to reflect on
all those Considerations, which had been alleged by the Ambassadors, and to
give him their answer in writing.

After this Representation, the Ministers and other Deputies having consulted
together, agreed to answer the Ambassadors in this following manner.

My Lords,
WE have received the Letter which your Excellencies has been pleased to send
us, by Monsieur -- Secretary to your Embassy, and having heard from him an
exact relation of the extraordinary pains your Excellencies have taken, to
represent to his R. H. our Prince, and the Lords his Ministers, all those
Reasons which might best serve to maintain our Right, and the answers by you
given to those reproaches, wherewith our Conduct in general, and some
particular actions have been charged, we with grateful hearts render to your
Excellencies our most humble thanks.

We have made all possible reflections on the Subject of your Letter, and which
way soever we turn our eyes, we meet with such difficulties as are impossible
to be overcome, and which we have taken the Liberty to put into the Memoirs
hereto annexed, on which we pray your Excellencies to cast your Eyes, and make
such Observations on them as your great Prudence shall suggest; we are verily
persuaded, your Excellencies have no other end than to offer those Expedients,
which may be safest for these poor Churches, who most humbly beseech you, if it
be impossible to procure a Revocation of the Order that has been published, or
to obtain any equitable Moderation of its Rigor, that you will then have the
Charity to think of some other Expedients, which you shall judge more proper
for our preservation; when you have taken notice of the difficulties which in
the Memoirs we have represented to you, we leave our selves wholly to your
prudent Conduct. This, my Lords, is the Opinion of the Churches in general, who
will never cease to send up Prayers to the Divine Majesty, for the prosperity
of your Excellencies Sacred Persons, and the happy success of your Embassy,
which is the wish,

My Lords, Of your most Humble, most Obedient, and most obliged Servants, the
Pastors and Deputies of the Protestant Churches in Piedmont. Siderac Bastie,
Moderator. David Legor, Adjunct. Jean Jahier, Minister. G. Mancloti, Minister.
P. Leydet, Minister. P. Jahier, Minister. Girand, Minister. Bertram, Minister.
Jean Manclot. Jean Chavie, Secret. Jean Laurens, Minister. Jaques Peyrot. Jean
Baptist Roberto. Estienne Gnatier. Paul Beux. Jean Pierre Guantan. Daniel
Alberon.

From Angrogn, March 28, 1686.

In their Memoir, in the first place, they obesrv'd, That none but the rich
Families could go out of the Country; and that others, how willing soever they
might be to depart, that they were not able to do it, by reason of their
Poverty; and if they stayed in the Country, they would certainly be forced to
change their Religion.

Secondly, It might happen, That when the chiefest Families were gone out of
the Country, the rest might be stopped upon one pretense or other,
notwithstanding they have been promised Liberty to do what they pleased; That
if their Patents, granted them by the interposition of many Sovereign Princes,
were revoked, there would be no scruple made of breaking the Promise past to
the Ambassadors.

Thirdly, That the sale of their Goods might be secretly opposed, by forbidding
the Roman Catholics to buy them; or at least, they should be able to sell only
their Lands which they had in the Champain Country, and not those which were in
the Mountains and barren places.

In the fourth place, They prayed the Ambassadors, to desire, that those Debts
might be paid which were legally due to them, and which they could not get in
before their departure; that his R. H. would likewise be pleased, to obtain
from the King of France, liberty to sell the Estates which they had in the
Valleys of Perouse, and to look after the payment of what was due to them from
the Inhabitants of that Country.

Fifthly, They did humbly pray, that sufficient time might be given them for
selling their Goods, and to find out a place of retreat; and that in the mean
while, the Execution of the Edict might cease, and their Ministers continue
their Exercises as formerly.

Lastly, They proposed to the Ambassadors, the difficulty of finding Wagons to
carry away their Families, and their Baggage, they being no less than 15000
persons.

This Writing being delivered to the Ambassadors, with the Letter sent from
the Inhabitants of the Valleys; they made a Visit to the Marquess St. Thomas,
and having told him, that they hoped to persuade the Vaudois to leave their
Country, provided they might do it in a safe and advantageous manner; they
desired him to ask his R. H. whether he would permit his poor Subjects to quit
his Dominions; and in case he found him so disposed, then to ask him, whether
he would be pleased to name some persons of his Council, with whom the
Ambassadors might treat of Conditions for their departure, and remove all
obstacles which might stand in their way.

While they were waiting for his R. H's. answer, the Ambassadors warmly
solicited the Ministers of State, to persuade his Highness to grant that which
they now desired, but their endeavors had not that success they expected; for
his R. H. commanded Count Marsenas to tell them, he was informed by his
Ministers, that they were very sollicitous to obtain free leave for his
Subjects to go out of the Valleys, and to adjust with some of his Ministers,
terms for their departure, but he had commanded them to declare, that this
people had been so audacious, as to take up Arms against him, even in a time
when he had no Troops near their Country, that they had committed a thousand
insolences, and braved him with such boldness, as deserved severe punishment:
They therefore were unworthy of that favor, the Ambassadors desired for them;
and so much the more unworthy, because before their arrival at Court, these
people had with great submission, presented several Petitions, to obtain some
moderation in the Execution of the Edict; but now pretended with Swords in
their hands to force him to revoke it; nevertheless he assured the Ambassadors,
that if these Rebels would show their Repentance for what had past, and submit
themselves with that respect which was due to him, he was inclined to be
merciful to them, and to let them see how much he regarded the Cantons
mediation. The Ambassadors surprised with this new Proposition, told Count
Marsenas, that they did not see how his R. H. could require from his Subjects
such a submission; for should his People own that they had been undutiful to
their Prince, they would render themselves guilty by their own confession, and
therefore they ought not to be obliged to make any declaration of this nature;
and should any go about to bring them to such a resolution, it would be
impossible to prevail with them, because they would never blacken themselves
with a crime, of which they knew themselves innocent, and give just occasion to
have their Goods confiscated, that they would have just reason to suspect any
man that should propose such a thing to them, and that from such an Overture,
nothing could be expected but prolonging their Negotiation, and rendering it
ineffectual.

But when Count Marsenas told them, his R. H. was positively resolved, that the
Vaudois Submission should precede the favor he intended to show them, the
Ambassadors thought fit to have recourse to the Marquess St. Thomas, desiring
him to soften a little his R. H. When they came to the Marquess they prayed him
to represent to his Highness, that in obliging his Subjects to confess they
were guilty of Rebellion, he required that of them, to which they could never
yield. That such a Declaration would cover them with eternal shame, and that
they could not in conscience confess crimes, of which they were not guilty.
That now it appeared his R.H. made little account of the mediation and
intercession of their Sovereign Lords, in resolving that the favors which they
desired, should depend upon a condition, to which his Subjects could never
submit.

The Marquess St. Thomas gave them the same answer they had from Count
Marsenas, which was* That the Prince was inflexible in this point, that it was
impossible to alter his mind by any Reasons that could be urged, and that it
would be in vain, to try to make him change his resolution.

This Answer from the Marquess, very much troubled the Ambassadors, who begun
to fear, that some snares were laying for the poor Vaudois, and that there was
a design to condemn them, by the Confession they themselves should make of
their Rebellion: Nevertheless, they resolved this difficulty should not make
them break off the Treaty they had begun; they considered, that his Highness
might tell the World, his Subjects had refused to accept the Favors he had
offered them; besides, they thought the ill success of this Negotiation, might
be imputed to them; but the Reason which most prevailed with them, was, that
they plainly saw, it would be more for the advantage of the Vaudois, to submit
to the Will of their Sovereign, than to expose themselves to all the mischiefs
their Disobedience might bring upon them.

They therefore determined to consent to the accommodation propounded to them,
as a less Evil, than to see the Valley Churches brought to Desolation: and the
rather, because the Marquess St. Thomas assured them, that his R. H. to
testify the esteem he had for them, would at their intercession grant all that
could be reasonably desired, without wounding his reputation.

But before the Ambassadors would propose to the Vaudois, that which their
Prince required of them, the Ambassadors desired not only to be informed, of
what nature the submission was to be, which was expected from them; but also to
regulate and agree with his R. H. Ministers, in what form and term it should be
drawn up.

Several Projects of the Petition to be presented to his R. H. by the Vaudois,
were by each party proposed; but at last it was agreed, it should contain a
most humble supplication, beseeching the Prince to pardon those offenses which
they might have committed; and if they had not paid that respect which was due
to him, yet they had never failed in the Allegiance they had sworn to his
Highness.

After which the Ambassadors having got a safe conduct for five or six of the
Inhabitants of the Valleys, they sent it away to them by the Secretary of the
Embassy, with a Letter whereof you have here a Copy.

Sirs,
ACcording to your desire signified to us, in your Letter of the 28th of the
Month of March, and the Memoir thereto annexed: We have requested his Royal
Highness, that he would be pleased to grant you leave to depart out of his
Dominions, and to dispose of all your Goods; that he would likewise be pleased
to appoint Commissioners, who with us, might regulate the manner of your
departure: Hereupon his Royal Highness has by one of his Ministers signified
to us, That he being your Sovereign, he could not without a breach of his
Honor and Authority, enter into any Treaty with you; but will have you depute
five or six Persons, with full Power to make the submission which is due to
him; and to petition for the favor you desire should be granted to you; and
then his Highness will testify what esteem he has for our Lords. We did
indeed expect a more favorable answer than this: but however, to take away all
pretenses from his R. H. of resolving to do that which may be fatal to you, we
think you will do well, to send Deputies as soon as possible, promising that we
will assist them with our best counsel, in delivering their Petition and
Supplication. Our Secretary, who who will deliver this to you, with the safe
conduct which we send, will tell you more at large, the particulars of our
Negotiation, and how the Court stands affected toward you.


The Secretary of the Embassy, having delivered this Letter to the Deputies of
the Valleys, whom he caused to assemble; and having given them an exact account
of the Ambassadors Negotiation with his Royal Highness, and what effect it had
produced; entered into a long discourse to exhort them to submit to their
Prince's will, and prayed that he might be speedily dispatched, assuring them,
that upon the Ambassadors account, they would obtain much more favor than they
imagined.

Those of the Assembly who had most sense and reason, especially the Ministers,
did all they could to persuade the rest to submit to the Law imposed upon them;
since in the extremity whereto they were reduced, they must either perish with
their miserable Families, or accept that which was offered.

But all the reasons which could be urged, were not able to prevail with them,
so that after having debated the question almost a whole day, they separated
without being able to agree in one opinion.

Those of the Valley of St, Martin, of Perouse, of St. Bartholomew, of
Parastin, of Rocheplatte, of Villard, of Roras, and one part of de la Tour,
were willing to make the submissions required of them, and having deputed for
that purpose, six Persons who had order to go to the Court of Turin; they gave
them Procurations in due form, whereby they promised to do all that they
thought fit in the Negotiation which they had undertaken, for the Interest of
the Valley Churches: But those of Boby, of St. John, and part of those of
Angrogne, flattering themselves with the hope of imaginary Succors, resolved
with Swords in their hands to defend the exercise of their Religion, and sent
to the Ambassadors, their Deputy named Bianchis, who delivered to them the
following Letter.

Most High, Mighty, and Sovereign Lords.
PVrsuant to the Letter which your Excellencies have been pleased to write to
the Valleys some days ago, our Churches of St. John, Angrogne, and Boby, throw
themselves at your feet, to assure you of their most humble respects, and of
the due sense they have of all those favors, which your Excellencies endeavor
to obtain and procure for them, from his Royal Highness our Sovereign, for the
continuance of the exercise of our Religion in these places: and as for the
proposition now in question, seeing our People cannot agree in the same opinion
with other Churches: We cannot send to your Excellencies the consent we desire,
and therefore have charged the Sieur Daniel Bianchis Syndich of the Community
of St. John, to tell you by word of mouth our thoughts, and most humbly to
beseech you, that you will be pleased to continue to us, the effects of your
Extraordinary and Paternal Charity, especially by your powerful Intercessions
with his Royal Highness, for the abovementioned Exercise of our Religion,
earnestly praying that the Lord will bless your Negotiation, and bountifully
reward all your care, pains, and travels, which your Excellencies have had the
goodness to take for our poor Flocks, in whose names, with all imaginable
respect and due submission, we are proud to bear the Title of your Excellencies

Most Humble, most Obedient, and most Obliged Servants, the Deputies of the
Churches. Deputies of the Church of St. John. Michel Purise Jean Muston,
Jean, Putta for Angrogne. Of the Church of Bo^y. Marque de Daniel, Negrin N.
Sindic, Francis Dane, Counselor, Stephan Pertin, Deputy,




The Sieur de la Bastie Minister of St. John, troubled at the division of these
unfortunate Churches, wrote to the Ambassadors in the following Terms.

My Lords,
I Take the liberty to present my most humble duty to your Excellencies, by the
Deputies who are going to Turin, to make the submission to his Royal Highness,
and to present to him the Petition which your Excellencies have thought fit. I
am with my Colleagues in very great consternation and affliction, to see our
People so much divided about our leaving the Country, fearing that this will
prejudice your Excellencies Negotiation with his Royal Highness in our favor,
and render your pains unsuccessful: We have not failed to do all we could to
make them understand, that in this present juncture of time, it was the safest
course could be taken; but we have not been happy enough to succeed and
satisfy all; if we did not know your Excellencies unparrallel'd Charity, we
should have cause to fear this indiscreet conduct, might lessen your Friendship
and Zeal for our good. We most humbly beseech your Excellencies to show in this
occasion, so much goodness and clemency, as not to slacken the indefatigable
pains you take, and I humbly beg your Excellencies Pardon for the Liberty I
take, and with all reverence, respect, and submission, I assure your Lordships,
that I am, your Excellencies

Most Humble, most Obedient, and most Obliged Servant, Sydrac Bastie, Minister
at Angrogne.
April the 4 th. 1686.

This diversity of Opinions made the Ambassadors fear, that the Enemies of
their Religion taking advantage of the Vaudois Division, would prevail with his
Highness, to destroy the innocent with the guilty, and to suffer none at all to
go out of the Country.

They therefore sent back to the Valleys, the Deputy of Boby, with a Letter
which they wrote to those that resolved to take Arms, conjuring him to use all
his Power, to make them agree in opinion with the other Churches. The Letter
was penned in this manner.

Sirs,
IT is true, that a Man's own Country has very great Charms, and the greatest
part of Mankind have a natural desire to live and dye in it, but yet the
Children of God, ought not to set their Hearts upon it, seeing they are
strangers upon Earth, Heaven being their proper Country; so that you will be
guilty of distrusting Divine Providence, if you fear you shall not be able to
find another Country, where you may conveniently live and adore your Heavenly
Father. In what part of the World soever a Man is, he ought to think himself
happy, if he there have liberty to serve God according to the Dictates of his
own Conscience. You ought to follow the Example of the Patriarchs, who drew
down God's Blessing on themselves, by relying on his Promises, and by
abandoning their Houses and Lands, when he commanded them to go and dwell in a
strange Country. The like Confidence cannot but be acceptable to God, and it is
without doubt, more conformable to the mind of the Gospel; to forsake a Man's
Country, than to take Arms against his Sovereign. Christians are called to
suffer, and not to resist, and we do not find that the Apostles or the
Primitive Church, made use of any other defense, but Prayers and Patience,
against their Persecutors. These are the Considerations which obliged our
Sovereign Lords the Evangelick Cantons to give us order; to procure from his
Royal Highness, your lawful Prince, free leave for you to depart, with
permission to dispose of your Goods, in case he will not any longer suffer the
Exercise of your Religion: And though you look on this retreat as an intolerable
Mischief, yet our Sovereign Lords consider it as a favor, when they reflect on
the sad Condition whereto you are reduced; they also think it will be very
difficult to obtain it from his Royal Highness: If he grant it at their
intercession: You ought not only to accept it with submission, but also to be
very thankful for it. After this, you cannot doubt but that we have been very
much surprised to hear, that you have resolved not to take this Course, but
intend to resist two mighty Potentates; who have obliged themselves to
extirpate you, in case you do not submit to their will: And herein you do not
only act against your Duty, against Christian Prudence, and against your own
Interest; but you give us just cause to complain of you, seeing that after
having engaged us in a Negotiation with your Prince, you will not so much as
stoop to lay hold on those advantages we are able to procure for you. Open your
Eyes then, and see the mischief into which you are running headlong, and the
fatal consequences of your resolution, which must necessarily ruin your
Churches, and destroy your Families; know that what is offered you, is so much
for your advantage, considering the present state of your affairs, that many
persons of the best quality, would have embraced it as a great blessing, in the
late Persecutions in France, yea would have been glad with all their Hearts, if
they might have been suffered to quit their Country Stark-naked. If you will
consider all these things, we hope their Example, whose Resolutions are more
reasonable, will move you, and persuade you to be of their opinion; if you
refuse to follow their Example, and persist in your obstinacy, you will be
guilty before God, not only of throwing away your lives, which you might have
saved, and of exposing your Wives and Children to butchery, but also of having
caused the ruin of the rest of the Valley Churches, which you might have
removed into another Country. Flatter not your selves with believing you shall
be able to escape these Mischiefs, by the succors which some have told you you
shall receive, for we assure you that they who entertain you with such vain
imaginations, abuse you; there is not any place that will or can assist you,
you will be forsaken by all people, even by one part of the Inhabitants of your
Country, so that you will soon be destroyed either by Famine or the Sword; they
that escape the fury of their Enemies, must expect to dye at a Stake, on the
Wheel, or the Gallows: We therefore conjure you, to let such considerations as
these prevail with you, and agree with those Communities, that have resolved to
desire their Prince's leave to retire out of his Dominions; believing that Gods
Providence will lead you into some place, where you may find perhaps a better
and more advantageous settlement, than that which you leave, and where the poor
will meet with charitable Persons who will provide for their necessities.
Hoping that God will inspire you with prudent resolutions, and that you will
give to your Deputies, such Procurations as other Communities have given
theirs; we recommend you to his Mercy, and to his divine Protection, remaining,
Sirs, Your very affectionate to serve, etc.

Turin, April 5th.

While the Ambassadors were expecting the return of this Deputy, they thought
it necessary to let the Marquess St. Thomas know in what disposition the
Vaudois were, and prevent those Evils which their Division might draw upon them
from His Royal Highness, and the Enemies which they had in his Council. They
therefore went to give this Minister a Visit, and told him, the Deputies were
come, that five of them were ready in the name of their Communities to make
their submission, which His Royal Highness required of them: But others who did
not know what they were to expect from His Highnesses Clemency, were not yet
resolved to Sign the Submission. In the mean time a Letter was written to them,
to advise them to follow their Example, who had resolved to submit, and that
their Resolution would be very spedily known.

After this, they prayed the Marquess to intercede with His Royal Highness to
favor those poor People, and beseech him to have some pity on them; That His
Highness seeing they were prepossessed with distrust, would so far declare his
Intentions, as to put them out of pain, and that the submission might be made
by common consent, to the satisfaction both of Prince, and People.

The Marquess St. Thomas told the Ambassadors, that the obstinacy of the
Vaudois did very much surprise him; nevertheless, he promised to do for them
all the good Offices he could with His Royal Highness, that so their delaying
to give His Highness the satisfaction He expected, might not be prejudicial to
them, and that His Highness might not follow the Counsel of other Persons, who
pressed him to use severity.

The Court was very impatient to see an end of this Affair, the Ambassadors
wrote a Letter to the Marquess St. Thomas, to let him know they had prepared
the Vaudois Petition, and that it should be ready to be presented, when it was
Signed by all the Deputies; but one of them being absent, they prayed nothing
might be done 'till his return.

The next day after this Letter was delivered to the Marquess St. Thomas, the
Ambassadors waited on him, to learn what effect it had wrought, when he pressed
very much that the five Deputies who were then at Turin, should Sign the
Petition, whereof he liked the form: The Ambassadors told him, that the
Subscription could not be made by the Deputies who were present, in his absence
who was sent to the Valleys; for their Interests being joint, they could not
separate one from another, and that it had been agreed, the Petition should be
Signed at one and the same time by all the Deputies.

But the Marquess St. Thomas having secret Orders to hasten the Subscription of
the Deputies who were at Court, was not satisfied with the Reasons given for
refusing what he demanded; and the next day he sent one of his People to the
Ambassadors, to desire they would dispose the Deputies to give him the
satisfaction he desired; but the Ambassadors wrote a few Lines to the Marquess,
wherein they said it was not just to divide those in the Subscription, who were
engaged in the same Cause; and that if some Signed the Petition without the
others, such a Proceeding must needs have ill Consequences, and therefore
entreated the Marquess to stay but one day more for the sixth Deputy, and
prevail with his Royal Highness to grant them the short stay they desired.

The Marquess having received this Note, told the Secretary of the Embassy who
brought it, that his Royal Highness was extremely displeased with these delays,
and likewise said he very much feared his Highness would take such a
Resolution, as would carry things to fatal extremities; the Deputies must
therefore Sign their Petition immediately, and bring it to him, that he might
present it to his Royal Highness.

The Deputies fearing to irritate so powerful a Minister, if they refused to
appear before him, resolved to go to his House; but all the Arguments the
Marquess used, could not persuade them to Sign the Petition, though he assured
them it should be no prejudice to those of Boby: But they stood firm to their
first Resolution; their excuse was, that they were obliged to stay for the
Deputy who was gone to the Valleys, That the success of his Negotiation was
uncertain, That he was to return speedily, and that Signing separately, might
involve them in a great deal of danger.

The Resolution of these Deputies at Turin, and that of the Vaudois who
intended to take Arms, very much disquieted his Royal Highness; and that which
more displeased him, was the news brought him, that they had killed two French
Men, who belonged to the Citadel of Pignerol.

The Ambassador of France who was extremely impatient, because his Royal
Highness delayed the execution of his Edict, failed not to take advantage of
this accident, and by it to dispose his Highness to take vengeance on his
Subjects, who had committed this Crime in contempt of his Authority, and to
deal with these People like Rebels. While the Enemies of the Vaudois were
contriving their destruction, the Deputies at Turin were in a sad Condition;
and not knowing what to resolve, they took Counsel of the Ambassadors, to know
what course they should take in this their present extremities: the Ambassadors
hoping that the Deputy who was gone to Boby, would speedily return, and that he
might bring back News which might appease his Royal Highness, thought it best
to stay for his coming, before they took any particular Resolution.

But the Deputy staying a long time, and his Royal Highness being continually
solicited by the French Ambassador, to put an end to this Affair, otherwise
the Troops which were in his Country would put him to excessive Charge; his
Highness, being likewise informed, that the Ambassadors had dispatched a
Courrier into Switzerland, who might bring them new Orders, resolved, for these
Reasons, to put an end to the business, and notwithstanding all the earnest and
pressing Reasons, which the Ambassadors urged in favor of the Vaudois, to
incline the Duke to defer for some little time his last Resolution, he caused
the following Edict to be Published the 9 th Day of June.

DIvine Providence in setting up Sovereigns over the People, gave to Princes
the Power of distributing Rewards and Punishments, that the hope of Reward
might encourage the good to do their duty, and the fear of Punishment, might
deter the wicked from doing evil; though our Subjects of the Valleys of Lucerne,
who make profession of the pretended Reformed Religion, deserve to be chastised
by the hand of Vengeance, because they have not only with great obstinacy
disobeyed Our Edict of the 31th of January, but have hardened themselves in
their wickedness, and are fallen into notorious and horrible Rebellion; yet our
natural Clemency surpassing their Crimes, We with fatherly forbearance have a
long time in vain expected their Repentance, and though they have hitherto
followed ill Counsel, We are still willing to leave them to their own
Resolutions, either to choose a good or bad Condition: We open to them a door of
Grace* that they may make advantage of it, in the manner following; wherewith
if they do not comply, by their ready obedience, let them thank their own
temerity for the Punishment they have deserved, and shall receive without
remission, from Our injured Patience.

First, therefore We confirm Our Order of the 31th of January, in all things,
wherein it is not contrary to this; and We, by Virtue of this present Edict, do
of our own certain Knowledge, full Power, and absolute Authority, by the Advice
of Our Council, Order, and Command all Our Subjects of the Valleys of Lucerne,
professing the pretended Reformed Religion, to lay down their Arms, and retire
to their Houses, within the time hereafter limited.

We also command them not to have any Meetings or Assemblies in any manner
whatever, that according to Our intention, the Judges of the places may have
free access thither, and that the Fathers Missionary, and other Religions may
return to the Churches they were forced to leave, and that the Catholics, and
those that have embraced the Catholic Religion, may return unto the Houses
which they quitted.

And seeing it is not reasonable that the Missionary Religious, the Catholics,
and such as have embraced the Catholic Religion, should be at any loss for the
many damages they have suffered from those of the pretended Reformed Religion,
We Intend, Will, and Ordain, that there be Levied indistinctly and generally,
upon the Goods of those of the pretended Reformed Religion, all such necessary
Sums to indemnify them, as shall be summarily proved before the Chevalier
Monroux, Chief Justice of the Valleys; Declaring nevertheless, that in case
those of the said Religion, do prove particular Persons were the cause of those
damages, then satisfaction shall be required of those particular Persons.

And to show Our said Subjects how great Our Clemency is, toward them, we
permit all who resolve to depart out of Our Dominions, to do it within the
term, and upon the Conditions hereafter prescribed.

But because their evil intentions have been too well known by their past
Behavior, and many may hide their wicked Designs under the Cloak of Obedience,
We reserve to Our selves Power of making such Laws concerning those who shall
not voluntarily quit Our Dominions, as We think good and most expedient, to
secure the peace of those that stay; which Laws we expect shall be observed by
them for the future.

And for an addition to Our Grace and Favor, We grant, as well to those that
shall depart voluntarily, as to those that shall retire by Our Command, leave
to carry with them what Necessaries, Goods and Effects they please, and to sell
such Goods and Effects as they leave behind them, but in the manner hereafter
expressed.

The same is intended concerning Foreigners, and those that are descended from
them, who are to conform themselves to the last Article of the abovementioned
Order, Dated January the 31th.

The Sale of Goods aforesaid shall be made to Catholics, and to Persons that
have embraced the Catholic Religion; but because such buyers may not be found
within the term hereafter expressed, and because it is not our Will, that the
Religionists who shall depart out of Our Dominions, should be deprived of the
benefit of our present Concessions; We grant them power to appoint four or six
Persons, with whom they may leave their Procurations, and who shall with our
permission stay three Months in Lucerne, with free liberty to treat and
negotiate with any Person for the selling the Goods of those that are gone, who
likewise may specify in their Procurations, upon what terms they would (for
their greater Security) have their Goods sold, and receive their price from
their Proctors, without Fraud or Imbezelment, wherever they desire to have it
remitted, whereof the Chief Justice Monroux shall be charged to take care.

They that will retire shall be obliged to be ready at such days and places as
are hereafter specified, and to depart without Fire Arms, by ways appointed,
either through Savoy, or the Valley of Aoste; to this purpose they shall have
Pass-Ports from us, that they may receive no ill usage or hindrance in our
Dominions, but on the contrary, that all aid and assistance may be given to
them; and because their number being great, they may be exposed to
inconveniences in their passage, and the places through which they pass
overcharged, they shall be divided into three Brigades or Companies, the first
to be composed of those of the Valley of Lucerne, who are to be ready at La
Tour this Month of April: the second Company composed of those of the Valley of
Angrogne, St. Bartholomew, Roche Platte, and are to be ready at St. Second, and
part the day following, viz. the 22th of this Month; the third and last Brigade
made up of those of the Valley of St. Martin and Perouse are Commanded to be at
Miradol, and part the 23d of this Month.

The term within which our Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion,
Inhabiting the Valleys of Lucerne, are to lay down their Arms in the manner
expressed in the first Article of the present Order, is eight days after it shall
be Published in Lucerne, within which time they are to obey the Contents of the
Order, if they expect to enjoy the fruits of Our Clemency, and of that Paternal
affection, wherewith, notwithstanding the greatness of their Crimes, We regard
Our Subjects, and We grant to all Our said Subjects, who punctually observe all
that is above mentioned, Grace, Pardon, Remission, Abolition, and an ample
Amnesty of all their Transgressions, Faults, Crimes, and other Offenses they
may have done or committed, since the publication of Our Order of the 31 th of
January last, as well in general, as in particular, so that they shall never be
prosecuted for them upon any pretense whatever. And we forbid all Judges,
Fiscals, and others to whom it may belong, any way to prosecute or molest them;
but if they shall render themselves unworthy of Our Grace, by not observing all
that We have above commanded, within the term prefixed, it will be of very
pernicious Example any longer to delay the punishment they have deserved, after
having thrown away Our favors upon them, and so long waited for their
repentance* We will then make use of those means which God has put into Our
hands, to reduce the obstinate to their duty, and punish them for their
intolerable insolence sent to Our Senate, etc. Given at Turin the 9 th of
April, 1686. Ratified the 10 th.

As soon as this Edict was Printed, the Marquess St. Thomas brought it to the
Ambassadors, whom he would have made believe, that it was for their sake his
Royal Highness had been so gracious to his Subjects, and that though the French
Ambassador was extremely angry so much favor was showed to the Inhabitants of
the Valleys, yet His Royal Highness intended the Edict should be bona fide
executed.

The Ambassadors having read the Edict upon the place, in the presence of the
Marquess, made some Reflections on it, they insisted chiefly on the shortness
of the time given to these miserable people to depart out of his Highnesses
Dominions, and to dispose of their Effects; they likewise took notice of the
small number of Proctors who were charged to sell the goods of so great a
number of Persons; they reflected on the time prescribed for sale, and some
other difficulties they met with in the execution of the Edict, which when they
had well considered, they intended to lay before his Royal Highness.

As soon as the Ambassadors had left the Marquess, they sent for the Deputies
of the Valleys who were ready to make the submission, and bid them return home,
charging them to inform their Communities of all that had past, and what was
contained in the Edict, and to let them know, that if they did not submit, it
would be impossible to procure the rigorous execution of the Edict to be in any
particular mitigated.

While these things were doing, the sixth Deputy who had been so long expected,
came back from the Valleys, and told the Ambassadors, that the Communities who
designed to defend themselves, persisted in that resolution, and that all the
arguments which had been used to incline them to better thoughts, wrought no
change in their minds, as appeared by the Letters written from the Valleys,
which were to the following effect.

My Lords,
PResently after the arrival of of our Deputy, we did not fail to give Copies
of the Letter which your Excellencies were pleased to write to our Churches,
they have been every where read, immediately after Sermon; nothing can be
written more true, more moving, or more consolatory; and your Excellencies may
be perfectly assured, that there is not a person who does not see and
acknowledge the Effects of your Christian Charity toward our Churches;
however, it has been hitherto impossible to persuade the greatest part of the
People to go out of this Country; some out of an apprehension, that it will be
the loss of many who stay; some out of a Principle of Conscience; and others
for diverse Considerations, which our Deputy will tell your Excellencies by word
of mouth. We are at our wits end about it, and scarce dare to appear before
your Excellencies after so much irresolution; our People are the more obstinate
in their opinion, since they have heard that several other Churches, or at
least a good part of them, never understood that any such thing as going out of
the Country was in question, when they gave their Mandate and Procuration to
their Deputies; or if they have heard of it, they are returned to their first
Resolution; which makes us justly fear, that when your Excellencies shall be
further engaged for these People, they will hereafter repent their refusing to
depart, which we likewise thought the Sunday morning, when we told your
Excellencies that we desired to have the opinion of our People upon this point;
foreseeing at first that it would be very difficult to make them consent to it;
the greatest part of them are resolved to be their Fathers own Children, and
hope the Lord will be their Deliverer, and serve himself of the weak, to
confound the strong, and that Heaven by some means or other will prevent the
designs which are laid against them. We doubt not but this will very much
trouble your Excellencies, and we are sorry for it with all our Souls;
nevertheless, we with all possible humility, conjure your Excellencies not to
wax cold toward our Churches, nor to deprive us of your powerful assistance
and support, which under God, has hitherto made us subsist; for Gods sake have
still pity upon us, which way soever things go; we pour out our Souls before
God, earnestly beseeching him, that he will be pleased to dispose all things to
the glory of his Name, and for the preservation of our People; and that his
Divine Providence will wake your Excellencies Instrumental to procure some few
days longer for us, once more to try the Peoples minds, and if it be possible
to know their final resolution by majority of voices, that so we may not be
blamed by either side; the Lord will abundantly reward all your Excellencies
Charity, and we are with all respect,

Your Lordships Most Humble, and Most Obliged Servants, the Deputies of Boby,
St. John, and Angrogne. Deputies of Boby. Jean Aghitto, Daniel Grass, Estienne
Danno,
Deputies of St. John. Michael Parisa, Jean Muschom,
Deputies of Angrogne. Jean Duffa, Pierre Duffa, and Louis Odin,


Angrogne, the 9th of April, 1686.

Most High, Mighty, and Sovereign Lords,
WE, with all humility, cast our selves at your Excellencies feet, to testify
how extremely sorry we are to see that a great part of our People have not
sense enough to consider with Christian prudence the favor which your
Excellencies endeavor to obtain for us, by procuring free leave for our going
out of this Country with body and goods, and will not with holy joy embrace
it, as a Present from Heaven, and a Favor for which they will another time
sigh in vain; this makes our hearts bleed, and the more, because the Letter
which your Excellencies were pleased to write to them, should immediately have
obliged to a resolution, in a business of this nature; we presume nevertheless,
most humbly to beseech your Excellencies to be so good, as to pass by these
Considerations, knowing that when men have to do with a multitude, it is very
difficult to bring them to any conclusion, and without a great deal of time
spent, to make them understand the reason and state of things, especially when
the business in question is, forsaking a Native Country, of which the
possession has been so long and so carefully kept; yet there is a great number
even of the best Quality, who entirely resign themselves to your Excellencies
Council, Charity, and Prudence, and will never refuse to do that which they
think most expedient for the glory of God, and for their own safety, and
preservation: the Pastors also are all of this Opinion, and we will punctually
follow the Counsel which your Excellencies shall please to give us; and we most
humbly beseech you to have pity on us, and our Families, to deliver us from a
mischief which in appearance is inevitable; this is the favor which we promise
our selves from your Excellencies, upon whom we pray that the Lord will power
down his most precious blessings; we are with all possible submission and
respect, Most High, Mighty and Sovereign Lords,

Your Excellencies must Humble and most Obedient Servants, Sidrac Bastie.
Guillaume Malanot.

From Angrogne, the 9th of April, 1686. It has been certify'd from a good
hand, that certainly his Royal Highness will not suffer the carrying away of
our goods, but that he will detain them, to defray the charge he has already
been at.

Secondly, that he positively resolves to have the Ministers and Strangers put
into his hands.

Thirdly, that our Arms must be laid down, and put into the hands of the
Governor.

Fourthly, that the Troops shall be let into the Valleys to pull down the
Churches, and that there shall be no more exercise of our Religion.

Fifthly, We hear that the Council will by no means suffer the French Troops to
come against us.




The Ambassadors had no sooner read these Letters, but they sent back the
Deputies with another Letter, whereof two Copies were taken, and one of them
sent to those of St. John and Boby, the other, to those of Angrogne, and de la
Tour.

This Letter showed them the vanity and little solidity of those Reasons upon
which they grounded their Resolution, not to accept of the Grace which was
offered them. The Letter told them, it was not to be denied, but that the Law
which obliged men to forsake their Country, was very severe, yet at the same
time, the Law is much more rigorous, which forces men to forsake the Eternal
God, and renounce the true Religion; that they ought to think themselves happy,
that of these two sad extremities, they were left to their choice; which
happiness was denied in France, to People of great Birth, and known Merit, who
were kept by force in their Country, and compelled to give themselves up to
Idolatry. That the things of this World are subject to continual Changes; that
Kings and Princes are often forced to quit their Crowns, and give up their
Dominions to their Enemies; and therefore private persons ought without
murmuring, to be subject to this common Fate, and submit with resignation to
the Decrees of Gods Providence, who by his chastisements tryes the faith of his
Children, and takes off their hearts from this World, to make them the more
earnestly seek after their Celestial Country. They had indeed reason to believe
that God's arm which had supported them in former Wars, was not shortened; but
that they ought to consider, God then had raised up their Neighbors to assist
them, with Men, Money, and Officers; then they had none but friends about them,
whereas now they were compassed with Enemies on all sides: Heretofore there
were a great number of People among them able to bear Arms, but at present,
they were deprived of all those advantages, their Prince alone was able to
extirpate them, and yet his Forces were not the only Troops they had to
encounter. That those of France were ready to fall upon them, and though they
might be so fortunate to have the better in some of their first engagements,
yet in the end, they must needs be totally overthrown by the multitude of those
that would supply the places of the vanquished: That the division which was
among them would be very prejudicial to them; That the refusing to accept the
offer made by their Sovereign, would make all the Protestant Princes to forsake
them, because they chose rashly to take up Arms, rather than to follow the good
Counsel which was given them. That they ought not to flatter themselves with
the hope of some miraculous Deliverance, as was that which God gave the Jews,
when he destroyed all the Army of Zenacherib. That in the Age wherein we live,
God does not work Miracles in favor of his Church, as he did in the time of
the Israelites. The Holy Scripture tells us, that to cast our selves into
dangers, out of which we foresee it is impossible to deliver our selves, is to
tempt God, who forsakes those that wilfully run headlong into danger. That
Christian Prudence, the Charity due to their Wives and Children, and that love
they ought to have for themselves, did oblige them to follow the Example of
other Inhabitants of the Valleys. That their Prince, looking upon them as
Criminals, would seize their Goods, and make them suffer ignominious
punishment, if they persisted in their resolutions. That seeing Divine
Providence had blessed their endeavors who interceded for them, it was plain
that God would not have them proceed any further in the way they were going.
That seeing a mitigation of the rigor of the Edict had been obtained for them,
they ought to accept it; it was not the fault of those who had mediated, that
their Condition was no better, and they might be assured, the Ambassadors would
zealously endeavor to obtain for them somewhat of greater advantage; but if
that should be impossible, yet they ought to accept of that which was offered,
seeing in the state wherein they were, they could not capitulate with their
Prince, who had Forces enough to compel them to obey him. That if they refused
to submit to his will, their obstinacy would not only cost them the loss of
their Bodies, but also of their Souls; and they had reason to fear that they
who escaped the Sword of their Persecutors, would at last perish under the
cruelty of those punishments which would be inflicted on them, to force them to
renounce their Religion. That they had no cause to fear, that the leave granted
to them to retire where they pleased, was a snare laid for them; seeing the
Court gave them such security as ought to have quieted their Minds in that
point, and satisfied them, that his Royal Highness would not suffer any thing
to be done contrary to his promise, to stain his honor and reputation by
public perfidy, or fail in the respects he has hitherto had for the
Evangelick Cantons. That if there had been a design to surprise them, it might
easily have been done at first, but his Highness would not permit it, nor ever
will for the future. In fine, the Troops of Savoy, and those of France, were
ready to attack them on all sides, and yet they might be sure no harm would be
done them, if they did submit to his Royal Highnesses Orders.

The Ambassadors at their leisure having reflected on his Royal Highnesses last
Edict, were of Opinion, that the Vaudois would not submit to it without
exposing themselves to very great inconveniences, and therefore they resolved
to renew their solicitations, to procure better Conditions for them: They
prayed the Marquess St. Thomas to obtain an Audience from his Royal Highness;
having obtained it, they told his Highness they had considered his last Edict,
and had taken the liberty to make some observations upon the three principal
points contained in some Clauses of it, viz. In the first place, that Clause
which gave the Inhabitants of the Valleys ten days time to go out of his
Dominions; secondly, that which prescribed to them the number of six Proctors
to sell their goods; and thirdly, that which for selling their goods allowed
them but three Months. They prayed his Royal Highness to cast his eyes on the
remarks they had made in the Memoir they had presented to him, and to consider,
that to abate the rigor of his Edict could in no wise be prejudicial to his
Highnesses Affairs; but would be of great importance to his Subjects, who had
so great a respect, and so much affection for their Sovereign, that they could
not resolve to leave his Dominions, because, in quitting their Country, they
knew they should be deprived of being able to testify their fidelity in all
occasions, by venturing their Lives in his service; they therefore hoped his
Royal Highness would show his Clemency toward them, and give such Orders as
were necessary for their going conveniently out of his Territories, and
carrying all that with them which they could save of their Ship-wrack'd
fortune; by this favor his Highness would give their Excellencies the
Evangelick Cantons a new occasion of continuing that affection and respect to
his Highness which they have always had for the Royal Family of Savoy; and as
to their own particular, his Highness would convince them, that their good
Offices had not been unsuccessful, for those poor miserable People for whom
they had interceded.

The Duke answered the Ambassadors, and said, That to show the esteem he had
for the Evangelick Cantons, he had given his People testimonies of
extraordinary Clemency; that he had not chastis'd them as they deserved, but
had waited with patience their coming to themselves, and returning again to
their duty; that they having carried on their Rebellion to the utmost
extremity, and given him new cause to complain, by the Insolences they had of
late committed, they had now tied up his hands so that he could not grant what
they demanded, without wounding his Reputation and his Authority. That his
forbearing them, had drawn upon him great reproaches from France; however he
was willing they should enjoy the benefit of his Edict, and if they expected,
that the rigor of the Orders therein contained should be abated, they must
render themselves worthy of it, by laying down their Arms, and submitting
themselves to his Will. The Ambassadors then delivered to his Royal Highness
the following Memoir.

YOur Highness is most humbly prayed to consider, That he who will, or must
leave the Valleys, in Obedience to the Edict Published by your Highness, is
obliged to prepare himself for his departure; for the carrying away his Wife,
his Children, and his Necessary Goods: He must provide for the sale of his
Corn, his Wines, his Provisions, and his Cattle, which cannot be left in his
House without care taken of them: he cannot leave them with his Proctor who
will be at Lucerne, and who by being at a distance cannot therefore take charge
of them: That within the term of eight days a man cannot account, either with
his Creditors or Debtors; because those with whom he has had dealings, may
perhaps not live in the Valleys, or because he may have accounts which cannot
be adjusted without the interposition of some Arbitrator. That as to real
Estates in Land, an exact and particular description ought to be made of every
Field, Vineyard, Meadow, Wood, their limits and boundaries set out, as also the
rights appertaining to them, and the Sums for which they are engaged; and
concerning all this, special and large Procurations must be given.

Seeing therefore your Royal Highness moved by your Justice and Clemency, has
been pleased to grant to your Subjects of the Valleys leave to retire where
they think fit, and to sell their Goods which they leave behind them; it cannot
be your Highnesses intention, that your Subjects should be deprived of the
Benefit and Effects of your gracious concessions, by not allowing them time
enough to depart, for that will be taking away with one hand, that which is
given them with the other.

Your Royal Highness is further humbly prayed to consider, that six Proctors
are not enough to sell the Goods of some hundreds of Families who are willing
to depart, and that the Employment cannot be given to any but people of the
Country, and consequently to ignorant and unlearned Persons, without capacity,
encumbered with their own Affairs: besides, these Proctors must be obliged to
run from place to place to get buyers, and to show the Lands that are to be
bought; they must pass Acts in several places before Public Notaries, and must
look after the sale of a great quantity of Goods dispersed in diverse Houses;
they, must tell Money, change it, remit it to foreign Countries, and look after
conveniences to do it. They must clear Objections, remove Obstacles, defend
themselves against unjust demands; They must receive Letters from those that
are gone, and send them an account of their business; in a word, they will have
a thousand other things to do, which cannot at present be foreseen.

Seeing then your Royal Highness does not intend to make any advantage of your
poor Subjects Goods, nor to augment your Revenue with the Spoils of your
People; your Highness would do well to permit them to name twelve Persons, who
during the time granted* by your Royal Highness, may proceed to the sale of
those Persons Goods who shall retire.

But because it will certainly fall out, that during the term of three Months,
be the Proctors never so diligent to sell the poor Refugies Lands, there will
be found but few Buyers; and that every one will stay till toward the end of
the said term, on purpose to take advantage of the necessity wherein People
are, to put off their Estates, and to get them from these miserable People at a
very low Price; they otherwise fearing they shall lose all. We hope your Royal
Highness will be so good as to remedy this inconvenience; and according to
Covenants past with his deceased Highness of Glorious Memory, in 1663. cause a
valuable price to be given for those Lands and Goods, which could not be sold
in three Months.

Your Highness being so exemplarily good and merciful, certainly will not
oblige any Person whatever to impossibilities, and therefore will readily
dispense with Women who Lie in, or are near their time; and also with Old or
Sick People, and not require them to observe the Law which you have prescribed
to others concerning their retreat. That your Highness will be pleased to
exempt them from quartering of Soldiers, who be they never so well
disciplined, are always disorderly; that your Highness will likewise suffer
them to live and die in their Houses, without fear of being ill used, and
robbed of their Goods and Provisions.

In fine, we earnestly pray, that your Royal Highness will be pleased to show
your Clemency toward those of the Valleys, who are in your Highnesses Prisons;
and likewise toward those that have been taken upon their account, and be so
Gracious as to give them their Liberty.

The Duke of Savoy when he received the Ambassadors Memoir, promised to
consider it, and said he would let them know his mind concerning it.

While the Ambassadors endeavored at Turin to do all the good they could for
the Vaudois, those People took up a resolution, which proved their utter ruin;
for whereas before the publication of the last Edict, the greatest part of them
had resolved to seek out a retreat somewhere else; they now joined all together
in one common consent, to defend themselves against the Armies which were ready
to fall in upon them.

In their Consultations, the Reasons given for this Resolution, were, that the
Edict to which his Royal Highness required their submission, contained many
things which they could not own, and others which they could not do; in the
first place, they said it was not just, that they should be bound to
acknowledge themselves guilty of the Rebellion wherewith they were charged,
seeing they had done nothing against his Royal Highness's service, but that
whereto, for maintaining the Exercise of their Religion, they were obliged.

Secondly, that they ought not to submit to the last Edict, because it
confirmed that of January 31. which deprived them of the liberty of serving God
according to their Faith.

Thirdly, They could not resolve to obey the Command of laying down their Arms,
because if they did, they should run the hazard of losing their Lives here, and
their Souls hereafter, and be in a condition as bad as they were in former
Persecutions, particularly those in the year 1655. when by woeful experience,
they found that some People made no scruple of breaking their word, and that
which confirmed them in this Opinion, was, the Troops coming so near to them,
notwithstanding the Marquess St. Thomas had promised and assured them, none
should enter into their Country till the term mentioned in the Edict was
expired.

Fourthly, That the time given to prepare themselves for their departure, was
too short, and that they could not comply with the Edict, because the number of
their Valley Inhabitants was very great, many were very old, and many others
sick.

Fifthly, It was impossible for their Goods to be sold by Attorneys or
Proctors, and though they did resolve to sell them, yet it was upon condition
they might receive the price they was sold for, before they went away, or to
have it deposited in the hands of the Ambassadors; that their Estates likewise
in the Mountains, might be sold as well as those in Plains, and also what they
had in the French King's Territories; in fine, seeing the sale was to be made
to Roman Catholics, they had cause to fear the Ecclesiastics would not suffer
them to be sold, in confidence that they themselves should be masters of them,
when all the Inhabitants were gone out of the Country.

Sixthly, All things were to be feared from those who held it for a Maxim, that
Faith was not to be kept with Heretics.

The Ministers and such of the Valleys, who had most sense and reason, did all
they could to hinder the People from coming to this extremity, but all the
Arguments that were used would not divert them from their Resolution, not keep
them from being led by those that flattered them with Imaginary hopes of
Succors; these were the Persons, who by persuading them not to accept of the
Grace which was offered, were the cause of their destruction.

By the following Letter it appears what art was used to make those People
change their minds, and run headlong to their own Ruin.

From Roche Platte the 14th. of April. 1690.
Most Illustrious, and most mighty Lords,
I See no possibility of keeping the People of our Valleys within the bounds of
their Duty, especially since a Minister of whose name you will hear, came
hither; he has so infatuated our People with confidence that they shall be
supplied with all things, that there is scarce a Minister can be safe in his
Church. All was quiet but the three Communities of Boby, Angrogne, and St.
John; and most People resolved to rely upon your Charity and Advice, and those
of the best judgments would have prevailed with the ignorant; who are in fault,
either because they do not know, or because they do not confide in your
Excellencies. But among all, my Church la Tour was fully resolved to submit,
till this Minister came, who has embroiled all, except some prudent Persons,
who desire the particular Favor of your Protection, and to have free leave to
depart, that they may retire to some place where they may serve God according
to his Commandments. I am with all Respect and Humble Submission, your most
Illustrious Excellencies,

Most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, Girard, Minister of La Tour.


In another Letter written by the Pastors of the Vally-Churches, there is a
Postscript in these words.

Mr. -- Minister in the Church of Pinache, a Valley of Perouze, is come from --
who, we verily believe has given him Instructions to stir up and persuade, as
he does all people, to dye rather than submit to leaving their Country, though
never so many Promises be made them.

This Resolution being reported to the Ambassadors, they plainly saw that in
the mind these People were, there was no appearance of making them change their
Resolution, or of bringing them to Reason.

But however the Ambassadors resolved to try once more, to persuade them to
accept the favor their Prince offered, though it was not so advantageous as they
wished, and considering the only way to make some impression upon them, was to
make their Retreat less inconvenient and less troublesome than it would be, if
the Terms of the Edict were to be observed; they fell to soliciting for an
Answer to the Memoir they had presented to the Duke of Savoy, that in case it
were favorable, they might send it to the Vaudois as the best Argument they
could use to prevail with them.

But the Answer was not such as they desired, for the Marquess St. Thomas told
the Ambassadors, that his Royal Highness would not make a more ample, or any
other Declaration, touching those things which were contained in his last
Edict, because his Subjects stood out so obstinately in their Rebellion, and
refused to lay down their Arms, boasting they were in a Condition to resist
him; his R. H. therefore had resolved to part in two days, and go in person to
reduce those Rebels to their Duty; but for those that would retire, they should
upon his word enjoy the benefit of his Edict, and such as would not submit,
should receive the punishment they deserved.

As soon as the Ambassadors had left the Marquess St. Thomas, they dispatched a
Currier to those of the Valleys, and by the following Letter gave them notice
what ill success they had in their Negotiation.

Sirs,
IN the Private Audience we have had of his R. H. your Prince, we earnestly
prayed him to permit you to quit his Dominions upon better and more favorable
Conditions than those which are expressed in his last Edict. We represented to
him as well Viva Voces as by a Memoir, those Reasons which we thought might
prevail with him to mitigate those Orders which were already published against
you; We earnestly prayed him to grant you longer time to prepare your selves
for so sad a parting, to sell your goods, to augment the number of the Proctors
who were to make the sale; to suffer the Aged, Sick and Weak, Women very big
with Child, and those that lay in, to stay in the Country, free from ill usage,
and from quartering of Soldiers; in fine, to give orders that the Proctors
should buy those goods which they did not sell within the time specified in the
Edict, but of all this we could obtain nothing from his R. Highness, because he
knew you were in Arms to hinder the Executions of his Orders; We have also been
with my Lord Marquess St. Thomas, and have entreated him to use his Credit with
his R. H. to dispose him to grant that which we demanded in your favor; but he
told us, that so long as you had Arms in your hands, you were to expect no
favor: His Highness goes this day for Precairos, and we have had our Audience
of leave, with intent to return presently to our own Country, unless Divine
Providence give us an opportunity of being serviceable to you; and seeing you
will not follow the Advice of prudent Persons, but leave the event of your
Affairs to God's Will: We pray that he will be pleased to support you in your
Calamity, and turn it to his own Glory, and your Temporal and Eternal good;
recommending you to his Almighty Protection,

We remain, etc.
At Turin.

Though the Ambassadors now saw that the Affairs of the Vaudois were desperate,
and to remedy them was impossible, they would not abandon those poor People,
thinking they might some way or other be serviceable to them, if they followed
his Royal Highness's Camp; and that they might so do, they prayed the Marquess
St. Thomas to ask his Royal Highness's leave.

But the Marquess told them their presence might give some jealousy to the
French Ambassador, and to the Pope; therefore since his Royal Highness had
great reason not to disoblige the most Christian King, the Ambassadors did not
insist any more on that demand: Things being in this condition, had his Royal
Highness been never so well disposed to show how much esteem he had for the
Ambassadors, yet he could not let them know how much he regarded their
intercession.

When the Ambassadors had their Audience of leave, they were told, if any
occasion should hereafter bring them to Court, all deference should be paid due
to their Character. They resolved to return to their Country, according to an
Order which within few days they had received from their Sovereigns, in a
Letter written to them from Zurich; wherein the Protestant Cantons recalled
them from their Negotiation, if they thought it would prove ineffectual.

They supposing that the Marquess St. Thomas, or some other Ministers, might
find some favorable opportunity to incline his Royal Highness to be merciful
to his poor Subjects of the Valleys, resolved to make them a Visit, and entreat
them to have compassion on those poor Creatures, and do them all the good
Offices that were in their Power; but the Court parting in great haste, it was
impossible for them to do what they intended; and therefore they requested that
by writing, which they could not by word of Mouth. A little while after they
received an answer from the Marquess, who assured them, that upon any overtures
from the Vaudois, he would employ his utmost power to serve them.

Some few days before the Ambassadors went a way, they received two Letters
from the Valleys; one written by all the Communities of the Valley Inhabitants,
directed to the Evangelick Cantons.

Most High and Sovereign Lords,
OUR Churches have a long time had experience, and especially in our present
unhappy Troubles, of your Excellencies unparalled Charity and fatherly
Affection toward them, and that very lately, by sending the Lords Ambassadors
to his Royal Highness upon the Publication of his Highness's Edict against us,
of the 31 of January last past, as appears by the Letter they have been pleased
to send us; we cannot sufficiently acknowledge the trouble, care, and pains our
Lords the Ambassadors have taken in our behalf, and for our Preservation; had
they met with Hearts disposed to our Peace and Welfare, their continual
Intercessions could not have failed of being effectual, but in that particular
we confess we are in the Worlds opinion unhappy; nevertheless we return all
possible thanks to your Excellencies, for the favors we have received from
your kind, pious, and Christian good Will toward us; we very well know, and
confess it with great Confusion, that our Lords the Ambassadors have not had
from our People that satisfaction we could have wished, by resigning themselves
into their hands; but we most humbly beseech them to Pity and support a People,
who think they are bound in Honor and Conscience to maintain their Religion in
their Country, where it has been a long time miraculously preserved. We see,
as to this World, our ruin is inevitable, but we hope God will revenge his
Quarrel, and that good People will not quite forsake us: Our confidence, next
under God, is in your Excellencies; we cast our selves into your arms and
Fatherly Bosoms, beseeching you by the Mercies of God, and in the Name of his
Son Jesus Christ our Common Father and Savior, that you will not withdraw from
us your Charity and good Wishes, but look with your Eyes of Compassion and
Fatherly tenderness, on so many poor Families, little Children, and other
infirm and in this World miserable People; and be pleased to make them feel the
favorable effects of your Christian Bounty. Praying the Lord will perpetually
protect your Excellencies, and abundantly reward your pious and Christian
Charity: We are, most High, Mighty, and Sovereign Lords, with all imaginable
Veneration, your Excellencies

Most Humble, most Obedient, and most obliged Servants, the Pastors, Elders,
and other Directors of the Valley Churches of Piemont. S. Bastie Moderator, Gr.
Malant Minister.


The Letter which the Ministers wrote to the Ambassadors, was Penned in these
following terms.

My Lords,
WE will still Communicate your Excellencies Letter to our Communities, it were
to be wished they had given better ear to the wholesome Counsel given by your
Excellencies, to draw them out of a danger which in Humane probability seems
unavoidable. God grant, against all appearances, that their Resolution may
succeed well, and show his power in their weakness and infirmity. I belive all
their Pastors are resolved to live and dye with them, since your Excellencies
are not against it; it cannot certainly be honest or excusable to forsake them
in such a conjuncture, and it must infallibly be a reproach to us to leave
them, seeing the good Shepherd is called to lay down his Life for his Sheep. We
give your Excellencies all possible thanks for the indefatigable care and pains
you have taken for our good, and for our preservation; and we beseech you, by
the Mercies of God, and the Love of Jesus Christ, not to forget us, but during
your stay at Turin, and after your return to the most mighty Evangelick
Cantons, to testify your Affection and Christian Chairty toward us by all
good Offices. We pray that our good God and Savior will recompense your
Excellencies Pains and Charity toward our Churches, with his most Holy and
Precious Blessings both of Heaven and Earth, and cover your sacred Persons with
his continual Protection; which is the most fervent and sincere Wish of yours,
who are with a profound respect,

My Lords, Your Excellencies most humble, most obedient, and most obliged
Servants, the Pastors of the Protestant Churches of the Valleys of Luzerne,
Angrogne, Perouse, St. Martin, etc. in Piedmont, and in the name of all. S.
Bastie Minister at Angrogne, the 17 th of April, 1686.


The Vaudois being resolved, as we have told you, and the Duke of Savoy gone to
the Army; the Ambassadors thought they had no more to do at Court, and
therefore now might return home; but because it might happen that the
Valley-People, seeing their danger near, and the Troops ready to fall upon
them, might by the Mediation of the Ambassadors, have recourse to the Clemency
of their Prince; they resolved not to be far from them, till they saw the Army
entered into their Country, and had heard what was the success of this
Expedition. But being informed that so soon as the French appeared in the
Valleys, those of St. Martin ran quite away, and that the Duke's Troops having
forced the Passages on the side of Angrogne, found resistance no where, they
plainly saw they had nothing more to do in Piedmont, and therefore went away
extremely grieved that they could not hinder the desolation of the precious
remainder of the Valley Churches. And being come back to their own Country,
they gave an account of their Embassy to their Sovereigns, who judging of their
Negotiation, not by the success it had, but by the Ambassadors Conduct; after
having declared, they were satisfied with the Zeal and Address which they had
made appear during the whole course of this nice Negotiation, they thanked them
for the care they had taken to discharge so worthily the Employment wherewith
they had been honored.

FINIS.
Some BOOKS Printed for R. Bentley.
Folio.
1. BEaumont's and Fletcher's Plays in one Volume, containing 51 Plays. 2. Mr.
William Shakespeare's Plays in one Volume. 3. Towerson's Works complete in one
Volume. 4. Dr. Allestry's Sermons in one Volume. 5. Dr. Comber's Works, the
four Parts in one Volume. 6. The Council of Trent; By Father Paolo. 7.
Toriano's Italian Dictionary. 8. Mr. Milton's Paradise lost, with 13 Copper
Cuts finely engraven, to express the whole Poem. 9. Milton's Paradise regained;
in the same Volume, Paper and Print, to bind with it. 10. Fodina Regalis; or,
the History of the Laws of Mines. By Sir John Pettus. 11. Bishop Brownrig's
Sermons.
Books in Quarto.
1. The Burnt Child dreads the Fire. 2. A Treatise of our Sanguinary Laws
against Papists. 3. Dr. Whitby's Answer to S. Cressy. 4 Mr. Nathanael Lee's
Plays in one Volume. 5. Mr. Thomas Otway's Plays in one Volume. 6. Panegyric
on His Grace the Duke of Schonberg. 7. Mundus Muliebris, or the Ladies
Dressing Room unlocked, and her Toilet spread.
Books in Octavo.
1. Dr. Whitby Of Idolatry. 2. Dr. Whitby of Host-Worship. 3. The Life of the
Marshal Turenne. 4. The Secret History of the House of Medicis. 5. Cornelius
Agrippa, of the Vanity of Arts and Sciences. 6. Mauger's French Grammar. Edit.
13. 7. Lipsius of Constancy. 8. Agiates Queen of Sparta. 9. Nicorotis. 10.
Plurality of Worlds, Translated by Mr. Glanvil. 11. Boylo's Art of Poetry;
Translated by Mr. Soames. 12. Poems and Songs, By Mr. Cuts. 13. Sir James
Chamberlain's Poems. 14. Mr. Coppinger's Poems. 15. Madam Colonna's Memoirs.
16. Hudibras complete, in Three Parts. 17 Seneca's Morals: By Sir Roger
L'Estrange. 18. Comber's Companion to the Altar. 19. Godfrey of Boloign; A
Poem. 20. Plato's Apology of Socrates. 21. Natural History of the Passions. 22.
Mockclelia, or, Madam Quixote. 23. Toriano's Italian Grammar, with choice
Dialogues and Phrases in Italian and English. 24. Covent Garden Drollery.
Books in Duodecimo.
1. Present State of England. 2. Enter into thy Closet. 3. Moral Essays, in
Four Volumes. 4. A perfect School of Instructions for the Officers of the
Mouth. 5. A prospect of Humane Misery. 6. Va^ity of Honor, Wealth and
Pleasure. 7. Bishop Andrew's Devotions. 8. Zelinda; A Romance. 9. Happy Slav^.
10. Hatige, or the King of Tameran. 11. Homais (...) of Tunis. 12. Triump^ of
Love. 13. Obliging M^stress. 14. Unfortunate Hero. 15. Countess of Salisbury.
16. Count Teckely. 17. Essex and Elizabeth. 18. The Pilgrim. 19. The Emperor
betrayed, by whom, and how. 20. The Character of Love. 21. Don Henrick. 22.
Princess of Fez. 23. M. Christianissimus. 24. Gallant Ladies in two parts. 25.
Victorious Lovers. 26. Love in a Nunnery. 27. Duke of Lorain. 28. Minority of
St. Lewis. 29. Queen of Majorca. 30. Count de Soysons. 31. Clytie. 32.
Dialogues of the Dead; in Two Parts. 33. Neapolitan; or, the Defender of his
Mistress. 34. Instructions for a young Nobleman. 35. Five Love Letters from a
Nun to a Cavalier. 36. Five Love Letters from the Cavalier in Answer to the
Nun's. 37. Religio Laici, in a Letter to Mr. Dryden. 38. Count Gabalis. 39. The
chaste Seraglion. 40. Rules of Civility. 41. The Extravagant Poet. 42. New
Disorders of Love. 43. Ottoman Gallantry; or, The Life of the Bassa of Buda. 44
Revived Fugitives. 45. Tamberlain the Great. 46. Court Secret, in two Volumes.
47. The Duke of Mazarine's Memoirs. 48 Gallantry a la Mode; or, Women in their
proper Colors. 49. Fortune-telling Cards.
In the Press.
The Art of Pleasing in Conversation.
A Catalogue of some Plays Printed for R. Bently.
1. BEaumont and Fletchers Plays: in all 51. in large Fol. 2. Mr. Shakespeare's
Plays: in one large Fol. Volume. Containing 43 Plays. 3. Tartuff, or the French
Puritan. 4. Forced Marriage, or the Jealous Bridegroom. 5. English Monsieur. 6.
All mistaken, or the mad Couple. 7. Generous Enemies, or the Ridiculous Lovers.
8. The Plain-Dealer. 9. Sertorius, a Tragedy. 10 Nero, a Tragedy. 11.
Sophonisba, or Hanibal's Overthrow. 12. Gloriana, or the Court of Augustus
Caesar. 13. Alexander the Great. 14. Mythridates King of Pontus. 15. Oedipus
King of Thebes. 16. Caesar Borgia. 17. Theodosius, or, the Force of Love. 18.
Madam Fickle, or the Witty False One. 19. The Fond Husband, or the Plotting
Sisters. 20. Esquire Old-Sap, or the Night-Adventures. 21. Fool turned Critic.
22. Virtuous Wife, or Good Luck at Last. 23. The Fatal Wager. 24. Andromache.
25. Country Wit. 26. Calisto, or the Chaste Nymph. 27. Destruction of
Jerusalem, in two Parts. 28. Ambitious Statesman, or the Loyal Favorite. 29.
Misery of Civil War. 30. The Murder of the Duke of Gloucester. 31. Thyestes, a
Tragedy. 32. Hamlet Pr. of Denmark, a Tragedy. 33. The Orphan, or the Unhappy
Marriage. 34. The Soldiers Fortune. 35. Tamerlain the Great. 36. Mr.
Limberham, or the Kind Keeper. 37. Mistaken Husband. 38. Notes on The Emperor of
Morocco, by the Wits. 39. Essex and Elizabeth, or the Unhappy Favorite. 40.
Virtue Betrayed, or Anna Bullen. 41. King Lear. 42. Abdellazor, or the Moor's
Revenge. 43. Town Fop, or Sir Tim. Tawdry. 44. Rare-en-tout, a French Comedy.
45. Moor of Venice. 46. Country Wife. 47. City Politics. 48. Duke of Guise.
49. Rehearsal. 50. King, and no King. 51. Philaster, or Love lies a bleeding.
52. Grateful Servant. 53. Strange Discovery. 54. Atheist, or the second Part of
the Soldiers Fortune. 55. Wit without Money. 56. Little Thief. 57. Valiant
Scot. 58. Constantine. 59. Velentinian. 60. Amorous Prince. 61. Dutch Lovers,
62. Woman Bully. 63. Reformation. 64. Hero and Leander. 65. Love Tricks. 66.
Julius Caesar. 67. Fatal Jealousy. 68. Monsieur Ragou* 69. Island Queen, or
Mary Queen of Scotland. 70. Empress of Morocco. 71. Commonwealth of Women. 72.
The Noble Stranger. 73. Duke of Millan. 74. The Knave in Grain. 75. Amends for
Ladies. 76. Mammamouchy. 77. The Emperor of the East. 78. The Wedding. 79. St.
Patrick for Ireland. 80. Albumazor. 81. The Tragedy of Albertus. 82. Royal
King. 83. Humerous Courtier. 84. The Hollander. 85. Merchant of Venice. 86
False Count. 87. Rover, Second Part. 88. Counterfeits. 89. Troilus and
Cressida. 90. Spanish Friar. 91. Lucius Junius Brutus. 92. Brutus of Alba. 93.
Caius Marius. 94. Siege of Memphis. 95. Byron's Conspiracy. 1. Part. 96.
Byron's Conspiracy. 2d. Part. 97. Loyal Brother. 98. Disappointment. 99.
Mackbeth. 100. Rollo Duke of Normandy. 101. The Lovesick King. 102. Maids
Tragedy. 103. Massacre of Paris. 104. Tempest, or the Enchanted Island. 105.
Psiche. 106. Richard the 2d. by Mr Tate. 107. Princess of Cleves. 108. Pastor
Fido.

