THE PRINCE OF Conde.

Made English.

LONDON: Printed for H. Herringman, at the Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New
Exchange. 1675.

TO THE READER.
Kind Reader.
HOw far you will be pleased with this Present of mine, I cannot resolve, but
this I can assure you, Persons of extraordinary Quality and Parts have perused
it with approbation. The great name that I am permitted to give it, is
sufficient to justify what I expose; for it is easily imaginable, that no Pen
could be so imprudently audacious, as to place it in the Title of any Book that
was defective, either in duty or respect.

Though in this little piece there are many Historical Circumstances which may
make it seem true, yet my design is not so much to delude, as to divert my
Reader, and prevent the Error into which he would fall, should he give too much
faith to every particular in it.

All the Passages of War, and Occurrences thereupon, are seriously true; but as
to Love, and those Mystical Intrigues, I cannot secure you. To speak properly,
it is a new kind of Romance carried on under illustrious Names, to make it the
more acceptable: For people have naturally more sense and compassion for a
Prince of their own knowledge, then for a Hero, they never heard of before.

THE PRINCE OF CONDE.
LOve makes as many People unhappy, as Fortune: Many great Persons have been
seen to struggle and bear up courageously against the assaults of Fortune, who
have not been able to withstand the attacks and impressions of Love. A Prince
of Conde (and that very name is sufficient to pronounce him a great Man) had
been the happiest Prince of his time, had not that Passion mingled it self with
others, which made him so eminent; but his Ambition (which he cloaked under the
pretense of Religion) ceased to be omnipotent, from the time that Love entered
into his Heart. He was Brother to Anthony de Bourbon, the Father of Henry the
Great, a Prince whose Memory is adorable in France, and whose Glory immortal,
whilst there is the least Fidelity in the Age. This Anthony de Bourbon (King
of Navarre, in right of his Wife Jeane d' Albert) was a Prince whose Courage
willingly reposed it self, when there were no great Affairs on foot to give it
agitation. His Prudence was but indifferent, and rather inclining to weakness,
or to use the terms of the Historian, He was considerable more for his quality,
then qualifications. But Lewis, his younger Brother, was valiant, firm, prompt,
daring, and so possessed of his own Merit, that he thought it a defect in his
Fortune, more then in his Capacity, that he also had not a Crown.

He was very young when he married Eleanor de Roy, rather to accommodate his
affairs (for his Birth was not attended with every thing necessary to his
living up to it) then for any great inclination he had to her person: Not but
she was one of the handsomest about the Court, but in those days their niceness
began to be extravagant, and the Gallants by profession (of which number the
Prince of Conde was one) feared no scandal so much, as that of being kind to
their Wives; virtue which they declared unfit to be practiced by any person of
condition. The Daughter of the Marshall de S. Andre (being as beautiful as her
Father was valiant) was the Person the Prince of Conde designed for his
Conquest. This Marshall was devoted entirely to the House of Lorraine (which
was a declared Enemy to the House of Bourbon) and had promised his Daughter to
the eldest Son of the Duke of Guise, against whom the Prince had too great an
animosity, not to seek out all ways imaginable to ingratiate with so fair a
Lady, though but in revenge.

The Marshall de S. Andre's Daughter was one of the Maids of Honor to Queen
Catharine, and not much loved by the rest, because her beauty was more
celebrated; and there is nothing mortifying amongst Ladies, like preference in
that point: But the pleasure which she took to find her self admired by all
people that saw her, supported her well enough against their little affronts,
and it was vengeance sufficient to leave them only such homages, as she had
refused. Francis the Second, who Reigned at that time, reposed his State
Affairs upon the Queen Mother, to whom nothing being dearer then Government,
she forgot nothing that might keep him in ignorance; representing to him, that
the life of a Monarch was no longer then the life of another Man; that many
times their prime was passed, before they understood how to employ it to the
best; and that the wisdom of a young Prince consisted in tasting more pleasure
then the rest of his Subjects. Poisoned with these dangerous Maxims, he
suffered no occasion to escape in which he might indulge, and the Queen upon
her own private account was so unwilling that he should want, that she made it
her business sometimes to contrive entertainments for him her self.

One day after a hunting match in the Forest of Meudon (which belonged to the
House of Guise) the Queen having sent the whole Court thither, would needs
regal them at a House which Monsieur Conde had at S. Cloud, and at that time
was one of the pleasantest places about Paris. The Maids of Honor of the two
Queens (for Francis the Second had married Mary, Daughter and Heir of the
Kingdom of Scotland, who delighted no more in State Matters then her Husband.)
The Maids of Honor of these two Queens (I say) were dressed with as much
exactness as was possible, and did execution according to the proportion of
Beauty, wherewith each of them was charged; but among them all, there was none
but Madamoiseille de S. Andre, universally admired; for she captivated all
people that presented themselves to her eye. The Prince of Conde, who had no
thoughts of courting her, but in opposition to the Prince de Joinville, to whom
she was promised, began to acknowledge that he had done her injustice, and to
find that upon her own score, she was sufficiently amiable, without other
considerations. She was so great a lover of Fishing, that being come to S.
Cloud, she desired one of the Queens Pages to procure her an Angle, what ever
it cost, and to expect her at the side of the Canal in the Garden, whither she
would not fail to repair with all possible speed. The great Feast that was
preparing, was not so much to her satisfaction, as the pleasure she hoped to
have after it was done. Least she should be followed with a shole of admirers,
with which she was continually attended, she went into the Chamber where the
Queens were; and passing through it, went down privately, by a Pair of back
Stairs, into the Garden to the Page, who was waiting for her, with her Rod and
her Line.

The Prince of Conde had never seen her so glorious as that day; and finding
her much handsomer then ordinary, he began to love her much better then before.
He was discoursing in one of the Walks, with the Admiral of Colignes, to whom
he discovered the Passion he had for that Lady, stopping his ears to what ever
the said Admiral could object against a thing that he found incompatible with
their design, of wresting the Government out of the hands of the House of
Guise. What has our design to do with my Passion (said the Prince) the
Religion of which, you are a Professor, (and I, the rather, because the Guises
are of the other.) This Religion, I say, does it forbid any Man that is a
Gentleman, for loving the most beautiful Person in the World? Or what vengeance
would be left for me to take of the Prince of Joinville (whom I hate for being
Son to the Duke of Guise) if, by a destiny transcending the good fortune of so
many brave Men as are at Court, he should engross so excellent a Lady. No, no,
Monsieur l'Admiral, said the Prince, that shall never be laid at my door. The
Privileges of the Guises are not great enough to exempt their Family from a
disgrace, that perhaps neither you nor I am exempt from; and though I were not
the most amorous of my Sex, it would please me to be so much their Enemy, as to
give them all the disquiet I might. He was in this discourse when he perceived
Mademoiselle de S. Andre marching toward the Canal, where she was attended by
the Page. Adieu Monsieur l' Admiral (said the Prince to him something suddenly)
it would be but civil, having brought you hither, to wait upon you back; but
the present conjuncture is, in my judgment, a sufficient excuse; and I should
deserve that fortune which I am preparing for other people, if I should suffer
it to pass without making my advantage.

Having made that short Apology, he left the Admiral, and followed Mademoiselle
de S. Andre, but for fear she should be angry, he followed her another way, and
never discovered himself till she had thrown in her Line two or three times. As
far as I see, Mademoiselle (said he, falulting her) you are resolved to give no
quarter to any thing. After so happy an Hunting, I thought you would have
suffered the poor Fish to have been at quiet, and contented your self to have
either killed or wounded whatever presented it self before your eyes. You are
mistaken Sir, (said she) if you think I have been so well pleased with this
days Hunting; I have had a misfortune, that, perhaps, I might have repaired in
this place, had not you interrupted me; and if you will, give me leave to be
free, I must tell you, I am under a secret disorder, that renders me almost
insensible of the honor I receive by your presence. The intelligence that I
have had of your progress this day, Madam, (replied the Prince) is perhaps
better, and more certain then you imagine; though your Engines were
unferviceable, your beauty was not; the shot that came from your eyes, was more
sure then that which came from your hand, wounded more certainly, and in a more
dangerous place. Mademoiselle de S. Andre having told the Page that there was
no farther need of his attendance, and the Page being gone, I understand you
Sir, (replied the Lady) and do see afar off, what is your design: The time of
so great a Prince is too precious to be abused. You love me? Yes Madam (replied
the Prince) I do love you, and I love nothing in the World, with so much
passion, as I love you. And where are your hopes? (said she to him) your heart
is engaged already to Madam la Princess, and mine to the Prince de Joinville,
who is appointed to be my Husband. If my heart were so wholly engaged to Madam
la Princess (replied the Prince) she would not suffer you to have so much
dominion there: And as to your heart, it is not yet obliged to the Husband, you
are still to marry, and which is more, you are too wise to permit that ever it
be.

Who is it, that I reserve it for? (replied the Lady, interrupting him with an
astonishment, that he seemed not to regard) For me, (replied the Prince, with a
confidence that redoubled her astonishment,) your heart is a prize impossible
to be deserved, but by a love as great as mine is for your Ladyship. The
Husband (who I will not say is promised, for it is the worst promise that can
be made to you.) This Husband, I say, with whom you are threatened, does he know
the value of the heart which your weakness reserves for him? If he valued it,
as it ought to be valued; would not be desire to ow it to your self, rather
then to the Authority of your Father, who sacrifices you to his particular
interest? The Prince of Joinville neglects you, since he has thought himself
sure of you; and you need not doubt, but he will do it more when you are in his
possession.

Monsieur le Prince (replied the young Lady, who had heard him with great
patience) I thank you for your good counsel; you speak to me like a true Enemy
of the Family, from whence I am descended, and of that, to which I am designed.
If you love me, as you pretend (and I am apt to think it possible, because I am
not altogether without allurements to constrain you) I have advantage enough
over you, to revenge Monsieur de Guise, and my Father, for the hatred which you
bare them.

These last words were delivered with an air, that gave the Prince to
understand, his affairs were not in so good a posture as he fancied; and the
formality which she used a while after, when she took her leave of him, did
perfectly disabuse him: He had presaged much happiness to his designs, from the
eagerness wherewith she demanded, whether he loved her? He used his endeavors
to have staid her, but all was to no purpose; she went back to the company that
she had left, and the Prince returned to the Admiral de Coligny, who was not a
little pleased, that she had ill treated a Passion which he had so little
approved.

The Evening being come, the Court returned to Paris; the Prince had another
sight of Mademoiselle de S. Andre in the Louvre; and endeavored to accost her,
but she avoided the occasion: As she was getting from him, a Note tell out of
her Pocket, which was taken up by the Prince, and the Lady never perceived it.
He had not patience to stay till he got home, before he looked what was in it;
he only went down out of the Louvre to read it more quietly, and by the light
of a Lantern, at the bottom of the Stairs, he found it contained these words.

DO not fail to meet me about one a clock in the morning, in the Chamber of the
Metamorphoses; the Chamber where we passed the last night, is too near the
Queens appartement: And the fear I had to disturb them, hindered me from taking
my pleasure as I would; La Noue (with whose fidelity you are already
acquainted) will take care the door shall be open.


This of the Metamorphoses, was one of the richest Chambers in the Louvre; it
was called The Chamber of the Metamorphoses, because every piece of the
Tapistry hangings represented some of the disguisements, of which the gods made
use to obtain their designs upon their Mistresses; and the piece that carried
the price from them all, was a Dana made by so neat a hand, and drawn in so
skilful a manner, that in her face one might see the very transport she was in,
when she perceived the shower of Gold.

The Prince of Conde was strangely surprised; he examined the hand, and looked
it over and over, but could not guess whose it should be: Had it not been so
late, he would not have failed to have carried it to the Admiral, and desired
his opinion; but it was almost midnight, and the rendezvous being at one, he
had not time enough to do every thing he projected. As he went up again to the
Louvre, he met Dandelot (Brother to the Admiral, and Colonel of the French
Infantry) going home: He desired him, that he would not be far off, and that he
would cause some of his Soldiers to stand to their Arms, and be ready to
relieve him, if he should happen to hear any noise. Dandelot pressed to know
what occasion he had for them, and made some difficulty to leave him: But the
Prince apprehending that a second might frustrate his designs, conjured him to
inquire no farther, protesting, That the thing which he was so eager to
discover, was only matter of Love; and that if it were any thing of greater
importance, he should not be the Man from whom he would conceal it. It would
much discompose me (replied Dandelot) if my zeal should be an impediment to
your good fortune. I am sorry that I have detained you these few minutes, which
you would have employed better elsewhere: To make you reparation, I will go and
dispose some of my Soldiers so near you, that they shall be ready to bring you
off, if any Husband be so much an Enemy to the State, as to interrupt the
pleasures of a Prince, who is so necessary to it. The Prince smiling at what
Dandelot had said, bowed his head, and went up into the Louvre, toward the
appartement, where the Chamber of Metamorphoses was. Whilst he was in
discourse with Dandelot, La Noue (who was the discreetest Woman in the whole
Court, for the conduct of such an intrigue) finding the hour of the Redezvous
at hand, had been to put the Key privately into the Door, and was withdrawn
again, to spare the fair Lady (to whom she had done that great service) the
shame of being seen in her passage.

The Prince advanced to the Door, and found the Key in it; having scratched
three or four times, and no body opening, he opened it himself, and stole in as
softly as he could. The Door shut with as lit-little noise as it opened; he
drew his Sword out of his Belt, and with his hand felt over all the Chairs in
the Chamber, to find whether any body was a sleep there: When he had satisfied
his curiosity, and could assure himself that he was alone, he moved toward
that side where he knew the Bed stood, with design to hide himself under it,
for he could not think of any other place where he might be so sure; and the
door of the Ballisters being locked, he passed over them.

He was no sooner settled under the Bed, but a Clock which he had in his
Pocket, with an excellent Bell, began to strike, and was near a quarter of an
hour in striking Twelve, which made him swear as many oaths, one after another.
This was a new trouble to the Prince, who had taken no little pains before to
lodge himself close. His first thoughts were to throw it out of the Window, but
the difficulty which he had passed to gain the Post he was in, remembering him
of what he was like to find in getting out, and returning again, he pulled his
Clock out of his Pocket, as well as he could, brake all the Springs, and put it
up again when he had done. The time that was behind, would have seemed cruelly
tedious to him, had he not employed it in making reflections, some rational,
and some amorous. The Prince of Conde under a Bed! he thought it was but an odd
place for so great a Person; and his heart as well as his quality, was much
offended at what his love had put him upon; but then presently he recollected,
and persuaded himself, That his reputation was at too high a pitch to be
lessened by any thing; that no posture was undecent, which was useful; that the
Gallant he endeavored to surprise, might possibly prove the greatest of his
Enemies, and it would be a shame to him, if scruple (which is ordinarily the
pretense of mean spirits) should make him lose so fair an occasion to revenge
himself. From these, he passed to other reflections; he doubted not, but it was
Mademoiselle de S. Andre, to whom his Note was directed; but his great trouble
was to think who it should come from: He saw plainly by the appartment which
they had chosen, that it was some person of quality who had good interest at
Court; and the appartment of the Cardinal of Lorraine, chief Minister of State
(to whom he was a mortal Enemy) being not far from the appointed Rendezvous, he
could not but think sometimes it might be he. The first voice that he heard,
was Mademoiselle de S. Andres, with that he was no much suprised, but not long
after, he heard another that startled him exceedingly.

Francis the Second, though young, had eyes like other men; and the Charms of
Mademoiselle de S. Andre had not escaped them: It was he who had given order
that Mademoiselle de S. Andre should be there, and committed it to Madam de la
Noue to give her notice; and she had caused that Note to be written by one of
her Maids, so expert in the profession of her Mistress, that her ingenuity was
recompensed afterward with a Priory of 5 or 6000 livers per annum.

The Prince displayed in this manner under the Bed, diverted himself very ill,
and had put by the Bed-cloaths toward the Head, to give himself more air, and
that he might the better understand what his Gallants would say when they met;
but he quickly pulled them down again, when he heard the Kings voice; and great
terrors were upon him, for fear he should be discovered. It was supected, that
he would, by force, endeavor to possess himself of the Government, and herhaps
that suspicion was but just: Had he been found concealed so near the Person of
the King, at so unseasonable an hour, with his Sword out of his Belt, his
Enemies would have misinterpreted his design, and of an amorous intrigue, have
made a capital offense: To which, the Note which he had taken up, would not
have added a little. By that it would have appeared, that he knew where the
King was to be at that time alone, and without defense; and the Guises, to whom
he gave great jealousy, would not have failed to have said, that it was a
place very proper to execute the worst designs that he had.

These considerations running in his mind, his discretion began to appear in
the releif of his Love; but it was something too late. He repented that he had
so rashly engaged himself in an affair, that, for ought he knew, might have
very ill consequences; and whilst he was under this confusion, the King and
Mademoiselle were undressed, and had doubtless given very good testimony of the
love they had one for the other, had they not been interrupted by an alarm that
obliged them to put off their expressions till another time.

The Queen Mary was three months gone with child; she was of a very tender
Complexion, and the exercise which she had used in that days hunting, had
disordered her much, to the affliction of all those who were pleased she was
breeding. The noise of her pains, quickly went through the Louvre; the Valet de
Chamber who was in waiting that night, and had the honor to be entrusted with
the Kings amors, came immediately to give him notice. The King was half
undressed, and being angry to have lost so fair an occasion, was much troubled
at the condition of the Queen; but for fear of being surprised with
Mademoiselle de S. Andre, it was necessary (against all common practice) to
leave the Mistress for the Wife; and lay aside the transports of a Lover, to
show the complacency of a Husband.

The Queen miscarried, for which, some were glad, and others were sorry; for
the Court was divided.

This accident, that bred an universal disorder in the rest of the Louvre, was
a great calm to the mind of the Prince. They had no sooner advertised his
Majesty of the condition of the Queen, but he retired with all diligence into
his appartment, and Mademoiselle de S. Andre into hers; whether she was
attended by the officious Matron Madam de la Noue, who took no care of locking
the Door after her, as a thing of little importance.

The Prince being left in this manner Master of the Field, was not long in
making his way out; protesting never to run himself into the like danger again,
at least, whilst he had the use of his Reason. Passing through an Entry toward
the Kings Antichamber, he met his Majesty as he was going to the Queens
appartment; the King asked him what he did in the Louvre so late with so much
care upon his countenance. He had a ready wit, and answered him presently, That
he came from play; that he had lost a considerable sum of Money; and, that the
news of the Queens indisposition having been used as a pretense to give off, by
the persons with whom he was at play, he was going home to his Lodgings in the
disorder his Majesty observed. It was happy for him, the King questioned him no
farther; had he staid above never so little longer, he had been certainly
undone. Dandelot in pursuance of his promise, had commanded some of his
Soldiers to be upon the Guard, who, upon the noise which was occasioned by the
Queens indisposition, ran to the releif of the Prince, and were already upon
the Stairs; when his name being much in their Mouths, his presence caused them
very seasonably to be silent. He went immediately out of the Louvre in the
company of Dandelot, to whom he promised to meet about ten of the clock, at the
Lodgings of his Brother, the Admiral of Coligny; where if he met him, he would
impart a secret to him, that he would not be at all troubled to hear.

His impatience to see the Admiral, was too great to fail at the appointed
hour: Dandelot was a great lover of Secreta, and had prevented him. Ah! dear
Cousin, cried the Prince, when he came near the Admiral, Behold the Man in the
World, under the greatest astonishment! all that I have seen hitherto in my
life, is nothing to what I am going to tell you: In a word, it is a thing so
incredible, that when I have told you, if you do not believe me, I shall pardon
you. S. Andre (I mean not the Mareschals Lady, for I believe her much wiser)
but the Queens Maid of Honor, is of so tried and tractable a virtue, that the
Prince de Joinville, if he marries her, can teach her nothing that is new. But
this is not that (said he) that is so strange, She is fair, she is among the
great People, where example gives some kind of Authority; she is not full
sixteen years of age, about which time, the honor of young Ladies begin to
totter: Few there are that can hold out continent so long, and common sense
will not suffer us to be amazed at any thing that Custom has made familiar.
But Cousin, this is it that will surprise you, you will never be able to guess
at the Gallant. Run over the whole Court, cast your eyes upon all the Gallants
in the Town, you shall name fifty, and I will lay you a wager you miss him.
This circumstantial description that he gave of Mademoiselle de S. Andres
Gallant, made them that they could not fix it upon any of that sort at Court;
but the Admiral and his Brother began to imagine it some old venerable Abbot,
whose love was not so pleasant as profitable: For the young Lady was rich only
in her Beauty, and therefore they named the Cardinal of Tournon, Bertrandi (who
had been Keeper of the Seals,) the Chancellor Oliver, the Seigneur de Pybrac,
and some others of that sort. No (said the Prince) if you consider his quality,
he is above all these, but if you consider his gallantry, he is much beneath
them. Mademoiselle de S. Andre is beloved by the King, of which, the last night
I had like to have had an incontestable evidence. Then he gave them an account
of all that had happened, and showed them the Note which had given him so strange
an alarm. This Note was of mighty use to their design; they had thoughts of
breaking the Union that was betwixt the Marshall de S. Andre, and the Duke of
Guise, and the most infallible way to succeed, was to ruin the reputation of
Mademoiselle de S. Andre, and make the Prince de Joinville to desert her.

Dandelot, being persuaded that Madam l'Admiral had more cunning and malice,
then all three of them put together, was of opinion, that she should be
consulted. She was so true a Hugenot, and had so great zeal of the honor of her
Religion, that for the service of God, there was no injustice in the World,
that she would have scrupled to commit; they sent to her to come to them, but
she was at Prayers behind her Bed, and could not come immediately: As soon as
she had done, she appeared, and the Prince having told her what he had told
before to her Husband, he would have shown her the Note, but she would not by
any means. It will be enough (said she to him) to destroy the reputation of S.
Andre, if you please but to read it to me. After dinner I will take an
opportunity to show it to the Queen, and swear a thousand horrible oaths that I
never so much as read it: If I should read it my self, I could not swear with
that freedom, for I would not wound my Conscience for a Kingdom.

The Admiral liked the expedient very well: Dandelot not only admired the wit
of his Sister in Law, but applauded her probity: The Prince who hated
Mademoiselle de S. Andre, as much as he had formerly loved her, and desired to
revenge himself of the affront (as he thought) which she had done him, in
loving the King, delivered his Note to Madam l'Admiral, who promised to make
good use of it. The Afternoon was long a coming, at least, in the opinion of
Madam l'Admiral. She was that day at the Louvre in very good time, and forgot
not the Billet which the Prince of Conde had given her. The young Queen was not
allowed to see any body, by reason of what she had endured the night before;
and because the King contented himself with his title, without doing the
drudgery; people did not address so solemnly to him, as to the Queen Mother.
Whilst the Queen was at dinner, three young Virgins were presented to her, the
Daughters of a Primiere Presidente of the Parliament of Rouen, which the said
President had brought forth at a Birth. They were all very fair, and so exactly
alike, not only in the features of their face; but in their shape, hair,
gestures, and voice, that they were forced to put them into several habits to
distinguish them.

The whole Court was in the Queens Chamber, admiring the strange resemblance of
these three Children, when Madam l'Admiral came in, she was so taken (as the
rest were) with the extraordinariness of the thing, that she forgot (at least,
for sometime) her designs against Mademoiselle de S. Andre. Looking upon the
young Maidens with too much intention, she drew something out of her Pocket,
and had the same misfortune which the Lady had, whom she was to destroy.

The Note wherewith the Prince had entrusted her, fell out of her Pocket, and
she never perceived it. The Prince de Joinville being next her, and seeing it
fall, cast his Handkercheif upon it very neatly, and, without much trouble,
took them up together. He was as impatient to be peeping, as the Prince of
Conde had been the night before: He stole out of the Louvre, read it, and was
infinitely surprised to find Madam l'Admiral (who had formerly been very
handsome, but not young these nine or ten years) should have a rendezvous of
this nature; for he did not hesitate one moment to believe, that it was she to
whom the Ticket was addressed.

The three young Virgins of Rouen, having taken their leaves of the Queen,
Madam l'Admiral began to remember her self of the design that brought her to
the Louvre, and that she had a fair opportunity to put it in execution. She
felt for her Ticket, but it was not to be found; she felt and felt for it with
great diligence, but to no purpose: She was so cruelly disturbed at the loss of
it, that foreseeing, it would be impossible to conceal it, she went home to her
Lodgings, where, with mere vexation, she fell sick all that day, and had,
perhaps, been so longer, had not the same thing cured, that wounded her, as the
consequence will discover.

Whilst she was complaining of the Heavens, that they had not permitted her to
accomplish her mischievous designs: The Prince de Joinville, who knew her
Father the Duke of Guise, suffered nothing to pass, that might do the Admiral a
prejudice, carried him the Billet, which he was sure would be very welcome. The
Duke asked his Son if he did not mistake, and if he was fure that the Note
belonged to Madam l'Admiral? The Prince de Joinville having assured him, that
nothing was more certain; they went together to the Cardinal of Lorraine, who
was in the company of the Marshall de S. Andre, drawing up the Articles of
Marriage (which was to be consummated in few days) that they might be carried
next morning to the King, and the two Queens, who would do them the honor to
sign them.

This Cardinal was a very dangerous Enemy. When he found opportunity to destroy
any Man that he hated, he never neglected it: And finding himself now, as he
thought, Master of the Reputation of Madam l'Admiral (whom he called The sworn
Enemy of the Church,) he believed he should have betrayed the Office of a
Cardinal, if he had deferred her ruin but one moment. The Duke of Guise, and
the Marshall de S. Andre, applauded his Eminences sentiment, as very
Religious, and altogether recommended it to the Prince de Joinville to be
silent, especially (said the Cardinal) to your Mistress; and if you have not
power to contain, forbear rather to see her: She is young, and a Woman; both of
which are incompatible with a secret. The Prince de Joinville promised what
they desired, and was as good as his word.

During the time that this unfortunate Ticket went from one Enemy to another,
giving as much vexation to the Colignies, as it did pleasure to the Guises: The
King being willing to recover what he lost the night before by the Queens
indisposition, gave order to Madam de la Noue (who was always ready at his
Majesty's service) to renew the bargain that was interrupted, and cause his
Mistress to meet him again at the old Rendezvous, as soon as the clock should
strike twelve.

The Cardinal of Lorraine (who knew that Queen Catherine had a mortal hatred
for Madam l'Admiral, as one who had been always intimate with the Duchess of
Valentinois, the Mistress of Henry the Second, went to wait upon her, desired,
that he might have the honor to speak with her in her Closet, and there to show
her the Billet which the Prince de Joinville his Nephew had so dexterously
taken up. Ah! insatiable (cried the Queen, when she had read it her self)
whilst she was young, it was no wonder she was courted by the Marshall
Strossy, and I never condemned her. Every one knows Madam (replied the
Cardinal) that youth will not last always, and your Majesty was always too
discreet to oppose your self against any thing that is permitted; for Courtship
is permitted or forbidden according to the different times, in which they are
practiced. In the time of the late King, the virtuous Ladies of the Court had
each of them some honest Gentleman, or other, with whom they carried on that
commerce of Gallantry; and this the old Ladies did as well as the young, when
their beauty began to decay, or they had means to supply the want of it, by
their bounty to their Court-Lovers, who perhaps had no other Revenue but their
bonne mine. But under the Government of your Majesty (to whom the State is so
infinitely obliged for your care and solicitousness to reform it) it would be
indecent to suffer this licentiousness, and leave the obscenities of Madam
l'Admiral, or the profanation of the place unpunished. I am not the only person
Madam (continued the Cardinal) who looks with indignation upon the insolence
which she would commit in a place where Mediocrity of respect is a kind of a
crime. My Brother of Guise (and you know Madam, how dear your Majesty's honor
is to him; and whether Heaven it self can produce a Man with greater zeal then
that which he has for your interest.) My Brother of Guise (I say) and the
Marshall de S. Andre (the next person to my Brother for his devotion to your
Majesty, in your whole Kingdom) are infinitely scandalized at this impudence;
and do attend what your Majesty shall please to command them. The Queen when
she had given the Cardinal freedom to speak what he pleased, replied, That she
was of his judgment; that this insolence was too criminal to pass unpunished,
and asked him, what expedient he could think of, to convince the Admirals Lady
of a crime which would be so easy for her to deny. I beg your Majesty's pardon
(replied the Cardinal) if I sully your imagination with a figure that may
perhaps entrench upon your modesty: I know what you will suffer, to hear me say
it is impossible to convict her, unless she be taken in the act: But there are
few terms to express any thing that is impure, that do not carry something of
immodesty along with them; and the blush that rises already in your Majesty's
face, gives no little luster to your Majesty's virtue. At length the Queen
consented absolutely to what the Cardinal desired: She had an old pique to
Madam l'Admiral, which she was very glad to satisfy so easily. And though her
authority over the Kings mind was very great, yet because he was naturally
wavering and inconstant: The Cardinal begged of her Majesty, that she would
preserve it as a secret from him, telling her, that her single advice was
sufficient to warrant what they intended to do.

Twelve a clock came, and several people were waiting, upon several designs.
The Queen could not think of sleeping, till she had had the pleasure of
understanding the confusion of the Admirals Lady, and who was her Gallant. She
had seen the Prince de Joinville after the Cardinal of Lorraine went away, and
he had with a great deal of readiness obliged himself to give her an account of
whatever happened in that business; the Queen commanded him to be punctual, and
promised to sit up till he came. She employed her self, in the mean time, in
reading, and had kept only two of the Ladies of her Bedchamber with her, her
Maids of Honor being gone to their Chambers as soon as the clock struck twelve,
as was the usual custom: And Madam de la Noue having advertised Mademoiselle
de S. Andre of the hour which the King had appointed, she bad her companions
good night, and for fashion-sake entering into her own Lodgings, stole out again
presently after to go into the Chamber of the Metamorphoses, where she staid
not long before the King came in.

The hearts of the Guises, and the Marshall de S. Andre, were too straight to
contain the joy that they conceived; they staid at Supper the Duke of
Montpensier, and the Prince de la Roche-sur-Yon, and promised them such a treat
as they could not expect. Twelve a clock struck, and they heard nothing of the
treat; the Princes called for it, but were desired to be patient, and to
believe, that if they waited three nights together, it would be well worth
their attendance when it came. The Rendezvous this night was appointed
precisely at twelve a clock; but that which was appointed in the Note, which
Madam l'Admiral had lost, was not till one; and the Duke of Guise, the
Marshall de S. Andre, and the Prince de Joinville (who thought themselves
highly engaged to their fortune, which had presented them with an occasion of
disgracing the most dangerous of their Enemies) would have believed themselves
guilty of an irrepairable fault, if they had been deficient in any thing that
might have hastened his ruin. The Duke of Guise had placed a Spy, where it was
impossible any body should enter into the Room of the Metamorphoses, without
being perceived: The Duke was assured of his fidelity, and told him, That a
Gallant had appointed a Rendezvous to his Mistress in that place, but he told
him not any thing who they were. He promised him great rewards, and conjured
him to observe very diligently, and not to stir till he sent him word by a
person, who for a signal should demand the Diamond that he had left with him.
The Spy wanted no wit, and understood well enough that the employment which
was given him, was one of the ways by which people were advanced most easily at
Court; he promised the Duke to be punctual in all that he desired. Things being
in this posture, the the clock struck one. The Marshall de S. Andre persuaded
the Duke, that men did not meet always exactly at the hour appointed; that
their design would infallibly miscarry, if it should be their ill fortune to
execute it but one moment too soon; and therefore advised him to protract
another half hour, and they should surprise the Admirals Lady in the height of
her delight. About half an hour past one, a person was sent to the Scout, to
demand the Diamond which the Duke left with him, which was the signal, upon
which word was to be sent, whether the lovers were come, or not. The Scout
replied, That they were come long since, and the Messenger ran immediately with
the news to the Duke of Guise.

COme Gentlemen, the hour of your entertainment is now come, said the Marshall
de S. Andre, to the Duke de Montpensier, and the Prince de la Roche-sur-Yon; it
has been long a coming it is true, but it is well worth your attendance; and if
ever you had occasion to laugh heartily in your whole lives, I dare promise it
will be presently: For my own part (said he, with a torrent of joy that
endeavored to expand it self) I must tell you, I would not change the pleasure
of this night, for the best days pleasure in my whole life: And if ever I had
any true delight, it is that which I am now going to receive, and you to be my
witnesses.

To give them a taste of it before hand, he told them in few words what it was;
the secret being no longer of consequence, seeing the execution was so near;
whereupon he showed them the Note which fell into the hands of the Prince de
Joinville (who by way of intimacy, he called already his Son in Law, because
his Marriage with the said Mareschals Daughter, as I have said before, was to
be consummate in a few days.)

The Duke of Montpensier, and the Prince de la Roche-sur-Yon, being young
Gentlemen, and lovers of diversion, were highly transported to be engaged in
such an adventure; proposed infinite satisfaction to themselves in seeing and
observing the looks of Madam l'Admiral in so mortifying a conjuncture, and in
discovering her Gallant. The Duke of Guise, the Marshall de S. Andre, and the
Prince de Joinville took each of them a Lamp in their hands, and followed by
the two Princes (whom they had undertaken to treat) they stole as softly as
they could to the door of the Chamber of the Metamorphoses. The Cardinal of
Lorraine knew a great part of the revenge would consist in his being present,
when Madam l'Admiral was surprised, but his Character would not permit him to
bear them company. They listened for some time at the door, but heard nothing;
the Duke of Guise scratched a little, and a Groom of the Chamber, who was left
there, and supposed it to be Madam de la Noue, coming according to her custom
to fetch Mademoiselle de S. Andre at a certain hour to her Chamber, he opened
the door. The Duke of Guise told him, That he understood very well what was in
agitation, and was privy to the secret: The Valet apprehending the Duke might
have some business of importance with his Majesty, suffered him to enter, and
all his retinue.

The Marshall de S. Andre, being least scrupulous, was the first who advanced
to the Bed side, and stood still as amazed and immovable when he saw the King
on one side, and on the other his Daughter, looking better then he had ever
seen her in his life. By reason of the warmth of the weather, her arms were out
of Bed, her neck naked, and her little new swelling breasts so white, and
represented the pretty red nipples, wherewith Nature had embellished them so
handfomely, that it was impossible to see any thing more tender and bewitching.

This surprise in the Marshall, caused the Duke of Guise to come forward, and
after him the Prince de Joinville, and the two Princes of the House of Bourbon,
in their turns. All of them were strangely astonished to see the King on one
side of the Bed, and Mademoiselle de S. Andre on the other, both of them asleep
with the same quiet and security, as if they had been Man and Wife: But though
the astonishment was universal, it was in a different manner. The Father,
Father in Law, and Lover, were in great consternation; but the Duke of
Montpensier, and the Prince de la Roche-sur-Yon, finding their entertainment
much pleasanter then was promised, were forced to take all imaginable pains to
keep themselves from laughing right out; and indeed it was well for the
Marshall, that his Daughters Breasts were so naked to take up their thoughts;
otherwise, the confusion in which he was, would have made any man laugh, though
he had been never so serious.

Whilst some of them were mortally troubled, and the rest so well pleased,
that it is not easy to be expressed: The light glaring upon the eyes of
Mademoiselle de S. Andre, awakened her; she rubbed them a while, opened them
when she had done; and the first thing she looked upon, being her Father, she
fetched a skreek that wakned the King; and I do not doubt, but he was as much
surprised, as other people; but his surprise being over, his love inspired him
with more wit, and more courage then he had ever discovered before. Having
endeavored to encourage and comfort Mademoiselle de S. Andre (who was weeping)
by promising to take her into his protection; he demanded of the Duke of Guise,
and the rest that were with him, by what authority they durst presume to enter,
at such an hour, into a place where they knew he was taking his repose. The
Marshall de S. Andre made answer, That had they known his Majesty had been
there, they would not have presumed to interrupt him; and that for his own
part, he expected nothing less then what he had found: That it was he who had
staid the Duke of Monpensier, and the Prince de la Roche-sur-Yon, to give them
a divertisement, in which he little thought his Daughter should have born
apart. That could he have presaged, or been assured of the honor his Majesty
conferred upon his family, he should have had more discretion and respect, then
to have brought so many witnesses; and having said so, he withdrew.

The King perceiving the presence of so many Princes, and especially the Prince
de Joinville, was a great trouble to Mademoiselle de S. Andre, he commanded
them to retire, and they obeyed his command. When they were gone, he applied
what consolation he could, and perhaps better then he could do in the presence
of her Father. He called for the Groom of his Chamber, by whose indiscretion
they were let in; but the Kings anger, and the Madamoiselles tears having given
him to understand the fault that he had committed, he was afraid of being
punished, and had made his escape: But the Governness, Madam de la Noue coming
in, in the nick, she lighted the King to his Chamber, and when she had done,
came back to do as much for the Mademoiselle.

The Queen Mother (to whom the Prince de Joinville had promised to give an
account of all that he should see) was naturally impatient; and the clock
having struck two, and no news of her Prince, she fent to look him, by one of
her Maids of Honor, in the appartment of his Uncle the Cardinal; he came to
wait upon her with a countenance as cheerful as the nature of the adventure
would permit. Prince de Joinville (said her Majesty to him, as soon as he was
near her) I do not ask after the greatness of her confusion, or whether Madam
l'Admiral is not almost distracted: I do not doubt but she is highly sensible
of the affront, and will move Heaven and Earth to be revenged: I pass all that
by, and only desire to know who was her Gallant. What is he? Is he young? Is he
handsome? Is he of any considerable quality? How did the Lady like him? Tell
me, in short, and give me a true description, especially how he looked and
behaved himself when he was taken. What interrogatories were these for the
Prince de Joinville, who was most desperately in love with Mademoiselle de S.
Andre? He replied (with a discomposure that was indeed to be excused) That the
Gallant her Majesty desired should be described, was very young: That as to his
person, those who delighted not in tall, lusty men, would think him handsome
enough; and for his quality, he must needs say it was very considerable: That
the Lady, was doubtlesty, very well pleased, and would be much envied by the
rest, when her good fortune was known: That as to his deportment and looks,
when he was taken, it was something more fierce then at other times; and that
instead of being terrified himself, he made his spectators to tremble. This
Madam is a relation which your Majesty has commanded me to give; let me beg of
you to inquire no farther. To morrow your Ears will be clogged with what I
forbear to tell you; and if your Majesty understood with what regret and
aversion I have gone thus far, you would admire my patience.

The Queen thought he had been ill, and suffered him to retire; he returned
into his Uncles appartment, and found him storming like mad. The Duke of
Montpensier, and the Prince de la Roche-sur-Yon, were got by themselves, to
laugh and make sport at the afflictions of the rest; the only trouble they had,
was to think all the World was in Bed, and they were forced to stay till next
morning, before they could publish what they knew.

They went late to Bed, but got up very early, being impatient to let the
Prince of Conde know upon what account the Guises, and the Marshall de S.
Andre, had detained them at Supper, and the end and Catastrophe of their design.

Though the Prince of Conde, and they, were of two contrary Religions, and even
of contrary parties; yet they had great esteem for one another, especially the
Prince de la Roche-sur-Yon, and the Duke de Montpensier, for the Prince of
Conde, upon whom they looked, as upon the bravest man of his time. The joy
wherewith the Prince of Conde understood the confusion of the Guises, revenged
him in some measure, for the troubles which the loss of the Billet had given
him before. Nothing could be more pleasant, then to imagine the pains which
they had occasioned, by their own conduct and eager prosecution of that
intrigue, and by the detention of two persons of their quality, to give them
such an extraordinary regale. The Prince of Conde liked the divertisement too
well to ingross it to himself: He would have been very unwilling the Admiral
should have had it from any body but him; and therefore fearing he might be too
late, that some other person might prevent him; and that his information should
not be the first, he repaired to his Lodgings with all diligence. The Admiral
was no sooner acquainted therewith, but he ran immediately into his Wives
Chamber; she had been ill all night of the loss of her Billet, and was to be
let blood that morning: But the tidings which the Admiral brought her, saved
her Surgeon a labor, and made a speedier cure then phlebotomy would have
done. Sick, or not sick, Madam l'Admiral got up, called for her Coach, told it
to every body she met, and they being as liberal of it as she, in a very short
time the news was known all over the Town. The Kingdom, at that time, was under
great agitation, by reason of the differences betwixt the Catholics, and the
Hugonots, who under pretense of Reformation, did exceedingly rend and distract
it. There were some persons who that morning had made a Song of the state of
the Kings affairs, and were singing it (but very low) as his Majesty was
rising; it was set to the tune of a Ballad that was then in mighty request, and
the words were these.

Alas fair Nymph, do you not think it a thing
Of dangerous consequence to abuse your Charms.
The Throne is tottering, yet the peaceful King
Reposes gently in your tender Arms.
Ah that (to calm our spirits) we might see
The State as quiet, and as snug as he.
The Queen her self, lies not more close then you,
Nor sleeps more sweetly by the Royal side;
You never concern your thoughts, nor curl your brow,
At Protestants or Papists Plots or Pride:
Ah that (for th'common good) our State did know,
But half that Peace, half that repose as you.
What is commonly sung about the streets, or once put into a Song, ceases to be
a Secret; nor was it long before the Queen was better informed of what the
Prince de Joinville gave her but an imperfect relation. Mademoiselle de S.
Andre, had been always constant in her attendance before, and not daring to
appear that morning, she confirmed what began to be public. The Queen sent for
her, but the Kings Physician (called Miron) was with Mademoiselle de S. Andre,
and had orders to say, That she was ill; which at another time would have been
a lawful excuse; but as things then stood, it was rather an argument of her
guilt; and her Majesty (who was not easily deluded) guest unhappily at the
truth. She was highly incensed, and could not constrain her self; she sent to
desire the King to come to her, the King came, and they went together into her
Closset, where she began to reprove him severely, and in a tone that might have
made him tremble: But the King being prepared by his Love and his Mistress,
interrupted her at the very first volley, and that with an assurance and
confidence beyond her expectation. He told her, it was true indeed, he had a
kindness for the person she named, and he desired she would give him leave to
entertain himself with her, or else surrender his authority, that he might
employ himself otherwise: He remembered the Queen, that her power was of no
longer duration then he pleased; that if she crossed him in his love, he would
not indulge her in her ambition; and that (without violence to the respect
which he ought her, as a Mother) when ever he did but say he would be King, she
must cease to be Queen.

These words she had reason to believe were none of her Sons; yet seeing
Mademoiselle de S. Andre spoke them by his mouth, she had as much reason to be
astonished, as if they had been his own. She durst not pursue the
expostulation, nor drive the business any farther, least Mademoiselle de S.
Andre should furnish him with another answer. The King was mistaken to think
that the Queen had a design to hinder his divertisements; on the contrary, her
thoughts were taken up, how she might entertain him perpetually; and had
Mademoiselle de S. Andre been only handsome, the Queen had been the first that
would have recommended her, and applauded his choice: But Mademoiselle de S.
Andre had Wit as well as Beauty; and a Head that was sufficient to keep the
Queen Mother upon her guard; for she apprehended, that when Mademoiselle came
once to be Mistress of the Kings heart, she would make him sensible, how much
he was abused. Upon which consideration, all was accommodated before they
parted; the King kept his Mistress, and the Mother the Government.

The Duke of Guise could not forget the great favors which he had received of
their Majesty's; and his gratitude was such, that he would not suffer his Son
to entrench upon the respect which he ought to the King so far, as to continue
his rival. The Articles of Marriage which the Cardinal of Lorraine, and the
Marshall de S. Andre had drawn up, were cancelled and torn, and the Government
of Lions (that was then vacant) being conferred upon the Marshall, every one
was contented, or at least they pretended it. Mademoiselle de S. Andre was
looked upon as the Kings Mistress, and respected beyond what she was formerly;
the Queen Mother was afraid of her, and though she could not behold her without
indignation, yet she thought it discretion to conceal it; and Queen Mary, if
any troubles were upon her on that account (as it is probable there were) she
also kept them to her self.

The Prince of Conde observing all parties so well contented, was much
discontented himself, and being unable to prevail with Mademoiselle de S. Andre
to love him, he resolved she should hate him. He watched his opportunity when
the King was absent, made her a visit in her appartment, and complemented her
slily upon her late advancement: She took it for an affront, as she had reason,
and answered him very quick and loud, That that was one of the Reasons which
had kept her from admitting his passion; for she had considered, and thought it
more honorable to be a Kings Mistress, then Mistress to a younger Brother of
the House of Bourbon, who had nothing to trust to, but his Sword. And
Mademoiselle or Madam ( for now I know not by which of them to call you,
replied the Prince) I loved you too well to let your great honor be lost in
obscurity: It is to your own Charms you were indebted for your dignity, but it
was to me you were beholding for the discovery. I could not endure you should
be any longer deprived of those respects, which that great happiness would
procure you; had it not been for me (who took inconceivable pains to be
satisfied of the truth) the World had been still ignorant of your preferment,
it is to me you are indebted for the first publication: And so far was he
transported with severity, that least she should not yet understand what he
meant, he told her in express terms, That at her return from S. Cloud, it was
he who had found the Note that she had dropped; that at one a clock at night,
he had conveyed himself into her Alcove, and been a spectator of the joy and
alacrity, wherewith she undressed her self, when as ill luck would have it, all
her hopes were defeated by the indisposition of the Queen. In short, he omitted
nothing that he thought might provoke her to hate him, and he succeeded so
well, that from that time she hated him mortally.

The Prince made Courtship elsewhere, and Mademoiselle de S. Andre kept to her
King, and did very well. The first visit the King made her, she made her
complaints of the Prince of Conde, and represented his deportment so heinous,
that the King could not but be so far sensible, as to espouse her quarrel, and
revenge it. Whilst they were employed in searching an opportunity, the Prince
made new addresses to another of the Maids of Honor called Mademoiselle de
Limevil, a young Lady not altogether so beautiful as Mademoiselle de S. Andre,
but kinder and less proud: And indeed he applied himself so effectually to her,
that he arrived at that which is the end of most Courtship. She had by him a
Son, which was born under the Reign of Charles the Nineth, the twenty fifth of
May, One thousand five hundred sixty one, and in the very Louvre; but the
Queen, who at that time had need of the Prince of Conde to balance the power of
the house of Guise, that was grown too haughty, connived at her frailty.

The inclination which the Prince had to Mademoiselle de Limevil lasted not
long, but rather because the affairs of State had changed their face, then any
disgust that she gave him. In the mean time, the King was highly offended at
his behavior with Mademoiselle de S. Andre; had sworn his ruin, and that he
might be as good as his word, he sided with the Guises: The Prince was called
but very seldom to Council, though in Justice he was to have been the first in
rank, yet he found the Guises set before him, by the Kings express order, and
the same contempt that inhanced the hearts of his enemies, troubled him
exceedingly.

The Heresy which Luther had diffused all over Europe, had from the days of
Francis the First, and Henry the Second, infected France in sundry places; and
the Hugonots being stronger and more numerous then formerly, began to think of
revenging the cruelties that had been exercised toward them; and their desire
was to commence with the Guises, as well for the interest of their Religion (to
which the Guises were professed Enemies) as for the benefit of the State, of
which, out of animosity they had already pronounced them Subverters; they
wanted only a head as valiant as the Prince of Conde, and it is possible he
would have accepted it, if the conspiracy d'Amboise had succeeded. To justify
their designs, Libels were spread abroad, and it was said the Prince of Conde
(who had a great deal of wit) was Author of them himself. They Remonstrated
that by the Laws of that Kingdom, neither Women nor Strangers were to be
admitted to the chief Ministry, and many examples they cited to show, that the
Administration of Cardinals was always fatal to France.

These Libels were highly offensive to the Guises, and above all, to the
Cardinal of Lorraine; either because his Ministry justified the examples which
were alleged, or because his Enemies Reasons were strong enough to justify
the truth of what they published. He suspected a Counselor of the Parliament
of Paris, called du Burg (a person of singular merit and virtue:) This du Burg
had been a prisoner a complete twelve month, only for professing himself a
Lutheran (for in those days nothing was more criminal) and if all those who
died for Religion, had taken the right side, the ancient Romans would have had
fewer Martyrs, then the Reigns of Francis the Second, and Charles the Nineth.
Least de Burg should make worser discoveries, then those which they imputed to
him wrongfully already, order was given to his Judges (who in respect of his
great parts, were inclined to give him longer time to confess) to condemn him
with as much speed as could consist with the glory of God, which was exactly
performed to the great satisfaction of the Cardinal of Lorraine. The poor
Gentleman took his death with extraordinary constancy; his countenance was
quiet and composed; he exhorted such of his persuasion, as were present at his
execution, to lay down their lives as freely (if there were occasion) as he;
assuring them, that Death was the happiest thing in the World, when Men
suffered in so excellent a Cause. His words made a deep impression in the
hearts of those who had already imbibed that new opinion; and they believed
their Religion infinitely the better, because a person of his wisdom and
perspicacity, had chose to die rather then to entertain any other.

Du Burgs death begot great animosity in that Kingdom: The Hugonots first
design was to have revenged it by force; but the fear they had of being too
weak, made them take new measures, and change their resolution: Some would have
it, that they intended no farther then the Guises, others were of opinion,
their design would have gone farther, if it had succeeded. Be it how it will,
their conspiracy which makes so much noise in our History, and passes under the
name of the Conspiracy d'Ambois, was discovered. Renaudie, a Gentleman of
Perigord (a great Lutheran, and greater incendiary) imparted it to an Advocate
of his acquaintance; the Advocate to a Master of Requests, called Vouze; and
Vouze (either abhorring the design, or desirous to do a piece of service that
might deserve to be recompensed) discovered it to the Guises. Nothing was ever
more horrid then the passages at Ambois for a whole week together: The blood
ran down the Streets, and the Throats were cut of all such as were suspected to
have conspired.

Mademoiselle de S. Andre who had as much influence upon the King as she could
wish, and retained still an implacable enmity to the Prince of Conde, thought
this a fair opportunity to destroy him: She promised pardon to two of the
Conspirators, if they would accuse him of being the principal Agent: They
accused him, and, with him, the Admiral and Dandelot: It is true, one part of
their impeachment was right, and if that enterprise had succeeded, the Prince,
Admiral, and Dandelot would have declared; but the poor people that accused
him, knew nothing of that, and the King knowing as little of Madamoiselles
design, seemed notwithstanding to be of her Plot, for he promised them pardon
(as she had engaged) if they charged him effectually. But this promise gave her
no little disquiet; she was afraid when these false witnesses were at liberty,
that they would recant: She thought fit to consult her Father, the Marshall de
S. Andre, in the Case; told him what her hatred to the Prince had prompted her
to do, and withal acquainted him with her apprehension. The Marshall hated the
Prince of Conde, and his Daughter was too far engaged to retire; the Prince
must be ruined, or she was undone: Though the King did her the honor to love
her, and had promised her protection; yet it would have cost him no little
trouble to have justified a crime of so important a nature. To leave these poor
Creatures no possibility of betraying her, certain persons were sent to the
prison, to which the Witnesses were carried back, who having taken them aside,
slew them immediately, and they deserved it for their treachery.

The rupture of this marriage betwixt the Prince de Joinville, and Mademoiselle
de S. Andre, did no^ interrupt the amity betwixt the Guises and the Marshall;
for they continued the best Friends in the World. In the mean time, the Guises
gave orders for the arresting the Prince of Conde next morning; proceeding with
all possible vigor, upon presumption, that he was really guilty, from the
testimony of the two false witnesses which they had carefully examined, and
were not a little joyed to find their evidence so clear: For as to the secret
which Mademoiselle de S. Andre had communicated to her Father, it was too
tender and delicate to be entrusted to any body besides.

During all this confusion, the Admiral was at his house at Chastillon, where
with impatience he expected the success of the conspiracy; and Dandelot coming
to Ambois (where the Court was at that time) having met, upon the Road, with
some of the Conspirators who were escaped, fled into Brittany, where his Lady
had a very strong Castle. There was none of them at Court but the Prince of
Conde, who continued there to support the enterprise as occasion was offered;
in so much, as none was in such manifest danger as he; for he had undoubtedly
lost his head, if he had been arrested: But about two of the clock in the
morning, before the Duke of Guises orders were to be put in execution, one of
his Valets de Chamber, suddenly awaked him, and delivered him a Note, which he
had just then received, with commands to deliver it immediately without
consideration, whether he was awake or a sleep, for the Prince had never an
affair that concerned him more nearly. The Prince of Conde opened it, and found
it from a Woman, but he could not imagine the hand; however, that which was in
it permitted him to loose no time in examining from whence it came. It
contained only these few words,

Save your self Sir, or your are a dead Man; I have no time to inform you any
farther.


The Prince was too sensible of his guilt, to deliberate what he had to do. He
got up, and departed out of the Town with all possible diligence. The Guards at
the Gates having yet no notice of what was resolved, were so far from
obstructing his passage, that they suffered him to pass with all the respect
that was due to his quality. He retired to Orleans, where his reputation was
great, his friends considerable, and ready to sacrifice themselves for his
interest: He had not been long gone, before the Kings Guards invested his
Lodgings, and were not a little troubled to find him escaped: His accusers were
sent for, but both of them were murdered, and no account could be given by
whose orders: The suspicion was stronger against the Prince of Conde, then
against Mademoiselle de S. Andre, and yet it was the Marshall, not the Prince,
who had caused them to be slain. Generally people are most jealous of the
person accused, and the Court was of opinion, that the Prince enraged to see
himself betrayed, had revenged himself upon his accusers before he had fled. By
the Kings order, Process was framed against him, which if he had been taken,
would have certainly been finished; but finding him escaped, it was judged
imprudent to carry things to extremity, and they rather chose to pretend
ignorance of that conspiracy, then to give occasion for new.

This temper and moderation in their Politics, did not at all accommodate with
the fury of Mademoiselle de S. Andre she complained of it to the King, who
acquainted her with the Reasons, upon which the Council had proceeded in that
manner; and told her, That the ruin of the Prince was but deferred, for he
would never pardon him, or forget his insolence to her: Some few days after,
the Court removed from Ambois to Orleans, where the States General were to
meet. The Prince was departed from thence to the Admiral at Chastillon, and
from thence to his Brother, the King of Navarre, who was at that time in his
Government in Guyenne. Passing by Chastillon, he showed the Admiral the Note by
which his life was preserved; the Admiral knew the hand, and assured him it
came from the Marshall de S. Andres Lady; but the Prince found so little
probability in that, that he could not possibly believe it.

In the interim, the time approached for the Convention of the Estates. All the
Princes of the Blood, and all the great Officers of the Crown, were required to
be present, upon pain of being degraded from their Dignities, and reputed
accessories in the Conspiracy. The Admiral not believing himself accused,
appeared at the place, but the King of Navarre (being less considerable at
Court then the Guises) refused to be present; and the Prince of Conde (who had
been practicing in all the Towns through which he passed) was so far from
obeying the Summons, that he raised Men with the Moneys he received from the
Hugonots to remove the Guises by force of Arms, which was concluded to be the
only way, considering the difficulty of a Conjuration, where so many were to be
entrusted; that it was hard but some of them would either be treacherous or
imprudent. The Caresses wherewith the Admiral was treated at Orleans, did
easily persuade him, that he was not at all suspected, and that the Note sent
to the Prince of Conde, was but an artifice of the Marshall and the Guises, to
remove him from Court, and render him suspect. He writ to the King of Navarre,
and the Prince of Conde, and conjured them not to make themselves criminal: He
assured them, they would be graciously received, and that their presence was
necessary to balance and correct the power of the Guises, which was like to be
too potent, unless restrained by the presence of the Princes of the Blood.
These Letters not prevailing, he writ again, and sent them word, That it was by
the Queens orders, who was grown weary (as well as the rest of the State) of
the Dominion and Tyranny of the Guises; and least they should question the
truth of his Letters, he sent them another, in which the Queen Mother explained
her self, under her own hand, and conjured them to rescue her from the
oppressions of that family.

This Letter was effectual, and brought them to the Lure: The desire which they
had to wrest the Government out of the hands of the Guises, made them forget
that the Queen was the most dissembling Princess of her time. The King of
Navarre would needs go, and (notwithstanding his repugnancy) pressed the Prince
of Conde so earnestly, that he was not able to deny him.

Mademoiselle de S. Andre (who had sworn never to pardon the Prince of Conde,
for the dishonor which he had occasioned to her, and his insolent expressions
thereupon) chose that moment wherein his Majesty was in his ecstasy of
pleasure, to beseech him (if he loved her as he pretended) to revenge and rid
her of a person, whose very presence was a secret reproach to her, which she
was not able to bear. What can a Man refuse his Mistress at such a time? or
rather, what will he not grant? The King need not have been in love, to have
been blind; he was of an age incapable of reflections; he promised her the
Prince should die; and would have promised her more, if she had desired it. As
soon as the King of Navarre came to Orleans, he was allowed his Guards; but the
Prince of Conde was arrested and put into custody: They revived his Process
that had been laid aside; accused him to have had a principal hand in the
conspiracy d'Ambois, and to have caused his accusers to be murdered, to conceal
the evidence of his crime: The King and Mademoiselle instructed his Judges;
after which it was a hard matter to prove himself innocent. As often as they
charged him with the murder of the Witnesses, he appeared strangely disturbed,
and that disturbance was taken by those who were to judge him as a great
argument of his guilt. They confronted him with one Sague, Secretary to the
King of Navarre, whom either the fear of the Rack, or the hopes of a recompense
had made to tell dangerous things. He was amazed to see that unhappy person
(who had received great obligations from him) to hold intelligence with his
Enemies, and endeavor his destruction; and this surprise was seconded by
another far more incomprehensible. One of his Guards, and a Man who would
attempt any thing for Money, gave him privately a Note that he had received
from an unknown person, who had conjured him to deliver it into the Princes own
hand: The Prince opened it, and found presently by the character, that it came
from the same person who had advised him so seasonably to preserve himself at
Ambois: He doubted not but now also she had something of great importance to
advertise, and in that opinion he read it hastily, and found these words.

TAke my advice Sir, and prepare for your
death; it is to no purpose to think of a
defense: The person that prosecutes you, is
a Friend to the State; nothing appears
more guilty then you: They who
(out of true Zeal and Loyalty to the King)
have rendered you so Criminal, were
honest Men, and incapable to be
suborned. I have too great an interest
in the mischeifs that you have done
in your life, to conceal from you
that the decree of your death is no longer
so great a secret. Those wicked fellows
(for so it is, you are pleased to call them)
who have adventured to accuse you, deserve
a recompense as justly, as you do
that death which is preparing for you; it is only
your Vanity persuades you, that
your Merit has created you Enemies,
and that it is not your Crimes,
which have caused your disgrace: Deny
with your usual impudence and obstinacy,
that you ever had any hand in the
wicked and detestable practices of the
Conspiracy of Ambois:It is not
(whatever you imagine to the contrary) im-
Possible to convict you. Fare
as you please, but prepare your self
well.

The poor Prince perceiving every body to insult upon his misery, had like to
have lost all patience: He could not comprehend upon what reason the same
person, who had advertised him so kindly before, to preserve himself, should
trample upon him now unnecessarily in so sad a conjuncture. Either he thought
he had never merited from her the least concern for his life, or else he
believed he had deserved what she had done for him; and though perhaps he had
not actually expressed himself in her service so far, as to oblige her to that
favor; yet he had never done any thing to displease her, or provoke her to that
insolence. However this way of proceeding was so different from her former,
that he took the Letter (which he had thrown upon the Table) read it over
again, and could not find one word in it, but of injury and reproach. He folded
it, and unfolded it several times to see if there was no mystery; for standing
as he did, accused of High Treason, it was dangerous to deliver their advice
too plainly, how favorably soever they might stand. He searched and examined so
long, that at length he found what he looked for. This Letter to read it, as
Letters are generally read, was without question, highly disobliging; but to
read it but half, that is after you have read the first line, to skip the
second, then the fourth, then the sixth, and so on with the rest, it will be
found in these terms.

TAke my advice Sir, and prepare for your
defense; the person that prosecutes you, is
more guilty then you. They who
have rendered you so criminal, were
suborned: I have too great an interest
in your life, to conceal from you
so great asecret. Those wicked fellows
who have adventured to accuse you, deserve
that death which is preparing for you. It is only
your Merit has created you Enemies
which have caused your disgrace: Deny
that you ever had any hand in the
Conspiracy of Ambois: It is not
possible to convict you. Fare
well.

There was great difference betwixt these two Letters: The Prince owned himself
infinitely obliged to the person who had writ it, for the share which she took
in his misfortunes, and the hints that she gave him; and he was extremely taken
with her invention, to signify her kindness so neatly, without exposing her
self (for certainly had the Letter miscarried, and been brought to the King, it
would rather have advanced her, then created her any trouble.) Very impatient
he was to know this Lady, to whom he was so prodigiously obliged, that he might
at least make her see how sensible he was of her favors: He could not make
himself believe it was Madam la Marshall, as the Admiral had assured him; and
the hatred that for a long time had been betwixt their two Families, was indeed
sufficient to dissuade him.

Whilst he was pondering with himself, and beating his brains to find out the
Author of this Letter. His Judges came into his Chamber to interrogate him the
last time; he denied very constantly, that he had any part in the conspiracy of
Ambois; maintained that his accusers had been suborned, and then murdered by
his Enemies, least they should have recanted, and not persevered in their
testimony; but not one word of the Letter which he had received: And though he
had been sure to have cleared himself by showing it in its natural sense, he
would rather have chosen to die, then have been ungrateful to a person who had
endeavored to preserve him with so much generosity. The Judges (whose integrity
was not to be biased by favor) could find nothing of clear evidence against
the Prince; but those who were delegated by the King, and Mademoiselle de S.
Andre, with instruction to be sure to find him guilty (as if whatever they did
for their own preferment would be just) alleged, that they had farther proof,
and the number of them being greater then the other; they framed an Arrest
against him (which the Chancellor de l'Hospital refused very wisely to sign)
and ordered him to be beheaded at the same hour when the States entered into
their House. But the King, Mademoiselle de S. Andre, nor the Judges, who had
been very busy in procuring this Arrest, had not the pleasure to see it
executed. The King fell ill, in the mean time, upon which, the Queen Mother
caused execution to be suspended; not so much in consideration of the Prince,
as of her own particular interest. She had the sole Regency of the State, and
doubted not, but if the King died, the face of affairs would alter, her other
Children being in their minority; which minority, being a great favorer of
ambition, she feared that if the grandeur of the Guises remained without
counterpoise, it would become as dangerous as the practices of the Princes of
the Blood.

This providence of the Queen Mother was not impertinent. The King died, and
the authority of Mademoiselle de S. Andre died with him. To avoid the
resentments of the Prince of Conde, and those of the Queen Mother (who hated
her mortally, for that she had wrought her self so cunningly into the
affections of the King) Mademoiselle de S. Andre retired into a Nunnery at Long
Champ. Francis the Second having no Children by Queen Mary of Scotland, the
next of his Brothers, who was Duke of Anjou, succeeded him by the name of
Charles the Ninth.

To dissipate the troubles which hindered Queen Catherine from the peaceable
enjoyment of her Regency; she endeavored an accommodation betwixt the Princes
of Bourbon, and the House of Lorraine. Neither party declined it, and the
Treaties being well received both on the one side, and the other, all was
composed, and the Prince of Conde discharged of his imprisonment by an eminent
Arrest of the Parliament.

I am telling a very true story, and yet it is almost incredible: The Prince of
Conde was so naturally amorous, that he fell in love even at the time that
Sentence of Death was pronounced against him: I am of opinion, there is not an
example of any Man that chose so improper a season as then: Whilst he was
uncertain what would be the event of the Kings sickness, he reflected sometimes
upon the Letter which he had received, and found it so full of kindness, that
it would have been a second death to him, to have died ungrateful. The desire
which he had to know to whom he was so highly obliged; the desire he had to
testify his acknowledgments; and the delight he took in his Obligation, were
things which I call love, and effectually they were so.

As soon as the Parliament had secured the honor of this Prince, his love
thought it time to act for his interest. The Prince concealing nothing from the
Admiral, showed him the Letter which was sent him in prison. The Admiral
assured him again, that it was from Madam la Marshall de S. Andre, and that he
knew the hand perfectly well. If it be so (said the Prince) I love Madam la
Marshall de S. Andre; and all that you can say to divert me, shall not hinder
me from loving her eternally. The hatred which was betwixt me and her Husband
(and perhaps is still) is increased thereby: For the accommodation made by the
Queen, is in truth but a palliated Peace; and besides, if my Reasons of State
were not, my Reasons of Love are abundantly sufficient to make me hate him; if
for nothing but being Husband to a Lady, for whom I have so great an affection.
But to return to Madam la Mareschalle, since the animosity (said he) betwixt
her Husband and me, hindered her not from making so generous efforts to oblige
me: I must love her, and that love without question will last: It is founded on
gratitude, which is a virtue to which I shall pretend as long as I live.

This Madam la Mareschalle was not own Mother to Mademoiselle de S. Andre. The
Marshall had married her Son three years since, and she was, at the most, but
two and twenty years of age, if she was so much. She was not altogether so
beautiful as her Daughter in Law, but she had beauty enough to captivate any
Man; and as nice as the Prince was, had wherewithal to make her self beloved by
him, without the assistance of the favors which she had done him. The Marshall
de S. Andre was grown white, and the fatigues of the War, how great soever they
had been, had contributed less to it, then five and fifty years, which he
confessed (though his greyness spoke him at least sixty;) but an old man
married to a young Lady makes always the best of his age, and will be sure to
conceal something. The Prince of Conde was very young, as handsome a person as
belonged to the Court, and was besides of excellent parts. Madam la Mareschalle
was not ignorant of it; for she also had her share, and upon the bare
reputation of the Prince, had conceived so great an esteem for him, as gave her
a concern for every thing that befell him. Her Husband (to comfort her for that,
of which his age had deprived her) had a strange kindness for her, which would
have been altogether unuseful, had not she taken advantage of it to be
serviceable to the Prince; he imparted to her all the transactions of State. It
was from him, that she had understood, that the Prince was to be arrested, when
she gave him advice at two a clock in the Morning to escape from Ambois. It was
he again, that was so weak to trust her with a secret, which his Daughter would
not have committed to any body but him; and certainly it had been sufficient to
ruin them both, had Madam la Mareschalle been as imprudent as her Husband.

The Prince was much disquieted with his new passion, and more solicitous for
his Mistress, then his life, though he knew not who she was, (for whatever the
Admiral could say to assure him, he still doubted whether it was Madam la
Mareschalle, to whom he was so strictly obliged.) The Prince made a visit to
the Marshall de S. Andre, and expressed great satisfaction in the
accommodation which the Queen Mother had made; but Madam la Mareschalle being
abroad, the Prince was so troubled that the Marshall de S. Andre perceiving it
in his looks, imagined that he paid him that complement with regret, and that
he was still his Enemy at the heart. His visit was but short, however he
excused it to the Marshall as well as he could. he told him, that his
resolutions were, for the future, to live in perfect amity with him, and to
visit him as often as he had opportunity.

Madam la Mareschalle had been to wait upon the Queen, and came in just as the
Prince was taking his leave of her Husband; so unexpected a sight of him, put
her to the blush. And the Prince, though not altogether so subject to blush,
perceived something in himself, that he was not accustomed to feel, which
privately suggested, that this was the Lady to whom he was so infinitely
obliged: He made her a short complement, but so perplexed and mysterious, that
her Husband could make nothing of it, though she understood it perfectly, and
was the more pleased with it, because it was not intelligible to all the World.
She answered too in such a manner, as gave no jealousy to the Marshall, and
yet the Prince thought somethings of it very kind; not that it was effectually
so, but he desired it should have been so, and men do easily believe what they
do passionately desire. They parted, the Prince, and Madam la Mareschalle
infinitely well pleased at their enterview, and the Marshall himself at the
same rate, neither better nor worse, then before the visit was made.

At night they met again at Court: Madam la Mareschalle was come thither to pay
her devoir, and the Prince was come thither to see her. The Duke of Guise
having something to say to the Marshall de S. Andre, took him aside, to the
great satisfaction of the Prince of Conde, who was ambitious of nothing more
then an opportunity of entertaining the Lady, which he had not confidence to
attempt whilst her Husband was present. Madam la Mareschalle, who cast her
eyes every moment upon the Prince, and was still encountered with the same
glances from him; thought she should not offend him, if she gave him a small
opportunity to accost her; and that he might do it with more ease, and she have
occasion to quit the Ladies, with whom she was in some impertinent discourse,
she pretended her Watch was down, and went to see what a clock it was at a
little clock in the Queens Antichamber: This project succeeded as she desired.
The Prince accosted her, and finding there was no body could hear him but
herself. I do not know Madam (said he) whether this be the hour that you would
have it: For my own part, I never expect to find one so favorable as to give me
opportunity to testify the Sentiments I have of your incomparable goodness;
for since I am at liberty, I ought to be ashamed to have made no better use of
a blessing that I have received wholly from you.

Madam la Mareschalle replied to the Princes civility, with as much modesty on
her side, pretending she understood nothing of what he said. He explained
himself; she had really an esteem for him, and perhaps what she thought nothing
but esteem, was indeed something more then she imagined: However she owned it
not positively, as unwilling to run a risk in a thing that might reflect upon
her reputation, before she understood him better then at that time she did. Why
Madam, said the Prince, is it possible I should be so unhappy, as to ow my life
to any but your self? I believe (said Madam la Marshall) it is to your own
innocence you ow it, and to no body else; and (supposing that was not
sufficient to absolve you) a prisoner of your birth, and accomlishments, has
greater privileges then ordinary. These are my thoughts, but if you desire I
should rather come over to yours, and believe it to some other person that you
are obliged for your life, though it were to your greatest enemy, I do not see
how you could call it an unhappiness. It is one Madam (replied the Prince) and
so much the greater, because I proposed no happiness equal to my being obliged
to you: It would have persuaded me, I had not been altogether indifferent to
you, and the duty which I had ought you, would have justified a passion that I
find increasing in me, and cannot but take this opportunity to discover: You
would, I say, have added love to my gratitude...... I see Madam (continued the
Prince, something more hastily then before) that word to which you are not
accustomed, is offensive to a virtue so tender, and so delicate as yours; but
my error is the cause of my boldness. I thought I could not have acquitted my
self of the duty which I ought you, but by loving you entirely: And the more
love I entertained, the more grateful I thought my self: However Madam, I am
most desperately in love; the Letters which I received, contributed to make me
so; and from the time I fancied them from your Ladyship, I have so accustomed
my self to love you, that if at present, it offends you, you ought to excuse it
as proceeding from a habit that is not easily removed. Madam la Mareschalle had
the good word of every body, and had hitherto preserved her reputation against
the attacks of Envy it self, which rendered her one of the most celebrated
persons of her time; nevertheless she could not but lend an ear to the passion
of so great a man as the Prince of Conde. She hearkened to all that the ardor of
his affection could dictate to his tongue; and when he had done, retired
without giving him any answer, rather to irritate and foment, then to revenge
or extirpate the love which he had conceived. Since her daughter in law was
recluse in the Nunnery at Longchamp, no body at Court was able to contend with
her; so as she had many Servants, and among the rest Anthony of Bourbon, King
of Navarre, and own Brother to the Prince of Conde: But being resolved, if she
entertained any, to have a lover whose excellent accomplishments, might in some
measure excuse her weaknesses, if it should be thought so; and that King being
timorous and irresolute, she continued firm in her inclinations to the Prince.

Two Rivals are never long without emulation, and how strong soever the
ligaments of blood may be, love will easily break them when they become
obstacles to their designs. The King of Navarre, who before was an Enemy to the
Guises, joining with their party, rendered it more strong; for some few days
before, by the Edict of Pacification, he was declared Lieutenant General of the
Kingdom. The War being not quite extinct, it was no hard matter to revive it,
and Fortune presented them with a pretense which both parties did equally
desire.

The first of March, in the year One thousand five hundred sixty and two, as
the Duke of Guise was passing by the little Town of Vassi, some of his retinue,
in curiosity, entered into a House where the Hugonotes were at their devotion,
and perhaps treated them with derision; which being disgusted by the Hugonotes,
a quarrel began, and from words they came insensibly to blows: The Duke of
Guise running in amongst them, to prevent any disorder, his presence revived
the hatred which the Hugonotes had for him; and one of them had the confidence
to throw a stone at him, and broke his head; which so animated his people
against them, that afterward he was not able to restrain them: And though he
used the utmost of his authority to hinder them, above fifty of the Hugonotes
were slain, and more then two hundred wounded. This was the Massacre at Vassi,
which has made such a noise in our History, and was a praeludium to all the
Wars which succeeded, not only in the Reign of Charles the Nineth, but
afterward under Henry the Third, and Henry the Fourth.

Report (that never presents any thing fairly, and as it is) carried the news
of this outrage to the Prince of Conde; and accompanied it with so many ill
circumstances, as gave him occasion to presume, that the Duke of Guise was the
Author. He departed immediately to attend the King at Monceaux, where, for some
days, he was diverting himself with the Queen Mother, and his Brothers, the
Dukes of Anjon and Alencon, in whose presence he complained to his Majesty of
the violence, which the Duke of Guise had used (contrary to the Articles of the
Treaty) to the prejudice of the Privileges granted to that new opinion; but by
the coldness of his answer, he found he was not to expect reparation, unless it
were demanded with his Sword in his hand. He dispatched Messengers privately to
the chief of his party, who since the late pacification were dispersed into
several Provinces; and appointed them a Rendezvous at Orleans, where (in spite
of the Arrest that was given against him, in the time of the late King) his
name was highly considerable. He was much pleased with so fair a pretense of
renewing the War; for his valor could not be idle: But this Martial inclination
was much impugned by another, which at that time, was more strong upon his
heart; and the Passion which he had for the Marshall de S. Andre, was
incompatible with a design that would remove him so far from her. The Queen
Mother, who for her own interest, apprehended they would seize upon the King,
in whose person all her authority was placed, conveyed him with all diligence
to Paris; but because the Cabal of the Guises (which she feared no less then
that of the Prince) were as powerful, she thought him not safe there, but two
days after removed him to Fountainbleau. The King of Navarre, whose character
of Lieutenant General of the Kingdom, obliged him to remain some time at Paris,
to give out such orders as were necessary for the good of the State, failed not
every day to multiply his visits to Madam la Mareschalle de S. Andre, who did
not reckon it among her good fortunes to receive them; her heart being too full
of the Prince of Conde, to afford room for any body else. To increase the good
opinion of her Husband, and give him farther assurance of her fidelity, which
he thought already incorruptible (and yet it was tottering at that very time)
she discovered to him the designs of the King of Navarre, who the day before
had intimated his affection; and told him, that after so mortal an injury, the
very sight of him would be a trouble, from which she would willingly be excused.

the Marshall ravished with the virtue of his Wife, granted her desire, and
consented, that the King of Navarre should be requested to discontinue his
visits: For his own part, though the offense which the King had committed, was
of an unpardonable nature, yet the Marshall suspended his resentment, least it
should separate him from his party, and engage him with the Prince. The next
day the King of Navarre renewing his visits to Madam la Mareschalle, was told
she was not within: He asked for the Marshall, and was answered, That he also
was abroad. This is not true (replied the King of Navarre) the Prince of Conde
is here, I see by his Liveries, and Madam la Mareschelle is with him, for it is
not to her Husband he makes his visits: And having said so, he presumed so far
upon the privilege of his quality, as to go up the Stairs into the Ladies
appartment, where he found the Prince, as he said. It is most certain, the
sight of a Rival, who is suspected to be in greater favor, disturbs a man
exceedingly where his Passion is strong. The King of Navarre could not support
the affront which Madam la Mareschelle had done him, in preferring his Brother,
whom he looked upon as much inferior to himself, in respect of the inequality
of his power; but the Mareschals Lady regarded not that: On the contrary, the
Princes extraordinary merit, made her look upon other things as the injustice
of Fortune, to which, if it had been in her power to have administered a remedy,
there is nothing but she would have enterprised, to have proved her self the
less blind of the two. You have reason Madam (said the King of Navarre, as he
came in) to deny your self to be at home; it is not grateful to be interrupted
in so pleasant a privacy: I see I have taken an ill time to visit you, which
perhaps you will not easily pardon. The Lady was much disturbed at the sight of
the King of Navarre, as being unwilling to have been surprised with the Prince
of Conde, though nothing passed betwixt them, that Fame it self could reproach;
and assuming an air more fierce then usual, she replied, That in the privacy
she enjoyed with his Brother, she feared no such affront as she had received
not many days before; and that to prevent a second from the same person, she
would take her measures so, as he should never find her alone. I suppose I
understand you Madam, replied the King of Navarre, you have no desire that I
should find you alone, but you are not offended to be alone with another; and
the orders you left with your Porter, assures me, that I should have done you a
kindness to have left you so now. Since you are pleased Monsieur, replied the
Lady. (For though he was King of Navarre, being born a Subject to the King of
France, they called him not SIRE, but only Monseigneur, as first Prince of the
Blood; but Madam la Mareschalle being in a Passion against him, thought her
self excusable in that point, and not obliged to those punctilioes with a
Prince who had treated her in that manner.) Since you are pleased Monsieur
(said she) to name your self, as if you had feared I should have imputed the
affront, which you have done me, to some other person, I will not rob you of
the honor of so noble an action: For a need I shall go farther, and confess to
you ingenuously, that the orders given to my Porter, were intended only for
you. This is too much Madam, replied the King of Navarre, and the presence of
that person whom you prefer, exacted not from you so blind a complaisance. I
have declared I love you, and am ready to do it again; if it be a weakness, it
is a weakness that may without dishonor be owned: I know not (however) upon
what reason you condemn it in me, and approve it in another. Madam la
Mareschalle would have returned him an answer, but the Prince prevented it, and
told the King of Navarre, in some kind of heat, That he considered neither his
Seniority, nor Majesty, when the reputation of Madam la Mareschalle was at
stake; that he forgot there, what perhaps he might ow him in another place;
that what she condemned in him, was condemnable in all the World; and that he
ought to judge more favorably of her virtue, seeing the temptation of his Crown
was not able to stagger it.

You speak Sir, a little too high (replied the King of Navarre) but I do not
admire it. Madam la Mareschalle inspires courage where she pleases; yet she
must give me leave to question, whether so bold a defender of her reputation,
contributes much to its establishment; and for what you would have me judge of
her virtue, the great care you take of it, is a great means to keep me from a
rash and temerarious construction.

Adieu Madam, said he, addressing himself toward her, I do not envy my Brother
the favors which you show him: It is but reason he should be favored in his
love, who has had so little of it in his fortune; and if your Ladyship will
give me leave to be free, I must tell you, I perceive that to be younger seven
or eight years, is an advantage that makes a man much more considerable to you.
And having said so, he went out resolved to revenge himself, both upon the Lady
and Prince. Though there was nothing in the passion which the Prince had for
Madam la Mareschalle, at which, the most nice and scrupulous Virtue could have
been scandalized, yet he was not a little discomposed, that the King of Navarre
should find them together. He made large Apologies that his visit was so
unseasonable, and promised to show his resentment so far, (if report should any
ways entrench upon her honor) that the Lady was not only affected, but forbore
not to testify it.

He had not had the happiness to discourse with her, since their conference in
the Queens Lodgings; and notwithstanding all the pains which he took to create
an occasion, she kept her self carefully upon her guard, and indeed declined
him as much as she could, least the esteem she had for him should be drawn into
an intelligence with his affection for her. The Prince in this anxiety being
about to leave Paris, and expose himself to the uncertainty of the Wars, could
not resolve to leave the Town without explaining himself once more to Madam la
Mareschalle; and to prevent her avoiding him, he made her a visit at her own
House, where he had been a complete hour before the King of Navarre interrupted
them. Whilst he was alone with her, he had expressed himself so tenderly, and
with so much testimony of his love, represented to her the possibility that
this might be the last moment in which he might ever see her again; that the
fortune of the Wars was uncertain; and, that if she suffered him to depart
without satisfying him, that it was to her he ought all his obligations, his
life would be a burden to him, of which he would endeavor to ease himself, the
first Battle he should be engaged in. He, I say, expressed himself so
passionately in these terms, that at length she could not hold, but cried out.
Live Sir, live; and if you have any passion for me, make good use of that
service which I have endeavored to render you. Alas Madam, replied the Prince,
how unprofitable is all your kindness, if your Virtue will not permit my
acknowledgments to exceed the degree of esteem! As many times as I have
presumed to declare my affections, so many times have your eyes (which I always
carefully observed) checked and reprehended my boldness; and now even at this
moment I see your color change, and your modesty, as it were, upbraiding me,
for setting so great a value upon your generosity and goodness. It is true
Madam, when at first you complained to me of the importunity of the King of
Navarre, I thought myself admonished, that I could not do the same thing,
without giving your Ladyship the same offense: But when I considered, that he
had never been received but with indifferency, and could not pretend to any
obligation upon account of your favors, I looked upon the Declaration which he
had the confidence to make, as an intrenchment upon your honor; whereas you
having been so noble as to concern your self for me, even to the saving of my
life, I thought my self obliged to love you upon much better grounds then he;
and to speak truth, I thought I could not conceal it without the highest
ingratitude.

This was their discourse before the King of Navarre came in; and the Prince
had negotiated so well, that he had prevailed with her to permit his affection.
But, I beseech you, (said Madam la Mareschalle to the Prince) never see me
again after the consent which you have extorted from me: I consent upon no
other condition, but that for the future your presence does not reproach my
weakness; and it is by your obedience in this point, that I must be convinced
of your love.

These words went very near him, yet as soon as the King of Navarre was gone,
he took his leave also. This parting was not however without great trouble; it
cost the Prince many a sigh, and Madam la Mareschalle who had forced her self
much to conceal her own sorrow, ceased to constrain her self as soon as he was
out of sight, and paid him in tears for all the sighs he had laid out.

Things being in this posture betwixt the Prince and Madam la Mareschalle, the
King of Navarre, more in spite to his Brother, then any religious
consideration, turned Catholic, and went over to the Church of Rome. Before
this, the Connestable de Montmorency had always been of the Princes party, but
being informed that the Prince had moved in Counsel for the resumption of some
gifts, and supposing himself the mark at which he principally aimed, because in
the Reign of Henry the Second, he had received One hundred thousand Crowns, of
which he had given no account; he joined himself with the Duke of Guise, and
the Marshall de S. Andre, under pretense of preserving the Religion of his
Ancestors: But the truth is, it was only fear of being obliged to refund; and
all that could be said by his Son the Marshall Mortmorency (repuced the Wisest
Man in the Kingdom) was not of power to divert him.

This League, which the Hugonotes called The Triumvirate, being augmented by
the accession of the King of Navarre, and the reputation that accompanied him
as Lieutenant General of the Kingdom; the Hugonots forsook Paris, where the
Catholics were prevalent. The Protestants were no sooner in the Field, and the
Prince of Conde at the head of them, but they began to make their Enemies
tremble, as their Enemies had made them before. The Catholics would not
propose it to the King to return to Paris, because the Prince of Condes party
increasing daily in their numbers, it was not impossible but they might seize
upon the Kings person. To prevent the mischeifs of such an accident, the King
of Navarre, the Duke of Guise, and the Connestable repaired to Fountainbleau
with all speed, where they found the Queen hesitating and uncertain which party
she should take; besides that, she was weary of the domination of the Guises,
it is said, that the Prince of Condes Religion appeared more commodious to her,
then her own: The History mentions a Letter which the Queen Mother writ to him
some few days before, which he sent afterward to all the Protestant Princes in
Germany, to provoke their assistance; the words of it were these.

I Watch only for a favorable opportunity to embrace your Party, and perhaps
your Religion. Have you a care on your side, and act prudently, that after so
great an advance, I may have no cause to desist. On my part, I will omit
nothing that may deliver me from the oppression I am under; I know what
measures I am to take to lull and infatuate the Guises, and when they believe
me the best Friend they have in the World, I shall let them see, That in Italy
there is no such Virtue as Sincerity. Consider the great confidence I repose in
you, and that I do entrust you with my Sons Interest, the Kingdoms, and my Own.


It was a strange surprise to the Queen Mother, to find her self pressed by the
Confederates, to bring the King back again to Paris. Before she could put her
self under the protection of the Prince, she expected till his Army should be
strong enough to constrain the rest of the Kingdom, to the expulsion of the
Guises; and because daily, Gentlemen were observed to repair to him, from all
the Provinces in France, to tender him their service, she thought that time was
not far off, and therefore expected it with the more patience.

These considerations obliged her to temporise, and her design was as soon as
the King of Navarre, and his Associates were returned to Paris, to take a
contrary Road, and carry the King to Orleans; which was the place of the Prince
of Condes Rendezvous, and the chief receptable of his Party. The Duke of Guise
having had long experience of her cunning, told her, That the Person of the
King was too dear to them to be trusted out of their sight, in so ticklish a
conjuncture; and the King of Navarre (who was naturally frank) added, That for
her self she might stay if she pleased, but there was a necessity that the King
must go along with them; and calling for his Coach, they carried him, with
tears in his eyes, to Melun that night; the next day to the Bois de Vincennes,
and from thence to Paris; where, under pretense of magnificence, they placed a
strong guard about him.

The Prince was much troubled when he understood the King was in his Enemies
hands, and thinking at first it had been a trick of the Queens; he took all
ways that he could invent to revenge himself of her. He published a Manifesto,
remonstrating, That the King of Navarre was entered into intelligence with the
Guises, to keep their Sovereign in durance; and to justify what he said, he
inserted the Queens Letter to him, and offered a sight of the original to any
Man that suspected it. There was so much probability in what he affirmed, That
all who were impartial, and not of the Guises Party absolutely, made no scruple
to believe it. However, those who were Neutral, and neither of the one party,
nor the other, got together in troops to demand the enlargement of their King;
and their numbers increased so fast, that they grew formidable to the
Confederates, insomuch, that they were obliged to procure a Declaration from
him (which they dispersed into all the Provinces of the Kingdom) importing,
That their Majesty's were perfectly at liberty, and had chosen Paris as a place
more proper for their safety; that to cajole the Hugonotes who had a design to
have seized upon the King, the Queen Mother had thought it convenient to
flatter them with frivolous hopes, and to wheedle the chief of their Party,
with a Letter that had succeeded as she desired.

This Declaration was followed with an Arrest of the Parliament, permitting any
Man to murder the Protestants wherever they met them, as persons guilty of
Treason both against God and their King. Nevertheless, no hostility having been
committed either on one side, or the other, the Chancellor de l'Hospital (one
of the wisest men of his time) used all his interest to dissipate a storm that
had been gathering and condensing so long: But his endeavors were ineffectual;
the War brake out in so many places together, that nothing but a shower of
Blood could extinguish it.

Love, which commonly is not to be found, but amongst sports and recreations,
had the courage to behold all these dreadful preparations for a Civil War. The
King of Navarre having made a second attempt upon the Virtue of the Mareschals
Lady, and with as little success, resolved to loose no more time about her, but
to comfort himself against his repulse there, by making his addresses to
Mademoiselle de Rouet, (a Maid of Honor to the Queen) and one that was not like
to be so inexorable. On the other side, Mademoiselle de Limevil her Companion,
and Maid of Honor to the Queen, as she was, (whom the Prince of Conde had
formerly loved, and arrived at such familiarity with her, as was for some time
an inconvenience to her) made it her business, as much as possible, to convert
his impatience to be fighting, into another passion, where she found the combat
was not altogether so unpleasant. She knew his inclinations, and did not doubt,
how valiant soever he was, but he was as sensible of Love, as of Honor. She
writ to him, and desired him to consider, That he was making War against a
person, for whom he had formerly had more kindness, for her Religion had placed
her among his Enemies.

This Letter not having the effect that she expected, she writ to him a second,
but to no more purpose then the first: At which she was so highly offended,
that for some time she was mortally angry with her self, that it was not in her
power to hate him.

The Queen (who during the War, had but an imperfect enjoyment of her Regency,
because all things went through the hands of the Lieutenant General of the
Kingdom) understanding by Mademoiselle de Rouet (to whom the King of Navarre
had discovered it) that the Marshall de S. Andres Lady had a great influence
upon the Prince of Conde, she sent for her privately, and conjured her to
employ her utmost authority, to make him consent to the Peace; promising she
would never be unmindful of so great an obligation. Had Madam la Marshall
durst to have trusted her with her intrigues, she would have done as the Queen
had desired. Her passion for the Prince increased every day; and though she had
Virtue enough to resist, she had not Virtue enough to triumph. She knew that to
encourage his Troops, and animate them against all danger, he would be sure to
show them an example, and expose himself first where the danger was greatest;
and this thought gave her such great and frequent anxieties, that under
pretense of being solicitous for her Husband, she conjured him to dispose the
Duke of Guise to an accommodation, as the Queen did desire. In the mean time,
the distance of the Prince was a torment to her; yet the reputation that she
had to be the person of the least scandal in the whole Court, corrected her
natural inclination: For the conservation of her Honor, she renounced her
affection, and would have acquired greater esteem, had she been always of that
mind.

The Queen disgusted that Madam la Mareschelle refused to write to the Prince;
and being desirous to know whether he had any kindness for her or not, resolved
to write to him her self.

After she had displayed the best Arguments she could think of, to persuade him
to consent to an accommodation, and represented to him, That the King (to whom
she had the honor to be Mother) the State, and her self, should be indebted to
him for their repose; she added, That thereby he would likewise do a singular
favor to Madam le Mareschalle, who would have writ to him her self, if it might
have been done with security: And to clear all doubts, that he might conceive
in his mind, she would bring her along to Mont le Hery, if he thought good to
meet at a day that she would appoint (attended only with fifty men, and she
with the same number) to confer about some way of preventing a War, in which
the happiest success that could be looked for, must needs be fatal to France.

The Prince thought no pleasure equal to a sight of his Mistress, and therefore
returned answer to the Queen, by the same Messenger, That he would not fail to
attend her Majesty at the Rendezvous, where ever she thought fit to command.
The Admiral, who was by that time come to Orleans, was of another opinion: He
understood the Queen so well, that all overtures from her were suspected by
him; but when Love speaks, for the most part nothing else can be heard: So that
it is no great wonder, if all the Reasons that the Admiral applied to the
contrary, had no effect upon the Prince.

The day the Queen had appointed being arrived, the amorous Prince appeared in
sight of Mont le Hery, and the Admiral suspecting some stratagem against his
person, put himself into his equipage, and made one of the fifty; though he was
not able to divert him from meeting, yet he persuaded him from trusting himself
in a Town that was inclined to the interest of the Guises; which reason was
sufficient to make him suspicious. The Queen came thither the day before;
before she came out of Paris, she commanded two of her Maids to pretend
themselves sick, that she might have a more plausible pretense, to take along
with her Madam la Mareschalle de S. Andre, and it succeeded as she desired: For
the Marshall was so far from giving any obstruction, that he seemed to be much
satisfied with the great honor the Queen conferred upon his Wife. The Prince
having sent a Gentleman to the Queen to remonstrate, that her forces were not
equal where she expected him, and to desire he might attend her at a little
Village betwixt Mont le Hery and Bretigny, where their Paroles could not on
either side be so easily broken; the Queen departed immediately toward that
place, accompanied with fifty Gentlemen, and the Chancellor de l'Hospitale who
was in the same Coach with Madam la Mareschalle de S. Andre.

As soon as the Prince, and the Admiral, perceived her Majesty coming, they
advanced to meet her; and when they were arrived at a competent distance to be
seen, they alighted from their Horse, and forgot nothing that was incumbent
upon them, to the Mother of their King. Though Madam la Mareschalle, and the
Prince, were equally impatient of seeing one another, yet they spoke not a
word: Nevertheless, where there is Love in the case, there are other ways of
signifying their minds; and it is no new thing, among them, to discourse by the
eye.

The Queen had appointed the Chancellor her spoksman, and he made several
Proposals for Peace; but whether the Prince came thither only to see Madam la
Mareschalle, or that his mind being preoccupied, was not enough settled to come
to a resolution, in so important a matter, he did not comply with any thing
that was proposed. The Admiral, persuaded that if Peace were concluded, he
should not be so considerable as the Prince; and besides, having secret advice
that they talked of cutting off his head, he made Proposals also in his turn;
but so unreasonable, that they began to suspect he had some intimation of their
design against his person; and that if the Prince were of the same mind, it
would be to no purpose to think of an accommodation: However the Queen would
not desist; and it may be said to her praise (supposing always that she meant
as she said) that the offers which she made were so reasonable, that the Peace
would have been infallibly concluded, had not the Admiral perverted the Prince
by his ill Counsels.

After two hours conference, they parted, and nothing concluded, the Prince and
Madam la Mareschalle, who had not seen one another but in the presence of the
Queen, and were afraid on both sides, least their eyes should have been wanting
in the explication of their minds, separated with extraordinary regret.

Both parties were now at a considerable distance, when the Queen unwilling to
be any ways defective in so generous a point, sent for the Prince to come back,
and desired Madam la Mareschalle to alight out of the Coach, and privately to
conjure him from the interests of the Admiral. She obeyed her Majesty's
commands, and the Prince seeing her make toward him, advanced to save her the
pains, and quickly arrived at the place which he desired. He cast his eyes
about, and seeing no body near enough to understand what he said, Ah Madam!
cried he, how cruel a thing is it to love! To see, and not to have the courage
to speak! Madam la Mareschalle apprehending she was observed by the Queen, told
him upon what account she was commanded to meet him, and desired to know what
he intended to do. Let us leave, I beseech you Madam, replied the Prince, these
affairs of State, and seeing our time of being together is so short, be not so
unkind as to deprive my love of any part of it: For in short Madam (said he) my
heart is too entirely yours to suffer you to be ignorant of its condition. I
must confess I do but equivocate with the Queen, but I have too great honor for
you to use any collusion; and the peace which I refuse, may assure you, that my
coming hither was more to enjoy the happiness of your sight, then to entertain
propositions of that nature. And what will be the effect of this enterview,
replied the Lady, if we must immediately part, and perhaps never to see one
another again? If the sight of me was so dear to you, as you would have me
believe, you would not leave me so easily, and the terms which are offered you,
would seem reasonable enough to prevail with you, to embrace an occasion that
might give you more frequent access. Alas Madam! replied the Prince, how
unhappy shall I be to leave you, if your kindness continues. The hatred I
retain for the Guises, is not proof against those favorable sentiments which
you have been pleased to express toward me: And although it will have great
reflection upon my honor, to leave the insolences committed against me
unrevenged, yet I shall wave them with delight, if the sacrifice of my
resentments may, in any measure, convince you of the greatness of my passion. I
require nothing of your love, (replied the Lady something fiercely) that may be
a prejudice to your honor. If the esteem I have for you, be any ways
considerable, it is to your own reputation alone, that you are indebted: And as
great a Prince as you are, perhaps I should not so easily have granted it, had
not you been a greater Man, and your merits been more venerable than your
dignity. I cannot but tell you, said she, it is a great trouble to me, that the
Peace is not concluded; but it would be much more, should any thing be patched
up to your diminution: I should be so far from interpreting the sacrifice of
your honor, to be an expression of your love, that I should understand it a
weakness that would make me repent the injustice of my choice; and if you will
give me leave to advertise you with sincerity, my heart, at present charmed
with the greatness of your exploits, would easily disabuse it self, if any
thing should escape wherewith you might be equitably reproached. The Prince
overjoyed to hear what he did, replied with a transport, he could not conceal.
How infinitely happy am I, Madam, to find so much generosity in a person I
shall adore as long as I live? How dear to me must my honor be, that is so much
considered by your Ladyship; and if my exploits were acceptable to you, before
it was my design to please you, what shall I not do now to augment a reputation
that renders me so much a debtor to your goodness.

After which, he told her upon what grounds he refused the Peace, representing
to her, that the Guises were in possession of a place that belonged to his
birth; and he was in equity to dispute it, though they had been advanced to it
by their merit. As to Religion, said he, I do not intend that shall be any
impediment to my fortune; nor have I embraced this (of which I make profession
now) because it was the better, but in opposition to the House of Lorrain, and
that I might be their enemy: For let me but revenge my self for the affronts
which I have received from them, and it imports not of what Religion I am. What
shall I say to the Queen? replied Madam la Mareschalle, in a manner that
expressed the trouble she conceived to leave him. She expects your answer, and
you know her impatience. In the name of that thing which is most dear to you in
the whole World, replied the Prince, do not hasten a separation that will be so
irksome to me. The affairs which the Queen has committed to your conduct, are
not of so little consequence to be slubbered over in haste, and perhaps I may
never again have so happy an opportunity of seeing you. But Sir, said she with
great tenderness, if we should be longer together, what should we say? Ah
Madam! replied the Prince, had I given as much love as I have received; what is
it we should not say?

Farewell Sir, cried Madam la Mareschelle (who perhaps began to suspect her own
continence) I am married, and it is enough to tell you, can hear you no
farther. If you have any value for my esteem, you know upon what terms it is to
be obtained, and how you are to comport to deserve it: But as dear as your
honor is to you, I would not have you purchase it at too great a rate, nor be
too prodigal of a life, for which perhaps I have a greater concern then you
imagine. Once again adieu; and with those words she took her leave of the
Prince, who conjured her to stay some few moments longer; but she told him,
That it was no argument of his affection, to have so little care of her
reputation; and his love being accompanied with great reverence and respect, he
suffered her to depart, and contented himself to wait upon her with his eyes
till she came to the Queens Coach; into which she was no sooner entered, but he
faced about and returned to the Admiral.

This Conference having no better success, and the Forces on both sides being
near, acts of hostility were begun, and the King reduced to an unfortunate
necessity of conquering his own Kingdom; Rouen having declared for the
Hugonots, was the first Town that was besieged. It endured several assaults,
with a resolution that would have gained it much honor, had the cause been as
good as their courage; but at last, the Prince of Conde, having in vain,
endeavored to relieve it (the Marshall de S. Andre having blocked up the
Passes) it was taken by storm, and the King of Navarre entered in triumph through
the Breaches.

This action was great, and made a great noise, but it was bought very dear:
For the King of Navarre receiving a shot in his shoulder (which had not been
dangerous, but for the too frequent visits of Mademoiselle du Ruet) it proved
so ill, that putting himself upon the Seyne to go back to Paris by Water, a
shivering took him by the way; and after that a cold sweat, which obliged him
to stay at Andelis; where the same day he died as he lived, that is to say, in
the same uncertainty as to his Religion, being neither true Protestant, nor
good Papist.

The Prince of Conde who had promised himself great honor from this expedition,
and knew it to be the only way to strike deep into the heart of Madam la
Mareschalle de S. Andre, was much dejected at the loss of Rouen: However
whilst the Kings Army was employed in Normandy, it came into his mind, to
advance with his Army to the very Walls of Paris, hoping that the suddenness of
his approach, and the confusion it must needs bring upon so large and populous
a City, might make its conquest more easy; but his success in that was no
better, then in his relieving of Rouen.

After the miscarriage of so great an enterprise, he thought it inglorious to
retire; and therefore chose rather to advance against the Duke of. Guise (who
was coming with his victorious Army from Rouen) and to engage him, if possible,
to a Battle that might revenge the Hugonots, for the loss which they had
sustained.

The Admiral was of the same opinion, and they had doubtless defeated the Duke
of Guise, had their conduct been as good as their courage: But their design
being more talked of then was necessary, the Marshall de S. Andre came up with
his Troops, and joined with the Royal Army, which had need enough of their
Succors. The Prince was at the head of 12000 Men, and the number of the
Catholics was no less. They met near the Town of Dreux, and the two Armies
being drawn up in Battalia, the Hugonots charged with that vigor, that at first
all the advantage was on their side. They made themselves masters of the best
part of the Catholics Cannon, and took the Connestable Montmerancy prisoner;
but being allured by the splendour of the Train, and the hopes of Booty, they
put themselves out of order to plunder the Enemies Baggage; which the Duke of
Guise (who was a great Officer) observing, he took the opportunity, charged
again, and improved the advantage of their confusion so well, that he turned
the scales, and forced the Hugonots out of the Field. The Prince of Conde, in
the greatest heat of this charge, advancing in opposition to the Duke of Guise,
found himself in the midst of a Party of Catholics, who demanded his Sword;
but instead of giving them an answer, he made use of it to make his passage;
but finding it to no purpose, he delivered it to Danville, the Connestables
second Son, and yielded himself his prisoner: Whilst the Catholics were in
this manner engaged with the Prince of Conde, a Body of the Hugonot Horse
having made a charge upon the Marshall de S. Andre (who was too hotly in
pursuit of the victory) they put him to the same distress, took him prisoner,
and were carrying him off to accompany the Connestable: But a Parisian called
Meziers, who had been formerly disobliged by him, took that opportunity to
revenge himself, and shot him dead upon the place.

The Admiral, with the relics of his Hugonot Troops, recovered Orleans with
all speed, apprehending, that if he were charged again, he should be forced to
quit the Connestable. The Prince of Conde was presented by Danville to the Duke
of Guise, who treated him with a respect, accompanied with many marks of
esteem, which were returned with so much generosity by the Prince, that it was
an astonishment to them both to consider, that notwithstanding the great
deference and civility they expressed one to the other, that yet they should be
so unhappy as to be Enemies.

Madam la Mareschalle de S. Andre, whose virtue had hitherto been unshakable,
was much troubled for the death of her Husband: But the news of the death of
Eleonora, Wife to the Prince of Conde, arriving presently after, gave her no
small relaxation. She had received a Letter from the Prince of Conde, dated
after the Battle of Dreux, to comfort her against the loss of her Husband; and
she to requite it, had condoled with him with the same ceremony upon the loss
of his Wife: But the design was only to advertise one another, that those
impediments being removed, they were now at liberty, and needed not any longer
restraint. In the mean time, the Duke of Guise (who had gained great reputation
by the greatness of this exploit) was unwilling to give the Hugonots breath)
the most of whose great Officers being prisoners, he concluded the opportunity
too favorable to be slipped; and Orleans being the most considerable Town of
their party, he thought by forcing of that, to reduce them to a necessity of
admitting what terms and impositions he pleased to exact.

He began that siege the beginning of February, and in spite of the extremity
of the season, and opposition of the Garrison, possessed himself of all the
Suburbs with the loss only of eight or nine men; but riding out one evening to
meet his Lady, who was at that time coming to the Leagure; the infamous Poltrot
having watched him three or four days before, shot him treacherously with a
Pistol, of which he died six days after, to the infinite regret of all that
knew him, and particularly of the Prince of Conde, who (though his Enemy) could
not forbear giving testimony of his sorrow at his first notice of the news. All
the Catholic Historians, and even those whose Religion he would have
destroyed, have thought it an honor to do Justice to his memory; and though
they were not of the same sentiments in point of Religion, yet in this they
agreed, That he had all the necessary qualifications of a Gentleman, without
any of the vices, either of a Prince or a Courtier.

Least he might leave a stain upon his memory, he employed almost the last
moments of his life, in clearing himself of the massacre at Vassi; calling God
to witness, That it was innocently, and without design, if he was the occasion
of the War. He advised the Queen Mother to take the Prince of Conde, near to
the Person of the King, his quality making it injust to keep him at a distance;
and this he proposed as the only way to accommodate all quarrels, and restore
peace to the Nation.

The Queen, who judged of other people by her self, and looked upon the words
of a dying man to be sincere, made use of the Duke of Guises Counsels,
supposing that being so suddenly to give an account of them to God, he had
delivered himself freely without artifice or cunning. She prosecuted the Peace,
and whilst she was before Orleans, caused the two prisoners, the Prince of
Conde, and the Connestable to be brought under good Guards, to a place called
l'Isle aux Baeufs. The Prince, who by the death of his Lady was become Master
of himself, and knew that Madam la Mareschalle was at as much liberty by the
death of her Husband, was impatient to see her, and desired Peace with all the
eagerness of the World: But the fortune of his Arms having been unkind since he
saw her last; and knowing that she was sensible so much of nothing, as of honor
and renown, he would willingly order it so, as the Treaty of Peace should
revenge the injuries of the War, and had rather remain a prisoner eternally,
then sign any thing that Madam la Mareschalle should not approve. After several
meetings, in which both Parties had proposed, and contested their several
interests, a Model was drawn up, of which the Prince desired a Copy, pretending
he would send it to the Admiral, who at that time was about Havre de Grace, in
order to the receiving a sum of Money out of England, wherewith Queen Elizabeth
supplied the Hugonots privately: But he sent his Copy secretly to the Marshall
de S. Andres Widow, with a compliment (the highest imaginable) That the Peace
or the War, depended upon her direction; and which she in her great wisdom
would vouchase to appoint, that he would stand to, and nothing else. This
transcendent expression of love (which left her arbitrix of the happiness or
unhappiness of the whole Kingdom) made great impression upon her heart: She was
more enamored with that, then she had been ever before: And if she had had no
love for him, she could, not in honor but make him some suitable return. She
did so, and the Letter which she sent, was doubtless as he would have desired;
for within eight days after, the Peace was concluded.

This great work having in a short time stifled all Divisions, and composed the
Animosities in all parts of the Kingdom; the Queen had thoughts not to return
so suddenly to Paris, but to carry the King through some of his Provinces, to
acquaint him with his Subjects, and that he might gain upon their affections.
The Connestable and the Chancellor de l'Hospital attended them, but the Prince
of Conde had other avocations. It was but a days journey betwixt Orleans and
Paris, and in a days time he might be gone; yet it was a long time to his
impatience.

It was about midnight before he could get to Paris, but no hour is
unseasonable for love: The Prince being of that opinion, alighted where his
love had conducted him; and Madam la Mareschalle being surprised with the news
that he was come in, and desired permission to see her, was so much
discomposed, that it brought a color into her face, that added new luster to
her beauty. After they had saluted, and great compliments passed on both sides,
the Prince perceiving they were alone, and that in civility the Ladies
attendants were retired out of the Room. I must have much love Madam (said the
Prince to her) or great confidence in your goodness, to appear in your
presence, having so ill observed your prescription. Honor was the only way, by
which you directed me to your heart, which I have been so far from acquiring
since our unhappy separation, that I have done nothing but contributed to the
glory of the Enemy, and that in so high a degree, as to make him master of my
Liberty, to which condition, no body had any title to reduce me, but your self.
Your Fame Sir, replied the Lady, has prevented you, and gives us an account of
your carriage without any disadvantage to your honor. It was not in flying from
your Enemy, that you was surrounded and taken; and when I recommended to you
the care of your reputation, it was not with design to object to you the malice
of your fortune. The Prince understood by the obligingness of her answer, that
the disgrace which he had received at the Battle of Dreux, had not alienated
the affections of Madam la Mareschalle, and that was enough for one visit.
Being late in the night, and having found her undressed, he thought it but
civil to take his leave, which he did, and departed sooner then he could have
wished, and perhaps sooner then Madam la Mareschalle her self desired. The next
morning he was to wait upon her again. He himself was in mourning, and found
her in the same dress, wherewith both parties were well pleased. For for one
time when that habit is effectually sorrowful, there are a hundred when people
are joyful to wear it. The Prince had children by his Wife, but Madam la
Mareschalle had none by her Husband, who had left her a considerable estate, of
which she was not to be accountable to any body. The year (during which, they
were obliged to some kind of decorum) being insensibly expired, Madam la
Mareschalle, not having had power to forbear loving the Prince, when her virtue
and fidelity to her Husband impugned it, loved him now without measure, where
she might do it without crime; and he took too much pleasure in the owning it,
to desire it should be a secret.

A certain Gentleman of Gascoigne called Montsequiou (whose greatest
qualification was to be a Captain in the Duke of Anjous Guards) with a
confidence natural to his Countrymen; cast his eyes upon Madam la Mareschalle,
and believed, that having the favor of his Master, he was in a condition high
enough to pretend to the Widow of a Marshall of France.

He was a Man of wit, and to procure himself admission, he obtained to be sent
to the said Lady with a compliment from the Duke of Anjou, upon the death of
her Husband. Having discharged himself well of this Embassy, and possessed
her, that he was a person of some parts, he made her several visits afterward
upon his own account; and endeavored to insinuate into her affection by his
respects, of which, the Gascoigns are no niggards, especially when it conduces
to their designs.

Madam la Mareschalle being one of the most considerable matches in the
Kingdom, Montesequiou was fearful least some body should get before him, and
therefore took his first opportunity to declare himself; at which Madam la
Mareschalle was much surprised, and looking upon him with scorn, she told him,
That did she not believe she should disparage her self by publishing his
confidence, she would have made him presently to have repented it; and then
turning away, she forbad him her presence for ever.

This Gallant, whose quality was not great enough to permit him to revenge
himself publicly, had recourse to the cunning of inferior spirits, and did
what he could to deprave and blacken the reputation of the Lady.

The kindness which she had for the Prince of Conde, and he for her, was the
discourse of the whole Court, and it was given on the Ladies side, that hers
was most violent; and that which made it the more credible, was a present that
she had made him, great enough indeed to cause it to be presumed, that it was
the recompense of some extraordinary service. After the Dukes of Anjou and
Alencon, the Kings Brothers, there was no body but the young Prince of Bearn
(who was since Henry le Grand) nearer the Crown then the Prince of Conde, and
yet this latter (though a Prince of the Blood) was but narrow in his fortune,
and could not make any expense proportionable to his quality.

The Mareschals Widow could not suffer so little a defect, in so considerable a
Man; she took delight in correcting the injustice of Fortune; and Valery being
one of the best of her Manors, she conjured him to accept it, and gave it in
so good earnest, that the Princes Heirs enjoy it at this day. To gratify her
kindness, (and perhaps to oblige her to something else, which I will not
mention in this place, and which malicious people say she never refused him)
the Prince promised her Marriage, and had married her immediately, had he
believed the Peace firm enough, to have lived quietly with her. In the mean
time people talked diversely of this Act of Bounty in the Widow: For one person
that commended it, there were ten who reproached it; and there happened at the
same time to be a Poet who exercised his vein upon it, and made two Couplets to
the the tune of a Courant that was then in mighty request.

When the mutinous Stars, call him forth to the Wars,
Success the Prince always pursues.
And Love in that case, thinks it fit to embrace
The same side that Victory does choose.
To this fortunate Prince (feared and loved ever since)
His dear an Estate did Demise,
Without telling its name, you may guess at what game
'Twas his Highness got such a Prize.
These Verses made more noise then they were worth: Montesquiou was one of the
first that had got them; and to revenge himself of his Mistress, he gave Copies
of them to any body that asked them: And when at last they were suspected to be
his, he denied them in such a manner as persuaded people it was true, though
indeed he was none of the Author. There being nothing in the Song, but what
either was, or was thought to the Princes advantage. It was not long before it
was sung to him; but he who sung it, was not so wise as he might have been. The
Prince desired the Copy, and asked him if he knew the Author; he told him it
was Montesquious hand, and that he had made them himself.

At his departure from thence, going directly to Madam la Mareschalles
Lodgings, he found her in a greater rage then ever he had seen her, and it was
not long before he understood the occasion. One of her intimate friends had
brought her a Copy of the same Verses, which she had heard sung also, and
inquiring of the Author, it was said to be Montsequiou. Madam la Mareschalle
had no mind to acquaint the Prince with the affront she had already received,
because she would not trouble him with the knowledge that he had so
inconsiderable a Rival: But enraged as she was, she could keep no measures, but
used all means possible to revenge her self of his insolence. The Verses which
had been given to the Prince, and those which were brought to Madam la
Mareschalle were written both in a hand, which confirmed the suspicion that
Montesquiou made them. This incensed the Prince so highly against him, that as
Montesquiou was one night returning alone from the Louvre, he met with those
who gave him an hundred good blows with a Weapon, not altogether so honorable
as a Sword; and least he should be ignorant from whence that beating came, they
told him it was a present from the Prince of Conde.

This assault made a greater noise then the Verses: The Queen, who loved the
Duke of Anjou exceedingly, took it very ill that the Prince should treat one of
his principal Officers at that rate: But there was too much inequality betwixt
them, for the Prince to make any excuse; and besides, since the Duke of Guises
misfortune, there was scarce a Gentleman in France, but would have sided with a
Prince of the Blood.

Things were in this posture when the Admiral (who was not at all pleased with
the Princes passion for Madam la Mareschalle de S. Andre) proposed a match to
him with Mademoiselle de Orleans, the Duke of Longuevilles Sister, who was
young, and handsome, and a better fortune then the other. Some are of opinion,
and have not spared to report it, that the Prince had obtained of Madam la
Mareschalle, that which should never be granted to any Man, whom a Woman
desires to make her Husband: For this is a certain property of love, to desire
without end, and when nothing is left to irritate that desire, love ceases, and
takes no pleasure in any thing it receives. However though the Princes heat
began to slacken every day, yet he was so far sensible of the favors which he
had enjoyed from the Lady Mareschalle de S. Andre, that he rejected the
Admirals proposition at first, as knowing how insufferable it would be to the
person in the whole World, to whom he had the greatest obligation. Yet his
design was to leave her by degrees, and to restore her Manor of Valery that
she had given him so generously; that he might discontinue insensibly, he
forbore his visits at first for two days, then four, and next a whole week.
Madam la Mareschalle thinking every hour lost that was not spent in his
company, complained of him so tenderly, and reproached his cruelty in so gentle
and innocent terms, that privately the Prince could not but accuse his own
obduracy, in not answering so incomparable a kindness.

One day as she desired him to make no more Protestations, but perform his
promise; he gave such poor and trifling Reasons to excuse it, that after she
had used the utmost of her power to conceal her sorrow, and was scarce able to
contain her tears which were ready to break forth before his face, she could
not but tell him. Then Sir, I see your love is at an end. Consider better of
your self Madam, replied the Prince, and do not so much injustice to your own
Excellency, to believe one can be so easily delivered from your Bonds: Were not
my love for you so great as you deserve, the bounty that you have expressed
toward me, would eternally present it self to my memory, and my heart is too
well placed to be guilty of ingratitude. Ah Sir! said Madam la Mareschalle, it
is not acknowledgments that I ask of you, it is love: If I have done any thing
for you that deserves to be remembered, that was my design; and if you do not
answer it, I have done nothing that I intended to have done. The Prince (who
hated ingratitude, and yet found himself too much disposed that way) made use
of all his wit to dispel that fear which Madam la Mareschalle had entertained;
but his heart had not the least share in what ever he said. As some people love
to see every thing in the best place, and let no opportunity escape, wherein
they may flatter themselves, so she believed whatever he would have her, and
even repented that she had so injustly suspected him. Thus they parted, she
more then ever in love with the Prince, and he distracted with the remorse that
those persons feel, who though endued with a great deal of virtue, are yet at
the point of falling into a crime. He suffered almost a month to pass, and
never made her a visit, because he could not get from her without trouble; yet
he writ to her every morning, and made the fairest excuses he could contrive to
render his absence supportable. At last having pumped himself dry, and no
reasons left to make his apology, the truth could be no longer concealed.

One night as Madam la Mareschalle was alone in her Closset, looking over all
the Letters that ever she had received from him, and (where she found them
kind) watering them with her tears; word was brought, that there was a
Gentleman without, who desired to speak with her from the Prince. He was
brought in, and having presented her with a Packet, she opened it hastily, and
found it in these terms.

IT is too much to abuse your credulity, Madam, and multiply my own crimes
together. I cannot longer forbear acquainting you, that I betray you; and that
instead of favors and kindness, you ought to oppress me with disdain. Would to
Heavens you had hated me six months ago! I should, at least, have had some
pretense for my ingratitude; and if I had separated with Reason, I might
possibly have separated without remorse; but fix my thoughts upon what object I
can, I foresee nothing but obloquy. My memory is full of your goodness, mine
eyes of your beauty, my heart is convinced of your love, and yet I write to you
now the last time, and am constrained, by the malevolence of my destiny, to
renounce the honor of seeing you any more. I know you are so kind as to love
me, and that I do wound you in your most tender and most sensible part; but it
ought something to support you, that I do it with less prejudice to you, then
to my self, seeing I lament what I loose, and you loose nothing that you have
reason to lament. In fine, Madam, being guilty against my will, I do not desire
you should have occasion to hate me for detaining a thing that I must confess I
hold of your love. I restore therefore your Valery which I cannot keep but
unjustly; and as for my life, which I ow to your goodness, I shall spend it so
miserably, and it will last but so little a while, that you will not have long
to upbraid my perfidiousness. Farewell Madam, I will not tell you with what
sorrow that word came from me; you will be able to judge of that by the grief
that will follow, and I shall let you see, that it is more torture to me to
commit a crime, then to punish it.


In what condition was the poor Lady upon the reading of this Letter; her heart
was great, and she thought complaints too mean to evaporate her sorrows that
way. Here, Sir, carry back this Paper which came in the Letter that your Master
troubled himself to send me (said she to the Gentleman who brought it) and tell
him from me, that he does not restore all that he had from me, and I cannot
absolve him for so little. The Gentleman made some difficulty to receive it,
but she gave him such Reasons, that at last he could not handsomely refuse. It
was the Grant which Madam la Mareschalle had given to the Prince of Valery,
which he thought dishonorable to retain having quitted the Lady. But though it
was a present worthy of him, when he accepted it; yet she thought it beneath
her to take it again upon those terms; nor could she prevail with her self, to
resume that from an ungrateful person, which she believed she had given to the
most faithful of his Sex.

When she found she was alone, and under no necessity of constraint, she gave
her self up wholly to grief, which her love and indignation fomented
continually.

It is certain the Prince was all this while in as great an agony as Madam la
Mareschalle. The month that he had suffered to pass without seeing her, had
been employed in negotiating his marriage with the Duke of Longuevilles Sister;
and least Madam de S. Andre should give any impediment to it, with the promise
that had been made her by the Prince; the Admiral had carried it so cunningly,
that though it was a marriage of great importance, it was to be consummated
that very night, without being known to above five or six who were to be
present.

This must be said in favor of the Prince, and all people must agree to it,
that he had many conflicts and combats within himself, before he could consent
to that infidelity. The kindness which Madam la Mareschalle had shown him,
before he had given her any occasion: The tenderness wherewith afterward she
had given him such tokens of her affection. The desperate condition to which he
foresaw she must, of necessity, be reduced: In short, whatever came into his
thoughts, when he remembered her, caused remorse and compunction in his heart,
and the nearer the time approached in which he was to give himself to another,
the more his sorrows increased. But the Admiral who hated Madam la Mareschalle
himself, and could not endure she should be beloved by any body else, stirred
not from the Prince till the marriage was consummate; the influence that he had
upon him, being too strong for all the Princes resolutions.

This Wedding that was kept so secret (least his promise to Madam la
Mareschelle might have disturbed it) ceased to be a secret, when there was
nothing to fear, and the next day the new Princess of Conde went in that
quality to pay her first homage to the Queen.

Madam la Mareschelle was in the Louvre, at the same time; and knowing nothing
as yet of what had passed the night before, she looked upon her only as
Mademoiselle d'Orleans, not imagining why the Page that carried up her Train,
should be in the Princes Livery; but she enjoyed this ignorance not long; for
in a short time, they told her what she was not willing to have known.

She went immediately from the Louvre, being unable to endure so ungrateful an
object. As she was going away, she met Montesquiou, and, in spite of her
malice to him, conjured him to follow her. She was no sooner in her Chamber,
but he was called up, and carried into her Closet, where being not to be heard
by any body but himself, Do you love me still Montesquiou? said she to him.
Montesquiou surprised at the demand, but more at the manner of delivering it,
imagined the cause, and guessed it must be rather anger, then love that made
her so kind. However not loving with the punctilio of a Gentleman, and it being
indifferent to him upon what Motives she married him, so it was but his fortune
to carry her, he told her, That he loved her, without intermission, from the
very first time he had seen her; and though he was so unhappy as to lie under
her disdain, yet it was still his resolution, and he would love her whilst he
lived. These are but words, replied Madam la Mareschalle, I have been too
lately, and too unworthily betrayed to believe such weak testimonies again. If
you love me, you must show it by more effectual evidence; and let me tell you
the evidence I require of you, is not to be performed by a person of mean or
indifferent courage? Consult your love before you give me an answer, and see if
it be capable of doing a piece of service for me, that shall be worthy of being
recompensed with my self. Declare it Madam, replied Montesquiou, and you shall
see how far my passion will carry me. The reward that you are pleased to
propose, is sufficient to encourage me against the greatest difficulties; and
to have the propriety of your Ladyship, is an honor, for which no enterprise is
too great. You speak as if you would do as you say, replied Madam de S. Andre,
and in that confidence I shall tell you the means by which you may merit the
recompense that I design for you. I loved the Prince of Conde; you know it well
enough, and the outrage that he caused to be committed upon you (which it is
now high time to revenge) made all the World believe he had as much affection
for me. I know it is ungrateful to you, to be remembered of this point, but I
do it on purpose to awaken your resentment: It is no matter to which of us the
vengeance belongs, so you take from him that life which he had long since
resigned, had I been so wise as to have left him to his destiny.

Consider what it is you propose Madam, replied Montesquiou, and when your
first transports are passed, will you not repent of your commands? Do you think
me so fickle, replied Madam de S. Andre, and that my heart is so poor to
forgive the injuries that are done me? If I repent of any thing, it will be,
that I concerned my self for a perfidious person, unworthy of my care and
solicitude; that I sacrificed all my pains to an ungrateful man, who remembers
so ill those favors which he never deserved; and in short, That I have pulled
upon my self by the force of my generosity, the affront of which I complain to
you, and you refuse to revenge. This, said she, is all I have to repent of; but
do not think that I will ever do it, of a thing so just, as what I now pursue:
The prize that goes along with it, ought to have made you undertake it without
farther expostulation; but since you hesitate, I may perhaps have less trouble
to persuade another, then to work upon you.

It is enough Madam, replied Monttesquiou, I am resolved and ready for what
ever you command. I feared least your affection to the Prince, had been still
so great as to have prompted you to be the first that should exclaim against
me, when the business was done; but I am satisfied now, that your desire is too
fervent, not to hear of it with pleasure; and seeing it is me you have chosen
for this great exploit, I shall take my measures so prudently and pursue them
with such caution, as shall not bring you under the least suspicion.

I ask no other security of your promise Madam, said he, then your own word. I
have too much honor for you to insist upon a Note under your hand, in so
ticklish an affair; besides though there is nothing so dear to me in the World,
as the price you have been pleased to set upon my service; yet I should think I
rendered my self unworthy of it, if I should stand to secure it with so
immodest a precaution.

This unhappy conversation continued for some time, and ended at last in a
promise that Montesquiou reiterated again and again, not to let many days pass
before he brought her the news of the death of the Prince of Conde.

Had she known what the Prince of Conde suffered for her, whilst she was
conspiring against his life, it is most certain she would never have been
carried to so violent a resolution. He loved her as well as ever, and his
kindness to his Wife was cold and indifferent; at first it was no little
trouble to the new Princess, but she accustomed her self to it by degrees, and
finding that she was not sole Mistress of his heart, we are assured, by very
credible Memoires, she made him as little Master of hers. But which way soever
it was, the Prince made several vain efforts to disintangle himself with Madam
la Mareschalle; but the impossibility of enjoying her now, made her appear the
more amiable, and never was his inclination so strong to marry her, as now he
had another Wife.

Her visits to the Court were not so frequent as before, least she should meet
the Prince, or the new Princess whom she hated as much: But having some
occasions wherewith she could not dispense, he met her two or three times, and
made it his business to accost her; but her care to avoid him, was as great,
and succeeded much better. However that was not sufficient to discourage him;
he was many times to wait upon her at her Lodgings, but she was never at home
for him; and her orders were so exactly observed, that as soon as any of his
Liveries appeared, the Gates were shut up, and no more opened that day.

It troubled him exceedingly to find so much unkindness, yet he could not be so
partial, but to know he deserved it. At last pressed by the violence of his
passion, he could subsist no longer without seeing her. To live in her
displeasure, was a very great torment; and how great soever his offense was, it
was less then his remorse.

One Morning when the Porter was more remiss then he should have been, he
conveyed himself in at the Gate, and ran directly to the Chamber where he used
formerly to see her, supposing he should easily have surprised her; but by ill
fortune for him, she had changed her appartment since he saw her last, and
having timely notice that the Prince was to visit her, she retired into her
Closset, and shut the door to her, resolving he should break it open rather,
then she would see him.

This severity did not make him forget the respect which accompanied his
passion: He conjured her only to let him have the honor to see her; and to
oblige her thereunto, he said so many kind things, that signified so much the
sincerity of his sorrow, as would infallibly have prevailed, had she been
capable of forgiving him. But let him say what he could, he was married to
another, and the very thought of that put her into a fury that rendered her
deaf to all his solicitations. He was a complete hour begging most earnestly,
that she would but grant him the honor to see her, though for as small a time
as she pleased; but being after all his importunity unable to obtain any
answer, but a few angry words which he received with the greatest submission,
he retired rather then be troublesome any longer; and within a few days removed
to Noyers in Bourgogne (which was a House belonging to his new Lady) to see if
absence, that is one of the usual remedies of love, could cure him of that
wherewith he was so cruelly tormented.

He had not been there long, before two Soldiers were apprehended, measuring
the Wall of the Castle, which they designed to have scaled. They were brought
in and examined, and finding themselves in danger to be very ill treated,
unless they discovered the truth, they confessed they had done it by order from
the Queen, and the Cardinal of Lorraine, who had resolved to surprise and
exterminate all the Hugonots; and that they might do it with more ease, it was
concluded to begin with the Prince of Conde, as their head. It is most certain,
this was resolved in Council, and the Admiral who was at Taulay, with Dandelot
his Brother (to whom that House belonged) had already some inkling of it. The
Prince not being far from them, dispatched a Courrier immediately, which
confirmed them much in what they were but jealous of before, because they had
had it from a person of but ordinary quality. Had they not instantly united and
retired out of that Province, they had been circumvented by a party of Horse,
which came into Bourgogne on purpose; but when the said party found they were
gone with a Convoy of an hundred and fifty Horse, they pursued them as far as
the River Loire, where they had passed at a Ford not far from Sancere. Scarce
was the Prince clear of the River, and firm on the other side, before the Kings
Troops appeared, and might easily have got over at the same Ford. But Evening
coming on, the Officers thought it more convenient to defer it till the next
Morning, and in the Night the River swelled so violently, that it was not
fordable any where; which putting a stop to the pursuit of the Catholics, the
Hugonots looked upon their preservation as a miracle. The Prince, the Admiral,
and Dandelot, being so strangely delivered, retreated to Rochel, where in a few
days time they had a general Rendezvous of all their own Troops, and Four
thousand Men brought to them by the Queen of Navarre. The Kings Army commanded
by the Duke of Anjou, remained in Campaign; and Montesquiou who accompanied his
Master, left not Paris without renewing to Madam la Mareschalle de S. Andre,
the promises which he had made to sacrifice the life of the Prince of Conde to
her resentment; but his flowness had made her often repent, that she had
committed the care of her revenge to a Man of so little resolution.

She attended with great impatience to hear the news of what he had done, when
one Afternoon, as she returned from some visits, which she had been making
abroad, her Porter delivered her a Letter directed to her, and brought by one
of the ordinary Messengers of the Post Office. The character of the
superscription, and the Seal being unknown to her, she opened it, and was
exceedingly surprised to find it came from the Prince of Conde: Her first
thoughts were to tear it without reading, but her curiosity to know what he
could expect after so great infidelity, overpowred her indignation, and
prevailed with her to read it: But all the choler wherewith she had fortified
her self (least by seeing it, she should be any ways melted) could not defend
her against the love that he expressed in it. The poor Prince, who to speak
properly, rather endured, then took comfort in his life (so unhappy he thought
himself to have contracted the hatred of his Mistress) had written to her (as
his last remedy) from Rochel, to endeavor, if possible, to mollify her: And if
he could not succeed, his resolution was to precipitate himself into so many
desperate actions, as would in probability afford him some person that might
revenge his infidelity.

This Letter was writ so much like a Gentleman; his excuses so cordial, his
contrition so likely, and something else there was so passionate and moving,
that altogether, they cost Madam la Mareschalle no few tears before she could
read them through: Instead of that fury which had possessed her before, the fear
least Montesquiou should be too faithful in the execution of her commands, was
the thing which wholly took up her thoughts: She writ to him with all speed,
and desired him to suspend the execution of his promise till farther order.

He received the Letter, and found by the alteration of her style, that the
detestation which Madam la Mareschalle had had for the Prince, began to abate,
and that if ever they came together, their love would certainly revive.

To make her believe her Letter never came to his hands, he would give her no
answer, but accused his own laziness for not having killed the Prince sooner.

Madam la Mareschalle (who perhaps guessed what was the design of his silence)
writ again to Montesquiou, and forbad him in express terms to execute a command
that she had laid upon him in her rage, but disapproved since she had recovered
the use of her Reason. This Letter exasperated Montesquiou so highly, that what
she intended to prevent the destruction of the Prince, hastened it; and made her
Agent the more vigorous in its execution.

In short, finding Montesquiou would return her no answer, but still continued
his silence, she dispatched a Messenger to him on purpose with a third Letter,
which she charged him to deliver into his own hand, to take from him all
possibility of excuse.

In the mean time the two Armies approached and came within sight of one
another, where they lay for a fortnight together skirmishing, and in defiance.
The Kings Army was more numerous by one third, but the Princes Army consisted
of better and more resolute men; and therefore they promised themselves the
victory, if they could bring the Enemy to a Field Battle.

The Prince, who knew nothing of what passed in the mind of Madam de S. Andre,
and was weary of his life, because he thought it was become indifferent to her,
advised by all means to press the Enemy to a Battle, which the Duke of Anjou
being young, and of less experience, declined. However after several charges
and pickeerings, which did but tire and harrass their Troops, an opportunity
was offered, and they must of necessity come to a general engagement.

The Hugonots were quartered at large along the River de Charente, and had
possession of the Bridges at Jarnac and Chasteau-Neuf, which was a great
disadvantage to the Enemy.

Armand de Gontaud-Biron who commanded under the Duke of Anjou, undertook to
beat them from their Posts, but not being able to carry Jarnac by surprise, he
turned toward Chasteau-Neuf, which the Hugonots deserted after they had broken
down the Bridge; but that was repaired again so suddenly by the care of
Monsieur Biron, that the Kings Army was passed over before the Hugonots
perceived it.

The Princes Army being divided and dispersed in several places, the Admiral
sent Orders to the Foot to draw off toward Bassac, whilst the Cavalry got
together from their farthest Quarters: But Monsieur Biron took advantage of
their disorder, and disturbed their Retreat so vigorously, that they had much
to do to defend themselves. The Admiral was making head against Biron, and the
Prince of Conde employed in favoring the Retreat of his Troops, when the
Admiral sending him word to advance, and that there was need of his presence;
he came in upon a gallop to his releif, and fought with such resolution, that
in spite of the inequality of his Forces, he disingaged the Admiral, and drew
upon himself the whole fury of the Catholics. At length (not able to bear up
against so great a number of his Enemies, and (to increase his misfortunes) his
Horse being wounded, and falling down under him at the same time) he presented
his Gantlet to a Gentleman called Argence, who received him with all the
respect that was due to his quality.

The report of his being taken, was carried immediately to the Duke of Anjou,
and the unlucky Montesquiou being by, and understanding that the Prince's Leg
was broke with the kick of a Horse, and that in that condition, it was not
possible for him to defend himself; he clapped Spurs to his Horse, and
gallopping up to him, found him sitting under a Bush, in which posture, pulling
out one of his Pistols, he shot him into the head, and killed him. This is
mentioned by our Historians, as one of the most infamous Actions that was ever
committed.

The Prince died without speaking one word; and although the Messenger which
was sent from Madam la Mareschalle made all possible speed, yet the business
was done before her Letter arrived.

The first news of that disaster put her into an absolute distraction, but
having recollected her self, by degrees she fell into a settled and deliberate
melancholy that lasted as long as she lived; and when, at his return,
Montesquiou came to demand his recompense, she looked upon him as the greatest
Monster that Nature had ever produced.

The Hugonots having lost so considerable a Chief, made but little progress in
their affairs afterward. Dandelot died a while after, some say of the grief, he
had conceived, for the death of the Prince of Conde; and others say, he died of
a Pestilential Fever. The Admiral lived till the massacre at Paris, upon S.
Bartholomews day, of which, he being the principal cause, was made the
principal victime.

FINIS.

