AN ESSAY ABOUT THE ORIGIN and VIRTVES OF GEMS.

Wherein are Proposed and Historically Illustrated some Conjectures about the
Consistence of the Matter of Precious Stones, and the Subjects wherein their
chiefest Virtues reside.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be sold by Moses Pit at the
White Heart in Little Britain, 1672.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THe Philosophy and Origin of Gems as well as their Usefulness and Virtues
will, I am persuaded be found, upon the attentive perusal of this Essay it
self, so rationally and warily delivered therein, that there will need nothing
to be said in the praise of the Composure thereof. I dare venture,
notwithstanding the Noble Author's modesty, to present it to the most Critical
taste, without hanging out a Bush to it.

All I have to say in the publishing thereof, shall be the same, that was
alleged by the English Interpreter of the Learned Steno's Prodromus to an
intended Dissertation of his, concerning Solids naturally contained within
Solids, printed the last year by Moses Pit in Little Britain; where in the
English Preface occurr passages to this effect, viz.

That the Honorable Author of this Essay, before he would see or hear any
thing of that Prodromus of Steno, did upon occasion solemnly declare to the
Author of that English Version (who there protests, that he speaks it bona
fide,) the sum and substance of what is deduced at large in this Tract; the
Manuscript whereof the said Interpreter then saw, and received it into his
custody for publication: Which Sum was this; First, that the generality of
Transparent Gems have been once Liquid Substances, and many of them, whilst
they were either fluid, or at least soft, have been imbued with Mineral
Tinctures, that con-coagulated with them; whence he conceives, that diverse of
the real Qualities and Virtues of Gems may be probably derived.

Secondly, as for the Opacous Gems, and other Medical Stones, as Blood-stones,
Jaspers, Magnets, Emery, etc. he esteems them to have, for the most part, been
Earth (perhaps in some cases very much diluted and soft) impregnated with the
more copious proportion of fine Metalline or other Mineral juices or particles;
all which were afterward reduced into the form of Stone by the supervenience
(or the exalted action) of some already inexistent petrescent Liquor or
petrific Spirit, which he supposes may sometimes asscend in the form of
Steams; from whence may be probably deduced not only diverse of the Medical
Virtues of such Stones, but some of their other qualities, as Color, Weight,
etc. and also explained, how it may happen, what he has (which he doubts not
but others have done also) observed of Stones of another kind, or Marchasites,
or even Vegetable and Animal substances, that have been found enclosed in solid
Stones; for as much as these substances may easily be conceived to have been
lodged in the Earth, whilst it was but Mineral Earth or Mud, and afterward to
have been, as 'twere, cased up by the supervenient petrific Agents that
pervaded it.

Nor are these petrescent Liquors the only ones, to which he supposes that many
Fossils may owe their Origin since he thinks, there may be both Metallescent
and Minerallescent Juices in the bowels of the Earth, and that sometimes they
may there exist and operate under the same Spirits and Steams.

So far the Preface to that Translation; which is here repeated, to do right to
this Noble Author, in the matter of the Theory relating to the Origin both of
precious and other Stones. Which done, I shall keep the Curious Reader no
longer from the Contentment, which he will doubtless find in the perusal of
this Essay.

THE PREFACE.
THat the Scarcity, the Luster and the Preciousness of Gems have made them in
all ages to be reckoned among the finest and choicest of Natures Productions,
is generally granted. But whether the Books, that have been divulged of them,
be answerable to the Nobleness of the Subject, seems not to me so
unquestionable: For, as for the Origin of Gems; to say with Aristotle toward
the close of his third Book of Meteors, that a dry Exhalation, (...), (whether)
fiery or firing, ((...)) makes, among other fossils, the several kinds of
unfusible Stones: or to tell us, according to the more received Doctrine, that
Gems are made of Earth and Water finely incorporated and hardened by cold;
This, I say, is to put us off with too remote and indefinite generalities, and
to found an explication upon Principles, which are partly precarious and partly
insufficient, and perhaps also untrue, And as to the History of Gems, that has
been so fabulously delivered, that especially among the Moderns, many learned
men, Philosophers and Physicians, have, for the sake of so many improbable and
sometimes impossible Virtues, that have been ascribed to Gems, been induced to
deny them any Virtues at all. It Is true, that I am not altogether so severe,
and that the esteem, that I find made by Learned men of the inquisitive Emperor
Rudolfue's Physician Boethius de Boot, makes me discriminate him and two or
three modern Authors, that in Books, professedly made on other Subjects, have
written incidentally of some Gems, from such notoriously fabulous Writers as
Mizaldus, Albertus Magnus, (if his name be not injured by the imputation of a
spurious Book) Baptista Porta, Kirannides (and some others that I forbear to
name,) from whose Learning one would expect more wariness and Judgment. But
though, for reasons elsewhere mentioned, I do not unreservedly think, that
Precious Stones, especially Opacous ones, can have no medical Virtues at all;
yet when I considered, how difficult it was to assign any thing that is
possible and intelligible, (which I do not take a substantial form to be,)
whence their Virtues may probably be derived, without giving some such account
of the Origin of Gems themselves, as was not to be expected from the Followers
of the Peripatetic, that is, the Received, Philosophy; I could not but wish,
that something were attempted on that Subject according to the Principles of
the Corpuscularian.

These things made me the less backward to comply with the Curiosity of my
Friends, which put me upon the following Discourse, wherein I was content to
try, what, without ransacking the Authors that had professedly written de
Gemmis, the consideration of the Subject to be treated of, my natural
propensity to take notice of Natures productions, and the trials whereto these
Considerations and Observations lead me, would suggest to my Pen.

Whether my Conjectures and Ratiocinations be as new to others as to those I
chiefly wrote for, it is not my part to determine: Only I designed to suit my
Discourse to the Phenomenon of Nature, without being sollicitous with whom I
disagree'd or complied. And therefore, though it should happen, that some
Conjectures of mine should, unknown to me, be coincident with the opinion of
some Classic Writer about Gems; yet I presume, the whole subsequent Hypothesis
and the Arguments it is founded upon, will appear to have been suggested to me
by the nature of the thing it self, and my way of considering it: not to
mention, that sometimes one may meet with a good particular Conjecture in an
Author, that understands not the importance of it himself, and knows not how to
make use of it, but builds it on some such fabulous Relation or erroneous
Principle, as is apt to discredit it with wary Readers, unless they be such, to
whom its compliance with the Opinions, they have on better grounds already
entertained, happen to recommend it. I know, it may be thought strange, that I
have been so very sparing in the Citation of those Authors, that have writ
whole Books about Gems; but I have this to say for my self, that I had neither
them, nor so much as my own Papers about the Origin of Minerals at hand, when
I writ the following Essay. Which I was the less troubled at upon two distinct
accounts; the first, because I remembered, that several passages, that I had
met with about the Virtues of Gems, cited out of diverse of those Authors, were
such as I should have much scrupled to vouch; some of them being such as I knew
to be false; others, that I shrewdly suspected not to be true; and others, that
appeared to me altogether incredible: And the second, because, to forbear
transcribing, what my Friends might probably have met with in Authors already,
would best comlpy, both with their Desires, which was to know my particular
thoughts; and with my design, which was partly to see, how far I could make out
those thoughts by my own Arguments and Observations, assisted only by some very
few historical passages, that I lighted on in Writers not Classie; and partly,
to take this occasion to prosecute diverse matters of Fact relating to the
subject I was treating of, which probably would otherwise have been quite lost.
And I doubted not, but if this first draught of my Conceptions were by my
Friends thought worthy of being enlarged, it would not be difficult for me,
when I should come at my Books and Papers again, to enrich this Tract with many
Histories borrowed from famous Writers; if that should be thought necessary by
persons, that were possibly less diffident of me than of them. In short; I
proposed this Discourse but as a Conjectural Hypothesis, wherein I attempted to
derive the Origin of Gems and one of the main Causes, (I do not say, the only
Cause) of their Qualities and Virtues, from Principles less remote, and more
intelligible than those of the Peripateticks; and having delivered diverse
Observations and Experiments of my own about the Phenomenon of Gems, to
explicate some of them by intelligible Principles, and illustrate others by
resembling things that may be really observed in nature or easily performed by
Art. Which way of handling my Subject permitted me to hope, that, whether or no
I should be thought a lucky Conjecturer about the Subject I attempted, I
should, at least in some measure, prove a Benefactor to what is perhaps
preferable even to lucky Conjectures themselves, the Natural and Experimental
History of such Noble Subjects as GEMS.

ERRATA.
PAge 31. line 3. read most of Gems, p. 53. l. 7. r. yet I shall, p. 108. l.
20. r. sented Steams, p. 146. l. 18. r. in close Vessels, p. 168. l. 18. r.
Observation, to which some, p. 164. l. 8. r. in Air and Water, p. 172. l. 2. r.
of kin to Metals, p. 178. l. 8. r. haemorrhagy, p. 179. l. 17. r. moistened, p.
180. l. 8. r. Bolus's.

AN ESSAY ABOUT The ORIGIN and VIRTUES OF GEMS.
SECT. I.
THough it will not perchance prove very difficult to propose to you my
Conjecture about the Causes of the Virtues of Precious Stones; yet I fear it
will not be easy for me to acquaint you fully with the Grounds of it. For
unless I should transcribe for you my whole Discourse of the Origin of
Minerals in General (of which you know Stones make a part) I cannot well lay
before you all the Considerations, by which I have been induced to take (...)
the Conjecture or Hypothesis I am about to propound: and consequently I cannot
well comply with your curiosity about Gems, without either omitting several
things which might much countenance the following Discourse, or proposing
(without amply proving them,) some things, that I confess seem not clear, nor
some of them so much as probable, by their own Light. But since you will have
it so; I will, rather than disobey you, present you in one Discourse several
things concerning Gems, whereof some belong to others of my little Tracts about
the Origin of Minerals from Fluid or at least Soft Bodies; tho some indeed
were more directly written concerning Gems: notwithstanding that they were
delivered not as an entire Tract about that subject, but as Corollaries that
might be drawn from, and applications that might be made of, what had been in a
more general way discoursed about the origination of Stones and other Minerals.
And therefore presuming that you will suppose with me in this Discourse some
few particulars, that, I think, I have elsewhere made probable, and might
perhaps do so from some of the Phenomenon mentioned in this Writing it self, I
would immediately address my self to the subject of it, if I did not think a
previous Admonition very requisite.

For, I must at the very entrance of this Discourse desire you to take notice,
that when I propose my Conjectures about the Virtues of Gems, I do not suppose
the truth of all, or so much as the tenth part of those wonderful properties,
that Men have been pleased to ascribe to them. For not only some of the Writers
of Natural Magic, but men of note, who should be more cautious and sober, have
delivered in their Writings many things concerning Gems, which are so unfit to
be credited, and some of them perhaps so impossible to be true, that I hope the
Believers of them will among the Votaries to Philosophy be as great rarities,
as Gems themselves are among Stones. And those that can admit such unlikely
Fables, will be as much despised by the Judicious, as Jewels can be prized by
the Rich.

For my part, I never saw any great feats performed by those hard and costly
Stones, (as Diamonds, Rubies, Saphires,) that are wont to be worn in Rings. But
yet because Physicians have for so many Ages thought fit to receive the
fragments of precious Stones into some of their most celebrated cordial
Compositions; because also diverse eminent Men of that profession, some of them
famous Writers, and some Virtousi of my own acquaintance, have by their
Writings, or by word of Mouth, informed me of very considerable effects of some
Gems, (especially Crystal,) upon their own particular Observations: And
lastly, because that (as I shall show anon,) I find no impossibility that at
least some costly and less hard, (though indeed more valuable) Gems, may have
considerable operations upon humane Bodies, some few of which I have had
opportunity to be convinced of, I will not indiscriminately reject all the
Medicinal Virtues, that Tradition and the Writers about precious Stones have
ascribed to those Noble Minerals: Contenting my self to declare in a word, that
suspecting most of them to be fabulous, my Conjectures aim only at giving one
of the Causes of those Virtues ascribed to Gems which Experience warrants to be
real and true.

Having thus explained in what sense my Conjecture about the Virtues of
precious Stones is to be understood; it follows that I propose the Conjecture
or Hypothesis it self; the substance of which may be comprised in these Two
particulars: First, That many of these Gems, and Medical Stones, either were
once fluid Bodies, as the Transparent ones; or in part made up of such
substances as were once fluid: And secondly, That many of the real Virtues of
such Stones may be probably derived from the mixture of Metalline and other
Mineral substances, which (though unsuspectedly,) are usually incorporated with
them: And the Greatness of the Variety and Efficacy of those Virtues may be
attributed to some happy Concurrent Circumstances of that Commixture. The first
of these heads relates properly to the Origin of Gems. The second, partly to
that, and partly to the kinds and degrees of their Virtues.

But that any Gems, especially the hardest sorts of them, should have a later
Beginning, then that of the Earth it self, will probably be thought to relish of
a Paradox; and I doubt not, it will pass with many for a great one, that some
of these hardest of solid Bodies should have been once fluid ones or Liquors:
Wherefore I shall endeavor to Countenance this Hypothesis by the following
Considerations.

1. And first the Diaphaneity of Diamonds, Rubies, Saphires, and many other
Gems agrees very well with this Conjecture, and thereby seems to favor it. For
it is not so likely, that Bodies that were never fluid should have that
arrangement of their Constituent parts, that is requisite to transparency, as
those that were once in a Liquid Form, during which it was easy for the Beams
of Light to make themselves passages every way, and dispose the solid
Corpuscles after the manner requisite to the Constitution of a transparent
Body. Therefore we see, that Silver in Aqua Fortis, or Lead in Spirit of
Vineager, having by that solution had their particles reduced into a fluid
Form, those particles, though before Opacous, are so disposed of as to make not
only a Diaphanous solution, but, if one pleases, transparent Christals. And
what Chemists usually try with those Metals, I have had the Curiosity to try
with several Stones, which I may hereafter have occasion to name to you. But
this Argument I bring rather to confirm than evince my Conjecture.

Secondly, The Origin assigned to Gems may be also countenanced by the
External figuration of diverse of them. For we plainly see, that the Corpuscles
of Nitre, Allom, Vitriol, and even Common Salt, being suffered to coagulate in
the Liquors they swam in before, will convene into Christals of curious and
determinate shapes. And the like I have tried in several metalline Bodies
dissolved in several Menstruums. But unless a Concreting stone, or other like
Body be either surrounded with, or in good part contiguous to a Fluid, it is not
easy, to conceive how it should acquire a Curious Angular and determinate
shape. For Concrescent Bodies, as I may so speak, if they have not room enough
in an Ambient Fluid for the most congruous ranging of their parts, cannot cast
themselves into fine and Regular shapes, such as I shall presently show that
diverse Gems seems to affect; but the Matter they consist of must conform to the
Figures of the Cavity that contains it, and which in this case has not so much
the Nature of a Womb, as of a Mold. And so we see that Saltpeter, and diverse
other Salts, if the Water, they were dissiolv'd in, be much too far boiled away
before they are suffered to shoot, will, if the Liquor fill the Glass,
sometimes coagulate into a Mass, fashioned like the inside of the containing
Vessel, or if a pretty quantity of Liquor remains after the coagulation, that
part of the nitrous Mass, that was ^educ'd to be concreted next the Glass, will
have the shape of the Internal sur^ace of it, whatever that be; but those
Christals that are contiguous to the remaining Liquor, having a Fluid Ambient
to shoot in, will have those parts of their Bodies, that are contiguous to the
Liquor, curiously formed into such Prismatical shapes as are proper to Ni^re.

To apply this now to Gems; That ^ivers kinds of them have Geometrical and
determinate shapes, though it be ^ot vulgarly observed, because we are ^ont to
see them when they are cut, if ^ot also set in Rings and Jewels; yet have often
had the opportunity to take ^otice of it, by having had the curiosity ^o look
upon many of them rough as Nature has produced them, and the good ^ortune to
take diverse of them out of their Wombs. For I remember, I have taken a good
number of Indian Granats ^out of a Lump of heterogeneous Mat^er, whose distinct
Cavities like so many Cells, contained stones, on some of whose surfaces you
might see Triangles, Parallelograms, etc. And being once near the Rock, whence
those Stones are chiefly fetched that are commonly called Bristol stones, I
remember, I rid thither and procured a Workman or two to dig me up a Number of
them, diverse of which I found to be curiously and determinately shaped, much
like some Christals of Nitre that I have taken pleasure to compare with them.
And the like figuration I have also observed in diverse Cornish Diamonds, and in
a fair and large one, which one that knew not what it was, found growing with
many lesser in Ireland, and presented me. And to let you see, that it is not
only in these softer Gems that this curious figuration is to be met with, I
shall add, that I found among many Stones, I had and took to be Rubies (and
those the Jewellers will tell you are exceeding hard) a considerable number,
whose shapes, though not the same with those of the Cornish and Irish Stones,
were yet fine and Geometrical. And the like I have observed even in those
hardest of Bodies, Diamonds themselves; of which remembering that in my
Collection of Minerals I had a pretty large one that was rough, I perceived
that the Surface of it consists of several Triangular Planes, which were not
exactly flat, but had as it were smaller Triangles within them, that for the
most part met at a point, and did seem to constitute, as it were, a very obtuse
solid Angle: Encouraged by this, I examined several other rough Diamonds, and
found the most of them to have Angular and determinate shapes, not unlike that
newly mentioned. And having thereupon consulted an expert Jeweller, that was
also a Traveller, though he could not name to me the shapes of the un-cut
Diamonds, he had met with; yet he told me, he generally found them to be shaped
like that I showed him; insomuch that such a shape was a mark, by which he
usually judged a Stone to be a right Diamond, if he had not the opportunity to
examine it by the hardness.

And this I shall add in favor of the Comparison, I lately intimated betwixt
the coagulation of Petre and that of Gems, that having once made an odd
Menstruum, wherein I was able to dissolve some precious stones, there shot in
the liquor, Christals pretty large, and so transparent and well shaped, that
they might well have passed for Christals of Nitre; and yet, if I much
misremember not, they were insipid. And I have diverse times taken notice in
such stones, as the Bristol Diamonds, That though that part, which may be
looked upon as the upper part of the stone, were curiously shaped, having six
smooth sides, which at the top were as it were cut off sloping so as to make
six triangles, that terminated like those of a Pyramid in a Vertex; yet that
which may be looked upon as the root or lower part of the stone, was much less
transparent (if not opacous) and devoid of any regular figuration; of which the
reason seems to be, that this being the part whereby the stone adhered to its
womb, it was sullied by the muddiness of it, and reduced to conform it self to
whatever shape the contiguous part of the Cavity chanced to be of; whereas the
upper part of the stone was not only formed of the clea^er part of the
Lapidescent Juice before the waterish vehicle was exhaled, ^ut had room and
opportunity to shoot unto the curious figure belonging to its Nature. And this
is much more con^picuous, where many of these Christals grow as it were in
Clusters out of one Mineral Cake or Lump; as I have seen ^ot only in those soft
but yet transpa^ent Concretions, which some of the ^^ter Mineralists (for the
ancient seem ^carce to have known them) call fluores, and particularly in a
very fine mineral ^mp, that I had once the honor to have ^^ew'd me by a great
Prince, and no less ^reat a Virtuoso, to whom it was then ^ewly presented. For
this mass consisted ^f two flat Parallel Cakes, that seemed ^ompos'd of a dirty
kind of Cristalline ^bstance, and out of each Cake there ^rew toward the other
a great Num^er of stones, some of which by their cohaesion kept the two cakes
together, and most of these stones, having each of them a little void space
about it, wherein it had room to shoot regularly* were Geometrically shaped,
and, which looked very prettily, were colored lik^ a (German) Amethyst. And I
have my self a pretty large stone, taken up her^ in England by a Gentleman of
my Acquaintance, which consists (as it were) of four parts: The lowermost is a
thi^ and broad flake of coarse stone, only adorned here and there with very
minute glistering particles, as if the^ were, (as probably they may be) of ^
Metalline Nature; over this is sprea^ another thin white, but opacous, bed
which is so inclos'^ between the fir^ named bed, and the two others, the
without defacing the stone I cannon well examine it: The third consists of
(...) congeries of minute Cristals exceedingly thick set, which therefore look
wh^tish, having little or no tincture of their own; and this part no more then
either of the former, is not much thicker tha^ a Barley Corn. The fourth and
uppe^ most part, which yet seems in great part to be the same Christals, which
as they grow higher and spread, acquire a deeper color, is made up of a great
Number of Amethysts, some paler, and some highly tincted, which are of very
differing figures, and bignesses, according (as one may ghess) as they had
convenience to shoot; these at one end of the stone lying in a flat bed (as it
were) and scarce exceeding a Barley Corn in length; whereas those at the other
end shoot up to a good height into figured Cristals, some of them as big as the
top of my little finger, and those are the most deeply colored, being also of
a good hardness, since I found that they would easily grave lines upon Glass.

I remember also, that going to visit a famous Quarry, that was not very far
from a Spring which had somewhat of a petrescent faculty in it, I caused diverse
solid pieces of rough and opacous stones to be broken, out of hope I had to
find in them some finer juice coagulated into some finer substances; and
accordingly I found, that in diverse places, the solid and massy stone had
cavities in it, within which, all about the sides, there grew Concretions,
which by being transparent like Crystal, and very curiously shaped, seemed to
have been some finer Lapidescent juice, that by a kind of percolation through
the substance, that grosser stone was made of, had at length arrived at those
Cavities, and upon the evaporation of the superfluous and aqueous parts, or by
their being soaked up by the neighboring stone, had opportunity to shoot into
these fine Christals, which were so numerous as quite to overlay the sides of
the Cavities, as I can show you in some large Clusters of them that I brought
from thence. And inquiring of an ancient Digger, whether he had not sometimes
met with greater quantity of them? he told me, that he had, and presented me a
great Lump or mass made up of a Numerous Congeries of soft Christals, (but
nothing so colorless as these other newly mentioned) sticking to one another,
but not any of them to any part of the Rock: So that they seemed to have been
hastily coagulated in some cleft or Cavity, as it were in a Mould, where
meeting and mingling before Concretion with some loose particles of Clay, the
mass may thereby be discolourd.

Our Argument drawn from the figuration of transparent Stones may be much
strengthened by the coalition I have sometimes observed, of two or more of such
Stones, and the congruity in the shape of some of them to the figures of those
parts of the others, that were contiguous to them and seemed to have been
formed after them. But though this Phenomenon be considerable to the scope of
my Discourse, yet perceiving that I shall have occasion to insist on it
hereafter, I shall not do it now.

Thirdly, Nor is it only the external figuration of these Gems, but the
internal Texture that favors our Hypothesis, some of them seeming much to
imitate in their Coagulation several of those substances, which I have observed
to have once been fluid. That common Salt may be made up of small saline
Particles, that by a Convenient Juxta-Position may be associated into great
Lumps, diverse of which are cubically shaped, is an observation easy enough to
be made. And that such Coalitions of particles may constitute solid and
considerably hard Bodies, I have tried by breaking some of the larger Cubes of
Sal Gem, and the Lumps of the Isle of Mayo-Salt, whereof the first is fossile,
the other marine, and both Natural. I have likewise found by Trial, that,
though Silver dissolved in Aquafortis appears usually to shoot, if it be taken
notice of, into flat and exceeding thin flakes; yet it is very possible so to
order the coagulation, that many of these thin Plates shall in their Convention
have their flat sides so placed over one another, as to make up pretty large
and thick Christals, whose very outsides will be finely shaped as being some
peculiar kind of Vitriol. Nor are these the only fluid Bodies, which I have
reduced to coagulate into Conventions, of such a flaky Texture; wherefore I
began to suspect that diverse transparent Minerals may have the like; and in
some Diaphanous kinds of Talk, whose outsides were Mathematically figured, I
found Encouragement to try, whether even some Gems themselves, notwithstanding
their hardness, might not have such an Internal figuration. Nor was I deterred
by considering, that it is taken for granted, that Gems are of an uniform
Texture, and that there must be a strange thinness in the Plates that make up
transparent stones, since no such thing has been noted by the most curious Eye,
but men have taken it for granted, that the Texture of all Gems is Uniform,
without any grain or fibers, no more than there is in Gold. But as to the
thinness of the Plates, I remember, I have several times taken pleasure to hold
a piece of good Muscovia-glass against the Light, when it was of such a
thinness, that the spectators, though provoked to look with curious Eyes, could
scarce see the Plate it self, and would by no means be brought to think that it
was possible to split it, till I did actually do it; and sometimes I then
subdivided it beyond even my own Expectation. But to examine this Conjecture, I
took some stones that had Geometrical figures on part of their Surfaces, and
which I had other grounds to think to have been once fluid substances, and
having diligently surveyed some of them, which seemed likeliest to give me
satisfaction, I manifestly enough perceived, not only with my assisted, but
with my naked Eyes, diverse parallel Commissures, which seemed plainly to be
made by the contiguous Edges of little thin Plates of stone, that appeared to
lie one over another, almost like the Leaves of a Book that is a little opened.

I remember that holding a large and rough Grizolette (as Artificers call hard
Gems, of a bluish color, brought them from East India) against the Light and
curiously observing it, I have sometimes plainly discerned a grain, as they
call it, in the Stone, and was answered by a skilful Artist that used to make
Seals of them, that such Stones would usually split according to the Ductus of
their Grain. I will not urge, that in some other Precious Stones, that were cut
and Polished, as particularly the Hyacinth, and even the Sapphire, by obverting
them several ways to the Light, I have been able to observe, as it were,
Commissures, which were so fine, as not to hinder, or call in Question the
Intireness of the Stone, for the Lapidaries purpose. This I say I forbear
insisting on, because the Phenomenon is far less considerable than what I have
several times observed in New English Granats, wherein, especially when they
are broken, the Edges and Commissures of the thin Plates or Flakes, whereof
they consisted, were very easily discernable. And to try whether this
observation would hold even in the hardest Stones, I had recourse to a pretty
big Diamond unwrought, which being placed in a Microscope, showed me the
Commissures of the Flakes I looked for, whose Edges were not so exactly
disposed into a plain, but that some of them were very sensibly extant like
little Ridges, but broad at the Top above the level of the rest. And these
Parallel flakes together with their Commissures, I could in a somewhat large
Diamond plainly enough discern even with my unassisted Eyes. And for further
satisfaction, I went to a couple of Persons, whereof the one was an Eminent
Jeweller, and the other an Artificer, whose Trade was to cut and polish
Diamonds, and they both assured me upon their repeated and constant Experience,
and as a known thing in their Art, that 'twas almost Impossible, (though not to
break, yet) to split Diamonds, or cleave them smoothly cross the Grain, (if I
may so speak,) but not very difficult to do it at one stroke with a Steeled
Tool, when once they had found out from what part of the Stone, and toward
what part the splitting Instrument was to be impelled: By which it is evident
that Diamonds themselves have a grain, or a flaky Contexture not unlike the
fissility, as the Schools call it, in Wood; which you will easily grant to
consist of assimilated water or Juices; which having been once fluid Bodies,
were fit to have their Particles so ranged or disposed, as to constitute a Body
far more easy to be cleft according to the Ductus of the Fibers (or Planes)
than otherwise. And I remember that having, as I thought, observed in a rough
Diamond, which I purposely examined, that the Flakes whose Edges were
terminated in one plain, were far enough from being parallel to those whose
Edges composed another plain, (I speak of Physical planes of the same Stone,) I
imagined that if this Diamond were to be cleft, it would not be smoothly split
into two pieces, because the Commissures did probably make Angles in the Body
of the Stone; and accordingly I learned of the ancientest of these Diamond
Cutters, that sometimes he met with Stones, that eluded all his skill, and
would by no means be split like others into two parts, but, before they were
cleft quite through, would break in pieces; which was a defect in the Stone he
could not certainly foresee, but was fain to learn from the unwelcome Event.

Fourthly, It seems not unprobable, that the Colors of diverse Gems (for I do
not say of all) are adventitious, and were imparted to them, either by some
colored Mineral Juice, or some tinging Mineral exhalation, whilst the Gem or
Medical Stone was either in Solutis Principiis, or of a Texture open enough to
be penetrable by Mineral Fumes. Which Arguments considerableness makes me hold
it unfit to be lightly touched in this place; though I cannot discourse any
thing fully of it in few words, because it not only suggests diverse
observations and other particulars, but requires also the mention of some of
the chief of them; which therefore I shall now subjoin.

1. And the first shall be, That many Gems, not to say almost all of them, have
been observed to be deprived of their Color, if having fallen, or been put
into the Fire they have layn too long there: Insomuch that I have found it
affirmed upon the Testimony of the Learned and Experienced Boethius de Boot,
that all Gems will loose their color in the Fire except Bohemian Granats. How
far this may be true I have not had opportunity thoroughly to examine. But I
well remember that having purposely exposed diverse Gems to the fire, though
that were but moderate, and had a Crucible interposed between it and them, some
of them seemed to have their Tincture much impaired, and others quite
destroyed. But I must be so free as to admonish you, that if these Trials be
not warily made, they may easily impose upon us; especially if we do not
consider the nature and cause of Whiteness. For any Diaphanous Body, as far as
I have yet observed, being divided into a multitude of very minute parts, and
consequently acquiring a multitude of distinct superficies's, which do briskly
reflect the Light every way outward, will appear to have a white color that
will be more or less vivid as the particles are more or less numerous, minute,
and otherwise fitted to scatter the incident Beams of Light; as you may see by
reducing to powder fine Venice-Glass, which will be white; and even red Inck,
if so shaken or beaten as to be brought to a froth, consisting of many minute
Bubbles, will seem to have put on a whiteness. So that if by too hasty an
Ignition, or too hasty a cooling of the fired Gems, they come to be flaw'd with
innumerable little Cracks, they may be thought to be made white by having their
Tincture driven away, when their whiteness really proceeds from the multitude
of those little flaws which are singly unperceived; and the rather, because the
Body may still retain its former shape or seeming intireness. To illustrate
which, I have sometimes taken pleasure to heat a piece of Crystal red hot in a
Crucible and then quench it in Cold Water: For even when the parts did not fly
or fall asunder, but the Body retained its former shape, the multitude of
little Cracks that were by this operation produced in it, made it quite loose
its transparency and appear a White Body. In making which experiment, the
multitude of produced flaws may be pretty well discovered to the incredulous,
if, as I have sometimes done, the ignited Crystal be warily and dexterously
quenched not in Water but in a very deep solution of Cochaneel made with Spirit
of Wine, in which operation, if it be well performed, (but not otherwise,)
enough of the red Particles of the solution will get into the cracks of the
Crystal, to give it a Pleasing Color.

The other trials that I have made about the reducing of Whiteness or paleness
in bodies, either transparent, or even Semi-Diaphanous only, About Tincture of
Coral.
belonging to an other paper, I shall here forbear to mention them, having
already said enough for my present purpose, which is not so much to affirm
positively, that no Proof at all can be drawn from the operation of fire upon
the Color of Gems, as to make you cautious, what Proofs drawn from thence you
admit.

2. Wherefore declining to say any thing more about the first, I shall now
proceed to the next Circumstance, that belongs to our Argument, (which you may
think to be more Considerable then the former) namely that the Colors of
several Gems, when they are not destroyed by fire, will be altered thereby;
which being a thing that happens to diverse fossile Pigments (of which some I
employ to tinge Glass,) and other Bodies confessedly Mineral, argues a
Commixture of Mineral substances in those Stones whose Color receives some of
the Alterations I speak of; which last words I add, because I would not impose
upon you by concealing, that there may be a change of Color produced by the
fire without any alteration of the tinging parts as such. For by flawing the
heated Gem in very many parts, a degree of whiteness or paleness emerging
thereupon may somewhat change the former Color. But this Alteration being but
a kind of Dilution, is not that which I here mean. For I remember I have taken
Indian Granats, and having in a Crucible exposed them to the fire, I found they
had exchanged their reddish Color for a Dark and Dirty one, like that of Iron
that has been long kept in the Air. And having taken some pieces of Agate
prettily enough adorned with waves of differing Colors, and kept them a
competent time (for they should not be kept too long) in the fire, I found, as
I conjectured, that the greatest part of the Agate seemed to be deprived of its
Tincture, being reduced to a pleasant Whiteness: But in some places where there
were stains of a differing kind from the rest, and where there ran little
Veins, that I ghess to be of a Metalline Nature, there, I say, the Color was
not destroyed, but changed, and the Veins of Pigment thus colored acquired a
deep redness, which they will retain, if let ^lone; though I was induced to
think by some Trials made on other pieces of Indian Agate, that even these
Me^alline Tinctures were not so fixed but that a lastinger fire would drive
them ^way, and leave the stones purely white. Such a change of Colors as I
lately mentioned in the Veins of Agate, is likewise found in those of some
other Stones, as also in some Pebbles, amongst diverse of which, that lost only
their Transparency by Ignition and Extinction in Water, one or two acquired so
much deeper a Color then it had before, that I thought it remarkable.

3. Another Circumstance that seem to favor our Conjecture may be this* That
it has been observed not unfrequently, that near many of the places where
colored Gems are found, some Mines or Veins of Metals are to be me^ with. And
I think it not unlikely, the if search were skilfully made, man^ more
Discoveries would be made o^ Veins either of Metalline Oar or some other
Mineral, Liquid or Concreted whence, by way of Juices or Fume^ the Gems may be
presumed to have received Tinctures. But usually when precious Stones are
found, Men's Ind^stry and Curiosity is too much confin^ to those rich Minerals,
and does n^^ make them solicitous to look after i^feriour Ones. Besides, that
in East India, whose Countries are best for the most Gems, they are wonderfully
unskillful at digging Mines; as I have gathered from the Answers of some, who
purposely went to visit the Diamond Mines, as they call them. To this may be
also referred, that Gems are several times found in the Metalline Veins
themselves, or very near them: As I can show you diverse Amethysts that an
ingenious Gentleman of my Acquaintance took himself out of a piece of Ground
abounding with the Ores of Iron and Tin, the latter of which was there
plentifully dug up. And in those colder Countries, such as Germany and England,
where hard Gems are more unfrequent, those soft ones that Mineralists call
Fluores, are often to be found in or near Metalline Veins, so finely tincted by
Mineral Juices, that, were it not for their softness, they might pass at least
among most Men, for Emeraulds, Rubies, Saphires, etc. as I have been informed,
not only by some Mineral Writers of good credit, but also by eye witnesses, and
partly by my own Observation.

4. The fourth Circumstance which may be alleag'd to the same purpose with the
three foregoing, is, That it seems possible, from some Gems by Menstruums to
obtain Tinctures that seem rather Extractions, than Dissolutions strictly so
called: I will not urge the Chemical Processes that may be met with in some
Authors to this Effect, because some Circumstances in the things and in the
Writers, made me so far suspect those I could try, (and those that required
undiscovered Menstruums, as they may be true, so, for ought I know, they may
not,) as to keep me from meddling with them. But I remember, I once made a
Menstruum, (I say once, because its preparation is so subject to casualty, that
I have often failed in it) which being poured upon well colored Granats, not
only not calcined, but entire, was in no long time beautified with a high and
lovely Tincture, which was admired by very skilful Persons, to whom I showed
it, because the Menstruum was not more corrosive than White Wind; and which yet
I therefore took to be a genuin Tincture, partly because it was drawn in the
Cold, partly because the Liquor would not tinge it self by standing, if no Body
were put in it, and partly because it drew a Tincture from Antimony of a very
differing color from this we speak of. Nor are Granats the only Gems, which I
have made the Liquor work on, in the Cold.

5. To these Four Circumstances I shall add this Fifth; That some Gems, which
Jewellers affirm without scruple to be Rubies, Saphires, etc. either are
colorless, or have other colors than those that are wont to belong to them.
That famous Goldsmiths, Benvenuto Cellini, in his little Italian Tract of his
own Profession, admonishes his Reader, Page 10.
that there are one kind of Rubies, that are Naturally white, (and not made so
by Art) which he proves by the degrees of hardness peculiar to Rubies. And the
same Author elsewhere tells us of Berills, Topazes, and Amethysts, that are
white. And it seems, by what he says not far from that place, that the Italian
Jewellers did not look upon the Tinctures of Gems as any thing near so
Essential to them, as they are commonly reputed, since they reckon Topazes and
Saphires, whereof one is Blew and the other Yellow, but both extremely hard in
comparison of other Gems than Diamonds (and perhaps Rubies,) to be of the same
species. The Degree of hardness of Rubies and Saphires is oftentimes so equal,
that I knew an expert English Jeweller, who for that only Reason (for he knew
not whence the difference of Colors might proceed) took Rubies and Saphires to
be of the same kind of Stone.

And that Gems, referred by Lapidaries to the same kind, may be very
differingly tinged, is a truth, whereof I have seen notable Instances in
Diamonds themselves; which I therefore prefer to other Instances, because the
extreme hardness of Diamonds is such as keeps Jewellers from mistaking any
other Stone for a true Diamond, if they are permitted to put them on their
rapidly moved Wheels employed to cut them. Now of true Diamonds I have seen
some, that were Yellowish, others that were more Yellow, and among the rest,
one that was so perfectly Yellow, that I at first took it for a fair Topaz,
though it were a Diamond valued at near three pound weight of Gold: I have also
seen Diamonds and those rough, as they came directly out of the Indies, and
were soon after bought by Traders in Diamonds for such, which were either
Bluish or Greenish. And I particularly contemplated one Stone, which, if its
shape and other things had not convinced me of the contrary, was so Green, that
I should have taken it for an Emerald.

I remember I had once occasion to buy a considerable number of small Rubies,
diverse of which were very curiously shaped, and coming to look upon the whole
parcel more leasurely than my have would permit me when I bought it, I found in
a great number of other Stones one, and but one, that was devoid of any Color;
but in other respects was so like the rest, as invited me to conclude that it
would have increased their number, but that it was coagulated and hardened
before the Mineral Pigment had tinged it of the same Color with the rest. In
which guess I was confirmed, when, having met with a Gentleman, who had been in
the chief Places of the East Indies, where Rubies are found, and particularly
at the River of Siam, or Pegu, near which he lived a good while, and where he
frequently saw Rubies taken out of the bottom of the Water, and sometimes took
them out himself; I learned of him by enquiry, that he had there seen several
Stones, each of which was partly a Ruby and partly colorless: And sometimes in
the same Stone there would be two portions of one sort, and the third, though
lying betwixt them, of another: Which has frequently obliged the Jewellers
considerably to lessen the Bulk of such Stones by cutting off the untincted
part. And, if my memory do not much deceive me, I saw in a great and curious
Princes Cabinet, among other rarities, a Ring, in which was set a Stone of a
moderate bigness, whereof only one half, or thereabouts, was well tincted, the
other being colorless. In Gems that are less precious, and not so transparent,
especially in Agats and in Opacous Gems, I could easily give a multitude of
Instances of the differingly tincted parts of the same entire Stone. And I
usually wear in a Ring a small Sardonix that was once a great Princes, wherein
there are three Portions one within another, the uppermost, Black, the
middlemost of a kind of Chestnut color, the other of a Blew, almost like a
Turquois, each of which portions is exactly of a fine Oval figure, and each of
the two uttermost is thoroughout of a very uniform Breadth as well as color,
and exactly parallel to the other. But 'twould not be here so proper as 'twill
be hereafter, to multiply Instances of Opacous Gems: Wherefore (having
mentioned only the Sardonix, because it is not always Opacous,) I shall add
concerning Transparent ones, That Jewellers reckon among Saphires not only that
sort of Azure Gems which usually pass for such, but also another sort of
Stones, because of their Saphirine degree of hardness; though for their want of
Tincture they call them white (Saphires.)

6. The Sixth and last Circumstance belonging to the foregoing Argument or
Consideration is this, That sometimes one may find Gems that are partly tincted
and partly not: As if the tingeing Pigment mixing with one part of the matter
whereof the Stone consisted whilst it was Liquid or soft, were not copious
enough to diffuse it self to the Whole, nor to give an equally intense Color
to all that portion that it tinges. It Is true that in some cases the Diffusion
may be stopped by the Petrescent Juices coagulating first in another part than
that with which the Tincture was mixed. And perhaps, in some other Cases, the
different Colors may have belonged to differing portions of matter,
coagulating upon or against each other, at differing times, yet so as to seem
one entire Stone, as I may have hereafter occasion to declare. Yet since, which
soever of these explications be admitted, it will, if it belong not to this
place, at least confirm our main Hypothesis (of the Origin of Gems from fluid
or soft materials:) I shall return to what I was saying about Gems, partly
tincted and partly colorless. And having only intimated upon the by, that in
some hard Semidiaphanous Stones, Europaean and East Indian, I have observed a
very unequal and irregular diffusion of the Tincture: I shall add to the
things, that may be gathered in favor of the proposed Conjecture from some of
the things before (as also since) related, these two Particulars.

The one, That I have (as I think I elsewhere mentioned) seen in Italy, among
Rarities, a large piece of Crystal about the bigness of my two fists, whereof
the Pyramidal part was of a Transparent Green, the Vertex being richly tinged
like an Emerald; but the further the color spread from the Vertex, the fainter
and paler it grew; so that, before it came near the Base, it was quite spent,
if I may so speak, leaving the bigger part of the Stone transparent, but
colorless, like ordinary Crystal. And by this perhaps we may explain an
Expression of Josephus Acesta, where he says, that Emeralds grow in Stones
like unto Christals, and that he had seen them in the same Stone fashioned like
a Vein; And they seem, adds he, by little and little to thicken and refine. And
in the same place this Learned Author has a memorable observation, that may
confirm both what I have just now related, and what we mentioned a little
above, about colorless Gems: I have seen, says he, some that were half White
and half Green; others all White, and some Green and very perfect. And this is
the first Particular I was to mention.

The Other is afforded me by the way I have used and elsewhere described, of
giving to pieces of Rock Crystal passably good Tinctures by Mineral Fumes. And
supposing the thus colored pieces to be as entire Stones as the beholders have
generally believed them, the instance will be pertinent to our purpose in spite
of an objection. For though the Colors thus given are not wont to pervade them
very deep, and have their penetration assisted by no faint degree of heat; yet
it is to be considered on the other side, that these pieces of Crystal had
attained their full hardness, and after their colouration, are cut and polished
like other Chrystals: Whereas the Gems that our Conjecture means, are supposed
to have been tinged under ground when they were yet fluid, or at least soft.
That there are sometimes generated in the Bowels of the Earth Mineral
Exhalations capable of applying themselves to the Stones they meet with there,
Of Subterraneal ^ires, etc.
I have in another Discourse sufficiently declared. That also some hard and
stony substances have been actually tinged with such Mineral Steams, I shall,
in the subsequent part of this Discourse, have occasion to take notice. And I
remember too, that even in so hard a Gem as a Sapphire, I have observed the
efficacy of these Subterraneal Fumes; having diverse times seen one of those
Stones, wherein a fine Seal was cut, which continued so oddly tinged
notwithstanding what had been taken off to reduce it to an exquisite shape,
that having inquired of a skilful Person of my acquaintance by whom it had been
Engraven, he both assured me that he had found it of the full hardness of a
Sapphire, and confessed to me, that the Mineral Fumes had so oddly tinged it,
that in his opinion it might, by the Looks, pass (rather) for a Chalcedonian.

And now, Sir, I fear I may need your pardon for having been so prolix in
Discoursing of one of the Particulars belonging to our Argument; to excuse
which, I have no other Apology to make, but that I hope what has been
delivered, will scarce seem impertinent, and that I might easily have made it
more tedious, if, to decline doing so, I had not purposely made some omissions.

Having then said thus much about our fourth Consideration, I proceed now to
add in the fifth place, on the behalf of the Hypothesis hitherto favored, an
Argument which I presume you will not think inconsiderable; Namely, that Solid
Gems may include Heterogeneous matter in them. Several Instances of this sort
in opacous Stones, I elsewhere recite upon my own Observation; but in
transparent ones they are very great Rarities; and therefore it will not, I
presume, be thought strange, if I mention but a few.

First then on this occasion I remember, that a very ingenious and qualified
Lady, who had accompanied her Husband in an Embassy to a great Monarch, assured
me, that she brought thence among several Rich Presents and other Rarities,
(some whereof she showed me,) a piece of Crystal, in the amidst of which
there was a drop of Water, which by its motion might be very easily observed,
especially when the Crystal was made to change its posture. And, if my memory
deceive me not, I have in some pieces of Rock-Chrystal taken notice of things
that seem to argue, that somewhat or other was intercepted within the Body of
the Stone.

A curious person, that traded much and was very skilful in Indian-Gems,
particularly Grisolets, which he got from the Indies, and whereof he showed me
the largest I have yet seen, being asked by me, whether he had ever found in
them any Heterogeneous substance, which something, I had observed, made me
suspect that some of them might harbor notwithstanding their hardness; he
averred to me, that among diverse rough ones, that were brought from the Indies,
he had with wonder seen one that was about the bigness of a Filberd, in the
Solid substance whereof there was a Cavity with a certain Liquor in it; which
by changing the posture of the Stone might be made to move to and fro in the
Cavity: And when the drop was settled, it was of the bigness of a round Pearl
that he showed me, which wanted somewhat of a moderate size for a Neck-lace.
And when he had answered the Questions I proposed him to clear my Doubts, he
added, that this Rarity made the Stone, which was otherwise of a small Value,
prized at an hundred Pound. And I have my self seen a monstrous Gem, if I may
so call it, and little less a Rarity then the former, that an acquaintance of
mine had bought, (as I afterward learnt,) from this Relatour; whose Narrative
about the Grisolet, I think the more Credible, because, that having had the
curiosity to break a Stone, that was brought as a Rarity from the East Indies,
where Gems are often harbored in such Stones, I found in the Solid substance
of it (which was so hard as to strike fire like a Flint, and in its little
flakes was at least Semediaphanous) a Cavity wherein were coagulated very
minute but polished and Chry^talline Stones, which seemed to have their points
inwards, which argued, that there had been some Liquor, in which these
glistering particles had shot, though in process of time the remaining and
incoagulable part of it may have been imbibed by the Ambient Matter if not have
escaped thorough it, by Virtue of some peculiar congruity of it with the Pores
of the Stone. Which need not be thought impossible, since experience has
assured us, that some solid Stones and even Gems may be (though slowly)
penetrated or have their Texture altered by common Water. No^ are these the
only Heterogeneous substances I found included in this Stone.

And if, as Amber is reckoned among Gems, and is sometimes of a greater
hardness than one would expect, so I could reckon it among true Stones, 'twere
easy for me to borrow thence a great confirmation of what I have been saying;
and how ever it will afford ^^ an Illustration of it. For, not to mention many
things, of what I elsewhere recite my self to have seen in Amber* I have now by
me a fine piece of cler^ and Solid Amber, (presented me by a Person no less
extraordinary than it) in which is included a large entire fly, in shape and
size much like a Grass-hopper, but variously and curiously colored, with his
Wings displayed.

To these Observations I shall add only this, That I have had my self, and
shown to others, one of that sort of pale Amethysts, that some call white
Amethysts; which had been cut to be set in a Ring, or turned into a Seal, and
was like that sort of Gems so hard, that I could readily cut Glass with it; and
yet in the Body of this Stone there appeared to be a considerable number of
things that looked just as if they had been hairs, some of them lying parallel,
and others inclining to one another; and having contemplated them as well by
Daylight as Candlelight, and in diverse positions in reference to the Light
and the Eye, some of them seemed at times to be of a lovely reddish Color, but
reflecting the Light, as if they were well filled either with Air or Water: But
for the most part they did, as I was saying, seem to be hairs of a Brownish
Color, which made the Stone not a little wondered at even by curious and
skilful Men. I leave you to judge, Whether 'twill be fit here to add, that I
have sometimes suspected, that even in Diamonds themselves there may possibly
be found intercepted, or mingled with a pure Lapidescent substance, some
Particles of Heterogeneous Matter. And that in this suspicion I was somewhat
confirmed, as by the odd Clouds I had observed in an extraordinary Diamond, and
by some Hydrostatical, and other Observations I made about those Stones; (some
of which I found heavier than either Crystal or white Marble,) so by my having
purposely demanded of an ancient Cutter of Diamonds of great Practice and
Experience, whether he observed not a sensible difference of weight among
Diamonds of the same place: For to this he replied, that he had; especially in
those that were cloudy or foul: Insomuch that showing me a Diamond that seemed
to me to be about the bigness of two ordinary pease or less; he affirmed that
he sometimes found in Diamonds of that bigness, about a Carrat (which is by
common estimation four Grains) difference in point of weight.

Sixthly, The last Argument I shall employ to show, That the Matter of diverse
Gems may have once been fluid, may be taken from the Proofs you will meet with
(in the following part of this Tract) of the Second Member of our Hypothesis.
For if it shall appear, that several even of the transparent Gems have
metalline or other extraneous Mineral Bodies mingled with them, per minima, it
will be very agreeable to reason to suppose, that such a mixture was made, when
the mingled Bodies were in a fluid form; since, beside that one may well ask,
how else the Metalline Corpuscles came to be conveyed into such compact and
hard Bodies as Gems, it is very easy to conceive, if our Hypothesis be
admitted, and very hard otherwise to apprehend, how among Bodies that differ
toto genere, as Metals and Stones, there should be made mixtures so exquisite
as many of these appear to be, partly by the Uniform Coloration of the Gem, and
partly by the Diaphaneity retained notwithstanding this dispersion of Mineral
Pigments through the whole Mass; and in many Instances also by the Curious
Figuration that we have lately been discoursing of.

Postscript. To all the foregoing Circumstances, I can now add something, that
I met with, since I thought to conclude with the Last of them, and that tends
highly to the Confirmation of our Hypothesis. In a Tract that makes part of a
small Book freshly Published in French, principally to acquaint Men with the
ways of estimating Gems according to the Rates of Modern Jewellers, the
Anonymus, but Curious Author, takes occasion, to give us, from the Mouth, as he
affirms, of the Famous late Travelers he conversed with in diverse places, (and
whose Relations are indeed the recentest I have seen is Print) an account of
the Number, and Names of the places, where Diamonds and Rubies are found in the
Indies, adding some Circumstances and Particularities about the Qualities of
the Soil in those places that I have not elsewhere met with. This Author then
speaking of the first of those three Diamond-Mines, which he makes to be the
only ones in the East Indies, having told us that the Stones are there found
some in the ground and some in the Rock, subjoyns, that those that are drawn
from the Rock, or the neighboring parts, have ordinarily a good Water; but for
those which are drawn out of the Ground, Que's ilya quelque sable n^ir ou rouge
parmi la terr^, le Diamant aussi en aura quelqu' un Page 9.
their Water partakes of the Color or Soil wherein they are found. So that if
the Earth be clean and somewhat Sandy, the Diamonds will be of a good Water;
but if it be fat or black, or of another color, they will have some tincture
of it. Nay he immediately annexes, that if there be some black or red Sand
among the Earth, the Diamond will also have some grain of it. And elsewhere
mentioning the Second Mine of Diamonds, which the Natives call Gems, he
admonishes his Reader, that in this, as in the Mine of Visapour, (which is that
formerly mentioned) the Stones partake of the Quality of the Soil where they
are found; so that if that be boggy or moist, the stone will incline to
Blackness, and if it be reddish, 'twill have an Eye of that Color. Elsewhere
he tells us, that of late Years there were found in the Kingdom of Golcond^
store of Diamonds, which were brought to the Nababe, or first Minister of
State, who forbad the making any further search after them, Page 18.19.
finding not one in the whole number to have a good Water, all of them being
Black or Yellow. But by the way, Page 37.
whereas this Author affirms it as a clear Truth, that as Gold is the heaviest
and most precious of Metals, so Diamonds are the hardest, and heaviest of all
Stones, he must excuse me if I declare, that what he asserts agrees not with my
experience, who having tried the weight of an uncut Diamond Hydrostatically,
have taken such a course to estimate its specific Gravity, as I find not to
have been yet taken by any other, and which you will easily grant to be more
exact than any other of the known ways can be.

The Argument that has detained us all this while, comprised so great a
variety of Matter, and may, I hope, perform so great a part of my task in this
Discourse, that, though I shall not much apologize for having dwelt so long
upon it, yet I should think my self obliged to make some amends for my past
prolixity by being succinct in the remaining part of this Treatise, and
therefore, having left off with an intimated promise to show more fully, that
diverse Gems contain Metalline or other Mineral substances in them, I should
immediately connect those Arguments to what has been lately said, but that I
think it altogether requisite, to make way for what is to follow, by first
taking notice of a main Objection, that may be urged against the Doctrine we
have been proposing.

This is taken from the Figuration of some Gems (and especially the Prismatical
one of Crystal) and seems the more fit to be urged against us, because we our
selves have, in the Second of the above-recited Arguments, given several
Instances of it. For it seems scarce possible, that so curious a shape should
be so Uniformly produced in such a multitude of Christals, great and small,
unless there were some seminal and plastic power to fashion the matter after
so regular and Geometrical a manner.

But he that shall attentively consider, what I elsewhere say concerning the
Figuration of Salts and of Metalline and other Magisteries dissolved by, and
concoagulated with Salts, may be very much assisted to discover the Invalidity
of this Objection. But yet, because I confess it is very specious, if not
important, I am content here to consider it a little more particularly.

To this plausible Objection then, I have two or three things to answer; First,
That there is no absurdity to conceive, that if there be a Seminal and plastic
power in Mineral Bodies, it may be harbored in Liquid Principles, as well as
otherwhere. For we see that the Seed of Animals, which oftentimes, as in
Elephants, Rhinocerots, etc. produces hard and solid Bones, Teeth, and Horns,
is at first but a Liquid substance; and the Formative power in some Trees and
their Fruits does convert the Alimental Juice into Woods, Shells, and other
Bodies very Solid and ponderous.

But Secondly, I elsewhere show, that even in the Figures of Allom, Vitriol,
See the Origin of Forms and Qualities now publish^d by the Author.
and other Salts, that are so curiously and Geometrically shaped, there is no
necessity to fly to a distinct Architectonick principle; but that those Bodies
themselves may receive their shapes from the Coalition of such singly invisible
Corpuscles, as by the Motion of the Fluid, wherein they did swim, and by diverse
assistant Circumstances, are determined to stick together rather in that manner
than in another. That this may be applied also to other Bodies, I shall need to
show in this place by no other Instance than that of the Salt, that (in this or
some other paper) I formerly told you I made of common Salt, only by the help
of Oil of Sulphur or of Vitriol and Water. For though it be manifefestly a
factitious Body compounded of Salt and Sulphur, and such a Body that therein
the Sea Salt, whereof 'twas chiefly made, has had its own Nature destroyed; yet
by reason of the Figure of the resultant Corpuscles, and their fitness to
convene when dissolved in Water, into curiously shaped Bodies, this factitious
Salt, when I have rightly prepared it, did sundry times shoot into long
Christals with points like Diamonds, that did emulate native Crystal as well
in the regularness of the shape, as in the transparency of the substance. And
to make it the more evident, That 'twas partly the Figure, that happened to
result from the operation of the Oil of Vitriol upon the Sea Salt, and partly
other Circumstances, that determined the shape of the Christals; I shall add,
that usually, when the Quality or proportion of the Oil of Vitriol was other
than it should have been, or an error was committed in some (important)
Circumstance or other of the Operation, the Saline Concretions, though they did
not shoot at all like Cubes, as the Sea Salt, which they were made of, would
alone have done; yet they did not shoot any thing at all like Rock-Christal, as
did those formerly mentioned; and for all this did, by reason of the curious
Shapes of the Corpuscles, they consisted of, shoot into Christals for the most
part finely Figured; though sometimes of one shape and sometimes of another.
And that you may not have any suspicion as if the regular Figure, which
Sea Salt is naturally of, is any way necessary to such figurations, I will add
an Experiment that I devised to show, That even out of a petrescent Juice such
curiously figured Bodies may be made. I took then some Stony Stiriae, elsewhere
mentioned to have been found in Caves or Grottoes where petrescent Liquors
coagulated before they have time to fall down, and having dissolved them in
Spirit of Verdigrease, I put the clear Solution to evaporate in a Digestive
Furnace after the ordinary manner; by which means, though I made the Experiment
more than once, I had rather a coagulated Mass than any thing like Christals.
Whereby you may learn the truth of what I was saying, That a Concourse of
diverse circumstances may be requisite to determine the figuration of consistent
Bodies, made out of fluid ones: since here, for want of time for making
occursions enough for the Particles to concrete i^ after the most convenient
manner, the Experiment succeeded not: Wherefore it being agreeable to my
notions, that some sorts of Bodies may require a longer time to make such a
Convention in, than others, I allowed many days to another solution of Stiriae
made in the same Menstruum; after which there shot, as I desired, about the
sides and bottom of the Glass a number of distinct Christals, long,
transparent, and curiously shaped, most of which, I think, I can yet show you.

Perhaps 'twill be said, that the petrescent Juice, when broken, does
oftentimes appear to abound, within, with stiriae or narrow streaks like those
of Antimony, and that I my self observe some Gems to be made up of thin flakes
or plates; which internal figuration seems to be much more difficult to be
accounted for without a Plastic Form, than the External.

I will not reply to this, that, for ought I know, diverse known Salts would,
when broken, appear to be Geometrically figured even in the lesser Corpuscles
as well as they are evidently so in their entire bulk, if we had eyes quick
enough to discern the Shapes of the minuter as well as of the bigger Bodies.
And we have great Inducements to think, that whether or no Cartesius do rightly
make the invisible particles, of which the smallest visible Grains of Sea Salt
are made up, to be long and rigid ^ike sticks; the minute visible concre^ions,
of which the bigger Grains of Salt consist, are as well as themselves of ^
Cubical figure; I will not, I say, insist on this reply, but proceed to
allege, That there are diverse Bodies so luckily ^hap'd, that upon a slow
Coalition, they will convene into a multitude of manifest Concretions; some of
which will consist of streaks, and others be made up of Flakes; as in the
Sal-armoniack, commonly sold in the Shops (for I speak not of the native, that
is said to come from Armenia,) though it be avowedly a Factitious Body, you may
often observe, upon breaking the bigger Masses, great multitudes of streaks,
like those we may usually observe in the broken stiriae of petrifying Water.
And I have more than once seen, and also made, artificial Concretions (of whose
preparation I elsewhere speak) some of which consisted of Salts alone, and
others of Salts and Minerals, as Stones or Antimony, which look very like Talk,
being white Bodies, made up of a multitude of very slender streaky Particles
lying long-wayes one upon another, as in that Mineral. And as I have taken out
of Earth many Concretions, which as they were for the most part outwardly
shaped like Rho^bus's or Lozenges, were composed of a multitude of flat and
extremely thi^ plates; so I have sometimes taken pleasure to imitate such
Concretions by Art. And though a Solution of Silver in purified Aqua Fortis
does usually afford only a great company of small, thin and seemingly simple
Flakes, like Scales of Fish, because Men have not any design like ours in
procuring the Concretion; yet having dissolved a good quantity of the Metal
together, and suffered it to shoot leasurely and with due Circumstances, I have
obtained sundry Christals, which both were Geometrically figured without, and
consisted of a multitude of exceeding thin Flakes orderly sticking to one
another. And I remember, That whilst the Objection, I am answering, was in my
thoughts, I pitched upon a yet more pregnant Experiment for the clearing of it.
For considering, how Tin-Glass, though a compact and ponderous Body, does
naturally consist of a multitude of shining polished Flakes, (which may be
easily perceived and distinguished by breaking a Lump of it into three or four
pieces;) I found by trial what I expected, That though a mass of this Mineral
were beaten to Powder, yet if it were melted and suffered to cool of it self,
the disposition of the Component Particles would determine them to stick to one
another in broad and shining Flakes, whereof many will be incumbent one upon
another, and some cross to one another at various Angles, according as the
matter happened in its several Portions to be diversely refrigerated. And some
Factitious Bodies may afford us the like Instances, as I have observed in some
mixtures of Copper, Iron, and other Minerals; and very conspicuously in good
Regulus Martis. Stellatus, whose Internal Configuration may be found by
breaking it; by which way I have observed with pleasure, That the Regulus
abounded with flat and shining Flakes of an almost specular Polish.

If it be urged, to confirm the former Objection, That some Lapidescent Juices,
even of those we mentioned in these Discourses, do concrete even whilst Men are
looking on; and yet our Stony Stiriae, often mentioned (which probably may be
also hastily Coagulated) have in some places a Streaky and in other places an
Angular Configuration of parts; I answer First, That I have seen diverse of that
kind of Concretions, which as far as the eye took notice of, were made up of
parts confusedly jumbled together. And next, That (to consider now those whose
Texture is more uniform) I have found by Trials, that, if there be a due
disposition in the component Corpuscles of Bodies to such Configurations, they
may be brought to concrete accordingly in a far shorter time, than almost any,
that have not tried, would expect, not to say, believe. Having sometimes for
Curiosity's sake warmed six or seven Ounces of Aqua Fortis, glutted with fine
Silver, 'till the mixture was all brought into a transparent Liquor; and having
then put the clear but strong Glass, that contained it, into cold Water, that
the Menstruum might be the more hastily Refrigerated, I observed, That when
once the dissolved Metal began to shoot, the Coagulation into figured Christals
proceeded so fast, that a naked Eye could see the progress of it. And having
sometimes put a quantity of Salt and Snow, or of some other strongly
Refrigerating mixture, into a convenient Glass, and wetted the outside with a
strong Solution of Sal Armoniack or some Urinous Spirit, though in less than a
Minute of an Hour it would be Coagulated; yet the Salt, into which it shot, had
usually a curious and determinate Figure according to the Nature of the Liquor
that afforded it; as I have often shown the Curious.

Perhaps you will say, that these Instances are taken from Saline Bodies, which
are for the most part disposed to convene in smooth Surfaces, and angular
Shapes, and easy enough to be wrought on by the External cold; and it may yet
seem strange to Philosophers themselves, what in some Cases must have happened,
if our Hypothesis be admitted, namely, that external Circumstances and
Accidents, such as the Figure of a Mold or Womb, the coldness of the Ambient,
etc. should visibly, and sometimes not a little, diversify even the internal
figuration of close and solid Minerals and Gems, without excluding all those
that are supposed to be of a quicker Concretion.

Wherefore to clear this difficulty, it may not be a miss to subjoin an
Experiment, that I devised to show, that if the Corpuscles of a Body be so
shaped as to be fitted by their coalition, to constitute smooth (and if I may
so speak) glossy Planes, though they be variously shuffled and discomposed as
to their Pristine order, yet if they be but a little while kept in a state of
fluidity, that they may the fitlier place themselves or be placed by other
Agents, they will presently be brought to convene into smooth and shining
Planes, and the Situation of those Planes, in reference to one another, will be
more Uniform and Regular, than almost any one would expect in a Concretion so
hastily made; notwithstanding which, their internal contexture will be much
diversified by circumstances, as particularly the figure of the Vessel or Mold
wherein the fluid Matter concretes.

Considering then, that (according to what I noted already) if we break
Tinn-Glass (taken for the Bismuth of the Ancient Mineralists) as it is wont to
be sold in Lumps in the Shops, it will discover a great many smooth and bright
Planes, (larger, or lesser, according to the bigness of the Lump;) which
sometimes meet, and sometimes cross one another at very differing Angles:
considering this (I say) I thought it probable, that a Body, that had already
been melted, and was apt to convene into such Planes, not only would do so
upon another fusion, but might have the order and bigness of those Planes,
diversified by the Figure and capacity of the Vessel, I should think fit for my
purpos^. Wherefore having beaten a sufficient quantity of it to powder, and,
when 'twas well melted, cast it into a good pair of Iron-Molds, whose Cavity
was an Inch in Diameter, we had a Bullet, which, being warily broken, did, as
we expected, seem to be, as it were, made up of a Multitude of little shining
Planes, so shaped and placed, that they seemed orderly to decrease more and
more as they were further and further removed from the Superficies of the
Globe; And they were so ranked, that they seemed to consist of a multitude of
these rows of Planes reaching every way, almost like so many radious's of a
Sphere from the Center or middle part, to the Circumference: Whereas if we melt
Tinn-Glass in a Crucible and let it cool there, the Matter being taken out and
broken, will appear indeed full of smooth Planes, but (as was lately intimated)
very irregularly and confusedly associated or placed.

I will not now stay to enquire, whether the orderly composition of the Planes
in our Bullet (which some curious Persons, that I showed it to, looked on, as a
not unpleasant sight,) may be derived from this, that the Matter was coold
first on the outside, by the contact of the cold Iron Mold, and the
neighborhood of the Ambient Air, and that the coagulation being once thus
begun, the parts of the remaining fluid, as they happened to pass by this
already coold Matter, with a motion, which, by reason of their removal from the
Fire, was now slackened, they were easily fastened against the already stable
parts, (as may be illustrated by the concretion of dissolved Nitre and Allom,
both about the injected sticks, and the Grains that first concrete against the
sides of the Vessel,) and the refrigeration still reaching further inwards,
till it came last of all to the middle of the Globe, that being the remotest
part from the refrigerating Agents; the apposition was successively and orderly
made, till the whole Matter was concreted. But, (as I was saying) I must not
now stay to inquire, whether the figuration of our Bullet may be explained
after this or some such way: or whether we are not to take in some subtle or
all pervading matter, or some other Catholic Agent? For though such points
may be well worth discussing, and we may possibly elsewhere say something of
them; yet here it may suffice to say, that we have varied the foregoing Trial
by casting Bullets of some other Bodies, (and particularly the simple Regulus
of Antimony) wherein it succeeded well enough, though the produced contexture
were not so Uniform as in Tinn-Glass. And I also tried, that having cast melted
Sulphur it self into a Globous Body of about five or six Inches in Diameter,
and warily broken it, though one would think it an unlikely Mineral to make any
other than a confused Concretion, it presented me great Fibers almost like
little strawes, whose number and (in great part) orderly situation afforded me
a much less unfit Instance for my present purpose than one would have lightly
expected. But what I came from saying, may serve to make out what I propounded
to my self; which having named already I need not here repeat.

But one thing more there is, that may be pertinent on this occasion, namely,
That I have broken diverse Marchasites of a peculiar sort, that were either of a
roundish, or of an almost Cylindrical Figure, to observe their internal
Structure and Qualifications; whereupon, I found in more than one of them (for
I remember not that I did in all) a great many rows of little Planes or
glistering Corpuscles, reaching from the innermost parts to the External
Surface, and in those that were somewhat Cylindrically shaped on the outside;
these ranks of Gold-colour'd particles in the several Planes of the broken
Mineral, seemed like Semi-Diameters ishuing out from a row of Physical Points,
conceived to be placed on an imaginary Line, lying almost like the Axis of a
Cylinder between the opposite ends, (though I do not well remember how near it
reached to them:) As if the Cavities of the Chalk or Clay, wherein these
Marchasites were found, had made the Soil like a Mold, wherein the Matter of
the Marchasite being detained whilst 'twas in a Fluid form, did afterward
concrete much after the manner that the Bullets of Tinn-Glass, Regulus, etc.
did in our Molds. But the prosecution of this Conjecture belongs to another
Discourse.

I shall therefore now proceed to a further Answer to the formerly raised
Objection: Wherefore as to the exquisite uniformity of Shape, which is so
admired in Gems, and is thought to demonstrate their being formed by a Seminal
and Geometrizing Principle; though I have, in the Second of the above mentioned
Arguments, ascribed to them such curious Figures, as argue their having been
generated after the way proposed in our Hypothesis; and though also I willingly
allow their shapes to deserve from us a delightful Wonder at the curiousness of
Nature's, (or rather her Author's) Workmanship; yet upon a more attentive
surveying of them, I do not find the Uniformity to be near so great as is wont
to be imagined; but have rather met with such Diversities as agree well with
our Hypothesis about their Figuration.

In several transparent Gems, it seemed manifest enough to me, (as I lately
also noted) that the Shape was, in great part, due to the Figure of the Womb,
or Mold, wherein the matter, whilst liquid or soft, happened to settle. In some
other transparent and well figured Gems of the same kind or Denomination, and
sometimes growing very near one another, by a diligent Inspection I found a
manifest and sometimes very considerable Difference in their shapes, either as
to the Number, or the Figures, or the bigness of the Sides or Planes that made
up the respective Gems; or as to two, or all, of these; comparing these
deviating Particulars with what would have been in a Stone of that kind or
Denomination, that were perfectly figured. This I had opportunity to take
notice of, particularly in two sorts of Stones; the first Granats, of which I
had a considerable number brought me out of America growing in one Lump of
Matter; but in distinct parts of it, and without touching one another: Among
which I took notice of a manifest disparity of shape, and so I did in some
Affrican ones, that were presented me; as also in others that were European,
one which, that was of an extraordinarily large size for a figured Gem of a
transparent kind, (for it weighed above Eleven Drachms and a half,) I
considered with a particular attention, and found, that, though it seemed to
have been coagulated in a Fluid Medium, and to consist of Twelve Planes, at the
concourse of two or three of which it seemed to have been broken off from the
Womb or Root; yet it was very far from the Dodecahedron of Geometricians: For,
whereas that consists of Twelve aequilateral and aequiangled pentagons, almost
all the Planes, that made up our Granat, were quadrilateral and very different
from what regularly they should have been, not only in magnitude, but in shape:
for one of them seemed to have five Sides, and of the rest, some were most of
kinn to a Rhombus, others to a Rhomboeides; but the most were but little better
figured than those that the Geometricians call the Trapezia. And thus much for
the first sort of Gems whose shapes I observed to be not regular. The Second
consists of those Christalline Stones, which they call Cornish Diamonds, and
which are some of them much harder than the Bristol Diamonds, or perhaps than
Rock-Cristal it self; it being easy to write upon Glass with them. Of these
Stones having procured a good number (many of which I have yet by me,) I took
notice, by comparing them heedfully together, that though some of them were
Geometrically and curiously shaped like Rock-Cristal, having each six sides,
whereof every two, that were opposite, were thoroughly like and equal enough to
one another; and though the Stone had a Pyramidal termination, made up by
several resembling and curiously figured Planes, that terminated in a solid
Angle or Apex; yet the greatest number, by much, of these Titular Diamonds was
made up of Stones, far from being so exactly and uniformly shaped, as those
newly described. For though most of them had six long Planes; yet oftentimes
the opposite ones (besides that they were not so parallel to one another, as
they should have been) were unlike and exceeding unequal; and those Planes,
that went to make up the Apex, though a part, they were usually angular; yet
being compared to one another, or to the Regular Patterns above mentioned,
their Figures, their Bignesses, and their manner of concurring (which was
sometimes not in a Point or Apex, but in a Line,) was so remote from being
uniform, that this great diversity and irregularity agreed far better with our
Hypothesis, than with its Rival. And yet in these Stones, the want of room to
coagulate freely in, could not with probability be pretended; for they seemed
to have been formed separately in a fluid Ambient, save at the bottom, where
they were fastened to the Rock, as appeared by an opacous Root, if I may so
call it, which still adhered to most of them. And, if I much misremember not, I
have more than once in Diamonds, newly brought from the Indies, and some of
them very fair ones, observed a great want of Uniformity in the Area's of the
Superficial Planes, or in their Figures, or both; and sometimes too in the very
number as well as Situation of their Solid Angles or Corners: about which I
hope to recover some Notes And so I have done with the first part of my Answer
to the above mentioned Objection; whereby it may appear, that there is no such
regular and constant Uniformity in the Shapes of Gems, but that their Real
Likeness may be reconciled to our Hypothesis.

But now in the Second part of my Answer, I shall endeavor to show, that the
Figuration of Gems may not only consist with our Conjectures, but confirm them.
For, I have more than once taken notice in the Cornish Diamonds I have been
mentioning, that sometimes a small Stone of the same kind, has made up, as it
were, one Body with a greater; so as that the lesser Stone did not only adhere
closely to the other, but was, if I may so speak, Set or Bedded in it. So that
when the Separation was made, there remained in the greater Stone a Cavity,
whose Figure did curiously answer that of as much of the smaller Stone, as
chanced to be harbored there. And, as sometimes I observed, that there was
such an adnascency, (if you will pardon the Word,) of a Lesser Stone to a much
Greater; so at other times, I met with the like of a Greater to a much Lesser,
with a Cavity in the Lesser, answerable to that part of the Greater that had
been lodged in it. Which, for ought I know, allows us with high probability to
conjecture, that the Stone, to which the other grew, was first formed and
hardened; since it retained its own shape, and that, whilst this remained
adherent to the Rock or Soil, some more Liquor, either that came afterward by
chance into the same Cavity, or (in case 'twere there before,) that was less
disposed to an early Concretion, began to coagulate by fastening it self
against the Solid Body that was already concreted: Upon which account these two
Diamonds must stick close together, and yet be but Contiguous, and a Cavity,
such as I freshly mentioned, must be left in the last concreted Gem. Which may
be illustrated by putting into a strong solution of pure Nitre, or Rock-Allom,
some little sticks of Wood or any solid Body, that may be kept steadily in the
same posture; for you will see many coagulations begin to be made against them,
and the Cristals thus concreted will necessarily have their Figures incomplete,
and have in them Cavities correspondent to those Parts of the Stick, whereto
the Saline Corpuscles fastened themselves. To which I shall only add, that
though I have given Instances of the adnascency of figured Stones only in
Cornish Diamonds, yet they are not the only transparent Minerals, wherein I
have been able to observe it. And particularly I remember, that I observed
among some Minerals left by a Goldsmiths to his Widow, a Fine transparent and
neatly figured Stone, which seemed to be pure Cristal, but was coagulated about
a kind of branching Wire, whereof a good part was enclosed by the Stone, that
seemed to grow out of a piece of Ore, that looked like Silver-Ore, and which
the Woman, that was a curious Person, upon the strict Inquiry that I made,
affirmed to be, together with the abovementioned branch, good Silver, produced
by Nature in that form, (which I thought the more credible, because of the odd
and almost hairlike shape wherein I have seen Silver-Ore to have as it were
grown;) which will excellently agree with the Resemblance, I was just now
proposing betwixt the coagulation of dissolved Salts and the liquid matter of
Gems, about Stable Bodies partly immersed in those fluids.

The very many Circumstances belonging to our First Argument, and the ^ast
answered Objection, have so long ^etain'd us, that I doubt, you now think ^t
more than time I should advance to, and dispatch the Second of those Grand
Considerations, whereon I at first inti^ated our Hypothesis was founded; And
this is built upon the Weight of ^ome Gems, which being greater than that which
seems to belong to them ^s hard and transparent Stones, I think ^e may probably
derive it from Metal^ine or Mineral Mixtures.

I question not, but as you will think this allegation new, so you will be apt
to question, how I come to know the Truth of what I here deliver; since, though
Gems are wont to be estimated by Lapidaries, as they weigh such or such a
Number of Carrats, or of Grains, yet they compare only the weight of this and
that Stone of the same kind in reference to one another, as the greater or
lesser weight argues the greater or lesser Bulk, without looking after or
knowing how to discover the Specific Gravity of several Gems which depends not
on the greater or lesser Bulk; as (if you know it not already) you will gather
from what I am now going to relate.

Considering then with my self, that for my purpose, it was requisite to have a
Gem as free as I could get from the Metalline Mixtures, that I suspected many
precious Stones to have; and remembering, that Rock-Cristal, as it is by
Mineralists reckoned among Gems, so it is hard enough, as I tried, both to cut
Glass, and to strike fire, and that its having so great a transparency, and its
being devoid of Color, makes it exceeding likely to be free from adventitious
mixtures; I pitched upon it as the Standard whereby to make a probable estimate
of the weight of Gems; and having Hydrostatically and with a tender Balance
examined the weight of it, first in the Air, and then in Water, I found its
weight to be to that of Water of equal Bulk as two and almost two thirds to
one: Which, by the way, shows us, how groundlessly many Learned Men, as well
Ancient as Modern, make Crystal to be but Ice extraordinarily hardened by a
long and vehement Cold; whereas Ice is bulk for bulk lighter than Water, (and
therefore swims upon it) and (to add that Objection against the vulgar error)
Madagascar and other Countries in the Torrid Zone abound with Crystal.

Having thus found the Ponderousness of Crystal in reference to Water, when I
met with a colored Gem, whose Specific Gravity I ghess'd to be sensibly
greater; I sometimes gave my self the trouble (for a trouble it is) to weigh
them in the Air and in the Water, and so discover, whether I conjectured
aright. And if its Specific Gravity did much exceed that of Cristal, I thought
it a probable Argument, that there might be some Metalline or Mineral
Corpuscles mingled with the stony Ones of the Gems, and that also it may
probably derive its Tincture thence. I will not tell you, that I then found
many sorts of transparent Stones much heavier than Cristal: For, besides that
the Trials were troublesome enough to make, I chanced to fall upon them in a
place, where I had not any store and variety of Gems to examine. But one
Instance among those that occurred to me, I shall here set down, because being
so notable, it may suffice to show, that, as to some Gems at least, my opinion
of their having an Adventitious Gravity, and consequently Ingredient, is very
probable. I had some American Granats, which I had a great and peculiar Reason
to beli^ve had been once Liquid Bodies, and therefore thought them the more
worthy to be examined; and finding their Color to be so deep, that they were
almost opacous, and judging by my hand, that they were much heavier than pieces
of Cristal of the same Bulk would be, I weighed them in a pair of nice Scales
in the Air and in the Water, and found them, as I expected, to be almost four
times as heavy as Water of the same Bulk, and consequently heavier by about a
third part than pieces of Cristal, equalling them in bigness, would be. Whence
so great an accession of ponderousness proceeded, I shall tell you, when I come
to my next Argument; to which I shall advance, as soon as I have noted, that
though, when colored Gems have a greater Gravity than Cristal, it is a probable
Argument, that they have some Metalline Pigment or other Mineral substance
mingled with them; yet if such Gems have no such surplusage of weight, it will
not follow that their Color cannot proceed from any Mineral Tincture; since
it is not unreasonable to conceive, that a Mineral Substance may be present in a
Liquor (such as the Lapidescent Juice,) that we suppose Gems to be made of,
even when it adds no manifest weight to the Body that harbors it; since I have
observed (what is odd,) That a Mineral Water, which by its Taste, its Effects,
and the Color it would strike, appeared to be richly impregnated with Iron,
being carefully by me examined Hydrostatically, did appear very little, (if at
all) sensibly heavier than Common Water.

The Third and last Argument, I shall now make use of, is taken from hence;
That out of diverse Medicinal Stones, and even out of some fine Gems, real and
Corporeal Metals, or other Mineral substances, may be extracted.

Of this Argument I shall at present say the less, because the further
prosecution of it will be more proper in the Second Part of this Discourse,
where I shall be obliged to handle it with reference to opacous Gems, in which
its force will best appear. And therefore I shall desire you to take notice,
when you arrive at that Part of the subsequent Discourse, of those particulars,
that may serve to strengthen the newly proposed Argument: And if it be
objected, that the Bodies, there treated of, are opacous Stones, not Gems, I
have these things to answer.

First, that diverse Stones, that are reckoned amongst precious ones, are
opacous too; as the Turquois, the Onyx, the Sardonix, etc. not to mention
diverse others, as Cats-Eyes, Opales, etc. which are as it were Semi-opacous.
Besides I much question, whether Diaphaneity be absolutely necessary to the
Essence, though it be to the Beauty, of those precious Stones, wherein it is
usually found. And I might here make it probable by discourse, that
transparency and opacity oftentimes depend but upon the manner of the Pigmen's
dispersion thorough the stony matter of the Gem, and the convenient or
inconvenient situation of the pores in reference to the beams of Light. But
waving this speculative Argument, I shall rather take notice, that several
precious Stones, and even Diamonds themselves, have sometimes great clouds,
which make them in those parts almost (if not quite) opacous, without being
thereby hindered from being true Diamonds or Gems, of this or that kind, to
which their hardness, color, etc. makes them appertain: And not to mention
Cornelions, Agats, and some other Stones that we may observe to be (as the
tinging Corpuscles happen to be in a due or an over great proportion mixed with
the petrescent matter, and to be Uniformly or inconveniently mingled with it,)
some of them transparent and some of them semi-diaphanous; I have seen worn in
a Ring a Sa^dmix it self that was transparent, as unlikely a Gem as that is to
be so. And as for Granats, though you know, that both of them are Diaphanous;
yet I have had some figured ones, that seemed quite opacous: and I have others
by me of several Countries, (where of one very remarkable for its large size
and Geometrical shape,) that are in some places Diaphanous, but as to the main
bulk of their Bodies appear at least almost as dark as ordinary Stones.

I further add, that I little doubt, but that experiments, not unlike those, I
shall hereafter tell you, I tried to obtain Mineral or Metalline substances
from Load stones, native Cinaber, Blood-stones, etc. might succeed in several
other of the more ponderous Gems, if it were not that the Glassy Nature, or
exceeding compactness of many of them, makes the Mineral Corpuseles, that are
harbored in the stony and insoluble parts, to be inaccessible to our Common
Menstruums. And when the Metalline and Mineral ingredient is very abundant, and
the Tincture of the stony parts not so very close, I question not, but even
from transparent Gems the adventitious Ingredient may, in part at least, be
dissolved. And to satisfy you about this matter, I shall now inform you, that
having by the ponderousness of the lately mentioned kind of Granats been
induced to conclude them impregnated with somewhat Metalline, and for that
reason to think it fit to try, whether I could separate it from them, or
otherwise discover it in them; I kept some of them (in a crucible) for a
competent time in the fire, and found, that they had exchanged their Color,
for one not unlike that of unbrightned Iron; and having reduced them to very
fine powder, and digested some acid Menstruums and particularly rectified
Spirit of Salt upon them, they afforded me a rich Tincture: Encouraged by
which, I hoped, that, without their being previously burnt, they would in Aqua
Regis afford a Tincture, and accordingly I obtained from crude Granats, (only
reduced to very fine powder) a rich Solution, which though in color it
somewhat emulated a Solution of Gold; yet partly by the Color of the burned
Granats and partly by the Taste of this Solution, I supposed, that another Metal
was likelier than Gold to be the predominant Mineral; and having gently
evaporated part of that Menstruum, I obtained from some of the rest certain
Cristals, whose shape, by reason of their smallness and disorderly coagulation,
I could not well determine; and touching with the Tip of my little Finger the
uncoagulated portion of the Liquor, this part of a drop, being put to a great
many drops of the Infusion of Gall, did so immediately turn it into a substance
that seemed full as black, if not blacker than Ink, as you would, I think, have
been somewhat surpised to behold.

Which trial I made to examine the conjectures I had, that one Mineral (for
perhaps 'twas not the only, that helped to constitute these Granats, was of a
Martial nature; which, if it were, I supposed it would, like other Bodies that
participate of Iron, afford with Galls an Inky color. I tried also with a
parcel of small and red transparent Stones, which some ghessed to be Granats;
others, more probably, Rubies, that being finely powdered, they would in an
appropriated Menstruum, (made extraordinary strong) give a Color like that of
dissolved Gold. And that there were really some parts of the Gem dissolved in
the Menstruum, appeared not only by the above mentioned color, but by these
two indications: The one, that having put some of this Liquor to some of the
same solution of Galls, I just now spoke of, it produced indeed, at the very
first, a dark Color, but not near so black as that of the Granats, and in a
trice let fall a copious precipitate that was almost white: The other, that I
was able to precipitate from it, by an urinous Spirit, a reddish substance,
which being suffered to dry in Air, seemed to grow into Bodies, in shape not
unlike Moss, and here and there small Mushrons, all of them prettily colored.
And from certain Granats that were in some places opacous, as well as in others
Diaphanous, I obtained a Solution from whence the superfluous Liquor being
abstracted, the residue, which was deeply colored, did in the cold afford me a
kind of saline concretions, which yet were not large enough to enable one to
determine their Figures.

And on this occasion I hold it not unfit to intimate, that perhaps, if Men had
curiosity enough to make trials, there would be other transparent Minerals
found capable of being wrought on by appropriated Menstruums. For, I do not
think, that every seemingly glassy contexture of a Mineral makes it unsit to be
wrought on: For though the clear Spar, which in most of our Western Lead-Mines
in England is sound next to the Metalline Veins, be at least Semidiaphanous,
and be of so glassy a contexture, that it usually breaks into smooth and glossy
Superficies, and looks like a Talk, and also for the most part is made up of
and presently reducible into Geometrically figured Bodies, shaped like
Rhombus's or Rhomboides; yet some other Trials, that I have made with this Spar
inducing me to suspect, that 'twas not indeed a Talk, but a Body of a much more
open Texture, I found, I could dissolve it in several Liquors, and particularly
in good Spirit of Salt, which would presently work upon it, even whilst it was
in Lumps, and that without the assistance of Heat; which Observation may
perhaps give some encouragement to such a curiosity as yours.

But by what I have said of the usefulness of Menstruums, I would not have you
think, that they are the only Instruments, wherewith something Metalline may be
obatin'd from some Gems: For in an other Paper of mine (to which such trials
more properly belong) you may find an account of some attempts of that kind by
fusions and appropriated additaments. And however such Trials may succeed with
you that aim at separating from a Gem a Metalline or Mineral Body of a
determinate Species; I can teach you an easy way, whereby I have (by the help
of fusion) more than once manifested in the General, that there may be
substances, partaking of a Metalline nature, in some kinds even of transparent
Gems. And partly by the same way, and partly by some others, I have been able
to determine probably enough, in some cases, that the Mineral substance is
predominant in it.

And here, before I dismiss the first part of our Essay, I think I may possibly
somewhat illustrate our Hypothesis, if I briefly mention to you an experiment,
I remember I once made to that purpose. And it was this: I reduced to powder
some of those Stiriae, that I have often spoken of, of water petrified, as it
were, spontaneously: I also considered with my self, that I had found Spirit of
Verdigreas, (which I make without the tedious preparations, that Bafilius and
others prescribe, by barely distilling without additaments good French
Verdigreas, and rectifying the obtained liquor) I had, (I say) found this
Menstruum to be not only (as I elsewhere observe) a good solvent for many
Bodies, but also to be distillable from many of them, without leaving near so
much of it self behind, as other Saline Solvents are wont to do: Considering
this, I say, I dissolved the stony stiriae in this Liquor, and having suffered
some of it to evaporate away, and put the rest into a cool place, I obtained,
as I expected, store of small but finely figured and transparent Cristals, that
shot much after the fashion of those of the purer sort of Nitre. With some part
also of the stony solution I mixed, in a convenient proportion, a high colored
solution of Copper, made likewise in Spirit of Verdigreas; and these two
solutions being made with the same Menstruum, and warily enough put together,
did not precipitate one another, but afforded me, upon the evaporation of the
superfluous moisture, among diverse Cristals that were transparent and
colorless, some that were richly adorned with a greenish blew Tincture of the
dissolved Metal. What trials I made by this way, little varied, to imitate
nature by associating into transparent Bodies stony and metalline Substances, I
cannot now give you a full account of; since I neither have by me the Notes, I
set down about those trials, nor think it fit to make this first part of our
Discourse more prolix, than I now perceive it to be already.

SECT. II. Containing a Conjecture about the Causes of the Virtues of GEMS.
WHat has been hitherto delivered in the first part of our Discourse, will, I
suppose, make it allowable for me to be more succinct in the Second. I shall
now therefore proceed to those other considerations, which, being assisted by
what has been already said, may, I hope, suffice, to keep our conjecture about
the Cause of the Virtues of Gems from seeming unreasonable.

And my first Observation shall be, that not only there is in the Earth a great
number and variety of Minerals, already known by particular Names; but probably
there are very many others that are not yet known to us.

The former part of this proposition will not be doubted by those, that
consider, how great a multitude of Metalline Ores, Marchasites of several
sorts, Antimonies, Tinn'd-glass, Fluores, Talks of various Kinds, Spars,
Sulphurs, Salts, Bitumens, etc. are mentioned partly by Chemists, and other
Mineralists, and partly by those that have given us accounts of Musaeums and
other collections of natural Rarities; insomuch that of only one Kind of
Fossils, the diligence of some modern Writers has reckoned up between two
hundred and two hundred and fifty; besides Animal Stones, as Lapis Bezoar,
Lapis Manati, Oculus Cancri, Lapis Porcinus, etc.

And as for the Second Part of our proposition or observation, you will scarce
deny it, though you consider with me but these two things.

The first is the small and inconsiderable proportion, that the perpendicular
depth, that the generality of Mines bears, to the Semidiameter of the Earth,
reckoned to be above 3500 Miles; so that, though our Globe were inhabited by
some hundreds of millions of men more than now it is, and they had curiosity
enough to dig Mines every where, and consequently there were Millions of
inquisitive and laborious men more than really there are, their Spades and
Pickaxes would, except here and there, penetrate so little a way into the
Earth, that a vast multitude of Fossils might, by lying deeper in the bowels of
it, continue undiscovered.

And to this First Observation I shall subjoin this Second, that, as far as I
have observed, almost every Region affords Minerals of its own, differing from
those that are taken notice of in other Regions. And in particular Countries,
as in some Shires of England, a curious and heedful Eye may, I doubt not,
observe several that are not taken notice of by the inhabitants themselves,
especially if well-made borers were diligently and skilfully employed to pierce
the ground, and bring up Simples of diverse Fossils that lie hidden under it.
But having elsewhere discoursed of this matter, I shall here only tell you, in
general, that in some parts of England, where I had more opportunity than in
others, to exercise some Curiosity about Minerals, I met sometimes in a small
compass of ground, with a much greater variety than I expected, and several of
them undescrib'd, that I know of, by any Writer; of which sort I have received
diverse others from several parts both of the old world and the new.

In the next place I consider, that Nature has furnished the Earth with
Menstruums and others Liquors of several sorts, and endowed it with diverse
qualities. This I have already manifested in the discourse of subterraneal
Menstruums, whereto I shall therefore refer you; only taking notice in this
place, that whereas water is abundantly to be met wi^h under ground, and for
the most part very copiously in Mines, by which it is capable to be variously
impregnated; this liquor it self, especially being thus altered, may in some
cases act the part of no despicable M^nstruum, and on some occasions otherwise
concur to the production of Mineral Bodies.

I further observe, that the subterraneal Liquors, upon one account or other,
(for we need not now particularly determine it) are qualified to work either as
Corrosive Menstruums, or as other Solvents, upon many of the Medicinal Earths
and other Minerals they meet with under ground: which Minerals, having never
been exposed to our sires, have their Texture more open, and their parts more
soluble than those, that have been melted by the violent heats of our furnaces.

And that even Common water will suffice to dissolve, and impregnate it self
both with the Saline and oftentimes with Metalline parts, that it meets with in
its passage, is obvious enough in the differing tastes and other qualities of
liquors, that all pass for common water, whereof some is found better and some
worse than others, to Brue, some to wash Linen, some to Dye Scarlet, or other
determinate Colors; some to temper Steel, and some for other uses.

But others unquestionably more eminent instances, are given us by the Mineral
Springs, whether Thermae or Acidul^, as Authors distinguish those that are
actually hot, (as at Bath) and those that are Saline and for the most part
sowrish (like those at Tunbridge and the ^ork-shire Spaw;) of which two sorts
good store are enumerated by Physicians and Geographers; and of which a far
greater number would be discovered, if men wanted neither skill nor diligence.
And here I shall desire you to take notice, that, though common water do the
most readily dissolve the Salts more properly so called, though not altogether
pure, it meets with in the bowels of the Earth, as we see it happens in those
Salt-Springs that come not from the Sea; yet there are also many others
subterraneal Bodies, which upon the score of their abounding with Saline
particles, will be dissolved by water, though they be of a compounded nature,
and contain very differing substances; as it is plain in those waters of Hungary
and other Regions, which by the evaporation of their superfluous moisture, will
yield Vitriol, a Mineral not only compounded but decompounded, as containing in
it a Saline, a Sulphurous, a Metaline and an Earthly part, (which it self I
have found to be none of the simplest Bodies;) every one of which may be made
distinctly to appear.

Lastly, I consider, that the Petrifie Juice or Spirit coming to be in a
sufficient proportion mingled with these impregnated waters, so as to coagulate
them, and concoagulate with them; from their coalition may result those
precious Stones that we call transparent Gems. For it is certain, that Bodies,
that were a while before in the form of waters, may coagulate into stony
stiriae, of whose odorousness and reducibleness into lime, I have already given
an account in my discourses of Lapidescent Juices; of which you may command a
sight. And that even Diamonds themselves, the hardest of Gems, were once fluid
substances, the first part of thi^ Discourse has, I hope, evinced.

To which I shall now add, that procu^ing some petrified Bodies to be brought
me from a place in England, which I could not be admitted to, I found, that the
Petrific Juice or Spirit, that abounded in the Earth of that spot of ground,
was so penetrating, and so operative, that it made some of the vegetable
substances, that were found in it, in their pristine shape, and, for ought I
could perceive, bigness, hard enough to cut Glass as well as grave* on I^on.
And 'twas among these rarities (if I much mis-remember not) that I picked up a
(moderately) transparent Body (which I think I have yet by me) that, by the
shape and other Circumstances I judged to have been a diaphanous Gum, belonging
to one of the pieces of petrified wood, that had been brought me, and was
hardened to a degree that made it capable of scratching Glass.

And now to bring home these things to my present subject, I conceive, that
some (at least,) of the Real Virtues of diverse Gems may be derived from this,
That whilst they were in a fluid form, (or at least not yet Hardened,) the
Petrescent substance was mingled with some mineral solution or tincture, or
with some other impregnated liquor, and that these were afterward
Concoagulated, or united and hardened, into one Gem, as a Diamond, a Saphir, a
Granat, an Onyx, a Boodstone, etc. And as diverse of the Virtues of Gems may
be in a general way deduced from the commixture of these Mineral Corpuscles; so
the greatness of those Virtues and the variety of those properties in
particular, may be ascribed to the peculiar nature of the impregnating liquors,
to the diversity of them, and to the greater and lesser proportions, wherein
they are mixed with the Petrescent juice.

To render this conjecture (for I propose it as no other,) thus summarily and
briefly expressed, the more probable; 'twill be fit to recall to mind the
Arguments, whereby we have already shown, both that Gems were once fluid or
soft Bodies, and that diverse of them were not simple concretions of a
Petrescent liquor, but consisted also of other Mineral adventitious Corpuscles:
Which may appear, partly by the separableness of such substances from some
Gems; (as we exemplified in Granats) partly by the specific gravity of others,
and partly by the differing tinctures (whereof one at least may well be
supposed adventitious,) to be met with in Gems of the same species, as Rubies,
Saphirs, Granats and even (the hardest stones, that we yet know of,) Diamonds
themselves; of which (as is before noted) I have seen some Yellow (and that to
a great degree,) some of other colors, but not so vivid, and some Green,
almost like Emeraulds.

Now since there may be in Gems, and in some of them abundantly such
adventitious Corpuscles; and since there is cause to think, that some may be
endowed with diverse properties and Medical Virtues; since also there is a great
difference among these impregnating particles and probably of a greater variety
of them, than is known to us; since lastly diverse Gems are not sparingly but
richly impregnated with these innobling Corpuscles, I see no sufficient reason,
why some of the Virtues of diverse Gems are not more likely to proceed thence,
than from those unintelligible and precarious substantial Forms, to which they
are wont to be referred.

But because there are some difficulties, that the objections of others or my
own thoughts have suggested against our Hypothesis; though I neither have time,
nor do think it very necessary, to discourse amply of them: Yet to clear the
way for what I am afterward to represent, I shall (though I can but briefly do
it) say something to each, that may perhaps appear no insufficient answer;
especially after I have declared, as I here do once for all, that I speak of
the True and Medical Virtues that belong to Gems; and that, as to those Magical
and other Extravagant properties, that either notoriously fabulous, or other
credulous Writers have made bold to deliver, I am so far from pretending to
afford them an Explication, that I do not allow them the least degree of Assent.

This premised, let us consider the chief difficulties themselves; among which
I doubt not but it will be objected, That it is not credible, that the Mineral
Substances, wherewith our Hypothesis would have Gems to be impregnated, should
have any Medical operation at all on the human body, in regard that they are so
locked up that they can communicate nothing to it, especially being
indigestable and unconquerable by so small a heat as that of the Stomach and
other parts of the Body.

But to this specious Objection I have several things to return by way of
Answer. And first of all; had there yet never been any actual Trial made,
whereby to know, whether a Gem be capable of having any Medical Virtues, I
confess I should find probability enough in the Objection to suspend my
Judgment, till experience should determine the Question. But since upon the
very credible Testimony of eminent Physicians and Patients themselves of my own
acquaintance, I find much less cause to disbelieve, than to assent to some
matters of Fact about the operations of Gems; and since such matters of Fact do
strongly argue in the general, that a Precious Stone may have Medical Virtues;
I think, the Objection, as it is proposed in general, is sufficiently enervated
by such particular instances, and ought not to keep us from believing upon
Experience the possibility of the thing denied; especially since there are
other things besides, that may be alleged in favor of our Hypothesis.

For it may be considered in the next place, that vigorous Load-stones emit
copious and very plentiful Effluvia; and yet, besides that ordinary Magnets are
usually a very hard sort of Stones, I have met with some Load-stones much
harder than ordinary ones, and possibly than diverse Gems. And it is farther
considerable, that there are Load-stones, (some of which I can show you,) which
do not only work upon Iron and other Magnetical Bodies, but have a manifest and
inconvenient operation upon Human Bodies, by being worn in men's Pockets or long
held in their Hands; as those, that have resented such operations themselves,
and observed them in others, have complained to me; which I might confirm by
some analogous observations, if I had time to relate them.

But now I proceed to observe, that among transparent Pebles, some of which,
you know, are by being barely well Cut and Set, made to counterfeit Diamonds, I
have found several, that may be brought in a trice to emit copious and even
strongly sented streams. And if you allow the opinion of the generality of
Modern Philosophers, who ascribe Electrical attractions to the ^(...)a of
bodies excited by rubbing, you will, I presume, allow me to infer, that very
light alterations may suffice to procure Expirations even from transparent
Gems: Many of which are Electrical, and so are the hardest of them, Diamonds
themselves; one of which I keep by me, that upon a little friction attracts,
vigorously enough to be wondered at by the Spectators.

And as to that part of the Objection I am answering, which contends, that Gems
are not to be digested or conquered by the heat of the Stomach; I will not stay
to examine, whether and how far the digestion of things in the Stomach be to be
ascribed to Heat, contenting my self to say at present, that, to make the
Objection valid, it should be first proved, that such Bodies cannot have any
operation upon the human body as pass thorough it, without any sensible change
of bulk, figure, etc. as Gems that are swallowed down are supposed to do. For,
we know, that some Chemists make Bullets of the Regulus of Antimony (which we
also have made, and observed something odd about them) which they call Pisulae
perpetuae, because when they have performed their operation in the Body; and
have been ejected with the Excrements, they are by some more thrifty than
cleanly persons, washed and employed again and again to the former purposes.
Nor do we know, what Analogy there may be between some Juices in the Body, and
some of the Mineral substances that impregnate Gem^ with their Virtues.

For, though the Oculus mundi be reckoned by Classic Authors among the rare
Gems, (as indeed good ones may be justly accounted Rarities;) yet i^ one of the
best sort be but a while kept in common Water, it will, as Experience assures
me, receive an alteration obvious to the Eye. I might here allege the
concurrent Authority of many, and the common Practice of most Physicians, who
in their public Dispensatorie^ as well as private Prescriptions, ordai^ the
Fragments of precious Stones to b^ taken inwardly, upon the score of the
Cordial and other Virtues they ascrib^ to them. But I shall rather make u^ of
less questioned Arguments, and without insisting on the manifest operation that
the Juices of the Body have not only on the Chalibeat preparations, where the
Metal is presumed to be opened, but upon crude Steel it self; or urging the
Examples of Lazarus Vitri-V^rax, or the devourers of Stones, as being rare
(...); I shall proceed to acquaint you, that with a faint Liquor, distilled
from a Vegetable substance, as temperately qualified and as plentifully eaten
as Bread, I have obtained, and that without Heat, from diverse hard Bodies, and
amongst them from a transparent sort of Gems, a manifest Tincture. And whether
some Juices of the Body, assisted by the Natural Heat of it, may not, in
reference to some Gems, serve for extracting Menstruums, though it may well be,
more then either I or the Objectors certainly know, yet the Instance, I come
from alleging, favors our Hypothesis more than theirs.

And even the Natural Heat of a human Stomach, nay perhaps the outward parts of
the Body, may be able, though not to digest precious Stones, yet to solicit
out some of their Virtues; since I am sure it makes a sensible alteration in
the hardest sort of them. For I have a Diamond, whose Electrical faculty may be
excited not only by rubbing, but, without it, by a languid degree of
adventitious heat. And I have had in my keeping a Diamond, which by Water, made
a little more than Lukewarm, I could bring to shine in the dark.

Object. If it be further alleged, that, though some Virtues may be conceded
to Gems upon the account of the Minerals that impregnate them, yet it will be
no way likely, that their Virtues should be so Various and Great, as even the
modester sort of Authors pretend. If this, I say, be alleged, I shall readily
acknowledge, that I do not think others or my self obliged to believe all the
strange things, that even some Learned Writers do sometimes ascribe to Gems:
And if any man will think, that some of them are fabulous, and more of them
Hyperbolical, he may sooner find me his Associate than his Adversary in that
point. For the Rarity of transparent Gems, their Luster, and the great Value,
which their Scarceness and men's Folly sets upon them, imboldens some to say,
and inclines others to believe, that such rare and noble Productions of Nature
must be endowed with proportionable, and consequently with extraordinary
Qualities.

But this being freely granted, I answer to the Objection; First, that it is not
improbable, that there may be in the Earth a much greater Variety of Minerals
dissoluble by the subterraneal Menstruums, and capable of concoagulation with
Petrescent Juices, then Authors have yet taken notice of: To which conjecture
diverse subterraneal productions, that I have met with, do strongly incline me.
And from the number and various mixtures of these may proceed not only a great
Variety of operative particles in precious Stones, but a high degree of Energy
in some of them.

And next I consider, that the Efficacy of those Mineral Tinctures or
Solutions, that are already known to us and may be concoagulated with the
Petrescent Juice, may be reasonably presumed to be much greater in some Gems,
whereof they became Ingredients, whilst they were (as Chemists speak) in
solutis principiis, than may be expected in our Shops or Laboratories from the
vulgar Solutions of the same Metals or Minerals, after they have by vehement
Fires been reduced into Gold or Silver, or Lead, or Antimony, etc. For, whereas
in these vehement Fusions, requisite to bring Metalline or other Ores into such
substances, the volatile and spirituous parts are wont to be driven away, and
the remaining Body becomes more hard and compact, and has his Virtues as it
were locked up: In the state of Fluidity those subtle and efficacious parts are
preserved, and united to the other Ingredients of the Gems, whence some
Emanations of them may be easily enough drawn out: As in the instance I not
long since mentioned, of the easy eduction of strongly sented Steams from
Pibbles so hard, that I found them more disposed to strik^ Fire, than Flints
themselves, that are used in Guns. And from the greater or less plenty, and
natural activity of the impregnating particles in this or that Gem, may
problably be deduced the difference in Color of some, and in Virtue of other
Stones of the same denomination: Of which we have in a Learned Writer or two,
eminent Examples given us, See Vnzerus de N^phritide.
of the great Virtue of some, and the inefficacy of other, that Experience has
discovered, among those Stones that go under the Title of Lapis Nephriticus.
For, though they be not properly transparent Gems, yet the Analogy betwixt them
and those that are, seems sufficient to warrant the mentioning of them on this
occasion.

And here we may subjoin two things, in favor of both the foregoing answers:
the First, that for ought we know, the Petrescent Juices themselves may have
all that is requisite to make them such, and yet have distinct Natures, and be
endowed with peculiar qualities, abstracting from those which they acquire upon
the score of their coalitions with adventitious Liquors. This I cannot stay to
make probable by the differences I have observed in Petrescent fluids, and
therefore I hasten to the Second.

The next thing which I would represent, is, that having observed Petrific
Liquors or Spirits to pervade and give a high degree of hardness to bodies,
that chanced to lie within their reach, though one would have thought them
sufficiently indisposed to receive such an induration; I see no absurdity in
supposing, that sometimes such a Liquor may invade, permeate and subdue
transparent Minerals, abounding in Saline, Sulphurous, and Bituminous
particles; which consequently being duly excited, may be made to emit their
more subtle and more active parts. And as I have cause to think, that
subterraneal Fires and Menstruums do diverse times make various compositions and
decompositions in the Earth, (as 'twere not hard for me to show, if I had
leisure;) so it is not impossible, but that the Spirit, we have been speaking
of, supervening, may mingle it self with such Bodies and petrifie them together
with it self into Gems. On which occasion, I remember, that I have had Salt,
made by nature in the bowels of the Earth, just like that which Chemists
compound by Art on the surface of it. And I have sometimes made by an easy
operation and a moderate degree of Fire a certain composition of volatile
particles of Salt and Sulphurs (some of which I have yet by me) which after
distillation did in a fluid Medium shoot into Crystals transparent, and more
curiously figured than I have seen diverse natural Gems to be. So that, if
either beneath or upon the surface of the Earth, such kind of substance happen
to be pervaded and subdued, by a clear petrifying Liquor; we may well presume
that the resulting concretions may be endued with Qualities, as well uncommon
for the Kind, as considerable for the degree.

Objection. If it be yet objected, that it is very unlikely, that Gems should
part with any Eflluvia or portions of themselves, since they lose not of their
weight, and some of them are very little heavier than Crystal it self, and
consequently are not like to have much adventitious substance to part with: I
might leave the answering of one part of the Objection to Physicians and
Chemists, who teach, that the Antimonial Glass and Cup imbue Wine and other
Liquors with a strong emetic quality without any sensible loss of weight. But
having elsewhere spoken of those things; I shall rather here demand, whether
the Objectors have tried the truth of what their Argument supposes by any way
sufficiently accurate? For I much doubt, that that has neither been attempted,
nor would be found easy to be performed. And till due trial be made, let me
represent, that though they will not allow common Water to be a Menstruum fit
to draw any thing with from such a Body as Mercury, which is wont to mock the
Chemists Aqua Fortis and Aqua Regis; yet both Helmont and others inform us,
that Mercury kept for a day or two in common Water, or boiled a while in it,
though it be taken out without any sensible diminution of weight or bulk, will
have imbued a considerable quantity of Water with a Virtue of killing Worms;
for which purpose it is much used, and often with good success in a great
Hospital in London, as the Chief Physician of it (a very judicious and
experienced man,) has more than once informed me.

And as for the lightness, that is objected against some Gems, besides that it
may safely be granted, that caeteris paribus such may have fewer or more
languid Virtues than others of the same kind; it may also be answered, that the
adventitious substance that impregnates the Petrescent Juice, may be of so
small specific gravity, as not to make the Gem at all heavier in specie than
Crystal it self. For this, (as we have formerly observed,) being about two
times and a half heavier than common Water of the same bulk, I have
hydrostatically found, that diverse Salts and some other Mineral substances are
of less specific gravity; and consequently, if they were concoagulated with the
Petrescent Juice that hardens into Crystal, need not increase the ponderousness
of it, and yet may imbue it with considerable Virtues: Nor is it necessary (to
add that in transitu on this occasion) that, not to alter even the
colourlesness of Crystal or the color of another Gem, the adventitious
substance should be purely Saline: For I have diverse times made Bodies, which,
though transparent and colorless like Crystal, and sometimes curiously and
regularly figured, were yet of a compounded Nature, and particularly abounded
with an easily separable and strongly sented Sulphur. But to give yet a farther
and more direct answer to the Objection; I shall add, that though, when a Gem
has much more specific gravity then Crystal, or will suffer an adventitious
Mineral to be separated from it, it is a very probable Argument, that the
Petrescent Juice is that Body compounded with an adventitious substance; yet it
will not necessarily follow, that, when neither of these Signs appear, the Gem
is quite devoid of any such substance. For, (according to what I elsewhere
declare,) the Petrescent Liquor, it mainly consists of, may be impregnated not
with the grosser substance, but with the finer and more spirituous part of the
Mineral, without having the specific gravity sensibly increased. Of which I
remember I showed a notable Instance to some curious persons, at a Mineral
Spring, which many were then drinking of by the Advice of Learned Physicians
for several Diseases. For though this Water both by it is Inky taste, by it is
blacking the Excrements of those that drank it, and by other Signs appeared to
participate richly enough of Iron; yet the ferruginous particles, it abounded
with, were so light and spirituous, that not only they would, as I tried, be
easily lost, if the Liquor were kept too negligently stopped; but when I came
whilst the Spirits were yet there, (it being but newly taken from the Spring it
self) to examine it hydrostatically with very good Scales and much diligence, I
convinced the Virtuosi that assisted, that this ferruginous Water was very
little, if at all, heavier in specie than other Water, which was brought as
common Water to be compared with it, and examined with the same Scales and
after the same manner.

And now, if you recall to mind what I have elsewhere said partly of the
Atmosphers of solid Bodies, and partly of the great Efficacy of Effluviums; I
hope, you will not think it absurd to conjecture, both that some precious
Stones may have Medical Virtues, and that diverse of these may be ascribed to
the Mineral substances, whereof they participate or consist; and especially to
those, which are best fitted to exert their powers by the copious Effluxions of
their more agile and subtle parts.

And by this time it may be seasonable to tell you, that though, what I have
hitherto discoursed do chiefly belong to transparent Gems; yet diverse of the
things already delivered may, with no great alteration, be applied to opacous
Gems: of which I shall speak much more briefly, not only for the reason just
now given, but because, if we have shown (as I hope we have) that even
Diaphanous Gems may be endowed with Virtues by the Mineral substances they
contain or are in part made up of; the Arguments will hold more strongly as to
opacous Gems: both because these are for the most part much less hard than the
others, and because it is far more easy to show by their specific gravity, and
the compoundedness of diverse of them, that the dark ones, than it is that the
clear ones, may partly, and sometimes plentifully, consist of Mineral
substances, imbodyed with, and hardened by Petrescent Juices or Petrific Spirits.

In favor of this Doctrine, I shall endeavor in the first place to show, that
what has been delivered is possible; and afterward set down some particulars
to make it very probable.

The first part of my Task might be easily performed, or perhaps would be
needless, if I were sure, you had no need to be told of any thing I have
written about Lapidescent Juices. But for greater security I shall in this
place briefly intimate, that among the Kinds of those Liquors, I have observed
a sort that is of so fine a substance, and yet of so Petrifying a Virtue, that
it will penetrate and petrifie Bodies of very differing Kinds, and yet scarce,
if at all, visibly increase their bulk, or change their shape or color. To
which purpose, I remember, that I have seen diverse Animal and Vegetable
substances so petrified, as scarce at all to be taken notice of, by their
appearance, to have been altered by the operation of the Petrescent Liquor. I
have with pleasure seen a thin Cream-Cheese turned into Stone, where the Size,
Shape, and Color even of the Wrinkles, and the bluish Mold (which it seems it
began to have when the Liquor invaded it) were so well preserved, that an
hungry man would not have scrupled to have fallen upon it for a good Bit. And
as for the hardness, that this Petrescent Juice can give to the Body that it
penetrates, I shall now only remind you of what I lately told you: That I have
had, (and I think yet have in another place) a pretty quantity of Wood
petrified in England, which retaining its former figure, and grain, and scarce
at all visibly increased in bulk, was so very hard, that I could make
Impressions with it upon Iron, and Glass it self, and make it strike Fire like
an excellent Flint. To which I shall here add, that the stony parts did not
suffer the Wood, which they had penetrated, to be reduced in the Fire, either
to Ashes or Charcoal. And I have by me a lump of Mineral Substances, wherein a
Petrescent Liquor, that fills the large intervalls between them, is transparent
enough, and harder than most Stones, as far as we could guess by some trial of
it made by a skilful Ingraver of Gems.

And to these instances might be added many others, if it did not by these few
sufficiently appear, that Petrifick Agents may insinuate themselves into the
pores of various Bodies, and turn them into Stone, without otherwise destroying
their pristine Nature, or so much as their former Figure.

Wherefore having in general shown our Hypothesis to be possible, we may now
descend to four or five particular Arguments, that it is hoped may help to
render it very probable. And these I shall fetch partly from the great specific
gravity of diverse opacous and medicinal Stones; partly from the fitness of our
Hypothesis to render a reason of diverse Phenomenon relating thereunto, some of
them scarce at all, and others much less probably to be accounted for without
it; partly from the Metalline substances to be manifestly separated or obtained
from the Stones we are treating of; and partly from the Nature of the Bodies
whereof Medicinal Stones seem to be compounded.

Arg. I. That the specific gravity of diverse opacous Stones, whereunto
Medicinal properties are ascribed, is very considerable, is a Truth, which, if
those that have writ ten of such concretions had been versed in Hydrostaticks,
and had had the curiosity to examine them that way, they might have easily
discovered; as will quickly appear by particular Examples: Before the mention
whereof, of, it will be fit for me take notice to you, that considering with my
self that white Marble is generally allowed to be a pure and solid Stone, and
upon the score of its whiteness is likelier than most others to be free from
Mineral mixtures, I thought, I might at least as well pitch upon that as on any
other for the standard of the specific gravity of opacous Stones, as they are
merely such. And accordingly having weighed a piece of white Marble in Air and
Water, I found it to be in weight to an equal bulk of that Liquor very near 2
12/100 to I, or, (that the proportion with very little error may be the better
remembered,) as two and seven tenths to one. And to make trial in a Stone
uncoloured, but, because harder, supposed to be of a closer Texture, we
examined a fine white Pible, which we found to be to an equal magnitude of
Water as two and above six Tenths to one. This being determined, 'twas not
difficult for me to think, both that diverse Bodies, that commonly past for mere
Stones, are more ponderous than white Marble of the same bulk; and that, if
there were any such great surplusage of specific weight, as I ghest, many will
be found to have above that of Marble, it might proceed from some Metalline
Body, though not visibly, yet really, and perhaps plentifully mingled with the
Petrescent matter of these Stones. The later part of this Conjecture will
hereafter be confirmed in the third Argument; which makes it unnecessary for me
to give you now of the former more than a few instances: which I shall soon
dispatch by telling you, that I quickly found by weighing the following
Minerals, first in the Air and then in the Water, that a Boodstone (bought at
the Druggist) was in weight to Water of the same bulk as 5 7/10 to 1; The
Loadstone, I then tried, (for all are not eequally heavy in specie) as 4 and
6ths / 10, to 1; L^pis Calaminaris, used for Rheums in the Eyes, and to turn
Copper into Brass, as 4 7/16 to one; Lapis Tutiae, as they call it, which is
also much employed in Rheumatick Eyes, as very near 5 to 1.

But here I must advertise you, that I have not found the proportion of each of
these bodies and water to be any thing near constantly the same, but sometimes
to differ very much in particular Stones of the same kind; which agrees very
well with our Hypothesis. For, according to that, those particular Stones, that
happen to partake more plentifully of Mineral substances heavier in specie than
Stone as such needs to be, ought to be more ponderous than others of the same
kind that are not so qualified: I said, heavier in specie than a Stone, as such
need to be, because there are substances that are reckoned among Minerals, and
are capable of endowing the stony matter, wherewith they are coagulated, with
Medical Virtues, and yet those substances may make the Stone or aggregate,
whereof they are made, not to be heavier but lighter in specie. From Jet, which
in some parts of Europe being found in Quarries of Mines is indeed a fossile,
which is wont to be reckoned among Stones, and by many worn as a Gem; I
obtained no inconsiderable proportion of oil: and having weighed choice Jet it
self in water, I found it to be bulk for bulk to that Liquor but as 1 22/10^ to
1. And there are some other fossils, hard as Stone and pollishable as Marble,
from which I have by distillation obtained two kinds of Oil, whereof one was
lighter than common water; which shows, that even bituminous and light
substances may be ingredients of a Stone: And that Salts, which are most of
them less heavy in specie than white Marble, may plentifully concur to the
making up of Stones; I shall have occasion to manifest at the close of this
Discourse by those Stones, whereof we in England use to make Vitriol. The
foregoing Reflection I have here touched upon, because I would intimate to you,
that Stones that are lighte^ in specie than white Marble may be compounded of
fossils whence they may derive peculiar Qualities, at the same time when I tell
you that in my opinion such Stones as are considerably more heavy in specie
than Marble may afford us a strong presumption of their owing their gravity to
the mixture of Metalline or Mineral substances. And this may suffice for our
first Argument.

Arg. II. The next shall be taken from the consideration of some Phenomenon,
(relating to Medicinal Stones) which agree very well with our Hypothesis, and
will scarcely be very well explicated without it.

And 1. As to Transparent Gems themselves, I have learned by inquiry of
Travelers, that have visited those parts of the East Indies, where they grow,
that sometimes one sort of Gems, sometimes another, and sometimes also Diamonds
themselves are found included in the Rocks where they are dug for, or in the
midst of hard loose Stones, which must be broken in pieces, to take out the
Diamond or other enclosed Gem: Which Phenomenon will be hard to be accounted
for, unless by our Hypothesis; according to which it may rationally be
supposed, that the Gem was first formed either in Earth or some other soft and
easily permeable substance, which being afterward pervaded by some Petrific
juice or Spirit, was turned into Rock or loose Stones, according as the Earth
and other ambient matter chanced to be an entire and coherent mass, or divided
into clods and other portions. And I remember, that the Governor of an
American Colony, having sent me among other Rarities, dug up in his
Country, an odd kind of Mineral, that seemed more ponderous than at first
sight it promised, I had the curiosity to break it, and found in it, here and
there, several Gems, which by their figuration and some other circumstances
were concluded to have been formed there, before the ambient Mineral had
obtained the nature it then appeared to be of. And in Opacous stones it may
hence happen, that a great lump of Medicinal Earth may be invaded and petrified
after the newly mentioned manner; so that it may not be thought incredible,
that some of these Medicinal Stones should be very large in comparison of
others: As I remember, that an ingenious Physician told me of a Spleenstone, as
they call them, in the hands of an acquaintance of his (where I might have seen
it, if my occasions had permitted,) amounting to about fourscore pound weight.
And on this occasion, I also remember that even in a Medicinal Stone, much
harder and heavier than Marble, and whereof I have seen lumps far greater than
I could lift, I remember, I say, that having had the curiosity to cause a
pretty big piece, violently broken off from the mass whereto it belonged, to be
sawn asunder, that I might consider the internal Textures, as far as 'twas
visible; I found several empty Cavities of differing sizes and figures in the
solid substance of the Stone, (which I think I have not yet lost:) which seems
to argue, that this compact and ponderous Body was made of a stony nature by
the supervening of some Petrescent Liquor* or Spirit, upon porous Earth or some
other consistent substance. For if it had been a mere Liquor wherein those
Cavities must have been so many aerial bubbles; it is not like that some of them
should have such irregular shapes, and that all should have continued without
emerging to the top.

2. Our Hypothesis will also help to render a reason of what seems exceeding
difficult to be explicated; namely, How some Gems, that seem to be entire
Stones, are in part of one color, and in that, which is contiguous to it, of a
quite differing: Of which sort we have the Sardonix, and some other opacous
Gems. And I have observed the like, though very rarely, in diaphanous ones.
For, according to our Hypothesis, it may be said, that a portion of matter,
imbued with one of the Tinctures of the parti-colour'd Gem, was first formed,
and afterward, some Petrescent Juice, endowed with another color, came to
settle contiguously to it, and so by accretion made up one Stone with it. I
might illustrate this by telling you, that though Fire do make a far greater
agitation of Bodies melted by it, than need be supposed in cold Petrescent
Liquors, yet I have found in making Artificial Gems, that by some mischance or
error in the operation, the Mineral pigment has richly tinged one part of the
transparent mass, without at all imparting that color to the very next part to
it; so that if I should show one of those I I have yet by me, you would judge
it to consist of two differing Gems subtlely glewed or fastened together,
unless you should in vain try as others have done, to discover by the Eye or
otherwise some naked commissure, which may keep those so differingly colored
Bodies from making up one entire mass.

But let us leave these Artificial Gems, and add to what I was saying about our
Natural Ones, that the Union of parts in these Resulting Stones (if I may so
call them) I was speaking of before, might be the more perfect, if the
supervening matter found not the first formed Stone to have attained to its
full induration: Though, for ought I know, even in this case, the apposition
may be so close, and the two matters so near of kin, that both may pass for one
Stone, and be polished both together without any blemishing discontinuity of
surface at those parts, where one would expect commissures. For I have by me a
lump, wherein there plainly appear Stones of colors very different from each
other, that were once distinct and incoherent; but by some petrescent Liquor
have had all their intervals so exquisitely filled up, that neither the touch
nor the Artificers Tool, the lump being now sawen asunder, discovered any
Commissures; but the whole Mass bears an uniform Polish, and is harder than
diverse Gems that are worn in Rings, readily enough striking Fire with a Steel.
And to confirm this the more, I shall add, that in a place where a prying
person of my acquaintance lighted on this portion of petrified matter, he found
not only other lumps, but diverse loose Stones, that seemed altogether of the
same nature with those, that by the supervention of the Petrescent Liquor were
united into stony masses. I have also had a curious Agat so formed, that it
seemed highly probable, that the opacous parts of its matter had been some
thin, but not altogether contiguous, Beds of fine Clay, or Earth, lying almost
parallel to each other (but not to the Horizon,) which by some Petrescent
Liquor, that chanced to settle there, was reduced to coagulate with it into a
partly opacous and partly diaphanous Stone. And of such Clays or Mineral
Earths, I have sometimes with pleasure observed more than one or two, which,
though distinct and perhaps of differing colors, were so very thin, that the
thickness of them all did scarce exceed an inch, nor did they always lie flat
or horizontally, but in differing postures both in reference to the Horizon,
and one an other, and now and then the exterior ones did successively almost
surround the interior: And of these thin Couches or Layers of Earth, I
remember, I have observed a considerable number, within a very small compass of
ground. I must not in this place stay to show, how probable it is, that much
after the same way may be explicated the production of diverse other Gems
besides Agats, as Chalcedonians and Jaspers, which are for the most part
opacous, but oftentimes have some parts that are not so. But I am content,
before I go further, to mind you on this occasion of what I elsewhere deliver,
That by purposely calcining, without breaking, some of these Stones, whose
greater part was diaphanous, I found, that the transparent parts turned white;
and that some of the thin Layers or Couches of Mineral Earth had retained their
color as well as position, and had it much heightened; so that one of these
Layers after calcination was of a very rich and permanent Red. And this
difference of Colors I observed not only in Layers, but in the Specks and
irregularly shaped Clouds (if I may so call them) of other Colors (as
Greenish, Bluish, etc.) I might here add, that I have found shining
Marchasites, not only in other solid Stones, but in Marbles; as also Flints
themselves, enclosed in great masses of Marble, and likewise Wood; in strong
Stones employed to build a Wall, and Shells (at least as was judged by their
shapes and sizes;) in a great mass of Stone that I met with almost on the top
of a Hill remote from the Sea, together with diverse other such Phenomenon,
which I think may probably be accounted for by our Hypothesis and scarce
without it. But being willing to dispatch this Discourse, and unwilling to
entrench upon the Discourse of the Effects of the Petrescent Juice, (to which
the consideration of these and diverse other Phenomenon, to be met with about
the Generation of Stones and petrified Bodies, especially in Wombs or Molds,
more properly belongs;) I shall in this place only point back to one
Observation, and answer one Objection; because both of them are pertinent to
our present Discourse.

The Observation is this: That even in transparent Gems, and which is more, of
the self same Species, I have sometimes taken notice of such an Aggeneration or
Accretion of Stones to one another, as argues their having been produced at
several times. For proof of this, I need no more than referr you to what I have
not long since, Page, 76, 77, and 78.
related about those Cornish Diamonds, wherein somet^mes a lesser Stone, though
Geometrically shaped, was found in good part enclosed in a greater, as well as
in part also extant above it. Whence I argued, that the production of this
aggregate of two Crystalline Bodies was not made all at once, but successively,
and that the lesser was first formed, which I shall now confirm by this
Consideration. That if the greater Stone had been first hardened, the matter of
the lesser must only have exteriourly stuck to it, and been as it were imbost
upon it; but could not have made it self in the substance of the greater a Bed
or Mold, especially of such a Geometrical figure as it self had not yet
received.

And though this successive Generation of the parts of (seemingly) entire Gems
may appear to you somewhat new and strange, yet that its fitness and
requisiteness to explain the foregoing Phenomenon and others, to be hereafter
mentioned, may the more recommend it to you; I shall add, that perhaps you may
be assisted to conceive, if not invited to admit it by a Mechanical
illustration. For we see in diverse Chemical Solutions, as of Salts and other
Bodies, that there are certain stages or periods of coagulation; so that, when
such a quantity of the superfluous moisture is exhaled, especially upon any
considerable refrigeration or other favorable circumstance, those particles
that are most disposed to coagulation will convene and shoot into Crystals,
after which no more will do so, till a farther and more considerable
evaporation of the water or other Menstruum be made; upon which will ensue a
new Crystallization of the parts. And I can show you the productions of a
metalline, but uncommon Solution, that I so made in an appropriated Liquor,
that the first shooting afforded me a Layer or Bed of curiously figured
Crystals, and the following, another Layer of fine Crystalline Bodies, that
have fastened themselves to the former, but differ notably from them both in
shape and posture. And in this Experiment, the dissolved Body was but one, as
the menstruum but one; but if there be a diversity of nature in the Liquors
that make up a menstruum, or in the Bodies that are dissolved in it; some of
the Corpuscles may convene either a part with those of the same Nature, or
mingled with those of a differing Nature; but yet at the same time and so make
up Crystals of a compounded Nature, and some of them may convene with
homogeneous particles, but at differing times; and so miss of such uniformity
as might else appear in their concretions. Which may be illustrated by what I
have elsewhere related concerning the Crystallizations of Saltpeter and
Sea Salt, dissolved together in ordinary water; where most commonly grains of
Salt of resulting figures are produced; and also a considerable part of the
Sea Salt coagulates in the form of imperfect Cubes about the bottom, before the
nitrous Corpuscles shoot into Crystals of their own (almost prismatical) shape.
And I might further add, that it matters not, whether the superfluous water be
wasted by Exhalation, or by being drained by a body fit to soak it up; as we
have had occasion to observe in accelerating the Crystallization of some
Bodies, where I was not willing to employ the heat of the fire, by placing,
underneath the Solution, dried Earth, or some other porous and soaking body.

With some Analogy to such instances as these, we may conceive, that where
there are Petrescent Liquors, mingled with common water, there may, by diverse
accidents, and particularly an hot Summer, a sufficient discharge be made of
the superfluous moisture, to make the more disposed parts of the Petrescent
Liquor to coagulate, and afterward the coagulation may be suspended, either by
the supervening of a colder season, as Winter; or even in Summer it self, by a
plentiful rain, or the effect of it, a Land-flood, which might check the
progress of coalitions by overmuch diluteing the Liquor, that might else have
turned into Stone. Not to mention, that trial has assured me, that there are
Bodies, and those of very differing kinds, which will in tract of time,
especially if their coalition be furthered by cold weather, coagulate, after
they have long remained in a fluidform, though the water or other menstruum, by
being enclosed in stopped Glasses, be kept from wasting. And since the Earth
harbors differing kinds of these Liquors (as I have elsewhere shown) and diverse
of them may be copiously impregnated, some of them with one sort of Mineral,
and some with another; we may conceive, that they may have distinct periods for
their respective coalitions, and yet may stick close to one another; in regard
that, though in our Chemical Crystallizations the Artists are wont to take out
of the vessel what shoots the first time, before they make a fresh exhalation
of the water for a new Crystallization, and by this means have the coagulated
Bodies, that they obtain at one time, more uniformly shaped; yet in the hollow
Receptacles, that the Earth affords to Petrescent Liquors, the Vessels
continuing the same from first to last, the Uniformity of the Bodies produced
by coalitions made at several times must be less regular, and the manifest
accretions or aggregates of coalescent Bodies must in all likelihood be more
frequent. And accordingly having suffered the exhaling of some Liquors to be
continued in the same Vessel, I had coalitions of very differing Bodies at the
bottom.

What I was not long since saying, makes me remember, that in order to a
satisfaction (which the Event gave me) of the conjectures I had about the
successive concretions of some solid Fire-stones, that were not suspected to be
other than entire and uniform masses, I caused two or three that I thought
likely and of very different sizes and shapes, and brought from distant places,
to be warily broken: Which Trial gave me the pleasure of observing, that the
internal Texture of the least of these Minerals, which was almost spherical,
was very differing from that of the more internal part of the substance of the
Stone. And that in the other and greatest Mineral there was a little globulous
Stone, that manifestly was not of the same piece with the invironing mass,
differing from it not only in Texture, but here and there by a discernable
Commissure: though in most places their Adhaesion was so strict, that we could
not make any separation of the two Minerals by the help of this Commissure. The
greatest part of this double Fire-stone I keep by me, and shall say nothing of
what I further observed in it, having mentioned what I said already but upon
the by.

I might add, that in some Circumstances, even in those Vessels, and therefore
without any manifest exhalation of the water or other Menstruum, and sometimes
where the dissolved Body was homogeneous, I have in process of time had
coagulations, where the last formed Crystals seemed plainly to have been
generated by way of accretion to the first.

Difficulty. Having now done with my Observation, I shall endeavor to clear a
grand Difficulty, which I foresee may be objected against our Hypothesis,
namely, That these Aggenerations (if I may so call them) of Medicinal and other
Stones are sometimes found in places, where there are no petrifying Springs,
and perhaps no Springs or other Waters at all, nay little or nothing but
Quarries or other masses of Stone.

But to this I answer, First, that if we admit of the Relations, that I
elsewhere mention out of approved Authors concerning Men and Beasts turned into
Stone by a petrifying Spirit, that suddenly invaded them, it will not be
absolutely necessary that there should be any Petrescent Springs or other like
water to produce such Minerals, as we are now discoursing of.

Secondly, for ought has yet been shown to the contrary, we may suppose that
Rainwater does sometimes bring along with it such petrifying particles as may
serve our turn. In confirmation whereof I shall add, that having of a learned
and judicious person inquired after diverse particulars relating to a famous
Bath, by him visited in Hungary, whose Water abounds very much with Pet^escent
particles, over which there is very high Building erected, I learned by his
answers, among other remarkable things, that to the Roof or upper part of this
tall Structure there were fastened many long stony concretions, (like those
wont to be employed to adorn Groto's;) which he affirmed to be from time to
time generated there, not, as I at first suspected, by the dashing up of any
drops of water; (which he averred could not reach any thing near so high,) but
by the copious petrific steams, that being there checked in their ascent, did,
according to their natural propensity, coagulate into Stone. Whether this
Relation may warrant me to guess, that in some places Stones may be generated,
without the help either of Rain or Springs, by the ascent of Petrific particles
in the form of exhalations from some lower parts of the Earth; which
exhalations, suffering the lighter steams that accompanied them to exhale, may
operate upon some disposed materials that they find in their way, and turn them
into Stone: whether, I say, this narrative may well suggest this conjecture, I
shall not now stay to examine, though the Earthy and sometimes Sulphurous
sediments that have been observed at the bottom of Rain waters, suffered to
settle in clean vessels, may seem to favor it; and though also I might
illustrate it by what I observed in a Bottle of distilled Liquor, whereof no
part would naturally ascend in a dry form: for having kept this Viol well
stopped in a safe and quiet place for a year or two, I observed that the
ascending steams had quite pervaded the Cork, and had formed at the top of it
numerous whitish stiriae, slender, but of a length that surprised me.

Thirdly, there is no necessity, that in all soils, where petrific waters are
to be met with, there should be petrifying Springs, at least above ground. For
I have caused to be dug store of figured and transparent Stones in a certain
Earth, that lay upon the upper part of a Rock, and seemed to be a very dry
Soil: Perhaps you will allow me to tell you, that I have by pouring a solution
of stony stiriae, made with Spirit of Verdigrease, on a convenient quantity of
Bolus Armenus, and suffering the soft mixture to remain in a Glass in the open
Air, till the superfluous moisture was exhaled; I have, I say, by this means
imitated in a little, what I have been now relating, and found small but
unting'd and figured Crystals dispersed through the little Cavities of the Red
Earth. But 'twill be more considerable to our present purpse to add, that the
fairest and hardest petrifying Wood, that I ever had or tried, was taken up by
an Ingenious person I employed in a Plot of Sandy ground, where he could not
find any petrifying or so much as any other Spring. To which I know not whether
I should add, that supposing the ground to have been once moistened with a
Lapidescent Liquor, whether brought thither by Springs, or any other way; one
may in our Hypothesis well enough account for this difficult Phenomenon, that
now and then, not only in the surface of the ground, and perhaps upon Rocks
themselves there are found Aggregates of figured Stones, that seem to grow
upwards, as it were from a Root; which much puzzle men to know how they came
there, and may incline them to their opinion, who ascribe Vegetations to
Stones. But to this may be answered, that many of the Concretions, we are
speaking of, may have been formed in wombs that lay, though not deep, yet under
ground, or in shallow cavities in the surface of it, and that, after their
formation, the looser Earth that surrounded them, may have been washed off by
Rains, blown off by Winds, or otherwise removed, leaving behind them these
Stones that adhered firmly to a solid Body. Besides, if I had time, I think it
were very possible for me to show, that stony Concretions might be produced by
the Mechanical action of the Air upon the stony particles that successively
apply themselves to the matter, that first begins to coagulate, when they are
ready to be forsaken by the moisture that accompanied those particles, and was
necessary to their due application to the casual rudiments (which pass for
Roots) in imitation whereof I have more than once obtained both from saline and
stony Solutions, dry tufts of prettily figured, and diaphanous or white, but
very slender, stiriae, (if I may so call them) that seemed to grow out of the
solid Glass, and made men wonder how they came thither, no Water or other
Liquor appearing near them.

Fourthly, It may very well happen, that the Petrescent Liquor may be so
mingled and dilated with ordinary water, as not to be distinguished from it by
the generality of men, nor to be capable of disclosing itself by its effects,
till either by the copious exhalation of the common water, or by some peculiar
advantages, it has to operate upon Bodies, it has opportunity to discover it
self. On which occasion I shall add, that there is a Lake in the North of
Ireland, wherein I could never hear but that Fishes lived as well as in other
Lakes, and yet there are some Rocks near the bottom of it, to which there
fasten themselves diverse masses and other pieces of a finely figured substance,
and transparent as Crystal; of which an eminent person, the chief Owner of the
Lake, presented me with some, and promised me more. Now if we suppose, that
either by Springs of Petrescent water, or by Rains, or by subterraneal steams,
or otherwise, waters, resting in any hollow place, though upon the top of Rocks
and Mountains, shall be sufficiently impregnated with Petrific particles; and
that afterward in process of time the merely aqueous parts shall be, by
degrees, by the heat of the Sun, the soaking of the grounds, the winds, or the
continual action of the Air, brought to exhale away in the form of Vapors, the
Petrific particles, which are not so volatile, will turn the Soil beneath them
and on the sides of them, as far as the Sphere of their activity reaches, into
Stone harder or softer, of this or that kind, according to the particular
nature of the Petrescent Liquors, and the Structure and other dipositions of
the Soil they invade: In which Soil, if there chance to be lodged Bodies
heterogeneous to it, whether vegetable substances, as Roots, pieces of Wood,
Gums, etc. or the whole Bodies of Animals, as Toads, Frogs, Serpents, Fishes,
etc. or their parts, as Shells, Bones, etc. or Minerals of an open Texture, as
Boles, unripe Ores; or else Gems or Stones of another kind already formed; any
of these things or any other that shall chance to be lodged there, must be
found either petrified or enclosed in Stone, when this changed and hardened
Soil shall come to be broken up. Nor is it at all necessary, that this
petrefaction of the extraneous Bodies, and of the Soil or Bed, be made at once:
For, it may well be made successively at several times, according as some parts
of the Petrescent Juice happen to be more copious and penetrant, and
consequently more fit to be soaked in further than other. For, as the
porousness happens to be greater in one part of the Soil than in another; or as
the Texture and disposition of particular Bodies, lodged in the Earth, gives
advantage to the Petrific particles to work on some of them sooner, or in a
differing manner than in others; so the Induration of the pervaded matters may
be very unequally made in point of time, as well as in other circumstances. So
that (to omit many other things explicable by it) we may, from what has been
already delivered, conceive, how it may happen, that Medical Stones of very
differing Colors, Consistencies, and Operations (of which I have several by
me, that I had from the same Mineral mass,) may be generated and seem entire
Bodies, though (as in some that I found,) the difference is so great, that one
part of the Medical Stone is dark, heavy, and opacous, and the other much
lighter, transparent, and quite otherwise colored. And upon the same Principle
may be explained, what I lately mentioned to you about the finding of Diamonds
enclosed in loose Stones and even in Rocks; of which we have credible
Testimony: which seems not more strange to me than a Stone, which I have by me,
which being a kind of Pible, contains in it a perfectly shaped Serpent, coild
up, but without a head, which appears to have been formed before the Stone, in
regard that in the upper and lower parts of the solid Stone there are cavities
left, which together make up one Cavitie, just of the size and shape of the
contained body; to which as it was easy for the matter of the Stone, whilst
'twas yet a soft body, to accommodate it self exactly; so it is scarce
conceivable, how, if the Pible had been first formed, the enclosed animal, if
it were one, or the matter whereof the seeming animal afterward was formed,
should not only get in, but find a cavity so curiously shaped and so fitted to
its bulk. And that this variety was produced at several times, might be further
argued from this, that the seeming Serpent is plainly of another and clearer
kind of Stone than that of the Mold, that incompasses it; and of the Mold it
self, one part, contiguous to the included body, is whitish, and abounds in
shining grains or flakes; in both which, it differs from the other and far
greater part. And now it will be time to hasten to the

Fifth consideration, which is, that for ought we know, in those very places,
where now there is nothing to be seen but loose Stones, and perhaps beds of
Stone themselves, that in those very places (I say) there may in times past
have been Petrescent Liquors, whether stagnant or running. For, I In an Examen
of an Experiment urged for the Magnetism of the Earth.
elsewhere show, (to an other purpose) that Earthquakes, Inundations of Seas
and Rivers, sinkings of ground, encroachments of the Land on the Water, fiery
Eruptions and other such Accidents, (some related by Authentic Authors, and
others happening in our own times, in places, some of which I had the
curiosity to see,) have among other odd effects been able to dry or choke up
Pools and Lakes, and to stop and quite divert the course not only of Springs,
but of Rivers, so as to leave no footsteps of them, where they plentifully
flowed before. Upon the score of which transpositions of notable quantities of
terrestrial matter and other great changes of the structure and disposition of
the Soil in diverse places, it may well be suspected, that the stony Wombs or
Molds, wherein the above mentioned Bodies were found, were heretofore at
sometime or other, of a muddy or earthy Nature, and were receptacles of
Petrescent Liquors, which at several times turned the whole mass of the Soil
into Stone, before the Springs or other Waters, containing the Petrific Liquors
or Spirits, were quite consumed, or had their course altogether diverted. But
though I could say much more to confirm and apply this, and the preceding
considerations; yet having spent so much of my time already, I shall not only
leave all that unsaid, but, to make some amends for having staid so long in
clearing this difficulty, I shall do little more than name the two remaining
Arguments.

Arg. III. It agrees very well with what we were formerly saying (in the first
Argument) about the great specific gravity of such as the newly mentioned
Stones, in comparison of that of white Marble or transparent Pibles, that it
should be possible, out of those Minerals to extract some of that substance,
whether Metalline or of kin to it, upon whose account I told you I supposed
them to be so ponderous. And accordingly we have by appropriated Menstruums
obtained, from the forementioned Bodies, (and not from those only,) Solutions
or Tinctures, which, besides that, by their color or taste, they discover
themselves, did, upon their being dropped upon a Solution of Galls or some other
convenient Liquor, or upon their being examined by other proper ways, produce
such changes of color or such determinate Phenomenon, as argued them to abound
with Metalline or Mineral particles, (which, for the most part of them I
observed to be of a Vitriolate nature;) so I found, that the Solution of a
Boodstone, which tasted very rough upon the Tongue, would with the infusion
of Galls make an Inky mixture; and the like would also be made with Lodestone,
Emery, Marchasites, etc. opened with corrosive Menstruums. But the Solution of
Lapis Calaminaris, which was of a golden color, did not operate like the rest
on the infusion of Galls; but yet by its taste, as well as color, sufficiently
discovered it self to have copiously impregnated the Menstruum. And now the
mention of Lapis Calaminaris minds me to take thence an instance of what I
lately intimated, that there may be other ways, besides that of dissolutions in
proper Menstruums, to show, that some Medicinal Stones participate of Metalline
and Mineral substances. For it is by melting Lapis Calaminaris with Copper, and
keeping them together for a competent while in fusion, that Brass is made;
wherein the red color of the Copper is changed into a golden one, and the
absolute weight (for I speak not of the specific gravity) considerably
increased. Nor is this the only Mineral Stone, from which I have, by a way
quite differing from those I have yet mentioned, namely with running Mercury,
obtained a Metalline substance. And though native Cinaber, used by eminent
Physicians both inwardly and outwardly, be looked upon by the Vulgar as only a
red Stone; yet it is known, in the Quicksilver Mines of Friuli, and some other
places where it abounds, that it is a Mercurial Ore, whence by vehement fires
they distill running Mercury, which we by moderate ones have sometimes done.

But here perhaps it may not be improper to tell you, that though, before any
admonition given men of the expediency of examining stones Hydrostatically, I
could not receive from others, yet I made against my self the following
Objection, That there are some Stones, to which useful Qualities are ascribed,
which are either not at all heavier in specie than is requisite for a Stone, as
such, to be; or so little heavier, that it is no way likely, that Metals or any
such ponderous Minerals should contribute either to their Productions or their
Virtues.

In answer whereunto I thought it may be said in the first place, that our
Hypothesis does no way oblige us to deny, that there may be such Stones. For
though it ascribes the Virtues of most Gems and Metalline Stones to the
metalline and ponderous Mineral substances they partake of, yet the concession
agrees very well with our Doctrine; which, (as will in the Fourth Argument be
more manifested) speaks in general, when it teaches, that the Virtues of Stones
may, in many cases, depend upon their consisting not of a pure petrescent
substance, but a substance impregnated with other Minerals, which, though most
commonly they prove specifically heavier than the Petrescent matter, as such,
without being the less, but rather in some cases the more operative and
communicative of their Virtues; yet in diverse stony concretions, the
adventitious ingredients may be specifically lighter than the genuine matter of
the Stone; as may be easily gathered from some passages of the foregoing
Discourse. For, not here to urge, that diverse Bodies, that pass for Stones, do
abound in particles of Salt, which may be much less heavy than pure Stone of
the like bulk, I have observed, that some other hard Fossils abound with a kind
of Bitumen, which, when by distillation brought to an Oil, is much less heavy
than a Stone of the same bulk. And, as I remember, I have had some portions of
such Oil, that would swim even upon common water: and lest this should be
ascribed to the subtilization, the Bitumen received from the fire; I will add,
that, having Hydrostatically weighed a piece of good Asphaltum, we found it to
be to water of the same bulk, but as 1 and somewhat less than 4/10 to 1. Which
was within a Tenth of the proportion to water of a stony, though a bituminous,
Fossile, commonly called in England Scotch-Coal. And because Sulphur as well as
Bitumen, is very apt, (and indeed more apt than before trial I expected) by
even a moderate heat or attrition to diffuse its steams, (usually rank sented
enough;) I shall add, that there are Variety of hard Stones, which abound in
Sulphur: (witness that in some places they obtain their common Brimstone by
sublimation thence) and yet having weighed a Role of Brimstone in Fire and
Water, I found it to be but a fraction scarce worth mentioning above double its
weight to the Liquor; which shows it to be much lighter in specie than Crystal
it self.

An improvement of this first Answer may furnish me with the second. For hence
we may argue, that it is not impossible, that the principal virtue of a light
Medical Stone should be due to some mixture of a Metalline or the like
ponderous substance; since, if some of the ingredients, that are plentifully
mixed with the true stony matter, be of the lighter sort, though there be also
some Metalline or other heavy Mineral particles mingled with the same matter,
yet the specific Levity of the one, in comparison of this matter, may
compensate the specific Gravity of the other, and they may all compose a Stone,
either less, or not more, ponderous than white Marble. On which occasion, I
remember, not only that I found a blackish East-Indian Flint, and likewise a
Black English one, to have to water not full the proportion of 2 6/10 to one,
but that one of the first pieces of black Marble that I examined
Hydrostatically, was found, notwithstanding the darkness of its color, to be
to water of the same bulk scarce any thing more than 2 7/10 to 1. which you may
remember was the proportion I found between white Marble and water, unless we
should say, that this blackness of color proceeded, not so much from any gross
Bituminous matter, imbodied with that of the Stone, but from some Mineral smoke
that had pervaded it. And this puts me in mind of speaking something in this
place about what might properly enough have been discoursed of long ago.

Wherefore I shall subjoin in the Third place, that it seems not impossible,
that the matter which Medical Stones are made of, may, before it comes to be
hardened, derive various colors and be imbued with Virtues by subterrraneal
Exhalations and other steams. This I fear you will think somewhat strange, and
therefore I shall briefly endeavor to confirm it by the mention of two or
three particulars.

That then many places of the lower part of the Earth emit copious exhalations
into the upper, and even into the Air it self; I presume you will grant, and I
have elsewhere proved it. That also such subterraneal steams will easily mingle
with Liquors, and imbue them with their own Qualities, may be inferred from the
Experiment of mixing the Gas, (as the Helmontians call it) or the scarce
coagulable fumes of kindled and extinquished Brimstone, with Wine, which is
thereby long preserved. And I have elsewhere mentioned, how I have incorporated
this Smoke with other Liquors, wherein I observed its operations o be notable.

That beneath the surface of the Earth there may be sulphurous and other
steams, that may be plentifully mixed with water, and there in likelihood with
Lapidescent Liquors, I have also manifested in another Of Subtertaneal Steams.
Dicourse.

That Quicksilver may be in part resolved into Fumes by less fires than many
of those that burn under ground, will be readily acknowledged by Chemists and
Gilders, and is obvious in the Fumigations employed in the Cure of the Lues
Venerea. And that Mercury may in the bowels of the Earth be so disguised, and
well mixed with stony matter, as to suffer the whole concretion to pass for
Stone, may be observed in some kind of native Cinaber.

That Sal Ammoniac, of which in some places there is to be dug up store, will,
with a moderate fire, be made to ascend in form of exhalations, is vulgarly
known, as to the factitious Salt of that name, and I have found it to hold in
the native. That common Sal A^moniac, Sulphur, Mercury and Tin will be sublimed
into a Gold-like substance, that participates of most, if not of all the
Ingredients, may appear by the account I have elsewhere given of the way, I
used in making Aurum Musicum: And that even Gold it self, the heaviest and
sixest of the bodies we know, may by no great proportion of Additament, and
that with but a moderate fire, be made to ascend in the form of Fumes or even
of Flame, I have several times tried, by ways elsewhere delivered. And that
Mineral Exhalations may be met with in the bowels of the Earth, is witnessed by
the Relations of diverse Credible persons, conversant about Minerals, that
affirm themselves to testify what they write upon their own Observation to
which; some things that I had seen my self did the more incline me to give
credit. And this copious ascension of Mineral fumes and even of Metalline ones,
may be much confirmed not only by what is written by professed Chemists, but by
the Learned and curious Johannes Kentmannus, who, in the useful Catalogue of
the Misnian Fossils he had collected, amongst the Pyritae or fire-stones,
reckons one, whose title is Pumicosus, and ab exhalatione ardenti nigro color
tinctus; and another, whose inscription is Coloris argenti, qui ab exhalatione
virosa color cinereo est tinctus. The same may be further confirmed by what I
have some where met with as related in terminis by the Learned Cabaeus, that he
found in the Territory of Modena.

To bring this home to our purpose, since there are Mineral Exhalations of very
differing kinds, dispersed in diverse places under ground, and since there are
several volatile Minerals, as Arsenic, Orpiment, Sandarach, etc. that are very
actively hurtful; there may be others endowed with Medicinal Qualities, and the
Exhalations of such Minerals either alone or mixed with Petrescent Liquors,
pervading duly disposed Earths and Bolusses, and other fluid, soft, or open
substances, before their induration, may endow them with Medicinal and other
Qualities.

Nay, when I recall to mind the old Phenomenon that I have partly observed, and
partly received from credible testimony, about the coalitions, mixtures,
tinctures, and the emanations, as 'twere, of those Tinctures, in metalline,
stony, and other fossile concretions; I dare not peremptorily deny, but that,
even after subterraneal bodies have obtained a considerable degree of
induration, and perhaps great enough to make them pass for stony ones, there
may be subterraneal steams subtle enough to penetrate, tinge, and otherwise
impregnate them. Which you would think the less impossible, if you reflect upon
what I just now related out of Kentman; and especially if I had time to add
here, what I remember, I elsewhere deliver about my trials to tinge native
Crystal with differing colors by the fumes of volatile Minerals. And that a
very small proportion of a Metalline substance, resolved into minute particles,
may suffice to impart a tincture to a greater quantity of other matter duly
disposed, may appear by those factitious Gems, wherein with three or four
grains of a skilfully calcined Metal, or some such Mineral pigment, we may give
the color of a natural Gem to a whole Ounce or more of vitrified matter. And I
remember, that in subtiler fluids, I have made the instance by vast odds more
conspicuous, having tinged with one grain or less of a prepared Metal (as Gold
or Copper) as much successively generated phlegm, as, if it could have been all
preserved, would have amounted to a bulky lump of deeply colored matter.

But your allowing the hesitancy I have expressed in this last Paragraph, is
not necessary to my present purpose, wherefore I shall not borrow any thing to
countenance it from another Paper, but pass on to what remains.

Arg. IV. The last thing, that I shall represent to show, that the Virtues of
opacous Gems and Medicinal stones may be more easily, than those of transparent
ones, accounted for in our Hypothesis, is this, That the main Ingredients,
whereof many such opacous Stones consist, were complete Mineral bodies before
they became Stones; some of them having been Medicinal Bolusses, or the like
Earths; some, Earths abounding with Metalline or Mineral Juices; some, Ores of
Metals, or Minerals of kin to, Metals; and some, in fine, Bodies of other sorts
or natures differing from these and one an other. For, all these several kinds
of fossils may, by the supervening and pervasion of Petrific Spirits, be turned
into Stone, and consequently retain many of the Virtues, they were endowed with
by the Mineral Corpuscles, that had copiously, either under the form of
Liquors, or Exhalations, impregnated them, whilst they were yet Earths, or
other bodies of a more open or Penetrable Texture.

I might illustrate this by the way I elsewhere mention, whereby I made such
mixtures even of Stony and Metalline Ingredients, that notwithstanding their
coalition were transparent, though you will grant that to be more difficult,
than to compound such concretions when one is allowed to make them opacous.

But here I must ^oviate an objection, which I foresee may be made against our
present Fourth Argument, unto which even what I have been now saying may afford
a rise. For since it seems by our Doctrine, that Gems may be but Magisteries,
and consequently but such compositions, as though made in the bowels of the
Earth, might be made or imitated by humane skill, it may seem very improbable
to many, that bodies so near of kin to Artificial ones, should be endowed with
such peculiar and some of them with such strange Virtues as are ascribed to
diverse Gems, and are thought to be capable of flowing only from certain
Substantial forms and those very noble ones too.

To this I might reply, that I admit not any such imaginary Beings as the
Peripatetic Forms, which I fear they will never be able to demonstrate. But to
avoid unnecessary disputes, I will rather answer in short, that such
compositions as are called Artificial, may, for all that, be endowed with great
Virtues, and such as are called Specific; witness the Virtues of many Chemical
Preparations, even of those that are used by Physicians of all sorts. And lest
you should think, I need to fly to Chemistry, of which some Learned Men are
pleased to have a great distaste, I will name a couple of instances out of Galen
himself; The one is the Ashes of Crafish, to which, notwithstanding the
destruction that has been made of the pristine Body by fire, he gives a greater
commendation against the, as strange, as fatal poison infused by the biting of
a mad Dog, than he does either to the Fish it self unburn'd, or to any medicine
of Natures own providing; and I hope you will grant a Virtue of that kind and
degree to be specific enough. My other Instance shall be taken from Treacle,
which though allowedly a factitious body, and consisting of I know not how many
Ingredients shuffled together, was yet in the days of Galen (to whom a Book is
attributed about it) and ever since has been the famousest Antidote in these
parts of the world, and has been celebrated not only for its Alexipharmacal
Virtues, which alone are sufficient to entitle it to specific ones, but for
diverse others which are generally ascribed to it, some indeed upon the score of
Manifest, but others also upon that of Occult Qualities.

The objection being thus dispatched, we may return to our Medicinal Stones,
about which I shall venture to add, that according to our way of Explicating
the production of them, a not impossible Solution may be offered of this
difficult Phenomenon. That sometimes Stones, that are thought without scruple
to be of the same kind (as has been particularly observed by Learned men of
the Lapis Nephriticus) are of such different qualifications, See Vnzerus de
Nophrit.
that some of them prove very considerable Remedies in cases where others prove
almost utterly ineffectual. And I have observed also, though very rarely, that
a Medical Stone may have Virtues, that are taught to be the properties of
Stones of another kind. For, according to our Hypothesis, when the stony matter
is impregnated as it ought to be with those Minerals, that in the ordinary
course of nature belong to that species, its Virtue will be such as it should
be for kind, but for degree may be very various, answerable to the plenty,
purity, subtlety, etc. of the Mineral that impregnates it. But if the stony
matter chance to be inbued with some other substance of a contrary nature,
though perhaps the proportion of it may be so small, and the color of it such,
as not to make an alteration in the Stone obvious to sense, and great enough to
make it judged to be of an other species; yet it may so vitiate the matter
wherein its expected Quality resides, or check and infringe its operations, as
not to leave the Stone any considerable degree of Virtue. And on the other
side, if it happen that the Mineral Corpuscles, that are wont to impart a
certain Virtue to the stony matter of one Gem, should, by some lucky hit, be so
united with that of an other sort of Gems (of which case I formerly gave an
Instance in green Diamonds,) though the quantity of this unusual Ingredient may
be but very small, yet, if it is efficacy be great, it may innoble the Stone
with a notable degree of some such Virtue, as is supposed not to belong to that
Species, but to an other.

And on this occasion I shall add, that I know a Gentleman (a professed
Scholar) who to the Eye seems to be of a Complexion extraordinarily Sanguin:
This person was for a long time so troubled with excessive bleedings at the
Nose, that, notwithstanding all the Remedies he could procure in an Academy of
Physic, where he lived, he was diverse times brought to Death's door, till at
length his Case growing very famous, there was sent him by an ancient
Gentlewoman a Boodstone, about the bigness of a Pigeons Egg, with an
assurance that it had done scarce credible Cures in his Disease, by being worn
about the Patients Neck. Upon the use of this Stone he quickly recovered his
Health, and had long enjoyed it when I conversed with him, but yet so, that
when he left it off any considerable time, his distemper would return. And when
I seemed to suspect that imagination might have an interest in the efficacy of
this Remedy, he answered, that he was very well satified of the negative; and
particularly upon this trial, that he had, by the hands of a third person that
lived not far off, and whom he named to me, stopped a Haemorrogie in a
neighboring Gentlewoman, whom the violence of the Distemper kept from knowing
that any thing had been applied to her, till a pretty while after the Blood was
stanched. I shall not here mention other Instances, though very remarkable, of
the efficacy of this Stone, which I had both from the Gentleman himself, and an
intimate Friend of his, who is a very Learned Man and a Physician; because I
have said enough to make it seasonable for me to tell you, that notwithstanding
all the odd operations of this Stone, when I came to look upon it, 'twas so
differing in Color and Texture from what I expected, that I should have taken
it much rather for a Gem of some other species than a Boodstone.

To confirm some of the Particulars comprised in this our Fourth Argument, and
show the variety and sometimes great plenty of Mineral and other subterraneal
matters, that may concur to the composition of Bodies that pass for Stones; I
shall observe, that the subtilty and penetrancy of some Liquors, if duly
considered, may evince it to be possible, that such Bodies should be petrified
by them and with them, as may in part consist of Animal and Vegetable
substances, as in petrified Skulls, Bones, and pieces of wood: And we see, that
soft Stone, which is plentifully found near Naples, and commonly called the
Lapis Lyncurius, being rubbed a little and mostened with water, and then
exposed to the Sun in a due season of the year, will, in a very short time, (as
Eyewitnesses have assured me,) produce Mushroms fit to be eaten; as if even
the seminal Principles and Rudiments of Vegetables may be so preserved in a
petrified Earth, as to be able to disclose themselves when they find an
opportunity. To which agrees well, what an eminent person, Master of some of
these Stones, informs me, That they now and then find them of a vast bigness,
as if whole masses of Earth, pregnant with the prolific Principles of Mushroms,
were, by some supervening but not very potently hardening Petrescent Liquor,
turned into Stone.

And not only there may be Bolsuses, sealed Earths, and such like fossils, that
are commonly known to be Medicinal, hardened into Stone by petrifying Agents;
but also other Earths, subject to be petrified, may have Medicinal and subtle
particles of such a kind in them, as scarce any body would expect. But to omit
Instances, belonging to another Paper, I have visited a certain Clay-pit in a
wast piece of ground, in which at a condsierable depth from the surface of the
Earth there lay a bed of Clay, which by distillation yielded some acquaintances
of mine a Salt so volatile and strong, and so differing from other subterraneal
Salts, that my Examens did not discover the manifest qualities of it without
some wonder; and the owners of it (persons curious and rich) did themselves use
it as well as give it in Physic, and cried it up for an excellent Cordial, and
a great opening and Diaphoretic Medicine.

That sublimable Salts, Sulphurs, Bitumens, (Bodies that communicate enough of
their Virtues,) may be met with in the bowels of the Earth; I have elsewhere
shown: And that such substances may be found in bodies that pass for Stones, I
have been induced to think by the Chemical Examen, that I purposely made of
some such concretions, particularly of that solid and heavy one, that is
commonly called Scotch-Coal, from whence I obtained by distillation, (wherein I
somewhat wondered, other men's Curiosity did not, as far as I knew, prevent me;)
a good proportion of Oil or liquid Bitumen, and no small number of Saline
particles that seemed to be of an uncommon nature.

That Metalline particles may concur to make up a Body, that passes for a
Medicinal Stone, may appear by native Sulphur which is it self a compounded
body, besides a good proportion of Mineral Earth.

I had thoughts not to make an end of this Discourse, without mentioning to you
some attempts, that I partly designed, and partly made, to illustrate some
passages of it by purposely contrived Experiments, whereof some were
unprosperously and others not altogether unsuccessfully tried. But not having
the Minutes of them by me, and not daring to trust my single memory in
Experiments so nice, and so long since made, as those were, I shall here put an
end to your trouble, especially since at length I perceive, that the
forgetfulness of my first intended brevity has misled me so far beyond the
bounds of it into Excursions, whereinto the unforeseen connection of things
unawar's engaged me, that I stand in need both of your pardon and my own: Of
yours, for having exercised your Patience with a prolix Discourse; and of my
own, for having receded from my Custom, by contributing to that prolixity, and
by expatiating upon Conjectures; to which, the more I conform to my own
Practice, the less I am indulgent: Though these may be the more pardonable,
because I have proposed them but as Guesses, not peremptory Assertions, much
less Physical Demonstrations. And if Aristotle himself, where he gives an
account of Phenomenon appearing above the surface of the Earth, scrupled not to
think, he had done enough, if he had shown, how such things may be produced; I
hope, it may be tolerable in me, who treat of things, that Nature does
privately in her dark and subterraneal Recesses, to have offered Accounts, that
are possible, if not probable. And yet I should have spent much less of my
Discourse upon Conjectures, if I had not seen, that they gave me Rises to bring
in more of Natural History, than I could else decently do. But after all this I
confess to you, (though you may think it a Paradox) that one of the main causes
of the Prolixity of these Papers was my Have, and that Experience has taught
me, on this Occasion (as well as on some others) that there may be more Truth
than there is Likelihood in the gentile Conceit of a French Secretary, that
said, He had written his Friend a long Letter, because he had not Leisure to
write him a short One.

FINIS.

